MEMORIALS OF WORTHY PERSONS. (Lights and Ornaments OF THE Church of England.)

The Fourth Decad.

By CL: BARKSDALE.

Hi Majores tui sunt, si te illis dignum prastes. Sen. OXFORD, Printed by A.
and L. Lichfield, 1663.

TO Mr THOMAS SAVAGE, Eldest Son of THOMAS SAVAGE, of Elmeley, Esquire; AND TO Mr
THOMAS WILLIAMS, Eldest Son of DAVID WILLIAMS, of Corndon, Esquire;
GENTLEMEN,
HAving in the late evil Times (never to be forgotten) been comforted and
relieved by the real Favors and pious Munificence of your Noble Parents, I do
gladly make this grateful Remembrance thereof in the Dedication of this part of
my Memorials of Worthy Persons to your Worthy Names. In these Papers, though it
were my principal design to honor the memory of the Lights of our own Church,
yet have I now and then taken in one of the Roman or Genevian Persuasion,
thinking They might not be unsociable here, whose holy Souls, I believe (now
that the Certamina are ended by death pulveris exigui jactu) rest in peace.
Some Hypereriticks (who are pleased with nothing but what they do themselves,
if yet they do any thing at all:) will despise me, and say I do actum agere,
and write what is written already. Truly, as a Historian does not make, but
frame and compose his matter; so an Historical Collector performs his
Undertaking, when with diligence and judgment he selecteth and compileth
dispersed pieces for the ease and benefit of his Readers.

If in this Collection I have done any service to Young Gentlemen, and other
ingenuous Persons, to incline them more to love piety and learning, to converse
with good Men and good Books, to become loving friends and Patrons, or obedient
servants and Ministers to the Church of England; This is my Delight and Joy;
This is, to me, instead of Praise, or any other Reward of my wellmeant
Endeavors.

That I have inscribed upon the particulars, the names of other friends, is
upon the most friendly Plinies reason, Ingenuum est fateri per quos profeceris.

Your obliged Servant, CL. BARKSDALE.

The Persons.
I. Dr Colet. II. Mr Langley. III. Bishop Morton. IV. Bishop Hall. V. Mr G.
Herbert. VI. Sr Tho: More. VII. Sr Henry Wotton. VIII. Bishop Bedel. IX. M.
Ant. de Dom. X. Mr Wheelock.
IOANNES COLETVS Cum cotis Aomas exculte COLEET Esorores Te doctos inter
posthuma fama refert.


MEMORIALS. I. Dr JOHN COLET, Dean of S. Paul's.
Out of his Life, Collected by Mr Tho: Smith of Ch: Coll: from Erasmus. D.
Anthonio Stratford LL. Bac.
1. JOhn Coheleth in the Heb. signifies Ecclesiastes, the Preacher. Colet is
that part of the ring wherein the precious stone or signet is set. Thomas. in
voce pala.
Colet was born in London, the Son of Henry Colet (Knight, and twice Lord Major
of that City) and Christian his Wife, a Matron of very rare Piety and Christian
Fortitude. She had 11 Sons, and as many Daughters of the same Husband: all
which she saw bu^ied, except John, her first born. Yet, when she was fourscore
and ten years of Age, her countenance was so comely and entire, her behavior
so cheerful and pleasant, as if she had never had any sorrow or any
childbearing in her life. So much strength of mind was shown in a woman,
caused not by Philosophy or human learning, but by sincere piety to God and
trust in Christ.

2. Nature was as indulgent to him as fortune; for he had a very proper, tall,
handsome and comely body. In his younger days he much addicted himself to the
study of Scholastical Philosophy, exquisitely learned in the liberal Arts: All
Tullies works were as familiar to him as his Epistles: so well read in Plato
and Plotinus, that when I heard him speak, methought I heard Plato himself: not
ignorant in any part of the Mathematics.

3. Being thus well principled at home (Master of Arts) he began to look
abroad, and improve his stockin foreign parts. In France he added to his
Humanity, what he chought necessary for the study of Divinity: which then he
effectually prosecuted in Italy. He studied the Fathers and Schoolmen: was well
versed in both Laws: singularly read in History, both Civil and Ecclesiastical.
Modern Writers also, he both read and diligently imitated, accommodating
thereby his style to the Pulpit, and preaching of the Gospel.

4. After his return from Italy, he staid not long in London, (where his
Parents lived) but chose to live in Oxford; where he publicly (yet freely and
without stipend) expounded S. Paul's Epistles, being not full thirty years of
age, younger than* was by two or three months. I here and then I had the
happiness to come first acquainted with him. Though at that time he had neither
took, nor desired any degree in Divinity; yet there was no Doctor whatsoever,
either of Theology or Law, no Abbot nor dignified Person in the whole
University, that did not frequent and (which is more) take notes of his
Lectures. Which was to be imputed either to Colet's authority, or their
studiousness and modesty, choose you whether.

5. But before he left Oxford, they honored him with the Degree of Doctor:
which he accepted, rather to please the Givers than himself. From that
University and these sacred Employments, he was called back to London by the
favor of K. Henry VII. who bestowed upon him the Deanty of S. Paul's: that he
might be President of his College, whose Epistles and learning he loved so
well: (He was made both Doctor and Dean An. 1504.) Of all the Deanries in
England the highest in esteem, but not of greatest value: which Colet embraced
rather as a barthensom charge, than honor. And therefore, as soon as he had
regulated his College of Prebends, and raised up the ancient Discipline that
was fallen down, he resolved (which was not usual in those times) to preach
every Holy day in his Cathedral, over and above his Sermons at Court, and many
other Churches. At S. Paul's he ran over, sometimes a whole Epistle, sometime,
a whole Gospel, the Creed, or the Lords prayer. Wheresoever he preached, he was
exceedingly followed, both by the chief Citizens and Courtiers: particularly by
Sr Thomas More (afterward Lord Chanc: of England) as appears by this following
passage of his Letter: What can be more troublesome to me, than to be deprived
of your sweet company? having been so long used to enjoy your most prudent
counsel, to be refresht with your most pleasant society, to be rouzed with
your most grave Sermons, and bettered by your excellent example and life: in a
word, in whose very countenance and gesture I was wont to be unspeakablie
delighted.

6. The Dean's Table, which in former times had, under pretense of good house
keeping, been too much prostitute to excess, he reduced to frugality. For he
kept himself to one meal a day many years together, both before and after his
preferment: which at once cut off all his supper-guests: late Dinners not a
few: and the more, because his entertainment (though neat) was neither costly
nor excessive; his sitting short, and his whole discourse such as pleased none
but those that were either learned or pious. For soon after he had said Grace,
his Boy read a Chapter (distinctly and aloud) out of S. Paul's Epistles, or
Solomon's Proverbs; from which he himself, for the most part, picked the subject
of that meals discourse, asking not only Scholars, but even ordinary people,
if they were ingenuous, what was the meaning of this or that passage: with as
much satisfaction to their minds, as refreshment to their bodies. He affected
neatness in his housholdstuff, clothes, books, meat; but not magnificence: and
was so much averse from all filthiness, that he could not endure solecisms or
barbarous language. He was hugely delighted with the conference of his friends,
who often kept him till late at night: but all his conference was either of
literature, or Jesus Christ. If he had no acceptable friend to chat with (for
every one did not please him) his boy did read somewhat to him out of godly
books. Sometimes he called me to ride abroad with him: and then he was as merry
as any man alive: but a good book was always his Comrade in his journey, and
his talk was continually of Christ.

7. Whatsoever Revenues accrued unto him by the Church, he entirely committed
to his Steward, to be distributed and spent in housekeeping. His own hereditary
rents and profits (which were vast) he himself distributed to pious uses. For,
his Father being dead, money flowed in apace from what was left him by
inheritance: and lest that being kept should breed some disease in him, he
therewith erected a stately new School in Paul's Churchyard, dedicated to the
Holy Child JESUS: whereunto he joined fair dwellings for two Schoolmasters, to
whom he assigned liberal stipends, that they might teach gratis, but so as they
should not admit above a certain number (viz. 153. from Jo. XXI. 11.) Above the
Masters Chair, stands the Holy Child JESUS, curiously engraven, in the posture
of one reading a Lecture, with this Motto, HEAR HIM: which words I advised him
to set up. And all the young fry, when they come in and go out of School
(besides their appointed prayers) salute Christ with an Hymn Which you may read
amongst Erasmus's Epigrams.
, Every Class contains 16. boys, and the best Scholar of each sits in a
seat somewhat more eminent than the rest, with the word CAPITANEUS engraven in
golden letters over his head.

8. Our quicksighted Dr Colet saw very well, that the main hope and pillar of a
Commonwealth consists in furnishing youth with good literature, and therefore
did he bestow so much care and cost on this School. Though it stood him in and
infinite sum of money to build and endow it, yet he would accept of no partner.
One left indeed a Legacy of an 100 pounds sterling to the structure of it; but
Colet thinking, that if he took it, Tam ingentes sumtus ut s^trapa^ quoque
deterrere possint. Eras. Ep. ded. ad Cop. Verb. which book he wrote for the
benefit of Paul 's School, as he wrote his book called Ecclesiastes (at the
request of B. Fisher) for Christ's Coll. and S. John's in Cambrige.
some lay people would challenge to themselves, I know not what authority over
the School, did by the permission of the Bishop bestow it upon holy Vestments
for the Quire. Yet, though he would suffer no lay man to have a finger in the
building, he entrusted no Clergy man (not so much as the Bishop, Dean and
Chapter of S. Paul's) nor any of the Nobility, with the oversight of the
Revenues, but some married Citizens of honest report. When he was asked, why he
would do so? he answered, That there was nothing certain in human affairs; but
he found least corruption in such men.

9. As all men highly Morus in Epist. ad Col. Neque valde miror, si clariss.
scholae tuae rumpantur invidia. Vident enim, uti ex equo Troj. predierunt
Graeci, qui barbaram diruere Trojam, sic e tua prodire Schola, qui ipsorum
arguunt and subvertunt stultitiam.
esteemed him for his School; so many wondered why he would build so stately an
house, within the bounds of the Carthusian Monastery, not far from the Palace
at Richmond: but he told them, That he provided that seat for himself in his
old age, when he should be unfit for labors, or broken with diseases, and so
constrained to retire from the society of men. There he intended to
philosophize with two or three eminent friends, among which he was wont to
reckon me, but death prevented him. For being few years before his decease
visited thrice with the sweating sickness (a disease which seized no Country
men but English) though he recovered, yet he thereupon grew consumptive, and so
dyed. He was buried in the South side of the Quire of his own Cathedral, in a
low Sepulcher, which he to that end had chose for himself some years before,
with this inscription, JOHN COLET.

10. Somewhat I shall add, first of his Nature, secondly of his paradoxical
Opinions, and lastly of his Afflictions, wherewith his ingenuous piety was
exercised: for some whereof he might have thanked his own natural temper. For
he was of a very high spirit, huge impatient of any injury, wonderfully prone
to lascivioufnesse, luxury and overmuch sleep, to feasting and facetiousnesse
above measure (all this he confessed to me himself) and he was not wholly safe
from covetousness. But against each of these, he fought such a good fight, by
Philosophy, Divine Contemplations, watching, fasting and prayer, that he led
the whole course of his life free from the infections of this world; and as far
as I could any ways gather (by familiarity and much liberal converse with him)
was a pure Virgin to his dying day. All his wealth he distributed to pious
uses. He did so daily endeavor to conquer all his passions, and subdue the
haughtiness of his mind by reason, that he would take it well to be admonished
even by a child. Lasciviousness, sleep and luxury he chased away by abstaining
constantly from supper, by continual sobriety, indefatigable study, and holy
Conferences. But yet, when there was occasion, either to discourse with fair
Ladies, or jest with witty persons, or feast with pleasant, a man might easily
perceive some footsteps of his nature: which made him, for the most part, keep
from the society of all lay people, but especially from banquets, to which,
when he must needs come, he commonly took with him me or some learned friend,
with whom he discoursed in Latin, that he might avoid idle talk. His custom was
to eat only of one dish, to content himself with one glass of bear or ale, or
two at the most. And, though he was delighted with good wine, yet he drank very
little of it, always suspecting his own sanguine complexion and inclination,
and being wary of all those things, by which he might offend any person
whatsoever. In all my life I never saw a more happy Wit: and thence it came
that he was exceedingly pleased with such Wits as were like himself: but at all
times, when he might choose his discourse, it was of such things as prepared him
for the immortality of a life to come. And when at any time he refresht himself
with pleasant stories, he did not fail to make use of his Philosophy in them.
He was much pleased with the simplicity of nature in little children (to the
imitation of whom we are called by our blessed Savior) being wont to compare
them to Angels.

11. Now for the second particular his Opinions, he much differed in them from
the Vulgar. The Scotists (of whose acuteness most men have an high conceit) he
esteemed heavy fellows, and any thing rather than ingenuous. And yet he had a
worse opinion of Thomas Aquinas than of Scotus: who, said he, if he had not
been very arrogant, would never so rashly (and yet so magisteriallie) have
presumed to define all points of religion: and if he had not savoured too much
of the spirit of the world. he would not have polluted all the doctrine of
Christ with so much of his own profane Philosophy. No man was more a friend
to true Christian piety, yet he had little or no kindness for Monks, or rather
I should say for those who are now (for the most part falsely) so called: and
therefore, while he lived, he gave them but little, and when he dyed, nothing:
not that he hated their profession, but because he saw they did not live
according to it. Yet his desire was, to have disengaged himself from the world,
and betaken himself to a Monastery, if he could any where have found a Society,
that was truly and unanimously resolved upon an Evangelical life. Though he
lived very chastely himself, yet he had a very charitable opinion of those
Priests and Monks, who had no other crime but venery: not that he did not
heartily abhor the sin, but because he found such men far less mischieveous
than others (if compared) who were haughty, envious, backbiters, hypoctites,
vain, unlearned, wholly given to the getting of money and honor. And he was
not more averse to any sort of men, than such Bishops, who were Wolves instead
of Shepherds, and commended themselves by external service of God, ceremonies,
benedictions and indulgences to the people, while with all their hearts they
served the world: i. e. glory and gain. He was not much displeased with them,
who would not have images (either painted or carved, gold or silver) worshipped
in Churches: nor with them, who doubted whether a notorious wicked Priest could
consecrate the Sacrament. Hereby not favoring their error, but expressing his
indignation against such Clergymen, who by an open bad life gave occasion to
this suspicion. As he did much approve of secret confession (professing that he
never had so much comfort from any thing as that) so he much condemned anxiety
in it, and repetition. He was content to Sacrifice on Sundays and Holy days,
or some few days beside: either to gain more time for his sacred studies, and
fit himself the better for his Pulpit employments, and the business of his
Cathedral; or, because he found that his dovotion had a greater edge, when it
was sharpened with intervals: and yet, he would not condemn them who were minded
to come to the Lords Table every day. Though he was a very learned man himself,
yet he did not prize the vast and confused learning of such as wander among
various sciences and books, saying, They got rather a learned sort of madness,
than any true incentive to Christian innocence, simplicity and charity. He
dissented from innumerable opinions commonly received in the Schools: in which,
he would sometimes tell his mind to his friends, but say nothing to others,
lest he should incur a double inconvenience, loose his own credit, and do them
no good, perhaps harm.

12. And now in the last place hear his Afflictions. He never agreed well with
his Bishop, who (to say nothing of his manners) was a superstitious and
stubborn Scotist. Neither was the Doctor acceptable to most of his own
College, because he was very tenacious of regular discipline; and the Prebends
complained, that he used them as Monks: whereas indeed that College was
anciently called East-monasterie. The old Bishop exhibited Articles against him
to the Archbishop of Cant: That he said, Images were not to be worshipped, etc.
But the Archbishop being well acquainted with Colet's excellencies, instead of
being his Judge, became his Advocate. Then the old man strove to incense the
Court against him, especially K. Henry VIII. himself: because the Doctor (when
the King was raising forces against the French) had said in a Sermon: That an
unjust peace was to be preferred before a most just war. Here the King (who was
an excellent person in his youth) gave an evident proof of his Royal parts,
exhorting the Dean privately; To go on in his preaching, freely to tax the
corrupt manners of that age, and not to withdraw his light in those most dark
times; adding, That he knew very well what incensed the Bishops so highly
against him, and how much good the Dean had done by his Divine life and holy
Doctrine to the English Church and Nation: Lastly, that he would so curb their
endeavors, that it should appear to the world, Whoever troubled Colet should
not escape unpunisht. Hereupon the Dean humbly thanked the King for his Royal
favor, but beseeched him not to do so; professing, That he had rather lay down
his preferment, then that any should suffer for his sake. Again, upon
Good Friday, the Dean made a Sermon to the King and Courtiers, which was much
admired, concerning the victory of Christ: wherein he exhorted all Christians
to fight under the banner of their heavenly King, and overcome, saying, That
they, who either through hatred, or ambition, or cov^teousness, do fight with
evil men, and so kill one another, fight not under the banner of Christ, but
the Devil; showing withal. How hard a thing it is, to die like a Christian: How
few go forth to battle free from hatred and covetousness; and how difficult
for such to be in charity (without which no man shall see God) who sheath
their swords in their brethrens bowels: adding, That they should rather imitate
their King Christ, than Pagan Caesar's and Alexa^ders. And he had so many other
smart passages to this purpose, that his Majesty was somewhat afraid, lest this
Sermon would dishearten the Soldiers that were listed. But, when Colet came
before the King, in his garden at Greenwich, the King bids him cover his head,
and speak his mind freely: and then his Highness began thus, Dean, be not
surprised with needless fears, I did not send for you hither to disturb your
most holy labors, which I resolve to cherish as much as I can; but to unlode
my conscience of some scruples, and to desire your advice concerning my duty.
The Conference lasted almost an hour and an half, and I must not relate it all.
Only, his Majesty wished, That what the Dean spoke truly he would speak some
time or other more plainly, lest the rude Soldiers should misunderstand it, as
if he had said, That no war is lawful among Christians. So the King called for
a Cup, and drank to him, embraced him most kindly, and promi^^ng him all the
favors that could be e^pected from a most loving Prince, dismissed him; and
turning to the Courtiers said, Well, let other men choose what Doctors they
please, and make much of them, This man shall be my Doctor. From that day
forward never durst his enemies trouble Colet any more: a person, that, in an
high fortune and plenty, was led and governed not by his nature, but by Christ:
in a word, whom I shall not doubt to reckon in the Catalogue of my Saints,
though he be never canonized by any Pope. Thus far Erasmus.

13. I shall only annex a few lines collected out of Stow's Survey of London
in fol. concerning his kindred. His father Sr Henry Colet (son to Robert Colet
of Wendover in Buckinghamshier, Esquire.) was buried at Stepney, where his Monument
still remains. And the Pictures of Sr Henry and his Dame Christian, and ten of
his Sons, and ten of his Daughters, remain in the window, on the North side of
St Anthony (or Antlin) his Church near Budge-row. But he was born in the
Manor of Hale in Buckinghamshire, near Wendover, and Alesburie: which Manor
our Doctor left to Paul's School, an^ some of his name dwell there still. See
hi^ Monument excellently described by learne^ Mr Dugdale in his History of St
Paul's Cathedral.

Ob. An. Dom. 1519. aet. 53.
^

^



From a rare Pen there came to fill this Place
A Character too rich to suit the Face;
The Author saw't* and (to himself best known)
Admired the Love, durst not the Notions own:
And for himself, and for his Book, he says,
What Is good is Gods, and Gods alone the praise:
Sermons take not from men's applause Renown;
The Peoples Practice is the Preachers Crown.
D: Loggan. delin: et seu^^.



II. Mr JOHN LANGLY. Master of Paul's School.
Out of his Funeral Sermon by Dr Ed: Reynolds (now L B. of N.) Mro: Markly,
Schol. Winche.
1. LEarning is so excellent an endowment, that the Teachers of it ought to be
^ad in great honor. And I scarce know a greater defect in this Nation, than
the w^nt of such encouragement and maintenance as might render the Calling of a
Schoolmaster so honorable, as men of great learning might be invited unto
that service. Errors in the first concoction, are not mended in the second:
what is lo^t in the School, is hardly ever fully recovered in the University,
And by how much the fewer men of great worth and parts are employed in that
Service, by so much the more should the loss of rare and worthy men in that way
be bewailed by us.

2. Great was the happiness of this City in this particular, while it enjoyed
this worthy man, and great the loss in being deprived of him. For though,
through Gods goodness, there be many excellent men remaining, out of whom some
reparation may be made of so great a damage; yet still I look on the departure
of this man, as if the middle and most precious stone in a rich Jewel should
drop out, which, though many others remain in, cannot but be greatly missed.

3. Our dear Brother was a learned man, learned in the whole Body of Learning:
not only an excellent Linguist and Grammarian, Historian, Cosmographer, Artist,
but a most judicious Divine, and a great Antiquarie in the most memorable
things of this Nation. Into whatsoever parts of the Land he traveled, he was
able to refresh and to instruct his Fellow-travellers in the most remarkable
particulars of every Country. Pausanias was not more accurate in the
description of Greece, than he of England. And I have heard, that he had it
sometimes in his thoughts to have published some thing in this kind. He was a
man of a solid Judgment: he always spoke e sulco pectoris, and I have, not
without great satisfaction, heard him give his Notions upon difficult places of
Scripture, and Arguments of Divinity in ordidinary discourse, as if he had
elaborately studied them.

4. He was able out of his full Treasury and Storehouse of Learning, to bring
forth both new and old. I never knew any learned subject spoken of in his
company, wherein he was not able most dexterously to deliver his opinion. He was
a man of a copious discourse, but withal so solid and judicious, as did ever
delight his Audito^s, never weary them. As Livie said of Cato, Natum ad id
diceres, quodcunque ageret, we may say of him, Doctum in hoc uno crederes,
quodcunque diceret.

5. He was a Worker as well as a Speaker; he was not a barren figtree, that had
leaves without fruit; nor a tinkling Cymbal, noise without love; he taught by
his life as well as by his learning. Verbi^ tantum Philosophari, non est
doctoris sed histrionis, as he said: and Dicta factis deficientibus erubescunt,
says Tertullian. And indeed, he was a man of fixed and resolved honesty, and
wondered in his sickness, what men did learn Christianity for, if it were not
in every condition to practice it, and ado^n the profession of it.

6. He was a patient man: patient in his School; patient in his sufferings,
willingly be^^ing the reproach of Christ, and not fearing the wrath of any man,
in comparison of the reverence he did bear to his own conscience: patient in
sickness, composing himself with as unshaken confidence to dye, as in time of
health he would have gone about any other business.

7. He was a faithful man, most exactly answerable to the trust of his place:
opprimi potius onere officii maluit, quam illud deponere, as once Tullie spoke.
It was hardly possible for any friend by any importunity to draw him from a
most punctual observation of timely attendance upon the duties of his place.
And so tenderly fearful was he of miscarriage herein, and so sensible of any
the least defect, that in a former Sickness he desired, if he should then have
dyed, to have been buried at the School-door, in regard he had in his
ministration there come short of the duties which he owed unto the School. The
fullest ears of corn bow their heads; and the most worthy men are most humble,
and apprehensive of their own failings.

8. He was a constant man: punctual and immovable from honest principles. Vir
rigidae innocentiae, as Livie said of Cato. He was of Polemo's judgment in this
point, Debere in esse quandam moribus contumaciam, That men having proved all
things should hold fast the best, and be pertinacious in goodness.

9. He was a Wise man. Prudence is requisite to tame and calm the wild and
unswaied humors of young children. It is noted as a special piece of Socrates's
Wisdom, that he did by his instruction fix and reduce the wandering and vicious
inclinations of Alcibiades.

10. I might go on, and instance in the Authority, Gravity, Meekness,
observable in our dear friend, but I only add his great care of the School at
his last, that there might be an able Successor chosen. The evening before he
dyed, with great earnestness he commended it to the Company by a Member
thereof, who came to visit him, That they should use their uttermost wisdom and
care to choose an able, learned, religious and orthodox man into the place;
naming one, of whose fitness both he and the Company and School had had before
great experience. And so much were they pleased to honor the judgment and
integrity of this worthy man, that presently after his death they pitched upon
an excellent learned man, whom he had so providently commended to them.

11. This worthy friend of mine, the Friday and Saturday before his own Fit,
was pleased to visit me, lying at that time under a sore Fit of the Stone. It
pleased the Lord the MOnday following to bring a Fit upon him, and sending to
enquire of his condition, he sent me word ho^ it was with him, and that he
looked on this Fit as a Messenger of death from God unto him. And though in
obedience to Gods appointment, he made use of means, yet he still insisted upon
it, that his time of dissolution was now come, and accordingly with great
composedness and resolvednesse of spirit, waited for death, as a man does for
a loving friend, whom he is willing to embrace.

Ob. September. 1657.
Reverendus in Cristo pater ac Dominus D. Thomas Dunel mensis Episcopus.
Obijt Ano^ Aetatis -- 95 Episcopatus -- 44 Salutis -- 1659





III. Dr THOMAS MORTON, Bishop of Duresme.
Out of his Life, Written by Dr Barwick, (now) Dean of S. Paul's. D. Thomae
Vyner, Rect. de Staunton.
1. HIs Coat Armor and pedigree show him to be of the same Original and Stock,
with that eminent Prelate and wise Statesman John Morton, Lord Chanc: of
England, and Archbishop of Cant: (by whose contrivance and management the two
Houses of York and Lancaster were united.) But, in his great modesty and
humility, he would not revive, nor so much as look upon, a very fair and large
descent of his Pedigree, when it was presented to him: though he liberally
rewarded the person that presented it.

2. The place of his birth was the ancient and famous City of York: his Parents
were of good note, Mr Richard Morton Mercer, and Mrs Eliz: Leedale (by whom the
Valvasours and Langdales acknowledge themselves to be of his kindred:) by whose
care he was brought up in p^etie and learning, first at York, and afterward at
Hallifax under Mr Maud: of whom he always spoke with great reverence, as a
grave man and a good S^oolmaster. He took root in the Nursery of Hallifax till
the eighteenth year of his age, before he was trans-planted into the Garden of
the University.

3. An. 1582. he was sent to Cambridge, and there admitted into S. John's Coll.
wherein were so many eminent Schola^s at that time, as he was wont to say, It
seemed to be a whole University of it self. The Master of the College was Dr
Whitaker: his first Tutor was Mr Anthony Higgon, who left him to the care of Mr
Hen: Nelson, who lived to see his Pupil pass through all the other Dignities
he had in the Church, till he came to be Bishop of Duresm, and a good many
years after.

4. An. 1590, he took his Degree of Master of Arts, having performed all his
Exercises with great approbation and applause. Afterward, for above two years,
he continued his studies in the College at his Fathers charge. And then, Mar:
17. 1592. he was admitted Fellow merely for his worth against eight Competitors
for the place. Which he was wont to recount with greater contentment to
himself, than his advancement to any Dignity he ever enjoyed in the Church.
About the same time he was chosen Logic Lecturer for the University: which
place he discharged with as much Art and Diligence, as may appear by his
Lectures fairly written, which I find among his papers.

5. In the same year he was admitted to the facred Order of Deacon, and the
next after, of Priesthood. Having received his Commission from God and his
Church, he was very ready to assist others in the way of charity; but not too
forward to take upon him a particular care of Souls. And accordingly we find
him for about five years after this continuing in the College, prosecuting his
own private Study, and reading to such young Scholars as were committed to his
care and Tuition.

6. An. 1598. he took his Degree of Bachelor in Divinity. And about the same
year, being presented, instituted and inducted to the Rectory of Long Marston,
four miles distant from his native City of York, he betook himself wholly to
the Cure of Souls there committed to him, which he discharged with great care
and diligence: And yet he did not intermit his higher studies for the general
good of the Church while he atrended it. To that end he had always some Person
to be his Assistant, whom he knew to be pious and learned.

7: And this assistance was the more necessary, because his great parts and
worth would not suffer him to enjoy his privacy in a country-cure. For first he
was made choice of by the Earl of Huntington, then Lord President of the North,
to be his Chaplain, for his dexterity and acuteness in disputing with the
Romish Recusants: for it was Queen Elizabeth's express command to him to
convince them by Arguments, rather than suppress them by force: and this she
expressed (as his Lordshop was wont to say) in the words of the Prophet, Nolo
mortem peccatoris.

8. But the Earl dying presently after, he returned again to his privacy at
Marston: where he continued not long, before the Lord Sheffield (who succeeded
as Lord President) commanded him to hold a public Conference before his
Lordship, and the Council at the Manor house in York with two Romish
Recusants, then prisoners in the Castle; which he performed with great
satisfaction to the Auditory, among whom were many of the chief Gentry and
Clergy of Yorkshire.

9. An. 1602, began the great plague at York: at which time he carried himself
with much Heroical Charity. For, the poorer sort being removed to the
Pesthouse, he made it his frequent exercise to visit them with food, both for
their bodies and souls. His chief errand was to instruct and comfort them, to
pray for them and with them; and to make his coming the more acceptable, he
carried usually a sack of provision with him, for those that wanted it. And
because he would have no man run any hazard thereby but himself, he seldom
suffered any of his servants to come near him, but sadled and unsadled his own
horse, and had a private door made on purpose into his house and chamber.

10. An. 1603. he attended the Queens Ambassador into Germany, being desirous
to improve himself by seeing foreign Kingdoms, Churches and Universities. His
stay in those parts was the shorter because the Ambassadors Commission
determined at the death of the Queen. But however he improved his time so well,
partly in furnishing his own Library with books at Frankfurt and elsewhere,
but chiefly in his conversation with learned men, and in his foreign
Observations, that he always very highly valued that opportunity.

11. At his return he was solicited ^y Roger Earl of Rutland to be his
domestical Chaplain. Which proffer he was the more willing to accept, for the
privacy he hoped to enjoy in a place where he was not know, for making use of
that Treasure of Books, he had got in his travels: And the rather, because
thereby he was brought so much nearer London than before, whither he must have
many occasions to go, for the putting forth of such Books, as he had in design
to write. For it was not long after that he printed his first part of his
Apologia Catholica. About which time, the Archbishop of York, Toby Matthews
(that most exquisite preacher) conferred upon him a Prebend in that
Metropolitical Church.

12. An. 1606. He took the Degree of Doctor in Divinity with the great
Approbation of both the professors in Divinity, Dr John Overal, that profound
Scholar, and Dr Tho: Playfer that acute Disputant and accurate Preacher, who
were both of them very competent Judges of men's abilities. And there began that
intimate acquaintance he had with the said Dr Overal (afterward Dean of S.
Paul's, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, and lastly of Norwich) which
continued between them till it was dissolved by death. And about the same time
he was sworn Chaplain in Ordinary to K. James, and by him made Dean of
Gloucester, and assumed by the Lord President of Wales for one of his Majesty's
Council for the Marches. In his first journey to Gloucester he went by Oxford at
the Act time: where he was incorporated and admitted to the same Degree he had
in Cambridg: where also he was much taken with the exercises of Mr Dan. Featly,
then a proceeder, and carried great friendship to him ever after. At which time
(among other eminent Persons) he fell into acquaintance with that famous Dr
John King, then Dean of Chapter Chapter afterward Bishop of London, which afterward
grew so intimate, that the Bishop made choice of him to perform the last
offices to him both at his death and burial.

13. An. 1609. he succeeded Dr George Abbot in the Deanery of Winchester. There
Bishop Bilson conferred on him the Rectorie of Alesford; and there (among other
learned men whose friendship he much valued) he had intimate acquaintance with
Dr Arthur Lake, then Master of St Cross. In the next year, a Parliament being
held, he preached the Sermon to the Convocation, upon Matthew: 5. 13. Vos estis
sal terrae, with general applause, and should have been Prolocutor, but in
modesty declined it, and preferred a friend of his. In his abode at London, he
took his lodging at Dean Overal's: who gave him the opportunity of a very early
acquaintance with the learned Isaac Casaubon, then newly come out of France,
andentertained by the Dean. The love thus begun was never intermitted in their
lives, nor obliterated by death, as appears by Casaubon's Monument at
Westminster Abbey, set up at the charge of Morton. About the same time he had
the opportunity of entering into a very good acquaintance with several other
eminent foreign Scholars and Divines: as namely, Scultetus, Diodati, Du Moulin,
whose worth is very well known by their learned works in print.

14. While he continued in Winchester, a certain great person passionately told
the ^ing, That Dr Morton had spoiled one of the best Deanries in England. It
concerned the Dean to vindicate his good name from that foul and unjust
aspersion. And therefore acquainting his Brethren of the Chapter with it, they
were very forward to give and he not backward to receive a Testimonia from them
under their hands and seals, That h^ had been one of the best Deans that ever
had been a^ Winchester in their times: and some of them were very ancient.

15. An. 1616. July 7. he was consecrated Bishop of Chaester. While necessaries
were preparing for his journey thither, and for the accommodation of his Palace
there, he retired himself to Clay-Hall in Essex, upon the earnest invitatior of
his Noble friend Sr Christopher Hatton, an^ there fell sick of a dangerous
Fever, but being happily recovered, presently put himself upon his journey
toward his great work, and was me^ on the borders of his Diocese and brought
into the City of Chester by such a great number of Knights and other the best
Gent: of the Country, beside the Clergy, as may give a lasting testimony, to
their honor as well as his, in showing such a religious respect to their
Bishop.

16. When he was settled there, he found all the inconveniences which he fore
saw, (and which made him at first loath to undertake that weighty Office) and
some also which he could not foresee at so great a distance. For, beside the
great number of Romish Recusants, which has always been observed in this
Diocese, he found another sort of Recusants (better known by the name of
Nonconformists) who, though they were not so many in number as the other, yet
had they so much perverseness and obstinacy in them, as made them equal, or
rather superior, in relation to the trouble he had with them. For the reducing
of them to their obedience to the Church, he used no less fatherly mildness
then strength of Argument: and after he had endeavored their satisfaction in a
public Conference with them about the use of the Surplice, etc. he printed a
Relation thereof with some enlargements, entitled, The defense of the three
innocent Ceremonies. But in reducing the other party, the Popish Recusants, God
blessed him with far better success, to the great content of his Majesty.

17. An. 1617. at the Kings return out of Scotland through Lancashire, his
Majesty was petitioned about some innocent Recreation for servants, and other
inferior persons, on the Lords day and Holy days, whose laborious Callings
deprived them of it all other times. The King consulted with the Bishop how he
might satisfy their desires without endangering this liberty to be turned
into lasciviousness. Whereupon the Bishop presented to the King in writing the
next day (Bishop Andrews attended the King the same time) several limitations
or restrictions, which the King so well approved that he said, He would only
alter them from ohe words of a Bishop to the words of a King: viz. That all
known Recusants, and all that are not present at Church at the Service of God
shall be barred from the benefit of this liberty: That these Recreations shall
not be used before the end of all divine services for that day: That every
person should resort to his own parish Church, etc. The Declaration was
published May 24. in the 16. of his Reign: and since republished by our late
Gracious Soverain, K. Charles 1. The good Bishop, to maintain his hospitality
in that place, where good housekeeping is so much valued and practiced, had the
Rectorie of Stopford in Commendam, bestowed on him by the King, where his name
and memory is still precious.

18. An. 1618. Mar. 6. At the mo^ion of that great pattern of Episcopal
perfection, Dr Andrews above mentioned, then Bishop of Eli (who was never
known to do the like for any other, and yet did this without his seeking or
knowledge, that he might have him his nearer neighbor, as he said, and of the
same Province with himself:) He was translated to the ^ee of Coventry and
Lichfield, void by the Translation of his old friend Bishop Overal to Norwich.
And here his trouble was not so great as at Chester, though his Diocese was
longer: because the common sort of people, for the most part, were better
principled by the care and vigilance of his Predecessor. But yet he abated
nothing of his former pains and industry, both in Writing, Preaching and
conferring with those that were not wilfully obstinate: besides his ordinary
Visiting his Diocese, and Confirming such children as could give an Account of
their Faith.

19. Among the works of Charity performed by this Bishop, while he was of that
See, memorable is the Education he bestowed upon one George Canner, (who like
another Didymus of Alexandria, or Fisher of Wewminster was born blind:) This
youth he brought up first at School, and afterward sent him to Cambrigde,
where he maintained him, and his Uncle to look to him, in S. John's Coll. After
he had taken the Degree of Bachelor of Arts, he sent for him into his o^n
Family, and there instructed him in the whole Body of Divinity; then admitted
him into sacred Orders, placed him in a Cure in St^ff^rdshire. Which Cure the
blind man discharged diligently and laudably, being a very good preacher, and
able also to perform the whole Office of the Church, as it is prescribed in the
Book of Common prayer, only by the strength of his admirable Memory.

20. Memorable also is that passage of the Boy of Bilson near Woolverhampton,
who being wrought upon by some Romish Priests, counterfeited himself to be
possessed with a Devil. But the Devil having steeled his heart (as his own
phrase was after his confession) he continued Demoniac longer than was
intended, and accused a neighboring woman, of the Romish Communion, for
bewitching him, so cunningly prosecuting the charge, as the woman hardly
escaped. The Bishop suspecting the Boy did but counterfeit, got leave of the
Judges to have the Boy home with him: where, by his wisdom and great pains he
discovered the imposture; and afterward, upon the Boys Confession and
Repentance, bound him out an Apprentice to a Shomaker in Bristol.

21. An. 1632. He was translated to the Sea of Duresm (void by the death of
Bishop Howson) a place of greater trust and honor, as well as of greater
emolument. For, besides the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Affairs (as before) he
had now the care and management of all the tumporal Affairs within the County
Palatine of Duresm, by virtue of the Palatinate, which for many hundreds of
years has been annexed to the Episcopal See: in so much as it passed for a
Maxim there: Quicquid potest Rex extra Episcopatum, potest Episcopus intra: And
yet in the same he carried himself with so much justice and equity for ten
years together before these late Troubles put a disturbance in the exercise of
his Government, that no complaint was ever made against him to the Parliament:
except only the case of Mr Smart, which yet had no relation to the County
Palatine, neither could the charge be made good against him.

22. Some Rules which he set unto his Government were these. First, for his
Fines at the renewing of Leases, he never intermeddled in setting them himself,
but referred the business to four Gentlemen of the neighborhood, to make a
moderate composition between him and his Tenants. 2. In wreks, he took such a
small sum of the persons that had suffered them, as was not worthy the name of
a Composition; and that only to preserve the right of his place. 3. In Deodans,
where any man had made himself away; though by law the whole estate was
confiscated in detestationem criminis, yet exceeded he not a fourth part of the
estate after the most moderate Valuation. And lastly, for Wardships; he used
that tenderness, as never any of the Gentry had wrong in their Minority.

23. How much greater his Fatherly care was, for the Spiritual affairs of the
Bishopric, will appear by his pious endeavors in settling competent
Augmentations upon the smaller Benefices He had given a good ex^mple long
before, whiles he was Bishop of Lichfield, in abating a good part of his Fine,
to increase the portion of the Vicar of Pichley in Northamptonshire. And now in
a work of so much importance, he applied himself for Counsel to three of the
most learned in the Laws, Lo. Keeper Coventry, Mr Noy, Sr Henry Martin, who all
concurred, That the Bishops Authority over Churches appropriate was neither
taken away, nor any way infringed, but that he may now appoint a competent
Augmentation, etc. See the Author.

24. Having thus fully informed himself of his just parts in a matter of so
high Concernment for the advancement of Christian Religion, and the good of
Souls, he resolved to put it in practice, as f^r as God should enable him, and
trust God with the event. He began at home with the Parish of B^shop-Auk^and.
Here he augmented the s^ipend of the Mother Church from sixteen pounds per an:
to fourscore, and the Chapels belonging to it from about six pounds per an. to
thirty; intending to extend the like Episcopal care in some proportion over all
the rest of his Diocese: But so pious heroical a work became abortive by the
Scotch Invasion, etc.

25. We are come now to the precipice of this Reverend Bishop's outward
splendour: though neither his Glory nor Happiness incurred the least diminution
by his future sufferings. For he was never more happy in his own thoughts, nor
more glorious in the eyes of all good men, then in being exercised in those
troubles, whereof the continual series of public affairs afforded him a
perpetual opportunity from this time till his death.

26. In one of the tumults after the beginning of the long Parliament, this
Reverend Bishop was in extreme hazard of his life by the multitude that were
beckned thither by the contrivers of our late miseries: whereof some cried,
Pull him out of his Coach: Others, Nay, he is a good man: Others, But for all
that he is a Bishop. And he has often said, He believed he should not have
escaped alive, if a leading man among that rabble had not cried out, Let him go
and hang himself. Upon this and the like violations of the liberty and freedom
essential to all the Members of Parliament, when the Twelve Bishops (whereof
this was one) remonstrated the just fears they were in, and Protested their
dissent from all Laws which should be enacted, till they might attend service
of the House with freedom and saftey They were all charged with high Treason by
the House of Commons, and committed to Prison, etc.

27. Our Bishop being (after four months) discharged from this his first
imprisonment, returned to his lodgings in Duresm House, and there attended his
devotions and study, till suchtime as his Adversaries thought fit to give him
another occasion to exercise his patience under a second Captivity, upon
occasion of baptising a Child of the Earl of Rutland's according to the Order
of the Church. And in custody he remained six months before he could obtain his
enlargement. After this he remained in Duresm house till he was thrown out
thence by the soldiers, that came to Garrison it, a little before that horrid
fact was committed upon the person of our late Gracious King: and after that,
being importuned by his honorable friends the Earl and Countess Rutland, he
became a part of their care and family at Exe^er-house for some short time. But
being loath to live at the charge of others, while he was able to subsist of
himself, and thinking the air of the Country might better suit with his
declining years, he betook himself to sojourn first with Captain Saunders in
Hartfordshire, and after with Mr Tho. Rotheram in Bedfordshire, till by the
great civility and earnest importunity of that Noble young Baronet, Sr Henry
Yelverton, he went with him to his house at Easton-Manduit in
Northamptonshire, where he found all the tender respect and care from the
whole family, which a Father could exspect from his children, till after some
four months he rendered up his happy soul into the hands of his Heavenly Father.

28. When the House of Commons had voted for the dissolving of Bishoprics, and
selling the lands that belonged to them, some prevailed for another Vote of
Yearly Allowance to present Bishops during their lives. Our Bishop had 8001 per
an. voted to him: but, while he was able to subsist without it, never troubled
himself to look after it. And at last, pressed by necessities, having procured
a Copy of the Vote, found it to contain no more than only that such a sum
should be paid, but no mention either by whom or whence. And by that time he
could procure and explanation of the Order to make the Pension payable out of
the Revenues of his own Bishopric, all the Lands and Revenues of it were sold
or divided among themselves. Only, by the importunity of his friends he
obtained an Order to have 1000l out of their Treasury at Goldsmiths Hall, with
which he paid his debts and purchased to himself an Annuity of 200l per an.
during his life, upon which he subsisted ever since.

29. No man can expect any considerable Legacies in the Will of a person
deceased, who made his own hands his Executors, while he lived: like his great
kinsman Archbishop Morton, who chose rather to enrich his kindred and servants
in his life time, then at his death: or rather, like Archbishop Warham,
successor to Morton, who lying on his death bed, called for his Steward to let
him know what money he had, and understanding from him, it was but thirty
pound, thanked God for it, and said, He never desired to dye richer. Our Bishop
had so much left him at his death, that he gave 40l to one of his servants who
then atten^ed him (having provided for the other formerly) and 10l to the poor
of the Parish, and his Chalice with a Patin double guilt to the Noble Baronet
for the use of his Chapel. The rest (deducing some small remembrances) he
ordered for his burial, which was also sufficient for a Monument, though far
below his worth, yet suitable to his great Modesty.

30. I cannot omit the chief Legacy of his Will for the common good of souls in
the Church of England, particularly in his own Diocese (See it in the Funeral
Sermon) where he concludes thus My earnest exhortation to them is, that they
would still continue their former Affections (notwithstanding all temptations
to the contrary) both to the Doctrine, Discipline, Government, and Form of
Worship in this poor afflicted Church: Which, if I did not believe to be the
securest way for the salvation of souls, I had not ventured my own upon the
same bottom.

31. His high esteem of the sacred Liturgy of the Church of England attended
him (as I may say) to his Grave. For he gave express command to his Chaplain,
not to omit, nor so much as transpose (as he had observed too frequently to be
done by others) the reading of the Lesson (1 Cor: 15.) which the Church has
prescribed to be read at the Grave: and which being read there, while such a
spectacle of mortality is before their eyes, could not (said he) but have a
greater influence upon their souls, than any Funeral Sermon he had ever heard
preached. Great fervor and devotion he showed in the Churchprayers: whereunto
he seldom answered with a single Amen; and at which duty he never kneeled upon
a Cushion (I think) in all his life, nor ever prayed but upon his knees, till
he was confined to his death bed: and even would neverly with his Cap on his
head, if he either prayed himself, or any other prayed by him, while he had
strength to pull it off with his own hands. Great consolation he took in the
Church-preparations for his long home: viz. in the profession of his faith and
Charity and Repentance, in receiving the benefit of Absolution, and the
Viaticum of the Holy Eucharist.

32. He lived a great number of years, and very few ever husbanded theit time
better; for he was never idle with his good will. He was often up at his
devotion and study before four a clock, even after he had lived above fourscore
years, and yet very seldom went to bed till after ten; and then had always a
servant to read some book to him, till such time as sleep did surprise him: and
so had he always when he traveled in his Coach, that his journey might not be
too great a hinderance to his study. He used to lie on a straw bed till he was
above fourscore.

33. He led his life in a holy and chaste celibate. The issue of his brain was
numerous, (beside M. SS.) above twenty several Volumes in print: some of which
are these that follow: Apologia Cath. p. 1. pars 2. The Catholic Appeal. Causa
Regia. The Grand Imposture, and proofs. Sermons. Confessions out of foreign
Divines for Bishops. Gods Providence: the last book he lived to publish, a fit
Meditation for his declining years in those sad Times.

34. To add somewhat of his Character. 1. His patience. In the greatest trial
of his temper that ever he had, the news of the Vote, that the Revenues of the
Church were to be sold, he only said: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away; Blessed be the name of the Lord: Which he repeated three times over
before the company he was in, and presently retired himself to his prayers: 2.
His Hospitality. He entertained the King and his Court, and (at least the
Officers of) his Army, all at one time in the first expedition toward Scotland,
which cost him (in that place of great cheapnesse) above 1500l in one day.
There seldom came any Scholar to him, whether Foreign or English, whom he did
not liberally entertain, and dismiss with a considerable sum of money. 3. His
Beneficence. He built a Free School at Bishop Aukland, and endowed it with 24l
per au: which is more by so much than ever he purchased to himself, for that
was just nothing. He gave many excellent books to the College where he had his
Education, to the value of 4 or 500l, with an intention at last to bestow 100l
per an. during his life (had not the times disabled him) to buy books of
special worth and not for superfluity. 4. His Almsgiving. While he was sufferd
to enjoy his estate, he had his Beadsmen in Livery at a constant Table, besides
what he gave away at his Gate, and upon other occasions. Nay, so constant was
he in this duty, even then when he had hardly so much left as to afford bread
for his own mouth, that he had always a certain number of poor impotent
persons in a constant pension, that came weekly to him for their allowance,
when he was not able himself to go among them to give it: and this will be
abundantly testified by the poor in all places, where of late he has lived. 5.
His Devotion. He would often forgo, ot at least much moderate, his one meal a
day; often deny himself some part of that pittance of time allowed for sleep,
to rise out of his bed, and to spend in prayer, as the Attendants in his
Chamber witness. [See the rest in the reverend Author of his Life and of his
Funeral Sermon.]

Ex Epitaphio.
Nullo non dignus Elogio, Eo vero dignior, quod nullo se dignum aestimaverit.

Ob. Crastino S. Mat.

Sepult. Festo S. Mich.

Anno Salut. 1659. Aetat. 95. Episc. 44.

The Effigies of Mr George Herbert: Author of those Sacred Poems called The
Temple.


IV. M. GEORGE HEREBRT. (Vide Vol. 1.)
Out of his Life before his REMAINS. D. Richardo Cooper, Rect. de Weston.
1. MR George Herbert was extracted out of a Generous, Noble and Ancient
Family, His Father was Richard Herbert of Blachehall in Montgomery, Esquire;
descended from the great Sr Richard Herbert in Edward the IV's time; and so his
Relation to the Noble Family of that Name, well kno^n. His Mother was daughter
of Sr Richard Newport of Arcoll: who doubtless was a pious daughter, she was
so good and godly a Mother. She had ten children, Job's number and Job's
distinction, seven sons. For whose Education she went and dwelt in the
University, to recompense the loss of their Father, in giving them two
Mothers. And this great care of hers, this good Son of hers studied to improve
and requite, as is seen in those many Latin and Greek Verses, the Obsequious
Parentalia he made and printed, in her Memory: Which, though they be good,
very good, yet (to speak freely of this man I so much honor) they be dull or
dead in comparison of his Temp^e Poems. And no marvel: To write those, he made
his Ink with water of Helicon, but these Inspirations Prophetical were
distilled from above: In those are weak Notions of Nature; in these raptures of
Grace: In those he writ flesh and blood, a frail earthly woman, though a
Mother, but in these he praised his Heavenly Father.

2. He did thrive so well in Cambridge in Trinity Coll: that he was first
chosen Fellow there, and afterward Orator of the University. The Memorials of
him left in the Orators book, show how he discharged the place: and himself
intimates, Church p. 39. That whereas his Birth and Spirit prompted him to
Martial Achievements, The way that takes the Town, and not to sit simpering
over a Book; God did often melt his spirit, and entice him with Academick
honor, to be content to wear and wrap up himself in a Gown, so long, till he
durst not put it off, nor retire to any other Calling. However, probably he
might, I have heard, (as other Orators) have had a Secretary of States place,
being one of the most prudent and accomplished men of his time. I have heard
sober men censure him as a man that did not manage his brave parts to his best
advantage and preferment, but lost himself in an humble way: That was the
phrase, I well remember it.

3. This good man like a good genuine son of Levi (I had like to have said
Melchizedek) balked all secular ways, saw neither Father nor Mother, Child nor
Brother, birth nor friends (save in Christ Jesus) chose the Lord for his
Portion, and his service for employment. And he knew full well what he did,
when he received holy Orders, as appears by every page of his Country Parson,
and by the Poems called Priesthood, and Aaron, and by his unparalled
Vigilance, which he used ever in his Parish: which made him a Peer to the
Primitive Saints, and more than a Pattern to his own age.

4. Besides his Parsonage of Bemmerton in Wiltshire, he had also a Prebend in
the Church of Lincoln. Which (I think) because he lived far from, and so could
not attend the duty of that place, he would fain have resigned to Mr Ferrer,
and often earnestly sued to him to discharge him of it. But Mr Ferrer wholly
refused, and diverted or directed his charity (as I take it) to the reedefying
of the ruined Church of Leighton, where the Corpse of the Prebend lay. So that
the Church of England owes to him (besides what good may come by his book of
the Country Parson toward the repair of us Churchmen in point of Morals) the
Reparation of a Church material, and erection of that costly piece of Mosaic or
Solomonic work, The Temple: which florishes and stands inviolate, when our
other Magnificences are desolate and despised.

5. He was of a singular sincerity in embracing, and transcendent dexterity in
defending the Protestant Religion established in the Church of England. He that
reads Mr Herbert's Poems attendingly, shall find not only the excellencies of
Scripture-Divinity, and choice Passages of the Fathers bound up in Meeter, but
the Doctrine of Rome also finely and strongly confuted: as in the Poems, To
Saints and Angels, p. 69. The British Church, 102. Church militant, etc.

6. As for our Brethren that erred on the right hand, his chief aim was, to win
those that disliked our Liturgy, Catechism, etc, by the constant, reverent,
and holy use of them. Which, surely, had we all imitated, having first
imprinted the virtue of these prayers in our own hearts, and then studied with
passionate and affectionate celebration, for voice, gesture, etc. as in Gods
presence to imprint them in the minds of the people, our prayers had been
generally as well beloved as they were scorned.

7. There is one thing yet, which I admire above all the rest. The right
managing of the fraternal Duty of Reproof is (methinks) one of the most
difficult ^ffices of Christian Prudence. He had not only got the courage to do
this, but the art of doing this aright. There was not a man in his way, be he
of what rank he would, that spoke awry in order to God, but he wiped his mouth
with a modest, grave and Christian reproof. His singular dexterity in sweetning
this art, thou may see in the gua^b and phrase of his writings. Like a wise
Master Builder, he has fet about a form of speech, transferred it in a figure,
as if he was always learning from another man's mouth or pen, and not racking
any. And whereas we all of us deserved the sh^rpnesse of reproof, he says, He
does this, and He does that: whereas, poor men, we did no such thing. This dart
of his, thus dipped, pierces the Soul.

8. His Art of Divine Poetry, and other polite learning, so commen^ed him to
Persons most eminent in their time, that Dr Dorne inscribed to him a paper of
Latin Verses in print; and the Lord Bacon having translated some Psalms into
English Meeter, sent them with a Dedication prefixed, To his very good Friend,
Mr George Herbert: thinking, he had kept a true decorum in choosing one so fit
for the Argument, in respect of Divinity and Poetry (the one as the matter, the
other as the style) that a better choice he could not make.

9. I shall omit several excellencies of this Person: His conscientious expense
of Time; which he ever measured by the Pulse, that native watch God has set in
every of us: his eminent Temperance and Frugality (the two best Purveyors for
his Liberality and Beneficence:) his private fastings, his mortification of
the body; his extemporary Exercises thereof, at the sight or visit of a
Charnel-house, (where every bone, before the day, rises up in judgment against
fleshly lust and pride:) at the stroke of a passing bell, when ancient Charity
used (said he) to run to Church and assist the dying Christian with prayers and
tears (for sure that was the ground of that custom:) and at all occasions he
could lay hold of possibly; which he sought with the diligence that others shun
and shift them; besides his careful, not scrupulous Observation of appointed
Fasts, Lents and Embers. The neglect and defect of this last (he said) had such
influx on the Children which the Fathers of the Church did beget at such time,
as malignant stars are said to have over natural productions.

10. With Fasting he impt his prayers both private and public. His private
must be left to God, who saw them in secret: his public were the morning and
evening Sacrifice of the Church Liturgy. Which he used with conscientious
Devotion, not of Custom, but serious judgment, knowing, 1. That the Sophism
used to make people hate them, was a solid reason to make men of understanding
love them: namely, Because taken out of the Masse-book: taken out, but as gold
from dross, the precious from the vile, The wise Reformers knew Rome would
cry, Schism, Schism! and therefore they kept all they could lawfully keep,
being loath to give offense (as our blessed Savior, being loath to offend the
Jews at the great Reformation, kept diverse old Elements, and made them new
Sacrament and Services, as their frequent Washings he turned into one baptism,
some service of the Passover into the Lord's Supper:) 2. That the homeliness
and ccursenesse, which also was objected, was a a great commendation. The poor
Lambs of the flock are forty for one grounded Christian; proportionable must be
the care of the Church to provide milk: i. e. plain and easy nourishment for
them: and so had our Church done, hoping that stronger Christians, as they
abounded in gifts, so they had such a store of the grace of charity, as for
their weak Brethrens sakes to be content therewith.

11. He thought also, that a set Liturgy was of great use in respect of those
without, whether erring Christians, or unbelieving men: that when we had used
our best Arguments against their errors or unbelief, we might show them a Form,
wherein we did, and desired they would, serve Almighty God with us: that we
might be able to say, This is our Church, Here would we land you: Thus we
belive, See the Creed; Thus we pray, baptize, Catechize, Celebrate the
Eucharist, Marry, Bury, Entreat the Sick, etc. These, beside Unity, and other
accessory benefits, he thought ground sufficient to bear him out in his
practice; wherein he ended his life, calling for the Church-prayers, a while
before his death, saying, None to them, None to them! at once both commending
them, and his Soul to God in them, immediately before his dissolution; as some
Martyrs did, Mr Hulliar by name, Vicar of Babram, burnt to death in Cambridge.
Who having the Common Prayer book in his hand, instead of a Censer, and using
the prayers as Incense, offered up himself as a whole burnt Sacrifice to God.
With whom the very Book it self suffered Martyrdom; when fallen out of his
consumed hands, it was, by the Executioners, thrown into the fire, and burnt as
an heretical book.

12. He was, moreover, so great a lover of Church-Musick, that he usually
called it, Heaven upon earth, and attended it a few days before his death. But
above all, his chief delight was in the Holy Scripture: One leaf whereof, he
professed, he would not part with, though he might have the whole world in
exchange. This high esteem of the Word of Life, as it wrought in himself a
wondrous expression of high Reverence, when ever he either read it himself, or
heard others read it; so it made him equally wonder, that those who pretended
such extraordinary love to Christ Jesus, as many did, could possibly give such
leave and liberty to themselves, as to hear that Word, that shall judge us at
the last day, without any the least expression of that holy fear and trembling,
which they ought to charge upon their Souls in private, and in public to
imprint upon others.

13. I have not so much as with one dash of a pencil offered to describe that
person of his, which afforded so unusual a Contesseration of Elegancies, and
Set of rarities to the beholder: nor said I any thing of his personal Relation,
as a Husband to a loving and virtuous Lady, as a Kinsman, Master, etc. Yet will
I not silence his spiritual love and cate of Servants, teaching Masters this
duty; To allow their servants daily time wherein to pray privately, and to
enjoin them to do it; holding this for true generally: That public prayer
alone to such persons, is no prayer at all.

14. I have given thee only these lineaments of his mind, and thou may fully
serve thy self of his book, The Country-Parson, in what virtue of his thy soul
longs after. His practice it was, and his Character it is: His, as Author;
and his, as Object. Yet, lo, the Humility of this gracious man! He had small
esteem of this book, and but very little of his Poems. Though God had magnifyed
him with extraordinary Gifts, yet said he, God has broken into my study, and
taken off my Chariot wheels: I have nothing worthy of God: And even this
lowliness in his own eyes, does more advance their worth, and his Virtues.

[Here, my Reader, give me leave to propose to thy view some lines of that
excellent Figure, The Country Parson, written by the Author 1632. printed 1652.
which book I read with joy that we have any such, and with grief that we have
no more.]

1. The Country Parson is exceeding exact in his life, being holy, just,
prudent, temperate, ^old, grave in all his ways. And because the two highest
points of life, wherein a Christian is most seen, are Patience and
Mortification: Patience in regard of Afflictions, Mortification in regard of
lusts and affections, and the stupifying and deading of all the clamorous
powers of the soul, therefore he has thoroughly studied these, that he may be
an absolute master and commander of himself for all the purposes which God has
ordained him. Yet in these points he labors most in those things which are
most apt to scandalize his Parish.

2. He is full of all knowledge. They say it is an ill Mason that refuses any
stone: and there is no knowledge, but in a skilful hand serves either
positively as it is, or else to illustrate some other knowledge. He condiscends
even to the knowledge of tillage and pastorage, and makes great use of them in
teaching; because people, by what they understand, are best led to what they
understand not. But the chief and top of his knowledge consists in the book of
books, the storehouse and magazene of life and comfort, the holy Scriptures.
There he sucks, and lives. There he finds four things: Precepts for life,
Doctrines for knowledge, Examples for illustration, and promises for comforts:
These he has digested severally. And for the understanding of these, the means
he uses are, a holy life, prayer, etc.

3. He has read the Fathers also, and the Schoolmen, and the later Writers, or
a good proportion of all: out of all which he has composed a book, and Body of
Divinity, which is the storehouse of his Sermons, and which he preaches all
his life; but diversely clothed, illustrated and enlarged. For, though the world
is full of such composures, yet every man's own is fittest, readiest, and most
savo^ry to him. Besides, this being to be done in his younger and preparatory
times, it is an honest joy ever after to look upon his well-spent hours. This
Body he made by way of expounding the Church-Catechism, to which all Divinity
may easily be reduced. For it being indifferent in it self to choose any
method, that is bent to be chosen, of which there is likeliest ^o be most use.

4. When he is to read Divine Services, he composeth himself to all possible
Reverence, as being truly touched with the Majesty of God, and that being first
affected himself he may affect also his people; kno^ing, that no Sermon moves
them so much to a reverence, which they forget again when they come to pray, as
a devout behavior in the very act of praying. Accordingly, his voice is
humble, his words treatable, and slow; yet not so slo^ neither, as to let the
fervency of the supplicant hang and dye between speaking; but with a more
liveliness between fear and zeal, pauzing yet pressing, he perfo^ms his duty.
Besides his example, he having often instructed his people how to carry
themselves in Divine Service, exacts of them all possible reverence, by no
means enduring either talking, or sleeping, or gazing, or leaning, or
half-kneeling, or any undutiful behavior in them; but causing them, when they
sit, or stand, or kneel, to do all in a strait and steady posture, as attending
to what is done in the Church; and every one, man and child answering aloud
both Amen, and all other answers on the peoples parts, using their reason, and
applying their powers to the Service of God.

5. He preaches constantly: the Pulpit is his joy and his Throne. If he at any
time intermit, it is either for want of health, or against some great Festival,
that he may the better celebrate it; or for the variety of the hearers, that he
may be heard, at his return more attentively. When he intermits, he is ever
well supplied by some able man, who treads in his steps, and will not throw
down what he has built; whom also he entreats to press some point, that he
himself has often urged with no great success, that so in the mouth of two or
three witnesses the truth may be the more established. When he preaches, he
procures attention with all possible art, both by earnestness of speech (it
being natural for men to think, that where is much earnestness, there is
something worth hearing) and by a ^^^^gent and busy cast of his eye on his
Auditors, with letting them know, that he observes who marks, and who not; and
with particularizing of his speech, now to the younger sort, then to the elder,
now to the poor, and now to the rich. This is for you, and This is for you: for
particulars ever touch, and awake, more than generals. He exceeds not an hour
in preaching, because all ages have thought that a competency, and he that
profits not in that time, will less afterward; the same affection which made
him not profit before, making him then weary; and so he grows from not
relishing, to loathing.

6. On Sundaies, having read Divine Service twice fully, and Preached in the
morning, and Catechized in the afternoon, he thinks he has in some measure,
according to poor and frail man, discharged the public duties of the
Congregation. The rest of the duty he spends either in reconciling neighbors
that are at variance, or in visiting the sick, or in exhortaton to some of his
flock by themselves, whom his Sermons cannot or do not reach. And every one is
more awaked, when we come and say, Thou art the man. At night he thinks it a
very fit time, both suitable to the joy of the day, and without hinderance to
public duties, either to entertain some of his neighbors, or to be
entertained of them: where he takes occasion to discourse of such things as are
both profitable and pleasant, and to raise up their minds to apprehend God's
blessing to our Church and State, etc.

(Here I had ended, but since I see the Book is hard in come by, prithee take
some more.

7. The Country Parson considering that Virginity is a higher state than
Matrimony, and that the Ministry requires the best and highest things, is
rather unmarried, than married. But yet as the temper of his body may be, or
as the temper of his Parish may be where he may have occasion to converse with
women, and that among suspicious men, and other like circumstances considered,
he is rather married than unmarried. Let him communicate the thing often by
prayer to to God, and as his grace shall direct him, so let him proceed. If he
be unmarried, and keep house, he has not a woman in his house, but finds
oppertunities of having his meat dressed and other services done by men servants
at home, and his linen washed abroad. If he be unmarried and sojourn, he never
talks with any woman alone, but in the audience of others, and that seldom, and
then also in a serious manner, never jestingly ^r sportfully. He is very
circumspect in all companies, both of his behavior, speech and very looks,
knowing himself to be both suspected and envied. If he be married, the choice
of his wife was made rather by his ear, than by his eye: his judgment, not his
affection found out a fit wife for him; whose humble and liberal disposition he
preferred before beauty, riches or honor.

8. He is very exact in the government of his house, making it a copy and model
for his Parish. He knows the temper and pulse of every person in his house, and
accordingly either meets with their vices, or advances their virtues. His wife
is either religious, or night and day he is winning her to it. Instead of the
qualities of the world, he requires only three of her. 1. a training up of her
children and maids in the fear of God, with prayers and catechizing, and all
religious duties, 2. a curing and healing of all wounds and sores with her own
hands: which skill either she brought with her, or he takes care she shall
learn it of some religious neighbor, 3. a providing for her family in such
sort, as that neither they want a competent sustentation, nor her husband in
debt. His children he first makes Christians, and then Commonwealths men: the
one he owes to his heavenly Country, the other to his earthly, having no title
to either, except he do good to both. ^^s servants are all religious: and were
it not his duty to have them so, it were his profit: for none are so well
served, as by religious servants, both because they do best, and because what
they do is blessed and prospers.

9. Owing a debt of Charity to the poor, and of courtesy to his other
Parishioners, he so distinguishes, that he keeps his money for the poor, and
his table for those that be above his alms. Not, but that the poor are welcome
also to his table: whom he sometimes purposely takes home with him, setting
them close by him, and carving for them, both for his own humility and their
comfort, who are much cheered with such friendliness. But he chooses rather to
give the poor money, which they can employ to their advantage, and sutably to
their needs.

10. He is full of Charity: it is his predominant element: all his works
relish of Charity. When he rises in the morning, he bethinketh himself what
good deeds he can do that day, and presently does them; counting that day lost,
wherein he has not exercised his charity. He takes care, that there be not a
beggar, or idle person in his parish, but that all be in a competent way of
getting their living. Whenever he gives any thing, and sees them labor in
thanking of him, he exacts of them to let him alone, and say rather, God be
glorified: that so the thanks may go the right way, and thither only, where
they are only due. So does he also, before giving, make them say their prayers
first, or the Creed, and ten Commandments; and as he finds them perfect,
rewards them the more. For other givings are lay and secular, but this is to
give like a Priest.

11. He has a special care of his Church, that all things there be decent, and
befitting his name by which it is called. Therefore, 1. he takes order that all
things be in good repair. 2. That the Church be swept and kept clean without
dust or cobwebs, and at great Festivals strawed and stuck with boughs, and
perfumed with incense. 3. That there be fit and proper texts of Scripture every
where painted, and that all the painting be grave and reverend, not with light
colors or foolish anticks. 4. That all the books appointed by Authority be
there, and those not torn or fouled, but whole and clean and well bound, etc.

12. Upon the afternoons in the week days, he takes occasion sometimes to
visit in person, now one quarter of his parish, now another. For there he shall
find his flock most naturally as they are, wallowing in the midst of their
affairs: whereas on Sondaies it is easy for them to compose themselves to
order, which they put on as their Holyday-cloths, and come to Church in frame,
but commonly the next day put off both. When he comes to any house, first he
blesses it, and then as he finds the persons of the house employed, so he
forms his discourse. Those that he finds religiously employed, he commends them
much and furthers them, by furnishing them with good books. Those that he finds
busy in the works of their calling, he commends them also. For it is a good
and just thing for every one to do their own business. But then he admonishes
them of two things. 1. That they dive not too deep into worldly affairs,
plunging themselves over head and ears into carkino and caring; but that they
labor so, as neither to labor anxiously, nor distrustfully, nor profanely. 2.
He advises them so to labor for wealth and maintenance, as that they make not
that the end of their labor, but that they may have wherewithal to serve God
the better, and to do good deeds. The Parson also questions what order is kept
in the house, as about prayers morning and evening on their knees, reading of
Scripture, Catechizing, etc. Neither disdaineth he to enter into the poorest
Cottage, though he even creep into it, and though it smell never so lothsomely.
For, both God is there also, and those for whom God dyed: and so much the
rather does he so, as his access to the poor is more comfortable, then to the
rich: and in regard of himself it is more humiliation.

13. When any of his Cure is sick or afflicted wih loss of friend, or estate,
or any ways distressed, he fails not to afford his best comforts, and rather
goes to them, then sends for the afflicted, though they can, and otherwise
ought to come to him. To this end he has thoroughly digested all the points of
Consolation, as having continual use of them: such as are, from God's general
providence extended even to Lillies, from his particular to his Church, from
his promises, from the examples of all Saints that ever were, from Christ
himself perfecting our Redemption no other way then by sorrow, from the benefit
of affliction which softens and works the stubborn heart of man, from the
certainty both of deliverance and reward if we faint not, from the comparison
of the moment of griefs here, with the weight of joys hereafter.

14. When a just occasion calls him out of his Parish (which he diligently
and strictly weighs, his Parish being all his joy and thought) he leaves not
his Ministry behind him, but is himself wherever he is. Therefore those he
meets on the way he blesses audibly, and with those he overtakes, or that
overtake him, he begins good discourses, such as may edify, interposing
sometimes some short and honest refreshments, which may make his other
discourses more welcome and less tedious. And when he comes to his Inn, he
refuses not to join in prayer, that he may enlarge the glory of God to the
company he is in. The like he does in the morning, using pleasantly the
Outlandish Proverb: Prayers and Provinder never hinder journey.

13. Wherever he is, he keeps God's watch, that is, there is nothing spoken or
done in the company where he is, but comes under his test and censure: If it be
well spoken or done, he takes an occasion to commend and enlarge it; if ill, he
presently lays hold of it, lest the poison steal into some young and unwary
spirits, and possess them even before they themselves heed it. But this he
does discreerly, with mollifying and suppling words: This was not so well said,
as it might have been forborne; We cannot allow this. Or else, if the thing will
admit Interpretation, Your meaning is not thus, but thus, or, So far indeed
what you said is true, and well said; but this will not stand.

16. He is in God's stead to his Parish, and discharges God what he can of his
promises. Wherefore there is nothing done well, whereof he is not the rewarder.
If he chance to find any reading in another's Bible, he provides him one of his
own. If he find another giving a poor man a penny, he gives him a tester for
it, if the giver be fit to receive it: if he be of a condition above such
gifts, he sends him a good book, or e^seth him in his Tiths, telling him when
he has forgotten it, This I do, because at such and such a time you were
charitable.

17. The Country Parson values Catechizing highly. He uses and prefereth the
ordinary Church-Catechism, partly for obodience to Authority, partly for
Uniformity sake, that the some common truths may be every where professed. He
requires all to be present at Catechizing. 1. For the authority of the work. 2.
That Parents and Masters, as they hear the Answers prove, may, when they come
home, either commend or reprove, either reward or punish. 3. That those of the
elder sort, who are not well grounded, may then, by an honorable way, take
occasion to be better instructed. 4. That those who are well gro^n in the
knowledge of religion, may examine their grounds, renew their vows, and by
occasion of both enlarge their meditations.

18. Being to administer the Sacraments, he is at a stand with himself, how or
what behavior to assume for so holy things. At Baptism, being himself in
white, he requires the presence of all, and baptizeth, not willingly, but on
Sondaies, or great days. He admits no vain or idle names, but such as are
usual and accustomed. He says that prayer with great devotion, where God is
thanked for calling us to the knowledge of his grace: willingly and cheerfully
crosses the child, and thinks the Ceremony not only innocent, but reverend:
instructs the Godfathers and Godmothers, that it is no complemental and light
thing to sustain that place: advises all to call to mind their Baptism often.
At the times of the Holy Communion, he first takes order with the
Churchwardens, that the Elements be of the best, not cheap or course, much
less ill-tasted or unwholsom. Secondly, he considers and looks into the
ignorance or carelessness of his flock, and accordingly applies himself with
Catechizing and lively Exhortations, not on the Sunday of the Communion only
(for then it is too late) but the Sunday or Sondays before the Communion, or on
the Eves of all those days.

18. If there be any of his Parish that hold strange doctrines, he uses all
possible diligence to reduce them to the common faith. The first me^ns he uses
is prayer, beseeching the Father of lights to open their eyes: the second is a
loving and sweet usage of them: the third is the observation, what is the main
pillar of their c^use, whereon they rely; as, if he be a Papist, the Church is
the hinge he turns on; if a Schismatic scandal. These he has diligently
examined, etc. Vide Auctorem (...).

V. Dr JOSEPH HALL, Bishop of Norwich. (See Vol. 1.)
Out of his Life, written with his own hand. D. Arthuro Charlett, Rect. de
Colinb.
1. I Was born July 1. 1574. at five of the Clock in the morning, in Bristow
Park, within the Parish of Ashby de la Zouch, a Town in Leicestershire, of
honest and well allowed parentage. My Father, under Henry Earl of Huntington,
Lord President of the North, had the government of that Market Town: my Mother
Winifride, of the house of Bambridges, was a woman of that rare sanctity, that
(were it not for my interest in nature) I durst say, that neither Monica How
far beyond a Picture is his worth
Whom Pen, nor Pencill truly can set forth!
Behold his Reverend FACE his better PART
^s left vngrau'd, this was beyond all Art.
His holy Thoughts in sacred MEDITATIONS
His ravished SOVLE with. heavenly CONTEMPLATIONS
Could not be drawn. Here only are his Looks
The Pictures of the rest are in his BOOKS.
^ Sampson

Imprinted for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith. 1628.

VERA EFFIGIES REVERENDI DONI. IOSEPHI HALL N^RWICI EPISCOPI.
This Picture represents the Form, where dwells
A Mind, which nothing but that Mind excells.
There Is Wisdom, Learning. Wit; there Grace and Love
Rule over all the rest: enough to prove,
Against the froward Conscience of this Time,
The Reverend Name of BISHOP is no Crime.
nor any other of those pious Matrons, anciently famous for devotion, need to
disdain her admittance to comparison. She was continually exercised with the
affliction of a weak body, and often a wounded spirit. What with the trial of
both these hands of God, so had she profited in the School of Christ, that it
was hard for any friend to come from her discourse no whit holyer. How often
have I blessed the memory of those divine passages of experimental Divinity,
which I have heard from her mouth! What day did she pass without a large task
of private Devotion, etc. In short, her life and death were Saintlike.

2. My parents had from my Infancy devoted me to this Sacred Calling, whereto,
by the blessing of God, I have seasonably attained: for this cause, I was
trained up in the public School of the place. After I had spent some years
(not altogether indiligently) under the ferule of such Masters as the place
afforded, and had near attained to some competent ripeness for the
University, my Schoolmaster persuaded my Father that I might have my
Education under an excellent Divine, the Preacher of Leicester. About which
time, my elder brother having some occasions to journey into Cambridge, was
kindly entertained there by Mr Nath: Gilby, Fellow of Emanuel Coll: who, for
that he was born in the same Town with me, and had conceived some good opinion
of my aptness to learning, enquired diligently concerning me, and hearing of
the diversion of my Fathers purposes from the University, importunately
dissuaded from that new course, professing to pity the loss of so good hopes.
My Brother, partly moved with his words, and partly won by his own eyes, to a
great love and reverence of an Academical life, returning home, fell upon his
knees to my Father, and after report of Mr Gilbies words, and his own
admiration of the place, earnestly besought him that he would be pleased to
alter that so prejudicial a resolution; that he would not suffer my hopes to be
drowned in a shallo^ Country-chanel, but that he would revive his first
purposes for Cambridge; adding, in the zeal of his love, that if the
chargeablenesse of that course were the hinderance, he did there humbly beseech
him, rather to sell some part of that land which himself should in course of
nature inherit, then to abridge me of that happy means to perfect my Education.

3. And now I lived in the exspectation of ^^^bridge, whither ere long I
happily came, under Mr Gilbies tuition, together with my worthy frind Mr Hugh
Cholmly; who, as we had been partners of one Lesson from our cradles, so so
were we now for many years partners of one bed. My two first years were
necessarily chargeable above the proportion of my Fathers power, whose not very
large Cistern was to feed many pipes besides mine; His weariness of expense
was wrought upon by the counsel of so me unwise friends, who persuaded him to
fasten me upon that School as Master, whereof I was lately a Scholar. Now was I
fetch^ home with an heavy heart, and no^ the second time had mine hopes been
nipt in the blossom, had not God raised me up an unhoped Benefactor, Mr Edmund
Sleigh of Darby (whose pious memory I have cause ever to love and reverence)
out of no other relation to me, save that he married my Aunt, pitying my too
apparent dejectedness. He voluntarily urged and solicited my Father for my
return to the University, and offered freely to contribute the one half of my
maintenance there, till I should attain to the degree of Master of Arts: which
he no less lovingly performed. The Condition was gladly accepted: thither was
I sent back with joy enough, and ere long chosen Scholar of that strict and
well ordered College.

4. By that time I had spent six years there, now the third year of my
Batcherlorship should at once make an end of my maintenance, and in respect of
standing give me a capacity of farther preferment in that house, were it not
that my Country excluded me: for our Statute allowed but one of a shire to be
Fellow there, and my Tutor being of the same Town with me, must therefore
necessarily hold me out. But the Earl of Huntingdon calling off my Tutor from
his Fellowship, then was I with a cheerful unanimity chosen into that Society:
which if it had any equals, I dare say had none beyond it, for good order,
studious carriage, strict government, austere piety; in which I spent six or
seven years more with such contentment, as the rest of my life has in vain
striven to yield. Now was I called to public Disputations often, with no ill
success; for neither durst I appear in any of these exercises of Scholarship,
till I had from my knees looked up to Heaven for a blessing, and renewed my
actual dependence upon that Divine hand. In this while, two years together, was
I chosen to the Rhetoric Lecture in the public School, where I was encouraged
with a sufficient frequence of auditors; but finding that well applauded work
somewhat out of my way, not without a secret blame of my self for so much
excursion, I fairly gave up that task in the midst of those poor acclamations
to a worthy successor, and betook my self to those serious studies, which might
fit me for that High Calling whereunto I was destined. Wherein, after I had
bestowed my self for a time, I took the boldness to enter into Sacred Orders;
the honor whereof having once attained, I was no niggard of that Talent which
my God had entrusted to me, preaching often as occasion was offered, both in
Country villages abroad, and at home in the most awful auditory of the
Universitie.

5. And now I did but wait where and how it would please my God to employ me.
There was at that time a most famous School erected at Tiverton in Devon, and
endowed with a very large pension, whose goodly fabric was answerable to the
reported maintenance. To the government of this School was I commended by the
Master of our House Dr Chaderton, when being in London I received a Letter from
the Lady Drury of Suffolk, tendering the Rectory of her Halsted then newly void,
and very earnestly desiring me to accept of it. Sir, (quoth* to the Doctor)
methinks God pulls me by the sleeve, and tells me it is his will I should
rather go to the East than to the West. Nay (answered he) I should rather think
that God would have you go Westward, for that he has contrived your engagement
before the tender of this Letter, which therefore coming too late may receive a
fair and easy answer. To this I besought him to pardon my dissent, adding,
That I well knew that Divinity was the end whereto I was destined by my
Parents; which I had so constantly proposed to my self, that I never meant
other but to pass through this Western School to it: but I saw that God, who
found me ready to go the farther way about, now called me the nearest and
directest way to that sacred end. The good man could no further oppose, but
only pleaded the dista^t which would hereupon be justly taken by the Lord Chief
Justice Popham (upon whom the care of the School was principally cast by the
Founder Mr Blundel) whom I undertook fully to satisfy: which I did with no
great difficulty, commending to his Lordship in my room, my old friend and
Chamber-fellow, Mr Cholmly, who finding an answerable acceptance disposed
himself to the place. So as we two, who came to the University, must now leave
it, at once.

6. Having then fixed my foot in Halsted, I found there a dangerous opposite to
the success of my Ministry, a witty and bold Atheist, one Mr Lilly, who, by
reason of his travels and abilities of discourse and behavior, had so deeply
insinuated himself into my Patron, Sr Robert Drury, that there was small hopes,
during his entirenesse, for me to work any good upon that Noble Patron of mine:
who, by the suggestion of this wicked detractor, was set off from me before he
knew me. Hereupon, I confess, finding the obdurateness and hopeless
condition of that man, I bent my prayers against him, beseeching God daily,
that he would be pleased to remove, by some means o^ othet, that apparent
hindrance of my faithful labors: who gave me an answer accordingly: For this
malicious man going hastily to London, to exasperate my Patron against me, was
then and there swept away by the Pestilence, and never returned to do any
further mischief. Now the coast was clear before me, and I gained every day of
the good opinion and favorable respects of that Honorable Gentleman, and my
worthy neighbors.

7. Being now therefore settled in that sweet and civil Country of Suffolk, near
St Edmunds-Bury, my first work was to build up my house, which was extremely
ruinous; which done, the uncouth solitariness of my life, and the extreme
incommodity of that single housekeeping, drew my thoughts after two years to
condescend to the necessity of a married estate, which God no less strangely
provided for me. For, walking from the Church on Monday in the Whitson week,
with a grave and reverend Minister, Mr Grandidg, I saw a comely and modest
Gentlewoman standing at the door of that house, where we were invited to a
wedding-dinner, and enquiring of that worthy friend whether he knew her; Yes,
c^oth he, I know her well, and have bespoken her for your wife. When I farther
demanded an account of that Answer, he told me, she was daughter of a Gentleman
whom he much respected, Mr George Winniff of Bretenham; that out of an opinion
had of the fitness of that Match for me, he had already treated with her
Father about it, whom he found very apt to entertain it, advising me not to
neglect the opper^unitie: and not concealing the just praises of modesty,
piety, good disposition and other virtues that were lodged in that seemly
presence, I listened to the motion as sent from God, and at last upon due
prosecution happily prevailed, enjoying the comfortable Society of that meet
Help for the space of forty nine years.

8. I had not passed two years in this estate, when my noble Friend, Sr Edmund
Bacon, with whom I had much entirenesse, came to me, and earnestly solicited
me for my company in a Jorny by him projected to the Spa in Ardenna, laying
before me the safety, the easiness, the pleasure and the benefit of that small
extravagance, if oppertunity were taken of that time, when the Earl of Hartford
passed in Embassy to the Archduke. I soon yielded, as for the reasons by him
urged, so especially for the great desire I had to inform my self ocularly of
the state and practice of the Romish Church; the knowledge whereof might be of
no small use to me in my holy station. Having therefore taken careful order for
the supply of my Charge, with the assent and good allowance of my nearest
Friends, I entered into this secret voyage, etc. Returning through Brussels, we
came do^n to Antwerp, the Paragon of Cities: where my curiosity to see a
solemn Procession on S. John Baptist's day, might have drawn me into danger
(through my willing unreverence) had not the hulk of a tall Brabanter, behind
whom I stood in the corner of the street, shaded me from notice.

9. After some year and half, it pleased God inexpectedly to contrive the
change of my station. My means were but short at Halsted; yet such, as I often
professed, if my then Patron would have added but one ten pounds by year (which
I held to be the value of my detained due) I should never have removed. One
morning as I lay in my bed, a strong motion was suddenly glanced into my
thoughts of going to London. In Drurie lane I was found by a friend in whom I
had formerly no great interest, one Mr Gurrey, Tutor to the Earl of Essex; he
told me how well my Meditations were accepted at the Prince's Court; and
earnestly advised me to step over to Richmond, and preach to his Highness. I
strongly pleaded my indisposition of body, and my impreparation for any such
work, together with my bashful fears, and utter unfitness for such a presence;
my averseness doubled his importuni^y: in fine, he left me not till he had my
engagement to preach the Sunday following at Richmond: he made way for me to
that awful Pulpit, and encouraged me by the favor of his Noble Lord, the Earl
of Essex. I preached through the favor of my God: That Sermon was not so well
given as taken: insomuch as that sweet Prince signified his desire to hear me
again the Tuesday following, which done, that labor gave more contentment than
the former; so as that gracious Prince, both gave me his hand, and commanded me
to his service.

10. My Patron seeing me (upon my return to London) looked after by some great
Persons, began to wish me at home, and told me, That some or other would be
snatching me up, I answered, That it was in his power to prevent, would he be
pleased to make my maintenance, but so competent as in right it should be, I
should never stir from him. In^^ead of condescending, it pleased him to fall
into an expostulation of the rate of competences, affirming the variableness
thereof, according to our own estimation, and our either raising or moderating
the causes of our expenses; I showed him the insufficiency of means, that I was
forced to write books to buy books. Shortly, some harsh and unpleasing answer,
so disheartened me that I resolved to embrace the first opportunity of remove.
Now whiles I was taken up with these anxious thoughts, a messenger (it was Sir
Robert Wingfield of Northampton's Son) came to me from the Lord Denny, no^ Earl
of Norwich, my after-most Honorable Patron, entreating me from his Lordship to
speak with him. No sooner came I thither, then after a glad, and Noble welcome,
I was entertained with the Noble earnest offer of Waltham. The conditions were
like the mover, free and bountiful: I received them as from the munificent
hands of my God, and returned full of the cheerful acknowledgments of a
gracious Providence over me. Too late now did my former Noble Patron relent,
and offer me those terms which had before fastened me for ever. I returned home
happy in a new master, and in a new Patron; betwixt whom I divided my self and
my labors, with much comfort and no less acceptance.

11. In this while, my worthy Kinsman, Mr Samuel Burton, Archdeacon of Gloc.
knowing in ho^ good terms I stood at Court, and pitying the miserable condition
of his native Church of Wolverhampton, was very desirous to engage me in so
difficult and noble Service, as the Redemption of that captivated Church. Which
work having once firmly settled, in a just pity of the mean provision, if not
the destitution of so many thousand souls, and a desire and care to have them
comfortably provided for in the future, I resigned up my Prebend there to a
worthy preacher, Mr Lee, who should constantly reside, and painfully instruct
that great and long neglected people: which he has performed with great mutual
contentment and happy success.

12. Now during the 22 years which I spent at Waltham, thrice was I commanded
and employed abroad by his Majesty in public service. First in the attendance
of the Lord Vicount Doncaster, who was sent upon a Noble Embassy, with a
gallant retinue into France. In this my absence it pleased his Majesty
graciously to confer upon me the Deanrie of Worcester, which being promised me
before my departure, was deeply hazarded whiles I was out of sight, by the
importunity of some great ones. Dr Field, the learned and worthy Doan of
Gloucester, was, by his potent Friends, put into such assurances of it, that I
heard where he took care for the furnishing that ample house: But, God fetched
it about for me, in that absence and nescience of mine, and that reverend and
better deserving Divine was well satisfied with greater hopes, and soon after
exchanging this mortal estate for an immortal and glorious.

13. Before I could go down, through my continual weakness, to take possession
of that Dignity, his Majesty pleased to design me to his at^^^dance into
Scotland; where the great love and respect that I found, both from the
Ministers and people, w^ought me no small envy from some of our own.
Suggestions were made to his Majesty of my pl^usible deme^nour and doctrine to
that already prejudicate people: for which his Majesty, after a gracious
acknowledgment of my good service there done, called me upon his return to a
favorable and mild account; not more freely professing what informations had
been given against me, then his own full satisfaction with my sincere and just
answer* as whose excellent wisdom well saw, that such winning carriage of mine
could be no hinderance to his great designs. At the same time his Majesty
having secret notice, that a Letter was coming to me from Mr W. Struther, a
Reverend and Learned Divine of Edenborough concerning the five points then
proposed and urged to the Church of Scotland, was pleased to impose upon me an
earnest charge to give him a full Answer to those modest Doubts, and at large
to declare my Judgment concerning those required Observations. Which I spedily
performed with so great approbation of his Majesty, that it pleased him to
command a transcript thereof, as I was informed, publicly read in their most
famous University. The effe^^ whereof, his Majesty vouchsafed to signify
afterward unto some of my best friends, with allowance beyond my hopes.

14. It was not long after, that his Majesty finding the exigence of the
Netherlandish Churches to require it, both advised them to a Synodical
Decision, and by his incomparable wisdom promoted the work. My un^orthinesse
was named for one of the Assistants of that Honorable, Grave and Reverent
Meeting; where I failed not of my best service of that woeful distracted Church.
By that time I had staid two months there, the unquietness of the nights, in
those Garrison Towns, working upon the tender disposition of my body, brought
me to such weakness, through want of rest, that it began to disable me from
attending the Synod. Yet it pleased God, the very night before I was to preach
the Latin Sermon to the Synod, to bestow upon me such a comfortable refreshing
of sufficient sleep, as whereby my spirits were revived, and I was enabled with
much vivacity to perform that Service. But when, notwithstanding all means, my
weakness increased, it pleased his gracious Majesty to call me off, etc.

15. After not many years settling at home, it grieved my Soul, to see our own
Church sicken of the same disease, which we had endeavored to cure in our
Neighbors. Sides were taken, and Pulpits every where rang of these opinions.
Now, as one that desired to do all good offices to our dear and common Mother,
I set my thoughts on work, how so dangerous a quarrel might be happily
composed, and wrote a little projest of Pacification, gathering out of Bishop
Overal on the one side, and out of our English Divines at Dort on the other,
such common propositions concerning these five busy Articles, as wherein both
of them are fully agreed. These reconciliatory papers were presented to his
Majesty, together with an humble motion of a peacesible silence to be enjoined
to both parts, in those other collateral and needless Disputations. These fell
under the eyes of some grave Divines of both parts, who p^oferd their hands to
a ready subscription: so as much peace promised to result out of that weak and
poor enterprise, had not the confused noise of the misconstructions of those,
who never saw the work (crying it down for the very name sake) meeting with the
royal edict of a general Inhition, buried it in a secure silence. I was
scorched a little with this flame, which I de^ired to quench; yet this could
not stay my hand from thru^^ing it self into a hotter fire.

16. Some insolent Romanists pressed nothing so much, as a Catalogue of the
professions of our Religion; to be deduced from the Primitive times, and with
the peremtory challenge of the impossibility of this pedigree dazzled the eyes
of the simple. Whiles some of our learned men, undertaking to satisfy so
needless and unjust a demand, gave, as I conceive, great advantage to the
Adversary; in a just indignation, to see us thus wronged by mistareing the
Question betwixt us, as if we, yielding our selves of another Church,
originally and fundamentally different, should make good our own E^ection upon
the Ruins, yea and Nullity of others; and well considering the infinite and
great inconveniences, that must needs follow upon this defense; I adventured to
set my pen on work, (desiring to rectify the opinions of those men, whom an
ignorant zeal had transported, to the prejudice of our holy cause,) laying
forth the damnable corruptions of the ^oman church, yet making our Game at the
outward visibilitie thereof, and by this means putting them to the probation of
those newly obtruded corruptions, which are truly guilty of the breach betwixt
us. The drift whereof being not well conceived by some spirits, that were not
so wise as fervent, I was suddenly exposed to the rash censures of many well
affected and zealous Protestants; as if a Remission to my wonted zeal to the
truth, attributed too much to the Roman Church, and strengthened the Adversaries
hands, and weakened our own. This envy I was fain to take off by my speedy
Apologetical Advertisement, and after that by my Reconcilor, se^^^ded with the
unanimous Letters of such Reverend, Learned, sound Divines, both Bishops and
Doctors, as whose undoubtable Authority was able to bear down calumny it self.
Which done I did, by a seasonable Moderation, provide for the peace of the
Church, in silencing both my Defendants and Challengers, in this unkind and
ill-raised quarrel.

17. Immediately before the publishing of this Tractate (which did not a little
aggravate the envy and suspicion) I was by his Majesty raised to be Bishop of
Exeter, having formerly with humble deprecation, refused the Sea of Gloucester
earnestly proferd to me. I entered upon that place, not without much prejudice
and suspicion on some hands. For some, that sat at the Stern of the Church,
had me in great jealousy for too much favor of Puritanisus. I soon had
intelligence, who were set over me for Espials: my ways were curiously
observed and scanned. However I took the resolution to follow those courses,
which might most conduce to the peace and happiness of my ne^ and weighty
charge. Finding therefore some factious spirits very busy in that Diocese, I
used all fair and gentle means to win them to good order; and therein so
happily prevailed, that (saving two of that numerous Clergy, who continuing in
their refracto^inesse fled away from censure) they were all pe^fectly
reclaimed: so as I had not one Minister professedly opposite to the anciently
received Orders (for I was never guilty of urging any ne^ impositions of the
Church in that large Dio^ess.

18. In the last year of presiding the^e, after the Synodical Oath was set on
foot (which yet I did never tender to any one Minister of my Diocese) by the
in^itation of some bu^^e interlopers of the neighbor County, some of them
began to enter into an unkind contestation with me, about the election of
Clerks for the Convocation; whom they secre^ly, without ever acquainting me
with their desire or purpose (as driving to that end which we see now
accomplished) would needs nominate and set up in competition to those, whom I
had (after the usual form) recommended to them. That they had a right to free
voices in that choice, I deny not: only I had reason to take it unkindly, that
they would work underhand without me and against me. It came to the poll: those
of my nomination carried it: the Parliament begun: after some hard tugging
there; returning ho^e upon a recesse, I was met by the way and cheerfully
welcomed by some hundreds.

19. In no worse terms, I left that my once dear Diocese: when returning to
Westminster, I was soon called by his Majesty (who was then in the North) to a
remove to Norwich. But how I took the Tower in my way, and how I have been
dealt with since my repair hither, I could be lavish in the sad report, ever
desiring my good God to enlarge my heart in thankfulness to him, for the
sensible experience I have had of his Fatherly Hand over me, in the deepest of
all my Afflctions, and to strengthen me, for whatsoever other trials he shall
be pleased to call me unto: That being found faithful unto the death, I may
obtain that Crown of life, which he has ordained for all those that overcome.

See Bishop Hall's Hard Measure.
VI. Sr THOMAS MORE,
Out of his Life, Written by J. H. D. Timotheo Norwood e^ Int. Temp.
1. SIR Thomas More was the only Son of Sr John More, one of the Justices of
the Kings Bench, a man singular for his many rare perfections. He was born at
London in Milk-street (where his Father for the most part dwelt) An. 1480.
shortly after, his Nurse riding with him over a water, and being in danger,
(...) the Infant over a hedge into the field adjoining. The Nurse escaped, and
found her child safe, and smiling upon her. His Father, pleased with the omen,
for his better education, placed him first in S. Anthonies School, and after he
had gooten the Latin tongue, in the family of Archbishop Morton; where he
showed such UERA EFFIGIES THOMAE MORI QVONDAM TOTIUS ANGLIAE CANCELLARII
DIGNISSIMI ETc.
wit and towardlynesse, that the Archbishop used to say to the Nobles at
dinner with him: This child here waiting at the Table, whosoever shall live to
see it, will prove a mavelous man.

2. The Archbishop for his advance in learning, sent him to Cant: Coll. (now
Christ-Church) in Oxford. Thence he removed to New Inn, an Inn of Chancery, to
study the Law: then to Lincolns Inn, where he was made Barrister. And then he
for some time read upon S. Austins de Civ. Dei, in S. Laurence Church, where
his Lectures were frequented by Grocin and other learned men: then, for three
years was he eader in Furnivals Inn: after which, for about four years, he gave
himself to study and devotion in the Charter House.

3. He was (first) married to Mr Coals daughter of New-hall in Essex, and lived
with her in Bucklers-burie in London, where he had by her one Son and three
Daughters, whom he brought up in virtue and learning, often exhorting them to
take that for their meat, and play but for their sauce.

4. In the later end of K. Henry 7. he fell into the Kings displeasure, for
opposing the imposition proposed in Parliament toward the matching of the Lady
Margaret into Scotland, Which he argued against strongly, that one of the Privy
Chamber told the King, A beardlesse Boy had frustrated all his expectations. To
avoid danger he determined to have gone over Sea, but the Kings death happening
soon after acquitted him of his fear.

4. No^ is he made Undersheriff of London, by which office, and his learning
together, he gained (as himself said) without grudge of conscience 400l per an.
for he was of Counsel in most causes, choo^ing ever the justest side, and for
the most part victorious. Twice was he employed abroad by the Kings con^^nt in
some great Causes of the Merchants. Being called by Cardinal Woo^sie to the
Kings service, he excused himself at first, but at last (his fame and merit
increasing) the King would take no denial. Thus is he made Master of the
requests: within a month Knighted, and one of the Privy Council; continuing in
his Majesty's favor and trusty service twenty years and above. In good part of
which time, the King was so pleased with his converse, and taken with the
variety of his learned and pleasant discourse, that Sr Thomas scarce ^^^ained
time (till he abated of his former mirth) once in a month to go home to his
wife and children. The King, upon the death of Weston, without asking, freely
advanced him to be Treasurer of the Exchequer, and in the 14 year of his
Majesty's reign was he chosen Speaker of the House of Commons.

5. At this Parliament he crossed the Cardinal and incurred his displeasure, so
that in revenge he counseled the King to send Sr Thomas Ambassador into
Spain, commending his wisdom, learning and fitness for that employment. But,
Sr Thomas having declared to his Majesty how unfit a journey it was for him to
undertake, the nature of the Country and his complexion so disagreeing, that if
he were sent thither, he should be sent to his grave: nevertheless being ready
with the peril of his life to fulfill his Majesty's pleasure; the King
graciously said. It is not our meaning Mr More to do you hurt, but to do you
good we would be glad: we therefore will think of some other, and employ your
service otherwise. And such entire favor did the King bear him, that upon the
death of Wingfield he preferred him to be Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.

6. K. Henry took so great pleasure in Sr Thomas's company, that he would
suddenly come to his house at Clelsey to be merry with him; and once, after
dinner walking in the Garden, about an hour embraced his neck. After, when his
son Roper rejoiced at it: I have no cause to be proud of it (quoth Sr Thomas)
for if my head would win him a Castle in France, it would not fail to go off.

7. Sr Thomas More; though in great honor and favor with his Prince, was not
therefore puffed up with pride, disdain or arrogance, but was of such a mild
behavior and excellent temper, that his Son in Law witnesses; For sixteen
years time and more that he dwelt in his house, and was conversant with him, he
could never perceive him so much as once in a passion. If he child any for a
fault, it was with exceeding love and compassion: if he fortuned to argue with
any learned man (as he was visited by many) when he perceived his adversary to
be in a streit, he would by some witty invention break off and fall into some
other matter.

8. When Sr Thomas was employed by the King in Flanders, an arrogant fellow had
set up a Thesis, that he would answer any question could be propounded to him
in what Art soever. Sr Thomas made this question to be put up for him to
answer, An Averia capta in Withernamia sint irreplegebilia, adding, that there
was one of the English ^mbassadors retinue, that would dispute with him
thereof. This Thraso, not so much as understanding those terms of our Common
Law, became ridiculous to all the town for his bragging.

9. As he walked by the Thames side near Chelsey, in discourse, he said: Now,
would to our Lord, upon condition that three things were well established in
Christendom, I were put into a sack, and here presently cast into the Thames.
Being asked, what those three things were, he answered: 1. That where most part
of Chriistian Princes be now at mortal war, they were at an universal peace. 2.
That where the Church of Christ is at this time sore afflicted with many errors
and heresies, it were settled in a perfect uniformitie of Religion. 3. That
whereas the Kings marriage is now brought in question, it were to the glory of
God and quietness of all parties well concluded.

10. When he observed any of his to spend much time in dressing themselves, to
be fine in their Apparel, he would tell them: That if God gave them not hell,
he should do them much wrong; for they took more pains to please the world and
the Devil, than many even virtuous men did to cleanse their souls and please God.

11. To his wife and children, when at any time they were troubled, he would
say: We may not look at our pleasure to go to heaven in fether-beds that is not
the way. For our Lord himself went thither through pain, and many tribulations:
and the servant may not look to be in better condition than the master.

12. The King sent the Bishop of Durham and Sr Thomas More Ambassadors to
Cambray (a place, then, neither Imperial nor French) to treat of a peace
between the Emperor and the French King and Him. In the conclusion, Sr Thomas
so worthily behaved himself (procuring in the league far more advantages unto
this Kingdom, than at that time by the King or his Council was thought
possible) that for his good service in that employment, the King made him Lord
Chancellor, and caused the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk to bring him through
Westmin^^er-hall to his place in the Chancery. Where the Duke of Norfolk in
audience of all the people there assembled, showed that he was from the King
himself streitly charged by commission, there openly in presence of them all,
to make Declaration how much all England ^as heholding to Sr Tho. More for his
good service, and how worthy he was of the highest preferment in the Kingdom,
and how dearly his Grace loved and trusted him.

13. Now upon Sr Tho: More's entrance into this honorable Office, every one
might perceive a very strange alteration. For, whereas the precedent Chancellor
Wolsey would scarce look or speak to any; into whose only presence none could
be admitted unless his fingers were tipped with gold: on the contrary, this
Chancellor, the poorer and meaner the Suppliant was, the more affably he would
speak unto him, the more attentively he would hearken to his cause, and with
speedy trial dispatch him. For which purpose he used commonly every afternoon
to sit in his Hall, that if any Person watsoever had any suit unto him, they
might the more boldly come into his presence, and open their complaints before
him. To show his integrity, he professed: If the parties will at my hands call
for justice, though my Father, whom I dearly love, stood on the one side, and
the Devil, whom I extremely hate, stood on the other, his cause being good, the
Devil should have right.

14. The Bishops (considering his learned works in defense of religion, and
knowing that (for all his Princes favor) he was no rich man, nor advanced in
yearly revenues, as his worthiness deserved) agreed together in Convocation,
and concluded upon a sum of four or five thousand pounds to recompense him for
his pains. T^nstal and some other Bishops repaired to him, and declared, That
albeit they could not according to his deserts so worthily requite him as they
gladly would, but must refer that only to the goodness of God; yet for a small
part of recompense, in respect of his estate so unequal to his worthiness, in
the name of their whole Convocation, they presented to him that sum, which they
desired him to accept of. To whom he answered: That like as it was no small
comfort to him, that so wise and learned men so well accepted o his doings, for
which he never intended to receive reward but at the hands of God only, to whom
alone was the thanks thereof chiefly to be ascribed; so also he most humbly
thanked the Honors for their bountiful consideration; But, for all their
importunity, they could not fasten it upon him, nor would he suffer them to
bestow it upon his wife and children.

15. He behaved himself in his office of the Chancellorship (for the space of
two years and a half) so wisely that none could mend his doings, so uprightly
that none could take exception against him, so dexterously that (it is to be
supposed) never any man before or since did that which h^ did. For he had taken
such order for the dispatching of all men's causes, that on a time sitting as
Judge there, and having finished one cause, calling for the next to be heard,
answer was made, That there was not one cause more depending. This he caused to
be set down upon Record.

16. After he had obtained of the King a discharge from his office, he fell
into his Majesty's displeasure about ^he Marriage. And then was he accused for
receiving a bribe from one Vaughans wife. The matter being laid to his charge
before the Council, he confessed, that a gilt Cup being (long after a certain
Decree) brought him for a ^^w years gift, and pressed on him, in courtesy he
received it. Whereupon his Adversary with much joy said, Lo, my Lords, did I
not tell y^u, that you should find the matter true? Sr Thomas desiring their
Lordships to hear him out, It is true, said he, I did, being much urged,
receive that Cup, but immediately caused my Butler to fill it with wine, drank
to the Gentle ^oman, and freely gave it to her again to be presented to her
husband, as a New years gift for him. This being testified presently upon oath
of the party her self and others, the mountain was delivered of a Mouse.

17. After the King's indignation against Sir Thomas More, the Duke of Norfolk
and He chanced to fall in discourse, and amongst other talk, the Duke said unto
him, By the Mass, Mr More, it is perilous striving with Princes, and
therefore I would wish you somewhat to incline to the Kings pleasure. For,
Indignatio Principis mors est. Is that all, my Lord, said Sir Thomas, Then in
good faith is there no more difference betwixt your Grace and me, but that I
shall dye to day and you to morrow.

18. When he was sent unto the Tower (for not swearing to the Oath of Supre^acy
and Succession) at his entrance there, the Porter demanded of him his upper
garment. Mr Porter, said he, here it is: and took off his Cap and g^ve it him:
I am sorry it is no better for thee. No Sir, said the Porter, I must have your
Gown, which he gave him.

19. The Lieutenant coming into his chamber to visit him, professed himself
obliged by former favors to ente^t^in him nobly: which since he could not do
for fear of the Kings displeasure, he prayed him to accept of his good will,
and such poor fare as he had: Master Lieutenant (quoth Sir Thomas) I believe
you are my frind, I thank you for your good will, and I assure you I d^ not
mislike my cheer: but whenever I do, then thrus^ me out of your doors.

20. In the ^ower, he had begun a Divine Treatise of the Passion of Christ, and
when he came to these words of the Gospel, (And the) laid hands on him and held
him) they ^ook from him all his Books, Ink, and Paper, so that he could go on
no further. Afterward, he applied himself holly to Meditation, keeping his
Chamber windows fast shut and very dark; the occasion whereof the Lieutenant
asking; It is time (said he) when all the wares are gone to shut up shop.

21. After he had received the sentence of death, he said to the Judges: My
Lords, as w^ read that Paul consented to the death of Stephen, and yet be they
now both Saints in Heaven, and shall continue there friends for ever; so I
verily trust, and shall therefore right heartily pray, that though your
L^^dships have been now Judges on earth to my condemnation, we may yet
hereafter all meet together in Heaven merrily to our everlasting salvation. And
so I pray God preserve my Sovereign Lord the King, and send him faithful
Counselors.

*See the rest, if you please, in this English Writer, or in Stapleton's Latin
book, Detribus Thomis.

Sr. Henry Wotton Knight.


VII. Sr HENRY WOTTON.
Out of his Life written by Mr Iz: Walton. D. Roberto Jones, Rect. de
Leckhampton.
1. SIR Henry Wotton was born An. 1568. in Bocton-Hall, in the Pa^ish of Bocto^
Malherb, in the fruitful Country of Kent: both House and Church seated within a
fair Park of the Wottons, on the brow of such a hill as gives the advantage of
a large prospect, and of equal pleasure to all behol^ers. But they are not
rem^rk^ble for any thing so much, as for that the memorable Family of the
Wottons h^ve so long inh^bited the one, and now lie bu^ied in the other, as
appears by their many Monuments in that Church; the Wottons being a Family,
that b^th brough^ fo^th diverse Persons eminent for Wisdom and Valor, whose
Heroic Acts and Noble Employments, both in England and in Foreign parts, have
adorned themselves and this Nation.

2. Thomas Wotton (the Father of our Henry) was a Gent. excellently educated
and studious in all the liberal Arts: who, although he had many invitations
from Queen Elizabeth to change his Countr^e recreations and retirement for a
Court life, offering him a Knighthood (she was then with him at his
Bocton-hall) and to be but as an earnest of some more honorable and more
profitable employment under her, yet he humbly refuses both; being a man of
great modesty, of a most plain and single heart, of an ancient freedom and
integrity of mind: A commendation, which Sir Henry took occasion often to
remember with great gladness, and thankfully to boast himself the Son of such a
Father: from whom indeed he derived that noble Ingenuitie that was always
practiced by himself, and which he ever commended and cherished in others.

3. Of this Family was Nicholas Wotton Doctor of Law, and sometime Dean of
Canterbury: a man whom God did not only bless with a long life, but with
great abilities of mind, and an inclination to employ them in the service of
his Country; as is restified by his several employments, having been sent nine
times Ambassador unto foreign Princes, a Privy Councellor to ^. Henry 8 Edward
6. Q. Marie and Q. Elizabeth: who employed him three several times for settling
of peace between England, Scotland and France, who also offered him the
Archbishopric of Cant. but he refused it, and dyed not rich, though he had
lived in the time of dissolution of Abbeys. He dyed (says learned Camden) full
of commendation for Wisdom and Piety.

4. The Father of Sir Henry after the death of his first wife resolved, if he
should marry again, to avoid three sorts of persons; namely, those that had
children, or had law suits, or were of his kindred. And yet, following his own
Lawsuits, he met in Westminster Hall with one Mrs Morton widow, (daughter to
Sir William Finch of Kent) who was also engaged in several suits in Law: and
observing her Comportment at the time of hearing one of her Causes before the
Judges, he could not but at the same time both compassionate her condition, and
so affect her person, that although there was in her a concurrence of all those
accidents against which he had resolved, yet he solicited her for a wife and
obtained her. By her he had our Henry, his youngest son.

5. His Mother was Tutoresse to him during his childhood: for hich care and
pains he paid her every day with such visible signs of future perfection in
learning, as turned her employment into a pleasing trouble. After, his Father
took him into his particular care, and disposed of him to a Tutor in his own
house: and when time and diligent instruction had fitted him (which was very
early) he was sent to Winch^ster School, a place of st^ict Dis^ipline and
Order, that so he might in his youth be mo^ded into a method of living by rule.
And that he might be confirmed in this Regularitie, he was at a fit age removed
from that School to New Coll: in Oxford.

6. There he continued till about the 18th year of his age, and was then
transplanted into Queens Coll. where within that year he wrote a Play for their
private use, the Tragedy of Tancredo, so ell, that the gravest of that Society
declared, he had in a slight exercise given an early and a solid te^imony of
future abilities. About the 19th year of his age, he proceeded Master of Arts,
and at that time read in Latin three Lectures De oculo: wherein, having
described the form, motion, curious composure of the eye, etc. in the
conclusion he took a fair occasion to beautify his discourse with a
commendation of the blessing and benefit of seeing; so exactly and
Rhetorically, as, among other admirers, caused that learned Italian Albericus
Gentilis (then professor of the Civil Law in Oxford) to call him, Henrice mi
ocelle; which dear expression of his was used by many other persons of note,
during his stay in the University.

7. After his Optic Lecture, he was taken into such a bosom friendship with
Gentilis, that if it had been possible, he would have breathed all his
excellent knowledge both of the Mathematics and Law into the breast of his
dear Henry (for so he used to call him) and though he was not able to do that,
yet there was in Sir Harrie such a propensity and connaturalnesse to the
Italian language and those studies whereof Gentilis was a great Master, that
this friendship between them did daily increase and proved daily advantageous
to Sir Henry for the improvement of him in several Sciences. Among his other
friends in Oxford, I must not omit the mention of a love there begun between
him and Dr Done (whom, he of this nation, who pretends to learning or
ingenuity, and is ignorant of, deserves not to kno^.) This friendship was
generously elemented, and as it was begun in their Youth in the ^niversity, and
there maintained by correspondent inclination and studies, so it lasted till
Age and Death forced a separation.

8. The year after Sir Henry proceeded Master of Arts; his Father (whom he did
never mention without this or some like reverential expression, That good man
my Father) changed this for a better life, leaving to Sr Henry, as to his other
younger sons, a rent charge of an hundred Marks a year to be paid for ever out
of one of his Manors of a much greater value. About two years after, being
about t^o and twenty, and having to his great Wit added the ballast of
Learning, he laid aside his Books, and betook himself to travel and a more
general conversation with Mankind: employing the remaining part of his youth to
purchase the rich treasure of foreign knowledge. Of which, both for the secrets
of nature, the dispositions of many Nations, their several Laws and Languages,
he became the possessor in a very large measure.

9. In his Travels (which was almost nine years before his return into England)
he stayed but one year in France, and most of that in Geneva: where he became
acquainted with Theodore Beza, (then very aged) and with Isaac Casaubon, that
most learned man. Three of the remaining eight years were spent in Germany,
the other five in Italy the stage on which God appointed he should act a great
part of his life) where both in Rome, Venice, and Florence, he became
acquainted with the most eminent men for learning and all manner of Arts, as
Picture, Sculpture, Chymistrie, Architecture, and diverse other manual Arts,
even Arts of inferior nature: of all which he was a most dear lover, and a
most excellent Judge.

12. He returned out of Italy into England about the 30th year of his Age,
being then noted by many, both for his person and comportment. For indeed he
was of a choice shape, tall of stature, and of a most pleasant behavior: which
was so mixed with sweet discourse and civilities, as gained him much love from
all persons with whom he entered into an acquaintance. And whereas he was noted
in his youth to have a sharp wit and apt to jest; That, by time, travel and
conversation, was so polished and made useful, that his company seemed to be
one of the delights of mankind. In so much as Robert Earl of Essex (then one of
the darlings of fortune) invited him first into a friendship, and after a
knowledge of his great Abilities, to be one of his Secretaries. After the Earls
Apprehension, he passed into France and thence into Ita^y. After some stay in
France, (where he met with his old friend Vietta, then Secretary to the great
Duke) he went the fourth time to visit Rome, and enjoyed the company of his
friends (notwithstanding his Religion) in the English College, and satisfied
himself concerning some curiosities.

11. After his return to Florence, the Duke having intercepted certain Letters
that discove^ed a design to take away the life of the then King of Scots, sent
Sir Henry to impart it to the King, under the name of Octovio Paldi an
Italian. Having deliverd his Letters and Message, and privately told the King
that he was indeed in Erglish-man, he abode there three months with much
pleasure to his Majesty, and so returned to Florence with a fair account of
his employment. Queen Elizabeth, some few months after departed, and King James
was proclaimed. When he was come into England, he commanded the Lord Wotton to
fend for his Brother Henry. Being brought to the King, he took him in his arms
and bade him ^elcome by the name of Octovio Baldi, saying, He was the most
honest, and therefore the best dissembler that ever he met with; adding, Since
I know you neither want learning, travel nor experience, and that I have had so
real a testimony of your faithfulness and abilities to manage an Embassage, I
shall make use of you in that kind hereafter. And indeed the King did so, most
of those 22 years of his reign: but before he dismissed Octavio Baldi from his
present attendance upon him, he resto ed him to his old name of Henry Wotton,
by which he then Knighted him.

12. Not long after this, the King having resolved, according to his Motto,
Beati pacifici, to have ^ friendship with his neighbor Kingdoms of France and
Spain; and also for diverse weighty reasons to enter into an alliance with the
State of Ven^ce; and to that end to send Ambassadors to these several places;
did propose the choice of these employments to Sir Henry Wotton. Who
considering the smalnesse of his own estate (which he never took care to
augment) and knowing the Courts of great Princes to be sumptuous and
necessarily expensive, inclined most to that of Venice, as being a place of
more retirement and best suiting with his Genius, who did ever love to join
with bus^nesse stud^e and a trial of natural experience; for which, fruitful
Italy, that darling of nature, and cherisher of all arts, is so justly famed in
all parts of the Christian World. Having therefore resolved upon Venice, and a
large allowan^e being appointed by the King for his voyage thither, and a
settled maintenance during his stay there, he left England, nobly accompanied
through France to Venice by ^entlemen of the best Families and Breeding that
this Nation afforded. Sir Albertus Morton his Nephew went his Secretary, and
William Bedel, a man of choice learning and sanctified wisdom, his Chaplain.

13. An. 1605. Sir Henry Wotton was received by the State of Venice with much
honor and gladness, both for that he delivered his Embassage most elegantly
in the Italian Language, and came also in such a juncture of time, as his
Masters friendship seemed useful for that Republic. In the contention with the
Pope (which lasted several years) the Venetians still acquainted K. James with
their proceedings, by the help of Sir Henry Wotton, Mr Bedel, and Padre Paulo,
whom the Venetians did then call to be one of their Consultors of State, and
with his pen to defend their cause. Which was by him so performed, that the
Pope saw plainly, he had weakened his power by exceeding it, and offered the
Venetians Absolution upon very easy terms; which the Venetians still
slighting, did at last obtain by that which was scarce so much as a show of
acknowledging it. These Contests were the occasion of Padre Paulo his knowledge
and interest with K. James: for whose sake principally Father Paulo compiled
that eminent History of the Council of Trent. Which History was, as fast as it
was written, sent in several sheets in Letters by Sir H. Wotton, Mr Bedel and
others unto K. James, and the then B. of Cant: in England, and there first made
public both in ^nglish and in the Universal Language.

14. For eight years after Sir Henry Wotton's going into Italy, he stood
fair, and highly valued but at last became much clouded by this accident Being
merry with his friends at Augusta (men of. the best note for learning and
ingenuousness, the Virtuosi of that Nation) he was requested by Christopher
^lecamore to write some Sentence in his Albo (a book of white paper, which for
that purpose many of the German Gentry usually carry about them) and consenting
to the motion, took an occasion from some accidental discourse of the present
company, to write a pleasant definition of an Ambassador in these very words:
Legatus est Vir bonus peregre missus ad mentiendum Reipub. causa: which Sir
Henry could have been content should have been thus Englished: An Ambassador
is an honest man sent to lie abroad for the good of his Country. But the word
for lie (being the hinge upon which the conceit was to turn) was not so
express in Latin as would admit (in the hands of an enemy especially) so fair
a construction as Sir Henry thought in English. This coming to the knowledge
of K. James by the malicious pen of Caspar Scioppius, much offended his
Majesty: and this caused Sir Henry Wotton to write two Apologies, one in
Latin to Velserus, and another to K. James: which were so ingenuous, so clear,
and so choicely eloquent, that his Majesty (who was a pure Judge of it) could
not so bear to declare publi^kly, That Sir H. Wo^ton had commuted sufficiently
for a greater offense. And now, as broken bones well set become stronger; so
Sir Henry Wotton did not only recover, but was much more confirmed in his
Majesty's favor.

15. And his Interest still increased with the Duke Leonardo Donato: after
whose death (as though it had been an entaild love) it was still found living
in the succeding Dukes, during all the time of his employment to that State;
which was almost 20 years. All which time he studied the Dispositions of those
Dukes, and the Consultors of State* well knowing, that he who negotiates a
continual business and neglects the study of dispositions, usually fails in
his proposed ends: But this Sir H. Wotton did not. For by a fine sorting of fit
Presents, curious and not costly entertainments, always sweetened by various
and pleasant discourse, by his choice application of stories, and his so
elegant delivery of all these, even in their Italian Language, he first got,
and still preserved such interest in the State of Venice, that it was observed
(such was either his merit or his modesty) they never denied him any request.

16. When he had attended the Emperor and German Princes eight months, to in
cline them to equitable conditions for the Resto^ation of the Queen of Bohemia
and her Descendants to their Patrimonial Inheritance of the Palatinate, and had
brought the business to a probability of success; but after a victory gotten
by the Imperial Army, saw the face of peace altered; at his departure from the
Emperor, he was so bold, as humbly to advise him to use his Victory soberly,
and still put on thoughts of peace. Which advice though it seemed to be spoke
with some passion, yet was taken in good part by the Emperor, who was ever
much pleased with his carriage, all the time that he resided in his Court; and
said, That though the King his Master was looked on as an Abetter of his enemy
the Palsgrave, yet he took him to be a Person of much honor and merit, and did
therefore desire him to accept of that Jewel, as a testimony of his good
opinion of him: which was a Jewel of Diamonds of more value than a thousand
pounds. This was received with all circumstances and terms of honor by Sir H.
Wotton: but the next morning at his departing from Vienna, at his taking leave
of the Countess of Sa^vina, an Italian Lady, in whose house the ^mperour had
appointed him to be lodged and honorably entertained; He acknowledged her
merits, and besought her to accept of that Jewel, as a testimony of his
gratitude: presenting her with the same that was given him by the Emperor.
Which being suddenly discovered by the Emperor, was by him taken for a high
affront, and Sir H. Wotton told so. To which (in the nobleness of his mind) he
replied: That though he received it with thankfulness, yet he found in himself
an indisposition to be the better for any gift that came from an Enemy to his
Royal Mistress: for so the Queen of Bohemia was pleased he should call her.

17. Many other of his Services to his Prince and this Nation might be insisted
on, as his procuration of Privileges and courtesies with the German Princes and
the Republic of Venice for the English Merchants, his releasing and relieving
many hundred captivated English soldiers, and sending them back in a
comfortable condition to thank God for their lives and liberty, in their own
Nation: but I must have to bring Sir H. Wotton in an instant from Venice to
London, whither he returned that year in which K. James dyed.

18. The King had, for the reward of his foreign service, promised him the
reversion of an Office, which was fit to be turned into present money, and also
granted him the Reversion of the Master of the Rolls place, if he outlived
charitable Sir Julius Caesar, who then possessed it, and then grown so old that
he was said to be kept alive, beyond natures course, by the prayers of those
many poor which he daily relieved. Mean while, his condition required present
support. For in the beginning of these employments he sold to his elder brother
the Lord Wotton the Rentcharge left by his good Father, and (which is worse)
was now at his return indebted to several persons, whom he was not able to
satisfy, but by the Kings payment of his Arrears: He had brought into England
many servants; of whom some were German and Italian Artists. This was part of
his condition, who had many times hardly sufficient to supply the occasions of
the day. (For it may by no means be said of his providence, as himself said of
Sir Philip Sidney's wit, That it was the very measure of congruitie.) he being
always so careless of money, as though our Saviors words, Care not for to
morrow, were to be literally understood.

19. But it pleased God, that in this juncture of time, the Provostship of his
Majesty's College of Eaton became void by the death of Murray, for which there
were (as the place deserved) many earnest and powerful Suitors to the King. Sir
Henry, who had for many years rolled the restless stone of a State
employment, and knowing experimentally, that the great blessing of sweet
content was not to be found in multitudes of men or business, and that a
College was the fittest place to nourish holy thoughts, and to afford rest both
to his body and mind, which his Age (being now almost threescore years) seemed
to require; did therefore use his own and the interest of all his Friends to
procure it. By which means, and quitting the King of his promised reversionary
Offices (and by a piece of honest policy) he got a grant of it from his
Majesty.

20. And this was a fair settlement to his mind: but money was wanting to
furnish him with those necessaries which attend removes and a settlement in
such a place. To procure that, he wrote to his old friend Mr Nicholas Pey (in
whom was a radicated honesty and true gratitude to the Family, having been
preferred at Co^rt by the Lord Wotton) to use all his interest to procure five
hundred pounds of his Arrears; for less would not settle him at the College,
and the want of it wrinkled his face with cares ('it was his own expression) and
that being procured he should the next day after find him in his College, and
Invidiae remedium writ over his study door.

21. This money being procured, and he being settled according to the desires of
his heart (the College being to his mind as a quiet harbor to a Seafaring man
after a tempestious voyage) his first study was the Statutes of the College: by
which he conceived himself bound to enter into Holy Orders, which he did, being
made Deacon with convenient speed. Shortly after, as he came in his Surplice
from the Church Service, an old friend, a person of quality, met him so
attired, and joyed him: to whom Sir H. Wotton replied, I thank God and the
King, by whose goodness I now ^m in this condition, a condition which the
Emperor Charles the fifth seemed to approve, etc. I daily magnify my God for
this particular mercy of an exemption from business, a quiet mind and a
liberal maintenance, even in this part of my life, when my Age and infirmities
seem to sound me a retreat from the pleasures of this world, and invite me to
contemplation; in which I have ever taken the greatest felicity.

21. After his customary public Devotions, his use was to retire into his
Study, and there to spend some hours in reading the Bible and Autho^s in
Divinity, closing up his Meditations with private prayer. This was, for the
most part, his employment in the forenoon. But, when he was once sat at
Dinner, then nothing but cheerful thoughts possessed his mind, and those still
increased by constant company at his Table such persons as brought thither
additions both of learning and pleasure. But some part of most days was
usually spent in Philosophical conclusions. Nor did he forget his innate
pleasure of Angling; which he did usually call, his idle time, not idly spent:
saying, He would rather live five Maymonths, than forty Decembers. He was a
great lover of his neighbors, and a bountiful entertainer of them very often at
his Table: where his meat was choice, and his discourse better.

22. He was a constant cherisher of all those Youths in that School, in whom he
found etiher a constant diligence, or a genius that prompted them to learning.
For whose encouragement he was (beside many other things of necessity and
bounty) at the charge of setting up in it two rows of Pillars, on which he
caused to be drawn the pictures of diverse of the most famous Greek and Latin
Historians, Poets and Orators; persivading them not to neglect Rhetoric,
Because Almighty God has left mankind Affections to be wrought upon. And he
would often say, That none despised Eloquence, but such dull Souls as were not
capable of it. He would also often make choice of Observations out of those
Historians and Poets* but he would never leave the School without dropping some
choice Greek or Latin Apothegm or Sentence, such as were worthy of a room in
the memory of a growing Scholar. He was pleased constantly to breed up one or
more hopely Youths, which he picked out of the School, and took into his own
domestic care, and to attend him at his meals: Out of whose behavior and
discourse, he gathered observations for the better completing of his intended
work of Education: of which, by his still striving to make the whole better, he
lived to leave but part of posterity.

23. He was a great enemy to wrangling Disputes of Religion. Having in Rome
made acquaintance with a pleasant Priest, who invited him one evening to hear
their Vesper music at Church; the Priest seeing Sir Henry stand obscurely in
a corner, sends to him by a boy of the Quire this question writ in a small
piece of paper, Where was your Religion to be found before Luther? To which
question Sir Henry presently underwrit, My religion was to be found then where
yours is not to be found now: in the written word of God. To another that asked
him, Whether a Papist may be saved, he replied, You may be saved without
knowing that: look to your self. To another, whose earnestness exceeded his
knowledge, and was still railing against the Papists, he gave this advice; Pray
Sir forbear, till you have studied the points better: for the wise Italians
have this Proverb, He that understands amiss, concludes worse. And take heed
of thinking, the farther you go from the Church of Rome, the nearer you are to
God.

24. And to another that spoke indiscreet and bitter words against Arminius, I
heard him reply to this purpose: In my travels, I rested almost a year at
Leyden, where I entered into an acquaintance with Arminius, then Professor of
Divinity in that University, a man much talked off in this Age, which is made
up of opposition and contrariety. And indeed, if I mistake not Arminius in bis
expressions (as so weak a brain as mine is may easily do) then I know and
differ from him in some points: Yet, I profess my judgment of him to be, that
he was a man of most rare learning; and I know him to be of a most strict life,
and of a most meek spirit. -- And doubtless many middle witted men (which yet
may mean well:) many Scholars that are not in the highest Form for learning
(which yet may preach well:) do justly fall under the reproof of S. Jude, for
being busybodies, and for meddling with things they understand not.

25. This is some Account both of his Inclination and the Employment of his
time in the College: where he seemed to have his Youth renewed by a continual
conversation with that learned Society, and a daily recourse of other friends
of choicest breeding and parts: by which that great blessing of a cheerful
heart was still maintained, he being always free, even to the last of his
days, from that peevishness which usually attends age. Yet his mirth was
sometimes dampt by the remembrance of diverse old debts: and finding some
decaies of health, he did, about two years before his death, that none should
be a looser by it, make his last Will. Concerning which a doubt still remains,
whether it discovered more holy wit or conscionable policy: but there is no
doubt, but that his chief design was a Christian endeavor, that his debts
might be satisfied, (as appears by this part of it.)

To my Lords Grace of Cant: now being, I leave my picture of divine love,
rarely copied from one in the Kings Galleries of my presentation to his
Majesty: beseeching him to recieve it as a pledge of my humble reverence to
his great wisdom. And to the most worthy L. B. of London, Lord high Treasurer
of England, in true admiration of his Christian simplicity and contempt of
earthly pomp, I leave a Picture of Heraclitus bewailing, and Democritus
laughing at the world: most humbly beseeching the said Lo. Archb. his Grace,
and the Lo. B. of London, of both whose favors I have rasted in my life time,
to intercede with our most Gracious Sovereign after my death, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, that out of compassionate memory of my long services (wherein I
more studied the public Honor than mine own Utility) some order may be taken
out of my Arrears due in the Exchequer for satisfection of my Creditors, etc.

Accordingly, conscionable satisfaction was given for his just debts.

26. He went usually once a year, if not oftener, to the beloved Bocton-hall:
where, he would say, he found both cure for all cares by the company (which he
called the living furniture) of that place, and a restorative of his health by
the connaturalnesse of that which he called his genial air. He yearly went also
to Oxford: but the Summer before his death he changed that for a jorney to
W^nchester College. And as he returned said to his companion: How useful was
that advice of a holy Monk, who persuaded his friend to perform his customarie
devotions in a constant place: because in that place, we usually meet with
those thoughts which possessed us at our last being there. And I find it thus
far experimentally true, that at my now being at that School, seeing that very
place where I sat when I was a boy, occasioned me to remember those thoughts
of my Youth which then possessed me, etc.

27. After his return from Winchester, he fell into a dangerous fever which
weakened him much: ^e was then also much troubled with a continual short
spitting; but that infirmity he seemed to overcome in a good degree by leaving
Tobacco, which he had taken somewhat immoderately. And about two months before
his death (Oct. 1639.) he again fell into a fever, which though ^e seemed to
recover, yet these still left him so weak, that those common infirmities (which
were wont like civil friends to visit him, and after some short time to depart)
came both oftener, and at last took up their constant habitations with him,
still weakening his body. In the beginning of a December following he fell again
into a Quartane fever; and in the tenth fit, his better part, that part of Sir
Henry Wotton which could not die, put off mortality, with as much content and
cheerfulness, as humane frailty is capable of, being in perfect peace with God
and man.

His Epitaph by himself.

Hic jacet hujus sententiae primus Author, Disputandi pruritus, ^cclesiarum
scabies, Nomen alias quaere.

Another sentence wherein he delighted: Animas fieri sapientiores quiescendo.

Another, Amor unit omnia.

Ob. Etonae, Anno Sal. 1639. Aetat. 72.
^



VIII. Mr WILLIAM BEDEL, Bishop of Kilmore.
Out of Mr Iz: Walton, and Bish: Hall. D. Thomae Carles, Rect. de Barnesley.
1. WHen King James sent Sr Henry Wotton Ambassador to the State of Venice, he
sent also an Ambassador to the King of France, and another to the King of
Spain. With the Ambassador of France went Joseph Hall (late B. of N.) whose
many and useful Works speak his great merit: with the Ambassador of Spain, Ja.
Wadsworth: and with Sir Henry Wotton, William Bedel.

2. These three Chaplains to these three Embassdors, were all bred in one
University, all of one College, all Beneficed in one Diocese, and all most
dear and entire friends. But in Spain Mr Wadsworth met with temptations or
reasons, such as were so powerful as to persuade him (who of the three was
formerly observed to be the most averse to that Religion that calls it self
Catholic) to disdain himself a Member of the Church of England, and declare
himself for the Church of Rome, discharging himself of his Attendance on the
Ambassador, and betaking himself to a Monasterial life; in which he lived very
regularly, and so dyed.

3. When Mr Hall came into England, he wrote to Mr Wadsworth (it is the first
Epistle in his Decads) to persuade his return, or the reason of his Apostacy.
The Letter seemed to have many expressions of love, and yet there was something
in it that was so unpleasant to Mr Wadsworth, that he chose rather to acquaint
his old friend Mr Bedel with his Motives.

4. By which means there past between Mr Bedel and Mr Wadsworth very many
Letters, which be extant in print, and did well deserve it: for in them there
seems to be a controversy, not of Religion only, but, who should answer each
other with most love and meekness. Which I mention the rather, because it
seldom falls out so in a Book-war.

5. Mr Hall in an Epistle to Mr Bedel at Venice, having lamented the death of
our late Divines, adds: What should this work in us, but an imitation, yea
(that word is not too big for you) an emulation of their worthiness? The
Church, our Mother, looks for much at your hands: She knows how rich our common
Father has left you: She notes your graces, your oportunities, your
employments: She thinks you are gone so far, like a good Merchant, for no small
gain, and looks you shall come home well laded. Let me persuade you to gratify
us at home with the publication of that your exquisite Polemical Discourse,
whereto our conference with Mr Alablaster gave so happy an occasion. You shall
hereby clear many truths, and satisfy all Readers: yea I doubt not, but an
Adversary, not too perverse, shall acknowledge the truths victory and Yours.

6. In a Letter of Sir Henry Wotton's to the King, is mentioned a Petition to
his Majesty from persons directed hither by the good wishes of the Archbishop
of Armagh, to make Mr Bedel (then Resident upon a small Penefice in Suffolk)
Governor of Dublin College for the good of that Society. And Sir Henry
himself being required to render some testimony of Mr Bedel, long his Chaplain
at Venice, in the time of his first employment there, goes on thus: I am bound
in all conscience of truth (so far as your Majesty will vouchsafe to accept my
p^ot Judgment) to affirm of him, that I think hardly a fitter man for that
charge, could have been propounded unto your Majesty in your whole Kingdom,
for singular erudition and piety, conformity to the Rites of the Church, and
zeal to advance the Cause of God: wherein his Travels abroad were not obscure,
in the time of the excommunication of the Venetians.

7. Then he certifies the King: This is the Man whom Padre Paulo took, I may
say, into his very soul; with whom he did communicate the inwardest thoughts of
his heart; from whom he professed to have received more knowledge in all
Divinity, both Scholastical and Positive, than from any that he had ever
practiced in his days. Of which all the passages were well known to the King
your Father of most blessed Memory.

8. And so he concludes in these words: With your Majesty's good favor I end
this needless office: for the general fame of his learning, his life, and
Christian temper, and those religious labors which himself has Dedicated to
your Majesty, do better describe him then I am able.

9. Mr Bedel was (to the great joy of Sir Henry Wotton) made Governor of the
said College: and, after a fair discharge of his duty and trust there, he was
thence removed to be Bishop of Kilmore. In both which places, his life was so
holy, as seemed to equal the primitive Christians: for, as they, so he kept all
the Emberweeks, observed (besides his private devotions) the Canonical hours of
prayer very strictly; and so he did all the Feasts and Fast-daies of his Mother
the Church of England: his patience and charity were both such, as showed his
affections were set upon things above.

10: Indeed his whole life brought forth the fruits of the Spirit, there being
in him such a remarkablenesse, that he had a good report of those th^^ ^^re
without. Those that in point of Religion were of the Roman persuasion (of which
there were many in his Diocese) did yet ever look upon him with respect and
reverence; and testified it by a concealing and safe protecting him, in the
late horrid Rebellion in Ireland: when the fury of the wild Irish knew no
distinction of persons, yet there and then was he protected and cherished by
those of a contrary persuasion; and there and then he dyed, though not by
violence.

11. With him were lost many of his learned Writings, which were worthy of
preservation: and, among the rest, was lost the Bible, which, by many years
labor and conference and study, he had translated into the Irish Tongue, with
an intent to have printed it for public use.

DE DOMINIS facies hcec est, quem Roma cremav^^ Cur ais* Ausonium liquerat ille
Iovem.


IX. M. ANT. de DOMINIS, Dean of Windsor.
Out of Dr Barwick. D. Roberto Glyn,, Rect. de Risington p.
1. ABout the year 1618. there came over into England that very learned, though
unfortunate man, Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, Primate of
Dalmatia, etc. Which, (as he was wont to glory,) was St Hieroms Native Country,
as well as his.

2. This great Scholar, (after he had so profoundly asserted the truth of
Christian Religion, as it is professed and practiced in the Church of England,
in so many particulars against the errors and Corruptions of the Sea of Rome,
in his Learned and laborious books, De Republica Ecclesiastica; and had also
from the Kings bounty received so great encouragements for his honorable
supports, as the Deanery of Windsour and Mastership of the Sa^oy, besides many
rich and yearly presents, not only from the Bishops and Clergy, but also from
the Nobility and Gentry.) Was so far wrought upon by that Politician Count
Gondamar, the Spanish Ambassador then in England, and other instruments of the Sea of Rome, (that sought his ruin under some specious pretenses,) as to take
up a resolution of returning to Rome; and could not be dissuaded from it by his
true friends; that really endeavored hi^ security. Among whom Bishop Morton
was neither the least nor last, who very earnestly advised him, both by word
and writing, not to venture himself upon such a hopeless and hassardous journey.

3. The Archbishops pretense was very plausible and commen^able (and how real
he was in it, must be left to God,) namely, to negotiate an unity in Religion
between the Church of Rome and the Church of England, upon those moderate
grounds which he had laid down, and so well defended in his learned and
laborious Works printed here at London. He app^uded himself in the excellency
of the work, in removing the Schism; and of the honor in becoming a Repairer
of the breach, and of the reward which is promised to the peace makers. And he
thought himself the more likely to go through with his work, by reason of the
seasonable opportuaitie he had at that time, when Gregory the fifteenth was
newly chosen Pope who had been of his old and intimate acquaintance, brought up
in the same School and College with him. And however, he was resolved to make
an attempt; because if he failed in it, he hoped he should lose nothing but his
labor; for as for his Indemnitie, Count Gondamar had promised him the
security of the King of Spain his Master. But how well that promise was
performed, will appear by the Sequel.

4. While he was swelled up full with this promise and these hopes, Dr Morton
the Bishop of Lichfield and Co^^ntrie coming to visit him, had this ensuing
discourse with him, (among many others) which I have often heard him repeat
with pleasure, and shall therefore insert it; and the rather, because it shows
us of how little authority the Council of Trent would be, if it were not for
the terror of the inquisition. Leichf. Domine quid tibi in animo est? Anne
convertere Papam? Atque etiam conclave papale? Spal: Quid ni domine? Anne
existimas eos diabo o^ esse, ut non possint converti? Lei^hf: Minime Domine;
nec puto dominum Spalatensum deum esse ut hoc possit praestare: Nostin enim
concilium ^ridientinum. Spal. Novi domine, and ausus sum tibi dicere, Millies
Mill sunt, etiam in Italia, qui huic concilio fidem nullam adhibeant.

5. This discourse (and many other) having passed between them, they parted
friendly. And not long after did this Bishop reinforce his arguments, with an
addition of many more, in a long and learned Epistle to him. Wherein, (among
other Motives to diss^ade him from his ^ourny) he used one, wherein he showed
himself a true Prophet, concerning the entertainment he was like to have at
Rome. Which proved to be, that before he g^t to Rome Pope Gregory the
fifteenth his old friend, was dead, and a successor chosen in his pl^ce; by
whom this Archbishop was imprisoned in Castro St Angelo. Where he died, not
without strong suspicion of murder or poison: And his body was afterward burnt,
(as of an Heretic,) in Campo Flori.

6. I could here start a problematical question concerning this learned Arch
bishop. Whether or no did he ever retract his works, which he pulished in
print? If he did, why did they at Rome bu^n his body for Heresy? If not, then
they abused him in his life time, as well as after his death, in the manifesto
which they put forth in his n^me, which was so learnedly answered by Dr
Crakanthrop. There is but one way of avoiding this Di^emma, (and that will
bring them into a greate^ strait than either of the other,) namely, That they
burnt him after his death for what he retracted in his life time; and if they
own this, they must withal proclaim their unjustice and cruelty to the world.
Let them take it in which sense they will, his reasons and arguments laid down
and urged in his learned works will more condemn their cause than the altering
of his opinion, (supposing but not granting that he ever altered it,) can tend
to their advantage. ^is many clear and convincing Authorities, from the holy
^criptures, Councels, argumentative to any indifferent person that is not
wilfully prepossest; then his own dubious perhaps imposed) authority can
countervail.

7. His Manifesto, (if it was his) consists only in affirming or denying in
bare words: in his Works, whatsoever i^ affirmed or denied, is back^ with such
convincing and irrefragable arguments, as no man has taken the boldness in
above forty years since they were written, to undertake the answering of them.

X. Mr ABRAHAM WHEELOCK.
D. Tho: Hyde, Biblioth. B. suum reddo.

1. THe excellent Mr Wheelock was descended of honest plain Parents in the
Country: by whose pious care he was bred up at School, till he was s^fficiently
furnished with good learning and ripe years to salute the Universitie. At which
time he was sent to Kings College in Cambridge: where he was so sedulous and
studious, especially in the Oriental Languages, Hebrew, Arabic, Persi^n, etc.
that he did not sooner obtain Degrees than Fame, both in the University and a^
broad.

2. After he had some years enjoyed the Degree of Master of Arts in the
Unniversity, Sir Henry Spelman, that rare Antiquary and lover of his Country,
did allow to him an Annual stipend of thirty pounds, to explain the Saxon
Tongue publicly in the Schools: and the Noble Sir Thomas Adams Alderman of
London did, as long as Mr Wheelock lived, constantly confer upon him forty
pounds per annum for the mainte^^nce of an Arabic Lecture, which Mr Wheelock
likewise read publicly. And this they did, not only o^t of that respect, which
they owed to the University, but out of the great esteem they had of Mr
Wheelock's wo^th ^n^ merits: for, being assured of his great Abilities, they
thought i^ not meet that so clear a l^ght should be hid, but shine forth for
the common benefit.

3. After this, in the year 1644, he set forth Venerable Bede's History in
Saxon and Latin, with the addition of his own learned Notes.

4. The ne^t thing he attempted was to transl^te the Persian Evangelists into
Latin: which he performed, and beg^n to print some few ch^^ters in Persian and
Latin at London; whither ^e was called to be an helper in that great wo^k of
the Biblia Polyglotta set out by that famous Pillar of learning and religion Dr
Brian Walton, ^te L. Bishop of Chester. But Mr Wheelock lived only so long as
to see a Specimen of the no^-^entioned Biblia, and not any entire part of it
published.

5. Here I must not omit, that, notwithstanding the eminenc^e of his learning,
and the great esteem he had among persons of excellent worth, he was of such an
humble deportment, even to the meanest of those that addressed themselves unto
him, that I think, without prejudice to any other, in this particular he was
the Phaenix of his age.

6. He dyed at London, being about 60 years of age, and lies buried in St
Botolphs Church near Aldersgate.

7. I only add the grateful Testimony of learned Wase in the Preface to his
exact Dictionary: Clariss. Dominus Wheelocus, Vir mihi totique Juventuti
Cantabrigiensi cum honor memorandus, ut communis Doctor ac Pater; linguae Sax.
idem ac Orientalium, imprimis vero Arabicae professor publicus.

FINIS.

