W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the
other
By His EXCELLENCY, Richard, Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and GOVERNOR
in Chief of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
etc. and Vice Admiral of the same.
A Proclamation.
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
FORASMUCH as the Sanctification of the Lords Day is of Divine Institution, and
enforced by many gracious Promises made unto the Observers thereof; as well as
diverse severe Threatenings denounced against the violaters of the same.
Notwithstanding which, and the good and wholesome Laws made and enacted within
this Province, and under the Sanction of the Royal Authority, in that case
provided, It is observed that not only Children and Youth, but many persons of
riper years, do too often profane the said Day by frequenting of Taverns and
Alehouses for Tippling and Drinking, walking abroad in the streets and fields
for diversion and recreation, and otherwise mispend the said Holy Time.

I do therefore by and with the advice and consent of His Majesty's Council of
this Province, upon the Address of the Assembly, hereby command and require the
strict Observation of the Lords Day from time to time. And that all Justices of
the Peace, Grand-jurors, Constables, Tything-men, and other Officers whom it
does or may concern in their several places, do take effectual care, that the
Laws made for the Observation of the said Day, be vigorously put in Execution
against all persons that shall transgress the same, or profane the said Day in
any way or manner whatsoever.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston, the Twenty-first day of June; In the
Eleventh Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini, 1699. BELLOMONT.
By Order of His Excellency and Council,

Isaac Addington, Secr.



GOD Save the King.
BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1699.


