The BEHAVIOR, CONFESSION, AND EXECUTION OF The Twelve PRISIONERS That
Suffered on Wednesday the 22 of Jan. 1678/9. VIZ. Robert Freeman, Drawn and
Hanged near Little Britain, for Murdering his late Master there. At TYBVRN,
George Brown, John Butler, Richard Mills, Christo Bruncker, George Kenian,
For a Burglary and Felony in Hatton-garden, taking away 380 ounces of Plate,
besides Rings and Money, under prerence of searching for Papists. William
Brain, For stealing an Horse, having been burnt in the hand formerly. Tim.
Smith. and Margaret Wells, For a Burglary and Felony in St. Gileses. William
Atkinson, and William Tiney, For a Burglary and Felony in Whitechappel. Francis
Jones, For a Felony and Burglary.



Giving a true Account of their Deportment in Prison aster Sentence, and last
Words, as far as material, at Execution: Attested by Mr. Ordinary.

LICENSED, Printed for C. L. 1678/9.

THE CONFESSION and EXECUTION OF The Twelve PRISONERS That Suffr'd on Wednesday
the 22th of January, 1678/9.
AS this sheet is made public as a Sea-mark to all that read or bear it, that
they may avoid those desperate Rocks of sin, on which these unhappy persons
lamentably shipwrackt: So particular circumspection has been used, that nothing
but Truth may be herein related, so as neither to abuse the Dead, or mis-inform
the Living.

At the last Sessions, there were in all Seventeen persons, viz. Fifteen Men,
and Two Women, that received Sentence of Death: but Five of them obtained (at
least for the present) His Majesty's Gracious Pardon; the other Twelve, this
22. of January, were brought to Execution.

The first was one Robert Freeman, and Apprentice to one Mr. Bailee, a Smith in
Little Britain, for Murdring whom, on the 12th. instant, he was not Condemned,
and came to suffer; which was ordered to be in Little Britain, not very far
from the place where the Fact was committed. It Is strange and sad to consider,
that not only at his Trial, but afterward, he persisted in asserting his
Innocence, not withstanding all the Arguments and Importunities Mr. Ordinary or
other Ministers could use, who took extraordinary pains in that behalf. Yet
confessed the sum of all that was Evidenced against him, as that he spoke those
words -- O do no not speak of that Gun, or words to that effect; that there
might be Blood on the Gun, etc. but avrr'd, that the door when he came down in
the Morning, was not Locked, but only Larcht, and the Key on the inside. He
discoursed very understandingly, and made solemn Appeals of his Ignorance, how,
or by what means he came to his end. But the Circumstances were so home and
undeniable, that even Chrity it self could not credit his Asseverations.

Mr. Ordinary on the Lords day took great pains to a waken them to a through
Conviction of their sins, from two remarkable and most suitable Scriptures,
viz. in the forenoon, Romans 3.19. -- For we know that what the Law says, it
says to them that are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all
the World become guilty before God. In the afternoon, from Psalm. 25. 11. For
thy Name sake, O Lord! pardon my iniquity, for it is great. And after the
Evening Sermon, inquired what impressions of Gods Spirit they found on their
hearts from his Ministerial Labors that day; to which they answered, That they
hoped the Lord would make it effectual to them.

On the Monday likewise, Mr. Ordinary visited them, and on the Tuesday they
being called together into the great Hall, he and two other Ministers came to
exhort and pray with them, in order to fit and prepare them for their great and
dreadful change. At first, many of them appeared very earnest to have the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper Administered to them: whereupon, Mr. Ordinary, and
another able Minister, opening the nature of that Ordinance, their
unpreparedness, scandalousness, etc. used most effectual Arguments why it was
neither necessary or convenient for them, under their circumstances; yet
withal, declaring their tenderness in no wise to debar them of any thing that
might be necessary or expedient for their Salvation: so that after above half
an hours pains, the Prisoners in general declared, that they were satisfied,
and did not desire i^. After satisfaction given in that particular, a very
worthy Minister gave them serious advice for their Souls Eternal Happiness, and
prayed very earnestly for them; which being performed, Mr. ordinary, (as his
usual manner is) did earnestly desire of them, to consider of the great
concerns of their Everlasting Condition; in order whereunto, he required a
particular account from every one of them, what hope they had, (after all
Counsels and Prayers) of their suture happy estate: whereunto every one gave a
particulr account thereof, most of them confessing and bewailing their
precedent Ill course of life, which might provoke the Lord to leave them to
themselves, to fall into those Crimes for which they were justly Condemned:
Some in particular confessing their Profanation of the Lords day, Disobedience
to Parents, Drunkenness, mixing with bid Company; the sin of Swearing, and
other Vices of the Tongue. One acknowledged, that he had for two years last
past; prayed earnestly to the Lord, to be preserved from the Temprations of his
loose Companions; but not setting a sufficient watch over his own heart, he was
not fortified against the aforesaid Temptations. Another declared, that being
in great wants, and having Overtures made of supplying him by invading the
Proprieties of other men, he was over-perswaded to join with them in such an
Attempt. Mr. Ordinary, after all these Confessions, earnestly pressed them to
search into their hearts, which were naturally so deceitful, that they might
not presume upon a false Faith and Repentance; and then another Minister
concluded for that time with Prayer.

On Wednesday morning about eight a clock, RoBert Freeman was drawn on a Sledge
(as is usual in cases of Petty Treason) to Little Britain, where just by the
Grate was a Gibbet erected: He passed with a solid composed countenance,
Reading all the way; and being brought thither, persisted in denying the Fact,
with several solemn expressions, too tedious to be here related: he repeated
the Lords Prayer with much appearance of zeal, as likewise the Creed, declaring
it to be the Articles of his Souls belief. Mr. Ordinary prayed with Him very
affectionately, and also he prayed himself in good words: he desired all young
Men to beware of Ill Company, and private sins, lest God should give them up to
the like disastrous end: he expressed largely the love he had to his Master,
and that he was not privy to, or conscious of any others that might be
concerned in his Murder; but that for his own part, he freely forgave all the
World, what ever thoughts it might have of him when he was dead; for he trusted
he had made his peace with God: and so was Executed, most people with sorrow
admiring at, and pitying his obstinacy; for so we cannot but call his denial,
after such convincing Evidence. Nor want there Examples heretofore of the like
resoluteness under the greatest Guilt, in Malefactors that out of hopes of
Pardon at last, or vainglory to dye pitied, have stifled their Conscieces,
and died with a denial of the Facts, which even before they confessed to Mr.
Ordinary. But we dare not censure in so abstruse a matter; himself-could not
deny, but the Witnesses, Court, and Jury, had proceeded fairly: for Men can but
act as things appear; therefore we leave him to the judgment of that most just
and all-seeing God, who righteously judges all the Earth.

The same forenoon, in four Carts were the other Eleven conveyed to Tyburn, who
when they were all tied up to the Beam, declared to Mr. Ordinary, and another
Minister, those particular sins, which they did shame themselves for, as the
just provocation of God, why he suffered them to fall into those foul Crimes,
for which they now dyed.

One of the five for the Burglary in Hatton Garden, delivered a paper of his
Confession, under his own hand, which he desired might be published, as some
evidence of his sorrow and Repentance to the World, the words of which are as
follows.

The first eminent sin which I can remember, was the Breach of the Sabbath;
then I proceeded to keep Company, where I learned to Curse and Swear, and
Profane Gods Holy Name; Lying and Adultery, Drunkenness, and Disobedience to
my Mother, who sought by good Counsel to reclaim me; which is the just canse my
days are shortened in this World. I have been guilty of a great many Robberies
on the Highway, and others besides this I am so justly Condemned for.

Another of the Five confessed, that he was guilty of all manner of sin, (that
of actual Murder and Treason excepted) and was much humbled for the same,
especially for his execrable Oaths and Curses, which had been the customary
Parenthesis of his discourses.

They all acknowledged, that the hand of the Lord had righteously brought their
Iniquities to light, and themselves to shame; they had deserved to be eternally
rejected, for several other notorious unknown Impieties, but they hoped for the
pardon of them, by the Merits of Christ, upon their Repentance, which is in
charity apprehended to have been sincere: they all prayed for themselves, and
some very pathetically, and beyond expectation. They desired Mr. Ordinary in
their words, which would not be heard so well in their own pronunciation, by
reason of the Multitude of Spectatours, that he would warn all present, by
their calamitous end, to take heed of all fin.

The Woman in the Morning, on some temptation, disowned that she was guilty of
the Burglary for which she suffered; but at the place of Execution freely
Confessed it, and desired pardon of God for that Lie in particular.

It was a sad and most affecting Spectacle, to see so many persons at once,
hastening themselves to an ignominious Death, by the Impieties of their Lives:
to behold such a fight, one would think, might awaken all that saw it, to fly
from such wicked Practices, to leave off their debauched Conversation and bad
Company, and seriously imploring Mercy and forgiveness for past Iniquities,
strenuously endeavor to redeem the time for the future, and lead their Lives
in Sobriety and Godliness; which God of his infinite goodness grant.

I do Attest the Particulars of this Narrative to be true.

Sam. Smith, Ordinary of Newgate.

FINIS.

