AN ALARM To all Impenitent SINNERS.

OR, The Spirit of Bondage raised up in Judgment and allayed in Mercy.

Declared in a short Treatise of the sweetness of God's love discovered in the
bitterness of his wrath.

By Humphrey Brown, M. A.

Confessio est salus animarum: dissipatrix vitic^: oppugnatrix daemonum: Quid
plura? ^ruit os inferni, portas aperit Paradisi. Augustine. in Lib. de paenit.

Lam. 3. 19, 20, 21. Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and
the gall. My soul has them still in remembrance, and is ^mbled in me. This I
recall to mind, therefore have I hope.

LONDON, Printed for Edw. Blackmore, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Angel in Paul's Churchyard, M. DC. L.

The Author to the Reader.
THe great Physician of our souls, does often cure the sore of sin, by the
sense of sin: and makes his Patients ^rize the greatness of the remedy, by ^e
grievousnesse of the disease. Our Quam diveses in misericordia, quam magnificus
in justitia, quam munificus in gratia, Domine Deus noster? non est qui similis
fit tibi. Bern. Sermon. 57.
^eavenly Father makes his children ^ste the bitterness of his wrath, that ^ey
may the more admire the sweet^esse of his loving kindness; he suf^ers them to
be almost drowned, in ^he raging Sea of the one, that they ^ight be saved in
the Arc of the over. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: On
them which ^ll severity, but toward me good^esse, if I continue in my
goodness: ^therwise I also shall be cut off, as indeed of late I was verily
perswad^ Romans 11. 22.
I should have been; for being a^ Tavern in London, where too often Ebrietas
manifestissimus est Demon. Bern.
drunkenness that most manif^ Devil keeps his Randezvous, I pla^ed with an
acquaintance of mine^ Tables, for a pint of Sack, but wit^ in a while doubling
our files, we b^gan Ira furor brevis est.
to quarrel; whereupon my reason, and that small Religion whi^ I had, was
overcome with unru^ passion; I wished the Devil mig^ have my soul, if I did not
fight wi^ him the next morning, and kill^ be killed: but mine own wrath w^ not
long over, before Gods wra^ overtooke me: for the thought ^ that abominable
execration, did ^ trouble me, that I knew not w^ whether I were in Hell, or
Hell in m^ the fearful roaring of that one s^ against me, brought all my other
si^ with ghastly looks to gaze upon m^ As the woman of Samaria concer^ing John
4. 29.
Christ, so I may say of my co^ ^ence, it told me all the sins that ever
^ommitted: and presented them un^ me in the ugly picture of Devils, ^ich before
I looked on in the form ^ Angels; as before they seemed to ^y palate all honey,
so in the anguish ^ my soul they were all sting. I saw ^ine sit on the brow of
Gods offend^ Sovereignty, each look sparkled ^dignation, and that indignation
^eath: there was a storm in Gods ^untenance, and a tempest in mine ^n heart
and tongue, crying out, ^ hell, and damnatinn, as my por^on; supposing my self
to have no ^terest at all in Christ. No Cordial ^f mercy could work on my
Nauseous ^omach: no Gospel-physick could I ^ake, in those raging Dog-daies of
any spiritual distempers; wherein I ^ounted my self a Dog, shut out of ^eaven,
and only fit for the kennell Rev. 22. 15.
^f hell: but at last, being often visit^d, by my worthy, and much honour^d
friend Mr Blakemore, Pastor of S. Peter's Cornhill, the pulse o^ my conscience
began to beat more mildly, being touched with the han^ of mercy. Prospera lux
oritur^ Prospera lux oritur linguis animisque favete: nunc dicenda bono sunt
bona verba die. Ovid. Fast. l. 1.
light proceeded out of darkness ^ joy out of sorrow: comfort out o^ despair:
and as I may say, Heaven out of Hell. God my merciful Father scourged me, I
cried bitterly, crying he heard me, and hearing, he comforted me: he continued
not long in his dreadful posture of war, bu^ condescended to a treaty,
making (a^ I trust) a perpetual peace with my soul. Wherefore I will praise
thee O Lord among the people: for thy Psalm. 108. 3, 4.
mercy is great above the heavens* and thy truth reaches unto the clouds. The
Lord is my portion, Lam. 3. 24, 25.
says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good unto them that
wait for him, to the soul that Dan. 9. 3.
seeks him. Set your face therefore (Dear Christian friends) unto the Lord
God, by prayer and supplication. And if any good shall accrue ^o you out of
these my poor endea^rs, let Gods have the praise, and ^ your prayers that I
may grow in ^ace, and in the knowledge of our ^rd, and Savior Jesus Christ: 2
Pet. 3. 8.
^o I hope will perfect that which ^ has begun that, I suffer not ship^ack
Domine quod coepisti perfice ne in portu nanfragium accidat. Aug. Phil. 4. 8.
in the heaven.

Finally, brethren, whatsoever ^ings are true, whatsoever things ^e honest,
whatsoever things are ^st, whatsoever things are pure, ^hatsoever things are
lovely, what^oever things are of good report: if ^here be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things: And the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all.

Amen.
Yours in Christ Jesus, H. BROWN.

AN ALARM TO ALL Impenitent Sinners.
WHen a man has not blushed, at the qu. of Satan's temptation, to come on the
Stage as a sinner; ^e thinks he should not be a^amed of public view, when ^e
scene is changed, and the part ^ a convert acted: for so to do, ^ere in this,
to cloud the glory of ^ercy, as in the other, to pro^ke the rigor of justice:
and Jer. 3. 3.
have a whores forehead in sin^ng, though a virgins bashfulnesse in
confessing, for mine ow^ part therefore, as declaring m^ Isa. 3. 9.
sin as Sodom, was to me a Com^die, so to declare Gods merc^ in my longed-for
reformation shall not be to me a Tragedy but rather the old man's Exi^ Psalm.
7. 13.
with the instruments of death and the new man's Intrat, wit^ Isa. 38. 20.
the stringed instruments, soun^ing by the finger of the holy spirit, shall be
to me the sweet soul-ravishing music, mo^ comfortable then David's Harp^ 1 Samuel 16.
to Saul, possessed with an ev^ spirit, and if in declaring God goodness to
me, I act to plea^ my heavenly Spectator, I have m^ reward: I seek not the
applau^ of any, but the happy conversio^ of all, who hug sin in their hear^
with as great danger, as the L^cedemonian Plutarch. Quod durum pati meminisse
dulce. Sen. in Hero. fur.
boy did his fox; O^ when I remember mine affliction and my misery, the
wormwood, an^ ^eg all, Lam. 3. 19. mine afflicti^n is renewed, to recount the
^isery of a sinner, without the Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. Paenitens de peccato dolet
and de dolor gaudet Aug.
^omfort of a Savior, si mihi sint ^ntum linguae, I could not ex^resse it: for
I know by the pulse ^f mine own conscience, the ^earful agonies of a sick soul,
^ung with the sense of sin: con^ientia peccati formidinis matter: ^e conscience
of sin is the mo^er of fear: and albeit to the ^odly, it be fair, yet it
presents ^arful fantasies, and hideous ^ectacles, to the eyes of sinful ^ules.

This I know, by a late woeful, ^oyful experience, I call it so; because
(blessed be God) it proved (...) a bitter-sweet unto ^e: But first of the
bitterness, and then of the sweetness.

Saint Bernard makes mention ^f a fourfold conscience: first, conscience
quiet, and good, as 1 Timothy 1. 5. and this is a continu^ feast, Prove. 15. 15.
Secondly, conscience good, but not quie^ and this was David's case, in h^
complaint thus, Thou have la^ me in the lowest pit, in darkness, ^ the deeps:
Thy wrath lies hard u^ Psalm. 88. 6, 7;
on me: and thou have afflicted ^ with all thy waves. Thirdly, conscience
quiet, but not good and such a one has he, wh^ hearing the words of the curs^
blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I wal^ in the
imagination of mine heart, ^ Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
add drunkenness to thirst: O qua^ta tempestas est haec tranquillitas what a
tempest is this calm what a war is this peace? for the that thus would have a
peace make a truce without the Broad seal of the King of kings: are n^ Hos. 4.
17.
better then Rebels, and man well expect his fearful march against them: though
his marc^ the longer, his assault will be ^e fiercer; the longer the ^aught,
the stronger the shoot* settling on our lees of sin, we ^r Gods dregs of fury,
he that ^eeps long in the pleasures of sin ^ earth, may ('it is to be feared)
Saepe quem tentationis certamen superare non valuit, sua deterius securitas
stravit. Greg. Moral.
wake in the pains of hell: find^g thorney thickets of sharpest ^rrows, for
rosy beds of his ^eetest pleasures.

4. a conscience neither quiet; or good; and this was my case ^hen the book of
my conscience ^as opened, and all my sins in ^apitall letters, were read by the
^ye of my woeful soul. And then sinful I, according to the Con^ents of those
records, gave sen^ence of damnation on my self. Job. 7. 15. Ier. 8. 3. Job. 15.
16.
^y soul chose strangling, and ^eath rather then my life. I that before had
drunk iniquity, like ^ater, as Job speaks, do behold ^ustly a torrent of divine
wrath, ready to overwhelme me: t^ waters of Marah compass the little Isle of
man in m^ round about: and no fre^ streams of Heavenly consolat^on, could
pass through the sa^ Sea of these hellish terrors: a the streams of my vain
worldly pleasures, in the Channel ^ presumtion, emptied themselv^ into the
gulf of despair, ^ the river Jordan into the dea^ Sea. Then, O then I found a
Ephesians. 4. 22. 1 Timothy 6. 9. Horat. 1. ep. ad Lollium. Malorum esca voluptas.
Cato. Major.
my former pleasures, to be b^ deceitful lusts, foolish an^ hurtful lusts,
according to the of the Poet, Sperne voluptates nocet empta dolor voluptas
despise pleasures: pleasure purcha^ed with grief, is hurtful, if an^ pleasure
was purchased wit^ grief, surely mine was, for while I with it as Satan's
Engine, rushe^ like an unruly horse, into the battle of rebellion, against the
(...)cred Majesty of my God, he Job. 6. 4.
^ercifull King, being provoked, ^ts his terrors in array against ^e, masters
up all my sins, before ^y face, as threatening to cut ^e off, with my own
formerly ^eloved, but now terrible par^y, even my transgressions; nay ^ore, the
high and mighty Lord ^f Hosts, discharges in a full vol^ey, all the roaring
Canons of ^is irefull and direful menaces against me, insomuch that the weak
bulwark of all my hope, was soon battered down: and then I hope-less,
help-less wretch, found by woeful experience, that the ^ins of Preachers, were
not only the Preachers of sins, to others, but also of most heavy judgments
to themselves. Then I found that I had only spoke for Jerusalem, but wrought
for the building up of Jericho, and Babylon: then I found that I had sailed by
Satan's compass, and not Gods; b^ the false light of his delusion, ^ not by the
Pole-starre of Go^ Rev: 4. 6.
grace, on this Sea of glass, the world: which made the Sou^ shipwreck by me,
cry out a^ 'twere in my ears, for vengeance against my soul, cast on the Syrte^
of a most sad condition: as Pau^ and Timothy, in Asia were presse^ 2 Cor: 1. 8.
out of measure above strength: insomuch that they despaired of lif^ natural:
so I was so pressed with the burden of my sins, above m^ strength, that I even
despaired of life eternal, and yet despised life natural, desiring (a^ I may
say) to die, if there were no heaven, who lived as if there were no hell. Such
an horror overwhelmed me, such a horror Psalm: 55. 5.
laid hold upon me, that as before I lived as if there were no law, no justice;
so now I lay as if there were no Gospel no mercy.

My sins that cloud of wit^esses Dicit quidem Plato animas hominum daemones
esse, etc. Aug. de civit. Dei l. 9. c. 11.
against me, did so hinder ^e Sunshine of Gods favor from me, that I beheld
the Sun ^f divine justice, without any ^eames of mercy: so that I con^eived my
soul to be no better ^hen a Devil, in my body; as ^lato held the souls of men,
to be Devils separated from the body, whereas a sanctified soul is as ^were a
certain God, dwelling ^n a humane body, or a heavenly Anima Deus est aliquis
humano corpore vivens Sen. ad Sunil. Epist 3.
^ing, taking up his mansion in ^arthly cottage.

Oh, such bitter things were written against me, by the pen of Gods justice,
dipped in the gall and vinegar of his sore displea^ure, that I then possessed the
in^quities Job. 13. 26. Dan. 5.
of my youth; which made me tremble, as Belshazzar, at the handwriting. Me
thoughts I read also, Mean Mean Tekel Vphar^in: I was weighed in the balance
and found wanting, eve^ of true zeal and piety, which crowns Christ ministry.
I looked therefore on the kingdom o^ heaven, as divided from me; an^ M.
Blackmore.
on hell as my right inheritance insomuch that when a learne^ Godly minister of
London, (for whom I am bound to praise God came to visit me, in my extremity,
and desired like the goo^ Samaritan to power in oil o^ Luke 10.
comfort, into my wounded conscience, it swimmed (as I may say on the top of
the overflowing of mine iniquity: and never touched my conscience, as a
remedy. All Gospel-salves were to me corrosives: God's woun^ though the
mildest, was to me ^ sword; such sinful malignan^ humors did so over-charge
the stomach of my soul; that the brea^ of life could not be disgested by me, as
any thing nourishable unto ^e. I looked on my self as no Magna est vis
conscientiae in utramque partem: ut neque timeant qui nihil commiserint: and
paenam semper ante oc^los versari putent qui peccaverint. Cato major* pro
Milone.
^raelite, and therefore I could ^ot relish that Sacred Manna. ^he Scriptures
are Gods Armou^y, wherein are weapons both ^ffensive, and defensive: but alas,
^ll the weapons therein were ^ffensive unto me, in that sad ^esertion; so
focible was my con^cience, in terrifying me, that ^he sword of Gods vengeance
^dged by my disobedience, was drawn before my face, covered with confusion.
Then I who Jehu^ike marched furiously in the broad way, in this woeful
straight I lay down, roaring for terror, and yet not able to cry for quarter,
to ask for mercy; deeming or rather dooming my self ( Spira-like) out of
heavens protection, because not within the lines of Christ's communication. The
Schoolmen observe that a Child of God, may so fall, that he may therein loose
aptitu^dinem regnandi: the fitness of reigning: but never jus regni^ the right
of the kingdom: bu^ I poor Creature, seeing my sel^ destitute, of the Royal
Charte^ of grace, shut my self clean ou^ of the City of glory. I measure^ my
right by my aptitude, and s^ found no place to enter, being fully persuaded by
the enemy* that I had lost Christ, the way^ and herein the devil played the
part of a cunning, deceitful^ Physician, who recounts althing^ that may
endammage, not any thing that may recover his patient.

A sick patient indeed was I, and my sickness threatened even (...). Basil. 1 Samuel 2. 25.
the very death of immortality: and who could entreat for me? As old Eli said
unto his wicked sons, if one man sin against another, the Judge stall judge
him: but if man sin against the Lord who shall ^treat for him? he goes the way
^ silence the mouth of the blood ^ Jesus; and lo then against whom sin is the
Solicitor in the ^ourt of heaven, and for whom christ Jesus is not the
advocate, ^ost miserable is the state of ^at man, most grievous is the ^cknesse
of that soul: yea truly it ^ the soul of sickness, the whole Isa. 1. 5.
^ead is sick, and the whole heart ^int.

I am sure it is a fearful thing Heb. 10. 31.
^o fall into the hands of the living God: nay, most fearful it is, when we
have not the wounded ^ands of our Redeemer to hold ^s up: certainly then as
presum^tion Desperatio homicida est animae. Aug.
was our heaven, despair will be our hell; the one march^ng in the front, the
other very ^ften brings up the arreare, or ^ather falls upon it, routing all in
Psalm. 50. Sermon. 6.
^ormer pleasures, marshalled by presumption: and slaying the self-condemning
soul; which ^ Job. 7. 20.
as a mark set against God, an^ is a burden to it self. We see i^ Genesis 4.
exemplified in Cain, Achitophe^ 2 Samuel 17. 1 Chronicles. 10. Mat. 27.
Saul, Judas and the like: whos^ souls being appaled with the sense, and
over-burdened wit^ the weight of their transgessions they despaired of the
haven^ and so cast themselves, into the gulf. They that before, like ^ ship
with full sail, hoised up the Top-gallant of their pride^ and the sails of
their affections to the poisonous blasts of Satan^ temptations, at last, like
bases^ cowards, struck sail to the Sceleratior omnibus o Juda and infelicior
extitisti: quem non paenitentia duxit ad Dominu^: sed desperatio traxit ad
laqueu^. Leo in Sermon.
Prince of darkness, who upon their total submission, boarded the pinnace of
their souls: and being a cursed Pyrat, from the beginning, robbed them of the
precious jewel of their salvation, which is the only prize he seeks ^or: as
the King of Sodom said un^o Abraham, da mihi animas, ^ive me the souls, Genesis
14. 21. ^ch is the devils method, if he ^ath the soul, which is man's all, ^e
has all his desire accomplish^d, as in Judas; who sinned more ^n despairing of
mercy, then in ^etraying his master, the Lord of ^f life, to death.

Now in the fall of man. 1. the Devil tempts. 2. Man consents. 8. God forsakes.
Satan tempts ^n malice, man consents in weakness, and God forsakes in justice.
Neither is he absent, where he seems to be a far off: for where Greg. Hom. 8.
super. Ezekiel.
he is not present per gratiam, by grace, he is per vendictam, by vengeance.

Oh, when the just Judge of heaven, and earth is present, in the last
acception, then the Lord is known executing wrath, who was not known suffering
wrong: then his Scorpions are feare^ whose rods were slighted: h^ sword is
brandished to a dese^ved slaughter, whose Scepte^ held out by the right hand ^
love, could not invite to a tim^ly submission. Then, Oh then, t^ Isa. 47. 3.
nakedness of a miserable sinn^ shall be uncovered: yea his sham^ Isa. 59. 17.
shall he seen: when God thus put on the garments of vengeance for clothing,
and is clad with zea^ as a cloak. Who can stand when Ioh. 9. 5.
the anger of the Lord is kindled^ he overturneth the highest mountains Hab.
3. 12.
in his anger. He threshet^ Isa. 63. 6.
his enemies in anger: nay more, h^ treads down the people in his anger, and
makes them drunk in his fury; and brings down their strength (...). Home^.
to the earth.

God has a revenging eye^ (says the blind heathen and: where sin is long in
the soul, as a black cloud; no marvel, if the storm^ of vengance break forth
in a (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 5. Isa 33. 23. Job 9. 17. Isa. 28. 2. Ier. 22. 28.
Hose. 8. 8. Psalm. 83. 15.
^hunder-clap of fury; wherein the poor soul has the tacklings loosed, cannot
well strengthen the mast, neither is able to spread the sail, and therefore is
^roken with the tempest as Job speaks, Gods storm is a destroying storm, as a
flood of mighty waters overflowing it casts down to the earth with the hand.

In this overflowing, all our pleasures and vain delights sink; but our sins
do swim in full view to the shame and confusion of our faces, who may justly be
esteemed in Gods sight as vessels wherein is no pleasure.

Such a one assuredly was I* when the most High thundered with his voice of
displeasure, persecuted me with his tempest, and made me afraid with his
storm, I saw no pleasure that God had in me, neither had ^ any pleasure in my
self, I could not but fall out with my self, because I had fallen out with my
God; vile I was in the sight o^ others, but viler in mine own.

Terror without, and horro^ within, like Pharaohs lean kine, swallowed up all
the fat kine o^ Genesis 41.
my former Carnal delights ^ which like the fair Nymphs in the Poets, brought
forth the foul Satyrs of fierce wrath, trouble of an evil conscience, and
despair of Gods mercy: conceiving it to be unprofitable to knock at the door,
or wait at the pool, but behold, I that was thus afflicted, tossed Isa. 54. 11.
with tempest and not comforted, beh^ld with the eye of faith a Savior,
presenting himself as a Covert of mercy, from the storm of incensed Majesty.
Though the cry of my sins were great at the dreadful Tribunal, yet the cry ^f
my Redeemers blood was ^reater, at the Throne of grace: ^here it did awake
mercy, and ^lled wrath a sleep, so that I ^ill sing of mercy and judge^ent,
unto thee O Lord will I sing. Psa. 101. 1 Lam. 3. 22.
^ is of the Lords mercies that I ^m not consumed, because his ^ompassions
fail not.

It is said, where the Philosopher ^nds the Physician begins; so where humane
reason and flesh^y wisdom was Non-plust in ^he without hope of remedie^, ^he
blessed Physician of our ^ouls (teaching me that Gods Metaphysickes are above
man's ^ogick) speaks to me with heal^g Aphorisms of mercy, saying ^n effect:
for a small moment have ^ forsaken thee, but with great Isa. 54. 7. 8.
mercies will I gather thee. In ^ little wrath I hid my face from ^hee, for a
moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the
Lord thy Redeemer.

But stay, does a fountain sen^ Iam. 3. 11.
forth at the same place sweet wat^ and bitter? Yes, sweet streams ^ mercy,
and bitter streams of j^stice, flow both from the sa^ fountain of grace and
glory.

Out of the same Throne pr^ceed Rev. 4. 5.
lightnings of Gods wi^ thundrings of his judgement^ and voices of his mercy:
which verse. 3.
are evermore shrill in faithfu^ ears. The Rainbow about the Throne, the
Covenant of gra^ is still visible in the Horizon ^ the Saints; though happily
n^ beculae quaedam, some thin clou^ may interpose.

When God is to show merci^ like the father of the Prodig^ Currit, he runs,
as being wil^ing, and rejoicing at it: but wh^ to show his inward disple^sure
by his outward warlike p(...) ^ure in judgment, ambulate, he ^alketh, as at
the casting Adam ^t of Paradise being pensive and ^sco^tented at it. He is even
grie^ed at the heart (as I may say) ^hen man's sin as a fire burn^g to
destruction, will not ^e quenched without the pow^ng forth of the full vials of
his ^rath. Oh what a springtide ^f grief is in God, when he is ^rovoked to
open the flud-gates ^f his fury to wash away the filth ^f our abominations? his
expo^tulation Hose. 11. 8.
in the Prophet, is a gra^ious proclamation of his tender mercies to the
proudest Rebels: How shall I give the up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee,
Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? says
^he Lord: who even echoes to his ^oice with sighs to this sad tune, mine heart
is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.

Mercy and judgment seem struggle in God, as Pharez and Zar^ Genesis 38.
did in the womb of Tamar: judg^ment like the one, with the skar^ Deus cui
proprium est mi sereri, ex se miserandi sumit materiam: quod uutem condemnat,
eum cogimus. Bern in Cant. Ger. 7.
thread of vengeance stretche^ out the hand, but mercy plucks back, comes forth
in triumph ^ conqueror over judgment.

In that God shows merci^ is from a principle of love ^ himself; but in that
he execut^ judgment, is from a princip^ of wickedness in us: for he dot^ not
afflict willingly, nor griev^ the children of men. I have n^ Lam. 3. 33.
pleasure in the death of him the dies, says the Lord God: wherefore Ezekiel.
18. 32.
turn your selves, and liv^ ye. Before the Lord of Hosts will giv^ the fierce
assault, he offers afriend^ly Isa. 1. 18.
parlee: as we read in the Pro^phet, Come now, and let us reason together,
says the Lord. When all Gods other attributes as ^ formidable Army threaten
man's Jam. 2. 13.
ruin, mercy the sweetest of al^ Gods attributes, rejoicing against Psalm.
144. 4.
judgment, intercedes, desires a treaty with man, who ^s like to vanity, and
whose days are as a shadow that pas^eth away. The Father of mercies ^angs out
the white flagge, in ^oken of grace and favor, if re^ellious man will submit;
but if ^e will still refuse and rebel, ^ighting against the Lord, then 2 Chronicles. 13. 12
^s Abijah said to Israel, under the conduct of Jeroboam, he shall not Vitiis
patientia victa est. Ovid. Amor. 3.
^rosper: his obstinacy overcomes Gods patience, which being abused turns into
fury, hangs out the red flagge of vengance in the day of wrath, trouble and
distress, wastness and deso^ation, clouds and darkness. When terms of mercy
are rejected, fire and sword must be expected. The Lord of Hosts in the day
Zephan. 1.
of the trumpet and alarm will bring obstinate rebels to distress, that they
shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and
their blood shall be powered out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.

Woe unto him that striveth Isa. 45. 9.
with his maker, says the prophet: yet weak unworthy I, may now say, that I
strove with my maker, wrestled with him in the strength of Jesus, till I
obtained a blessing, even such a blessing as peace, to my troubled conscience.
His rod and his staff comforted Psalm. 24. 3.
me; as he did chastise me with his rod, so he did uphold me with his staff.
God was to Psalm. 84. 11.
me a sun and a shield, a sun of righteousness arising with Mal. 4. 2.
healing in his wings: and a shield of salvation, to defend me from the
assaults of my deadly foes, the world, the flesh, and the devil: so that they
being swallowed up in victory, the Lord jesus triumphed in mine heart: is
invincible goodness could Bonitas invicti non vincitur, infiniti misericordia
uon finitur. Fulgent. Tota essentia Dei misericordia. Bern.
^ot be overcome by my wicked^esse, neither would his infinite ^ercie admit a
period from my ^nite misery: but as if he had ^orgotten to be just, he came to
^e (as I may say) with a sweet ^omplement of love; saying, O ^infull soul thou
have destroyed Hose 13. 9.
^hy self, but in me is thine help: according to the voice heard by Saint
Augustine relying upon his In vita Aug.
own strength, In te sias, and non stas, so long as I stood in my self in mine
own strength, I fell; but as soon as I fell in the power of Jesus, then I
stood; so that I may In vita Junii.
say with Junius, Thou wast mindful of me O my God: according to the multitude
of thy mercies, and calledst home thy lost sheep into the fold.

I ran astray out of Gods field, into Satan's enclosures; but the great
Shepherd of my soul, recalled me, as an object of his loving kindness, who
might have been a story of his vengeance: therefore (by his assistance) will
Isa. 12. 1.
I say, O Lord I will praise thee: thought thou wast angry with me, (...).
thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me. Where God is there is
heaven: for in his presence is the fullness of all joy, and at his right Psalm.
16. 11.
hand are pleasures for evermore. Quicquid mihi vult dare Dominus meus, auferat
totum, and se mihi det. Aug. in Psalm. 26.
Nothing is sweet besides God: whatsoever the Lord will give me, let him take
away all from me, and give himself to me.

It was the saying of one of King Cyrus his favorites, I care for nothing,
Cyrus is my friend. better far may a sanctified soul (...).
say so of God, I care for nothing; yet I enjoy all things, because God is my
friend: in respect of whom I may say with Job to all my other friends,
miserable comforters Job. 16. 2.
are ye all.

Now God is a friend to none, but in and through Jesus Christ: the Father
embraces none but such as kiss the Son with a kiss of love and homage God me
thinks Psalm. 2. 12.
speaks unto us as Joseph to his brethren, Ye shall not see my face except Genesis
43. 3.
your brother be with you; except Jesus our elder bother be with us, we cannot
behold the smiling countenance of God, as a Father; though we may to our
terror, behold his frowning look and austere, but as a Judge. Therefore, as the
two Cherubims. Ex. 25. 20. looked one toward another, but both toward the
mercy-seat: So albeit we look (in this blasphemous and licentious age) one
toward another as being contrary in judgment, yet we must al look toward
Jesus Christ, if we look for mercy: there is no mercie-seat but in him, God is
no hearing God, no helping God at all without him, for it pleased the Father
Col. 1. 19. Col. 3. 11.
that in him should all fullness dwell. He is all in all.

God the Father is covered with a cloud, where the glorious beams of his
Sons love have no reflection. Christ's presence turns earth into Heaven: and
without it, earth, nay Heaven it self were a very Hell. A natural man pitcheth
his Tent in this sublunary world, but a Spiritual man centred in Christ, soars
higher: he is with Saint Paul caught up as 'twere into the third heaven: he is
not where he is, but his love is where his Lord is; as Origin speaks of Mary
Magdalene Maria ibi non erat ubi erat; quia ibi tota erat, ubi Magister erat.
Origin.
seeking her Lord at the Sepulcher, supposing to have found the Lord of life,
in the place of death.

A precious soul whom Christ has kissed with the kisses of his mouth, and
betrothed unto himself in righteousness and in judgment, Cant. 1. 2. Hose. 2.
19.
and in loving kindness, and in mercies; such a one, I say, tramples Cui
Christus incipit dulcescere, necesse est amarescere mundum. Bern. Ser. in Cant.
the world under foot, for having heavenly promises, he nothing regards earthly
pleasures: though his work be here below, yet his master and treasure too are
above: here only is his pilgrimage; but there is his home, his inheritance,
where he need fear no Council of State, Committees or Sequestrators Psalm.
125. 1.
to desturbe him: no no, he shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever. His Savior is his strong tower and Castle of defense: he
may not therefore fear the siege, no not the storm of an enemy; though Hyaenae
instar cadaveribus delectatur, he deligheth to give Ambros. Psalm. 79. 2.
the dead bodies of the Saints to be meat unto the fouls of the air, and
their flesh unto the beasts of the earth.

Lift up thine heart then, O Psalm. 38. 4.
thou afflicted soul, though thine iniquities are gone over thine head, and as
an heavy burden, they are too heavy for thee: yet Mat. 11. 28.
they are are not too heavy for him, who has promised to ease thee; for as
the Poets feign that Atlas bore heaven on his shoulders; thy Redeemer is
willing to bear the hell of thy transgressions on his heavenly shoulders. He
sweet Jesus drank the bitter cup of his Fathers wrath, that we might drink
deep of the sweet cup of his Fathers love; he was contented to drink vinegar of
grief here on earth, that we might drink Mat. 26. 29.
new wine of glory, with him in the kingdom of his Father. As Marius being
accused before the Roman Senate of treason against the State, came and showed
his wounds, saying, quid verb a loquar? vulner a ^^quntur: why should I use any
^ords unto you in my defense? ^y wounds declare my love, and ^y blood as
flowing Rhetoric ^ay persuade you to a firm be^^ef of my loyalty: so the
wounds ^f the Lord Jesus demonstrate ^is love, quot vulner a tot ora, every
^ound is a mouth to speak how ^eare and precious we are in his ^ight. He trod
the wine press Isa. 63. 3.
^lone: he became the son of man, despised, and rejected of men, a man of
sorrows, and acquainted Isa. 53. 3.
with grief, that man mighr become the son of God; and cry boldly, Abba Father:
Where Romans 8. 15.
^he Apostle uses an Hebrew and Greek word, both signifying the same thing,
to show that Jew and Gentile have no salvation but by the spirit of adoption,
in and through Jesus Christ.

Gods mercy is the Arc that saves us from drowning in the deluge of
destruction; but Vu^nus Christi, Ostium Arcae, the Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 15.
c. 26.
wound of Christ is the door ^ the Ark: Christ's merit is the do^ of the Arc of
Gods mercy, an^ his death is of greater efficacy t^ Multo efficacior
Christimors in bonum, qua^ peccata nostra in malum, etc. Bern.
our good, then our sins can be t^ our hurt: he is more powerfu^ to save, then
Satan to destroy^ his power and will both are i^ league, where he is in love.

O then, is any one sick? her^ Mat. 9. 12.
is physic for him: is any heart^ Cant. 2. 5.
faint? here are flagons of win^ to comfort him: Is any conscienc^ wounded?
here is balm of Gi^lead to heal it. The Lord dot^ proclaim himself by the
mout^ of Jesus to be merciful and gracious, Exodus 34. 6, 7.
long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth^ keeping mercy for
thousands forgiving iniquity, transgression^ and sin. All our sins are but as
a^ drop to the Ocean of Gods mercie^ says Fulgentius.

Yet, let no man presume; for the same God is both a Savior and a judge, a
Lion, as well as a Lamb, he does not only take away the sins of penitent
souls, in love, but he roars as fiercely against incorrigible sinners, in
wrath: his blood is a Red Sea indeed; true Israelites only are saved in it,
but cursed Eypgtains are drowned, it is to the one a Sepulcher, to the other a
Sanctuary.

He only that believes on John 6. 47. Rev. 2. 10.
Christ. Has everlasting life by Christ. He only that is faithful unto
death, shall receive a crown of life. Faith is the hand whereby we receive Gods
blessings, and he that wants it, is like one that stands for an alms, and
wants an hand to receive it.

O show thy faith then by thy works, acquaint thy self, more and more with thy
redeemer, and be at peace, thereby everlasting good Job. 22. 21.
shall come unto thee. Come out o^ Babylon, dwell no longer in Mesech, neither
have thy habitation in the Tents of Kedar: but show Psalm. 120. 5.
thy self a Burgess of the new Jerusalem, by that golden chain o^ two links,
faith and true repentance. Is God incensed by thy presumption? labor to
pacify him with thy humiliation: and as thou have sent thy sins in a storm or
whirlwind of disobedience unto the Tribunal of justice; so send thy soul in a
gale of sighs, to the Throne of grace, then all thy sins will be as chaff
before the wind, Christ's merit scattering them.

The penitent contrite heart has godly sorrow for sin, and Psalm. 126. 5.
spiritual joy for that sorrow: they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
God sees the tears of his Saints as he did Hezekiahs, and albeit he gives them
tears Isa. 38. 5. Psalm. 80. 5. Psalm. 56. 8. Bernard. Psalm. 104. 15.
to drink yet he puts them into his bottle, and they are vinum Angelorum, the
wine of the Angels: for as wine makes glad the heart of man; so repentant
tears, distilling from the limbeck of a sorrowful faithful heart, make the
very Angels and glorious Saints chant forth Anthemes of joy to the praise of
the Redeemer; for joy shall be in Luke. 15 7.
heaven over one sinner that repents, more then over ninety and nine just
persons, which need no repentance. O then, I beseech you friends by the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, as we have brought heaviness to the Courts of
happiness, by our trangression; so let us strive to send melody and rejoicing
thither by our Conve^sion: then when the most High utters his voice in the
thundering Dialect^ of his indignation, we shall have peace; when obdurate
transgressors are plagued like the Egyptians, we shall be like the Israelites
in Goshen. And why? Exodus 26.
because true repentance is an^ Exception to the General Rule of Gods justice:
in a word, it is Omnipotent, overcoming him who overcomes all things. A^
faithful prayer issuing forth at the sally-port of the mouth^ from an humble
penitent soul, routes all Gods judgments mustred up in fearful hardness
against it: When God besieged Jonah 3.
Nineveh with his fearful menaces, threatening a fiery storm of destruction:
then the poor destressed violentiae sunt in precibus lachrymae. Aug.
Ninevites cast themselves down at the footstool of his grace, threw away all
other weapons, as unuseful, besides prayers and tears: with the power whereof
they raised the siedge, and by their repentance they made God repent, as I may
say, and albeit he could not endure their sinning, yet he seems to suffer in
their repenting, his compassion working in him a kind of passion. Which makes
my soul breath forth this Elogie Aug. Conses. l. 6. Deus a quo exire mori: in
quem redire reviscere, et in quo habitare vivere Aug. in. Soliloqu. Psalm. 90. 1.
in praise of my God, O vera summa suaevitas: omni suavitate dulcior! O true
incomparable sweetness, sweeter then sweetness it self! To go out from God
is to die: to return to him is torevive, and to dwell in him is to live for
ever. Which certainly made David rejoice to say, Lord thou have been our
dewlling place in all generations. O how safe and happy is his condition who
has the Lord for his habitation? he cannot be banished, heaven is his
inheritance and freehold, yea his Country: he cannot be sequestered, for he is
a member o^ the high Court of Parliament i^ Heaven, where none but obedient
subjects, maintaining the prerogative Royal of the King of Kings have any
interest: h^ 1 Timothy 6. 6.
cannot be plundered, he still keep^ his wealth, the riches of grace godliness
is to him great gain^ he cannot be imprisoned, for Gods presence turns the
prison^ into a palace: to speak a volume in a word; he that has not the Lord
has nothing; and he that has the Lord has al things; he Genesis 30. 27.
cannot but prosper, he must be blessed if Laban was blessed for Jacobs sake:
Obed-Edom because the Arc continued in his house; without all controversy, he
must be transcendently blessed 2 Samuel 6. 11.
with whom God delights to dwell. Good cause has he ^o sing with the sweet
singer of Israel, who thus resolved with himself; I will abide, in thy
Tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the eovert of thy Psalm. 61. 4.
^ings. As the sparrow fled into the bosom of Xenocrates the Philosopher from
the tallons of the Hawk: so let us fly with the wings of holy devotion to the
bosom of our God, and there we shall have all safety and shelter from the
cruel tallons of the Prince of the aires fury.

O then, let us love this gracious God with all our heart, and with Mat. 22. 37.
all our soul, and with all our mind.

The manner of loving God, is without measure no Synecdoche Modus diligendi
Deum est sine modo. Bern. Tract. de Dilect. Dei.
partis will serve in loves Rhetoric: no gradus remissus in this fire, which
like the Vestal fire among the Romans, or rather like the sacrificing fire on
the Altar among the Jews, must never be extinguished. The motions of our souls
in love toward God, must not be like violent motions in Philosophy, swift in
the beginning, and slow in the end: but like the motion of the spheres they
must be uniform and continual so, there will be motion and music both. A man
in this respect must be as S. John is styled totus, amativus, wholly possessed
with love: as the soul is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, whole in
the whole, and whole in every part, so it must be whole in the love of God: all
the faculties of the soul as lines of the same circumference, must meet in the
love of God as the center.

1. We must love the Lord with all our heart wisely, resisting the devil that
he may flee Iam. 4. 7.
from us. Satan is like the Crocodile if we pursue, he flies, but if we fly,
he pursues: we must therefore fight manfully under the banner of Jesus Christ,
casting off the works of darkness, Romans 13. 12.
and putting on the armor of light. As without holiness no man shall see the
Lord, so without it, no man shall scare the devil: the lodestone loses his
virtue besmeared with garlic, and we our efficacy polluted with heinous
trangressions: as I have read of Godfrey of Bullein, who being demanded by the
infidels how he had his hands tant doctas ad praeliandum, so well instructed to
fight, he answered. quia manus semper habui puras ab impuris contactibus
peccati, because I never defiled my hands with any notorious sins. Though the
worst of men may be triumphant Conquerers in other wars, as is apparent in
these evil days: yet the best men only are victorious in this holy war,
against the devil. They that undertak, in a sinful bravado to swear down
fortresses, blow away armies with a powerful breath, and kill the enemy
before they see him, are no warriors here, for like the Captains in Nahum,
they Nahum. 3. 17.
camp in the hedges in the cold day; but when the Sun arises (in the heat of
service) they flee away, and their place is not known where they are.

2. We must love the Lord with all our soul sweetly mortifying all fleshly
lusts, which war against 1 Pet. 2. 11.
the soul, under the command of that black General the Devil. First, Fury as
on the forlorn hope, fights like a madman: Adultery like treacherous Joab does
kiss to kill: Glutrony 2 Samuel 20. 9.
may stand for a corporal, Drunkeness is the master-gunner who sets all on
fire: avarice is a pioner still digging in the earth to make the shortest cut to
hell: Idleness is a gentleman of the Company: Hypocrisy is the ensign; but
Pride must be the Captain or Colonel else all the ranks are broken. Now we
must enter into Covenant to appose this carnal Army with Spiritual weapons;
me thinks God speaks to a soul, as that noble Roman did to his son, found in
Catilines conspiracy: Fulvius. in Plutarch.
Non Catilinae te genui, sed patriae: I begot thee not for that Traitor
Catiline, but for thy Country: So God gave us not a being that we should side
with that Arch-traitor Satan, but that we should valiantly fight for the
maintenance of his glorious prerogative, and the rights and privileges of our
Country which is above. In this war all must fight, women must be spiritual
Amozones, no neutrality can here be admitted, he that is not for God, does
declare against Ephesians. 6. 13.
him. Wherefore let us put on the whole armor of God, and fight his battles
continually without any truce or intermission then as blessed Triumphant
conquerors we shall eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst Rev. 2. 7.
11. 17.
of the Paradise of God: we shall not be hurt of the second death: we shall
eat of the hidden Manna: nay more, hear what Oration Rev. 3. 21.
our Captain Jesus Christ makes unto us, saying, To him that overcomes will I
grant to sit Donabit certanti victoria^; qui certandi dedit audacia^. Aug.
with me on my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set with my Father on
his throne.

2. We must love the Lord with all our mind constantly, overcoming al crosses
and troubles of the world. We are born to trouble as the sparks fly upward.
Man after he Job. 5. 7.
has been embarked nine months in a living vessel, at last he arrives into
this world, Lord of the Land, yet weeps at the possession: labor and sorrow
are the twins of sin borne at a birth, and man's life is an Hermophrodite
consisting of both, labor was Adams, and sorrow Eves, one of these for them
both if not both these for either one. Seeing then that we are borne to
troubles, let us bear them undauntedly in our greatest afflictions: let us
watch, stand fast in the faith, quit our selves like men and be strong. For
afflictions are but bitter arrows shot 1 Cor. 16. 13.
from a loving hand, and if God does not set us as a mark for the^, (...).
Beat. Dorotheus. Doct. 3
it is to be feared he has not set a mark on us for his own. Calamitas
virtutis occasio est, says Seneca, Tribulation moves Gods mercy toward the
soul, as winds do raise rain to refresh the earth. It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, says David. Psalm. 119. 71.

The Poets feign two Temples, the one of joy, and the other of sorrow; but so
built that we cannot go into that of joy, but through that of sorrow. We mus^
pass through a wilderness o^ Acts 14. 22.
tribulation, before we can arrive at the Canaan of felicity. I^ Heb. 12. 7, 8.
ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons: for what son is he
whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be Durate and vosmet rebus servate
secundis. Virgil. l. 1. Aeneid.
without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not
sons, says the great Doctor of the Gentiles. Read but the 11. Chapter of the
Second Epistle to the Carinthians, and there ye may behold a world of misery
delineated in Saint Paul as in a Map: there ye may read his misery to be
methodicall, and his torment accurate: yet, that which is another either grief
or fear, Romans 5. 3.
was his glory. We glory in tribulations says he, for I reckon Romans 8. 18.
that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with
the glory which shall be revealed in us.

As in the same fire gold glisters Sint sub uno igne. Rutilat aurum, palea
fumat, etc. Ita una eade^que vis irruens bonos probat, purificat, eliquat:
malos damnat, etc. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 1. c. 8.
and straw or chaff smoaks: so in the same furnace of affliction, to use the
Prophets words, Isa. 48. 10. Gods children are tried, melted and refined; but
the reprobates are consumed, spoiled and utterly destroyed.

The same fire which had no power over Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, slew
those men that took them up; the same Den of Lions was a slaughterhouse to
Daniels Persecutors, but an Asylum Dan. 3. 22. Dan. 6.
to himself: so the same tribulation is a haven to the Godly, but a gulf of
destruction to the Tantum interest non quali^, sed qualis quisque patiatur.
Aug. ibid.
wicked: so that in this we must consider the quality of the patient, not of
the disease.

Furthermore, as affliction it self is to the wicked a living death, and a
terrestrial hell: so their unacquaintednesse with i^ most commonly proves a
snar^ and ruin to them: as we read of Saint Ambrose Bishop of Millaine,
Marullus. lib. 5. c. 3
who being invited to a rich man's house, and hearing him boast of a continual
prosperity without any intermixture of adversity, he with his retinue
instantly departs, saying, ideo seinde sugere, ne un a (...) homine prepeiuis
prosperitatibus uso statim periret, least he should be so unhappy as to perish
with that wretched happy man. This reverend Father had not gone far, but
looking back he beheld the rich man's house, and all that he had, swallowed up,
as Korah Dathan and Abiram with the Numb. 16.
earth.

Therefore forget not the exhortation Heb. 12. 5, 6.
which speaks to you as children, my son despise not thou the chastening of
the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, nihil infelicius eo cui nihil unquam evenit adversi: Demetrius in
Sen. Heb. 11. 25. Psalm. 119. 97. Isa. 26. 16.
and scourges every son whom he receives. Surely there is nothing more
unhappy then him to whom no unhappiness does ever happen.

And O thrice happy is that Christian, whose affliction is so sanctified unto
him, that he will choose (as Moses did) rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God then enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. And blessed is that
soul which can sweetly breath forth with David, saying, Before I was afflicted;
I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.

How happy should I be if I could say with the Prophet concerning the
Inhabitants of this Land; Lord, in trouble have they visited thee: they powered
out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them: But alas, horresco referens,
our hearts Pharaoh like are hardened by Gods Judgments which roar not so loud
to our terror, as we are silent in our repentance; which makes God complain, I
have sent among you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt: your Amos. 4. 10.
young men have I slain with the sword, and I have taken away your horses, and
I have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostrils, yet have ye
not returned unto me faith the Lord. Again I hearkened and heard, but they
spoke not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I
done? every one turned to Ier. 8. 6. 7. 12.
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Yea the Storke in the
heavens knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the
Swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment
of the Lord. Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they
were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore shall they fail
among them them that fall in the day of their visitation, they shall be cast
down, says the Lord.

Me thinks. I hear the Lord utter his voice concerning this land, saying, the
Rulers take council together against the Lord, and against his Anointed: they
sit Psalm. 2. Psalm. 90. 20. 21. Quale est Dominantis arbitrium talis liber tatis
aspectus. Cassiodor l. 3. Epist.
on the throne of iniquity, and frame mischief by a law. They gather
themselves together against the soul of the righteous: and condemn the innocent
blood.

Again, this people has arevolting and rebellious heart, they are revolted
and gone. They are waxen fat, they shine: yea they overpasse the deeds of the
wicked: they judge not the cause; the cause of the Fatherless, yet they
prosper.

But how long? The just Judge Ier. 5. 23. 28.
of heaven and earth is bending his bow, and making his arrows ready against
the persecuters, he has bent his bow, like an enemy, Lam. 2. 4.
and called as 'twere a Council of war, upon the propounding this Question:
Shall I not visit for these things; says the Ier. 5. 29.
Lord? and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Woe to the
Rebellious Children, Isa. 30. 1.
says the Lord, that take council, but not of me; and that cover with a
covering but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin.

Verily we mask a foul face under a fair vizard; and put Gods stamp upon our
Adulterous Ias. 5^. 8.
Caine: costruing Gods meaning by our own, and expounding Gods will by our own
work, as if Gods ways were as our ways, and his thoughts as our thoughts.
Alas, we seem to be religious, not for Gods glory but (as we fondly conceive)
for our own advantage; making no other use of piety, then as it may serve a
trick of policy: so that truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot
enter: yea truth Isa. 59. 14. 15.
fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey.

There is a great show of new lights, yet we wait for true light, but behold
obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in darkness. Isa. 59. 9.
And as if we loved darkness better then light, we hate to be reproved, and
yet will not be reformed: like those beasts in Pliny, which have fell in Aure,
the hearing of truth galls us, and if any shall come unto us with a vae vobis,
as our Isreal's troubler, we will fetch him up with a Coram nobis; just, Ahabs
humor to Elijah, and Agamemnons in Homer to Chalchas. 1 Kings 21. 20


If learned and reverend Divines will not eat up the sins Hose. 4. 8.
of the people, and the sins of the Rulers which are the Rulers o^ Psalm. 14. 4.
sins, they themselves shall be eaten up as it were bread. In Salvian. de
guber. Dei. l. 5.
hoc seclus res devoluta est, ut nis^ quis malus fuerit salvus esse non potest:
he that will not swim with the stream of reigning impiety, is threatened to be
drowned in the raging Sea of unparalled cruelty. This is the birthday of 1 Samuel 4. 21.
Jchabod: the Churches magnificat is turned or tuned to miserere; so that
blessed is the man that has his nunc dimittis to the Church triumphant; so
miserable is the Estate of our Church militant. O tempora, O mores! all the
sins of former ages are rallied up in this, and keep their Randezvous in our
Land, which was once the envy of other nations, but is now become their
reproach: and the inhabitants thereof an Micah. 6. 16.
hissing, according to that of the Wiseman, saying, Righteousness exalts a
nation, but sin is a Prove. 14. 34.
reproach to any people. Then certainly it must be so to us, for many monsters
of sin which our Forefathers never dremed off, are visible amongst us;
laboring as 'twere to fright mercy from us: and with the Gadarenes to drive
Christ Jesus our of our Coast. As if we were able not only to contend with but
also overcome the Almighty. We hang our bloody colors of defiance against
him, sending him a challendge to show himself the Lord of Hosts as well as the
God of peace: for as Abner 2 Samuel 2. 14*
called fighting a sport, saying unto Joab, let the young men arise and play
before us: so to fight against the Lord with the weapons of unrighteousness is
our pastime and delight, as if there were no God to revenge, nor hell to
torment, Luke 18. 2.
like the unjust Judge in Luke, we fear not God, neither regard man. Animas
mortuas multi in corpore vivo habent. Aug.


Alas, we have dead souls in living bodies: neither Gods mercy that sweet
language of his love, could woe us to repentance; Isa. 26. 10.
nor can his judgments as a fierce Lion deter us from O mentes amentes,
perdidistis utilitatem calamitatis. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 33.
running in the broad way of wickedness: insomuch that as Augustine complained
of the Romans, reason is sequestered from our minds, and it is not so much our
error, as our fury, which makes us loose the profit of our calamity: Ah, the
trumpet is blown Amor. 3.
in the City, and the people are not afraid: the Lion roareth, and yet we
tremble not: so dead are we in sins and trespasses.

In this overflowing of our iniquity Quod vivitis Dei est, qui vobis parcendo
admonet, ut corrigamini paenitendo. Aug. ibid.
if we do not all perish as the old world did by deluge, it is not because we
are less sinful, but because God is more merciful. It is his mercy that we
live, and he spares us only to admonish us how we should improve his patience,
and long-suffering by our repentance. But God may justly complain of us
saying, I Isa. 65. 2, 3.
have spread out my hands all the day unto a Rebellious People, which walks
in a way that is not good, after their own thoughts: a people that provokes
me to anger continually to my face.

As Cyprian once complained Inter Populum frequente strage morientem nemo
considerat se esse mortalem. Cyprian.
of the plague of pestilence in Carthage, saying, that among a people
continually slain by the destroying Angel no man considers himself to be
mortal: So we of this kingdom plagued with war, pestilence and famine turn
not unto him that smites us, neither do we seek the Lord of Hosts, as if we
would make the Prophet a liar Isa. 9. 13.
who says, when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants Isa. 26. 9.
of the world will learn righteousness.

Surely God has a controversy with the inhabitants of this Land, because by
swearing, and Hose. 4.
lying, and killing and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and
blood touches blood; Therefore shall the land mourn. When rebellion against
Heaven blows the trumpet, and beats up the drum, desolation commonly begins the
march: destruction hangs over our heads as the sword over the head of Damocles,
but by a horse hair, a twine thread, I fear 'twill suddenly fall upon us:
according to that of the Apostle, When they 1 Thas. 5. 3.
say peace and safety: then sudden destruction comes upon them as travail
upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. We have grieved Gods spirit
by our multiplied transgressions, so that we may sighe out this lamentation,
The joy of our heart is ceased our dance is turned into mourning, the Crown is
fallen from our head. Woe unto Lam. 5. 15, 16.
us that we have sinned.

Consider this therefore all ye that forget God, stand in awe Romans 6. 33.
and sin not. The nature of sin is deadly, the least sin has in it the stinge
of death; and I may say every sin is great because it is against the greatest.
It may seem at first a Zoar, but at last it may prove a Sodom, drawing a hell
from heaven upon it.

The wicked shall be turned into hell, and the Nations that forget, God. When
the sentence is passed there is no reprieve to be expected; Psalm. 9. 17.
Nequaquam misericordia parcentis liberat, quos semel justitia judicantis
damnat. Greg. lib. 9. Moral.
tears of blood cannot obtain pardon: there is no hope of mercy in the place
of Justice; nor of life in the Region of death, Here in the world is the Sun
shines on the just and unjust both, but in the darkesome dungeon of eternal
death it is not so; darkness and sorrow there bar out all light and solace.

In hell there is a towfold punishment 1. Paena sensus, the punishment of
sense, which is so great, that the heart of man cannot conceive it, nor the
tongue utter it: the fire burns, but not consumes; the worm gnaws, but not
devoures; and as the joys on earth were torments compared with the unspeakable
joys of heaven? so the greatest torments in this world are very joys in
respect of the pains of hell in this lake that burns with fire and brimstone
the Rev. 20. 10.
damned are tormented day and night for ever and ever; death there always
begins and never ends.

2. Paenadamni, the punishment of loss, which is the greatest punishment of
all, sin at once opens the gates of hell, and shuts the door of heaven: the
damned wretches feeling the horrible weight of Gods wrath then weep, gnash
their teeth, and roar in the bitterness of their souls, for the loss of his
favor; then by the Logic of Opposites they find there is a heaven by their
being cast into hell: O fearful Topics when they are taught pugno contracto,
with the fist of Gods fury. Oh it is most lamentable to read sweet mercy lost
by the bloody characters of an enraged justice, and to measure the blessed
estate of the glorified Saints by the want of that happiness, not by the
fruition: it is another hell in hell to know the love of Jesus Christ as a
Savior, by his severity as a Judge only. O how much would he Aquinas.
Maluer^^t Saguntini se suaque omnia igne consumere, quam aut faederati populi
amicitiam deseretere, etc. Live. Bell. lib. 1.
that now lies frying in hell rejoice, if he might have but the least moment of
time wherein he might get Gods favor?

It is lamentable to hear, much more to read the woeful Tragedy of Saguntus,
a City of Spain destroyed by Hannabal, says Saint Augustine: but I may rather
say, that it is most terrible to hear the story of hell, but infinitely
wretched to feel the fury of that unquenchable fire, by reason of an immortal
death and a deadly life, ever dying and yet never dead. What David Psalm. 55. 15.
therefore wished unto his foes, I will wish unto my best friends, even that
they may go down quick into hell, by holy meditation, to prevent their casting
into it by condemnation: with an Ite Imparati ad paratum, go ye cursed souls
which were unprepared for heaven, to hell, a place prepared for the Devil and
his Angels; ye have sinned without repentance, and therefore ye must be damned
without remedy. Omnis anima aut Christi sponsa, aut Diaboli adultera est. Aug.
in Genesis


If the soul be Satan's Adulteress, and not Christ's Spouse, then hell must be
her inheritance, whose work was sin, and companion Satan: let us therefore
labor to espouse our souls to Jesus Christ, who will here decorateus with
grace; and hereafter when he bring us home to his Palace, he will cloth us
with robes of glory, and put a Crown of pure gold upon ou^ heads in the
kingdom of his Father. Where God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, and
Rev. 7. 17.
we shall have happiness without any heaviness, light without any darkness,
and all this without any end. Let us now commune with our own hearts, and
consider, As there is a Palace of glory so there is a dungeon of eternal
misery, both receptacles for the souls of men: the way to the one, is
pleasant, but the journeys-end is most painful; the way to the other is
paineful, but the journeys-end is most pleasant; the voyage is tempestuous, but
the arrival is beyond al expression joyful: as it is written Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. O then, let not us sell this everlasting kingdom of
glory for a cup of cold comfort, a draught of deadly poison, as Lysimachus sold
his kingdom for a cup of cold water: but as it is Satan's heaven, even in hell
it self to bring wretched men into utter darkness, counting himself happy
when he can make others like himself most unhappy: So let it be our heaven on
earth to fight against this cursed enemy, under the banner of the Lord Jesus;
till we have beat down all his strong holds, and utterly subdued him under our
feet, insomuch Romans 6. 14.
that sin shall have no more dominion over us.

Now, we must fight against this enemy in the Spring, even in youth: we must
labor to walk in the paths of holiness, whilst we are able to run in the
ways of wickedness: we must serve our best Master in our best days, least we
offer up the best of our service unto the worst, and the worst of our service
unto the best: if Satan has had our Magnificat all our days, God will scarce
accept of our Nun^ Dimittis at the last gasp: if our souls are dedicated at
first to Satan as his Synagogue, it is to be feared, they will never be
consecrated to God as his Sanctuary. Grace will hardly be courted by the old
man, which was rejected by the young: and he shall scarce win her in
sickness or on the death-bead, who did not woo her in perfect health: if God
come in youth and find no fruit, beware the fig-rrees curse, Never fruit grow
on thee hereafter. Mat. 21. 19.
Manna is to be gathered in the morning; and grace to be embraced in youth. As
Solomon (whose heart was the Throne of wisdom, and whose tongue was made up
of harmony) advises us, saying, Remember now Eccles. 12. 1
thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the
years draw nigh, when thou Frangas citius quam corrigas quae in malum
induruerunt Quintilian.
shall say, I have no pleasure in them. It is il graffing upon an old stock;
and to put the Nectar of virtue into the old stinking Cask of vice, is as
impertinent as to put new wine into old botles: therefore while we are young
men, let us cast off the old man with his works, and put on the new man, the
Lord Jesus Christ: who of 1 Cor. 1. 30.
God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption.

Would we then embosome our selves in Christ, do we desire to behold a gracious
mercie-seat in the midst of a just tribunal, let us humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God, that he may 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6.
exalt us in due time; casting all our care upon him, for he cares for us. He
forgetteh not the cry Psalm. 9. 12.
of the humble, it climbes the batlements of Olympus and wrestles with God till
it obtaines a blessing, it pierces the clouds of the air and by the strength
of Christ's outstretched arm, it dispells the clouds of Gods displeasure, and
cause^h the light of his countenance to shine upon us, miserable sinners.

Now therefore I beseech you that are my dear friends and old acquaintance, Ubi
nullus metus, ibi nulla religio. Psalm. 2. 11.
to set Gods mercy and his justice evermore before your eyes; the one to keep
you from presumption, and the other from despair: serve the Lord Mal. 3. 14.
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Say not within your selves, it is vain
to serve God: and what profit is it, that we keep his ordinance, and that we
walk mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? O what greater deformity is Quid
indecentius, quam curvum recto corpore gerere animum? Bern. in Cant. Ser. 14. A
praefinibus arcendus est hostis. Sen.
there then to have such crooked souls in upright bodies? But I hope better
things of you, show your valor therefore by driving the enemy back in the
frontiears; deal with your sins as the Pygmies deal with the Cranes, crack
them in the shel: sin is as the Sea, if it once make but a small breach, it
threatens a great deluge: and that which first seems but a peccadillo, may at
last without deception of sight, be seen in a multiplying glas^e. Non est
securum inter serpents dormire: Hieron.
it is not safe to sleep among serpents, Peccatum dulce in faucibus,
tormenmentum invisceribus. Aug.
nor slumber in transgressions: for they which run the hazard, commonly like
men stung with Aspes, they hasten to death, not feeling their dying, but are
dead, before they thought themselves to have been sick. Sin is indeed a
poisonous pill sugared and candied over; it is sweet in the mouth, but Peccati
dolor et maximus et aeternus est. Cicero. Attic.
sour in the maw: pleasent to the sense, but destructive to the soul: the
taking of it is delicious, but the operation deadly: for if Romans 8. 13.
ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the spirit do mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Though wickedness Job. 20. 12. 13. 14.
(says Job) be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue, though
he spareit, and forsake it not, but keep it still within his mouth: yet his
meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of Aspes in the midst of him. He
forsakes his own mercy. Lay Jonah. 2. 8. Iam. 5. 9.
your hands therefore upon your hearts, behold, the Judge stands before the
door; Jesus Christ is ready to descend in a Throne of clouds to judge the
world: and if ye have not your Quietus est in the soul, before death with a
cold hand presents one to you in the body, eternally miserable must ye be. When
the righteous shall at the great day, and general Assizes come out of their
graves, as Miners out of their pits, laden with gold and glory, ye like
wretched Malefactors, shall come out of the dungeon, see him whom ye have
pierced, and receive your just condemnation from him: ye shall for a moment
Romans 1. 7.
behold the light, to make your everlasting darkness the more grievous to you.

Therefore now while it is called to day harden not your hearts; procrastinate
not your repentance, Hose. 13. 14.
least it be hid from your eyes: he that promises to him that repents pardon
does not promise to him that sins repentance. Presume not, ye which have an
hour to day, know not whether ye shall have life to marrow: Wherefore brethren
give diligence to make your caland election sure: for if ye do 2 Pet. 1. 10.
these things ye shall never fall.

Draw near to God with a Heb. 10. 22.
true heart, in full assurance of faith, having your hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and your bodies washed with pure water. Your Loyalty to the
King commands you much, but your love to God will command Qui sequntus es
Davidem peccantem, sequaris Davidem paenitentem. Ambr.
you more: and indeed, ye cannot well honor the one, unless ye fear the
other. And as for my part, I must speak to you as Saint Ambrose did to
Theodosius excusing a sin because David did the like; if any of you have
followed me sinning, I beseech you to follow me repenting: and let your passing
an act of oblivion on my ill example, put you in remembrance of my precept: for
as David to Bathsheba, and Paul to the Galatians, so I to you. As the Lord
lives, that 1 Kings 1. 29.
has redeemed my soul out of all distress wherein I trust I had Gal. 4. 19.
the pangs of a new birth) I travail in birth again till Christ be formed in
you.

Now, to conclude, if any shall say Physician heal thy self Luke 4. 23.
or if with my former sins I am upbraided as Saint Augustine was In vita Aug.
by the Donatists, give me leave to answer with that Reverend Father, saying,
Look how much they blame my former faults, by so much the more I commend and
praise my Physician, who Ier. 30. 13.
has restored health unto me, and healed me of my wounds, because they called
me an Outcast. Therefore having good 2 These. 2. 16.
hope through grace I will sing unto the Lord as long I live: I Psalm. 104. 33,
34.
will sing praise to my God while I have my being. My meditation of him shall
be sweet; I will be glad in the Lord. I will labor to lighten Duo suut tibi
necessaria, conscientia and fama: constiencia propter rem: fama propter
proximum. Ambr. Epist. ad Constantin.
in my life, and thunder in my doctrine; that by the one I might beat down
vice; by the other approve and improve virtue. Two things will I hold necessary
for me, towit, a good conscience, and a good name, the one, to edify my
neighbors, and the other to comfort my self: in both will I seek Gods glory,
in neither mine own praise. I desire Sic vivendum est, tanquam in conspectu
^ivamus: sic cogitandum, tanquam aliquis pectus intimum prospicere possit. Sen.
lib. de Moribus.
so to live as if mine enemies were still beholding me. I will not as if I were
borne under the Planet Mercury (through Gods grace that works in me) be good
with the good, and bad with the bad: but labor by a pure conversation to
confirm the good, and convert the bad, or else eschew them, for I may have a
bad acquiantance, but I will never have an incorrigible companion. I will be
afraid of sinning, not as a servant, but as a son: I will more fear the
displeasure of my God as a loving Father, then his dreadful menaces as a
severe Judge.

I will (by Gods assistance) Heb. 10. 13.
hold fast the profession of our holy says without wavering: and if any
prevailing power shall vote in opposition to it, I will pray for their
conversion, but not act with them to mine own confusion. I had rather suffer
for the Gospel, then let the Gospel suffer for me. God may give mine enemies
leave to make no conscience of my Ship-wracke, but I trust he will never give
me 1 Timothy 1. 19.
leave to make Ship-wracke of my conscience. The testimony whereof, is that I
resolve to fear Prove. 24. 21.
God and the King, and not meddle with them that are given to change. My soul
longs for the consolation of Israel in the restoring the beauty of holiness
Revel. 9.
in the sanctuary, which is polluted with Heretics and Schismatics that cloud
the glory of our Church as locusts coming out of the smoke of the bottomless
pit. As Solomon says, the Prove. 30. 27.
locusts have no King: So these locusts will have no mortal King on earth; but
the King over them is the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the
Hebrew is Abaddon, but in the Greek Apollyon. Rev. 9. 11.
Be not thou of their council O my soul, neither enter into their path, but
avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. Prove. 4. 15.


My ambition shall be to embrace truth, and my study to learn Christ, in whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge as in a Divine celestial
Col. 2. 3.
Academie. I will look on other learning as the trimming, but on this alone as
the vesture of my soul: other arts and sciences are Vae tibi Aristoteles
laudaris ubi non es, etc. cruciaris ubi es. Aug.
called liberales, but they cannot liberare me ab inferno, free me from hell:
therefore that knowledge shall be to me the most precious which is the most
gracious and saving. I care not by humane learning to be as a Meteor advanced
above the height of an ordinary capacity: so I may by learning Christ, be as a
Star fixed in the Orb of grace, above the beggarly Elements of natural
abilities. Neither do I speak against humane learning (which I esteem) in the
positive, but only in the comparative. When I mention the Sublime Raptures of a
soul which is Christ's Pupil, the Sun of natural light and humane
understanding must suffer a grand Eclipse.

I will ever account him the best scholar who is the best Christian;
preferring an Abcedarian in Gods O Economicks, before a profound Sophie in the
worlds Politics.

And concerning outward estate, I deem that the best which God declares by his
dispensations so to be: if heaven be entailed to my soul, I am rich enough for
had I all things in the world without hope of that, I were very poor. Whilst I
am in the world, I will take heed that the world come not into me: I will
esteem it as my servant, not my master; as my road, not my home; as a
wilderness, not a Canaan: the pleasures thereof shall be my Vacation, not my
Term. God alone shall be the delight of my soul, who is the soul of my
delight: and so do I desire to finish my course in the Church Militant, that
the High Priest, Jesus Christ, may give me a blessed induction into the Church
Triumphant. In confidence whereof, One thing have I desired Psalm. 27. 4.
of the Lord, that will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in
his Temple. I had rather Psalm. 84. 10.
be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of
wickedness: For I have put off Cant. 5. 3.
my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?

Gloria in excelsis Deo.
FINIS.

