THE CASE OF Thomas Bushel, of Enston in the County of Oxon, Esquire.

TRULY STATED.

Together with his progress in Minerals, and the desires of several Merchants
and others that are willing and ready to advance so good a work for the benefit
of the Nation.

Humbly tendered to the serious consideration of the Honorable House of
COMMONS, And all other persons in Authority, whether Civil or Martial, that
are desirous to advance the TRADE of the NATION, supply the Necessities of the
Poor, by discovering the hidden Treasures of the Earth, preserve the lives of
many poor Creatures from untimely death (who now are destroyed in their prime
for petty Fellonies) which might otherwise be made serviceable to the
COMMONWEALTH.

London, Printed in the Year 1649.

THat whereas the right and interest in and to all Mines Royal, which are
fountains of the Treasure of the Nation, has always been an undoubted and
legal right belonging to the Crown, and always enjoyed by several Letters
Patents, and Farms taken from the Crown, and to that purpose in all grants of
Lands from the Crown, the said Mines either by express word, or else by
implication of Law have always been excepted and reserved, for that it has
been found by experience, that the owners of Land, who receive a constant
profit by the Herbage and other fruits of the Earth above ground, are seldom
willing to adventure any part of their fortune for discovering the hid Treasure
in the bowels of the Earth: And whereas all Subjects were invited and
encouraged by several Proclamations from his late Majesty, and his Royal
Father King James, to spend their times and pains in discovery of the said
Mines.

And I Thomas Bushel having had many years relation to that great Secretary of
Nature, the late Lord Chancellor Bacon; and thereby from him learnt many
secrets in discovering and extracting Minerals; and that it was not only the
harmliest gain, and greatest good to the Commonwealth, but the principal
study and industry of the best bred persons of other Nations, and the
honourablest improvement that this world is capable of, which was the first
inducement that encouraged me to look after the search thereof, being by good
and learned Council satisfied touching the legallity of the title and also
having found out a new way of discovering the concealed treasure of the Earth,
with more certainty and less hazard, by means of a Portugal with whom I
advised, and likewise was assured, that in the Mountains of Broomfloid,
Tallibont, Geginan, Combmerven, and the Darren, there was great quantities of
Silver and Lead, of which I informed his Majesty, moving him to undertake the
work; but his Majesty, for some reasons to himself known, declined the same,
and command^d me (the Lady Middleton holding the said Mines Royal in Wales, by
virtue of a Grant from King James) to buy the same, and to take the Mines,
which I accordingly did, paying unto the Lady Middleton 400 l. in hand, and 400
l. per annum, during the continuation of her interest therein, by virtue of the
said Grant; having first obtained from his said Majesty (upon my engagement to
cut through the said five Mountains, at My own charge, by a new way of
discovery) not only a confirmation of the said Letters Patents, formerly
granted to Sir Hugh Middleton, together with the several Leases from the
Governors, Assistants, and Society of the City of London, but also an absolute
engagement upon his Majesty's honor, and under his Signet and privy Seal, for
the performance of any other Act of Grace, or assistance, that I or my Counsel
should at any time desire, not being detrimentall to his Honor, or the
Commonwealth, as by the ensuing Grant appears.

CHARLES R.
TRusty and welbeloved, We having taken into consideration your late Relation
concerning your proceedings and intentions for the perfecting of that great
work happily by you begun in our County of Cardigan in Our Principality of
Wales, concerning those hopeful Mines by you discovered, approving well of
your beginnings, proceedings, and intentions, We have thought good out of Our
Royal disposition, to the encouraging of you and all such as are studious or
industrious, to do to Us or Our Commonwealth profitable service, to assure you
by these Our Letters that you shall not only by Our protection peaceably enjoy
the Contract and bargain by you made with the Lady Elizabeth Middleton,
concerning the said Mines, with all things thereunto belonging: but also be
well assured that both you, your Agents, Assistants, or Coadjutors shall from
time to time have all the furtherance and favor We can vouchsafe to you or
them. And for the better encouraging of you to go cheerfully and confidently on
with the works, when your learned Cou^c^ll at the Law shall advise you to pray
any further Act or Acts from Us, whereby the design may be advanced, and you
and your Assistants secured, you shall find Us ready to grant unto you any
your lawful desires: And in the mean time these Our Letters shall be a good
and sufficient testimony of Our Royal intentions toward you, and Our good
wishes to the prosperity of your undertakings.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall under our Signet the three and twentieth day
of February, in the twelfth year of Our Reign.
To Our trusty and welbeloved Subject and Servant Thomas Bushel, Esqu.
This is entered in the Signet Book 23 Febr. 1636.

Ja. Store.



And further to prevent all disturbances which might discourage my proceedings,
His Majesty gave Warrant to Mr. Attorney general to proceed by information in
the Starch amber against all such as should be so great enemies to their
Country as to interrupt so public a good. The copy of which Warrant follows.

CHARLES R.

TRusty and welbeloved, We Greet you well. Whereas we have taken into our
serious consideration, of what consequence the probability of increasing our
Mines Royal may prove to Us, and Our public weal, being diligently searched
into. And for the better encouragement of Our loving Subjects and speedy pay of
the poor Myners; Erected a Mynt in Our Castle of Aberustwith and entrusted Our
design to the sole care and Government of Our Servant Thomas Bushel, whose
industri^us proceedings We so well like and approve of, that Our resolution is
absolutely bent to further the prosecution of his endeavors on Our behalf, for
the perfecting so good and pious a work: As We will and Command you that you
take special care, that you speedily proceed in Our Court of Starchamber
against such malicious persons as have, or do go about, not only to Eclypse
Our Prerogative in Myneralls, and so frrustrate Our Princely Pleasure in a
Common good, for the benefit of their own private ends, by endeavoring to make
those Mines theirs, which hold Silver worth the refyning, and of Right
belonging unto Us; But also such persons as have of late practiced Combinations
of Affronts against those entrusted by Us, and Our Mines Royal to Our
dishonor, As by the Certificates hereunto annexed will inform you;
Authorizing you likewise for the better regulating of unruly Myners complained
of, to draw up a Warrant for a Stannary Court fit for Our Royal signature,
that We may be troubled no further. And this shall be your special Warrant,

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this seven and twentieth day of Febr. 1638.
To Our Trusty and welbeloved Sir John Banks Knight, Our Attorney General, or
Sir Edward Littleton Knight, Our Sollitor General.
By virtue of which Grants from his Majesty, I being interessed in some of the
Mines Royal in Wales, Devon, and Cornwall, and being desirous to know what was
a Mine Royal in the sense of Law, I obtained the opinion of diverse learned men
in the Law, who declared their judgments therein, as follows.

The Declaration of learned Lawyers, what a Mine Royal is, according to former
Presidents.
Although the Gold or Silver contained in the base Metal of a Mine in the
Land of a Subject, be of less value th^n the baser Metal; yet if the Gold or
Silver do countervaile the charge of the refining, or be of more worth then
the base Metal spent in refining it, this is a Mine Royal, and as well the
base Metal as the Gold and Silver in it, belong by Prerogative to the Crown.

Sir Ralph Whitfield, his Majesty's Sergeant at Law. Sir Edward Herbert,
Attorney General. Oliver St. John Solicitor. John Glanvill, Sergeant. John
Wild, Sergeant. Rich Cresswell, Sergeant. Orlando Bridgman, the Princes
Solicitor.
Robert Holborn. John Hern. Ed. Bagshaw. Tho. Lane. Rich. King. Edmund
Prideaux. John Maynard. Edward Hide. John Glinne. Charles Fulwood. Harbottle
Grimston. John White. George Peard. John Franklin. Richard Weston. John Glover.
William Ellis. Tho. Culpepper. John Goodwin. William Sandford. John George.
James Haward.


THat shortly after my first entrance upon the Mines in Wales, there were
drowned 80. plumps, by reason of a great deluge of water then happening,
whereby my undertaking became unlikely in the judgment of others, to produce
any good effect, either to my self, or the Nation, that I was by my friends
pitied, and by my foes laughed at; so that had I not duly considered the
Justice of the undertaking in respect of God, the honor in respect of my
Country, and the possibility in respect of my self, meeting with so many
discouragements I had certainly desisted: but God, who is the Author and
Finisher of all just undertakings, supported me under, and carried me through
that great work; and after nigh four years night and day spent in recovering of
the said decayed Mines, by the continued maintenance and industry of five
hundred Families, and the expense of about 7000 l. as a reward of my hazard,
expense and labor, brought me to reap the harvest of my hope, with discovering
far distant by the Art of dyalling, where the Veins of Silver and Lead Ore
sprang at the superficious of the Rocks, from the old Works in new places,
which the malice or ignorance of some, that knows not the generation of
Metals, nor the largeness of their extent in creation, of depth and length,
for man's use and Gods glory, would needs affirm that it was a new work, and
not a branch of the old Mine, formerly deserted through the said deluge of
water; which, to confute their incredulity therein, I have been at 10000 li.
charge, for to thread the supposed new Mine to the old work, that others of my
profession might as well be verst in the mystery of Myning, and encouraged
therein, when all other hopes are frustrated of receiving profit from their
deeper search for Mynerall treasure, as I was assured of the truth by the
aforesaid L. Chancellor Bacon, and a Portugals description of such a Mynerall
experiment.

Having made the discovery as aforesaid, and b^ing satisfied in the Legality of
my undertaking in respect of man, I endeavored to proceed therein according to
the Law of God, striving to do unto others as I would they should do unto me.
In order whereunto (having discovered a branch that issued from the old Mine
(at the mountain of Geginan) I at the general Assize held for the County of
Cardigan (Judge Turner being on the Bench) publicly propounded unto the Gentry
and Freeholders of the said County, being Owners of the Herbage, That if any of
them would (by my example) adventure to discover the concealed Treasure in any
Herbage, belonging unto them, at their own charge, they should (although the
Grant was particular to me from his Majesty) enjoy the benefit of my Grant and
Mint, for their encouragement therein; But if they did (in respect of the great
charge and hazard) decline the same, That then, if afterward my endeavors were
cround beyond present probability or expectation, they would not envy or repine
at that blessing which Gods providence as a reward of my labors, bestowed upon
me: Further adding, That if, in the prosecution of the said work, I might
commit any Trespass upon the Herbage of any Gentleman, or others, I would give
such answerable satisfaction as should by the next Justice of Peace be judged
double to the damage sustained by my trespass thereupon: which promise I have
constantly performed ever since my first undertaking: The Mines mo^^ commonly
being discovered in such Grounds as are worth not above three pence per Acre,
which has been proved upon a full Hearing this Parliament.

But to proceed.

Having by the mercy of God raised a considerable benefit, I did not cast about
how to hide, but to improve my Talent for the good of my Native Country, which
my gracious Maker had bestowed: As an evidence whereof I improved my ability
for the recovering of several drowned Mines, and discovering other new
branches of the old Mines wrought by the Romans, (viz.) at the Mountains called
Tall^bont, Broomfloid Combmervin, Geginan, Commustwith, Comsum-Lock and the
Beacon hill of the Daren; by which means Trade was greatly increased the Common
wealth enriched, and many thousands of poor people relieved.

I applied my self to find out some more facile, less chargeable, and more
expeditious way, (not only to discover new, but to recover the old decayed
Mines. In order whereunto I contrived a way of Addits, cutting level through
the lowest part of the Mountain, (and not beginning at the top, and sinking
downward,) whereby the work was made more profitable, and less subject to the
casualties of damps, and drowning, by preserving a constant water course, which
was extreme incident to the other way of myning, whereby most commonly the
Myners were drowned out before they could attain half the riches of the Mine;
and also avoiding the tedious and chargeable sinking of air-shafts, by
conveying air through the Mountain many hundred Fathoms, with Pipe and Bellows,
away never before used by any undertakers, but now approved by all. And because
I found that the wood of the Country was exceedingly wasted, by extracting the
said Minerals; and that it could not be possible to afford sufficient supply,
or if it did, it must be at such a rate as would devour the greatest part of
the gain, besides the prejudice that would redound to the Country by the decay
of Wood, being forced to use such great quantities thereof; I made trial of
many expensive conclusions, and ceased not till I had contrived a way to make
the defects of the Valley answer the fertile Mountain, by a supply of fuel; so
that with Turf and Sea-coale charked, I have and do refine the Silver and Lead
without Wood and Charcoale, by which means the undertaking is of much more
advantage as well to the Commonwealth as to the persons engaged in the
prosecution thereof.

His late Majesty having received sufficient testimony of the Premises, and
being sensible of the great good that was like further to redound to the
Nation, by my charge and industry, for my better encouragement, and to the end
that others might be induced to join in assisting me in a work, conducing so
much to a general good; and in pursuance of his promise made at my entry
thereupon in the year 1636. did, by and with the advice of his Privy Council,
grant the Impost and Customs of all Lead that should be transported out of
England and Wales, for the Rent of 6000 l. per annum, to be paid by me to His
Majesty, his Heirs, etc. for 21 years: giving me also full power to deduct out
of the said Rent all such sums of money as I had formly disburst for his
service, with 8 l. per Cent. for the forbearance thereof.

His Majesty seeming to be convinced by his Council at a full debate: That it
was much better that I should enjoy the Customs for a certain Rent (though
happily (some years) beneath the value thereof) for that by my charge and
industry the staple Commodity of the Nation would be greatly increased; so that
if I, by the discovery of the concealed Treasure got 100 l. the Commonwealth
would gain 1000 l. by the advancement of Trade, in respect of exportation and
Importation, then that the said customs should be trusted to the general
Farmers or Collectors, who could add nothing to that National work (unless
it were discouragement to me and my fellow undertakers;) and also that the
Grant of the said Customs could not be less then 21 years, for that no man
could be encouraged otherwise to adventure his estate in the promotion thereof,
since a short Lease would be expired before a man could possibly obtain the
fruit of his charge and hazard, a dozen years being many times spent before a
Mine could be attained.

But in the unhappy difference between the King and Parliament I was forced by
the power of the Parliaments Army, and necessitated to retire my self into the
Island of Lundy, of which His Majesty made me Governor, where I remained
peaceably, without doing prejudice to any, until the Lord General in his
Letter bearing date the 8 of April, 1646. sent me by a Drummer this following
Order.

Die Sabbati, 12 January, 1645. At the Committee of both Kingdoms at Darby
house.
It is Ordered, That a Proposition be made to Mr. Bushel, That if he will
deliver up the Isle of Lundy this Committee will use their endeavors with the
Parliament, that he may be restored to his Interest in the Silver Mines.

GUALTER FROST Secretary to the same Committee.

Together with which Order his Excellency sent a safe Conduct for me to come to
the Head Quarters to treat with the Lord Say, or with such as he should appoint
touching the said Proposition made by the said Committee. Some months after
the said Committee sent another Order, thereby promising their Endeavors to the
Parliament, for the taking off the Delinquency of the Soldiers that were with
me in Lundy, etc.

After receipt whereof (having first obtained his Majesty's consent for the
Resignation thereof,) I informed my Lord Say by Letter, That I could willingly
yield obedience to the said Orders, if the sight thereof would relieve my
losses, or cancel my Obligations; But since I could receive neither
satisfaction or security by those, I proposed, That the Honorable Committee of
both Kingdoms would be pleased to procure the restitution of my estate with all
other immunities thereunto belonging by an Ordinance of Parliament, that
thereby I might be enabled to pay my debts, and prosecute that public
employment which I had formerly undertaken, and that before my Surrender
thereof, otherwise I should be constrained to retain it as the refuge of my
fortune, etc.

Many Messages, Letters and Replies passed for some months about the Surrender
thereof, after which it pleased the honorable Parliament to grant my desire, as
appears by the ensuing Order.

Die Sabbati, 10 July, 1647.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That upon the
delivery up of the Jsle of Lundy to the Lord Viscount Say and Seal,

(...) The sum of my desires are,

That since his late Majesty, in pursuance of his said promise made at my
entrance upon the Mines in the year 1636. being convinced by his Council at a
full debate: That it was much better that I should enjoy the Customs for a
certain Rent (though happily (some years) beneath the value thereof) for that
by my charge and industry the staple Commodity of the Nation would be greatly
increased; so that if I, by the discovery of the concealed Treasure, got 100 l.
the Nation would gain 1000 l. by the advancement of Trade, in respect of
exportation and Importation, then that the said customs should be trusted in
common to Farmers or Collectors, who could add nothing to that National work
(unless it were discouragement to me and my fellow undertakers;) and also that
the Grant of the said Customs could not be less then 21 years, for that no man
could be encouraged otherwise to adventure his estate in the promotion thereof,
since a short Lease would be expired before a man could possibly obtain the
fruit of his charge and hazard, a dozen years being many times spent before a
Mine could be attained: for these and the other reasons before specified, his
Majesty was pleased to sever the said Custom of Lead from the great Farm, and
to grant the same to me and my Assigns for the term of twenty one years, for
the Rent of 6000 l. per annum, giving me power thereby to deduct out of the
said Rent, all such sums of money as I had formerly disbursed for his service,
with an allowance of 8 l. per cent. for the forbearance thereof, as by the said
Grant appears: By virtue of which Grant, as by my Council I am advised, I
have a legal interest in the said Customs during that term.

And forasmuch as the Custom, which formerly was 2 l. 8 s. p^r Fodder, has
been by the Parliament, for the good of the Commonwealth reduced to 20 s. per
Fodder; And for that the quantity of Lead now transported, is nothing near so
much as was shipped and transported formerly, as by the certificate of Customs
annexed may appear: That therefore, although I might justly claim the benefit
of the said Grant from His Majesty by virtue of the former recited Order of
Parliament, which provideth, that I should upon the performance of the
Conditions therein specified, be restored to all my Estate, with such right as
I, or my Assigns, had, or ought to have had, in the Mines, etc. Yet declining
my Interest herein, by virtue of the said Grant, I humbly submit my self to the
Judgment of Parliament, not doubting their readiness to give all just
encouragement to my endeavors, which shall tend only to the advancement of the
public good.

In pursuance whereof I humbly propose and desire.

That forasmuch as by my charge, vast expense and hazard (being thereby
damnified many thousands of pounds) the Trade of Lead being a Staple Commodity,
has been, and is likely to be advanced, That therefore I may be permitted to
farm the said Customs of Lead, for the term of years abovesaid, paying 2500 l
per annum for the same; which according to the due computation of the
quantities of Lead transported for two seven years last past (abating the
reducement of the Customs by the Parliament, from 2l. 8 s. per Fodder, to 20 s.
per Fodder, together with the deductions and allowance of the charge of the
Collection thereof, which amounted to above 1000 l. per annum) as a Rent
sufficiently proportionable, as by the Certificates from the Farmers and
Commissioners, who by order of the Committee of the Navy have examined and
certified the same, may fully appear; the substance of which certificates, for
better satisfaction, are here inserted.

It appears by the Certificate from the Farmers of the Customs herewith
presented, that there was transported in An. 1634. and from thence till the end
of the year 1640. (being seven years) 40772 Fodders, three quarter of Lead, and
no more. For which, if there had been received (as the Book of Rates now
allows) only 20 s. per Fedder, the Customs of Lead for these seven years,
would then have amounted unto 40772 l. 15.s. 0. d. Which being divided into
seven parts, it appears that the Customs did yield yearly. l. s. d. 5824. 13.
6. It appears also by the said Certificates, that in the year 1641. and to
the end of the year 1646. (being six years, there was transported 25483.
Fodders and a quarter of Lead, and no more. For which, if there had been
received only 20 s. per Fodder, the Customs for those six years, would have
amounted unto 25483 l. 5 s. which being divided into six parts, it appears
that the Customs did for that time yield yearly (besides above a twentieth part
that pays double Customs) l. s. d. 4247. 4. 2.

But in case it shall not be judged convenient for me to Farm the same, that
then I may be permitted to enjoy the Lead and Oar Custom free, which I already
have, or hereafter shall (at my own cost, or the charges of such as shall
adventure with me) discover out of new Mines, or such as have been drowned and
discerted for many Ages: And to the end that a work of such National advantage
may not be retarded, nor my self and other undertakers discouraged; but rather,
by all just ways and means enabled to prosecute and carry on the same: I
further humbly propose, That for the future, the Parliament would be pleased to
Ordain, That all persons convicted of petty Felonies may be employed in the
said Mines, giving sufficient security for their true service therein, until
such time be exspired as shall be adjudged meet for the expiation of their
Crimes; by which means I conceive many poor Creatures will not only be
preserved from untimely death, and removed from their idle company, but being
forced to work, be made serviceable to the Commonwealth, and sensible of their
own follies; the charge greatly lessned to those who venture their fortunes in
the said undertakings, for the reasons following:

Whereas it has been the custom in all Kingdoms, States and Commonwealths,
where Mines are hapily discovered to give all encouragement to Miners and
Adventures in Mineral Works, by the Grant of several Charters, Franchises,
and Privileges, whereby they might the more diligently attend the same; and in
pursuance thereof so to be governed and ordered under a particular jurisdiction
in all places; as Georgius Agricola, who was the most expert Mineralist of
these latter Ages, and himself King of the Mines of all Germany, does testify
and affirm; as the Staneries heretofore in England in some sort were. And
whereas the late King James, who was truly styled, The King of peace, and
mirror of mercy, was graciously pleased for saving the Lives of such
Malefactors as were condemned to Death by the Law for Petty Felonies, being
such as were not any Scandal to the Church or State, nor had imbrued their
hands in blood, to admit their Transportation by the East India and Virginia
Companies, for their furtherance of Plantations: In which action he did also
cast his eyes upon the warrantable proceedings and presidents of other most
famous Princes in the like kind; as the late Queen Eliz. who built certain
Galleys of purpose for employment of such kind of Offenders, of strong and able
bodies, as might attend her memorable designs at Sea, especially upon all
sudden and resolute Enterprises, it being the usual way and course not only
of the ancient Romans, to adjudge persons condemned for notorious crimes to
work in the metal Mines, but also of other Christian Princes, as the King of
Spain both for the supply of his Galleys against the Turks and Moors, and
especially for the Enlargement of his Indian Mines of Gold, Silver, Quicksilver
and the like; and his Conquests of Moloceo, Goa Ormus, and other rich and
populous Islands; The King of France, for his Galleys of Marsellis; The State
of Venice; The Duke Florence, who by such kind of saved Offenders built Ligorn
(one of the most famous Sea Ports within the Straits.) In all which States and
Services, diverse of these Malefactors, by good encouragement, have sought not
so much by surviving as by their incredible Labors, effecting matters otherwise
held invincible, to obliterate their former Ignomies by merit of Reward. And
whereas in this Commonwealth too many such Offenders are most untimely cut off,
in their best abilities of Service; so there is means of employment for such
persons, to redeem their lost Reputation, by endeavoring to do faithful
Service for their Countries honor, and the Commonwealths good, in the happy
work of discovering Minerals out of the barren Rocks: My humble Suit therefore
is, That you would be pleased, out of all these weighty considerations, and
beneficial consequences, tending so much to the good of the Commonwealth, to
grant me power for the choosing of such several persons out of the Prisons in
this Nation, as are and shall be condemned for small Offenses, and of able
serviceable bodies, by the approbation of the Judges; as shall implore your
mercy, to be employed by me in the works of the Mines Royal, they giving
security for their good behavior, with such limitation of time, and allowance
for their sustentation, as to your Wisdoms shall be thought fit; that by their
dutiful and laborious performance therein, they may afterward come into the
happiness of your Pardon for their former Offenses.

Thus having given you a perfect Narrative of my Rise, Growth, and Progress in
this common good; together with the sum of my desires, as matter of
encouragement in the further prosecution thereof, I will only add some few
particulars to manifest the advantage that would by the said Grant, redownd
immediately thereupon, to the Honor and Profit of the Nation, and then leave
the premises to the serious consideration of the Parliament, and all others
that desire to further a work of such public concernment.

As for example.

1. If in three or four thousand Tuns of Lead yearly raised, (which for some
years last past have been, and now is) the Trade and Customs both by
Transportation and Importation, be kept up and increased to many thousand
pounds profit yearly, then it must be inferred (and cannot be denied) That if
double and treble the quantity be so raised, by the charge and practice of my
self and fellow-undertakers, The result thereof must of necessity be
equivalent, and increase the value of the Customs imported; whereby the Nation
is advantaged, and the Adventurers encouraged.

I desire to propound this Quaere, Whether

2. If the concealed riches of our Nation so discovered (with less danger and
greater honor) be not much more advantageous for the inhabitants to seek them
(by Gods providence) at home, then to imbark their thoughts and Estates upon
the hopes of Foreign parts to enrich themselves, by advancing the Trade of
another Country, since by the practique experience of a private man, the
general Charge of a Miners profession is reduced to half the value of former
disbursments, and as much more certainty in the way of discoveries.

Tho. Bushel.

These considerations, and my late practique experience at Combmartin in Devon,
did not only invite the worthy Merchants of Barnstable and Bydifford to write
this ensuing Letter unto me, for Transporting all my Lead and Oar Fraight-free
in stead of Ballast; but also diverse other Merchants, by their good example,
were induced to adventure upon my having a Farm of the Customs, according to
the proportion of my Rent abovementioned, the several sums hereafter
expressed, as to a public work, and in hope of enriching themselves by the
same providence.

SIR,
SInce, you have been pleased at your own great charge to discover those
deserted Works at Combmartin for the public good of our Country: And whereas
you are interessed in the Mines of Wales, which furnish you both with Lead and
Lead-Oar, These are to request you, to be pleased to make this our Harbor
partaker of the Benefits may proceed therein, and what we buy not from you for
ready moneys, we shall be ready to transport for you Fraight-free instead of
Ballast, you rendering it aboard to all such Ports, as our Vessels shall
commerce withal: In so doing, we suppose the result thereof will more properly
conduce to your hopeful proceedings in the said works of Comhmartin, which we
wish all happy success, and remain

Your Loving friends, Richard Harris. William Leigh. George Shurt. Robert
Dennis. John Tucker. Thomas Horwood. Anthony Benny. William Palmer. Lyonel
Becher. Richard Harris. William Nottel. John Down. Walter Tucker. R. Flemming.
Richard Medford. William Wood. Francis Newton. Edward Flemming. Tho. Cox.
Nathaniel Fisherleigh. Robert Frayn.

Barnstable 6 October. 1648. WHereas Thomas Bushel Esquire, Farmer of the Mines
Royal, is willing and ready to adventure his pains, and a great part of his
Estate, in discovering of the deserted Mines of Combmartin in Devonshire, and
in cutting through diverse Mountains in Wales, or elsewhere in Darbishire, for
the discovering of Silver and Lead Mines. And whereas by his Relation, he is in
good hopes that he shall get an act of Parliament freeing the said Mines, so to
be discovered and recovered, from payment of any Customs for twenty one years,
or else that he shall become Tenant to all the Customs of England and Wales,
at such a Rent as they are now worth, for which he has already Letters Patents
from his Majesty: Now for that the said Thomas Bushel, doubting his own
Estate will not be sufficient to go through with, and perfect these chargeable
Adventures; and being contented to admit of such persons as will adventure with
him in the Mines, to have a proportionable charge of the profits thereof
Custom free. We whose Names are hereunder written, being desirous to forward
the public good of this Kingdom, and hoping (by Gods Providence) to gain
profit to our selves, do hereby declare, That so soon as the said Mr. Bushel
shall by an Act of Parliament have the said Customs granted unto him, we will
each of us according to our several Subscriptions, lay down and pay the said
several sums of money, to be employed by the said Mr Bushel in the said
Mines as aforesaid; to the end we may have a proportionable share of the
profits arising by Adventures, as aforesaid.

We whose Names are underwritten, will adventure in the business abovesaid, as
follows: Martin Iefferson 800 li. William Parkhurst 300 li. Timothy Lumm 500
li. Francis Ottley 500 li. Henry Seley 500 li. George Goodman 300 li. James
Ingram 300 li. Robert Mees 500 li. Henry Archibold 300 li. Edmund Goodyer 500
li.





Many others have proffered and promised to adventure, if the Customs be granted
as desired.

Which public Service was likewise a great motive to his Excellency, and the
Lord Viscount Say and Seal, to direct the Letter of Request, at follows:

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire. Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Mr Speaker,
I Formerly granted safe conduct unto Thomas Bushel Esquire, who had the
command of the Isle of Lundy, to come hither to Treat concerning the surrender
of that place, and he like a Gcntleman truly performed on his part such
Articles as were agreed on; since which time he has been very industrious in
finding out of Lead Mines, which are like to produce good quantities of Silver,
proof whereof you may please to see, and having seen a Letter under the hands
of the Merchants of Barnstable, to further his endeavors for the public; I
could not but out of a sense I have the general good will be exceedingly
advantaged by the way of his industry humbly offer it as a request of mine,
That Mr. Bushel may have for his better encouragement, your best assistance in
restoring him to all his Estate, according to mine agreement, and the Order of
both houses, dated the Tenth of July, 1647. And although by that agreement and
Order, he humbly conceives he may justly claim the Customs of Lead of England
and Wales, at such Rent as the same were formerly granted him by Letters
Pattents from His Majesty under the Great-Seal for a good Term of years
unexpired, yet he has been, and still is contented to decline that claim, and
submit to such a reasonable Rent for the same, as the Committee of the Revenue
shall propose; And in pursuance hereof, the then Farmors of the Customs have
by Order of the said Committee of the Navy (as I am informed) returned a
certificate, whereby the true values of the said Customs of Lead may appear; I
have therefore thought fit, humbly to recommend the said Certificate, together
with the Petition of the Myners of Derby-shire and Devon, and his Propositions
for the public good and make it my request that he may speedily Farm the said
Customs of Lead, during the time of his former Grant, whereby his adventures
for discovering Minerals, and recovering the deserted works of this Kingdom,
may be encouraged to join with him in so common a good, least he be enforced
to leave this Realm, and so good a work perish by his absence: For truly Sir,
this last discovery of his in the County of Devon, with the port of other his
proceedings, has almost persuaded him to become an Adventurer; Who remains,

Queenstreet 14. Martii, 1648. Your humble Servant, THO: FAIRFAX.



