COncionem hanc, cui Titulus, Cesars Due, and the Subjects Duty, molliendis
hominum Animis, Offensaeque deprecandae habitam Eboraci a Rdo Viro Tho: Bradley
S. T. P: legi, perlegi; and quia a summa ad imam usque ejus chordam nihil
uspiam reperire est nisi quod eo plurimum faciat, Typis proinde publicis
mandandam censui

Edm: Diggle, S. T. P. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino
Archiepisc'. Eborac'. a sacris domest'.
Episcopo-Thorpae Aug: 11. 1663.
CESARS Due, AND The Subjects Duty: OR, A PRESENT for CAESAR.

IN A Sermon preached in the Minster at York, at the Assizes there holden Aug.
3. 1663. by way of Recantation of some Passages in a former Sermon Preached in
the same place and Pulpit at the last Assizes imediately before it.

Both of them

By Thomas Bradley, D. D. Praebendary of the Cathedral and Metropoliticall
Church there, and Chaplain to his late Majesty of blessed Memory; Oxon' Exon'

YORK, Printed by Alice Broad, and are to be sold by Richard Lambert at the
Minster-Gates, 1663.

Matthew 22.21. Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars.


THese words are a cautious Answer to a captious Question proposed to our
blessed Savior by the Herodians, not so much for satisfaction, as for Cavil,
that they might entrap him, and ensnare him, and that in his Answer they might
catch something from him, whereof they might accuse him unto Caesar. Four such
Questions were there proposed to him in this Chapter by four several Sects or
sorts of people; all which took their turns to oppose him, and took placet one
of another to dispute with him; The Sadduces, the Pharisees, the Scribes, and
the Herodians. The first three of these he had easily shaken off, and gave them
such full satisfying or convincing Answers that they had no heart to ask him
any more Questions, ver: 46. But now in the 4th place comes in the Herodian;
and he charges most dangerously and desperately of all the rest, both in
respect of the matter of his Question, and of the manner of proposing it. First
for the matter of it, all the other Questions were concerning matters of
Religion; this matters of policy, and of State, and that in a point of high
concernment, about Cesar's Revenue, the Tribute money: As to the manner of
proposing it, all the rest in plain downright terms propose their Questions,
but the Herodians go more subtlely to work; for first, to avoid all jealosie,
and to prevent all suspicion of their evil intentions toward him, they court
him with a fair co^plement Master, ver: 16. Secondly, they give a large
testimony of him for his wisdom and courage, sincerity and impartiality in
teaching the ways of God truly, and not regarding the person of Man, and to
all this they themselves subscribe Scimus, We know it: And thus having by their
hypocritical flattery and dissembling Insinuations laid their train, they
give fire to it, and propose their Quaere, Licetne? is it lawful to give
tribute to Caesar or not? But what an insidious Question was this? and how
dangerous for him to answer to, what a horned Dilemma that push't both ways,
Answer which way he could; for had he resolved in the affirmative, Licet, it is
lawful, and you must pay it, then had he set the Pharisees against him, which
could not endure to hear of any such Taxes or payments: or had he resolved it
in the negative non licet, it is not lawful, and you need not pay it, then had
he incurred the just displeasure of Caesar, and the Herodians, as an enemy to
his Revenue; so that take it which way he would, he had a Wolf by the ears,
and guide as steadily as he could (on the one side or on the other) he was in
danger to be bitten.

But in vain is the Nett spread before the eye of that which has wing; full
well did our Savior see the fallacy, and the policy of this subtle Question,
and discover the Asses ears under the Lions skin, and as wisely and warily
did he shape his Answer, to avoid their snare, not by answering their Question,
but by asking them another, unto which they could not answer him, but they must
answer themselves too to the Question which they put to him, and condemn
themselves for making a Question of it; Whose Image and superscription is this?
ver: 20. as if he should say, you will all confess that to your Caesar, your
Sovereign, there is a Tribute due from his Subjects, and you must acknowledge
that he whose Image you do own upon your coin, whose stamp upon it, and
superscription or circumscription about it, makes it current amongst you, is
your Caesar, your Sovereign, why then do you ask me this Question, to which (in
this solution you have given to me) you have answered your selves? read your
duty and Cesars due, not out of my answer to you but out of yours to me, and
out of the Coin which you carry about you, and out of the superscription upon
it, or circumscription about it, that will tell you, that it is not only
lawful to pay it, but it is unlawful not to pay it, and therefore Reddite
Caesar's.

Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars

In which words here are three things offered to consideration. 1. The Person to
whom this Tribute is due, and that is Caesar; Give unto Caesar. 2. The things
that are to be given unto him, with his right unto them, they are his own, The
things that are Cesars. 3. The manner after which they are to be given, and
that is by way of rendition or return, redite, render; thus give unto Caesar
the things that are Cesars: And every one of these three parts carries its
reason in it, enforcing the duty, and so binds it upon us as with a threefold
cord, not easily broken.
Upon a review, every one of these branches divides it self into two, or has
two particulars included in it: In the first, the person of Caesar is here
offered to us; first to consider of Government in general, with the benefits
the Subjects receive under it: and secondly more particularly of the Cesarian
or Monarchical Government in the Text the most perfect and absolute of all
other. In the second, the things that are Cesars; here are two things to be
considered; first what things they are, secondly the right that he has unto
them, because the Text says they are his own; the things that are Cesars. In
the third we are to consider upon what account the Subject brings in Cesars
due, and that is by way of return, in the word Redite: And secondly after what
manner they ought to be brought in, and that is freely in the word give, Give or
reader unto Caesar the things that are Cesars.


I begin with the first of them drawn from the consideration of the person to
whom it is to be paid, and in him of Government at large, and the benefits that
Subjects receive under it: For it is clear our Savior mentions this as an
Argument why they should pay Tribute to Caesar, because he was their Caesar,
their Sovereign, and under his Government they received many benefits; even
the benefits of Government. What Tertullus the Orator speaks to Felix the
governor of Cesarea, Acts 24.2. That may all Subjects in general speak to and
of their Sovereigns respectively, and upon the same grounds and reasons:
Forasmuch as by thee we enjoy much quietness, and many good things are done to
our Nation by thy Providence, we acknowledge and accept it always, and with
all thankfulness, (most noble Caesar.) It is by their care and providence under
God, and by their faithful and prudent Government of us, and executing
judgment and justice in the Land, that we enjoy our peace, our plenty, our
liberty, our property, our Religion, our all that we have; Take away Government
from among us, and what will become of us, and of all these? which of us can
say that any thing that he has is his own, or secure himself of his life for
one hour? Oh bless God for Government, certainly the greatest blessing that
ever God sent down from heaven to earth in temporal things, is the blessing of
Government, it is the very stay of the world, the band that holds all together,
which once being loosed, it is impossible but we should fall all into heaps of
confusion, and be reduced again into the first Chaos; and therefore among all
the creatures in the world the wisdom of Almighty God the high disposer of
all things, has set and established a Government: If you look into heaven,
there is Government and order; we read of Angels, and Arch-Angells, and a
glorious Hierachy in the Church Triumphant: if you look into Hell (the very
emblem of confusion) there is a Government; we read of a Prince of Devils: if
we look into all the Creatures between them both, we shall find a kind of order
and Governamongst them; the fowls of the air have their Eagle, the beasts of
the earth their Lion; the Fishes of the sea their Whale; even amongst those
feeble Creatures the Sectilia, the Bees acknowledge a Master, the Grasshoppers
have no King, yet go they forth all by Bands, which shows they have their
Leaders; All Creatures in heaven, in earth, and under the Earth cry up
Government and with one voice acknowledge it the Mother of their peace and joy.
Therefore give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, because he is your Caesar,
your Sovereign; and for the good you receive under him, the benefits of
Government.

But secondly, as Government in general is necessary among all, so among all
sorts and kinds of Government this in the Text, the Cesarian, or Monarchichall
Government is the most perfect, the most absolute, and excellent above the
rest. I will not here spend time to read amongst you a Lecture of Politiques,
to show the sever all kinds and forms of Government which are found amongst
men, nor put them into the Balance to weigh them, and to compare them one with
another: there are but three principal sorts which stand in competition for
preeminence, Democracy, Aristocracy, and Monarchy; among all which, Monarchy
holds up its head above the rest, as the Cedar among the shrubbs, or as Saul
among the rest of the common people, higher by the head and shoulders, and has
clearly the preeminence in five respects.

1. In respect of the Nobleness of it, it is the most noble form of
Government, and that which most nearly resembles that whereby Almighty God
governs the world, and that's purely Monarchical. What were all the
Governments of the world to the four great Monarchies, the Assyrian, the
Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman, under which the world was governed for the
greatest part of the time since it was created; and whose same has drowned all
other Governments in comparison of them?

2. For the Antiquity of it, it is the most ancient of all other: It is a
mistake in policy to imagine that Monarchical Government sprang out of
Political, as that out Oeconomicall, and so was merely founded upon the
consent and agreement of men only; whereas it owns God only for the Founder of
it, and is as ancient as the world, or man upon earth: The first man that was
in the world was a Monarch, and that not only over his own Family (which he was
by a paternall Right) but over all the families of all the Generations which
were in his time, which was little less then a thousand years. In Abraham's
time we read of Melchisedech a King of Salem; Moses was a King in Jesurun; and
Job (in all probabillity ancienter then Moses) was a King in the East, as the
Ancients tell us; so that neither was Nimrod the first Monarch, (as some would
have it) nor Saul the first King; (as others) there were Monarchs ancienter
then them both; and before Democracy or Aristocracy were cast into forms of
Government.

3. Monarchy is the most perfect form of Government in respect of the unity
that is in it; it is the great happiness and fafety too of a People when they
all as one man are united together in one body: this was the happiness of
Jerusalem, Psalm 132 2, 3. Jerusalem is a City that is at unity within it
self. and Balaam speaking of the many thousands of Israell^, Numb. 23. speaks
of them all as one man, God brought him out of Egypt, he has as it were the
strength of an Unicorn; he shall couch down as a Lion, and as a great Lion, who
shall rouse him up. and in this language all along, he speaks of them in the
singular number, he, him, and his, all singulars; and compares the whole body
of them to some one Noble creature, a Lion, a Unicorne; all speaking their
unity, which was their happiness, their honor, and their safety too. But
there is no form of Government of that force to keep multitudes together in
unity, as the Cesarian or Monarchical government is, wherein so many thousands
of people, of so many several Nations, several Languages, several Religions,
several Customs, Callings, manners, interests, or howsoever different one
from another: yet as the members of the natural body (as different as they)
united together under one head do concur to the making up of one beautiful
body natural; so all these united together under one Head and Monarch,
convenient in eodem tertio, and concur to the making up of one body politic.

4. For strength Monarchy has the preeminence, vis unita fortior; it cannot be
but where power and authority are united in one, it must needs be of greater
force and strength, then where it is divided and distributed amongst many; and
the stream running down in one channel must needs be more forcible, deep, and
strong, more impassable, and carry a deeper Vessel, then when it is divided
into many smaller Rivulets: the Persians at the siege of Babylon found it so;
and the sage old Father in his deathbed, persuading his sonns to unity by the
Emblem or Hieroglyphick of a faggot bound up and impregnable, and the same
loosed, and the sticks taken out single, and so easily broken one by one, made
them sensible of the strength and security that was in unity, and the weakness
that was in division, exposing to danger of ruin and of being broken in
pieces; even such is Monarchy in comparison of other forms of Government, as a
mighty stream running down in one channel, and they divided into many smaller
currents: as a faggot strongly bound up not to be broken, and they as a faggot
loosed and divided, and so more easily to be dealt withal.

Lastly, the Monarchichall Government is the most excellent and perfect form
of Government of all oshers, because it is most free from those incenveniences
which they are all subject to, and with which they are usually distempered and
disturbed. For Aristocracy the next unto it, how long will it continue free
from the mischiefs of ambition, envy, and emulation? how apt are great spirits
(with Adonijah) to exalt themselves, and grow impatient of rivality? through
divisions in Reuben arise great thoughts of heart: Nec far potest Caesarve
priorem, Pompeiusve parem: Caesar will endure no superior, Pompey no equal:
and then the next is to make parties, to strengthen themselves, to accuse and
impeach one another, to weaken their adversaries, that under these pretenses
they may carry on their own designs, and engage a whole Nation in their
personal Quarrels, and embroile them in war and blood to serve their
ambitions. For Democracy, the ignoblest of all the rest, that places
Sovereignty in the people; what a monstrous Hydra is it, multorum capitum
bellua? how unconstant in theirs resolutions? how tumultuous in their
elections? how tormented with divisions, and distracted with factions? what a
low constitution at the best? always fain to truckle under some neighbor
Prince or other for protection, which at some time or other takes occasion and
advantage from their divisions to fall upon them, and to make a prey of them;
the usual conclusion of most of them: besides, how continually subject to
change? the most dangerous mischief in Government in the world. Denocracy is
very apt to degenerate into Anarchy, Aristocracy into Oligarchy, Oligarchy into
Democracy again; and thus they are in a continual rotation, whirling and
wheeling about out of one form into another, none of which changes are ever
made without the expense of much blood and treasure to the danger of ruin of
their whole State: and therefore the wise man advises not to meddle with them
that are given to change, Pro: 24.21. but mark it, in the same place he bids
us fear the King, and from that Government never to desire to change: neither
is it so subject to change as these other are, being the apex and the (...),
the highest kind of Government, from which neither Prince nor People have any
reason to change for any other; not the Prince, for higher he cannot go, and he
has no reason to desire to go lee; not the people of what degree or quality
soever, because they cannot mend themselves, being where the meanest may have
protection and the greatest account it their honor to be near unto him who is
the fountain of honor, and never think much to submit to Soveraignity in a
King, which to their Peers in Aristocracy they would not do, much less to
their Inferiors in Democracy.

But how happy are we of this Nation in this respect, (if we could see our own
happiness) which have the Quintessence and whatsoever is excellent in all
these united together in one the most happy Government that live under, and
that's Monarchy limited by Law; the best of Governments under the best of Kings,
CHARLES the second. And this is a strong argument to persuade with us to give
unto Caesar the things that are Cesars; And the first proposed, we now pass to
the second, wherein we are to consider.

1. What those things are which we are to give unto Caesar. 2. What is his right
unto them, because the Text says they are his, the things that are Cesars
And I will acquaint you with the latter of these first, with Cesars right to
the things that are demanded of us, that he may demand them the more
confidently, and we may bring them in the more willingly and freely. And a
right you see he has, the Scripture plainly speaks it, when it calls the
Tribute and other dues, the things that are Cesars, and of this it is necessary
we should be fully persuaded: It is a great mistake amongst men, yet general
amongst the vulgar, to thike that whatsoever they part with to Caesar, comes
merely out of their own store of free gift, a mere Donative, a Gratuity, a
Benevolence, that they might choose whether they will pay or no, and so he
merely an Eleemosynary in the receiving of it; and therefore men usually pay
their Tribute to the Prince, as they do their Tithes to the Priest, with an ill
will, as imagining they pay them both upon the same score of free Benevolence;
but in both equally mistaken: for first, as for Tithes, they are none of
theirs, they are the Lords, as a Rent reserved out of Lands, and he has
disposed them as he has thought fit, that is to the Church, and to his
Ministers: Tithes are mine says the Lord, and I have given them to the sons of
Levi: You may sell your Lands, but you cannot sell your Tithes; you may let
your Land, but you may not let your Tithes; they are none of yours to let, they
are the Priests: when therefore you pay your Tithes to the Priest, you pay no
more then is his due, you give to the Priest the things that are the Priests.
In like manner it is with your Tribute to the Prince when you pay Tribute to
the Prince, you pay him no more then is his Due; you only give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars: it is not a matter arbitrary, whether you will pay it
or no, but a matter necessary, you must pay it: it is not a courtesy, but a
duty, not a gratuity, but a debt; St. Paul expressly calls it so, Rom: 13.7.8.
To detain it therefore is a sin, not only against the Law of justice and
gratitude, but against a Principle of common honnesty. which commands us to
give every man his own; and if every man then Caesar amongst the rest; and
therefore give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars:

And there are three ways by which Caesar comes to have a right unto those
things which he requires of us, and so they become the things of Caesar.

1. Those things are Cesars which belong to him in the right of his Crown, and
which are inseperably annexed unto it. 2. Those things are Cesars which the Law
of God gives unto Caesar. 3. Those things are Cesars which the Law of the Land
gives unto Caesar, and which by Act of Parliament are settled upon him; and all
these are strong rights, and do give unto him an unquestionable Title to all
those things that are by all or any of these ways made his.
As to the first of these ways, it werehigh presumption in me to undertake to
give in an account which are his in the right of his Crown; such things there
are, and they are great and many, which are flowers of the Crown, which no
Subject may presume to touch much less to crop off, under pain of being guilty
of an high Crime on taking away from Caesar things that ere Cesars.

But secondly, those things are Cesars, which by the Law of God are given unto
him, and they are great and many, the Question here moved is only concerning
Tribute, Shall we pay tribute to Caesar or not? but the Answer is larger then
the Question, and injoyns and includes not only Tribute, but all other dues
whatsoever, the things that are Cesars. And there are six things which by the
Law of God are clearly given to Caesar, first, Fear, 2. Honor, 3. Obedience,
active and passive, 4. Defense, 5. Prayer, and 6. Tribute.

1. Fear, Proverbs 24.21. My Son fear thou the Lord and the King. 2. Honor, 1
Pet: 2.13. Fear God honor the King. 3. Obedience, Eccles: 8: 2. I council
thee to obey the Kings command, and that because of the Oath of God. 4.
Defense, Psalm: 105.15. Touch not mine anointed. 5. Prayer, 1 Timothy: 2.1. I exhort
therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks, be made for all men, especially for Kings. 6. Tribute, as in the
Text and Context.
These are all due unto Caesar, and that jure divine, by divine right, and that's
the highest and the best right; and therefore if we fail in the payment of any
of them, we are guilty of witholding from Caesar his Right, we do not pay unto
Caesar the things that are Cesars. But because the question here moved is
particularly concerning tribute the last of these six, and that's the very
Subject of the dispute in the Text. it is fit I should more particularly speak
to it; for be you well assured, that not for their sakes alone was this
Question here ask't, nor for their satisfaction alone, was the resolution given
to it, but for ours also, and for all Subjects in all places, and in all ages
to the end of the world, (according to the several Laws, Customs and Usages
under which they respectively live) who would be as ready to question the due
of it as they here were. I shall therefore endeavor to show, first, from
authority of Scripture. 2ly. from the example and practice of former times.
3ly. by strong and unanswerable reasons, not only the justice and lawfullnesse,
but the equity and reasonableness of paying Tribute unto Caesar.

And first for Scriptures, they are clear and plentiful Romans 13.7. Render to
every man his due, tribute to whom tribute belongs: and in the 6 verse, For
this cause pay we tribute. So there is a tribute to be paid, and there is a
cause for it, which the Apostle there shows at large. And of the four
Evangelists, three of them have given this very charge, and in the same words,
(an itteration not usual in the Scripture unless it be in some serious matter)
which they would have well taught and learned, Matt: 22.21. Mark 12.17. Luke
20 25. Rom: 13.6, 7, 8. Solvite, says one Text: Redite, says another: Give,
says a third. As a Debt, says one: As a due, says another: As his own, says
a third. Thus you have it from Scriptures clear, with line upon line, precept
upon precept, commanded and enjoined, and by the Authority thereof a Revenue
settled upon Cefar.

Secondly for Examples, see Solomon the wisest of Kings, extraordinarily
assisted by almighty God for the Government of his people; he had his public
Revenue, and great Tributes paid in unto him for the support of his Government
and for this purpose he had his Officers to gather them in in all his
Provinces, and over all the rest one great Officer of State to take their
Audits and Accounts, his great Treasurer as you may call him, that was
Adoniram, he was over the Ttibute. 1 King 4.6. And after him Rehoboam his
son, who was King in his stead, had the like Officer in the same trust, and
that was Adoram, 1 King 12.18. he was over the Tribute. Amaziah levied a Tax,
(2 Chronicles: 25.9.) of 100 Talents: Menahem another (2 Kings 15.19.20.) of 1000
Talents of silver, a great Tax of 50 shekeles a man. In Augustus time there
was a new tax imposed upon the People, and it was a great one; there came out
a Decree that all the world should be taxed, that is, all that were under the
Roman Empire, and these were extraordinary taxes (besides the standing Revenue)
imposed by a new Decree upon occasion, and yet they were paid; where (in the
last of them) the pains was more then the pay, for every one was to repair to
his own City and Tribe that he belonged to to be taxed: Luke 2. In our
Saviors time we read of certain Officers appointed on purpose to gather up
this Tributemoney among the Jews, they were called Publicanes, always rank't
with sinners, and on the right hand: but what do we speak of these? our Lord
himself did not only by his command enjoin it, but by his example confirm and
second it; himself paid tribute unto Caesar, Mat. 17.27. what need we any
further witness?

Thirdly, As Scripture does command it, and example confirm it, so reason does
persuade it, and strongly evince and demonstrate the equity and necessity of
it; and I shall give you these five reasons of it.

1. The first is drawn from the consideration of his public Office, his
public capacity; you must not look upon Caesar as a mere man, but as a
Magistrate, as a man clothed with majesty, a King, a Sovereign, the head of
the Tribes, a Collective person, in whom the many thousands of Israel are
united and represented; as the Sun in the firmament, which has influence
upon all, and all an interest in him; as the soul in the body which by the
spirits, the cursitors of it, conveyes life, and sense, and motion to all and
every even the least Members of it; such is Caesar in his Dominions, as the
Sun in the firmament, and as the soul in and to the natural body, so is he
to the body politic. It is but reason that public persons in public
capacities should be publicly supported.

2. As Caesar is a public person, so it is for the public that he lays out
himself and that which he receives, for the public behoof, for the public
service, for the public good; as to himself, what has Caesar of all that is
brought in more then will serve one man? he eats no more, he drinks no more, he
wears no more; whatsoever is used about him more then will serve him as a man,
is to be charged upon his Office, not upon his person, it is to be imputed to
him as in his public capacity, not as a Man, but as a Magistrate, a Prince, a
Sovereign, to fit and enable him for the carrying on of the public affairs,
and for the managing of the Government, in which we are all concerned; and so
in effect it is laid out for our own use, not unto his, who has only the
trouble of disposing it for ours. All Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is
never the fuller, for what it receives in one place, it sends forth in another
for the good of the whole Land; for part of it is exhaled out of the sea by the
warmth of the sunnebeames, and so conglomerated into clouds, which are carried
about by the wind like bottles in the air (as Job calls them) and so power'd
down in showers to water the dry and thirsty earth, and part of it is sent and
convayed out of the Sea through the Cavernes of the earth (as it were by pipes
and conduits, and being defecated in the passage of it from the saltness that
was in it) issues and breaks out into springs and fountains, and is convayed in
rivers and streams through the valleys of the Land for the comfort and
refreshing both of man and beast, even so and no otherwise is it with the
Caesar, the Sovereign in his Dominions, if he receives with on hand, he
destributes with the other; he receives to have, but not to hold it returns
again in the blessings and benefits of Government, and therefore the detaining
of it is a wrong not so much to him, as to the public and to our selves
involved in it. I have read some where of a mutiny that was raisd by all the
members of the boagainst the belly, The members complained and murmurred
against the belly that it devoured all and wrought none, the rest of the
members did their parts to work and bring in sustenance, and when they had done
so, the belly devoured it, and still was calling for more; this they
apprehended as a grievance, and for redress in it (upon consultation had about
it) they resolve and agree thenceforth towithhold from the belly the usual
Alimony and nourishment which formcriy they did afford it; but what was the
issue of it? in withholding their contribution of the accustomed supply which
formerly they did afford it, they did but punish themselves; for soon after the
face grew pale, the cheeks lean, the sides thin, the hands weak, the knees
seeble, and the whole body wasted and in a consumption: I need not apply it;
say it is but a sable, every Fable has its Moral, and so has this. There is
mention made in Zach: 4. of a mystical vision: Zachary sees there a golden
Candlestick with a golden bowl on the top of it, seven Lamps burning in it,
every Lamp had a golden Pipe belonging to it, which conveyed oil to it: and
on either side of it was an Olive Tree to furnish the Pipes with a continual
supply of oil, which they conveyed to the Lamps to keep them burning: there
are many Interpretations of this vision, but sure this is plain enough for one,
to show that if you would have any light or benefit by the Lamps you must keep
them burning; if you would continue burning, you must supply them with oil: if
you do either take away the Pipes or cut down the Trees which should supply
them with oil, the Lamps will burn but awhile I leave to your selves the
application of it. Certainly, if the suprea Magistrate as a great burning and
shining Light consume himself to give light to others, others have no reason
to think much to supply him with oil to keep him burning: and this is another
reason why we should willingly and freely give unto Caesar the things that are
Cesars

3. The third reason is taken from the consideration of the great charge that
it required for the managing of the Government of a Kingdom, and carrying it
on with that honor and State that is but fitting and necessary: Government is
a chargeable employment, there must be Navies abroad at Sea to secure the
Coasts, and to keep us safe at home; there must be Armies abroad and at home
too, to secure us from insurrections, rebellions and commotions; there must be
Ambassadors sent abroad into foreign Kingdoms and States both ordinary and
extraordinary, and there must be Ambassadors entertained from sorraign parts
to hold correspondence with the Nations, and to gain intelligence; there must
be Courts of Justice and honorable Persons sitting in them to minister
judgment and justice unto the people; there must be great Officers of State to
be employed in the Public affairs; there must be honorable provisions for
the Household, with a Port and Retinue becoming Majesty; Debts of the Kingdom
must be paid, public engagements taken off, Soldiers must be paid off their
Arrears; Men and Arms, Ammunition and moneys always in a readiness, and a
thousand things more which I cannot mention: all these require full Treasuries;
and whence shall all these supplies arise? or whence should they arise? but out
of the public Tribute; Quis militat propriis stipendiis; St. Paul thought it
unreasonable that any Soldier should go a warfare in the service of his King
and Country at his own charge; much more unreasonable and impossible is it that
any Prince should manage the Public Government at his own charge: therefore
give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars.

4. The fourth reason persuading to this duty of paying Tribute to Caesar, is
taken from the consideration of the great pains and care that is required in
Government, and which Caesar takes in the execution of his Office, and the
discharge of that high Trust which God has committed unto him. We little know,
and less consider what careful thoughts their heads are taken up with night
and day, that all may be well under their Government and that their subjects
may be preserved in peace and safety: Splendorem videmus, curam and laborem non
videmus: we see the outward splendor and glory of Courts, and that dazles our
eyes, but the inward cares, troubles and dangers that attend them in the
execution of their great Office and high Trust, we see not: they often wake,
when their subjects sleep; their thoughts are often troubled, when their
subjects are quiet; they often in danger, when their subjects are secure, every
one under his own vine, and his own fig tree, eating the fruit of his own
labors, when their careful thoughts will neither suffer them to eat, nor
drink, nor sleep in quiet that their Subjects may do so. Very sensible of these
things was the Philosopher, when he said, That if men did but know the cares,
the trouble, and the dangers that lie within the circle of a Crown, they would
not take it up to wear it: and gravely Erasmus, Miseros esse Principes si mala
sua intelligant, miseriores si non intelligant: that among all conditions of
men, Princes were miserable if they knew the evils that did attend them, and
more miserable if they did not know them. Very significantly does the Prophet
Isaiah call Government a burden, a burden upon the shoulders, no light
burden, such as may be born with the hand, nor carried at arms-end, but such a
burden as he must put under his shoulder to bear it: Isa. 9. where speaking of
Christ in his Office of ruling the People, he says, The Government shall be
upon his shoulders: such is the condition of Caesar, the Sovereign in his
Kingdom and Dominions; he has his load, the Government is upon his shoulders,
we have no reason by our divisions and distractions to add more weight unto
it, but rather by our contributions every one to set our hand to it to make it
lighter. It is a remarkable expression of the Prophet, which we read in the 78
Psalm, where giving testimony of King David's governing of Gods People, he
says thus, He fed them with a faithful and true heart, and guided them
prudently with all his power. where we see how many abilities are here met
together to make a good Governor, here is faithfulness, and truth, and
tenderness, and prudence, and power, and all these strained up to the height
to make him a good Ruler and Governor of Gods people; even so is it with all
faithful and religious Princes; they are fain to put forth all their power,
prudence, wisdom, knowledge, skill, and experience, and the utmost of their
abilities, and all little enough in the governing of their people: we may take
a conjecture of this in the Government of some lesser Societies which we are
better acquainted with, suppose it be but of a College, a Corporation, or a
Family; how hard a matter do we find it to govern them in peace, and to keep
them in order? how much ado have we to keep them from factions, and from
divisions, and to hold them together in unity? and yet if the Supreme
Magistrate do not so by all our Families, and all the Societies consisting of
them, and by all his people in all his Dominions to the satisfaction and
contentation of all Parties howsoever distracted and divided among themselves,
presently we are ready to fall foul upon the Government, and to think hardly
of him that has the managing of it. The Greeks have a very significant
Proverb amongst them, and it speaks something to our purpose: (...): There is
one great servant in a great family, and that's the Master; si licet exemplis in
parvo grandibus uti: if I may make such uneven Comparison, it is true of great
Princes in their Courts and Kingdoms as well as in a Master in a private
Family, they are called the great servants of State, and truly so they are
(pardon the expression) and the greatest care and burden, the weight of all
lies upon them. Let this be a fourth reason why we should render unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars; the sense of the great burden that lies upon him, the
difficulty of Government, the danger he is exposed to in the managing of it,
the great pains and care that he takes to govern us with justice and to
preserve us in peace: therefore render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars.

Lastly, give unto Caesar the things that are Cesar's for the good we recive
under and by his Government, the very word in the Text imports as much, and
implies that consideration as the reason of the duty; (...), says the Greek;
redite, says the Latin, not give, but render in both: but rendering
presupposes a receiving first, what we render we do but restore what was
before delivered to us; we do but return with one hand, what we received with
the other; therefore give to Caesar, because you receive from Caesar more then
you give, and better then you give: and what is it that we receive from Caesar?
it has been already showed in part, in the beginning of this discourse; what
do the sublunary bodies receive from the Sun? what do the members of the
natural body receive from the soul that animates them? the same do the
Subjects receive from their Caesar, who is as the Sun in the firmament of his
Kingdoms? and as she soul of the body politic of his Dominions. Daniell in
his vision, Dan: 4. sets forth the benefits of Government under the emblem of a
goodly Tree spreading forth his boughs and branches every way far and near,
even to the uttermost parts of the earth; the fowls of the air sat in the
boughs and branches of it, and the beasts of the field, great and small lay
under the shadow of it; he adds further that the Tree was full of fruit, and
all Creatures fed upon it, and had sustenance from it: even so it is with a
great Monarch in his Dominions, he is a universal good amongst his subjects,
and the influences of his Government flow forth to the utermost of his
Dominions unto all sorts of people, Clergy and Laytie, great and small, as well
as the smaller Birds that sit and sing upon the lower or outward branches where
they can get footing, as to the greater fowls that sit upon the higher boughs
and top-branches of it, as well to the smaller Cattle that quarter on the
outsides, as to those more noble creatures, the Lions, and Unicornes etc. which
quarter nearer to the body of the Tree; they all receive from him both food and
shadow, shelter and protection, countenance and maintenance and all, it is from
the Tree, from the Monarch, inasmuch as it is by his means, by his care and
pains in the wise managing of the Government and in executing judgment and
justice amongst his Subjects that they do enjoy them, and are protected in
them, as Tertullus acknowledges, Acts 24.2. The Royal Prophet David was so
sensible of this, that he seems in a manner to impute all that the Subject
enjoyes to the King, as the royal fountain of Government and security, by
which he streams it out and conveys it to them: In the 2 Samuel: 1.24. where
exhorting the daughters of Israel to mourn for Saul their King now dead, he
makes this his argument, because living he did so much for them, and they
received such benefits from him, even to the very garments which they wore; Ye
daughters of Israel mourn for Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other
delights; who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel: how did Saul cloth
them which he never saw, nor probably they him, but a few of them? but only
thus, that under his prudent Government and protection of them, they with their
Parents and Husbands thrived, and prosper'd, and grew rich, and were protected
in the peaceable possession and enjoyment of what they had, which otherwise
they could not have been secured in: and upon this account David imputes it
unto Saul, that they enjoyed all these precious things from him, as if he had
freely given them unto them, as it were out of his own Wardrobe and Jewel
house: Ye daughters of Israel mourn for Saul, who clothed you in scar let,
with other delights; and put on Ornaments of gold upon your Apparel. The case
is the same, and the reason the same to all other Subjects under the government
of their Sovereigns and Cesars respectively; and therefore in the same language
will I apply it to all sorts of people among us, under a better Government then
that was, and under a better King then Saul was.

Ye Daughters of England mourn for him that is gone, who clothed you in
scarlet, with other delights, and put on ornaments of gold upon your Apparel;
but rejoice in his living Image left behind, under whose happy Government and
Protection you enjoy the like benefits, privileges, and favors.

Ye Ladies, which like the Lillies of the field neither sow nor spin, yet
Solomon in all his Royalty not clothed like one of you; remmember who it is
that clothes you in scarlet, with other delights; that puts on ornaments of
gold upon your apparel, with gemms, and jewels, pearls, and precious stones,
with which you are so illustrious; be thankful to him, glory in him, and
rejoice before him.

You noble Lords and great Ones, whom he has taken near unto himself, and
made Princes of the first List, in advancing you to Honors and Offices above
others; remember who it is that clothed you with scarlet, with Robes and
Ermins; who it is that put the Coronet upon your Heads, that put upon you the
Collar and the Garter of Honor, and other Ensigns of greatness and of glory;
be thankful to him, glory in him, and rejoice before him who is the fountain
of honor, and by whom to be honored is your highest glory.

You Right reverend and holy Bishops of the Church, the Chariots of Israel and
the horsemen thereof, whose very Robes speak your Gravity, Innocence, and
Purity; remember who it is that set the Mitre upon your Heads, that granted out
your CONGE DELIERS, that clothed you with Aaronicall Garments, garments for
beauty and for glory: be thankful to him, glory in him, and rejoice before him.

You Reverend and learned Judges of the Land, whose honor and Office is to
administer judgment and justice unto the People; remember who it is that
clothed you in scarlet, from whom you receive your honorable Commmissions of
Oyer and Terminer, and from whom you have your Authority delegated; be
thankful to him, glory in him, and rejoice before him.

You Reverend and learned Academicks, Doctors, and Dignitaries, who have
attained the highest degrees of Schools in either of the Universities, many of
the faculties; remember who it is that has clothed you in scarlet, and who is
otherwise your high Patron, and munificent Benefactour; be thankful to him,
glory in him, and rejoice before him.

Et spes, and ratio studiorum in Caesare tantum. You rich Merchants, grave
Citizens, honest and ingenious Contrymen, all of all sorts, remember from
whom, and by whose means (under God) you do enjoy your peace, your plenty, your
security, your protection, by whose care it is that the Ships sail in safety,
that the shops are open with security, that the Plough goes in peace, that you
reap your harvest quietly, and eat the fruits of your own labors; and think
not much to return an acknowledgment for these benefits; do not grudge and
grumble to pay Tribute to whom tribute is is due, upon such valuable
considerations; and cheerfully render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars:
which brings in the third part of the Text showing the manner after which they
should be done, in the verb, Give, or Render.

That is, do it freely, do it fully, do it timely; As God, so the King loves a
cheerful giver: disputes and delays in these cases are interpreted denials,
and viscosa beneficia, as the Philosopher calls them, benefits or gifts which
hang like Birdlime upon the fingers of those that give them, as if they were
loath to part with them, ingrata sunt, they lose their acceptance, and forfeit
their reward; therefore give, and give freely; render and render readily, not
as upon constraint, but as of a willing mind; and surely if this must be done
to a Tiberius, to a Nero, how much more and more cheerfully to a Constantine,
to a Theodosius.

And here to stir up all good Subjects to the ready performance of this duty,
I entreat you to consider with me these four things.

First, In what state our Caesar found this Kingdom, whenby Gods goodness he
returned to it; the Exchequer empty, the Crown jewels and goods sold, yea the
Crown it self, with the Scepter, and Globe, and all the rich and precious
things which his Royal Father and his Ancestors had stored up and preserved,
of inestimable value made away; The ward-Robes plundered and rifled, the Plate
and Household Stuff in all his Majesty's Palaces taken away, yea the Palaces
themselves pulled down and ruined, and the very materials of them sold; the
Kingdom deeply in debt, in vast and incredible sums; a numerous Army of Horse
and foot deeply in Arrears to be paid off; a great Navy at Sea far more
chargeable then it to be discharged: to say nothing of his Majesty's own Debts,
for we cannot imagine that he could live by the air so long in foreign
parts; so that his condition at his return was much like unto our Saviors
when he was upon the earth, that had scarce a place to lay his head, nor bread
to put into it.

Secondly, consider what great things he had to do, and in part yet has; to
set in order a tumultuous Kingdom, and a ruinous Church, both of them so
miserably out of frame, that it is the work of an age to set them to rights
again; to keep in pay great numbers of Horse and foot for Guards and Garrisons,
the restlesnesse of discontented people necessitating it; to pay off the Navy
and the Armies, and the debts of the Kingdom; to build and to repair, and
furnish anew his Majesty's Royal Houses and Palaces demolished, neither
Crown, nor Scepter, nor Globe, nor Robes, nor Ward-robes, nor Plate, nor
Household Stuff, nor any thing to speak on left, except he would buy it anew
with his penny, nor so much as bare walls to bring them to until he build them.

Thirdly, Consider his frugality since his return, so far from wast and
profusednesse in expenses, that the very necessaries are very slender; for his
household provisions, if you should compare them with Solomon's, you would wonder
at the vast difference between them, in the 1 Kings 4. We have the constitution
of Solomon's house a List of his Officers, and of the Diet and daily provision
of his house, and this was his provision for one day, thirty measures of fine
flower, and sixty measures of meal, ten fat Oxen out of the stall, and twenty
out of the Pastures, a hundred sheep, besides Hearts, and Roe-buckes, and
fallow-Deer, and fatted foul; if you compare these with the household of our
present Caesar, you will wonder at the difference, and yet his Kingdoms and
Dominions are far greater and of larger extent; but it seems his contribution
and his Tributes are not so great. And take a conjecture of his frugality but
in one instance more: Here have three of the blood-Royall (very near unto his
Majesty) dyed since his Majesty's coming in; the Funeral expenses of all these
three came not to the third part (I think I may say the thirteenth) of the
expenses of the funeral of the late Usurper.

Many other things might I allege to bring on this duty with chearfullness and
readiness, his unparalleled sufferings, his invincible patience under them; his
constancy in his religion against trials and temptations, not without much
grace and strength to be resisted; his stupendous mercy showed to his
implacable and desperate enemies; his indulgence to tender Consciences; his
studious endeavors to compose all differences, to satisfy all parties, if it
were possible; never did any Prince study his Subjects as he has done.

Fourthly and lastly, to crown all the rest, he brought with him an
Olive Branch, the emblem of peace; has put an end to our civill-warrs; has
broken our swords into mattocks, and our spears into pruning-hookes; has
restored our Religion, revived the Laws, settled the Courts of Justice; has
under God, and God by him, made good to us and to our Nation that gracious
promise made to the people of God upon their return: Isa: 2. He has turned
his hand upon us, and purely purged away all our dross, and taken away all our
tin, and restored our Judges as at the first, and our Councillors as at the
beginning. Great are the things which God has already done for us by him, and
great things we hope he has yet by him to do for us; haec si non moveant
singula juncta movent: All these things surely may be of great force with all
good Subjects freely to give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and tribute
to whom tribute belongs; tribute of Subsidies, tribute of Customs, Tonnage
and Poundage, tribute of First Fruits and Tenths, tribute of Tax or
Contribution, tribute of Confiscations (from which the Treasury has its name
fiscus; Nehem: 10.8.) tribute of fines, tribute of Hearth-money, tribute of
Excise.

And because this last is the tribute which is so much talked off, and so much
trouble has been about it, because of all other it is so much grumbled at, and
comes in so hardly, and I my self have been complaind off for Preaching
against it in this place and Pulpit at the last Assizes; it is very fit that in
it I should more clearly and fully declare my self, and in discharge of that
duty, I do here openly, clearly and confidently declare and assert, that the
Excise as it is here established in England, is (in the constitution of it) a
Legal and just Revenue, and one of the Tributes here in the Text due unto
Caesar: and therefore if any man ask me as the Herodians did our Savior in this
Context, Licetne? is it lawful to pay it or not? I answer as our Savior did
them; Licet, it is lawful to pay it; it is utterly unlawful not to pay it:
fore Render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars. And that you may do it
cheerfully and readily, without murmuring or disputing, I will give you in some
reasons showing not only the justice and lawfulness, but the equity and
reasonableness of it; and they are these.

First, it is established by Law, and that silences all disputes, it is settled
by Act of Parliament as a part of the Revenue; and therefore a right not to be
questioned.

Secondly, As to his Majesty he is no gainer by it, he has parted with a very
honorable Revenue in lieu of it, to wit, the Court of Wards, one of the
fairest flowers in the Crown, so fair, that the great Counselor, Lord
Treasurer Burliegh, once Master of that Court, did in's deathbed advise Queen
Elizabeth never to part with it out of her hands, for that it was an unknown
Revenue, and one of her Majesty's best Farms; but howsoever that being taken
away, and only this left in the room of it, if we should withold this too,
what shall we leave him?

Thirdly, The third reason is taken from the consideration of the subject out
of which the Excise oath arise, the commodity on which it is imposed, and that's
strong-drinke, an element upon which there is more thrown away in vain expense,
then upon any one thing, nay, may I not say upon all other Commodities, in the
Land; upon which, especially in great Towns, and by many other persons in many
other places too, there is near as much thrown away in wast as would reasonably
serve for all other necessaries: and in the excessive and intemperate use or
rather abuse of which, there is more sin committed and occasioned in the
Land, then about any other thing whatsoever: if then the wisdom of the
Parliament to take men off from this excessive and intemperate abuse of it and
themselves, have laid such a legal charge upon it, who can judge but that it
was an Act of Wisdom and Prudence, of Piety and Religion in them for the
restraining of abuses.

Fourthly, The last reason is taken from the freedom that men have to take up
the profession which makes them liable to pay Excise, or not to take it up, to
use it, or not to use it; there is no man compelled to it, and if he like it not
upon those terms upon which he is to be Licensed and admitted, he may let it
alone, and there is no hurt done, if he like it not with the encumbrances, he
may pass by and leave it, and the Excise shall never trouble him: Volenti non
fit injuria.

Upon all these reasons and considerations I conclude, That the Excise (in the
constitution of it) is a just and a legal Revenue, that the imposition of it
upon those commodities upon which it is laid, is no wrong to any man: that not
only by law, but in reason and equity, it may justly be demanded and ought to
be paid; and therefore I exhort and admonish all persons concerned in it, not
to dispute it, not to quarrel it, but willingly and readily as in all other
Tributes, so particularly in this of the Excise to Render unto Caesar the things
that are Cesars.

And so I have done with my Text, and now come to my task; a task enjoined me
here this day, and that is no less then a Recantation of some indiscreet
passages, in a Sermon which I here preached at the last Assizes in this place
and Pulpit; the main Charge against me in it was, That I preached against the
Excise, and Excise-Men, it lies in the 38 and 39 pages of the Book, for it was
since printed; the words then delivered I confess were unadvisedly spoken, I
was too sharp in those expressions, and while I spoke of and against Biters, I
my self became a Biter. Another passage there is which is excepted against,
and it is contained page 23. where my illguided zeal put me on too far in
pleading for the resurrection of a Presidentiary Court in these Northern-parts;
so far, as to charge the Westminsterian Lawyers, That they would engrosse all
the law unto themselves, as if they meant to make of it, one great Monopoly;
these words were unadvisedly spoken, and I went too far in that charge.
Another passage there is, and that is found page 48. wherein I was very bitter
against Rack-renting Landlords, and Depopulators; ranking them amongst the
Biters, and the Grinders in the Text: in this I confess I went too far, it
was unadvisedly spoken, and gave offense, And indeed I am sorry that any thing
should be spoken by me at any time which might justly give offense to any, even
the least of little ones, much more that should offend Authority; and sure I am
that intentionally I never did, nor ever will do so; yet seeing some passages in
that Sermon have given such occasion of offense, I am heartily sorry for it, I
wish they had not fallen from me, much more that they had not been Printed.

And these passages which have been by me here mentioned, I think fit to be
retracted, and disowned; particularly that wherein I say, That the government
of this Nation is Arbitrary in the Maladministration of the Excise; which
words, together with all other Indiscretions whatsoever contained in that
Sermon and dropped either from my tongue or pen, I do here in the presence of
you all, fully retract, disclaim, and disowne.

I will conclude with one word which his Majesty spoke to me himself at the
Councell-Table, and it was close and home, and did more silence me, then all
that was spoke to me besides, and it was this;

That his Majesty thought it was my duty to preach conscience unto the people,
and not to meddle with State-affaires: which words, as they were a severe
reproof for what was past, so they are a serious admonition for the time to
come; and I shall most studiously, and exactly henceforth observe and obey it,
and wish all others to do so too.

FINIS.

