ADVERTISEMENT.
I Have been desired by some Gentlemen, who are Well-wishers to the intended
LAND-BANK, to publish my Answers to the following Queries, propounded by
several who have read my PROPOSALS, Viz.

Where will there be Money found to Circulate the proposed Bills of Credit?

If I take up Bills to the value of 1000 l or more, of the Directors, upon the
Security of my Estate, and these Bills be delivered out in Payment from one to
another, How shall I get these Bills again if I have a mind to clear my Estate?

When I have settled my Estate upon the Trustees, How must I get it out of
their Hands, if I would sell it, or settle it for a Jointure? etc.

If I pay at any time part of my Principal to the Directors, Whether I must
notwithstanding continue the payment of the whole Interest, or be from that
time discharged from payment of Interest for such part of the Principal I shall
so pay the Directors?

1st Quest. answered. The procuring Money to answer these Bills is part of the
Method which I have to lay before those Directors who shall be chosen by the
Subscribers, which I think is not reasonable for me to discover till I am in a
Capacity to put it in Execution, lest I give others an Opportunity to raise a
Superstructure on my Foundation, which some have already attempted to do.

2d Quest. answered. No Man's Estate is proposed to stand engaged for any
particular Bill or Bills of Credit, but for such value only in Bills or Money
as he shall take up or receive upon the Security of his Estate; and upon his
payment of so much Money, or delivering up Bills of Credit to the like value,
his Estate will be cleared.

3d Quest. answered. Any Man may as well sell or otherwise dispose of his
Estate that is so settled, as he may any mortgaged Estate, this being in this
respect no other than a Mortgage, only it is suited more for the advantage of
the Mortgager than are the usual Mortgages: And any Man who settles his Estate
in Trust may have his Deed up again whenever he pleases, upon payment of
Principal and Interest.

4th Quest. answered. You are to pay Interest for so much Principal as you from
time to time shall owe to the BANK, and for no more.

The Substance of my PROPOSAL is this,

That the Freeholders are only desired to unite themselves into a Body, by
subscribing their Estates to be a Fund for a National LAND-BANK.

And no Man who shall subscribe obliges himself, nor his Estate by his
Subscription, the same being rather a Memorandum of the Names and Estates of
such who are willing to encourage it.

And I propose, that when there shall be a Subscription of 100000 l. per Annum,
the major part of the Subscribers met together are to choose Trustees on whom
to settle their Estates, and Directors to manage the intended BANK.

To these Directors I shall propose my Methods of raising Money, and till then
the Subscribers or their Estates are under no Obligation, nor themselves at a
Penny Charge.

As my Methods shall be approved or disapproved, the Subscribers may settle or
forbear to settle their Estates.

If they settle their Estates, their Estates are to be chargeable for no more
than what they themselves shall actually receive: and the Subscribers, if they
please, shall be furnished with three fourth parts of the Value of their
Estates at 3 l. 0 s. 10 d. per Cent. per Annum.

And if they shall not settle their Estates, as they will not have been at the
least Charge, so they will be at no Trouble but only writing their Names, and
meeting once to choose Trustees, Directors, etc.

The Subscription Books lie open at the Chambers of Thomas Gooding Sergeant at
Law, in Field-Court in Grayes-Inn At Philip Neave Esquire his Chambers, the second
Staircase of the Paper-Buildings in the Inner Temple. At Lawrence Braddon Esquire
his Chambers, Number 4. the second Staircase in the new Square at
Lincoln's Inn. At the House of Robert West Esquire the Corner of Buckingham-Court
near Scotland-Yard. At Mr. John Smith's in Exchange-Alley: And at Mr. Humfry
Hack shaw's in Lothbury near the Royal Exchange in London.

John Briscoe.


