THE POOR CLIENT'S COMPLAINT
COlin by Promise being Obliged to pay,
Me such a Sum, betwixt and such a day:
I asked it; he refused it; I addressed
Aulus the Lawyer: He replied, it is best
To Sue him at the Law. I Will make him debtor;
Your Cause is good, there cannot be a better.
Being thus advised away to Pete I trudge,
Pray him, and pay him to bespeak the Judge:
Engaged thus for better and for worse
I must proceed, and thus I do depurse.
For Writing Summons, Signing, Signeting:
With a red Plaster and a Paper Ring;
For Summoning the Principal, and then
For Citeing Witnesses to say Amen;
For Executions (alias Indorsations)
For Tabling, Calling with Continuations:
Next for Consulting Aulus and his Man;
For he must be Consulted now and than:
For pleading in the Outter-house and Inner.
From Ten to Twelve, then Aulus goes to Dinner:
For Writing Bills, for reading them, for Answers
More dubious then those of Necromancers.
For Interlocutors, for little Acts,
For large Decreets, and their as large Extracts.
For Hornings, for discussing of Suspensions,
Full Stuffed with Lies and frivolous Pretensions:
For Please your Lop. and such like Petitions,
For raising and for serving Inhibitions.
And for Comprysings, or Adjudications,
For their Allowances for Registrations;
With many other Acts, and Protestations,
Which may be Summed up in one word Vexations.
Then unexpectedly upon a small
Defect alleged, Colin Reduces all:
We to it again, and Aulus does disjoynt
The Process, and debates it Point be Point;
The Cause at length's Concluded, but not ended,
This made me Wonder! Aulus he pretended,
Decreets must not be given out at Randum,
But most abide a serious Avisandum.
Conform to course of Roll; when that will be
Indeed I cannot tell, nor yet can he.
Thus Aulus has for Ten years space Extended
The Plea, and further more I have Expended
Vast Sums, to wit, for Washing, Lodging, Dyer,
Yet seldom did I rest, or sleep in quier.
For Coal, for Candle, Paper, Pen and Ink.
And such like things, which truly one would think,
Were unsignificant, but yet they are come
In Ten Years space unto a pretty Sum.
To Macers, Turn-keys, Agents, Catchpols, Petes,
Servants, Sub-servants, petty Foggers, Cheats;
For Morning-drinks, Four-hours, half-Gills at Noon
To fit their Stomach for the Fork and Spoon,
To which they go, but I poor man mean while
Slip quietly to the Earl of Murray's Old Kirk.
Isle.
We meet again at two, then to desgeast
Their bellyful, they will have a Gill at least,
Sometime a double One; for Brandy-wine
Can only end the War called Intestine:
For Mum, Sack, Claret, White Wind, Purl, Beer, Ale,
(One he would have it new, another stale)
Both must be pleased, for Pipes, Tobacco, Snuff,
Tuist, Coffee, Tea, yea and a greasy Stuff
Called Chocolet, Punch, Clarified Whey,
With other Drinks, all which I duly pay:
For Rolls, for Nackets, Roundabouts, Sour Kakes,
For Cheshire-Cheese, fresh Butter, Cuckies, Bakes,
For Panches, Saucers, Sheepheads, Cheats, Plack-pyes.
Lamb-legs, Lamb kirnels, and Lamb Privities.
Skait, Lobsters, Oysters, Mussels, Wilks, Neats Tongues,
One he for Leeks, Beer, and Red-herring longs.
This must be had, an other does prefer
Raw herring, Onions. Oil, Spice, Vinegar.
Rare Composition; and he is truly sorry
It Is not in Colpeppers Dispensatory:
For Aples, Peers, Plumbs, Cherrys, and Green-peese
Dulce, Tangles, Purslain, Turnapes, Radishes,
With forty other Things, I have forgot,
And I Am a Villain if I paid them not.
Moreover my Affairs at Home sustain
Both the emergent Loss, and cessant Gain;
Aulus himself terms his a double loss,
And I call him and it, a triple Cross:
By all these means my Expense does surmount
Near ten times, ten times Colin's first Account.
And now e're that I wholly be bereft
Of the little Time and Money to me left,
I Am at the length resolved thus to do,
I Will shun my Debtor and Lawyer too:
And after this I never will give credit
Unto one Word, tho either of them said it:
You Will ask which of the two I Would rather shun,
Aulus; it is he, it is he has me undone,
I Have Words from both, but sad Experience tells.
That Colin gives, but Aulus dearly sells.
FINIS.

