TO THE Right Honorable, THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND
Right Honorable,
I Once more in the name of the most high God beseech you, to remove the old
Earth, and set up the new, as God has ordained, by setting up the Government
among us, with the Laws, the Statutes, and Judgments of God contained in the
Word; it being the alone foundation on which God will establish the Nations
which he has now shaken, and is about to shake; when things shaken shall be
removed, that his Law and Rule which cannot be shaken may remain. Right
Honorable, this only work saves the Nation from ruin, and presently possesses
this people of unspeakable happiness, and puts an end to our National
differences with God, and those among our selves, and wi l make your memory
precious to the Ages and Generations to come, and acquit you of your souls Vows
to God; which tender I therefore renew, and humbly lay before you, because Mr.
R. Vaughan has put up his Plea before you, for and in defense of that we call
the Common Law; whereunto I return him the ensuing Answer, beseeching you to
judge between us, and that a liberty be granted to God, his Law and Cause to be
pleaded before you at your Bar, against all humane Laws that stand in
competition with it, that when you come to stand before his Bar, you may have
his Law speak for you, and not against you in that day, which is the unfeigned
desire of

Your affectionate servant in the witness of the Lords truth, JOHN BRAIN.

To Mr. R. Vaughan of Grayes Inn.
Sir,
THe ingenuousnesse of your appeal to the Magistrate, in your Answer to Mr.
Peter's Proposalls, concerning the Law and its Reformation, occasioned these
indigested lines, to let you know it is the cause of God, and to be deduced
from the Word, by which the Teachers thereof are chiefly in the way of advice
concerned therein, and Mr. Peter's or my self come rightly to take cognizance
thereof, equally with you, if not before you: Sir, the Lawyers of old addressed
themselves to the Divine Law of God, you to the humane Law of Heathens, which
is too low to be pleaded for in these days of light and profession; especially
before the High Court of Parliament, who are bound to God to reform things
according to the Magna Charta of God, and not of men; your Law is grounded only
on the corrupted reason and judgments of rude men, this on the Will, Justice,
and Holiness of God, the just measure and true trial of actions, so that
those that judge by the one, and have the other, are liable to the Judgment
thereof, and those only that judge by it, free their souls from guilt and
punishment: Sir, in your Epistle to the Parliament, the greatest happiness you
wish the Nation, is the continuance of the Common Law; is this wish of yours
for your own Interest, or purely for the good of the Nation, if for the Nation,
Sir think again, whether the Commonweal would be more happy in the Law of God,
or in yours, it having so many precious promises of all temporal good, and
deliverance from temporal evil, together with the protection of the Almighty
God, which your Law has nothing to do withal, but deprives the people
thereof, and all else that can be called a peoples happiness: and for the
lopping of the Law, you will find it is but lost labor, God has laid the Axe
to the root thereof, as being corrupt therein, as well as in the branches, and
the Scripture tells you, That every plant which the Father has not planted,
shall be pulled up, which the Laws and Governments of men are. Alas Sir! what
is it to compare your Laws with those of other Nations, to keep them up, and
to pass by the Divine Law of God, as if there were no such thing in being; to
the Law therefore, and the testimony that will destroy and condemn your Law,
and it is Rule, your Law you say was not the Conquerors Dictate, yet it was the
Dictate of corrupt men, and that it was not Lex Scripta, which was it is want
and weakness; the Moral Law of God was written with his own finger, your Law
is a Law on wheels, uncertain and changeable, which you term reason and
convenience, which are infinitely short of the grounds of the Divine Law, to
which every soul must submit to every tittle, or be damned, but not so to
yours, your Law you say has lost it is Face, it may be you mean it is Head,
which Gods Law has not, nor can it for ever; your Law, as other Popish
trumpery, you say, is baptized with the name of the Common Law, this is owned
for the Divine Law of God, whose Image and superscription of Holiness and
Justice is ingravened thereon, and at last shall judge Law, Lawyers, and all
men else; your Law is but almost a comprehensive Rule and measure (as you say)
but Gods altogether; Gods is the Rule and Measure, yours nor rule nor measure,
for as he is one, so with him is but one Law which is his own: and for what the
former Parliament affirmed concerns not this, whose souls are under a Vow to
God, to reform this State according to the Word, by which only is to be
produced the Nations Freedom, and the Peoples happiness, though it be granted
that your Law has the likeness of gold in it, yet it is not Gold as the Law
of God is, nor will it bear the purifying once alone, much less seven times
seven, but like dross it consumes before the fire comes near it, of which, you
have not feared to say as much as God has said for his own eternal truth,
without any ground or warrant; which as fire will speedily devour the dross,
and corruption of the Nations their Laws and Governments.

For your Epistle to Mr. Peter's, I doubt not but he will sufficiently return
you a seasonable answer to it, only in general I observe you in your
expressions to be extremely differing from your self, and him, one whiles as
with kisses you speak him fair, and anon as a foe you use contumelies and
debasements, as of one illiterate, rude, irtationall, prejudicate in his
Opinion, and rash in judgment, which I only mention to prevent offenses
between you for the future, being men have engaged, (as you say) in the same
cause, which proves offensive to your self and others, being in your writings
but as unsavory salt.

Sir, For the retreat of all good things it is to God, his power, safety, and
being, whence things that are good and just did proceed: now if God protects
yours, he must decline his own, if he protect his own, he must destroy yours,
for there can be no more two Laws with God, then two Gods; yours therefore
cannot retreat to this safety, because it is none of his, but as Moses Serpent
eat up the Sorcerers, so will Gods Law eat up yours; for as there is but one
God, so there is but one authorized Law of his, his came out from him, yours
from men like your self, which bears their superscription, and has their
Image of lightness, corruption and vanity engraven on it.

In your Introduction.
You condemn the peoples lightness in too soon believing and being lead of
men, which is truth, they looking to customs and antiquitys to the neglecting
of Gods truth and verity, the traditions of men having for a long time made
void the Laws of God: Sir, you say what Mr. Peter's wrote was as the Tohu vabohu
in the Creation, which yet did appertain to the Creation of God, and God gave
being to that, but not to your Law, which is part of the old earth that is
shortly to be removed, Rev. 21.1. And whereas you say, the plain honest man
knows not the Law, I think it is clear, nor you, nor those that have studied
them longest know them not, nor is there any Privilege to the Nation by them,
but is that thing this day stands between them and their Privileges, which is
the divine Law and Communion with their God, men's being in place thereof, your
Laws, Foundations, and Institutions, had their being from the corrupted reason
of the Heathen, which you say is not inconsistent with right reason and
Scripture, whose proceedings, Laws and punishment infinitely differ from that
commanded of God, which being proved by your most ingenuous Confession; and as
you say by the judgment of all Lawyers, is to be casheer'd out of their very
countenance as an excrementitious thing, obsolet and useless, to hear which
from your self, makes me admire and wonder at the progress truth has made
among men, which I hope Sir was no rude nor sudden conception in you, but the
best, which like a good Orator at last you offer at the feet of Authority, as
the thing that is most worthy to be taken up and judged by them, and as the
only cause of God and the Nation your writing to Mr. Peter's Legentem oportet
credere, has joined with it very amphibologicall terms, where you charge him
with this fault, that he hints little of Scripture: I hope the motion for a
Government and Law that is altogether contained therein, will find a placid
acceptance with you, and all love God in truth, which are not placita
principum, nor clericorum neither, your preferring your Law before all Law in
the world, is very unjustifiable, whiles the Law of God remains therein, whose
descent is from God and heaven, and not from men and earth as yours is; and as
for the continuance of your Law, you know that the Kingdom of God by the Kings
of the world, and the Church by the power of Antichrist have of a long time
lain desolate, your self acknowledge your law to be chaffey, who yet sees not
as God sees what is chaff therein, you desire to have the corruption of the Law
to be destroyed, in whose very foundation the pure eyes of the righteous God
sees nothing else but corruption it self, which God in the fire of his Zeal
will consume and destroy, your presumption of Mr. Peter's is viz. that if he
were acquainted with your Law and it is principles, etc. the best whereof are
but reason and experiences, which he is capable of as other men, but of the
worst thereof, he and my self are ignorant and all; except the men that
profess it, to whom for my part I leave them, as that that has not long to
live; and to say in this, Mr, Peter's meddled out of his calling, being a Law
Witness. (1.) If any have a call, he has one to do what he did. (2.) I know
not that God made it a call or trading to plead his Law, every man being to be
a Lawyer, and to know that Law, by which he was to live, and in case of offense
to be judged by it, who from their infancy were to be brought up in the
knowledge of it, so that you can never prove that the disposition and steerage
of affections, makes a sufficient call in an unwarrantable practice: and if the
Law, as you say, be a common Birthright, any man in desiring the best Law,
cannot be said to be abroad, and not at home, you say, facile est inventis
addere, which proves your Laws imperfection, and the perfection of Gods is
proved in this, that nothing is to be added thereunto; the good, if any be in
yours, is swallowed up in this, because it is far better; and by this you see
it is not warrantable to offer any thing that is new, but what only is in the
Word; and whereas you, because a Professor will not plead for your own Law, I
therefore because I profess this plead for it, which should I not do, were in
some kind to deny it, and betray it, which I fear to do, and whereas you will
sit under the sentence of men, you and I must dwell and lie for ever under the
Majesty and the sentence of the Law and Judgment of God, and cannot avoid it;
and it is easier to kick against the pricks, then to oppose in word or writing
against the Royal Law of the eternal and mighty God, the wounds of conscience
being most unsufferable to a creature.

In your answer to his Proposalls, you say, he has spoke all and more then he
knows, which is very much to be done in so few words and little paper, yet
indeed a man in a little that is not good, may know so much, that he desires to
know no more: now that there were Registers or Scribes belonging to every place
of Judicature in the Jews Republike is clear, which I think Mr. Peter's means,
whose book I have not read, in which place of Judicature sat daily two Judges,
to expedit Justice, and avoid delays of causes, which Judges were chosen by
the people by many notes of integrity, which people had first covenanted with
God in the way of the Law, the Judges Power under God was not arbitrary, but
confined to the revealed Law of God, from which they were not to decline,
either to the right hand, or to the left, from whom in clear cases was no
appeal; and with Mr. Peter's I say, the happiness of Government lies not in
humane Laws, as we see by experience, but good men, when they see to the
executing of them: And with your self there must be good Laws ( viz. Gods,) or
good men in Authority will do but little good, when good men live under the
command of them, as well to execute it is punishments, as to do it is other
Injunctions.

To P. 6. When this Republike is made agreeable to that of the Jews, which I am
bold to say, will be not only entailes, but the bottom and being of things will
most certainly be strangely altered, changed, or removed; and it is the will of
God, that the first born, whether Male or Female, should have a double portion.

P. 7. You allow that the Moralls and Judicialls of Moses are the best Laws,
yea, you say all honest and just Lawyers concur therein, and it were very
strange if they should not, the act it self of denying it were to make them
unhonest and unjust both, but if so, what weakness is it in the people, yea,
what wickedness to refuse that, for any other whatsoever, it being a strange
exorbitancy, for men to live by Gods Law, and be judged by man's, which is
against God, his Law, and People diversely.

But say you there is not an express rule in the Moralls and Judicialls of
Moses, for every particular occurring contingent case that happens.

1. Which to affirm, is to destroy the glory and perfection of the Word of God,
and to question and dispute his wisdom, who would rule by an unsufficient Law
over men.

2. The prohibition of not adding nor diminishing, had been but the peoples
straightning and destroying of their well-being, and God would have given them
liberty in this, as any other thing, if it had been necessary for them.

3. The Jews were as numerous as this people were, and as corrupt as others, so
that that which was made to serve them well, as well serve this Republike, or
any else, for the Law was indefinitely made for all offenders, as 1 Timothy 1.9.10.

4. The vast capacity of the Law is not known to us, because not looked into,
which appears in Gods binding men only thereunto.

5 Let but the Nation be set in the Jews Common weal form, and I doubt not but
by the assistance of God, to show how any usual cause may be judged, that can
arise in difference between man and man, and most such also as are unusual,
most certain it is, all are in a more just way decided there, then in all the
Laws of the world they are or can be.

P. 8. You distinguish between politic reason and it is Laws, and natural
reason and it is.

Question may be where without an Injunction Royal of God, reason has the
force of a Law, among the people that have the Law of God by them, who thereby
are not left to reason, God saying of men having their own Laws only, that they
were without Law.

P. 9. You plead for the being of Lawyers, which indeed every man should be,
and were of old, that could read and expound the Divine Law, but that any
pleaded it before the Judges, or that had fees for so doing, and made a
profession of it, as now, is not expressed in the Word, nor was it so among our
selves, by the first Advocates of your own Law.

P. 10. That we have need of a Law is most certain, and as certain it is, that
we need no other but the Law of God, by which nor Lawyers not Judges can do
Injustice.

And for wills and Testaments, if men dispose of their estates according to
God, they are useless, the eldest being to have double, and the rest an equal
portion, the widow first provided for, for which dividers were by authority
appointed to make a speedy division, and so all needless suits of Law
prevented, and causes of complaint and envy most vvisely abolished, by the
direction of the most just God, and that unjust making one rich and proud, and
all the other poor, though such often times as were far better then the Heir
before God, comes by this distribution to be annihilated to the common good,
and benefit of all the other issue of men in the Nation, and the good of love
and unity continued hereby among brethren.

P. 11.12. For the Records this: if this Nation ever receive the Rule of God,
and his Laws to be governed by them, men will see there is no need of
preserving them: The age now in being will do by them, ruling by Gods Law, as
those with their books of curious Arts ruled by the Gospel, Acts 19.19.

P. 13.14. As for imprisonments, I beseech you see the freedom of the
Government of God; by which Law none was to be imprisoned longer then the time
of the determining of his cause, which was immediately to be heard and decided,
if the case appeared clear.

P. 16. What is spoken of taking away the gray headed errors of the Law, and
it is extuberances, that they may be expunged; time will tell you and it will
prove most true, that you will begin to purge the Law, until you have purged
Law and all away; and it is most certain, the Law never in all the ages it,
ever run in, met with such like contingencies as at this day it has, and every
day it is like to do.

P. 17. The Law and Justice of God is above all men, because not made by men,
but it is not so in humane Laws and Rule, because they make their Laws as God
made his; and truly whiles one place has more privileges then another, it
appears not to me how there can be a Commonweal.

That by the Law of God, in Cities, or other eminent places, there were to be
Judges, to see Justice done to the people, is clear, and that in difficult
cases, some of the most eminently gifted of the Nation, were appointed to be
consulted with by the Judges that understood them not, by which Justice ran
like a stream by every man's door, when Trials were to be decided every day,
not every half a year, and so the cause of imprisonment prevented, and whereas
you say, frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, it holds true
indeed; for if the Law of God be sufficient to rule a people, what need is
there of man's.

P. 19. Is spoken of Ministers proposing for themselves, I hope if men seek the
advance of Gods Law and Rule, they propose not for themselves, but God, which
all ought to do, and to deny themselves if they will follovv Christ! O how
much better is it to consult with the Law and Testimoney, then with flesh
and blood, men and learning, reason and experiences.

P. 20. That the Testimoney of Witnesses in Judicature, was to be given by
Oath, is apparent in Scripture, and is part of the Divine Law and worship of
God, so that men ought not to come against their neighbor, but in this way,
viva voce.

As for the punishment of Witnesses and Judges that are corrupt, it is
expressly set down in Scripture, and provision made to prevent it, or to find
it out.

P. 22. The Law of the Land sets down punishments, for offenses committed
against the Light of Nature, but the question is,

1. Where the punishments are agreeable to the nature of the offense, if not,
how then can they be just.

2. If agreeable to the Word, if not, how can it be warrantable to put them in
execution.

As for pardoning of offenders, if men assent to the Divine Law, and covenant
with God to observe it, and after break the same.

1. They are then under the Law, and by the Law either they ought to live or
die.

2. To save any, the Law condemns, is not in man's power, who is made under the
Law, and not over it, who are not to dispense with it is commands in any kind,
he being to be a doer, and not a Judge of the Law, James 4.11. Luke 19.27.
concerns the age we live in more then an^, in which the end of such as reject
the Dominion of Christ is held forth ^o us, that we draw not destruction on our
selves and ours.

Sir,
SEt up the Standard of reason, experience, equity, policy, profit, etc.

And put in into one scale the Law of God, and in the other your humane Law,
purified, lopped, and amended, and I Will tell you, yea God himself, Angels and
Saints shall witness it, it will be less then nothing to it, and lighter then
vanity.

Sir, I have written this only to discharge my conscience herein, and that I
may prevent my destruction from God, which for my silence would seize on me; I
yet now look for ruin on my self and Family, for witnessing to the Truth of
God from the world, so that a woe is to me if I witness not to the Truth, and
woe is to me if I witness to it my unworthiness, to hold forth the truth,
only wounds me, which the Lord pardon, and you and the world pass by, and I
shall be a debtor to you, and all, being worse then the worst of men, and an
unworthy Witness of the Truth of the great God;

John Brain.

FINIS.

