A TABLE, SETTING FORTH The manner of that great Philosopher the Lord Chancellor
Bacons Searching for Metals by making Addits through the lowest Level of Hills
or Mountains, and conveying Air into the innermost parts of their Center by
Pipe and Bellows; as well as by Art to mollify the hardest Stone, without the
tedious way and inestimable Charge of sinking Aerie Shafts; and is now intended
to be put in practice by his Meniall Servant Thomas Bushel, on Hingston-Downe,
according to his Lordships command, and the approbation of that great
Mineralist, Sir Francis Godolphine; with the demonstrative Reasons of each
particular to the Lords of the Fee, and Proprietors of Hingston-Downe, is as
follows;
The Beacon
Note that between every double Line is contained 40. Fathom for the close
Addit, And at each end 150 Fathom for the open Addit.

M. The Mountain O. The old Shafts that have been sunk. S. The Shafts supposed
to be sunk, but avoided by the now way of Addit. B. The Pipe and Bellows


woodcut of smith shop North

Smiths-shop



woodcut of smith shop South

Smiths-shop





FIrst, the true description of Hingston-downe, lies in Longitude East and
West five Miles, with Millions of Shafts that have been visibly Sunck upon
several loads of Metal, by the Romans, Danes, Saxons, Jews, and Britans, And
is in breadth 700 Fatham, at the Basis lying North and South, as well as in
depth 200 Fatham from the Becon perpendicular to the Center of that addit now
intended.

The reason why I undertake a work of this nature, and in these parts, is as
follows;
FIrst, the Ambition of gratitude to answer his Highness Heroic trust, reposed
in me to discover this Nations Mineral Treasure.

Secondly, my obliged fidelity, to my Lord Chancellor Bacon, to practice this
his Philosophical invention, for the general good; and in particular to give
new birth to the drooping conditions of my fellow Pupills, the poor Miners
drowned and deserted works.

Thirdly, my Cordial desire to serve these Western parts with the benefit of
so useful a president, I having already practiced the same in Wales, and found
the fruitful effects thereof.

Secondly, the reasons why I begin my Addit or Aqueducts, from Smal-Coome and
Hooke-Coome, to meet underneath the Becon at the aforesaid Center, is;
FIrst, because these Coomes lying lowest equal with my addits, all the water
that shall fall from the superficies being 200 Fatham perpendicular to the
level of my said Addits, may by that means be easily conveyed away.

Secondly by mine own experience, I found not any of our predecessors to search
lower then 40 Fatham. So that I am confidently assured that cutting North and
South thorough the aforesaid 700 Fatham, I shall command all the Loads, Rakes,
and Veins of Metal in that Hill, which is conjectured by the multitude of
Shafts upon the superficies to run five Miles in length as aforesaid; and how
probable then may it be to reedifie a second Indies out of the drowned and
deserted works of our Nation by this example, I shall leave to the rational
Judgments of them who are practitioners in those affairs; Especially whither
these mine endeavors will not give much hopes to verify the old proverb in
this age of ours, Hingston down well wrought, is worth London town dearly
bought. For if the riches of those Groves in 40 Fatham sinking has occasioned
the aforesaid proverb, as well as the inundation of water has caused them to
desert from their Mineral profit, it cannot be denied by common sense, or rules
of reason, this addit undermining most of the said works 150 Fatham, and then
ascending up into their several loads of Metal, to draine the waters in their
old Groves, but that it carries the fairest encouragement of probable
conjecture to make good the true riches of the old proverb of Hingston down,
in this age of ours.

The reason why I use Pipe and Bellows, is,
FIrst, to convey Air into the innermost part of my Addit without the sinking
of Airy Shafts, and preventing the vast expense and tediousness of time, which
caused our Forefathers being ignorant of this invention, to leave such supposed
riches of hidden Treasure to us their posterity.

The reason why I make my Addit or Aqueducts open 150 Fatham at each end, is,
FIrst, to facilitate the dispatch of 300 Fatham of the 700 the first year, by
the reason of the multitude of hands that may be set on work, which will not be
admitted if close, and likewise it being the shallowest place of the Hill, it
will require but the same expense.

Secondly, that the close Addit may be but in length 400 Fatham of the 700. and
to shorten likewise the drift of the same in point of time, I begin my Addits
at each end of my open Trench as Counterdrifts to meet each other, And so
consequently the whole will be dispatched in half the time; And therefore you
may rest assured that I have so maturely Calculated the ways and means, not
only of this great work at Hingston-down, but also of that of Coom-Martin in
Devon, Guinop in Cornwall, and Mondy in Summerset, that I doubt not, but in 4
years to set a period to all expectations, if God per^^it, and I have the honor
of your wellwishes.

The reason why I make the dimension of my Addit 10 Foot broad, and 10 foot
high, keeping my level equal in my open and close Aqueducts, with the lowest
depth of the Coome, is,
FIrst, because it draws the inundation of Water from the whole Hill, and
conveying the more plenty of Air into the lesser Addits, which must follow the
loads of Metal when we cross them in our common shore or principal Addit, as
also to prevent those Damps that frequently arise from the sulphurous nature of
the earth at that Center.

Secondly, for the more convenient passage of Wheel Barrowes each by other in
sockets of Timber, to carry the loads of Metal and Rubbish out of the several
Addits.

Thirdly, because I have found by mine own experience in cutting thorough other
Mountains of the like nature, the great inconvenience of little Addits, in
respect of the aforesaid reasons, and likewise the prejudice I have received in
being careless of losing a foot in the level, when I met with the several
Loads and Veins of Metal.

The reason why I do not willingly desire any other Partner but Providence,
and his Highness patronizing this great enterprise of Hingston-down, Coom
Martin in Devon, Guinop in Cornwall, and Mendyp in Somerset, is,
FIrst, because I have had already the experience of some Partners, and found
the fruits of Providence to assist me more, when they did ever decline the
Mineral design, then when I had compliance with their several purses, which
made me call to mind his Lordships frequent observation, that many partners in
the public acts of Mineral adventures, where greediness of gain had more
rule (...) their hearts, then to illustrate the Creators glory, became usually
the sad Elogie of Misfortune and dis-incouragement to others.

Secondly, for that if those two Addits at Hingston-downe prosper according to
the Proverb, and the other two at Coom Martin, and Guinop aforesaid, one tenth
part must be solely dedicated to pro^^cute the like works in the other 20
Mountains, marked out by the aforesaid Lord, and that great Mineralist Sir
Francis Godolphine, who both subscribed it under their hands, to be the most
harmeless gain and greatest good to a Commonwealth, the choicest study and
endeavors of the best bred persons in other Nations, and the most Honorable
Employment this world was capable of.

Thirdly, because I have found the faithfulness of such friendship in some
friends which heretofore gave me credit, as out of their own honesty, and
noble nature, they have been willing to accept of their present use, and
forbear their principal three years, rather then such a Mineral design
should perish, and I incapable to prosecute the same for the Public Good, and
honor of the Nation.

Lastly, because I conceive all Mines were created for Man's Use and Gods Glory,
but in what age to be revealed, or by whom, is only known to the searcher of
all hearts, who can best judge of mine and my designed ends. So that it may be
probably hoped that this age of ours which has had such a strange revolution
of Providence, is appointed by the Disposer of all things, to disclose the same
to public Sight, for when I had enlarged by discourse; my Lord Bacons
observations to his Highness of the spreading Veins or Loads of Metal in
this Northern Clymate, I found such a natural inclination of his Highness
wisdom, to further these Conceptions of my Quondam Master, practiced by my
self, as he has granted me the whole power of his assistance to search for
such Minerals; And likewise promised the continuance of his favors, and to
make good my Articles, for the ends holden forth. And what person then of an
ingenuous spirit that is not impoisoned with envy, will bear unfriendly
though^ to those that search after such subterranean treasure at their own
charge, for the good and honor of their native Country, and which in a manner
is presented unto them by the hands of God?


