CERTAIN ACTS AND DECLARATIONS made by the Ecclesiastical Congregation of the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates.

Met at Clonmacnoise the fourth day of December 1649. And since Concluded.

printer's or publisher's device

KILKENNY Printed in the year of our Lord. 1649. And Reprinted at London by
Robert Ibbitson.

By the Ecclesiastical Congregation of the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Prelates.
WHereas heretofore many of the Clergy and Laity did in their actions and
proceedings express much discontents and divisions of mind, grounding the
same on the late difference of Opinion happened amongst the Prelates and the
Layty, by which the Nation was not so well united, as was necessary in this
time of great Danger, wherein all, as with one heart and hand ought to oppose
the Common Enemy. We the Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates of this Kingdom
met motu proprie, at Clonmacknose 4 Decembris 1649, having removed all
differences among us (not entering into the merits of diversities of former
opinions) thought good for removing of all jealousies from our own thoughts,
hearts and resolutions, and from others, who had relation, or were adherent to
the former diversity of opinions, to manifest hereby to all the world that the
said divisions, and jealousies grounded thereupon, are now forgotten, and
forgiven among us on all sides as aforesaid. And that all and every of us, of
the above Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates are now, by the blessing of God,
as one body united. And that we will, as becomes charity and our pastoral
charge stand all of us as one entire body, for the interest and immunities of
the Church and of every the Prelates and Bishops thereof, and for the honor,
dignity, estate, right, and possession, of all and every the said Archbishops,
Bishops and other Prelates. And we will as one entire and united body forward
by our counsels, actions and devises the advancement of his Majesty's Rights,
and the good of this Nation in general and in particular occasions, to our
power, and that none of us in any occasion whatsoever concerning the Catholic
Religion, or the good of this Kingd. of Ireland, will in any respect single
himself, or be, or seem opposite to the rest of us, but will hold firm and
entire in one sense as aforesaid; hereby detesting the actions, thoughts and
discourses of any that shall renew the least memory of the differences past, or
give any ground of future difference among us, And do in the name of Jesus
Christ exhort all our flock to the like brotherly affection and union, and to
the like detestation of all past differences or jealousies as aforesaid,
arising hitherto among them. And we desire that this our declaration be printed
and published in each Parish by command of the respective Ordinaries. ut
videant opera vestra bona and glorificent Patrem vestrum qui in Caelis est.

Datum apud Clonmacnose 13 December. 1649. Signed by, Hugo Ardmachanus. Fr.
Thomas Dublin. Thomas Casshel. Joan Archiep. Tuam. Fr. Boethius Elphyn. Fr.
Edmundus Laghlinensis and Procurator Waterfordiensis, Emerus Clogher, Robertus
Corcagiensis and Cluanensis. Nicholaus Fernensis. Edmundus Limericensis. and
Procurator Episcopi. Ossoriensis. Franciscus. Aladensis. Andraeus Finiborensis.
Joan. Laonensis. Fr. Oliverus Dromorensis, Fr. Antonius Clonmacnosensis. Fr.
Hugo Duacensis. Fr. Arthur Duneusis, and Connerensis. Fr. Terentius
Imolacensis, Fr. Patr. Arsdagh. Oliverius. Deis Procurator Episco. Medensis.
Dr. Joa. Hussy Procurator Episco. Ardfertensis. Fr. Joannes Cantwell Abbas. S.
Crucis. Dr. Thadeus Clery Episcop. Rapo. Procurator, Fr. Gregorius o Ferraile
Provin. Ordinis Praedicatorum Provin. Hiber. Fr. Thomas Mackeyernane Provin.
Fratrum Minorum Provin. Hiber. Walterus Clonfertensis Congregationis Secretar.


By the Ecclesiastical Congregation the Kingdom of IRELAND.
WE the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordianries, and Prelates of the
Kingdom of Ireland, having met at Clonemacnose proprio Motu the fourth day of
December in the year of our Lord God 1649. to consider of the best means to
unite our flocks, for averting Gods wrath fallen on this nation, now bleeding
under the evils, that famine, plague and war bring after them, for effecting
a present union, decreed the ensuing Acts. 1 We order and decree as an Act of
this Congregation, that all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries within
their respective Diocesses, shall enjoin public prayers, fasting, General
Confession, and Receiving, and other works of piety toties quoties to withdraw
from this Nation Gods anger, and to render them Capable of his mercies. 2 We
order and decree as an act of this Congregation, that a Declaration issue from
us letting the people know how vain it is for them to expect from the Common
Enemy commanded by Cromwell by authority from the Rebels of England, any
assurance of their Religion, Lives, or Fortunes. 3 We Order and decree as an
Act of this Congregation, that all Pastors and Preachers be enjoined to preach
amity. And for inducing the people thereunto to declare unto them the absolute
necessity that is for the same, and as the chief means to preserve the Nation
against the extirpation and destruction of their Religion and Fortunes resolved
on by the Enemy. And we hereby do manifest our detestation against al such
divisions between either Provinces or Families: or between old English and old
Irish, or any the English or Scots adhering to his Majesty. And we decree and
order that all Ecclesiastical persons fomenting such dissentions, or
unnatural divisions, be punished by their respective Prelates, and Superiors,
Juxta gravitatem excessus, and (si opus fuerit) suspendantur beneficiali and
Pastores a beneficio and officio ad certum tempus, Religiosi autem a Divinis
juxto circumstantias delicti. Leaving the Layty offending in this kind, to be
corrected by the Civil Magistrate, by Imprisonment, Fine, Banishment, or
otherwise, as to them shall seem best, for plucking by the root, so odious a
crime; the execution whereof we most earnestly recommend to all those having
power, and that are concerned therein, as they will answer to God for the
evils that thereout may ensue. 4 We Decree and Declare excommunicated, those
high way robbers commonly called the Idle Boys, that take away the goods of
honest men or force men to pay them Contribution, and we likewise declare
Excommunicated all such as succor or harbor them, or bestow or sell them any
victualing, or buy Cattle or any other thing else from them wittingly, Likewise
all Ecclesiastical persons ministering sacraments to such robbers, or Idle
boys; or burying them in holy grave, to be suspended ab officio and beneficio,
si quod habent, by their respective superiors juxta gravitatem delicti. This
our decree is to oblige within fifteen days after the publication thereof in
the respective Dioceses.


Signed by, Hugo Ardmachanus. Fr. Thomas Dublin. Thomas Casshel. Joan. Archiep.
Tuam. Fr. Boethius Elphyn. Fr. Edmundus Laghlinensis and Procurator
Waterfordiensis. Emerus Clogher, Robertus Corcagiensis and Cluanensis. Nicolaus
Fernensis. Edmundus Limericensis, and Procurator Episcopi Ossoriensis.
Franciscus Aladensis. Andreas Finiborensis. Joan. Laonensis. Fr. Oliverus
Dromorensis, Fr. Antonius Clonmacnosensis. Fr. Hugo Duacensis. Fr. Arthurus
Dunensis, and Connerensis. Fr. Terentius Imolacensis. Fr. Patric. Ardagh.
Oliverius Deis Procurator Episco. Medensis. Dr. Joannes Hussy Procurator
Episcop. Ardfertensis. Fr. Joannes Cantwell Abbas. S, Crucis Dr. Thadeus Clery
Episcop. Rapo. Procurator. Walterus Clonfertensis Congregationis Secretar.


By the Ecclesiastical Congregation of the Kingdom of Ireland.
WE the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries and Prelates of this
Kingdom of Ireland, having met at Clonmacnose proprio motu, on the fourth day
of December, in the year of our Lord God 1649. taking into our consideration
among other the affairs then agitated and determinated for the preservation of
the kingdom, that many of our flock are mislead by a vain opinion of hopes,
that the Commander in chief of the Rebels Forces, commonly called the
Parliamentaries, would afford them good conditions, and that relying thereon
they suffer utter destruction of Religion, lives, and fortunes, if not
prevented. To undeceive them in that their ungrounded expectation, we do hereby
declare as a most certain truth, that the Enemies resolution is, to extirpate
the Catholic religion, out of all his Majesty's Dominions, as by their
several Covenants does appear, and the practice wherever their power does
extend, as is manifested by Cromwels Letter of the 19 of October. 1649 to the
then Governor of Rosse. His words are: For that which you mention concerning
liberty of Religion, I meddle not with any man's Conscience, but if by liberty
of Conscience, you mean a liberty to exercise the mass, I judge it best to use
plain dealing, and to let you know, where the Parliament of England have
power, that will not be allowed of. This tyrannical resolution they have put
in execution in Wexford, Drogheda, Rosse and elsewhere. And it is notoriously
known, that by Acts of Parliament, called The Acts of Subscription, the Estates
of the Inhabitants of this kingdom are sold, so as there remains now no
more, but to put the purchasers in possession, by the power of Forces drawn out
of England. And for the common sort of people, toward whom if they show any
more moderate usage at the present, it is to no other end but for their private
advantage, and for the better support of their Army, intending at the close of
their conquest (if they can effect the same as God forbid) to root out the
Commons also, and plant this land with Colonies to be brought hither out of
England, as witness the number they have already sent hence for the Tobacco
Islands, and put enemies in their places.

And in effect this banishment or other destructions of the c^^mon people, must
follow the resolution of extirpating the Catholic Religion, which is not to
be effected without the massacring or banishment of the Catholic Inhabitants.

We cannot therefore in our duty to God, and in discharge of the care we are
obliged to have for the preservation of our flocks, but admonish them, not to
delude and loose themselves with the vain expectation of conditions to be had
from that merciless Enemy. And consequently we beseech the Gentry, and
Inhabitants, for Gods glory, and their own safety, to the uttermost of their
power, to contribute with patience, to the support of the War against that
Enemy, in hope that by the blessing of God, they may be rescued from the
threatened evils, and in time be permitted to serve God in their Native Country,
and enjoy their Estates, and fruits of their labors, free from such heavy
levies, or any other such taxes as they bear at present: Admonishing also
those that are inlisted of the Army, to prosecute constantly according to each
man's charge the trust reposed in them, the opposition of the Common Enemy, in
so just a War, as is that they have undertaken for their Religion, King, and
Country, as they expect the blessing of God to fall on their actions. And that
to avoid Gods heavy judgment, and the indignation of their Native Country,
they neither plunder nor oppress the people, nor suffer any under their
charge, to commit any extortion or oppression, so far as shall lie in their
power to prevent.

Signed by Hugo Ardmachanus. Fr. Thomas Dublin. Thomas Casshel. Joan Archiep.
Tuam. Fr. Boethius Elphyn. Fr. Edmundus Laghlinensis and Procurator
Waterfordiensis, Emerus Clogher, Robertus Corcagiensis and Cluanensis. Nicelaus
Fernensis. Edmundus Limericensis, and Procurator Episcopi O* Joriensis.
Franciscus Aladensis. Andreas Finiborensis. Joan. Laonensis. Fr. Oliverus
Dromorensis, Fr. Antonius Clonmacnosensis. Fr. Hugo Duacensis. Fr. Arthurus
Dunensis, and Connerensis. Fr. Terentius Imolacensis, Fr. Patric. Ardagh.
Oliverus Deis procurator Episco. Medensis. Dr. Joannes Hussy procurator
Episco. Ardfertensis. Fr. Joannes Cantwell Abbas. S. Crucis. Dr. Thadeus Clery
Episcop. Rapo. Procurator, Walterus Clonfertensis Congregationis Secretar.

Imprimatur,

Henry Scobel. Cler. Parliamenti.



FINIS.

