THE CHARGE OF THE Admirals of England.
Licensed according to Order.

AS England is Walled round with a Wall of Water, Her Defense of that Wall by
Her Floating Castles, Her Naval Strength and Management, is her greatest, if
not almost Her only Bulwarks and Rampants. This is most certain, as the British
Empire holds a twofold Regale, Her Scepter, and Her Trident; Her Dominion at
Land, and Her Sovereignty at Sea; so, that Maritine Principality being the
Frontiers and Out-lines of Her whole Power and Territories, and consequently
Her chiefest Strength, as being Her only Inlet; that Deputed Hand, that under
the Imperial Commission, has the Charge of Her Admiralty, has the highest Post
of Honor, and the most Important Trust that a Crowned Head can lodge in a
Subject. For, as no Attaque can be made upon England, without first gaining Her
Mastery of the Sea, the Preservation of that fairest of Her Crown-Jewels is,
and ought to be Her ablest Care and Industry.

This is notoriously manifest from the never-dying Fame of our Great Elizabeth,
where one entire Naval Triumph over Spain, was of more Advantage to this
Kingdom, and carried more Trophies along with it, than all the Battles and
Successes of a Third Edward, or a Fifth Henry, in the very Bowels of France.
For, to sum the whole Grandeur of that Greatest of Potentates, and best of
Queens; Her Sword-work at Land, though encompassed with Enemies, was nothing to
Her Thunder-work at Sea.

The Fortune of that single Stroke, attended with so great a Blow upon Spain,
and Her prudent Caution of suppressing the Maritine Growth of France, even
against their great Fourth Henry himself, in threatening to burn his Navy in
their Harbor for so much as attempting to build a Capital Ship of War, was of
that high Import to the English Grandeur; that had Her Politics been pursued,
and Her Advantages from that only Success been rightly improved by Her
Masculine, though (Heavens knows) more Effeminate Successors; England had held
the Scale of Europe to End of the World, and the present Greatness of France,
the now Terror of Christendom, had been wholly an impracticable Attempt and
Ambition.

But as the aforesaid Esteminacy of the succeeding Reigns, utterly neglected
that fortunate Occasion, and lost the happy Forelock; which had we held, we had
awed the whole World, and preserved the English Greatness, as immortal, as that
Princesses never-dying Memory, and has thereby so infinitely lessened our
Original British Luster: Nevertheless, it is not so late, even after all our
Losses, and former Mis-managements, to endeavor some part at least of so
necessary a Recovery. This Glory at least we have to boast, for our
Encouragement, That never more hardy Courage sat on the English Throne than
now. Nor a Prince, whose Endeavors and Zeal can be more strenuous, or more
indefatigable, for the Redemption of our too long falling Glory. Could all
Hands follow; but as this leads, both Fear and Despair would be far from our
Doors, and a new Dawn of Hopes surronnd us.

But to return to our Admiral's Cause: As the Sea is a Divisum Imperium, a
separate Sovereignty from that of the Land; and accordingly the Laws; by which
all Maritine Affairs are tried, are different from the common Law of the
Nation; So the Lord High Admiral of England's Commission, as so much different
from any other Command, constitutes him no less than a Viceroy; a Title above
any other Dignity, or Preferment whatever.

If the Honor of the Command it self be so Eminent and Illustrious, the
Faithful and Zealous Execution of it must be truly more Honorable and
Illustrious; for indeed it is only the Discharge of a Trust, and the Exertion of
Virtuous Actions, and Gallant Achievements, are the true Foundation of Renown
and Glory.

As the ever-memorable Drake has left a Name that will live as long Time it
self shall last; we may likewise add, That our latter Honorable Admiral Russel
has acquired as large a share of Fame, as true English Courage, rewarded with
Success and Victory, can well reach. And it is highly to be wished, that our
this present Years latter Expedition, in our Joint Commission of Admiralty,
could have met with as fair a Chapplet of Laurels. But if either any unsmiling
Providence above, or unhappier Conduct below, have denied us that Blessing;
it is our Misfortune, that so fair a Chian should ever be broken, and that such
Signal Happinesses should be other than the continued show'ring Favors of our
kind Stars.

But whether our this Years Unhappiness at Sea was Misfortune, or
Mis-management, is a Province above me; it is safficient, that Sub Judice lis
est. The Cause is depending before the Great Council of the Land, Our Patriots
in Parliament Assembled, whose Vigilance and Wisdom, as they have the
Inspection now before them; so their Hands have the Balance, and Scales, to do
Justice accordingly.

London, Printed for Tho. Batcheler, at Charing Cross, 1693.


