THE CASE OF THOMAS DAVISON.
THat Thomas Davison, Son and Heir apparent of William Davison Gent. about Five
years since became seized in Fee of the Manor of Langton Juxta Partney Com.
Lincoln, value 400 l. per Annum, as of the gift of his Father who reserved to
himself 140 l. a year for his life, and charged with a Jointure of 60 l. a year
to Rachel his Grandmother and an Annuity of 50 l. a year in Fee going out of it
to William Lister Esquire; and also charged with other Debts and Real encumbrances
of the said William the Father, amounting to 2000 l.

That the said Thomas Davison being so seized, and the Estate Charged as
aforesaid, did, upon a Marriage with Bridget, Daughter of Thomas Ely Gent. and
700 l. portion, settle the premises by Indenture Tripartite, and Fine Leavied
to the uses following (viz.) as to part of the Manor amounting to 200 l. a
year (but chargeable as aforesaid) to himself and the said Bridget for her
Jointure; and after their decease, as touching all the premises as well in
Possession as Reversion to the 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, and other Sons in
Tail, with provision for Daughters, failing Issue Male, the Remainder to his
own right Heirs.

That Thomas Davison finding the Estate so charged with his Fathers Debts,
contracted a further Debt, before and since the Marriage, of 1500 l. by
Judgments, etc. The whole Debt amounting to 3500 l. (pro ut Schedule) besides
the Rentcharge and precedent Estates aforesaid; by reason whereof, there is not
sufficient to pay the interest of the debts, much less to maintain the said
Thomas and Bridget, who have issue between them Thomas an Infant, in whom the
Estate-Tail is vested.

Whereupon, by advice and consent of friends of all sides, it was thought fit
that the Premises should be sold, and satisfaction being given to all parties
interested for their respective Estates and Debts, the remainder of the
purchase Money to be bestowed in Lands to the value of 200 l. per Annum to be
settled upon the Husband, Wise, and Infant, with Remainder in Tail pro ut in the
former settlement, which will yield a present subsistence to the Father and
Mother, and a better and more advantageous Estate to the Infant, than that he
now has, considering the former Charges.

That to the intent aforesaid, the friends have contracted with one Mr. Langton
for the sum of 7500 l. out of which there is agreed to be paid to Rachel for
her interest 300 l. to William the Father for his interest 700 l. for the said
Annuity in Fee 1000 l. to the several Creditors their respective Debts and
Damages; the residue of the Purchase-Money to be bestowed in the Manor of
Oxcomb, or other Lands in Com. Lincoln, to the value of 200 l. per Annum, and
to be settled as aforesaid.

Wherefore the Bill prays with the consent of all the friends and parties
interested, That it my be so Enacted, That the said Manor of Langton may be
vested in Trustees to be sold for the raising of the said Sum of 7500 l. to be
disposed of according to the said Agreement; notwithstanding the Uses limited
to the said Bridget, and the said Thomas the Infant, in and by the said
Indenture Tripartite.

A General saving of all Rights etc. other then, etc.


