The Case of the Widow and Children OF JOHN SAYER Esquire; Deceased, and WILLIAM
LIGHTFOOT, Gent. Relating their TITLE to the Manor of BIDSTONE, about to be
Impeached by a BILL brought in before the Lords in Parliament, in Order to be
passed into an Act for Restoring the Earl of Derby to the said Manor.
BY INDENTVRE primo Septembris, 1653. and FINE for Corroborating thereof, the
Right Honorable Charlotte, Countess Dowager of Derby, the present Earl's
Grandmother, and Charles Earl of Derby, and Dorothy Henene Countess of Derby,
the now Earl's Father and Mother, convey the said Manor of Bidstone, and
other Lands in the County Palatine of Chester, to William Steel, his Heirs and
Assigns, to the Use of him, his Heirs and Assigns for ever: But subject to the
Jointure of the said Countess Dowagers, secured by a Lease for ninety nine
Years to Trustees determinable upon her death, with Covenant, That the said
Manor and Premises were free from all other Encumbrances, and for enjoyment
and further assurance.

By Indenture the 25th. Septembris, 1655. the said Countess Dowager and her
Trustees Demise the said Manor and Premises to William Steel for ninety
eight years, if she should so long live, under the Rent of 300 l. per Annum,
clear of all Taxes or Payments; and Steel enters and enjoys accordingly, and
duly pays the said Rent.

In April 1662, William Steel in consideration of 6000 l. Sells and Conveys
the said Manor and Premises to John Lord Kingstone and his Heirs, but subject
to the said Rent of 300 l. per Annum; who likewise enters and enjoys, and pays
the said Rent during the Life of the said Countess Dowager.

The said Lord Kingstone Mortgages the same for 6000 l. and being in Possession
of the Premises by his Will, 9th. of March, 1675, devises to several Trustees
therein named, and their Heirs, all his Lands in England and Ireland in Trust,
to sell and dispose of such parts thereof as they should think fit, for Payment
of his Debts.

The Heir, Trustees, Executors, and Mortgages of the said Lord Kingstone, by
good Conveyances and Assurances in the LAW in the year 1680: In consideration
of 6260 l. in Money really and bona fide paid, and subject to a Judgment of
4000 l. Penalty from the Lord Kingstone to Sir Robert Vyner, not yet paid; Sell
and Convey the said Manor and Premises to the said William Lightfoot and John
Sayer, Deceased; under whose Will his Widow and Children now claim.

NOTE,
That in the Year 1662, Charles Earl of Derby, the Father of the present Earl,
endeavored to obtain an Act of Parliament to Restore him to the Manor of
Mould and Mouldsdale, Hope and Hopesdale, in the County of Flint, but never
attempted to be Restored to the Manor of Bidstone, or to Impeach the
Purchasors Title, when the Original Purchasor, Steel, was alive, and in
possession; but in December 1665, wrote a Letter to the said Lord Kingstone,
claiming his Promise, that he might be the Purchaser, or have the Praeemption
of the said Manor, in Case his Lordship parted with it.

But now after all this length of Time, there is a BILL brought in before the
Lords in Parliament, to destroy a Legal and undoubted. Title by Conveyances and
Assurances solemnly and duly executed; and by a New Law, to take away this
Estate from Purchasers who bought at a full vallue, and that too under a Devise
for Payment of Debts by the Will of the Lord Kingstone, who was likewise a
Purchaser himself for a full Consideration, and that without the least shadow
of Fraud or unfair Practice in either of the said Purchasers, who had not the
least reason to suspect that any such Matter would ever have been attempted,
the said Charles Earl of Derby acquiesing as to this Manor when Mr. Steel
had it in Possession, though he sought to be restored to other Mannours and
Lands: And yet by the said BILL the Original Conveyance is to be taken as a
Mortgage, and the Purchasers in Possession, who bought it but in 1680, and are
mere Strangers to the Transactions between William Steel and Charles Earl of
Derby, must account for the Profit of the Premises thirty two years back, and
loose the whole Consideration Money by them paid; unless they should chance to
save some part thereof, by proving that William Steel, to whom they are mere
Strangers, did two and thirty years ago pay a greater Consideration than the
Profit of the Premises from that time till this, will amount to Satisfy.


