THE CASE Of The KERRY QVIT-RENT 1681.
GENESIS, 47 Chap. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, v. 23, Then Joseph said unto the people,
Behold, I have bought you this day, and your Land, for Pharaoh, lo, here is
seed for you, and ye shall sow the Land.

24 And it shall come to pass in the increase, that you shall give the fifth
part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field and
for your food, and for them of your household, and for food for your little ones.

25 And they said, Thou have saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of
our Lord, and we will be Pharaohs servants.

26 And Joseph made it a Law over the Land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh
should have the fifth part; except the Land of the Priests only, which became
not Pharaohs.

27, And Israel dwelt in the Land of Egypt in the Country of Goshen; and they
had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied excedingly.

The Land was Pharahos, and the Men his slaves
Yet but One Fifth for Seed and all, he craves;
The Tenants throve and multiplied, so as
The Rate of Fifths a Law for long time was.
But two Fifths, without Seed, from the Owner's Soar,
It Is thrice as much, as Pharaoh took, and more;
Well; have We three Fifths left? Not One, We say;
Strange Rules took two, Mistakes the rest, away.
What if for three years, We have paid Nineteen?
In Egypt Never so od a Rule was seen:
Do'nt Pharaoh cruel; Nor the worst bondage, style
Egyptian; (...) in our Isle.
The CASE of the KERRY Quit-Rents. 1681.
COurts of Judicature are open to all comers, and Those who hear their
proceedings, are Judges, even of the Judges themselves. Now the persons
concerned in this Case have had the Judgment of so many Bystanders (whilst
their Cause was Arguing in the Exchequer.) That they are encouraged to expose
it in Print to the Judgment and Cognizance of the whole World. And have
together with their Case Printed an Afidavit also, which may serve as a
Juramentum Calumniae, Importing that they themselves think well of their own
pretensions and that what they contend for, is not a small or frivolous matter,
and may persuade the Reader, that the grounds whereupon they proceed, are not
only true, but that the dealings which they have had upon them are Wonderful.

They are not unmindful that to Print their Concernments is liable to many
dangers and Inconveniences; But believing that their Arguments are founded
upon Eternal Truths, not temporary Tricks, They hope that no Caprice,
Prejudice, Revenge, Surprise, sly Insinuation, Ridiculing of Right, pretense of
Intricacy, power of Factions, Envious disposition, nor other secret causes can
finally prevail against Laws founded upon common sense and reason; Wherefore,
and for that they expect their Adversaries will also be upon Oath, and in
Print, concerning this Matter, They venture out and say, that the Case of the
Kerry Quit-Rents consists of these principal points or questions viz.

THere is a Survey, wherein the Quantity of profitable Lands is set forth in
two several Columns. The one commonly called the Extreme Collumn. And the
other, the Reduced Collumn.

Now the Question is, By which of these two Collumns the Kings Quit-Rent ought
to be charged and paid?

2 Whereas the Plaintiffs have enjoyed the Lands set out to them, scarce three
years of 21 years and a half, and the Kings Ministers have disposed of them for
the rest of the time. The question is, whether by the intention of the Clause
in the 37th. page of the Explanatory Act, (which is to encourage Plantation)
the Quit-Rents be not fully satisfied, which Collumn soever be the Legal
Measure, or what money soever be the true Value of the Lands; so as the
Plaintiffs at the end of the said 21 years and a half, might justly be
restored, or rather admitted to the possession of their Lands?

Many who have been acquainted with these Questions, need not to have them
explained, But the rest of the World (for we address to the whole World) must;
Wherefore we say as follows to the first, viz.

1. That Soldiers (whose Lots fell in Munster) were for satisfaction of their
service, To have Lands at 9. shillings. the Acre, at a time when Lands were not
worth 7 years purchase, (Though we shall reckon them here at ten:) So as the
Lands must be worth about ten pence three farthings per Acre, to make such a
satisfaction; and because about 3 pence three farthings must be paid out of it
as an yearly Quit: Rent to the King, The Lands must be worth 14 pence half penny
the Acre, or otherwise it will not be satisfactory or profitable in the sense
of the Law.

2. In some parts of Munster, much Lands were wholly unprofitable (as Logh,
being no Land at all, Rock, upon which no grass Grew; Bogg, on which the
little that grew, was inaccessible but in some few months of the year. And in
this same Country, few Lands were worth above 2 s. 6 d. the Acre before the
Wars (when they were, and might be peopled and enjoyed and Anno 1655 when the
same was Surveyed not thereof) So as almost the whole County consisted of Lands
dubiously, confusedly and intermixed profitable, worth before the Wars between 1
d. and the said 2 s. 6 d. per Acre; The Medium whereof is about 15 pence half
penny as the value of indiferent good pasture Lands, and no Ill Standard and
Measure of profitable Lands, in Order to a competent satifaction of the
Soldiers.

3 In Order to this Survey, an Instruction was given, Printed and published
Anno 1654. for distinguishing between profitable and unprofitable in these
words.

You are to distinguish by admeasurement, the profitable, from the
unprofitable, or return by good Estimate, the Aliquot part of the same, in case
the One lies dubious, and confused (Or in very many, and very small spots)
among the other. The meaning whereof was, That if the distinction or bounds
between profitable and unprofitable were very plain and clear, that the
distinguishment should be made by Lines, to be Geometrically admeasured and
described; But where a parcel of Land containing in Geometrical content,
(suppose) 100 Acres had no more Tussocks of Pasturable grass growing within
its whole circumference, then were equal to 25 Acres; Or if the whole 100
Acrers, were accessible for Cattle, but 3 months in the year; or if but one
quarter of the grass were good food, and the rest useless weeds, or that 4
Acres thereof were worth but one Acre of the worst Arable in the same parish or
Barony; or about 15 d. per an: We say, that the meaning of the said Instruction
was, that the Surveyors should by good Estimate return the Aliquot part, by
saying (as in this Instance) that the said Parcel of Land did contain 100
Acres, whereof one quarter was profitable, or indifferent pasture, or (which is
all one) whereof 4 Acres are Equivalent to one of profitable, or indifferent
good pasture or course Arable, or whereof 4 Acres are worth about 15 d. the
intended value of one satisfactory Acre.

4 In pursuance and according to this Instruction, the Surveyors have returned
Books in these several forms folloing viz.

IN KERRY Down Survey.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Numb: in the Plot, Proprietors Names, Denominations of Lands,
Number of Acres by admeasurement, Lands Profitable, Lands Unprofitable, The
Value of Course Pasture showing how many Acres is worth one of good Pasture,
The Profitable reduced according to the value, or deduction being made
according to the Value, Brosna, 40, 40 -- -- 40, Killen, 50, 40, 10 -- -- 40,
Rossan, 120, 120, -- -- 6 -- 20,

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Num-ber in the Plot, Proprietors Names, Denominations of Lands,
Number of Acres by Admeasurement and the quality of the Lands part-Profitable,
Acres equal to one in value, Lands Profitable Lands Unprofitable, Brosna, 40 --
40, -- Killen, 50 -- 40, 10, Rossan, 120 -- 6 -- 20, --

And in Tirawly Down Survey.
1 2 3 4 5 6 Number of Reference, Proprietors Names, Denominations, Total
Content, Profitable, Unprofitable Brosna, -- 40, 40, -- Killen, -- 50, 40, 10,
Rossan, -- 120 20, 100, Profitable

And in Straffords Survey of Conaught and Clare made before the Wars.
1 2 3 4 5 6 Number, Proprietors Names, Denominations, Profitable, Mixed, Wast,
Brosna -- 40, -- -- Killen, -- 40, -- 10, 0, 00, Rossan, -- 120, 0, 00, --
Profitable

All which Down Surveys were delivered into the Surveyor Generals Office in
manner and form aforesaid, after many sorts of previous examinations, and after
the Bonds for making the said Survey were delivered up and cancelled anno 1657.
and before the Lands in question were set out, (which were set out by the
reduced Collumn,) and the said Surveys and distributions were confirmed by
pages 31, and 33 of the Act of Settlement; But most of all by pages 9 and 10.
As also by pages 21, 22 and 23 of the Explanatory Act, even with all their
faults, if any were in the same.

5 After this Survey was so Recorded, 5 certain parishes in Munster were given
out in satisfaction of 9295 l. at the Act rates of 450 l. per Thousand Acres;
which said parishes do contain 21000. Acres by the reduced Collumn, and do just
answer the said debt, but contain 138 thousand Acres of Lands dubiously and
confusedly profitable, by the extreme Collumn; which Number pays it near 7
times over, and the Civil-Survey (made by the Oaths of the most experienced
Inhabitants of the place, by a Jury and before sworn Commissioners; returned
the same Lands to contain 20700 Acres, which the Reduced Collumn of the Down
Survey makes 21000 Acres as aforesaid; and is more then the Civil Survey,
(which is also approved by the Act,) does make it.

6. Upon some Mistake of charging Quit-rents (by unexperienced persons soon
after His Majesty's Restoration) according to the Extreme Collumn; His Majesty
anno 1662, rectifies the same by bringing down His Quit-rent, to the Reduced
Collumn. The Court of Exchequer anno 1663/4 do the same by 2 formal Judgments.
The Lord Lieutenant and Council did also Report unto, and advise His Majesty to
have the said Reduced Collumn Juditially established. And two of the present
Judges of the Exchequer and several other Judges ( anno 1677. upon their
Settlement of Conaught) charged Quit-rents only upon the Aliquot part
profitable; And the Kings Attorney General in 4 Replications to the Plaintiffs
Plea, has confessed; That the Extreme Collumn, (though in some places
entitled Profitable) contains Lands but dubie and. Confuse utiles and that the
Reduced Collumn contains the number of Acres satisfactory; and is the Method of
the Down Survey.

Moreover, not only several parts of the Survey Books do expound one another,
but the Authors of the said Survey (besides their former Oaths) have (viva
voce) in open Court Sworn the Intension of the said Survey to be as aforesaid.

8 It is to be further Noted as follows viz.

1. That the aforementioned 21000 Reduced Acres of the said 5 parishes are
returned by the Civil Survey to have been worth before the Wars 1232 l. 18 s. 6
d. which is just 14 d. the Acre. Out of which 3 d. Quit-Rent must be paid. Now
some of the Reduced Acres, are compounded of 40 Geometrical Acres standing in
the extreme Collumn: But to charge the said 40 Acres (worth but 14 d.) with 40
times 3 d. or 12 s. 6 d. Quit-Rent, is absurd and impossible, especially when
according to the common Level of the whole Nation, the Quit-Rent of such Lands
would be under 2 d.

2. The Adventurers had the best Lands in Ireland allotted to their
satisfaction, and yet one quarter thereof, is returned for absolutely
unprofitable, and chargeable with no Quit-Rent at all: But here, scarce 1/40
part is returned for absolutely unprofitable, which shows, That the
unprofitable does stand in the Extreme Collumn, intermixed with the Dubie and
confuse Vtiles, as the Attorney General and the Printed Instruction call them.

3 In the Books of Corcaguiny, The Extreme Collumn (which is in some other
places entitled Profitable though in the sense aforesaid) is entitled Part
Profitable and the Reduced Collumn has no other Title then Profitable In this
Barony there are no pasted Labells; Nor has Sir Wm: Petty or Rob Marshall any
interest in the same? Nor is the Collumn of total contents (being the same
with the 4th Collumn in other places) at all expressed: so as in this Barony,
The reduced Collumn is most indisputably and literally meant and expressed for
the profitable measure, and this Barony Was returned upon the same
Instructions, and by the same hands as the rest were. The Maps in both, are a
like, though the form of the Collumes do differ, and in both places, the
diference between the contents of both Collumnes, is thus expressed viz. [Acres
to be deducted to make the other Profitable] Which is the same as to say,
[Acres to be deducted out of the extreme Collumn, to make the Acres of the
Reduced Collumn; profitable] So as the Title Profitable in the extreme is, and
must be interpreted by the 7th Collumn of values or Aliquot parts, which is an
Integral part of the Down Survey, and can signify nothing else. Thus the 5th
Collumn may as well be called Profitable as a stack of Corn may be called Corn:
Besides, there stand many parcels in the said extreme Collumn, which in Truth
are wholly and absolutely Profitable, and never reduced to a lesser Number in
the subjoyned Collumns, as has been rashly and vainly alleged. Now these
parcells wholly profitable, and all the rest being part profitable, had, (upon
good consideration) the Title of profitable put over them; Because the Collumns
imediately adjoined, as also the Maps, Abstracts, Instructions, Values and
Corcaguiny, besides the Surveyors themselves, did all expound and limit the
same in that sense which all Unbyassed partys have still understood and
adjudged it, The Other meaning being absurd and Naturally impossible. And even
the Court of Claims did allow 54000 Acres of Lands profitable according to the
extreme Collumn in satisfactision of 2551 l. which is 9 times more then was due
at the Act rates of 450 l. per thousand Acres.

Objections to the Premissies.
ALTHOUGH the Lands in question were set out by the Reduced Collumn, as
aforesaid and no alteration or correction was made thereof by page 33 of the
Act of Settlement. Though the King and Government allowed the Reduced Collumn
anno 1662. and 2 Judgments passed for it anno 1663/4 though the Court of
Claims allowed 54000 Acres by the extreme Collumn to pass in satisfaction of
2551 l. debt, Though the Lord Lieutenant and Council represented to the King
the Inconveniences of the extreme Collumn anno 1670. and though the present
Chancellor and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, together with the Lord chief
Justice Booth and Sir Richard Reynell charged all quitrents in Conaught Anno
1677 upon the aliquot part and not the extreme measure; yet John Marshall was
advised to plead Anno 1678, To which the Attorney General Replied in behalf of
the reduced Collumn once, twice, thrice and a fourth time, and the late farmers
(designing to gain 30000 l. by the extreme Collumn,) did, after 2 years
sinister machinations, upon the 20 January 1680, object as follows.

Viz.

object. 1. That the Column of aliquot parts or values and the reduced Collumn,
were sinisterly pasted on to the Books of the Survey, since their being put
into the Office.

Answer. The contrary was proved by those who made them, and the view of the
Books does show the same to be Impossible, and where the reduced Collumn is
cleerest, There are no pasted Labells at all.

Object. 2. The latter Branch of the Printed Instruction, was not Intended for
distinguishing Profitable from Unprofitable, and therefore did not Warrant the
distinguishment as it stands in the Reduced Collumn.

Answer. The Surveyors Swore they understood it so, and Acted accordingly, and
their work was admitted after special debates there upon; Besides the words of
the Instructions explain themselves.

Object. 3. That the said Latter Branch was only to exempt the Surveyors from
measuring small parcells otherwise then by Estimate.

Answer. Their First Instruction Oblidged them to measure the smallest
parcells, of Forfietd Lands; and their Books are full of parcells under ten
Acres, and some of under an Acre, are returned by their Quantity, Figure and
Situation, and not by Estimate.

Object. 4. That the Instruction (if it were intended for distinguishment of
Profitable from Unprofitable) was not pursued: But instead of such
Distinguishment, There was only a Par made between the best and all other
Lands, by seting forth how many Acres of the latter, was worth one of the
first, or best.

Answer. The Fact is denied, for the Par, was between doubtful intermixed Lands
and indifferent Good Pasture, or the Course Arrable of the place, which is the
same as Profitable: so as the Reduced Acre (though composed of 40. Acres) was
worth but about 14 pence before the War (as appears by Record) and Let Anno
1678 for less, by the late and present Farmers.

Object. 5. The Surveyors had no Standard whereby to make this Par and
therefore the same is a mere Whimsey, and void.

Answer. 1. They had a better Standard for this distinction between profitable
and unprofitable, then they had for doing it by Lines.

2. They had the value before the Wars, and the advice of the most experienced
men of the Country, In so much as they did not differ from the civil Survey
(allowed by the Act) above 500 in 21000 Acres.

Object. 6. They did not return how mmay Acres of course Land was worth One of
Profitable, but of Pasture, and so varied from their Instructions.

Answer. In Straffords Survey, Pasturable and Profitable was taken for the same
thing: (most Lands being Profitable but as they are Pasturable) for what is
termed Pasture in the Collumnes, is called Profitable upon the Maps of
Straffords Survey, as it also is on the Kerry Survey.

Object. 7. The Instructions require the returning of the aliquot part, But the
Survey Mentions no Aliquot part, But how many Acres of course is worth one of
Good, or the like.

Answer. It Is The same thing to say That the Lands A, are One Quarter
Profitable, or Pasturable, as to say, That 4 Acres of A, being course Dubious
intermixed Lands, are worth One of indiferent good Pasture, viz. such as was
worth 14. d. the Acre before the Wars.

Object. 8. The 4th Collumn (which is the total content) seems to be the
extreme Collumn, and the 5th, (now called the extreme) to be the reduced
Collumn, and the 8th. (now called The Reduced Collumn) to be an Unreasonable
Reducement upon a Reducement.

Answer. 1. The total of 2, or more Numbers, is never called the Extreme of
such Numbers, Nor is the part of a total, ever Termed, the Reducement thereof.
2. No Lands entirely Profitable (standing in the 5th Collumn) was reduced in
the 8th. but were the same in both. Lastly, In some Baronies, the 4th. Collumn
is wholely omitted, being only the Result of other Collumns, and put in for
Conveniencie only.

Object. 9. The 5th, or Extreme Column has for Title the Word [Profitable] in
most Places.

Answer. In that Title the word Profitable must be understood dubious intermixed
Profitable made clear and neat Profitable by the 7th. Column, and set off in
the 8th. Collumn, As a Stack of Corn is called Corn, though mixed with straw and
Chaff; but the same being Winnowed by the 7th. Collumn, The 8th Collumn does
contain the Corn in the sack, or fit for use, so as the 5th, 7th, and 8th
Collumns, are as three Syllables of the same word? Nor can either of them be
used alone or a part.

2. The Surveyors have sworn this to be their meaning in their Returns, The
Books themselves show it, but the Maps and abstracts more expressly, Besides;
in the Barony of Corcaguiny, The extreme Collumn has for Title [part
Profitable,] and the Reduced Collumn has for Title [Profitable] and this
Barony was Surveyed by the same hands upon the same Instructions with the rest.
Moreover, The Maps are alike, even where the Titles differ; and the words
[Acres to be deducted to make the other Profitable] are in both Forms? Nor were
the Surveyors limited to the method of their Collumns, and the variety of their
wording does best prove the unity and Identity of their meaning.

Object. 10. These Aliquot parts or values, are no where but in Kerry? nor
there, but where Petty and Marshal are concerned.

Answer. ^ The Aliquot parts (or Reduced Collumn which is the same thing) are
in 4 Baronys of Kerry where Petty and Marshall are not at all concerned, Nor
have they any interest in Tirawly nor in the rest of Conaught or Clare.

The aliquot parts are also in the Down Survey of Tyrawly and every where in
Conaught and Clare; And although these three Surveys are represented in three
several Forms, Yet in Substance, and in their Maps, They are all One, and the
very several Forms are Convertible each into the other

Object. 11. That the Law says the Profitable Acre ought to consist of 160.
Perches, but by admitting the Reduced Collumn, the said Acre may contain 2000.
or more Perches.

Answer. If in a Surround of 2000. Perches, the Tussocks and spots of Pasture,
amount but to 160. Perches, Then the Whole Surround is but one Acre Moreover,
notwithstanding this Law, 5000. Perches, were charged but as one Acre in
Conaught by the present Judges of the Exchequer, and other. Judges also, in the
year 1677. upon the Settlement of Conaught.

Object. 12. 1 Those that set out Lands Anno 1655.

2. Those who charged Quitrents Anno 1661.

3. And the Court of Claims, did all take the extreme Collumn for the legal
content.

4. And Dr. Petty was paid for Measuring according to the same.

5. Nay, those who had judgments for the Reduced Collumn did afterward quit
them, and submit to the extreme, without Reluctance.

Answer. These 5. Objections are briefly answered thus.

1. Those who set out Lands by the Extreme Collumn did it,

1. Before the Survey was settled, and without Order. 2. By private Agreements,
not public Authority. 3. In a way (by depressing the Act Rates) which was
Equivalent to the doing of it by the Reduced Collumn, and according to what was
then a Law.
2. As to charging Quitrents by the Extreme Collumn, It was done by unskilful
persons most erroniously, and soon after corrected by the King, and Chief
Governors of Ireland, and by two Judgments of the Court of Exchequer. And all
this, before the Down Survey or Quitrent was confirmed by the Acts.

3. What the Court of Claims seemed to do, was done by their Sub-Commissioners
who Acted by books which had not the said 2 Collumns in them, who were under a
Byas of Acrage, and what they did of this kind in the Lord Dillons decree, was
afterward corrected by the Exchequer.

Moreover, the Court of Claims themselves allowed 54000 Acres in satisfaction
of of 2551 l. debt, whereas less then 6000. Acres answers the same.

4. That Dr. Petty was paid by the Extreme Collumn, is a matter uncertain and
full of questions: But if he were not, he ought to have been so paid by the
Extreme Collumn for that his Contract bears it, and because he ought to have
rather more then less wages, for measuring of Bogs, Rocks, Shrubs and Loghs,
and for making of extraordinary Collumns and Estimates, then for Measuring of
plain and pleasant places.

5. Those who quitted the Judgments which they had for the Reduced Collumne,
did it for far greater Advantages- And those who suffered them so to do, and to
Retrench by the Extreme Collumn (to the great damage of the common stock) may
at some time or other be questioned for it. For all these Transactions were
made truly Subsilentio; And whether they be good or not, must be lest to the
Law.

Another sort of Objections.
Object. It Is Dangerous to alter what the Court of Claims have once done and
Executed.

Answer. The charge of Quitrent made by the said Court was Judicially altered
in the Lord Dillons Case, being the very same with this? 2, This Act of the
Court of Claims was but Ministerial.

3. They were [though worthy men] both Judges and parties in this matter.

4. They held forth an Easier Quitrent viz That of an half penny per Acre by the
extreme Collumn; so as Marshalls Lands in Dunkeron (which are chargeable with
103 l. by the Reduced Collumn) would at an half penny per Acre by the extreme
Collumn, come but to 74 l. which sum stands still in their Certificate.

5. Moreover the Earl of Essex his Reducement did supersead what the Court of
Claims had done; 6. Besides they Acted by defective Copies of the Down Survey,
in Which the Reduced Collumn was wholely omitted.

Object 2. That the Earl of Essex had moderated these Quitrents from 492 l. to
148 l. per annum, and that his Certificate [taken out thereupon] was an Estopel
to the Pleadant's claiming the Reduced Collumn.

Answer. 1. The Lawyers have by Book-Cases shown, that the mention of an
Estopel, is not only Odious but in this Case Illegal, and dishonorable to the
King.

2. It was never pleaded to be an Estopel in the Attorney Generals four
Replications, and that it is too late to plead it now.

Lastly, The Earl of Essex his Certificate was not to take Effect, till Letters
Patents were accepted upon it, which was never done, because the said
Certificate had many things in it, which [in respect to those who made it]
shall not be mentioned? Nor had the Earl of Essex etc. any intention or
authority to raise Quitrent above the Law, But to abate them so much below the
Law, as might encourage Plantation.

Object. 3. Although the Attorney General has confessed that the Reduced
Collumn is an integral part of the Down Survey and made upon the Printed
Instructions, that the Method of this Survey, is the Rule for satisfing the
Soldiers and charging Quitrents, That the Lands in the Extreme Collumn are but
dubie and confuse Utiles, That the Lands in the plea were set out by the
Reduced Collumn, That the Conaught Survey is the same as in Kerry, and that the
Charging of Quitrents there, is the same as is demanded here etc.

It was said, That his Confession (though so often and deliberately reveiwed)
was of little weight.

Answer. The Law Books show, that in Matters of fact, his Confession binds the
Court, for otherwise his Confession was of lesser force then that of the
meanest Attornyes which binds his Clyent; Besides, the Fact confessed; was
all proved over again before the Court.

A Third sort of Objections, were Answers to what Marshal had pleaded viz.
Object. 1. THat the 2 Judgments of the Exchequer in behalf of the Reduced
Collumn, passed Subsilentio and were afterwords declined.

Answer 1. They were exposed to all persons concerned.

2. The Record publicly read in Court.

3. They were grounded upon Certificates of the surveyor General and the oath
of the particular surveyor.

4. The King, the Lords Justices, Lord Lieutenant and several Judges and privy
counselors allowed the same and the like things; moreover the said Judgments
were declined subsilentio for sinister ends, and for greater advantages but
never Judicially or otherwise nulled to this day. Lastly, it apears not how
little, or how much that Strepitus must be, which the Law calls Silentium.

Object. 2. That though 54000. Acres seem to have been set out for 2551 l.
which sum requires but 5668 Acres at the Act Rates of 450 l. per thousand
Acres in Munster, Yet in truth 5668 Acres were only set out in satisfaction of
the said debt, and that the rest [being above 48000. Acres] were cast in for
satisfaction of Encumbrances and Chiefryes wherewith the Lands were charged.

Answer. It is strange That the Encumbrances were 8 times more then the Value
of the Land? or that 5668 Acres of clear Lands could not have been found
amongst the 54000 Acres inserted into the Certificate of the Court of Claims;
besides such a way of proceeding is without precedent, as well as without
Reason.

Object. 3. That although the Lord Lieutenant and Council upon report of the
Committee of the Council, (by Instruments signed by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord
Chancelllor, Lord Chief Justice, Lord Chief Baron and many others) had
recommended the Reduced Collumn to be Judicially confirmed, (as it had formerly
been) That the extreme Measure had been a loss to the King, and would entitle
the Farmers to Defalcations etc. Yet the King had done nothing upon it

Answer. The King (by his several Letters since) has pressed the Consideration
and Settlement of the Reduced Collumn; and this plea it self was filed upon an
Order of the Lord Lieutenant and Council in Trinity Term 1678, grounded upon
his Majesty's said Letters, and after the Earl of Essex his Reducement to 148
l. had been made.

Object. 4. That the Conaught Survey was not like the Kerry Survey, and that if
the Late Commissioners for the settling of Conaught had charged Quitrents only
upon the Aliquot part, and not the extreme content, It did not concern the
Pleadant to take notice of it.

Answer. 1. The Kerry and the Conaught Surveyes are the same in substance and
in their Maps, though they do differ only in the form of their Books of
Reference.

2, The Reason of charging Quitrents in Conaught by the Aliquot part, is far
less, and less Warrantable then in Kerry, and those transactions are produced
by the Pleadant as precedents a fortiori; for that the Reduced Acres of
Conought, are of Triple value to those in Kerry; And for that the present
Chancellor, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, were Judges and
Commissioners with the Lord Chief Justice Booth, and Sir Richard Reynel for
Conaught: so as these Transactions were also pleaded as Arguments ad hominem as
well as ad rem.

As to the other Chief Question, viz.
WHether, according to the true meaning of the Clause in the 37th Page of the
Explanatory Act (Which appoints, That the legal Quitrents shall be so Moderated
as to encourage Plantation) That for scarce three years enjoyment of the
Premises, The Kings Ministers shall dispose of them the remainder of 21 years
and a half, and (We might add) give the profits of them to those who never had
any right thereunto, and who have Grosely contemned and Violated the Orders of
Court made concerning the same?

As to this question, We shall only leave the Reader to an afidavit made the
25th of July 1681, before the Lord Chief Baron and hereunto annexed, until
further proceedings shall call for a larger discourse both upon this, and the
former question also? Only Noting for the present, That out of the said
Afidavit, there do arise the following Arguments for discharging of the said
Lands from all Seisures Custodiums etc. viz.

1, Arg. It is most certain that the King has had these Lands by seizure and
Custodium from Easter 1675 to Michaelmas 1681, which is 6 years and a half, and
that the Grantees never meddled with them in any measure, but between Michaelmas
1668 and Easter 1675, Which is also 6 years and a half: so as by the severest
Rules that ever were conceived, the King was never to have one half of the
Profits for his Quitrent, as (in this Case) he has had.

2, Arg It is certain, That (besides the said 6, years and a half from 1675 to
1681.) the King and others (under him) did also possess the premises from
Easter (1660 to Michaelmas 1668, which is 8 years and a half more, making in
all 15 years, which is certainly sufficient to pay the Quitrent for 6 years
and a half,

3 Arg. of the 6 years and a half (hitherto supposed to have been enjoyed by
the Grantees) It will appear, That not 3 years of the said 6 years and a half,
has been so enjoyed by them, viz.

1, By Reason of Levari's and Seisures happening within the said 6 years and a
half.

2, By the Usurpation of certain persons called REFRACTORIES.

3, By the frequent and cruel distrainings of the late Farmers for what was
neither due nor possible to be paid.

4. For that the 2392 l. (acknowledged to have been recieved) is not full 3
years Rent according to the Leases by which the Grantees did, or might have
let the same, if they might have been quiet.

Wherefore 3 years and a half of the said 6 years and a half, was held by the
King and those who directly or indirectly made use of his Name; so as the said
3 years and a half added to the last mentioned 15 years, makes 18 years and a
hlaf, and is a sufficient quitrent for the other 3 years,

4, Arg. The said 2392 l. is not 2 years and a halfs Rent according to the
present Custodium Rent of 1120 l. per annum; so as the Question now is, whether
19 years be a sufficient Quitrent for 2 years and a half?

5, Arg. The said 2392 l. is not One year and a halfs Rent, at the Rate of 1830
l. per annum: which the Farmers have certified the Lands, which yielded the
said Money, to be worth; so as the last Question? is, whether 20 years, be not
a sufficient quitrent for one year and a half, Whereas by the Earl of Essex his
most severe Rule, one year should suffice for that purpose: so as the other
years (all quitrents being discharged,) together with the value of the said
Woods) is to be accounted for, to the Grantees:

6 Arg. Moreover, although the Earl of Essex and the other Commissioners made
a Rule, That parts should be given to the King for Quitrent, (against which,
there are many weighty Objections) yet even according to that Severe Rule it
self, The King was paid his quitrents by Anticipation, even in that proportion
up to Easter 1681 by the first 8 years and a half; for that 8 years and a
half, is the of 21 years; and a quarter; But It will rather appear, That the
King had these Lands ten years before the Grantees had any profit at all out of
them, and consequently was paid up till the year 1685; and moreover that he had
held them the Equivalent of 15 years, when the Grantees had held them but
three years before the Custodium was granted Anno 1678; And also that the said
Custodium was granted after his Majesty (by the advice of the Earl of Essex
himself and Lord high Treasurer of England, in his Letters of the 28th of April
1676 and the 8th of December 1677) had directed the contrary.

These 6 Arguments (rising gradually one above another) We hope, will be as
Easy stairs by which the Lamest understanding may get up to the Top of this
Truth; to wit, That the said Lands ought now, to be (and long since to have
been) discharged from all seisures, Custodiums etc. even according to the
severest Rules that ever were made in pursuance of the said Clause in the 37th
Page of the Explanatory Act; But much more, according to the Rates made by the
Lord Lieutenant and Council, and according to the dictates of common sense and
Reason, and the common Rule of the whole Kingdom, For if but one year in 8, or
if but part of the Profits be generally given to His Majesty for Quitrnet
throughout the whole Nation; then It is wonderful, That above 18 years
disposure of the premises should not have satisfied the Kings-quitrents for the
Grantees enjoyment of the same but 3 years only, As the Subsequent Afidavit
Imports.

The Affidavit made before the Lord Chief Barron Hene.

