A Caveat against General Indemnity. OR, Reasons why the Patentee
Commissioners and Farmers of Beer and Ale, etc. Within the Cities of London and
Westminster, etc. and the Subcommissioners and Farmers of Beer and Ale, in the
several Counties of England, Scotland, and Ireland, should not be comprehended
in the general Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, humbly offered to the High and
Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT.
1. BEcause it will not stand with Parliamentary Justice, to grant them
Indemnity, etc. before the Petition of the Master and Wardens of the Company
of Brewers of London; (now lying before this Honorable Parliament) be read,
and in that, the cause of all the Brewers, Inkeepers, and Victuallers within
these Nations be heard, qui statuit aliquid, part in audita altera, aequum
licet statuerit, hand aequus fuerit.

2. Because the Farmers these two years last past, have under the pretense of
advancing the late Protectors Revenues; robbed the good people of this Nation
of above one Million of pounds Sterling, of which they have not paid above one
moiety into the public treasury, so that by this general Act of Oblivion: The
Commonwealth will lose near 300000l Sterling, whereby the burdens will lie
the heavier upon those who have been impoverished by bearing of them already.

3. Because by the oppressions, rapines, and cruelties of these Farmers; (as
was lately made appear before a Committee of the late Parliament so called;
whereof M. Scott, was Chairman, and several other persons of worth and
honor, of this honorable Parliament were members) most of the Brewers have
been impoverished, some utterly ruined, and others enforced to give over their
trade; So that it did appear to most of the members of that Committee, that the
tender mercies of these wicked men were cruel. How then can such men be
capable of an Act of grace, mercy, and Indemnity, when as the Scripture says,
Jam. 2.13. He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy.

4. Because these men, having gained very great Estates by the ruins of
others, ought to make restitution to those poor people whom they have robbed of
200000l by their wicked and unjust Gage. And by their returning of small Beer
for strong, and by Gaging worts boiling in the Copper, and hot in the Backs,
the which they are not obliged to do, if they are comprehended in the general
Act of Indemnity and Oblivion. So that your selves likewise will be accessory
to the peoples ruin, and be partakers of these men sins, and Act contrary to
the command of God, Isai. 1.17. Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve or
righten the oppressed, judge therfatherless, plead for the widow.

5. Because to grant these men an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, is not to
assert the Good Old Cause; One part of which is to bring Capital Delinquents,
to condign punishment, and to vindicate the liberties and properties of the
people: against all arbitrariness, oppression, and tyranny of any single person
whatsoever. Their Court, Parasits, Agents, or Instruments.

Dabit Deus his quoque Finem.
Psalm. 12.5. For the Oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy: Now
will I arise says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that would
ensuare him.

