The CASE of the EARL of MACCLESFIELD, against Mr. John Starkey, who while he
served as a Jury-Man, published a malicious Libel against the said Earl and
others, contrary to Law, and all Pretense of Color from the Office of Jury-Man.
Mr. STARKEY and others of the Grand Jury at Chester, Mich. 1683, subscribed
and published a form of a Presentment in Paper, brought them ready drawn by
five of their Fellows, in the Words following.
WE the Grand Jury sworn to enquire for the Body of the County of Chester at
the Assizes held in the Common Hall of Pleas in the Castle of Chester, upon
Monday the 17th Day of September, in the 35th Year of his now Majesty's Reign,
and in the Year of our Lord, 1683, having heard his Majesty's Declaration to
all his loving Subjects, concerning the treasonable Conspiracy against his
sacred Person and Government, lately discovered, openly read to us in Sessions
by order of the Court, as well as in our respective Parish-Churches by Royal
Command, and seriously considering the Extensiveness of the said Conspiracy,
and dreadful Consequences thereof, had it taken effect, since Notions of
Sedition and Rebellion have been cultivated to such an amazing Height, that
some have not only dared to draw them into Practice in their Lives, but to
propagate them with their latest Breath, by devilish Insinuations of their
Consistence with Religion and Law. We conceive it high time to manifest our
Separation from such Persons and Principles, their Favorers and Abettors with
the Detestation of that dreadful Climax, the Bill of Exclusion, treasonous
Association, Ignoramus Juries, and seducing Perambulations, by which the
Accomplices advanced toward their intended Assassination and Massacre, which
barbarous Design it cannot be imagined that forty, or the Council of any six
durst undertake without confident Reliance on Confederate Auxiliaries; and not
knowing the Latitude of such dire Combinations, but heedful to our present
Charge and Duty, with the indispensable Obligations the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy lay upon all; We hold our selves bound in this distempered Juncture
of Affairs, to present that we have strong Apprehensions of Danger from a
dissatisfied Party in this County, who not only showed their Defection openly
by an Address made to Henry Booth Esquire; and Sir Robert Cotton Knight and
Baronet, at the last Election of Knights of the Shire, tending to alter the
Succession of the Crown, with other dangerous and seditious Purports, giving
Assurance of standing by them in that Design without respecting their Oath of
Allegiance to the King and his Heirs, but also by their several Meetings and
Cabals since, which administer greater Suspicion from the store of Arms many of
them were provided with, and for that the same Persons unanimously assembled
with Schismatics, and disaffected in the public Reception of James Duke of
Monmouth, who has appeared a prime Confederate in the late treasonable
Conspiracy, the Concourse of armed Persons then attending him, especially in
and near several populous Towns in this County, where they invited and
instigated the Rabble in a broad Mixture of various Sectaries with superfluous
Joy and popular Noise tumulted on that occasion, has had an evil Influence on
this yet unsettled County, and brought a Terror upon his Majesty's good and
peaceable Subjects. For Remedy whereof, with Relation to the public Peace,
and, to prevent as far as in us lies, the spreading of such Contagion, as also
to wash our Hands from all Misprision by concealing Proceedings that may
encourage greater Evils in other parts of his Majesty's Dominions, We conceive
it expedient that the principal Persons who promoted the aforesaid seditious
Address, and also those who were notorious in Comforting, Aiding and Abetting
in the routous Reception and Entertainment of the said Duke of Monmouth, and
his Associates in this County, together with the Frequenters of Conventicles,
and those that harbor and countenance any Nonconformist Minister or Preacher,
should be obliged to give Security of the Peace, and particularly Charles Earl
of Macclesfield, Richard Lord Colchester, Charles Lord Brandon, Henry Booth
Esquire; Sir Robert Cotton Knight and Baronet, Sir Willoughby Aston Baronet, Sir
Thomas Manwaring Baronet, Sir Thomas Bellet Baronet, Sir John Crew Knight,
Nathaniel Booth Esquire; Colonel Thomas Leigh junior, John Manwairing of Baddily
Esquire; Peter Leigh of Booths Esquire; Colonel Roger Whitley of Peel, and Mr. Thomas
Whitley his Son, Roger Manwaring of Kermincham Esquire; Tilston Breten of
Stapleford Esquire; Sir Robert Duckenfield Baronet, Thomas Lea of Dernehal Esquire; and
Mr. Robert Hyde of Cottenhall, Edward Glegge of Grange Esquire; Richard Liege of
High-Leige Esquire; Mr. Roger Whitley, Mr. Robert Venables of Winchcombe, William
Minshull of Namptwich Esquire; John Hurlestone of Newton Esquire; and Charles his Son,
and William Whitmore of Thurstaston Esquire; We also present that all Persons not
frequenting the Church according to Law, are Recusants, it being impossible to
know the Hearts of Men, for what cause they refuse to come to Church, and that
all Connivance and Indulgence in that case is the ready Road to Rebellion,
Popery and Arbitrary Power. And further we desire humbly to present to his most
sacred Majesty our repeated Congratulation of Joy for his and his Royal
Brother's happy Deliverance from the late treasonable Conspiracy, with our
Assurances, that we will with our Lives and Fortunes stand in Defense of his
sacred Person and Government, his Heirs and lawful Successors, to all which we
subscribe our Names.

IN this Presentment twenty eight Persons not the least considerable in their
Country, as appears by their Names, are by this State-Jury marked out as
Conspirators against the Life of the then King, and as if they had showed an
open Defection from their Allegiance; nay the Jurymen turn Evidences, and say
they present these to wash their Hands from all Misprision.

The Earl of Macclesfield finding himself scandalized to the highest degree,
brought his Action for this against the Defendant in the Exchequer: The Plea
was, That he did nothing but as a Grand-Jury-Man, in pursuance of the Articles
given in charge, and according to the Evidence against the Earl.

The contrary to this appears upon the Presentment it self, there being nothing
in it so directly laid against the Earl, that he could take Issue upon it, and
therefore he, as he had reason, demurred to the Plea; yet Judgment was given
for the Defendant through the Solicitations of Graham and Burton, who
undertook the Defense as the King's Cause, for which considerable Sums of Money
issued out of the Exchequer, as appeared by their Books produced before the
late House of Commons.

The Hardship of which Judgment, and the Consequences of it in relation to all
the Peers of England, are now submitted to their Considerations.

Mr. Starkey in his printed Case says, Whether the Fact were true or false,
will not alter the Case, being according to the Evidence given before them. But
if it were false, and without Evidence given, no doubt it will be a great
Inducement to the Lords to relieve a Member of their House, if they can do it
by Law, lest themselves should suffer in the like Case.

It is in Proof that no manner of Evidence was given before the Jury against
more than one, that Evidence very insignificant, and yet even that was
afterward manifestly known to be false.

Besides there is full proof that this Presentment proceeded from a Conspiracy
between Jefferies, then Chief Justice of Chester, who brought it from London
ready drawn, and five of the Jury, who managed the rest, threatening some, and
prevailing upon others with the Name of Loyalty, for which end they brought a
Message from Jefferies, that it was expected for the King's Service.

Nor were they satisfied in presenting this Libel as their Act, but published
it to several others not of the Jury, and procured their Hands to it, but being
so far sensible of their Error, had it writ over again, leaving out the other
Hands. These things make it demonstrable that the pretense of being Jurymen,
cannot give any color to what they did.

And the Fact arising within the County, upon which they grounded their
Presentment, makes the Malice of it undeniable. As to the Suggestion of great
quantities of Arms, it was so far from true, that not above two hundred were
seized upon the most diligent search.

The real grounds were no more, than that the Duke of Monmouth had great
Respect paid him, upon his coming into the Country in a peaceable manner, being
accompanied by most Persons of any Consideration: and when the present Lord
Delamere was chosen for the Shire, a Paper without any Hands to it, was
delivered him, the Original or true Copy of which they never saw, wherein he
was desired, as Representative of the County in Parliament, to vote for
excluding a Papist from succeeding to the Crown; which Paper is fully justified
by the Bill of Rights, declaring it inconsistent with the Safety and Welfare of
this Protestant Kingdom, to be governed by a Popish Prince.

How innocent soever these Particulars were, so blind was their Malice against
the said Earl, that they inserted his Name, though he had no Share in either of
them, and only entertained the Duke of Monmouth at his House: But indeed their
Malice to him was not singular; for some others in the Presentment were not in
the Country when those things happened, which they would improve into Treason.

It appears upon the face of the Presentment, that it was nothing more than an
Effect of the Design then carried on by Papists, and others in conjunction with
them, to make distinctions of Parties among Protestants, and to expose and
oppress them who appeared most forward in asserting the Religious and Civil
Rights of the Nation, and whose Interest in their Countries made them
formidable to the Conspirators.

This their Presentment was without Precedent, but from one of the like birth
about that since in Northamptonshire, has no Foundation in Law, and is
manifestly contrary to the Duty of a Grand-Jury-man. For,

1. Here are many false and scandalous Matters maliciously insinuated, as
Causes of requiring Sureties of the Peace from the Persons presented; and yet
there is no direct Charge, which ought to be contained in every Presentment;
and the want of it makes this a plain Libel, designing only to defame, and to
encourage false Witnesses against some of the Persons presented, who were then
Prisoners in the Tower.

2. All criminal Matters found by a Jury, ought to be by Indictment, upon
Record in some Court, that the Party accused may have means of Acquittal.

3. Sureties of the Peace ought not to be required of any, especially a Peer of
the Realm, but where an actual breach of the Peace, or some Crime of an higher
Nature, is positively sworn.

4. Though Jurymen may determine Matter of Law, as it is coupled with Fact, in
Evidence before them, they ought not to pronounce Sentence for Punishment of
any Fact, as here they do in requiring Sureties of the Peace, though no Fact is
directly laid against the said Earl and others.

If the Earl of Macclesfield should not be relieved in this Case, it would be
an Encouragement for Grand-Juries to libel any Peer in disfavour with his
Prince, as often as they shall be incited to it by Designing-Men. And what is
now the Case only of one Earl, may be the Case of any or all the Protestant
Peers of England, if they should have the unhappiness to live in such Times as
we are but lately delivered from.

Nor could the making an Example of a Grand-Jury-Man, who has so evidently gone
beyond his Office, to serve a Turn against a Peer, in the least discourage
others from finding Indictments against Peers upon positive Proof, or such as
seems positive to them.

FINIS.

