To the Memory of my dear Friend and Brother, Mr. William Tailor, late Preacher
of the Gospel in St. Stephens Coleman-street.
IS Tailor dead? Tailor of Coleman-street?
That learned Orthodox Divine, that sweet
Evangelist; that true Nathaniel,
An Israelite, in whom no guile did dwell:
Simple, yet Compounded, virtues combined
Within his heavenly bosom were enshrined.
Who can compute our loss? for in this one
We, truly, seem to lose a Million.
Strife was 'twixt's Life and Doctrine to inherit
The Preeminence, either did it merit;
But 'twas concluded, to decide the strife,
Life was in his Doctrine, Doctrine in his life:
He taught by both, his Congregation,
He Doctrine Preached, lived the Application.
So great a Student, one would think that he
Neglected had his public Ministry,
And yet in public, so did he abound,
You Would think no time for study could be found;
Save that the hearer well might judge that he
Such notions never Preached Extemporie.
Some for opening the Text, do passing well;
Others in Application do excel;
Some men with skill in Languages abound,
In the Ancient Fathers others are profound.
Some for School Divinity, famous are,
Some Practical, some for Polemik rare,
The gift of some does most in Prayer lie,
In Preaching others claim their exc'llency:
Tailor excelled in All, as if that He
Of All these gifts had the Monopoly.
Sweet in converse, deligh^ful, but not vain;
Nothing impure did his Communion stain.
Humble, but not buse; Grave, but not austere;
Not rash, but valiant; joy was mixed with fear.
Meek in his own Cause, but in Gods so stout,
The Zeal thereof did wholly eat him out. Psalm. 69. 9.

His bounty had undone him, but that he
Did give in Faith, as well as Charity.
He eyed the Promise which says not in vain,
Prove. 11. 25.
He that waters, wat'red shall be again.
Thus he Isa. 32 8.
thrived by giving, for thereby,
The bread which Love did break, Faith did break, Faith did multiply.
Cases of Conscience, skilful to untie
He was, and balm to wounded souls apply.
His dear Relations so fulfill did he
With fruitful influence, and Piety,
That Wife, Children, Servants, Familiars All
Rising up early, did him Blessed call.
Faithful he was to his Religion,
His Principles, Trust, and his Commission.
Faithful to Christ, till death, nothing could make
That precious Saint once to prevaricate;
Not Wife, or Children, nor of all most dear,
His Ministry; Nothing did lie so near
His heart as the interest of Christ: For Him
Death in its horrid'st shape had welcome bin.
Nothing too dear for Christ: He knew full well,
Christ had redeemed him from the lowest Hell.
In short, this was the Value of the man,
Each man's p^rfection made his Anagram.
And is he gone? Let England mourn, 'cause she
Has lost a Mourner, a true Jeremie;
Another Elijah, who for her sake,
Intercession unto God did make
Incessantly. Let London weep a tear,
Because a light is fallen from her Sphere,
Of sweetest influence, and perfection,
No single Star, but a Constellation.
Yea, let his Orphane Congregation weep
Forth sad laments; Now left as sheep
Without their Shepherd; Let Wife and Children moan,
Her Guide of youth, Her Bosome-Teacher's gone;
Their Father, who by Paul-like Prodigy
Changed Sex, and traveled, their New Birth to see.
Let Friends lament, to whose Arcana He
Was wont both Ark and Oracle to be.
And oh that mine head were waters, mine eye
Of tears a fountain day and night to cry
My sad complaints, for loss of such a Friend,
Who as another Soul to me has bin. Credere unam animam in duobus esse
divisam. Min. Hell. Octav.

At the report of so sad a story,
Who can forbear, Jer. 22. 18.
Ah Lord, and ah his glory!
This Aggravates our sorrows, that his Sun
Did set at Noon, before his work was done.
Before his work was done! I must unsay
That word, His work was done in half his day:
So fast he wrought, and being girt with might,
Thought his task to double before 'twas night;
Death snarl'd, yet fearing the encounter; at length
Lays Ambush for him; and consumes his strength
By lingering sickness, promising thereby A Consumption.

Unto himself the easier Victory.
But was no means applied in due time,
To have prevented Death's foreseen design?
Why were not Learned Physicians feed
To consult his Cure? Ah, there was no need;
Of so great worth, so much beloved was he,
They feed Him, their Patient for to be:
That Proto-Medicus of Court, sans compare,
Invites him home, to be his Bosom-Care,
And Studies him with such anxiety,
As, if Tailor lived not, Himself must dye.
But all in vain: Then where Physicians end,
Divines begin; whole days in prayer they spend,
As Luther for Miconius once did pray. Melch. Ad.

As if they meant not God should say them nay;
Not like success! Prayer, that could command
The Josh. 10. 12, 13.
Sun stand still once an whole days space, and
Bring 2 King. 20. 11.
back the shade in King Ahaz Dial,
By ten degrees gone down, could not recall
The Setting Sun of holy Tailors life;
Nor all the cries, of Children, or of Wife:
His work was done; Then said his Lord to him,
Mat. 25. 21, 22.
Well done Good Servant, Faithful thou have bin,
In what is less, Come take thy Robe and Crown,
And Rev. 3. 21.
Reign with me for ever on my Throne.
A joyful word it was; for when as he
Death, as his Fathers Messenger, did see
Make his approach, He, Welcome Death, did cry,
Welcome my best friend, welcome Eternity.
But Death retreating; much he did complain,
Death retreating; much he did complain,
As one near Shore, hurled back into the Main
Of Disappointment; ceased not to mourn,
Until eft-soon Death hast'ned his return;
And from the Court of Heaven, his fiat brings:
Then Bowing head Swan-like (this Song) he sings,
Into thy hands, Lord, I commit
My spirit, which is thy due, Psalm. 31. 5.

For why thou have redeemed it,
Oh Lord my God most true.
I Will say no more, but add to Balaam's wish,
LET HIS LIFE BE MINE, Numb. 23. 10.
my last end like His.
Sic maerens flevit T. C.


