THE CASE OF Elizabeth Duchess of Albemarle, and Christopher Monk Esquire,
Appellants. AGAINST John, Earl of Bath, and others Respondents
THE Appellants Bill in the Chancery sought to be relieved against two Deeds of
Lease and Release mentioned, The proceedings in Chancery, and state of the Case.
to bear Date the 15 and 16th of July 1681: And that the Estate Real and
Personal of Christopher, late Duke of Albemarle, might go according to his
Graces last Will, Dated the 4th of July 1687. And to have an Execution of the
several Trusts in the said Will.

And the said Earl insisted on a Will of the 23d of August 1675, and on the
said Deeds as well executed and duly obtained, and sought thereby wholly to
avoid, and render ineffectual the said Last Will, though the same was most
solemnly-made and intended by the said Duke to be the complete and entire
Settlement of all his Estate as herein after is mentioned.

The Court on the 8th July 1681, First Decree. The Will of 1689, confirmed as
to the personal Estate and a Decree for Account accordingly.
after four days Debate Decreed the Duchess to have her Specific Legacies,
and the personal Estate to be accounted to Mr. Monk, and otherwise to be
applied according to the Will of 1687. Which Decree for the Personal Estate has
never since been questioned. And the said Will of 1687, had also, before been
solemnly sentenced to be a Good Will, and that the Duke intended the same so to
be, by the Court of Delegates. But as to the real Estate, before any further
direction to be given touching the same, the Court did think fit, and so order,
That a Trial at Law should be had touching the said Deeds of Lease and Release,
in such manner as in the said Order is mentioned: and after the said parties
were to resort back to the Court, for their further direction.

A Trial was accordingly had, Trial at Law, and the Cause again heard.
and there happened to to be a Verdict for the Defendants, and afterward the
Cause being several days again debated, before the Lords Commissioners, they
took further time to consider thereof. But before they made any final Decree,
that Commission was superseded. And the said Cause coming to be further heard
before the Lord Keeper, several matters were insisted upon, whereby in Equity,
to establish the said Will of 1687, as the entire Settlement of the said Dukes
Estate, notwithstanding the said Deed. His Lordship on the 22d of December
last, pronounced a Decree therein, Second Error.
to this effect. That as to the Appellants, several Claims and Demands to the
real Estate of the said Duke under the Will of 1687, against the Deed of 1681,
their said Bill, should be dismissed, and did not Relieve the Appellants, as
with humble Submission ought to have been done. And therefore they have brought
this Appeal, wherein the General question is, Whether the Deeds of 16 July
1681, or the Will of the 4 July 1687 in Equity be construed to be the true
Settlement of the Duke's Estate.

Observe. 1st. That in this Decretal Order, as now entered, of all the matters
offered and debated in Court, after four days were spent herein, there is not
any one particularreason given for the Judgment of the Court, as is usual in
Cases of so great consequence: But only in general, That the Court saw no Cause
in Equity to Relieve

2dly. That the Lord Keeper and Judges did lay great stress on the Verdict, and
that there had been no motion for a new Trial And that so the Deeds must be now
supposed to be taken as good Deeds: Which it is humbly hoped will not now be of
weight; For there was nothing insisted on at the Trial but the Fact only. And
so the Verdict is or ought to be of no further Evidence, than that the Duke
sealed the Deed. And there was no motion for a new Trial: Not because the
Appellants were satisfied with that Verdict, or had, as they conceived, any
reason so to be. But because it was and is conceived, That supposing the Duke
did Execute such Deeds, there are matters in Equity arising out of the Deeds
themselves, and otherwise relating thereto, sufficient to set the same aside,
or render the same ineffectual. First, Either as unduly obtained, Secondly, Or
as unduly secreted and concealed from the Duke. Or Thirdly, as in Equity
revoked by the last Will of 1687. Or Fourthly, as a Trust resulting for the
Duke, whereby this his last Will of 1687, may have its full effect, and
operation. But before these Points are severally considered, it is necessary to
see what the Will and Deeds are; and under what circumstances they stand,

And were the Fact, the direct question at present, it would be remembered and
is proved: Some of the Evidence as to the Fact of the Deed.
That when the Deeds were first produced by the Earl, they were read by his
Lordship's own Counsel, to be dated, the Lease the 15 July 1681, and the
Release the 16 July 1682, at which great notice was taken, and with much
difficulty Mr. Bows and Mr. Buttler got the Earle's leave to look on the same,
and observed the Lease to be 1682, as the same had been read, and with those
two Witnesses concur, the Lord Cheney Mr. Cheney, and Dr. Barwick, and thereof
Mr. Bows, and by Lord Cheney 's direction, Mr. Cheney then entered several
Memorandums in writing: And on sight of the Deed of Release, there appears now
a plain Razure, both in the Year of the King, and in the Year of our Lord but
in no other word throughout the whole Deed, for ought appeared.

Now the difference was very material, not only because if the Release were
1682 (as these five Gentlemen say it was), it would not only be void at Law
(the Lease being determined) but Sir William Jones, whose name is Endorsed as a
Witness, was dead in July 1682.

As also, That it now appears to have been Engrossed at the Earls House, at St.
James 's, and by his direction, by one Thompson, who has been the Earls
Scrivener for these thirty Years. Whereas the Earl by his Answer says, he knows
not who Engrossed it: But it being of great moment and secrecy, was all
committed to the Care and Conduct of Sir William Jones.

And also, that Thompson on his first Examination swore, That in 1687 he
Engrossed for the said Earl a Deed of the same purport, as this, (whereas this
Deed is dated 1681) and remembers not that ever he Engrossed any other. But
when he is afterward produced by the Earl, then there is shown to him a
Parchment prepared to be, but never Executed by the Dake. And this he says, is
what he Engrossed for the Earl in 1687, (as is said, prepared in 1687) both as
to the Power of Revocation, and every thing else is the same in words with the
Deed of 1681, saving only the last Covenant not to revoke the Will of 1675 And
Thompson says, he thought it had been Executed in 1687, and this done without
the Duke's directions, or any occasion for the same: for if the Duke had before
Executed the other, and had it in his Custody, (as is said by the Earl in his
Answer) what need was there thereof?

As also, That after July 1681. the Earl was advising with my Lord President
how he might procure a Settlement from the Duke.

As also, That the Seal of the Duke's Coat of Arms, which is upon this Deed,
was cut by Mr. East, for the Earl of Bath, and the Earl paid him for that 3 l.
10 s. and also for another small Seal of his own Arms at the same time. And the
said Mr. East still has the impression of both Seals, which he kept in soft
Wax.

As also, How many Witnesses, well acquainted with the Handwriting of the
Duke, and Sir William Jones, and Sir John Coppleston, have sworn, they do not
believe these to be so. With other Evidence offered on that Subject, of the
Fact.

But more immediately toward the Points of Equity, it is to be considered,

That the Will of 1687. Contents of the Will of 4 July 1687.
contains a fair, complete, and honorable Settlement of all the Real and
Personal Estate; some part to the Duchess for Life, some part to his Friends
and Relations, and Legacies to others of them, and particularly to Bevil
Greenvill, younger Son of the Earl of Bath, Lands worth 30000 l. and to Sir
Walter Clargis, after the death of the Duchess, Lands, to the value of 1500 l.
per annum, or thereabouts. It devises a Monument not exceeding 5000 l. to be
erected for himself, his Father, and his Mother; and devises Almshouses to be
built, and a Charity of 200 l. per annum to Twenty poor Widows, pursuant to the
intention of his Mother, and provides well for the payment of his Debts, and
leaves the inheritance of the greatest part of his Estate to his Cousin Col.
Tho. Monk, and his Sons in Tail-Male, with Remainder to his Cousin Col. Henry
Monk in Ireland and his Sons, with other Remainders over; and contains his
humble Request to His Majesty, in memory of his Father, and his own Services,
to create the said Col. Tho. Monk (the Appellant Monk's Father) Baron Monk of
Potheridge, and to the Heirs Males of his Body; so that the Name of Monk, and
his Estate, may to Posterity remain together. And because the Earl, by his
Answer, has made his Case, and accordingly the Court have seemed to take it
highly reflecting on the Duke's Honor, That the Duke, at the very time of
making the Will of 1687. intended the same should be void, and signify
nothing, and the Deed stand, and that the Duke sent him to Counsel, to advise,
Whether the Deed could be avoided by a Will? and he told him, It would not:
Wherewith the Duke seemed well pleased. It is therefore to be seen what Steps
the Duke made about it; and the whole may be put upon that issue, Whether the
Duke in this Case was guilty of so much Folly, Prevarication, and Dissimulation
toward GOD and the King, his Wife and Relations, when he had no sort of
Benefit or Temptation upon him so to do; as not really to intend that to be
effectually his Will which cost him so much care and pains, and which was so
solemnly perfected, as will appear.

The Proofs of the Sincerity of his Intentions, Prooss of the Sincerity of the
said Duke's Intentions, by the last Will of 87. some of them precedent, some of
them concomitant, and others subsequent.
and the Freedom of his Mind, are some of them precedent to the Will, some of
them concomitant, and others of them subsequent.

Sir Henry Bellasis and Sir Robert Clayton swear the Duke's declaring his
Intentions precedent before the Will prepared, who he intended to give Col.
Monk in Holland the best part of the Estate, and how he intended to setle the
same. And Sir Robert Clayton, That the Duke sent him for the Lord Chief Justice
Pollexfen to draw it; and in order thereto, sent to the Earl of Bath for a
former Will of his he had made: Which accordingly the Earl of Bath confesses
he gave him in December 1686.

The L. Chief Justice Pollexfen swears, He went with Sir Robert Clayton, and
drew the Will, by Directions and Instructions from the Duke's own Mouth, and
was often with him about it, and that several Alterations were by the Duke's
Order made in it, and that the Matter was long transacting and settling, and
that he never saw any man more earnest to have his Will well done, and
according to his mind; and when he had finished the Draught, he read it to the
Duke, and after some amendments again thereupon made by the Duke's directions,
he was desired by his Grace to get his Clerk to engross it, leaving blanks for
the Executors Names; and the Duke desired him to be one of his Executors, to
which he consented; and, that Sir Thomas Stringer was some of the times present
with the Duke and him about it. That it was published at Sir Robert Clayton's,
after the Duke had there Executed the Deeds of the Manors of Dalby and
Broughton to Lord Jefferies, in the presence of Three Witnesses, and of Sir
Tho. Stringer, who did not subscribe, because he was one of the Executors. And
for the greater solemnity, the Duke has to Three several parts, each
containing 19 sheets of Paper, and to every sheet of each part subscribed his
Name, and affixed his Seal, and caused the Witnesses likewise to subscribe
their Names to each sheet, and afterward sealed them under three several
Covers, and endorsed on all the Covers, with his own Hand, these words, My
Will, the 4th July, 1687. He kept them all in his own custody till his going to
Jamaica, and then delivered one of them to the Lady Eliz. Pierpoint, to be
given to the Duchess of Newcastle; another of them he gave to the said Col.
Monk, whom he had sent for from Holland for that purpose, and writ to his
present Majesty, then Prince, to procure him Leave to come, and did treat him,
his Wife and Son, with Lodgings and Diet in Newcastle-House, with himself, and
made him a Present of 3^0 l. for his Expenses in coming over. The third part
thereof he carried with him to Jamaica, where about a fortnight before his
Death he re-published the same, and kept it in his strong Box, amongst things
of the greatest value to him, and directed the Keys thereof to be given to his
Wife, in case he relapsed and there dyed

Besides all these Solemnities, Letters between the L. of Bath, the Duke, and
the Trustees, about Monk, in confirmation of his Last Will.
and the great care and concern of the Duke, in his said Will, for his Kinsman
Col. Monk; when afterward the Duke in Jamaica heard of the death of the said
Col. Monk, he put himself and Family into Mourning. And not only the Duke, but
also the Earl of Bath, Sir Walter Cla^gis, Sir Tho. Stringer, and the rest of
the Duke's Trustees, looked on the Appellant Christopher Monk, eldest Son of
the said Colonel, as the person who would have the Duke's Estate in case of his
death: Which appears by Letters even under the Earl of Bath 's and others of
the Trustees Hands, recommending it to the Duke, on the death of Col. Monk;
That since his Grace had thought fit to promote that Branch of his Family (how
remote soever) into so great a share of his Favor, there should be something
done toward the breeding up the Children, to make them appear in the World
answerable to that figure which his Grace had designed they should one day make
in it. Such is the one of the Letters signed by the Earl of Bath. And diverse
other Letters there are to the same effect, as also from the Duke, in Answer,
directing, That the Earl of Bath and Trustees should forthwith send into
Holland for the Appellant Christopher, and that Care be taken of him, to have
him well educated; That he may (as the words of the Letter go) receive such
improvement as is proper for what I have already designed him; and therefore
think it convenient, that he be put under the Tuition of Mons. Faubert; and
that particular Care be taken to see it done, and give me an Account, from time
to time, how he proceeds in his Studies. And accordingly the Trustees, and
particularly the Earl of Bath, who took upon him the greatest Trouble thereof,
agreed for him, and a Servant with him, to be at Monsieur Faubert's, at above
200 l. per annum Expense; and the Earl of Bath often visited him there. Whereas
if this Will of 1687. be not the Real Will and Setlement of the said Duke, (but
that the Deed of 1681. should stand) there is nothing at all given to the
Appellant Mr. Monk, to make a Figure, or bear any Character, as the Letters go.

The Earl of Bath, by his Answer, The Earl's Answer about Faubert's.
goes to explain all this, and says, That Faubert's was the place where the
Duke used to breed his Pages to Fencing and Riding; and has also proved it by a
Witness; but he has not showed, That such Expressions as are in the Letters
were usual with the Duke or himself, in relation to the Pages, viz. What
Figures they were to make, and what Characters they were to bear one day in the
World, and how many Pages the Duke did breed with a Servant at such expense,
and how many Visits the Earl did ever make the Pages, as he used to do Mr.
Monk, and how many of the Pages were to proceed in their Studies there as the
Duke directsr Mr. Monk should do.

And as to the pretended Importunities of the Duchess to obtain the Last Will,
it is fully answered.

The Duke and Duchess always lived well together; Dutchess's pretended
Importunities answered.
neither was it her Interest in any sort to set up Mr. Monk, for Col. Monk
was much a Stranger, in comparison of the Earl of Bath, who tells by his Answer
how many ways he had obliged her. Besides, this Deed (if Dalby and Broughton
had not been since sold) setles very near as much Land on her as the Last Will.

And the Lord Chapter Just. Pollexfen swears, he used to be with the Duke in the
mornings, and that he acted, freely and was in a very fit condition to make a
Will.

And Mr. Bows swears he recommended it to the Duke, instead of the use of the
Goods for Life, to give her the property of them, and that he refused. As also,
denied to give her the Inheritance of that which had been her Fathers Estate at
Grindon, which shows the litlte influence she had: And likewise that the Duke
expelled the Will to be good. But yet his esteem for her appears in that, in
the Will produced by the Earl of Bath, and in a Will of 1673, and in all his
Wills, he named her sole Guardian of all his Children, if he had any.

And it is further here to be considered, That the Duke had too much Courage to
do any thing through fear, or importunity; and more Honor than so to dissemble
either with the Earl, or Colonel Monk: but the natural construction which
saves the Duke's Honor, is, That in 1675 he might intend some part of his
Estate to the Earl of Bath. But in 1687, when Colonel Monk 's great credit in
the Army had more endeared him to the Duke, and he had hopeful Sons, and the
Eldest Son his Godson, and the Duke as by the Will is expressed, desiring that
the great part of his Estate should continue in his own name, really intended
it for Mr Monk and his Sons, etc. and yet was bountiful also to the Earl of
Bath 's Son, as aforesaid, and he might well in so many years alter his
intention. And as to the Deed in 1681.

Now that this Deed must have some way by Surprise, Surprixe in Reference to
the Deed of 1681.
or other undue means, have been imposed upon the Duke, appears by the
circumstances that attend it, and from the face of the Deed it self: There Is
not the least proof offered, that the Duke ever gave any directions for it, or
read, or heard one word of it read; nor that ever there was any Copy or
Counterpart. And upon reading thereof, it appears in very unusual manner and
expressions, to labor extremely to make a show of a Consideration.

And then for the Substance thereof, It is absolutely inconsistent with it
self. It recites a Will of the 23d of August 1675 (which the Earl of Bath says,
is the Will the Duke took from him in 1686): and it misrecites several things
of it; Then it says, it is intended thereby to Corroborate and Confirm the
Will, and yet entirely revokes and contradicts it, and limits the Estate to
different uses, except only the Manor of Midgham and Tile-Mills, which only
are to the same uses: But then this Devise, in which they only agree, is
written on the Margent of the Will, in the Earl of Bath 's own Hand: but by
what Order or Authority from the Duke does not appear.

And here it is also to be noted, That the Devise to the Earl of Bath and his
Heirs, is on the sixth Sheet of this Will of 1675, and that this sixth Sheet of
this Will is of a different Paper, different Handwriting, and a different Seal
from all the rest of the Sheets of the Will.

The Will of 1675, Further instances of Surprise.
gave all the Dukes Estate to his own Daughters in case he had any, before the
Earl, or his Sons or Daughters, as good reason there was. But the Deed of 1681
limits the Estate in Essex and Lancashire, etc. to the amount of 5000 l. a
Year, so as the same would go to the Earl of Bath and his Daughters before the
Dukes own Daughters. Which seemed not Answered, in saying that the Duke might
expect the Earl would be created Duke of Albemarle, and do it for his support,
but certainly the Earl's Daughters were not to be Dukes, and yet they would by
the Deed carry the Estate from the Duke's Daughters.

Part of the occasion of making the Deed, the Earl says by his Pleadings, was
to make Provision for younger Sons, in which his Marriage-Settlement was
defective. And yet, the Lands settled by this Deed of 1681, for such Younger
Sons are Redrisse, Norton, Disney, etc. which by the Marriage-Settlement were
settled on the Duke's Eldest Son.

Then the extraordinary nature of the Power of Revocation, That it must be done
in the presence of six Witnesses, and three of them Peers, whereby the Duke put
himself under great incapacities; some times it might be impossible for him to
get three Peers, as it was in Jamaica; And if he had them, he was in their
power whether they would be Witnesses or no. And thereafter comes the Covenant,
not to Revoke or alter the Will of 1675, which by that Deed was actually
Revoked, as aforesaid.

Nor had the Duke himself any power by the Deed to make Leases: and yet all
this must be kept from the knowledge of the Duke, and so he knew not how
exactly to pursue it.

But the Earl Bath by his Answer, The Earl of Bath's Answer about the
Engrossing the Deed, and Sir W. Jones.
to give the greater credit to the Deed, says, That he knows not who Engrossed
it, but it was committed all to the Care and Conduct of Sir William Jones, and
he came to be a Witness to it, at Albemarle- House, and believes Sir William
Jones read it to him before it came to be perfected, and that the Duke was
often with him about it, after the time that Sir Tho. Stringer had prepared the
Draught, but was not to be trusted with the knowledge of the Execution of it.

Now when the Court observed the strange frame of the Deed, and the many
Inconsistencies, Improprieties, and Conitradctions therein. They declared, That
they did not believe that ever Sir William Jones drew the said Deed, only was
consulted upon the Provisoe, which seems not to consist with the Earls Answer,
which says, that the Care and Conduct of the wholewas committed to Sir W.
Jones. And it now fully appears, That Sir William Jones has no hand in the
Engrossing thereof; but it was done by Thompson at the Earls House, as
aforesaid.

And the great Secrecy, not only in the obtaining, Concealment.
but concealing thereof appears, in that it must not be known to the Duke of
Newcastle, or any of the Trustees therein; nor to Sir Walter Clarges, who has
an Estate thereby, and was the Duke's intimate Friend and near Relation; nor to
Sir Thomas Stringer, who, it is said, drew the Draught. But yet the Earl's
Answer confesses he was not to know of the Execution thereof, lest he should
tell the Duchess, tho she has so great an Estate thereby, that it was her
interest to espouse it, and thank the Earl for his great kindness expressed in
his Answer, by prevailing with the Duke to make her Estate thereby so much
better than it was before.

Then that the Duke with the privity of the Earl of Bath, sold Dalby and
Broughton to the Lord Jefferys, as also Bitchfield before, without the least
notice either by the Duke, or the Earl of any such Deed: And made many Leases
without fines, which he had thereby no power given him to do. And also made
diverse voluntary Conveyances, and Grants of Rent Charges of 100 l. per annum,
to one, and other voluntary Annuities to his Friends and Servants, which would
be avoided by the Deed. And all the subsequent acts of the Duke so inconsistent
therewith, That it is next to impossibility to think that the Duke should have
done the same, and yet be acquainted with the said Deed.

And the Lord Chapter Just. Pollexfen, and Sir Robert Clayton say, that they
enquired on the said occasions, what settlement the Duke had made, and could
hear of none, but the Marriage-Settlement in 1669. Besides, Mr. Courtney says,
it was under great Injunctions of Secrecy, the Earl spoke to him about it. And
the Earl offers no proof that it was ever seen in the Duke's Custody, or
delivered to him by the Duke, from the time of the first Execution thereof,
only says the Duke gave it to him in his Bedchamber, and no body present,
unless some body might be behind the Bed. And there is nothing does more
clearly prove the Concealment of the Deed from the Duke, than his great Care
about his last Will in 1687.

However, Third General Head: it is in Equity Revoked.
though the Power of Revocation be not literally pursued, so as to be a
Revocation in strictness at Common Law; yet in Equity under these
circumstances, the said last Will of 1687, ought to be adjudged a Revocation
thereof, as made pursuant to the intent of that power thereby reserved to the
Duke: The Witnesses according to the Letter of the Power ought to be six, and
three of them to be Peers, but they need not all be present at the same time,
nor all to subscribe their names. Now though there were only three Witnesses
present at first, yet there were many more than six, to whom the Duke
afterward published it here and in Jamaica: So that there wants neither number
nor credibility of Witnesses, only quality for three of them, which it is hoped
will be no objection in this Case; when it was not possible, when he last
published the Will in Jamaica, to have it.

But the Court would not allow this in Jamaica to be a Publication, being
accidental, though it was plain in the proof, That the Duke took it then in his
hand, and told the Witnesses it was his Will, and directed the Keys of his
strong Box, where it was kept, to be given to the Duchess if he dyed: And the
more accidental it was, the more it shows the Innocence and Sincerity of the
Duke's intentions.

It does appear upon the Face, ^^^ching the ^^^t of Trust.
and by the express words of the Deed, that the Estate limited to the Earl, is
upon this special Trust and Confidence, That he shall sell so much of the Lands
as shall fully and honestly pay all the Duke's Just Debts, and Legacies, and
Funeral Charges, as much as the Personal Estate comes short in the Payment
thereof by his Executors in his said Will mentioned.

So that, according to this very Deed, whatsoever Debts the Duke had
contracted, or should contract, though not in the presence of Six Witnesses,
and though they were to the full value of the said Estate, the Earl must, by the
Letter of the Trust, sell the Estate to pay the same; and so must he have done
to satisfy all the Devises and Legacies, which the Duke at his pleasure should
make or give by any other Will, were it not for the Addition of those Five
Words, viz. (In his said Will mentioned.)

Now, when one of the chief Considerations of the said Deed is expressed, to
corroborate that Will of 1675. and make good those Legacies given thereby; and
that the Last Will does so plainly revoke that Will; and that the Earl by
reason thereof would now have the whole without paying the Legacies; What more
just construction, than that this Deed, Reasonable Construction of the Deed.
as the Case was in Dyer's Reports, should be constructed, quasi a Will: And
that there was a Trust for the said Duke, who might have charged it to the full
value; and that thereupon the Last Will of the first and last Owner of the
Estate may not be frustrated.

Nay, by such Construction several of the chief Ends pretended even of the
Deed, will be also answered; for, the Descent to the Posterity of a Regicide,
as also the Heir of any other person setting up any Counterfeit or
Surreptitious Will, which are intended to be obviated by the Deed, will be as
well this way prevented, as they are by the Deed, or any other Construction.
And the rather also ought such Construction to be made, for that in the Draught
which is produced as a Support of the Deed, just after the said five
restrictive words, viz. (In my said Will mentioned) there appears so much of
that sheet as would contain two lines has been cut away from the bottom, where
the said five words end: And by the remaining Heads of the Letters it appears,
there was another line writ before it was cut, which might very well be to pay
his Debts and the Legacies in the said Will mentioned (or in any other Writing
to be made or appointed). And if the words had been so, they will not deny, but
that the Last Will would have had effect thereon.

NB. This cutting off the under part of the Draught in this material place was
never Observed till the Last Hearing; and till a good account be given, how the
words came to be cut, they should be presumed to be for the Appellant's
Advantage. Now, for the Privy Seal which the Earl has, promising, that the
King would create him Duke of Albemarle, and also give him that part of
Theobald's which was to revert to the Crown, Answer about the Privy Seal, and
the old and late Duke their Services and Friendship.
and is said to be got at the instance of George Duke of Albemarle, in case his
Issue Male failed.

It is plainly answered, That both those were things entirely the King's, but
that the Duke never intended him any of his Estate. He made a Setlement on his
Deathbed of all his Estate, and also before had made his said Will, and was so
far from giving the said Earl any part of his Estate, that he did not so much
as Name him a Trustee in either of them; and by his Will appointed nine
Guardians of his Son, but the Earl of Bath none of them; and, That it was not
Duke Christopher's constant Intention, appears by a Will of his made in 1673.
whereby the bulk of his Estate is divided amongst his other Relations, and
nothing given to the Earl of Bath, but a small Remainder after an (...) ^erril
Greenvill.

And for his Relation, Friendship, and Services, All that may be, without his
having the Estate, and the Friendship and Services as is believed, were fully
returned; and if they were not, the Duke remembered them sufficiently by the
Last Will, in the said Devise to his said Son.

As to Col. Monk deceased, About Colonel Monk.
who (now he is not to speak for himself) has been greatly disparaged, he was
publicly known to be a Gentleman of great Worth and Honor, and as such was
raised in his Profession. He had the advantage of the Earl, by being of the
Duke's name, for whom, and for his Name, the Duke expressed great Regard and
Concern; and on all occasions in Company, and by Letters and otherwise, the
Duke called and treated him as his Relation, and one of the Friends he loved
best, which is Reason sufficient for what he did.

Lastly, It is to be noted, Court declared several things mysterious, and not
to be understood.
That though there be a Decree against the Appellants, yet in the giving their
Opinions of the said Matters, as to the Stories of Thompson, and some other
things, it was declared on the Bench, They were so mysterious, they could not
be understood. And therefore it was by another on the Bench declared, He would
leave several things out of the Case as mysterious, and to that effect. But it
is with humble submission offered to consideration, Whether the Reason and
Argument be not better, That they ought therefore to be brought into the Case,
and that the Deed ought therefore to be set aside; considering that the Earl of
Bath, who pioduces it, was all along privy, as he says, to every thing of it,
and not as a Stranger thereto. For all which Reasons the Appellants humbly hape
their Lordships will Order the said Decree to be Reversed, and the Appellants
relieved, and that the said Last Will, so solemnly made, as aforesaid, may be
Established, as the Settlement of the Duke's Estate as he intended the same.


