The CASE of the Manufacturers of Iron in ENGLAND.
Humbly praying, for the following Reasons, that the Duties upon Wrought Iron
may be continued.
THird of Edward 4. Cap. 4. these following Iron-Wares are prohibited:
Stirrops, Harness for Saddles, Spurs, Andirons, Gridirons; any manner of Locks,
Hammars, Pincers, Fire-Tongs, Dripping-Pans, Harness for Girdles, Knives,
Daggers, Wood-Knives, Tailors Shears, Sissars, Razors, Pack-Needles,
Chasing-Dishes.

1 Richard 3. Cap. 4. these following Iron-Wares are prohibited: Harness for
Girdles, Knives, Hangers, Tailors Shears, Sissars, Andirons, Tongs, Fire-Forks,
Gridirons, Stock-Locks, Keys, Hinges, Garnets, Spurs, Horse-Harness, Bitts,
Stirrops, Buckles, Chains, Chafing-Dishes, Shears, Spitts, Candlesticks, Grates.

5 Eliz. Cap. 7. these following Iron-Wares are prohibited: Rapiers, Daggers,
Knives, Hilts, Dagger-Blades, Horse-Harness.

Which good Laws put a Damp to the Foreign Workmen, and such Encouragement to
the English, that they have brought all the said Goods to such Perfection, that
England has no occasion to Import them, and in many of them we now outdoe all
Parts of Europe.

In the second Year of the King, in an Act for Granting their Majesty's certain
Impositions upon all East India Goods and Manufactures, and several other
Goods, etc. they were pleased to lay these following Duties upon Iron-Wares,
and Iron wrought. s. d. Iron Potts and Kettles 1 3 each. Small Backs for
Chimneys 1 2 each. Large Ditto 2 4 each. Iron slit or hammered into Rods 5 0
the 112 lb. Frying-Pans 4 0 the 112 lb. Steel 5 6 the 112 lb. Plates single 4 4
the hundred. Ditto double 8 8 the hundred. Harness Plates 1 4 each. All other
sorts of Iron-Ware manufactured 5 0 the 112 lb.

Which Duties have occasioned a great Perfection in the making the said Goods
in England, and the Importation is mightily lessened thereby, which gives a
sew selfish People (that dealt in the said Goods) hopes that it will be a means
to take off or lessen the said Duties; but it is hoped that these following
Considerations will over-balance what hey can offer to the contrary. I.
Although the Importations be lessened for the said Goods; yet they have brought
in more Money for these five Years last past, than ever they did in that time,
which may appear by the Custom-House-Books. II. That most of the said Goods,
although made in England, are made of Foreign Iron, which has brought in more
Customs to the King, than the Complainants are willing to pay for the Custom,
when imported in the Manufactury. III. There is several new Works built, and
several hundred Families employed (in making the said Ware) more t han before
these Additional Duties were laid. IV. It is but reasonable to believe that
former Parliaments had prohibited these Goods, when they prohibited Goods of
the same kind, had this Kingdom had Artificers to make them (as they then had
not.)


Where but the Manufacturers encouraged by having a Re-payment of the Custom of
the Iron, when Exported in the Manufacture, England would be capable to Export
many of the said Goods to the great Enriching of this Kingdom.


