The CASE of the French Protestants Refugees, settled in and about London, and
in the English Plantations in America.
WHereas there is a Clause in a Bill brought into the Honorable House of
Commons, Entitled, An Act for preventing Frauds, and Regulating Abuses in the
Plantation-Trade; in these Words, viz.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Alien or
Foreigner, or any Person or Persons, other than such as are Natives of England
or Ireland, or such Persons as are born in His Majesty's Plantations in Asia,
Africa, or America, shall, after the (...) Day of (...) Exercise the Trade or
Occupation of a Merchant or Factor, in any of the said Plantations, upon pain
of the Forfeiture of (...) one (...) to His Majesty, one to the Governor of the
Plantation, where such Persons shall so offend, and the other (...) to the
Person suing for the same in any of His Majesty's Courts in the Plantation
where such Offense shall be committed, etc.

The French Protestants Refugees in this Kingdom, in behalf of themselves, and
of the French Protestant Refugees settled in the English Plantations in
America, do humbly Represent, That having been cruelly prosecuted in their
Native Country, for the sake of their Religion, they came and sheltered
themselves in this Kingdom, being invited there-to by the late King Charles the
Second's Declaration of the 28th of July 1681: And since, by another of his
present Majesty, made the 25th of April 1689, inviting all French Protestants
hither, and promising them their Protection etc.

That upon this Encouragement they came over in great Numbers, bringing all
they could convey away with them, with their Trades, Arts, and Manufactures,
and were very kindly received by this Nation, and had that Favor shown to
them, that a great many of them were made Free Denisons.

That they also being invited by several of the Lords Proprietors of the
English Plantations in America, to go thither and inhabit those Countries, many
of them transported themselves and Families there, with great Hazards, Troubles
and Charges.

That some Hundred Families of them are now settled there, and have improved in
a manner those Colonies, by making the Ground Arable, and by their Trades,
Labors and Industry; insomuch, that particularly Carolina and New York are,
for the most, inhabited by them.

That the said French Protestants Refugees, settled here and in those
Countries, have, on all Occasions, showed their Loyalty, Zeal and Affection, to
the present Government, by supporting very cheerfully the Charges and Taxes of
the Land, and wearing Arms for the Defense of it, especially in the Attacks of
Quebek, Martinico, Guadalupa, Jamaica, and St. Domingo, several having lost
their Lives, and others being wounded, in those Occasions: And many there and
here being come to great Losses, both by the Earthquake at Jamaica, and by the
Enemies Privatiers at Sea.

That if such a Clause should be inserted, all those poor People there would be
reduced to the greatest Extremities, or forced to return back to England, where
they must starve, or be maintained by the Public Charity. Besides the great
Prejudice those who are settled in this Kingdom will unavoidably receive by it,
having the most part of their small Stocks employed in the Plantation Trade, to
support their Brethren there, and procure a small Livelihood to their Families
here.

Therefore they humbly pray this Honorable House to commiserate their
Condition, and use such Methods for their Relief, as this Honorable House in
their Wisdom and Charity shall think fit.


