THE CATHOLIC GAMESTERS or A DUBBLE MATCH of BOWLEING
depiction of King Charles II, enthroned and surrounded by his lords and peers
Kent Huntingdon Bedford Clare Stamford Dorset. (...) Middlesex. Exeter
Bridgwater. Devonshire Manchester. Winchelsea Chesterfield. Rochester
Burlington. Hallifax Radnor. Lincoln Viscount Say and Seal Viscount
Faulconbridge


Lords.
Eure. Wharton Pagett. Chandes North-Grey of Rolle-ston Gray of Wark Mountagve
of Boughton Howard of Eserick Herbert of Cherbury Lovelace. Hatton Lucas.
Rockingham Holles. Dellamere Townesend. Crew


Some of the Protestant Peers
P. Rupert D. Buckingham Bis. Hereford Bis. Lincoln D. Monmouth M. Winchester
E. Shaftesbury. L. P. C.^ E. Essex. L. Commer Trea


The Loyal Protestants of the house of Commons.
depiction of Protestants in the House of Commons The Kings Evidence
depiction of a group of men Dr. Oats. Dr. Tonga. Capt. Bedlam. Mr. Kirby Mr.
Everard. Mr. Dugdale. Mr. Prance. Mr. Baldron. Mr. Mowbray. Mr. Dangerfield.
Mr. Genison Mr. Smith.


London Burnt by Popish priests and Jesuits sep: 2d 1666
depiction of the 1666 fire of London and the Popish priests and Jesuits who
burnt it Prove. Simons Prove. Strange Prove. Whitebread Keimish Blundel Harcourt


depiction of a bowling match The Upper Games, for Lives
depiction of the pope and the devil egging the bowlers on Dear Pope Here Is
your Bowlers ye herriticks


Kind Devil they are holy Gamesters if they Carry in ye Corner


depiction of the bowlers Bowl on you sonns of Rome but know
Well hold ye Rubbers ere you go
Don Bellois Don Staffois Don Monis Don Arundis Don Petrois Don Powwowis


Dam ye both wheather will ye thrust uss


that is the Bowl that does it


depiction of a man D^bysis the Logorn Purser
here is your Ground Sir


3 Popish Mises
depiction of three women observing the bowling match Do you see him Madam


he is Dead a Blessed Beginning


depiction of the death of Godfrey by the bowlers in the Fatal Gap see Godfrey
Dies
He was the Nations Sacrifice.
depiction of a group of Godfrey's murderers Green Bury Hill Gerrard Kelly
with others

Godfrey's murderers 12: 78

depiction of nine pins arranged for bowling the nine pins ueilds uss Troting
and serves to hide our Plotting
depiction of a scaffold from which several victims are hung and upon which a
victim is about to be beheaded Your dateing Gamesters, all at Stake to Venture
^^t look o'th Scaffold (Traitors) where ye Center
Strike home* their Works done.


With an Account of a sharp Conference held on the Eve of St. Jago, between his
HOLINESS and the Mohammedan DONS in St. Katherines Bastile: wherein their
Nine-pins are wholly condemned, and their Worships severely checked, for playing
at that small Game now in the heat of his Harvest.
To the Tune of, The Plot in the Meal-Tub; or, Tan-Ta-Ra-Ra-Ra, make shift.
[Published by a By-stander, to prevent false Reports.]
WHo likes to read, may judge what is coming on us,
And pray (in earnest) Lord have mercy upon us.
Read he that likes, whilst he that likes it not,
Is fairly judged he likes their damned Plot.

Enter Pope disguised. At Nine pins now! a pretty hopeful Game:
Was it for this your Worships hither came?
A cursed Mistake! I find our Choicest Tools,
And greatest Knaves, are now the greatest Fools.
By Hell I Am angry, that ye should so miss
The game above, where but one murdered is;
Ye pawned your Souls to have ruined All ere this,
But strangely failed in it! Now you turn your hand
And bowl for Farthings, whilst they firmly stand
Like Rocks together. Tell me, Sirs, what you
In The Devil's Name with me intend to do?
What a damned Journey have you made me take,
Allong of you, and Mother-Churches sake,
Been tossed at Sea, and rolled about the Nore;
I Will Heretic turn before I Will go it more.
Then where is your Worships if I leave my Beads?
A Parl-comes next, and off go all your Heads.
That must be done before the incredulous Rout
Will ere believe that I am come about.
They know already we dispense with those
That go to Church, take Sacrament, and Oaths:
Therefore not trust us what we say or swear,
Till t'other's done, that we in earnest are.
Which way to take, my Thoughts are undirected,
Until I find how Mounsieur stands affected;
But should I turn in truth, it is good enough
For such insipped common Nine-pin Stuff.
My Self may get by it, save a Thing more rare
Than this same Triple Bawble now I wear,
Which otherwise is hazarded I swear.
Howere I Will venture't, prove it good or ill,
And have a Push for it ere I lose it will.

[And so you may, Sir Pope; but one thing know,
I miss my mark if ere you get it so.
But that is by the way, perhaps I do but jest;
I pray go on (Sir) let us hear the rest.]

Ye shall (quoth he) I must my stomach ease,
And speak the Truth, tho some it may displease.
When I Commissions to your Worships sent
To be my Chieftains in the [Blest Intent.]
(You know my meaning) then 'twas better things,
To murder Subjects, stob or poison Kings,
And lay those Northern Heretics in Blood,
Who have our See for many Years withstood,
This was the Game ye first did undertake;
But that ye did no better progress make.
Amused the Consults, and astonished All,
To see you baffled by a Godfrey fall.
By the Mass (Sir Dons) I wonder at your Sloth,
That damned neglect (in Time) may ruin both.
Had you pursued it then, it is ten to one
You might with ease the Royal Game have won.
I fear my Lady spoke the naked Truth
To that same Dangerous (but Apostate) Youth,
That all our Men of Courage now were gone,
(Or in fair way to be so ere't be long.)
What shame is it (ye Gamesters) for to see
Your Ghostly Fathers mount the Triple Tree,
For their bold Actions, Holy Traitors dear,
While you, like Drones, do trifle out the Year.
There Is one thing more I ought not to omit,
Nor you great Dons, in gratitude forget,
Though they did Penance, Ye have escaped the hand
Of Commons-Foes who are gathered in the Land.
But to disperse them was a Mystery,
Too great to think what cost my Friends and I.
Those mortal Foes know so much of our Plot,
That had they chanced much longer to have Sat,
By Peter's Chair, you all had gone to Pot.
And can you be so idle as to think,
We run such hazards, parted with our Chink,
For Game at Nine-pins? No, it gained you time,
That ye might spring a second Counter-mine.
Then down with Pins, and throw aside the Bowl,
Let each Man fall to Plotting in his Soul
(If he have any) make it now appear
They are devoid of either Grace or Fear.
Cabal together, Guinnies will, I Am sure,
Keep Argos Hands, and hundred Eyes secure;
And ere't be long some Stratagem contrive,
Which may your Freedoms and my cause retrieve.
Let Hell direct you; but if Hell be dry,
I Will send some Priests shall keep ye company,
And that is as well: A Jesuit or two
Not long ago the Devil could out-doe.
To make all sure, this my Counsel is,
Which being followed, doubtless cannot miss;
Pursue the Game in the Meal Tub was begun,
And he that dares that bold Adventure run,
Shall be my Darling, Satan's eldest Son.
Follow that close, get Presbyterian down,
The day's our own, ye cannot miss the Crown.
Farewell old Friends, I must make haste away,
For fear they burn me if I longer stay.

Here Reader, we the Second Part begin:
Mark how the Dons rail at the Man of Sin.
We have an old true Saying of our own,
When Knaves fall out, the Truth is often known.

Dons. Pox on his Picture, and his Cause so pure,
Between 'em both they 've ruined us we are sure.
Must we, like Spaniels, to the Work be banged
Of Mother Church, and merit to be hanged?
Ruin our Fortunes, hazard thus our Lives,
Nay, been so mad as wheedle in our Wives;
But they must go (they say) the Devil drives:
And after all, like common things, rejected,
Because our Projects have not been effected.
Can we the ill Luck of our Ruffians help,
When here confined Prisoners, ye Whelp?
Had they but acted what we did contrive,
There had not been an Heretic alive.
So full of Lies and Perjuries they were,
Not You your self could mend them, were you here.
But if they are spoiled in Executing, We
Have done our parts, as all the World may see.

Pope. Hold, mighty Dons! methinks too fast ye go.
What have ye done, that ye upbraid me so?
All I have gotten by your great Projects,
Are a few Saints, with Ropes about their Necks,
So hasht and butchered, all my labor's vain;
Not Lucifer can set them right again.
Hell keep the rest from Justice (we call Fury)
And send them Wakeman's, or a Gascoin Jury,
Picked, bribed, instructed how to murder Truth,
From Grand St. Martins Bull, and Cits Wide Mouth.

Dons. What have we done? Fools may that Question make.
What have we not done for your cursed sake?
Here Is some among us for this fifty Years
Have Traitors been; engaged by the Ears
The best of Subjects with their lawful King,
Of which blessed Work the Universe did ring;
Got into Arms, then after him we run,
And never left him till he was undone.
What Seignior Con could not by Poison do,
Our Party did: His End we brought him to.
Three hundred thousand murdered at least
In England, Scotland, and the Irish Feast.
And since the Nation did his Son restore,
We have bin full as active as before;
Have hunted Counter in his Parliaments.
Got Pentioners, who Voted by Contents.
Got Bills to pass against the Common Good,
And ever yet its Happiness withstood.
By Us their Church and State is so divided,
They quarrel yet: Nor can it be decided,
(Impatient we!) until Nolls Dunkirk's sold:
'Twas got by Rebels. But the Tangier Mould,
When finished, will all the Shipping hold.
Used all our Skill to break the Triple League,
Made James confess to Beddingfield and Teage.
In that (by Hell) we showed our highest Art,
And stabbed the Protestant Interest to the heart.
Employed our Priests, who did the City burn,
And Heretic Churches into Ashes turn.
Beat Butter-Boxes when we could come at 'em,
Which led the way unto the Ships at Chattam,
Then all we did, was, bid the Divil rot 'em.
Conjoined our Butchers with our Friend of France;
And to our Councils, Petticoats advance.
By whom he knows, as well as Heart can wish,
What ere we do, as Beggar knows his Dish.
Begun a War, then up a Peace did smother,
To break their Allies; then begin another.
To Turks and Frenchmen did the Shipping sell,
As Heretic Marvel late the World did tell.
All this we did, and ten times so much more,
To serve our Ends, and Mother Church [that Whore]
Before we to the present Trick did fall;
And had that took, w^ had done the Devil and all.
And what that is, your Holiness can guess,
For we will be damned ere any on it confess.
Nor does it matter whether we do or not,
Since Heretick-Commons have so much on it got,
By him whose Name, and Oaten-Pipe, does fret
Our very Guts, as on the Tenters set,
We curse our Stars he is not ruined yet.
But there is some hopes, by what we hear of late,
Whose Lives he saved, requite him with their hate.
A good reward! But had he half on it done
For Mother Church, he had the Popedom won.
And now, dear Friends, you Jesuits, be Judge
If it is not hard his Holiness should grudg
A little Pleasure, which affords us trotting,
After whole days [and nights] we have bin Plotting;
Witness our Pacquets twice a week that da ce
To Rome, to Spain, to Portugal, and France,
From whence ere long we hope to have such Friend;
Shall set us free, accomplish all our Ends.
Tell us 'twas He kept Common-Foes from sitting!
It Is known he lies: for, did we think it fitting,
We other Reasons for the same could show,
Than He (perhaps Infallible) does know.
But let that pass: it is done, we think our Stars,
Those Fiery Jades that draw in Titan's Cars.
Now after all, should we be left in the lurch,
Our Prayer shall be, The Devil take the Church.

In troth, that is honest. To conclude, I shall
Give my Amen, The Divil take ye all,
For Plotting Villains, worse than Canibal.
England will nere be safe, nor Christendom,
Till all your Necks under the Hatchet come.

Then the Tune is, Finis, Funis.
LONDON: Printed for William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street. 1680.


