The CASE briefly stated, between the East India Company of the United
Netherlands, and the Assigns of William Courten, with some Queries resolved
upon the Case,
WIlliam Courten of London Merchant, May 12. 1641.
being interested in the two Ships named the Henry B^^a Adventure, and Bona
Esperanza, sets them forth (inter alia) to Sea for trading Voyages in the
East Indies.

William Courten being (...) bred to several persons for 100000 l. Apr. 26.
1642.
and upwards, and Sir Edward Littleton being bound with him for the said Debts,
W. Courten grants all his Interest, Stock, Freight, and Merchandises in the
said Ships (inter alia) to Sir Edward Littleton for the Consideration of 20 s.
and to indempnifie him from the said Debts; Provided that if William Courten or
his Executors pay the said Debts within 27 months, and fave Sir Edward
Littleton harmless, then the Grant to be void.

William Courten and Sir Edward Littleton by Indenture tripartite, Dec. 19 1642.
reciting the first Deed, and a great debt of 24000 l. due to Sir Paul Pindar,
for a further security of that debt, grants to Sir Paul Pindar, his Executors
and Assigns, all the said Ships Stock, Merchandise, and their whole Interest
therein with the policies of Assurance, under diverse agreements; the effect
whereof is, that Sir Paul Pindar should have satisfaction by several
proportions out of each Ship, and the residue to be to Sir Edward Littleton for
the purposes in the said Indenture; by all which it appears, that Sir Paul
Pindar was not to have more then satisfaction of his Debt, but after that
should be satisfied in fuch manner as is expressed in the said Indenture, the
benefit of the Surplus was to be for Sir Edward Littleton and William Courten.

The Debts for which Sir Edward Littleton was bound, are not discharged within
the 27 months, nor yet are discharged to this time, Anno 1663.

The Ship Bona Esperanz^^ and her L^ding is surprised in her Voyage by the
Agent: Anno (...)
and Ministers of the East India Company of the Netherlands, and the Bona
Adventure taken into their possession, to the damage of the Proprietors 85000
l. sterling. as appears by the proofs taken in the Court of Admiralty; besides the
damnum emergens by loss of their Trade.

William Courten makes a Letter of Attorney to Jacob Pergens of Amsterdam, Oct.
26. 1645.
to sue the East India Company for the said Ships and Goods, to the use of
Courten.

Sir Paul Pindar makes a Letter of Attorney to Jonas Abeeles of Amsterdam, Feb.
11. 1647.
to sue the said Company for the Ships and Goods, to the use of Pindar, and
sent over his Indenture tripartite, setting forth the assurance and condition
of the Grant at large.

William Courten having absented himself from England, Feb. 22. 1648.
did in Holland make a pretended Bargain and transport of the said Ships and
Goods to Jacob Pergens.

Jonas Abeeles intimated his Claim in writing, May 25. 1648.
and sent it by a public Notary to the Directors of the East India Company,
setting forth his Procuration from Sir Paul Pindar, and the Grant to him from
Courten and Littleton as aforesaid; protesting that if they made any agreement
with Pergens, it should be of no effect, and that they should pay the money
again to him in right of Sir Paul Pindar.

Jonas Abeeles caused to be arrested in the hands of the East India Company,
Nov. 13. 1648.
all the money and total sum which should by liquidation and agreement to be
made with the said Courten for the said Ships and Goods and the Escheevens in
Court declared the (...) to be v^d.

Notwithstanding the said Intimation, protest and Arrest, Sept. 18. 1649.
the Directors of the East India Company alleging the King of England was
dead, made an agreement with the said Jacob Pergens and one David Goubart for
85000 Gilders, for the Ships, Goods and Damages aforesaid, which was paid
accordingly, upon caution given by the faid Jacob Pergens and Peter Boudan
Courten, to indempnifie the said Company against ^indar and others.

Jonas Abeeles brought an Action Before the Escheevens in Amsterdam, Febr. 17.
1650.
against the Directors of the East India Company, for the said 85000 Gilders
with Interest for the same, until effectual payment thereof to him for the use
of Pindar.

The Directors of the East India Company summoned Jacob Pergens and Peter
Boudan Courten before the said Escheevens, Sept 13. 1652.
to indempnifie them from all after Claims of money, and to free them from all
Costs and Damages of Sir Paul Pindar and others.

Sir Paul Pindar dyed, Anno 1652.
and soon after Jonas Abeeles dyed, so the business rested until the Kings
most happy restoration into England.

Upon his Majesty's Letters to the States General, Anno 1662.
requiring satisfaction and reparation to be given to the partie^ interested
and injured, after many debates between Sir George Downing Knight and Barone^,
^us Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary, and the Deputies of the States General for
English Affairs, the Damages of the two Ships were excepted in the 15. Article
of the Treaty made the 4th. of September 1662. from the general abolition of
Injuries and Da^^^es, in these words: Hoc excepto, quod scilicet qui se
jacturam passos dicant in duab^ (...), viz. Bona Ad^^^^a^ (...) Esperanza,
poterunt litem inceptam prose (...) Which was to be (...) the way Sir George
Downing had begun by the Kings Orders and Commands.

Sir George Downing in pursuance of his Majesty's further Orders, An. 1663. and
1664.
made several fresh Addresses to the States General for satisfaction of the
said Damages, and that they would Order the East India Company to liquidate the
Accounts, and make restitution accordingly.

During the said dispute and controversy, the Advocates of the East India
Company made these two Objections,

First, That the Grants to Sir Edward Littleton and Sir Paul Pindar were not
good and effectual in Law, being only a Security, and that movables could not
be transferred by Deed, without the possession given.

Secondly, That the Assignment from Courten to Pergens was valid, and the
Composition made by him with the East India Company good and effectual against
Littleton and Pindar.

And desired to see the Opinions and Resolution of the most able Lawyers in
England under their Hands, as to those Points, which was returned into Holland
subscribed by Sir John Glynn, Sir John Maynard, and Sir Edward Turnor Speaker
in Parliament, giving their Reasons of the Law in the Case at large; affirming,
That the Grant to Sir Paul Pindar was good and consequently that to Jacob
Pergens void: asserting, (...) Amsterdam, for that the possession by the Law of
England goes with the property, and where the right or property is, there by
the Law is the possession, unless some other person obtain actual possession as
a Trespasser. Yet all proved ineffectual and to no purpose.

Then the King by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, Anno
1665.
reciting the substance of all the proceedings, with the Debt stated by the
Judge of the High Court of Admiralty, amounting to 151612 l. and in whom the
Property was vested, gave Commission and Authority to Sir Edmund Turnor Knight,
and George Carew Esquire to equipp and set forth Ships and Pinnaces to Sea, to
seize and apprehend the Ships, Goods and Merchandises of the Subjects of the
States General, to be of force until they should have reprized the said Debt,
Damages and Charges to the use of themselves, and the rest of the persons
interested in the same.

That after vast expenses in setting forth Ships to reprize the said Damages,
and before any thing considerable was gotten toward the charge of equipping
the said Private Men of War, the Dutch during the Treaty at Breda made several
Attaques upon his Majesty's Ships at Chatham, and other Ports, and procured
these Articles following (inter alia) to be agreed upon in the said Tre^.

(...) Scotland, France and Ireland, and the States General of the United
Netherlands, concluded at Breda July ^^/^^ 1667.

Artic. 3.
Also, That all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, Losses, which his said Majesty and
his Subjects, or the foresaid States General and their Subjects have on either
side sustained during this War, or at any time whatsoever heretofore, upon what
Cause or Pretense soever, be buried in Oblivion, and totally expunged out of
Remembrance, as if no such things had ever past.


