THE CASE OF THE Fishermen in KENT: Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the
Parliament.
THAT the Fishermen Inhabiting within the Liberty of the Vice-Admiralty of
Kent, may not be brought into a Corporation or Company with the Fishermen of
London or River Thames.

And that the Fishermen of London and River Thames may not be allowed to Drudge
for Oysters within the Liberty of the said Vice-Admiralty.

THe said Vice-Admiralty extends throughout the whole County of Kent, as well
in, upon, or by the Sea, or public Rivers, or fresh Water Channels, Ports,
Creeks, and all other places whatsoever overflown, between the Flux and Reflux
of the Sea, and to the full and high Water, or upon the Shoars or Banks
whatsoever adjacent from all chief Bridges downwards toward the Sea.

There are many Towns of Note within this Liberty; as Rochester, Strood,
Chatham, Milton, Feversham, Whitstable, Herne, Reculver, Herchington, Margaret,
Kingsgate, Broadstaires, Ramsgate.

Within the said Vice-Admiralty there have Courts been kept time out of mind
for Rectifying and Correcting all Abuses done upon the Waters, etc. within that
Jurisdiction.

And in particular, a Court is kept at Pleasure for the well ordering of the
Oyster Grounds within the said Vice-Admiralty; And for Correcting all Offenses
and Misdemeanors done by the Fishers therein, contrary to the Orders of that
Court. And the Authority of the same Court has time out of Mind prohibited the
Drudging for Oysters within the said Liberty, by all Persons whatsoever, who
have not served their Time to Fishermen Inhabiting within that Liberty.

All Fishermen within the said Liberty are at the Command of that
Vice-Admiralty upon all Occasions; but more especially for Their Majesty's
Service. And for that purpose there is a Register kept in the
Vice-Admiralty-Office of the Names of all Fishermen and their Servants, and
places of abode within the said River, that their Attendance may be required
whenever it shall be thought fit.

And most of Their Majesty's Ships lying in Harbor at Chatham; The Fishermen
within this Liberty are constantly called to assist in the Rigging of the Royal
Navy; And whenever it puts to Sea, most of the ablest and best Seamen amongst
them are constantly engaged in that Service.

So that if the Fishermen of London, or the River Thames, shall have the
benefit of Drudging for Oysters within this Liberty of the Vice-Admiralty, or
be let in to enjoy the rest of the Privileges there; it not only destroys the
most Ancient Jurisdiction and Courts of the Vice-Admiralty of Kent; but will
Ruin all the Fishermen there; (who are many Thousand Families) And destroy the
best Nursery and Breed of Seamen and Mariners in England by taking from them
their Trade and only Encouragement and Support.

The CASE of the Fishermen in KENT.


