Captain Leisler's CASE.
IN the Month of February 1688. there came News to New York, that the then
Prince of Orange was Landed in England; and in April then following, the
Inhabitants of New York received an account that the People of New England had
seized upon Sir Edmond Andross (the then Governor of New England and New York)
The President of his Council, and several others of his Council, as well
affected to King James's Interest; and thereupon the People declared for the
Prince of Orange and Protestant Interest, etc. Whereupon those of the Militia,
and others of New York, finding that Captain Nicholson (the then
Deputy Governor of New York, under Sir Edmond Andross) would not there declare
for the then Prince of Orange, etc. The Militia seized upon the Fort, and by
turns the Captains of the Militia (of which Captain Leslier was one) kept Guard
there; and thereupon sent their Circular Letters to choose an Assembly, which
Assembly, or Committee of Safety, Captain Leisler by the Assembly first made
Captain of the Fort, and soon after Commander in Chief of New York.
being met June 1689. Under their Hands and Seals appointed the said Captain
Leslier Captain of the Fort; and in August then following, under their hands
and Seals constituted the said Captain Leslier Commander in Chief of the
Province of New York, till Order should come from their then Majesty's. In
December then following, there arrived a Messenger from England with a Letter
from His Majesty, under the Signet, thus directed;

To our Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Nicholson, Esquire our Lieutenant Governor,
and Commander in Chief of our Province of New York in America. And in his
Absence to such as for the time being, take care for preserving the Peace, and
Administering the Laws in our said Province of New York in America.

Which Letter, after a short introduction, runs in these words;

We do hereby Authorize and Empower you to take upon you the Government of the
said Province, calling to your Assistance in the Administration thereof,
Captain Leisler by the King constituted Deputy Governor of New York.
the Principal Freeholders and Inhabitants of the same, or so many of them as
you shall think fit: Willing and Requiring you to do and perform all things
which to the Place and Office of Our Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief
of Our Province of New York, does or may appertain, as you shall find necessary
for Our Service, and the good Government of Our Subjects, according to the Laws
and Customs of Our said Province until further Order from Us; and so We bid you
farewell. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 30th. Day of July, 1689; in the
First Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, Nottingham.


Captain Leisler (being as before) Constituted Commander in Chief of the
Province of New York, and Nicholson having been gone from New York about six
Months before the Kings Letter Arrived: The Messenger told Capt. Leisler, that
if he would receive the Letter, Note.
and give a Receipt for the same, he should have it; which Capt. Leisler
accordingly did, Captain Leisler by virtue of the King's Letter, acts as
Lieutenant Governor for ^3 Months before Ingoldsby arrived.
and Capt. Leisler being by His Majesty thus Constituted Lieut. Governor, he
continued by Virtue of this Authority under the Signet, Lieut. Governor without
any Opposition, for about thirteen Months, and then Capt. Ingoldiby Arrived at
New York with two Companies of Foot, who by his Commission was obliged to obey
the Governor of New York for the time being; Capt. Ingoldsby disowning Capt.
Leisler's Government, without any Authority demanded Possession of the Fort,
which Leisler refused; but offered him and his Soldiers all the Accommodations
the City of New York could afford. Ingoldsby, before Slaughters arrival,
demands Possession of the Fort, (without producing an Authority so to do);
which Leisler refused to give.
Capt. Ingoldsby continued some short time peaceably at New York; at Length,
upon Complaints by the Inhabitants of New York, against the rudeness of Capt.
Ingoldsby's Soldiers, there happened some Disturbance, and thereupon Ingoldsby
planted Guns against the Fort, etc. So that soon after many Guns were fired
both against, and from the Fort. On the nineteenth of March 1690, in the
Evening, Coll. Slaughter Arrived at New York, and that very Night read his
Commission, and Swore four of his Council, and then fent Capt. Ingoldsby to the
Fort to demand Possession thereof; Capt. Leisler hereupon sent one that knew
Coll. Slaughter, out of the Fort, to see whether the Coll. was Arrived, and the
Messenger returning told him that Coll. Slaughter was come; upon which Capt.
Leisler about ten that night sent two Persons to Coll. Slaughter to
Congratulate his Arrival, and to offer him Possession of the Fort, and to
receive his Commands, and Capt. Ingoldsby did then promise those Messengers
should safely return, but contrary hereunto those Persons were Seized by Coll.
Slaughter; upon notice hereof, Capt. Leisler took care to put all things in
order for the delivery of the Fort the next Morning to the Governor, and
accordingly in the Morning sent a Letter to the Governor, desiring him to send
one to take Possession of the Fort, whereupon Capt. Ingoldsby was sent, and
then Capt. Leisler ordered the Gates to be opened, and Capt. Ingoldsby with his
Soldiers were let in; Leisler Commanded about three Hundred Men then with him
in the Fort, to lay down their Arms, which they immediately did; and Marched
out of the Fort.

There happened no Act of Hostility after Colonel Slaughter Landed.

Captain Leslier and many under him were made Prisoners, and soon after
Leslier, Milbourn, Leisler is indicted of High Treason charged to be committed
two days before Slaughter landed, and consequently before Leisler's Authority
determined.
and others, were tried for High Treason and Felony charged against them to be
Committed the Seventeenth of March (which was two days before Colonel Slaughter
Landed, and whilst Leslier was by the King's Letter (as before) constituted
Lieutenant Governor) and at the Trial Mr. Dudley was President, or Chief of
that Court.

Captain Leslier produced a Paper to the Court, and desired to be resolved a
few Questions before he Pleaded, which the Court refused; Captain Leslier still
insisting upon that before he would plead, the Court gave Judgment against
Leslier and Milbourn for High Treason, and soon after they were accordingly
Executed.

Whether this Relation was proved before that Honorable Committee that last
Sat upon this Bill, Is Humbly Submitted to those worthy Members then present
-- And if this Account was then proved: It Is Humbly hoped this Bill may pass.


