THE CHARGE AND IMPEACHMENT EXHIBITED Against the Bloody JUDGES of our late
Royal-Martyred KING CHARLES.

WITH His Majesty's Proclamation, touching the horrid Murderers of His Royal
Father of blessed memory; and the most horrid and Execrable Treason committed
upon the Royal Diadem, Crown, Scepter, and Dignity, contrary to the known Laws
of the Land, and the Peoples Liberty. With the Resolves of Parliament, touching
Hugh Peter's, and Cornet Joyce, and the rest of the Wicked Actors that committed
the most Barbarous and horrid Murder in cutting off the precious Head of our
late Gracious Lord and Sovereign King CHARLES.


London, Printed for G. Horton, living near the Three Crowns in Barbican, 1660.

The Royal Summons.
THe positive judicial Law of God, is; That whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed. Genesis 9.6. And the reason is there rendered, because
such destroy Gods Image wherein man is made: And the cry of blood (if not
punished by man) is so great. Genesis 4.10. That the Lord comes down from heaven
to call the murderer to account, and by some visible, and remarkable
judgments or other, to stigmatize this sin, as these following examples will
more fully manifest, viz. Murderers ought to be punished with death. Genesis 9.6.
Exodus 21.12. Prove. 28.17. Rev. 13.10. No recompense is to be taken for it, Number.
35.32, etc. For it defiles the Land. Hos. 4.2 3. Its diligently to be sought
out. Deuteronomy. 21.1, etc. God punishes it head. Psalm. 55.23. It excludes from
heaven. Gal. 5.1. Rev. 21.8. Sundry other Scriptural Examples might we here
instance; As in the case of Pharaob, Abimelech, Absalom, Manasseh, Ahab, and
Jezabel, Zimri, Herod, Shallum, Manahem, Baanah, Rechab, and Cain, the latter
being cursed by God for murdering his Brother, Genesis 4. The other two
preceding, were slain by the command of David, for killing their Lord
Ishbosheth.

And shall not such who are guilty of Innocent Blood, nay Royal Blood, be
called to an account? yes, otherwise God forbid. In order whereunto, the Lords
and Commons Assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious and Christian
consideration, the most horrid and execrable Treason and Murder committed upon
the Person and against the Life of our late Lord and Sovereign King Charles the
First, of Blessed Memory, Declared their absolute detestation against so
abhorred an Act; And having made a large progress upon the Act for a General
Pardon and Oblivion, It was the Result of both Houses; That Colonel Harrison,
Colonel Barkstead, Thomas Scot, Cornelius Holland, John Lisle, William Say,
and John Jones, be exempted from the benefit of the Act for a General Pardon,
and Oblivion, for murdering of His Royal Majesty, of blessed memory.

As also, that Andrew Broughton, one of the Clerks to the pretended High Court
of Justice, and Edward Dendy, Sergeant at Arms to the said pretended High
Court, be likewise excepted from the benefit of the Act for a General Pardon;
and the other persons also who were concerned in the cutting off the head of
His late Majesty of ever glorious memory, to be also excepted: Hereupon the
Honorable Houses of Parliament Ordered, That George Joyce (that son of
Perdition) commonly known by the name of Cornet Joyce, and Hugh Peter's (one of
Baals Butcherly Priests) be taken into Custody, and that the Sergeant at Arms
attending the Parliament, do take the said George Joyce, and Hugh Peter's, in
safe custody, which was accordingly performed.

And whereas there are diverse other persons who sat, gave judgment, and
assisted in that horrid and detestable Murder of our late Lord and Sovereign
King Charles, of never dying memory, being deeply guilty thereof, and of that
most horrid and bloody Treason, have out of the sense of their own guilt,
lately fled and obscured themselves, whereby they cannot be apprehended and
brought to a personal and legel Trial for their said Treasons according to Law:
His Majesty therefore by the Advice of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, has commanded a Proclamation to be published, summoning all such
persons therein specified, to appear and render themselves within fourteen
days, under pain of being exempted from Pardon.

These are those, that Ambitiously aspired to that excess of Dominion, as if
themselves should never be brought to Judgment; whereas, indeed, the Dignity
of the Throne, and the Sovereignty of the Scepter, is no Boon of Fortune, or
thing of chance; for Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West,
nor from the South; neither by confederacy of Designs, nor fortuitousness of
Events: But, Government is Gods Ordinance, and Governors are all accountable
to Him as Supreme; the highest Empire, it is sub Jove Emperium, God is the
Judge, he pulls down one, and sets up another; And when he does it by
Divine Ordination, it is a Regular Providence, putting a period to the Royal
Line of one Family, and by transferring the right of Power to another. And whom
GOD sets up by a Divine Ordination let them look to it, who resist his lawful
Dominion: For, in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, a Cup of Wrath, whose
Wine is red and full of mixture; That is, whose Judgments are grievous and
full of horror. And where He finds a Disobedience to just Authority, there he
powrs forth of his Cup of Fury; The top whereof, the simple and seduced shall
drink to their Chastisement and Correction, but the maliciously wicked shall
drink up all, nay, suck out the dregs thereof to their temporal ruin and
eternal destruction. But, as for the Execution of this Wrath, we must leave it
unto God; for our most Gracious Sovereign Charles the Second, by Inheritance
and Divine Providence, King of Great Britain, etc. is full of Clemency and
Meekness, and may truly be styled The Mirror of Princes; as appears by his
late gracious Pardon: But many being deeply guilty of that most detestable and
bloody Treason, in passing Judgment and Sentence of Death upon our late
Martyred King Charles the First of happy memory; and endeavoring to escape the
hand of Justice by flight; His most Sacred and inimitable Majesty Charles the
Second, by the advice of His Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
commanded the ensuing Proclamation to be forthwith published, viz.

By the King.
A Proclamation to summon the Persons therein named, who sat, gave Judgment,
and assisted in that horrid and detestable murder of his Majesty's Royal
Father of blessed memory, to appear and render themselves within Fourteen
days, under pain of being exempted from Pardon.
CHARLES R.

CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all Our loving Subjects of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Greeting.
We taking notice by the information of Dar Lords and Commons now Assembled in
Parliament, of the most horrid and execrable Treason and Marder committed upon
the Person, and against the Life, Crown and Dignity of Our late Royal Father
Charles the first of blessed Memory: And that John Lisle, William Say,
Esquires, Sir Hardress Waller, Valentine Wauton, Edward Whalley, Esquires, Sir
John Bourchier Knight, William Heveningham Esquire, Isaac Pennington Alderman
of London, Henry Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert Millington, Edmund Ludlow,
John Hutchinson Esquires, Sir Michael Livesay Barenet, Robert Tichborne, Owen
Roe, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroope, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe,
Cornelius Holland, John Carew, Miles Corbet, Henry Smith, Thomas Wogam, Edmund
Harvey, Thomas Scot, William Cawley, John Downs, Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter,
Augustine Garland, John Dixwel, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, Jame; Temple,
Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave and Thomas Weight Esquires, being deeply Guilty
of that most detestable and Bloody Treason, in sitting upon, and giving
Judgment against the Life of Our Royal Father; And also John Cook, who was
employed therein as Solicitor, Andrew Broughton and John Phelps, who were
employed under the said persons as Clerks, and Edward Denby who attended them
as Sergeant at Arms, have out of the sense of their own Guilt lately sted and
obscured themselves, whereby they cannot be apprehended and brought to a
personal and legal Trial for their said Treasons according to Law. We do
therefore by the Advice of Our said Lords and Commons, Command, Publish, and
Declare by this Our Proclamation, That all and every the persons before named
shall within Fourteen days next after the publishing of this Our Royal
Proclamation, personally appear and render themselves to the Speaker or
Speakers of Our House of Peers or Comnions, or unto Our Lord Mayor of Our City
of London, or to the Sheriffs of Our respective Counties of England and Wales,
under pain of being excepted from any Pardon or Indemnity both for their
respectivs Lives and Estates: And that no person or persons shall presume to
harbor or conceal any of the persons aforesaid, under pain of Misprision of
High Treason.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the 6th. day of June 1660. in the Twelfth
year of Our Reign.
FINIS.

