THE SEA-MENS INVITATION, WITH A Passengers Observation In some particular
things which concern them that practice Navigation. 1 Their remarkable
Deliverances; and the use they make of them 2 Their tempting and provoking of
God about the Wind, which obeys the Lord. 3 Their abusing themselves and their
liberty when they go a shore, whereby the creature suffers. 4 Something in
particular to the Captains and Masters, and to all their Inferior Officers. 5
How little the Seamen (with the soldiers in the Fleet) are profited by their
Chaplains that in the year do get several groats out of their wages. 6 And a
more excellent way of Teaching shown then that of their Chaplains.


They that go down to the Sea in ships, that do business in great waters,
these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep, Psalm. 107.23, 24.
And they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know him from the least to
the greatest of them, Jer. 31.34. By a servant of the Truth, and a lover of
Righteousness, called William Caton.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

The Sea-mens invitation, with a Passingers observation.
GIve ear O ye Seamen; And listen, O all ye that practice Navigation; Is
there any men upon the face of the earth that has more emminent deliverances
from apparent perils then you? Is there any calling or employment, wherein the
Sons of men are exercised, that the wonders of the Lord are more evident, or do
more frequently appear then in yours? Can any men that replenish the Earth,
declare experimentally such remarkable deliverances from death, as you can?
has not the sentence of death been oftentimes passed by you upon your selves,
when you have seen no visible way to escape it? and even at the very time, has
not deliverance come from the Lord beyond expectation? what dreadful and
boisterous, terrible and tempestious storms do you often meet withal by Sea,
which were able to bring down the courage of the strongest man among you, and
to make his heart to faint, and his flesh to tremble? and have not your eyes
seen those stilled by him whom the wind and seas obey? But consider in the
height of them, and in the midst of your distress, when death was feared and
expected, was not then amendment of life promised, and a full resolution and
determination in your hearts to live more godly and righteously the residue of
your days, if that the Lord would be pleased at that time to deliver you? and
according to your desire it has come to pass, and your request in that
particular has been granted, as many of you can witness.

But now mark and consider what use you have made of the remarkable
deliverances before mentioned, have you not been elevated and puffed up by
them? have you not been the more negligent and carlesse in serving the Lord,
thinking that he would deliver you as he had done, though you spent your life
as you had done formerly? have you not often boasted of them, and vaunted your
selves in making vain repetitions of them over your cups and pipes, and do you
not often times curse yourselves, and swear by your deliverer, when you are
repeating of them as idle stories, rather then as remarkable deliverances? but
hear oh ye despisers of the Lords rich mercy, of his forbearance and long
suffering, How are your promises performed to the Lord, which you made in your
distress, or how have you paid your vows unto him? seeing that after the
hardness and impenitency of your hearts, you treasure up wrath unto your
selves, against the day of wrath, and Revelation of the righteous judgment of
God, who will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.4, 5.

Moreover notwithstanding your manifold mercies, and the remarkable
deliverances that you have above other men, who is there amongst the Sons of
men, that exceeds many of you in iniquity, in licentiousness and
Lasciviousness? alas for you, that you should thus requite the Lord, as if
he were like unto your selves; Surely friends, out of the multitude of his
mercyes, and in his tender compassion has he been pleased to deliver you out
of many external perils (which none besides him could have done) and eminent
dangers in which you had been overwhelmed long, ago had he not had
commiseration and pity upon you, who joines hand in hand to work wickedness,
and does rejoice in iniquity and takes more pleasure in unrighteousness then in
the Lord your deliverer, who has no delight in the death of a sinner, but
rather in showing mercy on those that fear him, and work Righteousness.

And be it known unto you O ye Sea-fairing men, that your iniquities exceed the
sins of many, who have not seen half of the wonders of the Lord, that you have
been eye witnesses of; How can superfluity of naughtiness abound more among a
people then it abounds among some of you? and how few are there among you that
will appear nobly to reprove it, but will rather connive and wink at it, yea
and join with them that live in it, although there is a witness for God
against it in your consciences, yet that is little regarded nor its reproofs;
for if you did mind it and its reproofs, then would you rather reprove the evil
in your companions then consent unto it, and so thereby you become guilty also,
even as he who sees a thief, and consents unto him; but oh be awakened to
righteousness, if there remains yet any true zeal in you for God, and let
wickedness be expelled out from among you, that righteousness may take place
in you, and this know that the spirit of the Lord God will not always strive
with you; therefore learn to do well, and cease to do evil, that truth and
equity may abound among you, as sin and iniquity has abounded, then shall your
light break forth as the morning, and your health shall spring forth speedily;
yea, then shall you call, and the Lord shall answer you, you shall cry, and he
shall say here I am.

One thing I have often observed among you (oh ye seamen) and that is your
tempting and provoking the Lord about the wind; but let me ask you does it
ever blow, but its fair for some of you? as for instance, if the wind be
Easterly, and some of you be in Holland ready to come for England, then the
wind is good and fair for such; and at the same time peradventure, some of you
may be in England ready to go for Holland, but frets against the wind which
obeyes the Lord, and when he pleases he causes it to come Westerly, so that
it becomes good for you also, but not the sooner for your tempting of God about
it. And if it continue not good until you by it be brought to your desired
haven, alas, how will you then frown against it, and provoke him whom it
obeyes by your cursing and swearing, by your impatiencie and frowardness? yet
notwithstanding, he who causes the rain to fall upon the just and the unjust,
he also makes the wind to be serviceable to you all, without which none of you
could sail from Country to Country like as you do, though it might be just with
the Lord (who is slow to anger) to cause the wind to be still, and so thereby
deprive you of the benefit of it, because of your unthankfulness for it, and
your unworthiness of it; and this know that, if he should bid or command it to
be still, you (if you were ten times more then you are) could not make it blow;
for it will not obey you, but him that created it (viz.) the Lord God of Hosts
is his name, who is daily provoked by you concerning this thing, and you chafe
and sret your selves about it when it is against you; but which of you by
cursing and sweaing by chafing and fretting your selves can make it blow as you
list, though it blows where it lists, and as he pleases whom it obeys?
Were it not better therefore for you to be still and quiet and content,
considering that although it be not good for you in particular, yet it is good
and fair for some that practice Navigation, who ought to have the benefit of it
as well as you, although none of you have ever seen it good for you all at
once, yet I believe there is none among you that has sailed upon the Sea half
a year together, but that the wind has been good for you at one time or
another. And this I say concerning it, that it may teach you, who are
disobedient to him whom it obeys (to wit the Lord) who rebuked the wind, and
said unto the Sea, peace, be still, and then the wind ceased and there was a
great calm; but though you are by him forbidden to swear, Mat. 5.34. yet you
are more disobedient to him then the wind, which ceased at his rebuke, but so
do not you from swearing at his reproof. He says love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, etc. But are not you disobedient to him in those things,
and in many more which might be instanced? And therefore I say the wind may
teach you, which sometime some of you will curse for obeying him, who says
bless and curse not; but your folly in this thing is mighty great, and the
Lord he will judge you for it, and do not think that he will hold you guiltless
who curses that which he brings out of his treasuries, Psalm. 135.7. which in
it self is very good.

And who amongst men could more subsist without it then you, who sometimes will
seem thankful for it, when it satisfies your wills, but if it cross you, bow
froward and impatient are you? fretting your selves and provoking him whom it
obeyes when it crosses you; therefore consider of this ye that go down to the
Sea in ships, that do business in great waters, and learn to fear the Lord, who
commands and raises the stormy wind; Note, when stormy winds come (with
which you are often offended, that it is the Lord that raises stormy winds,
and who also stilleth them, and him they do obey who makes the storm a calm,
so that the waves thereof are still: and then are not you glad when you are
delivered from the rage of the proud swelling waves of the boisterous sea? but
alas how quickly then do you forget your vows which you made to the Lord,
when your hearts fainted and your souls melted because of fear and trouble that
was upon you in the tempestious storm, when you were almost at your wits end?
but O that you would now be persuaded to pay your vows to the Lord, and not to
forget all his deliverances, nor yet his mercies and favors which he has
bestowed upon you, then would he oftentimes for your sakes rebuke the winds and
the sea, yea he would hear your cry in the time of trouble, and bring you out
of your distress.

Wherefore be awakened to righteousness, oh ye Sea-fairing men, and cease from
rejoicing in iniquity, and from taking pleasure in unrighteousness, least that
the Lord cause the great deep to swallow you up, like as it has done many
thousands before you, who have been Rebellious and disobedient to the Lord whom
the winds and the seas obey.

Another thing has been observed by others as well as my self among you, and
that is this (to wit) when you have been several months upon the sea, (more or
less) and that afterward you by the providence of God come well into a
Harbor; and being permitted to go a shore, either about your business, or to
see your friends, or to refresh your bodies, or the like, even at such times do
you most shamefully abuse your selves, by drinking excessively until you make
your selves more like beasts then men; And thus you abuse your selves and your
liberty, and comes thereby the more to be bereaved of it, and in all this the
creature suffers, being made subject to this vanity though not willingly.

But for the sake of the weak, and of those that are almost void of
understanding among you, I shall show you in three particulars how the creature
suffers: First, it may suffer by being several months upon the sea, being kept
with salt and dry victuals, and sometimes great scarcetie thereof, not only of
meat, but also of drink, insomuch that a cup of clear water with a crust of dry
bread would be of great worth sometimes; and such a day some of you have seen.
Secondly the creature suffers when you come a shore (even the very time when it
should be refreshed,) by your excessive drinking and intemperate eating, you
not being wise enough to govern your selves in such a condition, when your
stomachs will not bear much meat, partly by reason of the long scarcety, nor
your heads much strong bear, having drunk little for a long time before; thus
the good creatures of God being abused by you, you through the abuse of them
become worse then you were when you had need of them. Thirdly, when you have so
abused your selves, with wine, strong water or strong bear, then can you not
govern your selves, but oftentimes does that which you ought not to do, and
thereby transgresses the Law a shore, or the orders you have a board upon your
ship, and then it may be one punishment or another is inflicted upon you (if
the Officers neglect not their duty) whereby the creature is made to suffer;
And then after your drinking excessively, you are for a time unfitter to do
your business then you were before you went ashore; and then peradventure by
reason of your abusing your selves and others, you may come to be debarred of
the liberty of the going a shore, to take the benefit of the wholesome Air, and
to be refreshed with such things as the Country do afford, which you may have
need of, and yet want them aboard.

To the Captains and Masters of all Ships, and to all their inferior officers.
HAd you been guiltless of those sins whereof the Seamen (whom you are set
over) are guilty, then you should have been a terror to them that do evil,
and much of the evil which abounds amongst them would have been suppressed by
you, who are Authorized to rule over them; but much of your authority you lose
by partaking of their sins; for behold, does not the witness of God in your
own consciences accuse you, and tell you, you are inexcusable your selves,
forasmuch as you are overtaken with those sins your selves which you reprove
them for? But consider, ought you not to have been good patterns, and examples
of righteousness among them? ought you not to have walked in the fear of God
among them, and endeavored to have kept them in the same? ought you not rather
sharply to have reproved them for their evil, then to have joined with them in
the evil, as oftentimes many of you do? and have done, when you see they cannot
govern themselves, ought not you therefore to govern them? wherefore are you
Authorized and set as Masters and Captains over them, if not to govern and
order them? But how can you do that when you are inflamed with wine, strong
waters or strong bear? and at such times your weakness and nakedness does
appear unto them, and if you reprove and punish them for being as you are, then
the Lord by his witness does judge, and condemn you; for you being guilty, the
Lord will not acquit you, neither shall you go unpunished; but this I would
have you observe, that whilst you are guilty of those things for which you
reprove them, you cannot reprove them with that authority and boldness you
might do it if you were clear your selves of those things for which you reprove
them, neither is your reproof and punishment so effectual to them as it might
be, if you were free from that for which you reprove and punish them; but alas
what is that sin among them that you are free from? And therefore cannot their
transgressions be reproved by you as they ought to be, until you have ceased
from your own. And this I say, if you were but faithful unto the Lord in what
you know, you might be instruments of good among them whom you rule over; but
while your conversation is so vain, your carriage so light, your behavior so
wanton, and your words so unsavory, there is little hope of their reformation
who follow you for examples; Oh therefore be awakened to righteousness that
you may be patterns of righteousness to those that thirst after it, if there
be any such among you: and grieve not the holy spirit no longer, which daily,
secretly reproves you, the reproofs of which has been set at naught by many
of you, as it appears by your continuance in the reproveable things for which
you are reproved, and these few lines are to you Captains and Masters, with
your inferior Officers, not to upbraid ye, but to reprove you to
righteousness, that you may come faithfully to discharge your duty in those
things which are committed to your charge and trust, for which you are not
only to be accountable unto man, but also unto the Lord, who will render a
reward to every one according to their deeds done in the body, whether they
be good or evil.

And as for you who have Chaplains aboard with you, whom you look upon to be
Ministers of the word, and whom you own as teachers; This I have to say unto
you in general concerning them, That if they were sent of God to preach his
word, and to teach you, then they would preach freely without coveting your
groats or diminishing from your wages.

Are they not of that sort of whom the Lord speaks by his Prophet Malachi, Mal
3.5. and says I will be a swift witness against those that oppress the
hireling in his wages, seeing they must have a groat in the month out of your
wages, and has the same wages allowed them that you have; mark, do you not
work harder for your wages, and take more pains for the same then they? then
judge you whether this be equal or not that they should have of your wages, for
which you were hired, not being content with as much as must serve you who are
worthy of your hire, and its pity that you should be oppressed by them
hirelings, who it may be may have two hungroats in the month one of them more
then one of you, If they did not come more for the love of your groats, then
out of love to your souls, its probable that the same wages might serve one of
them, that serves one of you.

Moreover, if there be a hundred men in one Frigot more then in another, will
not they seek to get into that Frigot where there is most men? and is not this
one of their ends that they aim at, (viz) so many more men, so many more
groats in the month? And here they resemble their brethren the parish teachers
who will strive to get that parish Church (as they call it) where there is most
Tithes, or the greatest benefice: Now I say such are not Ministers of the
Gospel, neither does the Lord send such to preach his word; therefore cannot
they profit you at all: And again if they were Ministers of the word, or
appointed of God to teach you, then they should be good examples to you, which
they are not in their pride, in their covetousness, and in their oppressing you
in your wages, neither are they good examples to you, in their intemperate
drinking until they be inflamed, nor yet in their lightness and wantonness by
which they cause you to err: And are not they inexcuseable for judging and
reproving you for these things whilst they themselves are guilty of the same?
But some will say that after they are rejected upon the Land, they will serve
poor seamen; And when you have them, what are you benefited by them? or what
difference is there in your life and conversation that has them, and theirs
that have them not? hitherto I have perceived none; for wickedness and
profaneness abounds, both among you that have them, and also among them that
have them not. Therefore in love to your Souls am I moved to show unto you a
more exellent way of teaching then theirs, which shall be free without money
and without price.

Hear now then O ye Sea-fairing men who practice Navigation, have you not been
sometimes in jeoperdie of your lives? yea, have not your hearts sometimes
fainted, and your souls even melted, (as it were) within you, by reason of the
extremity of fear, and trouble that has been upon you in perilous and
tempesteous storms? And has not there some thing even at that very moment of
time been awakened in you, whereby you have in measure seen the wickedness of
your condition, and the sins of your youth? now that which was thus awakned in
you, was Gods witness, or the light which Christ Jesus (the Son of God) has
enlightened you with all, which from thenceforth (if you had obeyed it) it would
have taught you the residue of your life to have lived godlily, righteously and
soberly in this present evil world, it would have taught you to have forsaken
drunkenness, pride covetousness, lying, swearing, cursed speaking, yea in few
words it would have taught you the whole duty of man, which is to fear God and
keep his commandments; And this is that teacher, the excellency of whose
teaching excels your Chaplines; For they teach you to believe that the
Scripture is the light, and the word and the power of God, but this will teach
you to believe that he is the light, Joh. 5.39. Romans 1.16.
and the word of whom the Scripture does testify, and that the Gospel is the
power of God according to the Scripture; They will teach you by an hour glass,
it may be two or three hours in the week, but this teacher will not be limited
to an hour, to a time, nor yet to a place, but is always present with you to
teach you the fear of the Lord. 2 Timothy 3.
They through their Ministry may keep you always learning, and yet not be able
to bring you to the knowledge of the truth; but they who are taught by this,
come to the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus; this teacher will teach
you freely without money and without price; but your Chaplains must have a
certain sum of money, otherwise many of them would lay down their trade of
Preaching. This will teach you to sing with the spirit and with understanding,
1 Cor. 14.15.
but they will teach you to sing David's conditions, which he passed through,
and which many of you undergand not; 1 These. 5.22.
This will teach you to pray with the spirit and with understanding; but they
will teach you to pray formally at set times, as if the spirit were limited to
a form, and the holy one of Israel to a set certain hour; This will teach you
to shun evil in its appearance, to avoid the pollutions of the world; and to
forsake sin, and to abstain from it, but they will teach you that you cannot
escape the pollutions of the world while in the world, Prove. 14.34.
but that you must be polluted with them; neither that you can be free from
that which is a shame (or a reproach) to any people; they will teach you to
contend against that which reproves you for sin and condemns it in the flesh
( viz. the light in your conscience:) But it will teach you to love it, to obey
it, to follow it, though it judge you, and reprove you, it is for your good,
that you by it might be brought out of the things for which you are judged and
reproved into peace with God who teaches his people by this teacher, whose
teaching by it is a more excellent way of teaching then man's invention; which
many in these latter days have received by tradition, of which sort your
Chaplains are who oppress you in your wages; and teaches for doctrines things
which they ought not for filthy lucres sake; 1 Timothy 3.3.
as in those particulars before mentioned you may see which briefly I have
instanced, but many more might be alleged whereby it might be more evidently
manifested that the way by which God teaches (in the light) does far excel
the teachings of your Chaplains; 1 John 2.27.
and this teacher whereof I speak is that which teaches of all things, which
is truth, and no lie, which abode in the Saints and abides in them, and as it
taught them, so were they to abide in him who is light, Christ Jesus, and then
they needed neither Priest nor Chaplain nor any man to teach them, and they
that come to witness the teachings of this teacher (the anointing) they need
not say one to another, know him who has promised to teach his people himself,
even him whom the winds and Seas obey; for such comes to know him and his
teachings, even from the least to the greatest.

Now if you would come to know this excellent way of teaching, you must come to
the light which shows you sin and evil, and convinces you of the same, and
then you will come to know its teachings, guidings and leadings, love it, and you
love Christ; believe in it, and you believe in Christ, obey it, and then you will
obey him whom the winds and the sea obey, therefore be not rebellious and
stiff-necked, O ye that sail upon the great deep, but turn you unto the Lord at
his reproof, who secretly oftentimes does reprove you for your sin and
transgression whereby you have been long separated from God, who does not
delight in the death of a sinner but rather in showing of mercy.

O that you would be wise and learn to fear the Lord, then should I with
thousands more rejoice in your Reformation; And this I know, that there are
some among you which is daily burdened with the wickedness that abounds among
you, and yet scarce dare to reprove you, finding so much in themselves that is
reproveable, but if such do keep to the light whereby that which is reproveable
is manifested, they will come to feel the opperaperation of the spirit of
judgment and of the spirit of burning in themselves, whereby they will come to
be purified, and then they may freely reprove that in another which is judged
and condemned in themselves.

Truly (O ye sea-fairing men) my soul pitpittieth you, Isay 57.20.
when I consider that you are like the troubled Seas which casts up mire and
dirt, your mirth and you melody, your jesting and your folly, your laughter,
and your vanity, your pastime and your singing, your storming and your raging
sometime against the wind, and sometime one against another, alas what is it
more then the mire and the dirt, or the foam of the troubled Sea which is your
figure: I have also observed that it is hard to find a grave solid sober man in
a ship that fears God and works righteousness, but upbraiding and provoking
one another to naughtiness and folly; superfluity of that is to be found among
you, as if you should not be called to an account for it; but O! let the time
past suffice wherein you have done very foolishly, and now learn to fear the
Lord; and let the wind and Sea (which you have so much accasion for, teach you
to obey him, who has more delight in obedience to his voice, then in
burnt-offerings and sacrifices.

This is the day of your visitation wherein the hand of the Lords love is
stretched out toward you, 1 Samuel 15.22.
and wherein he is waiting to be gracious unto you, therefore now in this the
day of the Lords everlasting power, seek ye the things which belong to your
peace, while they may be found, least the day come wherein they may be hid from
your eyes; in love to your souls is this Paper write and sent among you as a
token of Gods visitation to you, from one who has viewed your condition, and
was moved with commiseration and pity toward you who now has time, but how
long you may have it you know not; therefore while you have it, prize it.

Amsterdam in Holland the 4. Mon. 1659. W. C.

THe mighty day of the Lord is coming, and he will teach his people himself,
who is gathering his people, from all false shepherds, and Christ Jesus the
great Shepherd, shall rule over them and teach them who will write his Law in
their hearts, and put his Law in their minds, and he will be their God, and
they shall be his people, Heb. 7. and his annoiting shall be in them, and as
that does teach them they shall abide in the Son, and in the Father, and his
spirit in them shall lead them; and as that does lead them, they are the Sons
of God; and it shall lead them into all truth, and it shall comfort them, and
bring all Christ's words to their remembrance which he has spoken forth, and
that spirit is it that does reprove the world, which is the Saints Comforter,
therefore to that, that does reprove you all, must you come before you know the
Comforter.

THE END.

