WAR Practically Performed: SHOWING All the REQUISITES Belonging to a
Land-Army, IN Marches, Battles, and Sieges. Deduced from Ancient and Modern
Discipline By the Experience of Capt. NATH. BOTELER.

London, Printed for Peter Parker at the Sign of the Leg over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1672.

To the Honorable Sir RICHARD BROWN Knight and Baronet, Major General of the
City of London, by His Majesty's special appointment.
SIR,
THE Spheres in their several Orbs turning about the Center that glorious
Luminary the Sun, do by a mutual concord serve in their courses to the
preservation of the whole Universe. Even so is it with sublunary Bodies in
Terrene Governments. The King (who is not only Head but Heart of his Subjects)
makes use of suitable Spirits to grand Employments, that so the refulgent Rays
of Regality may disperse the influence of good Government amongst his people.

The eminency of your late sufferings in our distractions, has most worthily
raised you to be a Star of the first Magnitude in the Sphere of this great and
populous City. And no wonder, when the meanest amongst us has found your
exquisite industry in making Justice Scale an Armature sufficient to defend our
heads from the fury of Mars his sword. It Is certain, when Military and Civil
Knowledge concur in one Magistrate, the Citizen may then sleep securely, and
look upon his Shop without fear of filching. Your Genius leading you naturally
to use both Swords, (being centred and cemented in you by long Experience) it
has been a motive inducing me to present you with this Posthumous Work of a
Learned Author. No doubt but something may be found worthy observation therein,
he having so ingeniously compared Ancient with Modern Discipline, and drawn the
whole Art of War into a Compendious Manual. It may be looked upon as a Generals
Guide, or rather Remembrancer, and the Soldiers Instructor in the Politic
part of War; by which means Natural Valor and daily Experience may make him
capable of climbing to the highest pitch of preferment. Sir, I hope you will
peruse it with pleasure, and find such content therein as may be a recreation
to your Martial Spirit; which will something extenuate the boldness of

Your Servant H. F.

A DISCOURSE OF The Requisites in making of a War by Land. BOOK I. Of
Munitions, comprehending Moneys, Arms, and Victuals.
THere are three especial Requirables in the making of War by Land: Munitions,
Men, Discipline.

Under Munitions are comprehended all such materials, or things in general, as
a War cannot be without: And these, via apparanda sunt, ut vincas celerius. And
the principal of these are, Moneys, Arms, and Victuals: for Disciplinam non
servat jejunus exercitus.

The second Requirable being Men or Bodies, are distinguished into
Common-Souldiers, and Officers or Commanders: Of Common-Souldiers, there are
Footmen and Horsemen, or the Infantry and Cavalry: Of Commanders; the
Generalissimo (who is to be only One, under the penalty of losing All) and his
Sub-Alterns, as the Lieutenant General, the Lord Marshal, the
Serjeant-Major-General, the Colonel-General, with the rest of the Officers of
the Field, hereafter to be particularized.

The third Requirable (as inseparable in a regular War as any of the rest; for,
plura concilio, quam vi perficiuntur) is Discipline. And this comprehends all
Councils of War, Martial Courts, Stratagems, and Actions of that nature; as
also managements of Arms, Forms of Battails, Marchings, and the like. And of
every one of these, in this our Treatise, somewhat shall be observed; but very
briefly of them all.

CHAP. I. The necessity of Treasures. How they are attained by several Princes:
and how they may be best preserved.
AND first of the first principal, (Moneys or Treasure) included under the
first Requisite, which is Munition. Now Treasure or Moneys are justly termed
the sinews of a War, as without which no orderly War can march or be managed:
and therefore not to be undertaken (especially offensively) without a
sufficiency of this kind, timely and beforehand laid up. The wise Warrior,
as well as the wise Builder, being in the first place to forecast his accounts
and future expenses, before he enter upon any Action of this Nature. And herein
the main difficulties are how to attain them, and how to preserve them.

The Tyrants of the East, as the great Sultan, the Persian, the Mogol, and the
Tartarian, furnish their vast expenses of this kind, by being absolute Lords of
all their peoples Estates, who are all their slaves. The Christian Princes, who
pretend not so far this way, but govern more moderately, do this much after one
manner, allowing only some petty varieties; as the Monarchs of Spain, by their
Customs upon imported and exported Merchandise, but in particular and chiefly
by their rich and unexhausted Mines in America. The French Kings by Customs
likewise, and Imposts, and especially Imposts upon Salt. The Monarchs of Great
Britain by Customs also, but most substantially and thoroughly by Subsidies and
Fifteens granted in Parliament. As for the rest of the mixed Monarchs, as those
of Poland, Denmark, and Swedeland, they do the same, by the same ways, with
little or no difference; only the great Duke or Emperor of Muscovia, as he is
the nearest neighbor to the Eastern Tyrants forementioned, so he comes
nearest unto them in this kind of Tyranny especially. As touching the
Commonwealths of Christendom, governed in a kind of Aristocratical way, as
those of Venice, the Grizons, and Switzers, and some others, more petty, as
that of Lucca, Genoa, and some of the free Towns in Germany; though in the
means of their raising their Treasures they differ not much from the absolute
Princes forementioned, yet can they better enlarge themselves according to
their occasions, as being done by a general Consent, and not at the will or
pleasure of any One in particular. Hence is it that the United States in the
Low Countries, having been forced by their exigents to nurse themselves up by a
War, adventured upon an Addition to all the former Christian courses, by their
Taxes upon all sorts of Victuals, called Excises; and hereby fill their
Exchequers, and to admiration have maintained a long War against a Potent
Enemy.

I intend not to enlarge my self farther in this particular of procuring
Treasure, as being a work rather appropriated to the Statesman then Soldier:
only I shall take liberty to pass a Souldier-like Censure upon them in brief;
as, That that of the Tyrants is so insupportable, as it cannot be expected to
attend any other opportunity, then to clear it self by a general Revolt; and
therefore must be made good by as general a strength, which must needs exhaust
any Treasure, be it never so great, and make the Possessors poor, though never
so rich: That that of the Christian Princes must needs be subjected to many
casualties; as, to a decrease in Customs by the point of Trading, to the
hazards of loss when imported from the Mines in Foreign Parts, to the
discontenting of the Subject when upon occasion they shall be never so little
increased and innovated, and to over-tedious and dangerous delays (not to speak
farther) when they are to be had by consent of Parliaments: so that the
Low Country way, when (as now with them) it has gotten a Prescription by Time,
and a Toleration by Custom, seems preferrable to them all, and especially in
regard of the certainty of having them.

As for the preserving of them when they are gotten, I shall only say, that it
may be surest done, either by melting them into Bullion or VVedges, and so to
coin them upon occasion (as was the practice of the Ancients) or to lend them
out for some small profit to particular persons, upon good caution: an especial
care being had withal, that the Officers of the Exchequers be men of
integrity, chosen rather out of persons of honorable birth and breeding, then
of Mechanics, and men of base condition and quality. And thus we have done
all we mean to do about the first principal, included under the first
Requirable, which is Munition.

CHAP. II. Of Armours of proof. Of Buff-Coats, and quilted Jacks. The length of
the Pike. Pikes not to be overlong.
WE shall speak in the next place, and in this second Chapter, of the second
Principal contained under the first Requirable, that is, of Arms; and first, of
Defensive, and those fitted for the bodies of men: touching which, I shall not
particularize in the pieces and names, well enough known to every
Train-band-man; but only enquire into the use, and when they seem best fitted
for service, and for the turn they are provided.

And first of those called Arms of proof. A proof indeed of the degeneration of
men's spirits and courage, and wherewith the wearers become so overcharged, and
shackled, that they seem chiefly prepared to fight against the shock and brunt
of their own coats of Steel; and as if bound rather to defend their Arms, then
their Arms them.

In which regard (for mine own part) I find no reason why they should be in any
great request. For should there be found one man of a thousand so well
underlaid as to march or stand under one of them, yet shall he not be able to
fight, no not to keep his legs against the force of a Musket Shot within
point blank, or a level Range: for though perhaps it pierce not his thick
armor, yet shall it sure enough lay the bearer on his back, there to lie until
he find a Comrade or two to set him on his feet, or be trodden to death with the
prease of his own side. And truly there is but little difference, either in
respect of assistance to his Party, or safety to himself, between a man's
being killed by a Musket Shot by the want of his boisterous Arms, and his
being overthrown and tortured to death by having them upon him.

I deny not, but such kind of Arms as are defensible against the Sword, the
push of the Pike, and the force of a Pistol-shot, may be usefully born: and I
make it a Quere whether this may not be done as well by a good Buff-coat, or at
the least, by those quilted Jacks (in my opinion improvidently left off of
late) used by our old brave English Archers, as by any iron Armor whatsoever:
for these, when they are not pierceable, are not wearable; and when pierceable,
make the wound incurable for the most part, by having a piece of the iron of
the Armor carried into the body before the bullet. And certainly, (unless we
will fall out with most of the Ancients in point of credit) it must be granted,
that they had the use of certain linen Arms of excellent proof and use. And
Justus Lipsius (lib. 8. dial. 6.) out of Nicetus his Chronicle, thus describes
one of them: Conradus (says he) fought without a Target, and in lieu of a
Curace, he had a woven weed made of Flax, soaked in sour Wine, well salted
withal, and often folded. It was so sure against outward force, being thus
fulled, salted, and folded, that it could not be pierced with Iron or Steel.
Pliny (Hist. Not. l. 8. c. 48.) also makes mention of the like. And Caesar
(De Bell. Civ. l. 3.) has somewhat to this purpose. And truly it is much to be
pitied, that this Invention has been lost to our age.

The next Weapon Defensive (especially against Horse) is that of the Pike, of
which the most considerable is the length. Touching which, it is generally
held, that it ought not to be shorter then eight Cubits, which make twelve
foot. Some Pikes (among the Ancients) have been found sixteen foot in length:
witness Polyenus (lib. 2. in Cleon. Sect. 2.) where he says, that Cleonymus
besieging Edessa, and having overthrown the Wall of the City, the Pikemen
(says he) sallied out, whose Pikes were sixteen cubits in length. And it is
not to be denied, but that short Pikes are greatly disadvantaged, having to do
with such as over-lengthen them: for with a long Pike, a man is able to strike
and kill his enemy, and himself not be touched. And hereof Patricius (Parel.
part. 2. l. 3. c. 8.) gives us an example at the battle of Sorano, where
Vitellozze Vitelli discomfited the Almanes only with the advantage of Pikes;
his (says the Story) being an arms length longer then those of the Enemies.
And at our being at the Island of Rey, after the Enemies horse (at our first
landing) charging furiously French-like, were most of them slain in the place
by our foot, and their Bodies of Pikes came up to the push of ours; It was
observed, that our Pikes were longer then theirs, and this was thought to be
one main cause of our so sudden and through routing of them.

Nevertheless (in my opinion) a consideration is to be had, that no Pikes be
admitted to be overlong, lest they both exceed the measure of his strength and
management that is to use them, and by their over-length do over-sway
themselves; and so by hanging crooked when they are to be charged, do hinder
both the force and certainty of their stroke. I hold therefore, that the
proportionable and due length of a Pike may be, when the head of the Pike of
the fourth man in the depth of the File, being charged, shall somewhat advance
beyond the face and shoulder of the File-leader. And the ordinary length now
required in Pikes, being fifteen foot, is well-near answerable hereunto. As for
the Three-quarter-Pikes and Half-Pikes, they are serviceable and proper to be
used upon the walls of Towns, and behind Ramparts, Brestworks, and in Trenches;
but not so for services against Horse, and in Campagnia. And thus far
concerning the Weapons of Defense, proper for the bodies of Men.

CHAP. III. Of the places and parts fit for Fortification.
WE are now to give some Advertisements concerning the Defense of Towns: and in
the first place, touching the places and parts fit for Fortification.

Now these are to be such by Nature, as may be made inexpugnable by Art, or at
the least brought to the nearest terms of being so. Of which kinds are Rocks,
Islands, Hills, and Necks of Land. But herein it is carefully to be observed,
that none of these places be commanded by an external height; or if they be,
that that part be fortified also. Observation is also to be made, that the soil
of the part be not Sandy; for then there can be no repairs either against
Battery or Sap. Respect is likewise to be had to the air, that it be wholesome,
and especially that the place be well provided with water; and so, that it
cannot be cut off by the Enemy: That it be in a Country well furnished with
Victual of all kinds; and withal so sited, that it may serve as a Bull-work
unto that Country, either by a Guard of a Port, or the Defense of a Passage:
That it be apt to offend an Enemy on all sides by Sallies; for so it shall be
apt also to be relieved, and cannot be blockt up with any one Fort alone: That
it be not so great as to require over-many men to Man and Defend it; nor so
little as not of capacity to receive a sufficiency of hands to give an
impediment to an Enemy in his passage: the mean betwixt these two, being, when
in the Diameter it consists of three or four hundred paces: and lastly, That
it be in such a part, as that no Siege can be brought before it, but by an Army
divided. To which end, the situation upon Rivers, and Tongues of Land lying
betwixt two Rivers, are most proper and convenient. And these are the usual
Advertisements and Observations to be made and received in the point of choice
of the Place and Part that is fit for Fortification. Whereunto I shall only add
thus much (confirmed herein by Gyrolamo Maggi, (lib. della Fortif. l. 1. fol.
4.) and Iacomo Castriotto, approved Engineers,) that in new parts to be
inhabited upon any terra firma, or any large Islands, where all Landing-places
are too many to be secured by Fortification; the most useful and provident part
to raise the strongest piece upon, is in some Mid-land place, where there is an
Intention to settle: the which nevertheless is to have some smaller pieces of
Fortification round about it, or near unto it, upon the most likely and obvious
Avenues, that so an assaulting Enemy may be impedited in his approaches, as
not daring to leave an Enemy behind him, whereby he may be in eminent peril of
being cut off from all manner of supplies, and may expect to receive continual
molestation by those in the Forts left behind him; and likewise the Inhabitants
may find means not only to shelter themselves in their persons, but to save
their goods and cattle within and under the command of this Fort thus situated.

CHAP. IV. The perfection of Works due to Fortification, in the point of a
Bulwork and its parts, and in the point of the Curtains and its defenses.
THe part proper for Fortification being thus found, some Caveats are to be
received touching the perfecting of the works. And these are, that an especial
care be taken, that the Bull-works be not hollow, and that the Piazza or Plain
thereof be raised equal with the Rampart to the foot of the Parapet: And that
there be no Vault nor Casemate that may give Impediment to the play of the
great Guns, either by blindings with smoke, or any other way: That no Angle of
a Bulwork be over-small, lest it prove easy to be battered; nor over-large,
lest the point with a small battery be hidden from the flank: That every
Bull-work have his Counter-mine; the which, though some think (by way of saving
of charge) may be timely enough done when an Enemy begins to make his
Approaches, yet for my part I cannot approve of so thrifty a presumption: That
every Bull-work have two Sally-Ports as secretly contrived as may be; to which
end, the Angle of the ears of the Bull-work is the most proper part: That every
Flank regard the face of the opposite Bull-work, that so the Enemy may be
dislodged from Mining the Rampart: That the Angle of the Flank be a right
Angle; because an obtuse Angle lays the Cannoniers or Port-holes overopen,
and a sharp Angle disordereth the Face of the Piazza of the Bull-work, and of
the ears thereof: That there be in every Flank, one piece of Ordnance at the
least, so secured, as that it may serve for a constant defense for the opposite
Bullwork: That the Port-holes next to the Angles of the Curtain, lie as little
discovered as possibly may be; provided nevertheless, that they regard and
scour the ditch and the covered way, or false Bray, with some part of the
circumjacent Campagnia; That the defense of the Face of every Bulwork be taken
out of half of the Curtain, and so be made, that it may be re-guarded by the
Flank, thereby prohibiting an Enemy to Mine; the which cannot be done if the
defense should be taken from the Angle of the Flank, as of old: That the
distance from the Angle of the Flank to the point of the opposite Bulwork, be
not above two hundred paces (within which distance the great Guns may work
their effects) nor fewer then one hundred and fifty; that so the Defendants
guarding in the Flank, may not be offended by the Enemies Musketeers from the
point of the Counterscarp: That the Ports be made in the midst of the Curtains,
and not of the Flanks nor Ears, which otherwise might be weakened by them: That
no part be discovered from the Spalto or shoulder; so shall it not be subject
to batteries, or at the least not to the same battery of the Point or Flank:
That the Curtains between the Bulworks be drawn in a right line: That no Bridge
lead directly to any part of the Work, that so the use of Petards may be
frustrated; and this also may be done by Draw-bridges: That the whole Work
command round every way, over all the plain where it is erected.

And these are the material and principal observations and advertisements due
to Works of Fortification, when new ones are to be raised, and the choice of
the place to be had at pleasure.

CHAP. V. Of defective pieces of Fortification. Of the Forms of Works: the
Triangular the worst Form.
WE are in the next place to make some advertisements touching such pieces of
Fortification as are defective, either in respect of Form, or otherwise: and
all such are so to be held, which participate not of the correspondence and
defense which they should borrow one of another.

Now this mal-correspondence may be reformed, by giving to the parts of the
same denomination, equal proportion in height, breadth, length and
declination, if the situation will possibly permit. And the defenses are
secured and amended by increasing of the points of the Bulworks to such a
moderation, as that they be not carried to the prohibited terms of sharpness;
the which for all that, serves not for the reformation of all old Works, but
only for such as are regular.

As for the irregular (besides the reformations of particular members) it will
be needful to build some new and entire bodies of Fortification. The truth is,
that in the reforming of the substance and main of old Works, more labor is to
be used then skill; for herein it is only necessary to fill the Bulwork, if it
be hollow; to increase the thickness of the Curtains and Parapets, if they be
not sufficient to resist a Battery; to make the ditches deeper, broader or
narrower, as cause shall require; to cut a Counter-scarp with his Ravelins and
Flankers round about; to advance the Spalto, or shoulder, if it be over-low, to
the heigh of the Cordone; to increase or diminish the scarp, as need shall
require: and lastly, to repair the Camiscia if it be ruinous.

As for such Fortresses as are sited on Sandy Grounds, being in themselves
altogether without remedy against battery or sap, the natural defect is to be
supplied by an Artificial Camiscia of wood, made with such proportion of Scarp
and thickness, as that it cannot be ruined but by much time and great labor.
And when the Curtains are excessively long, and thereby defective, the Redress
may be either by a Cavalier or a Platform, or by setting the Flanks the nearer
one unto another. But the best way is to make two Curtains of one, and to raise
a new Bulwork in the midst between them. And the Spalla may be perfected by
either the same, with a new Camiscia, or by retiring the Curtain farther into
the Fortress. As for the defects of the Gola of a Bulwork, they are not to be
reformed and made wider, but by removing of the Spallaes so much as is needful,
toward them of the opposite Bulwork.

As for the Forms of Works of Fortification, the Triangular and Square ones are
justly the most imperfect of all others, by reason that the Bulworks must of
force become over-sharp in the points (and especially in the Triangular Form)
whereby they are easily battered in that part, to the extreme danger of the
whole Piece; by reason that the Enemy cannot be offended from those parts, but
may safely come to the assault, without being endangered in Flank: and besides,
if the Parapet chance to be beaten down by the streightness of the site caused
by an acute Angle, all place is absolutely taken away for a retreat, and no
room left to erect another in its stead, either with Gabions or Trenches. In
these respects it may therefore be concluded, that the best Forms of Fortified
Towns, are those which consist of most sides, as nearest approaching to the
circular Form, which is the most capable of all others, and by consequent can
afford the more commodities for the accommodation of strong and ample Bulworks,
and have the Angles more obtuse. And the Streets likewise may the better be
direct and strait, which is a main matter toward the defense of a Town of War;
by reason that they may be the better traversed with Trenches and Barricadoes
upon all occasions. And thus much touching the Works due unto a Fort, and a
fortified Town, both regular and irregular. It remains to say somewhat of the
Ports; the which shall take up the Chapter following.

CHAP. VI. The best Forms for Ports. The part where the Ports are to be made.
TOuching the Ports of a Town of War (not to speak any thing of the Antique
ones, justly despicable) the general modern rule is, That the extremities or
points of these Works be not extended or thrust out any way beyond those of the
Curtains, lest by their interposition, they hinder the operation of the
Artillery, and so frustrate the defense of them: And that these Ports are to be
raised so near unto the Bulworks, that from them they may be defended by
Musket Shot.

As for the part where these Ports are to be made, the famous Engineer
San-Martin Propounds it to be upon the Curtain; their largeness to consist of
six Braces, their height of nine: and that near unto each Port, is to be a
Postern cut out of the Curtain, in breadth one Brace and an half before, and
three behind: and that the Counter-port should be of five Braces in breadth, and
eight in height: and between the two Ports, he would have left the covered
Piazza, or Plain, or Passage, to be in breadth one Brace, and in length thirty
two; having withal two places so framed, as from them to give fire on each side
upon the first Gate: and on each side of this passage to be three square Rooms
below, of eight Braces on a side, wherein to lodge the Soldiers of the Guard;
and as many above, directly over them, to be passed up into by two Ladders or
Stairs; the one Stair on the one side, and the other on the other, upon those
sides of them which lie within, and toward the Town and the Guard thereof: and
so the whole piece become a perfect Square, upon the flat top of which, he
would have a Cavalier to be raised, to be passed up unto by two other pair of
Stairs in the Flanks toward the Curtains.

Thus propounds the great Engineer, San-Martin or San Mariano. Nevertheless,
if the height of these Works be advisedly considered by this prescription, I
see not (howsoever the Front may make a gallant Prospect) but it must needs
carry which it very much of peril, and lie open to a Battery, by reason of the
height. And therefore I am of opinion, that these Ports with their seconds,
are not to be made upon the very Curtains themselves, but somewhat within them;
and so to make a kind of Ear or Pome unto it, the which may so stand out before
the Port, as to hinder the Enemy from beating upon it with his Guns, and
withal offend such of the Enemy as shall approach behind the shoulder: and
likewise it shall hereby play very freely upon that side of the Bulwork which
is next unto it, and upon the bosom or bowing of the foresaid Ear, Pome, or
Guard of the shoulder that flankers it.

True it is, that the way or passage which leads from the Port into the Town,
is to be (for a good way) somewhat extraordinary large, and withal with such a
bending, that two pieces of Battery, at the least, may directly and fully beat
upon the Port it self: to which end all the whole passage is to be kept clear
from all impediments of houses, or any thing else that may hinder the play of
these Ordnance.

CHAP. VII. Of Forts or Citadels within Towns. The best Forms of these Forts.
Of the Cavaliers within these Forts.
FRom these Ports we have occasion to observe somewhat touching such Forts and
Citadels as anciently, and in many places to this day, are raised and
maintained in some Towns of War; and serve as well to defend the place against
an assaulting Enemy, as to hold the Town it self in a we and order.

Now to this purpose, the antique use was to seat the Citadels in the midst of
the Town, upon some high and elevated part: and if none such was there to be
found, then to raise them in any other part, best tending that way.

The more modern practice has been, and is, to erect these Citadels in such a
posture, and in such a part, that the one half of them might be within the
Walls of the Town, the other half without, as the situation would bear. And
this was principally done, that supplies might be brought in or out unto the
Citadel, without being in danger to be hindered by the Town, if it should happen
to be impatronized either by Rebels or by an Enemy. But this way has not
passed without reproof, because the part without the Walls may be so ruined
either by Battery or Mine, that the part within shall not be able to put into
it any sufficient supplies.

It Is my opinion therefore that Citadels within Towns of War are most properly
sited, when they stand upon the most eminent and elevated part, and if it may
be, upon the very Walls of the Town, and so serve in the nature of a Bulwork
also, to guard and flanker the Curtains of the Wall on each side; but yet so,
as not to be offended by the over-vicinity of any of the Bulworks; and that
they be contrived with one or more secret Posterns, or private and close
Avenues, that Munition and Men may at all times be conveyed into them; and that
every way they have a full command upon the Town wherein they stand, and be
able especially to beat upon such parts thereof as are most frequented, and
especially the Marketplace and Ports; so that if the Town should chance to be
surprised by an Enemy, or turn Rebel, it may not only be battered by the
Fort, but the parts thereof disarmed, and means and commodity afforded for the
receipt of all such supplies as may be intended for the regaining of the Town.

As for the Forms of these Citadels, howsoever the Triangular and Quadrate
Forms are disapprovable in Royal Forts (as formerly was noted) yet in these, in
regard they are generally but small, they may be allowed to consist of four
sides, and indeed not of above five: yet is their circuits not to be so little,
but that there may be a sufficiency of Retreat upon all occasions: for
otherwise they may suffer much. As for their Walls, Curtains, and Bulworks,
they ought to be (in my judgment) somewhat larger, and their ditches deeper
then those of the Town, as sustaining the greater charge, and undergoing the
more of danger.

It is also very necessary, that within these Citadels, Mounts or Cavaliers, be
raised in the midst of them, not of stone (for these may not only be easily
ruined by an Enemies Counter-battery, but withal prove dangerous to the
defendants in Guard near at hand,) but of good earth: the top of which is to be
circled with Gabions, or solid entrenchments. And thus may the Territory and
Champain round about be commanded with the Ordnance mounted upon them, and the
Enemy be disabled from making his approaches but with much molestation and
danger.

As for the way to furnish these Citadels with water, it must be done by Wells
or Cisterns, or both, in convenient places. And for their Arms, Victuals, and
Powder, Caves and well-secured parts must be framed, wherein to store them: and
especially for their Powder, that it may be so distributed and repartited, that
it be not either by chance or treachery fired all at once. But of this more
shall be prescribed in another place. Now the benefit and assistance that have
been found by these kind of Citadels, was evidenced in that of the Campi doglio
at Rome, which recovered that City from the Gauls: In that of Tarento, which
held out five years after the taking of the Town, and was the means of reducing
it. And of late in an Action of our own in the journey to the Island of Rey,
where the Citadel of the Town of S. Martins, (though it lay without the Town,
because the Town was unwalled) after we had been possessed of the Town and
whole Island, for three months space, by its holding out against us, put us to
a Retreat, with the loss of our cost and labor, and the lives of some of our
best men.

CHAP. VIII. The best matter whereof to build Forts. How to be wrought where
there is sand.
AS for the substance and matter whereof the Works of this Nature are to be
made and to subsist, it is earth; and of earth, the perfect clay is the best.
And yet when this is to be had, provision is withal to be made of store of
brush and fagots. Of which, in raising the Bastions or Scarps, one faggot is to
be laid in every three foot of ground, and so thoroughout the whole Work: only
the Front of the Work is to be made up with good Turf, with the Green side
outward, and to be well lined with brush and fagots, with good mold thrown
both upon them and into them; the which will not only make it firm, but
comely. And where none of this prime earth is to be had, but that only of the
middle sort, which is part of a firm clay, and part of sand; then ought there
to be provided the greater store of this brush and fagots, and mud, or the like
stuff, to be thrown into the Fagots, and a faggot to be put between every two
Turffs of earth.

But where nothing is to be gotten but mere sand only (which is the worst of
all sorts of earth,) a very great abundance of brush and fagots are to be had
in readiness; and the most firm and stable Turff is to he fetched elsewhere,
and to be proportioned into eight Spans in largeness, and sixteen in length.
And the rows of Turff are to be doubled the one upon the other, and with great
Pins or Dibbles of strong wood, each of them of two foot in length, to be
pinned and fastened together. And every course of two Turffs are thus to be
pinned; putting withal into every course a sufficient store of fagots filled
with sand: and in the face of all, some of the best earth is again to be laid
to the thickness of four Spans, that so this earth may be scarped by little and
little, to cause the Work to show fair; two Scarps being to be made between
every five foot of ground, always mingling withal, within and near unto the
firm earth, some Straw, or Mud, or the like stuff.

And indeed these fagots or brush, are the most principal materials, as well
for defense in Cities, as in all approaches upon them: neither, to say truth,
can any defenses at all be suddenly raised by any means without them, nor any
half Moons, or the like; so that it may well be said, Want Fagots, want
Defenses.

And this is evidenced in no part more, then in the Low-Country-VVars, where
most of their designs reflect upon the taking and keeping of strong Towns, and
where all, both defenses and approaches are chiefly made up with these fagots:
witness above all others, the last famous Siege of the Borse, where the expense
in these kinds alone, was on the Assailants part infinite great, and the
effects no less admirable.

CHAP. IX. Of Guns in a Town of War: Where best to be placed.
HAving gone thus far in the point of Forts and Fortifyings of Towns of War,
we are to give some advertisements about the Artillery and Guns belonging and
due unto them.

It is the general opinion, that in a Town of War of the true size, which (as
before said) is to be in the diameter betwixt three and four hundred paces,
there are not to be fewer then sixty pieces of Ordnance, which are thus
qualified: Of Cannons twelve, shooting forty pounds of iron, which are to be
employed in Counter-Batteries. Of Demy-cannons eighteen, shooting twenty four
pounds of iron, for the defeat of the Enemies defenses and trenches. Of those
called by the French, Quarts du Cannons, shooting ten pounds of iron, wherewith
to offend the Enemy in his approaches, and to endanger his Sentinels and
Out-watches. Of Fieldpieces twenty, shooting five pounds of iron, or seven and
a half of lead; to be employed not only upon the Walls and Ramparts, but upon
the entries of Breaches: and besides all these, three Morter-pieces at the
least, for the throwing of Grenades and Fireworks into the Enemies Trenches,
and to give light in the nightime, for discovery of the Enemies Works.

These are the Repartitions of the great Guns, accounted requisite for the
defense of a well-fortified Town: wherein I shall only advise to change the
twelve whole Cannons for so many half ones. And my reasons are, first, because
they are more manageable: secondly, in that they may the oftener, and with more
ease, be charged, discharged, and recharged: thirdly, in regard that they do
not over-shake their Walls and Works, as Cannons do: and lastly, in that they
exact not so many hands to manage them, nor require so great expense of Powder
as the other.

As for the parts and particular places where these great Guns are to be
lodged, and especially during the time of a Siege; the Rules are, that if the
Enemy plant his Batteries against the Curtains of the Wall, the Guns in the
Town are to be mounted upon the Bulworks next unto that Curtain where the
Enemy batters: lodging withal some few Pieces upon the inmost brink of the
ditch which flankers with the breach. But in this point, especial care is to
be taken, that these Pieces, as well on the Bastion as Ditch, be never suffered
to play, save when the Enemy presents himself in multitudes to force the
breach, that so they may lie undiscovered.

But if the Enemy batters upon the Bulworks, then the neck of the Bastion is
to be cut and retrenched; and within this retrenchment some great Guns are to
be laid, and with good shoulders to be well covered and shadowed, until the
Enemy adventures to force the breach, and then to be thoroughly employed on the
sudden. And this retrenchment may also be used in defense of the Curtains, if
there be a void place for the making of a half Moon, or the like piece of
Work. And thus are the great Guns to be lodged and employed in a
well-fortified Town of War.

CHAP. X. Of the Outworks requisite to a Town of War. Of the Ditch, the
Ravelins, Hornwork, Counter-Scarp, Half Moons.
HAving thus far discoursed of the inward Works of a Town of War, we shall
now advertise somewhat also of the Outworks.

And first of the Moat or Ditch, which lies the next without the Town-VVall;
and is sometimes in some places without water, sometimes filled with water; and
again: sometimes filled with a standing water, sometimes with a current.

Now of these particulars, as also of the breadth of the Ditch, some disputes
have been which should be the best. Of which (as affecting brevity) I shall
only say, That the dry Ditch may be fittest in respect of the Works that may
be made in it; and the wet, in regard of retarding and troubling of an Enemy,
and forcing of him to fill it up, or to lay Galleries over it.

The second Out-work without the VValls, are the Ravelins; and these generally
are cut out triangle-wise, and are raised for the most part, in the middle of
the Ditch, and serve as well to defend and scowre the Ditch, as also in the
nature of Casemates.

The third Work without-dores, is that called the Counter-Scarp; and it is a
kind of Brest-work, cut enclining by little and little downwards, and sited on
the outmost shore or side of the Ditch: and it serves for the safety of
Musketeers.

The fourth Work of this nature, is termed a Horn-work; and it is contrived to
secure and scowre the Curtains of the Counter-Scarp. And it takes the name, by
having their corners of the Fronts shaped like a Fork, or two Horns joined
together.

Last of all, before these Horn-works are again cut out certain places of a
safe Retreat, called Half Moons; and these are also fortified with a
Counter-Scarp about one Cubit in height. And into these Half Moons are
passages cut out for the Soldiers to go from the Front of the Horn-work
behind them, over little Draw-bridges thrown over their Ditches.

And these are the chief and prime of all those Pieces termed Outworks; which,
to speak truly, are rather the Repairs and Succors of faulty Pieces of
Fortification, then any true ones themselves. Touching all which in general,
and especial care is to be had, that both the outward and inward Works of a
true fortified place, be so contrived, and so correspond one to another, that
some of them lying higher then others, and others again in an equal height,
they may with the more surety defend each other from the Flanks, and from
above: so that from the outmost to the next to it, and from thence to the rest,
there may be a safe retreat for the Defendants upon all occasions.

CHAP. XI. Ways of Defense, by Protraction, Frustration. Batteries, Mines,
Assaults, how to make void. Defense of Towns by way of Sallies. How to carry
off a Garrison out of a Sea-Town.
WE shall now propound some courses of defense by way of Protraction, and
others by way of Frustration; whereby a besieged place may happily preserve it
self against expugnation.

Now the courses by Protraction, are either by the raising of some small Forts,
or by Counter-approaches, or Sallies. The Forts to this purpose are to be
raised within Musket Shot of the Town, whose Ditches are to be emboqued from
the Flanks of the Bulwork, or at the least from some part of the Curtain, from
which also the platforms of the Forts are to be wholly discovered; that if the
Enemy should gain them, he may as suddenly be beaten out, and disabled from
maintaining them. The Counter-approaches are to be emboqued from the Flanks,
and to begin at the Counter-Scarp, and so to be carried toward the Enemies
approaches. And the use of these are, both to delay the Enemy in his
approaches, and to lodge Soldiers in; from whence they may aid the Defendants
in their Sallies. And the one part of the earth taken out of these
Counter-approaches, is to be cast up toward the Enemies Works; and the rest
to be carried into the Town for Munition-earth.

As for Sallies, whenever they are to be practiced by night, a sure course is
to be taken that intelligence be gotten how the Enemy is lodged, that they may
be brought on accordingly: if they be to be made by day, it must always be done
upon a sure advantage, and a strict injunction that they pass not beyond the
distance of a Reserve to be given them by the shot of the Town. And thus by
these Sallies discreetly made, the carrying of Galleries and Traverses intended
by the Enemy, may be hindered from being brought over the Ditch. And the like
may also be done by Counter-mines, if the Ditch be dry; and by throwing into
it combustible matter, as Fireworks, and the like. And if the Ditch be wet,
provision must be made of Boats and Floats, for the better conduction of these
Sallies whenever they are made. And these are the courses of Protraction.

Those of Frustration, are performed either by making void the Enemies
Batteries, or his Mines, or his Assaults.

His Batteries may be made void either by a Counter-batterie, which may
dismount his Guns, spoil their Carriages, or ruin their Gabions: Or by a
repair of the breaches made by the Enemies Cannon; to which end, store of
Timber, Pales, Faggots, Hurdles, and Munition-earth, are to be provided: Or by
carrying the earth into the Town which falls from the Battery, that it
remain not either in the Ditch, or increase the Scarp.

The Enemies Mines may be frustrated, either by Counter-mines, or by Batteries
from the opposite Flank, or by wetting of the Powder in the bed of the Mine, or
by giving vent unto the Mine. And either of these may be done when the place of
the Mine is discovered; and it may be discovered by the use of a long Piercer,
such as are commonly used in the proving and search after Cole-mines.

The Enemies Assaults (though they cannot be absolutely restrained) yet may be
sustained either by the Cannon securing in Flank, and fully re-guarding the
breach, being continually well plied during the whole time of the assault; or
by a Counter-Mure, whose platform ought to be straight, and the Flanks so
contrived that one may not endamage the other: Or by Mines as well in the ditch
as platform of the Counter-Mure, and which may be covered with boards full of
nails: Or by continual throwing of Grenades, Stones, Timber, artificial fires,
and the like combustible matter.

And if any place of strength, as Town or Fort, shall happen to be so assaulted
and stormed, as that neither hope of any inward defense remains, nor hope of
Quarter; in this desperate condition, if a Sally be made out of diverse Ports at
once, and that unexpectedly and thoroughly brought on, and well followed; it has
been found not only to mitigate the heat and violence of the assault, and
control the fury of the Enemy, the better to obtain reasonable and
Souldier-like conditions and Quarter; but also quite to alter the face of the
day, and absolutely to occasion the quitting of the Siege.

And hereof we have a punctual example from Caesar in his Commentaries, where
Sergius Galba (being sent to make good a certain passage of the Alps, and to
that purpose resolving to winter in the part) was suddenly besieged, and
assaulted in his standing Camp, by the native inhabitants; and being so
over-pressed with multitude, that no hope of longer defense remained, by the
advice of Caius Volusenus, the besieged Romans brake out through all the gates
of the assaulted Camp, on such a sudden, and with such a courage and alacrity,
that they gave the assailing Enemy no leisure to consider of what was done, nor
to satisfy their judgments and apprehensions upon so unexpected a motion: so
that the face of all things being suddenly changed, the Romans (says the
Story) found the means to slay more then the third part of thirty thousand men,
and absolutely routed all the rest. And if a Garrison or Army being besieged in
a Haven-Town, the Port being open to Seaward, shall be so forced upon by an
overpotent Enemy, as that the place must needs be forsaken; the safest course
to do this, consists in some Works to be made within the Town: and these
Works may be of three sorts; either by Muring and Barricadoing up the Entrances
and ends of the Streets and Lanes which might give access to the Enemy; or by
sinking some Ditches or Trenches cross those ways and passages, which may also
be stuck full of sharp stakes and calthrops, covered and shadowed over with
light and thin hurdles, that the assailing Enemy may not heed them; or to
hedge in all such Avenues as lead unto the Port, with a strong Pallizado.

As for the course of conveyance of the Soldiers out of the Town to
Shipboard, it must be carried with as little show of fear as may be; and by
the stay and showing of some of the lightest armed men here and there upon the
Walls and Bulworks, to make a semblance of a longer holding out of the place;
and that the Enemy may take no notice of the least intention of a retreat. And
these last reserve of men, are to be called off upon the giving of a word,
after the rest of the army are embarked, without noise or tumult.

And of this also we find a president during the Civil Wars between Caesar and
Pompey, who being besieged by Caesar in Brundisium, punctually practiced this
course, and safely shipped all the remainder of his forces into Greece, where
most of his Legions were before. And this he did without loss or trouble,
although Caesar did his best to prevent it.

And surely had we done the like at the Isse of Rey, and in this manner shipped
our men at the Town of St. Martins, and not marched over into the small Island
of Loiz by Land, in all likelihood we had escaped that blow, and had come more
fairly off in that our unluckie descent.

CHAP. XII. Of the expugnation of Forts: how by an Escalade, either in the
night or day. The Bridges for an Escalade, how ordered. Of Surprises by the use
of Petards. Of approaches upon a besieged Town. Of Galleries used in Sieges,
Batteries, how to be made and preserved.
ANd thus having spoken somewhat of all the ways and practices Defensive in a
War, we shall now do the same touching the courses of Offense.

And first of all, this ought to be received as a Maxim, that whosoever
intends to expugn any place whatsoever, is to be at that present, in that
part, Master of the Field: he ought also to be well informed of the situation,
strength and provisions of all kinds, wherewith the place he means to besiege
is furnished. As in particular, with what kinds of Ordinance, and how many;
with what quantity of Provisions, as well for defense as in point of Victual.
A true and perfect designation is likewise to be procured of the VValls,
Fortifications, Bulworks, and Bastions; of the strongest and weakest parts of
the place, as also of the most Minable and Unminable parts. And if he aim to
attempt it by surprise, that it be resolved with judgment, and executed with
diligence and resolution: and in particular, if by way of Escalade or Scaling,
either by day or night, that perfect information be gotten of the quality of
the Ditch; as, whether it be filled with a standing water, or a current;
whether it have a Counter-Scarp or not, on the innermost side. If it have a
Counter-Scarp, and the water in the Ditch be a current, the course by way of an
Escalade may be, by the provision of a dozen of light bridges made with two
poles of Pine, or some other light wood, to the length of fifteen or twenty
foot, and the thickness of a man's thigh; upon which poles, traverse pieces of
planks are to be fastened a footwide asunder, Ladderwise, and to be in largeness
about three foot. At the ends of which Ladder or Bridge, as well before as
behind, two strong cords are to be fastened; that by them, when the Bridges or
Ladders are thrown over the water of the Ditch, they may be drawn back at
pleasure.

These Bridges thus fitted, may each of them be carried by six men: and being
brought to the side of the Ditch, and set down upon the water, four or six
Soldiers are to bestow themselves upon each bridge, sustaining themselves upon
their Pikes, and so to pass over the Moat. These men being thus gotten over,
they are to thrust back the Bridges, holding the ends of the cords which are
next unto them, and giving room and a length of cord for the bridges to pass
over, that so they may reach to the other outward side. The which being done,
four or five Soldiers more are (as formerly) to pass upon each bridge; and
those Soldiers that were first over, are to draw these bridges up unto them.
And thus to continue doing, until there be so many Soldiers past over as the
place is capable to receive, or shall be held sufficient to carry the Town.

This being done, these bridges are to be drawn up out of the Ditch by the
Soldiers that have passed over, and are to serve in the nature of Ladders for
the scaling of the Wall. And because they may perchance prove too short for the
height of the Wall, it is a necessary providence to have for every one of
these bridges a smaller Ladder, not fully so broad as the Bridge-ladders
themselves; the which may be enchased and made fast unto them by their steps,
and so the want of height in the bridges supplied.

It is good providence also to provide some Ladders of cords with strong hooks
of iron at their ends; the which hooks by throwing, are to be latched to the
top of the Wall.

But these are not so much to be trusted upon, as the former Ladders, in regard
that they may be often thrown up, before they fasten. And these are the most
probable and secure courses to be practiced in Escalades. Many others there are
of this nature, which are to be varied, according to occasion and opportunity,
to this purpose.

But if a Surprise be intended by the use of a Petard, one approved course may
be, by fastening the Petard to the end of the Mast of a ship, much after the
same manner that small barrels of Guns are laid into stocks of wood. At the
other end of which Mast is to be hung a weight counterpoising the Petard, that
so it may be directed and moved in a straight line. And in the midst of the
Mast are certain wheels to be fastened, equal to the wheels of the Carriage of a
Cannon. Behind these wheels, when the Petard is brought to the part where it
is to do execution, impediments are to be laid to prevent all reverse. And it
is to be brought up as close to the place where it is to work, as possibly may
be. And against the time of giving fire to the Petard, provision must be made
of a Drawbridge, to supply the place of a Drawbridge belonging to the Town
that is to be attempted, if it should be broken down, or drawn up.

And thus much only touching such attempts as are to be made upon a Town of
War, by way of Surprise. But if this be to be done by encampings, observation
is to be made, that the Army be lodged and entrenched with such judgment, that
the Quarters on all sides, and at all times, secure and second one another; and
withal be so well united, that they may both repel the Enemy in Campagnia (if
he shall offer to fall on that way) and to maintain themselves withal against
the besieged Town. As for the approaches upon the Town it self, they are to be
begun somewhat beyond the distance of Musquetshot from the Towns Wall (except
the situation of the place afford other advantage) and from thence are to be
carried forwards to the Ditch, and then through the Ditch to the face of the
Bulwork: and rather to the Bulwork then the Curtains, (especially if the
besieged Town be any thing large) because the Curtains are guarded with more
then one Flanker, whereas the Bulwork is only with one.

And in the making of these approaches, these particulars that follow are
always to be observed. First, That all the earth taken out of the Trenches be
thrown toward the Town besieged. Secondly, That these Trenches lie not open to
any part of the Town, either in Front or Flank. And this to be done by carrying
of the Lines of the approaches fully without the points of the Bulwork toward
which it is to be approached; and withal, by making them deep below the line to
six foot, and not broader in the bottom then to twenty foot. Thirdly, That all
these approaches flank one another; which is done by making of many Trenches
(al le Forbici) every one of them being to be to the length of thirty or forty
paces. Fourthly, That every Trench be provided with some small Works for the
lodging of a Corpse du Guard; and these are to be cast up at the ends and
mid-parts of the Trenches. Fifthly, That at the head of every approach, a small
Fort be contrived capable to lodge so many Soldiers as may repulse any Sally.
Sixthly, That the Angles of the Trenches be deeper then the rest of them, so to
preserve them from being discovered from any part of the Town. Seventhly, That
the cutting into the Counter-Scarp be under ground, and not directly embocqued
with any part of the Wall. Eighthly, That those approaches which be carried
through the Ditch to the Wall, be made of matter incombustible; and withal, be
of force to resist any battery from the Flank which regards them. And this
is to be done by Traverses if the Ditch be dry, and by Galleries if it be wet.

And these Galleries are to be reduced into members or parts, that so the more
easily they may be carried from place to place; and to be rejoyned when they
are to be used; and then to be covered with fagots and earth, or with mats made
and kept wet, that the Enemy may not endanger them by Fireworks. And these
Galleries may be larger or lesser, as cause requires, carrying the height of
nine feet, and the breadth of six: though true it is, that the larger they are,
the better they are, as admitting a freer passage for men, be they either
Soldiers or Pioneers.

Now whilst these approaches are thus in action, Batteries are to be raised and
planted: to perfect which, respect is to be had of their security, their
execution, their form, and the expedition. Batteries may be secured against the
shot from the Town by Gabions, seven foot high and six foot broad, filled with
solid earth well trodden: and against Sallies, by Trenches well furnished with
Soldiers to repel the Enemy. Batteries may prove defective in their execution,
both by being over-remote, and by the manner of mounting of the Guns. The
distance therefore from the part to be beaten upon, is not to be above two
hundred paces, nor nearer then one hundred: for when they are within the one,
or without the other, the ball loses of its best force. As for the forms of
Batteries, the Guns are best mounted when they may stand parallel with the
Battery: because when they are under the horizon, the ball affects its
natural repose; when above, it suffers violence. As for the form of the body
of the Battery, the most proper is that of a half Moon; preferable to all
others, in regard that it discovers wider, flanketh better, and requires fewer
Gabions then any other form. Touching expedition in point of a dispatch, the
aptest course is, for the Master or General of the Artillery to make use of a
sufficient number of Cannoneers for the attending upon the Battery: and the
Work it self is much forwarded by a Trench cast ten foot before the front of
the Battery, where the Soldiers may be lodged and shrouded from the Enemy;
and withal it will serve for the traverse of the Guns.

But all this, though never so thoroughly observed, proves defective in the
particular of making an assaultable breach, without the use of Mines or Mining:
for though the use of Mines at the first coming up of great Guns, was for a
time neglected; yet has the practice of them been revived, by reason of the
perfection of modern Fortification; the which by occular demonstration has
evidenced, that Artillery is not otherwise profitable for expugnation, then
only to take away Defenses. And therefore in this ensuing Chapter we shall
advertise somewhat of them.

CHAP. XIII. Mines, how to be made and used. How to lodge the Powder in Mines.
IN the use of a Mine there is nothing more to be suspected, nor more perilous
then a Counter-mine from the Enemy: to avoid which, the way whereby it may be
done, is to be declined, either on the one side or other, as occasion and the
site of the place will suffer.

A Mine therefore is not to be carried in a right line, but courbed and
crooked. And the sides thereof are in many places to be bored with long and fit
Piercers of iron, that so the Enemies Counter-mining may be heard; which cannot
be so closely nor secretly wrought upon, but by this means may be discovered
and heard. In the carrying likewise of a well-contrived Mine, an especial care
is to be taken against the sinking and falling down of the earth from above,
whereby the Miners may be buried: to prevent which, it is to be well fourred or
underpropped with pieces or pillars of Timber, seven foot high if the part will
bear it: and the breadth of the Mine is to be five foot, sided with planks and
roofed with boards. And if the ground be found over-moist, and stored with
Springs of water, it is also to be floored with boards, leaving a small Trench
for the water to pass away, or digging some small Wells to the same intent.

The Mine being thus, and in this manner conducted to the destinated part,
where it is to do execution; a bed or chamber is to be framed for the receipt
of the powder: the which being lodged in it to a sufficiency, is to be very
carefully closed up, that no air may enter, save only at that small hole
through which the train of Powder is to pass into the chamber or bed of the
Mine, whereby the whole mass of Powder may be fired at the time when it is to
do execution. And it is to be observed, that the nearer the passage or
thorow-fare of the Mine approaches to the Chamber, the narrower it ought to
be: so that though at the mouth of the Mine it may be seven foot high and five
foot broad; and at the half way, five foot high and four foot broad; yet at the
very chamber it ought not to be larger then only for the entrance of the
barrels of Powder to be put in one after another. But above all things, an
especial care is to be had by the Conductor of the Mine, that before he begin
his work, he be very attentive and diligent in taking the exact distance that
is to be between the beginning of it, and the end; with the precise
consideration of all its winding and traverses, that so he may be sure of the
right placing of the bed of the Mine, under the part upon which it is to do
execution; lest otherwise, not only the whole labor and cost be lost, but
prove prejudicial to his own party. To which end also, the declination or
sloping of the chamber or bed, is to be made parallel to the Scarp of the Wall:
for if it decline either more or less then the Scarp, it will there break
forth, because it shall there find the least resistance; and so in stead of an
assaultable breach, make only a small hole in the Rampart. And thus far
touching the conduction of Mines, and the firing of them.

CHAP. XIV. Of Breaches, and the Assault. How the Ditch is to be passed over.
THe Mine being thus fitted and fired, (before any assault be offered or
attempted) the breach is to be viewed, and judged whether it be assaultable or
no; and all the Defenses are to be taken away, both in Front and Flank. And
this is to be done by planting the Cannons in such a manner, that they may
thoroughly discover them, and hereby the Assailants put upon the breach with the
better security and hope of success, as well in respect of themselves, as of
their Seconds and Thirds, if need be.

As for the ordering of the Soldiers which are to assault; some appoint the
armed men to be flanked with the shot; others put the shot in the Front and
Rear of the armed men. But for mine own part, I conceive the most approved
order to be, that the armed men be flanked with shot; only placing some three
or four ranks of shot in their Front, the better to give fire continually upon
the breach, until the armed men have recovered the top of it: And during the
whole time of the assault, all the Trenches to be furnished with the very best
of the shot, who are to beat the Enemy from their Parapet, that they may not
give any aid to the defendants in Flank: And the whole Camp besides to be in
Arms, both Horse and Foot; as well for the more terror to the Defendants, as
for the intercepting of the Enemy upon all occasions and interruptions.

And if it fall out that in the assault of the Breach the Ditch cannot be
conveniently passed over by the way of Galleries (formerly described) the most
proper course in stead of them may be, after the Breach is thoroughly made, and
the approaches under the covert of the Trenches brought to the brink of the
Ditch, to fill up the said Ditch with earth and fagots; toward which also the
ruins and rubbish of the Wall made by the Battery will much conduce: neither
is there any Moat of standing water, or Ditch so deep, but by this course may
be surmounted.

True it is, that sometimes to this purpose long and great Trees are thrown
into the Ditch, covered over, and fastened together with planks, and shadowed on
the sides with Blindes: But this is not held so certain as the former, though
both of them are in use where the Ditch has in it a standing water. But if the
water of the Ditch be a current, and any thing swift, then the best way is to
make a bridge upon a large boat; the which being apted and contrived to the
breadth of the Ditch, over against the Breach, is to have certain Draw-bridges
belonging to it, at each end one, so fitted, that they may serve for Blindes
and coverts also, to shadow such men as are to conduct the bridge. And being
thus contrived and manned, it is to be suffered to float down with the stream
from the place where it was first framed (which must be in a place freest from
danger of the Enemy:) and to be moored and made fast directly upon the breach,
that so the Draw-bridges formerly mentioned, being then let fall, the Soldiers
which are upon the main bridge may not only find a sufficient and wellsecured
passage for themselves, but for the rest of the Army also, (as many of them as
shall be thought needful) to assault the Breach, and to storm and carry the
Town.

CHAP. XV. Of all kinds and forms of Battles. Of double Batteries, and the
like. How the Guns are to be mounted in double Batteries. Of the Guns proper
for Batteries, how employed.
BEfore we leave this subject touching Assaults upon Towns and Forts, and the
approaches due unto them; and though somewhat also has formerly been noted
touching Batteries; yet, for the better understanding of them every way, it
will be necessary to add somewhat more at large.

Batteries are Mounts of earth, and their Forms are generally thus contrived:
the sides of the Works toward the Enemy are to be made Cannon-proof, that is,
of twenty five foot in thickness: in the Rear and Flank of them they are to
have a Wall of fifteen foot thick; only the one side of this Wall is to be
thicker then the rest, as rising with a Walk and a Parapet on the inside: in
their Front they are to be lined with two exterior Angles, and their faces to
be raised with open Windows, or Ports (as they are generally called) through
which the great Guns are to play: on their insides they are to have a good
groundselling or floor made of Turff, Fagots, or the like; of eight foot in
height, and in breadth answerable to the greatness of the whole Work. And this
floor is to be covered with planks, for the better traversing and reverse of
the Guns.

But before the raising or planting of any of these Batteries, especial
observation is to be taken, whether there be any possibility or likelihood of
succor to be brought to the place against which this Battery is raised: for if
there be, then care is to be had, that though the Enemy should give on with a
main force, yet the Ordnance upon the Battery may either be retreated or
defended. And this may be probably effected by firming the Battery on all
sides, and by so blocking up all Avenues, and making of convenient Parapets,
that the Enemy shall not be able to make any other accesses, save by the very
Ports where the Pieces lie. And if the Battery be of necessity to be planted
upon a Dike, and thereby may be in peril of being drowned; the height of the
Dike is to be considered, and provision made accordingly; and a passage toward
the Campagnia to be guarded and kept free, that so the Pieces may be carried
off that way, if there be no other remedy.

And because it is generally necessary, and especially in some cases, that the
Pieces of Battery be lodged in secret, and as much obscured from the Enemies
Cannon in the Town, as possibly may be; one especial course tending this way,
may be practiced by making a convenient descent in the Platform; and that in
such a manner, that the Pieces may make their reverses so downwards, as being
reversed may fully hide themselves from the Enemies view: and then to be drawn
up again by pullies and cords well fastened to the heads of the Carriages and
the Wall of the Battery aloft.

True it is, that these Guns thus lodged are only to be employed upon the very
nick of occasion, and not ordinarily. A second way therefore there is, by
making a double Battery, in this manner. First of all, a Battery is to be
raised with Shoulders and Ports, sufficiently deep, equal, and large, as well
before as behind, in such a fashion that through them the Enemies Cannon may be
discovered in a right line. This done, another Battery is to be framed, with
Ports and Shoulders in a due and answerable proportion, ten foot behind this;
from which through the Ports of the other, the Enemies Pieces may also be
perfectly seen in a right line. And in these innermost Ports the great Guns are
to be mounted: the which nevertheless, by reason of the foremost Battery, will
lie so closely shadowed and hidden, that the Enemy shall very hardly discover
them, or at the least to any hurt or damage.

A third way to this purpose, may be by the choice and laying out of a natural
piece of ground; before which a Ditch being sunk to the depth of eleven foot
(which will give a sufficient defense for the Guns and those that manage them)
a sufficient quantity of ground is to be allowed for the reverse of the Guns,
with the distance of twenty foot one from another in their being lodged; having
an overplus of ground behind them, which by the help of Pioneers is so to be
sunk, that men may safely pass to and again behind them undiscovered; upon
which, planks being artificially laid, the Guns are to be mounted. And last of
all, Ports are to be cut through the natural earth, to a sufficiency of
largeness, depth, and height, through which the Ordnance are to play. And this
is a Work so assured, as not to be annoyed or endangered from any part of the
Towns Wall, if the earth be firm and solid.

As for the Guns proper for a main Battery, as well in respect of number as
kinds, they may be thus repartited; eight Cannons, six Demy-Cannons, and four
Quart du Cannons or Culverins. Touching the distance they are to be lodged in,
from the part to be battered, we have spoken before. As concerning the ordering
of these eighteen Pieces upon the Battery: The Cannons are to be planted in one
Camerade, and to beat and batter in Angle right against the Curtain: The six
Demy-Canons to be divided into two Camerades, on each side of the Cannons
three, and to beat in Traverse: The four Culverins are to be employed for
Defenses, and to play upon the Enemies Pieces that shall be found in flanker of
the Curtain from the Bulworks. For though it be true (as aforesaid) that where
Batteries are to be laid against Forts and small Towns, where the Bulworks are
near one unto another, it is better to batter upon the Bulworks then the
Curtains; yet against fortified places of large extent, where the Bastions or
Bulworks are far removed, it is more advantageous to beat upon the Curtains; in
regard that the Bulworks are better furnished then those Curtains can be: and
besides, the Enemy may better entrench himself within the Bastion then within
the Curtain; neither can the Bulworks in large Pieces of Fortification bring
any extraordinary damage at an assault, by flanking of the Curtains; by reason
of their distance one from another. On the contrary, true it is, that in
Batteries made against Castles or Forts, it is safest to batter upon the
Bulworks: for here the Bastions are so neighboring, and Flank with so main a
force upon the Curtain, that an assault cannot be given without an
extraordinary Carnage, and much loss of Men. And when the Battery is thus upon
the Bastion, the same Pieces are so to play and batter in Cavalier, or upon the
point of the Bulwork, as they did before upon the Curtain.

CHAP. XVI. A besieging Army, how to defend it self Presidents hereof ancient
and modern Observations upon the Siege of the Borse.
HAving gone thus far in this way, by the way of Offense, we shall now in this
Chapter give some Advertisement how a besieging Army is to defend it self when
it expects to be assaulted by at Enemy, a Friend to the place besieged, and
perhaps Master of the Field; which has befallen both anciently and modernly.
And though it be a case of much danger, yet have some expert and wise
Commanders provided for themselves and their Armies, to the preservation of
both.

The Rules and practices conducing hereunto, have been these: To entrench so
sufficiently against the Town besieged, that no irruptions or Sallies may be
made upon them out of the Town, to any considerable loss or danger: That all
the Quarters be so well fortified in their Outworks, that neither Horse nor
Foot from abroad may make any assaults upon them, but with infinite
disadvantage and hazard: That a most especial care be taken that the besieging
Army be so lodged and encamped, that by some commanded Passage it may be
certainly and sufficiently supplied with Victual, either from some of their own
neighboring parts, or some other Country to friend: And withal, that the
circumjacent Country, through which the Enemies Army is to approach, be as much
as possibly may be, harried and wasted beforehand; that so it may either not be
able to victual it at all, or at least very sparingly, and that with much
hazard and loss.

And of this, because Presidents work much, I shall set down three: The one
ancient, taken out of Polybius (in his ninth Book;) which was acted at the
Siege of Capua: before which the Roman Consul Appius being set down, Hannibal
seeking to remove him, (and being by far Master of the Field) enclosed the
Roman besieging Army between himself and the Town besieged; and finding no
possibility of forcing the Consul in his Trenches, he practiced to draw him out
to some Skirmishes; but failing in both, and wearied with many urging
inconveniences, he was thus forced to march off, and leave him before the
Town: by reason (says the Author) that the Romans had both sufficiently
victualled themselves beforehand, and providently so wasted the Country round
about, before the coming in of the Carthaginians, that when they were come they
were not able to abide it, through the want of Victual, and especially Forage
for their Horse. The Marquess Spinola preserved himself in the like manner, at
his Siege of Breda. But beyond all others, we have a singular President to this
purpose, in the last Siege of the Borses when that Town was taken in by the
United States: In their stupendous Works in the outward Entrenchments, which
were no less in Circuit then a good days journey; every where fortified with
Hornworks, Half Moons, Batteries, and the like: In their diverting of a River
from its natural course, so that the besieged Town was not only deprived of
necessary water, but all that part of the Country deeply drowned, whereby the
Enemy might have an access to relieve it: In that, to prevent a Relief to the
Town by Boats, there was raised a firm Causey of three miles in length, through
so washy a place, that it was little less then a Lake; the which Causey was
broad enough for two Carts to meet and pass by one another; with foot-paths
besides, on each side, and every where strengthened with Sconces, Batteries,
and Horn-works, all of Earth: And lastly, in that (which made it fullest of
wonder) this world of Earth and Fagots was brought in Boats from a part at the
least two or three miles distant.

And yet all these were the Works only (as one may say) without doors. As for
those within, they were the particular Brest-works, and the strengthening of
every Quarter: The Trenches that first led to the Enemies Sconces without the
Town; and after they were taken in, carried to the Town-ditch: The Galleries
that were laid over the Ditch: And the Mines which were brought under the Wall.
So that although the Enemy marched toward us with a very potent army, and
every way very well provided, yet durst he not (indeed could not) do any thing
to any purpose, save only look upon us as we lay in our Works: but was forced
to let fall that important Piece into the hands of such an Enemy, that well
knows both how to keep it and make use of it.

CHAP. XVII. Of Powder: touching the choice and keeping of Magazines of Powder:
how to be safely lodged. Victuals, how to be conducted The duty of the prime
Conductor. Of the Victuallers or Sucklers.
ANd thus far we have touched upon the most of the material Pieces belonging to
the first Requirable in the making of a War, and that is, Munition.

It remains to take some notice of Powder and Victual, and so to end this our
first Book.

And first concerning Powder: Of which I shall only speak of the choice of it,
and the lodging of it when it is gotten. For the choice of it, or the trial of
it: That Powder which being laid upon a smooth stone or plank, or the like,
having fire given unto it, does mount upwards with a clear fire and flame,
without much smoke, and without leaving any soil or mark upon the stone or
plank, may be received for good Powder. On the contrary, if upon the firing
there remain any moist white substance somewhat bluish, it is a sign that the
Brimstone is not sufficiently purified, wherewith that Powder is mixed: if
there remain any grains of an earthly color, it is an evidence that it was not
well grounded nor cleansed: if there be whitish grains, it is a sign that the
Saltpeter is too salt, and neither well grounded nor purified: if there be
seen any reddish or tawnyish grains, it is a token that the Coals were not well
prepared: if Powder (some small quantity) being laid upon ones hand, and there
fired, offend not the hand at all, or very little, but result with a small
noise or puff, it is a singular sign of excellent good powder. As for the ways
of trial without fire: if Powder being bitten by ones teeth, taste moderately
salt, it is a tolerable token of its goodness: if it be of color not overblack
nor obscure, but somewhat tending to a red, it is a very good evidence of good
Powder.

As touching the safe laying of it up: It is a most-necessary providence for
the ordering of Powder for the use of an Army in action, that it be disposed
into two or three several places, and many Magazines, the better to avoid the
danger as well of casual fires, as treasons, and the Enemies surprises.

And for the safe keeping and certain security of it in Towns, and especially
where mighty Magazines are to be provided, it was the practice of a wise
Republique, to lay up the several materials and ingredients in several parcels;
as the Saltpeter by it self, the Brimstone by it self, and the Cole by it
self; the which upon all occasions might suddenly be fitted for present use:
And in the mean time, all the hazards and mischiefs that might otherwise ensue,
be absolutely prevented.

And thus much touching the particular of Powder. As for that of Victual, it is
obvious to every judgment, that it must be provided according to the number of
the Army, and the length of the March, and the nature and condition of the
Country that the Army is to pass through. I shall therefore speak only of the
course of conducting it, and of those kind of people that are to sell it,
termed Sucklers.

For the order of conduction of Victuals to or for an Army, (especially when
there is peril of being charged by an Enemy upon the way) command is to be
given, that all the disordered multitude of Carriages and Wagons wherein the
Victuals and the like Baggage is to be carried, be put in equipage either
before day, or very early in the morning of that day wherein they are to march.
And in the first place, some Troops of Horse are to be sent out to discover
upon all the Advennes of the Enemy: and for the better safeguard, the
Artillery appointed for their guard may be usefully placed both in the Van of
these Carriages, and in their Rear; and that not only to beat upon the Enemy
if he shall approach by any of those ways, but by their thundering to give
notice which way the Enemy comes; that so the Soldiers may take a general
Alarm, and according to former direction repair to the part that shall most
require assistance. Both sides of the ways also where the Carts of Provisions
are to pass, are to be guarded with loose Wings of Horse, and with them some
numbers of Musketeers may be advantagiously intermixed, and the best of the
Horse may bring up the Rear. And in this manner may the Carriages march, and be
ready to receive any Charge. Diligence is likewise to be used, that such ways
of March (as much as may be) be made choice of, as are least subject to
ambushments; and that whenever they are to come to blows, it may be in places
of advantage. To which end, either Altes are to be made, or a quick March to be
practiced, as cause requires. And to this purpose also, good use may be made of
Wagons in stead of a Trench, drawing the Soldiers within them when a
desperate Charge is attempted by the Enemy.

As for the prime Conductor of these Victuallers and Victual, he is to be the
first man out of the Quarter, when these Troops are to march, and to make a
stand, and to take a view of them all, and to hasten them forwards. And when
they are well-near all passed by, he is to march in the Rear of all, though now
and then he may advance before into such parts as he conceives may most require
his presence; but ought to be the last man that takes up his Quarter. He is
also to observe that all the Carriages and the Soldiers of that guard be
quartered before the dark of the night; that so whilst there is yet some
daylight, he may ride round about the Quarter to see that all things be sure.

Care is likewise to be had (if possibly it may be) that intelligence be gotten
from the inhabitant Peasants, as well of the Ways, as of the Enemy; and that
as well for convenience as safety. To which end all Bridges and Passages are to
be known, possessed, and guarded. Spies also are continually to be employed, to
gain knowledge, and to give notice of the Enemies designs. And Sentinels in the
nightime to be placed upon all Avenues. And if an extraordinary strength be
expected to assault, it will be necessary to raise some Redoubts and Forts upon
the Ways and Passages, and upon all places where an Enemy may oportunely give
on.

Touching the Victuallers or Sucklers, and Merchants and Artificers which
follow an Army; they are not any of them to bring any of their Commodities or
Merchandise into the Camp, without license from the General; who is to command
to have them well viewed, lest their Victuals should be corrupt, and infect the
Soldiers with sickness; and their Merchandise sophisticated, and the Soldier
cheated and abused. Nor are these men to sell any of their Commodities but in
that part and place where the Quartermaster-General shall appoint, lest
disorders grow in the Quarters; nor there neither, but at such times, and at
such a rate, as shall be allowed by the Provost-Marshall-General, that so there
may be no extortion upon the Soldiers.

And if any of these shall be found Delinquents in any of these kinds, he is
to incur the penalty of Imprisonment and Confiscation of his goods. And if he
offend against any of the Martial Laws published for the government of the
Army, he is to suffer according to the quality of the offense.

And thus we have briefly run through the three principals dependant upon the
first Requirable in the acting of a War, comprehended under the Term Munition.
And so we end our first Book.

A DISCOURSE OF The Requisites in making of a War by Land. BOOK. II. Treating
of the second Requirable in the making of a War by Land, which is Men, or
Bodies; with other Materials of War.
CHAP. I. Touching the choice of Soldiers. Of the Officers due to a private
Company
IN this Second Book we shall give some advertisements touching Men, or Bodies,
wherewith the Body of an Army is to be made up: It being the second Requirable
in the general Subject we treat of, which is War by Land.

And in the first place, we shall propound some cautions about the election and
choice of these men; wherein five particulars are most considerable. 1. That
they be rather taken out of barren Countries, and hard breeding, then out of
Cities where there is full feeding and ease. 2. That they be young, as rather
of eighteen years of Age, then eight and forty: for the one may better be
brought to obedience by good Discipline, whereas the other are more apt to
obstinacy, and perhaps, vice. 3. That they be of a middle stature, strong of
body, and manly looks. 4. That they be of lively spirits, resolute, bold, and
well metled. And 5. and lastly, that they be of an honest condition, and not
bred up in effeminate and womanish Trades, much less in Debauchments and
baseness.

As for the choice of men, in respect of the part where they were born; as
whether Natives or Foreiners: I consent with those who prefer the Natives; in
regard they are generally more loyal; in that they are more patient, more
tractable and obedient, as being every way more interested; in that they are
less chargeable, and sooner at hand: whereas Mercenaries and Strangers, as well
at going as coming, force longer attendance, greater expenses, and are subject
to commit many more outrages.

As touching the election of Soldiers in the point of the kind of Arms they
are to carry: Howsoever the strongest and tallest men are generally ordered to
carry Pikes, and the lowest and nimblest to handle the Musket; yet it is mine
opinion, that above all other things, respect and consideration is to be had,
to what Arms every man does best frame himself, and to which he stands best
affected. To which end, it is not amiss, that the Muster-Master take notice of
it, before he distributeth the Arms to the Individuals.

And for the Composition or number of Soldiers in every private Company (by
multiplying of which Companies, Regiments are made; and of Regiments, Armies:)
Howsoever this has been found much varied, yet in regard of a competent
advancement for the Captain, and the performance of his Command, the due and
aptest composition seems to be of two hundred men with Officers and all; to
be divided (if you will go according to the vulgar Discipline) into two equal
Bodies, of one hundred Pikes and one hundred shot: or after the late Discipline
with the Swedes (the which in respect of the use of the fiery weapons, I most
approve) into twelve Files of Musketeers, and nine Files of Pikes; and
reckoning six men to every File (for so many and no more they use to order the
depth) a complete Company may consist of one hundred twenty six men, besides
the Officers.

Now the Officers due to every private Company (to begin at the lowest, and so
upwards) are these following.

The Lancepesado, or Launspreciado; who is the leading man of the one half of a
File, and thence vulgarly termed the Middle-man. And this Officer (as the rest
of them) takes his place, either by his antiquity, or the reputation of him
under whom he commands; as the Lancepesado in the Generals own Company, is
the primest; as he the meanest, that is of the youngest Captains Company of the
Regiment.

The Corporal is the next above this; who is the leader of a whole File, which
in number is more or less, according to the use and custom of several
Disciplines.

The next preceding the Corporal, is the Sergeant of the Company; and this
Officer has no settled place or leading with the Company, but passes to and
again, to see that the Files and Ranks be well observed in all parts of his
Company.

The Drum is the next Superior to the Sergeant, who ought to be a Soldier as
well as a Drummer, and (if it may be) a Linguist, or at the least, a piece of
one; that so he may take and give all passages of Parties about which he is to
be employed. And these Drums are ranked according to the Officers and Captains
they serve under: as, the Drum-Major of the Army is the principal; the
Drum-Major of the Regiments next under him, ranked as their Regiments; and then
the Drummers of every Company.

The next superior Officer, is the Ensign, or Bearer of the Captains Colors;
who is to be a Gentleman, or deserving to be so reputed. And with us (for the
Spanish Discipline admits of no Lieutenant, but their Alfereze or Ensigns
supply both places) he takes place next after the Lieutenant.

The Lieutenant of a Company is next above the Ensign; and in his Captains
absence acts all the Captains duties, and in his presence executes his
Commands.

The Captain is the prime Officer of a private Company, and ought to be as
prime in his sufficiency and abilities. And these are the Officers belonging to
a single Company. For as for the Clerk of the Band, and the Surgeon, whereof
every particular Company ought to have one of each kind; they are not properly
to be accounted Soldiers, nor Military Officers, as having no Command; though
the one as necessary for the Captain and Treasurer in keeping accounts, and the
other for the Soldiers, in curing their wounds, as any of the rest.

CHAP. II. Of the Officers due to a Regiment. Officers having a general charge.
Of Officers next inferior to Field-Officers. Of Officers of the Field, with
their Titles and Charges.
AS for the Officers belonging to a Regiment, the lowest of them is the
Quartermaster; whose Office, besides the divisions of the Quarters, is to take
up the lodgings for his Regiment, in the nature of a Harbenger: and he holds
rank according to the dignity of the Regiment wherein he serves, and of which
he has care.

The next above the Quartermaster, is the Provost-Marshal, who takes the
charge of all Delinquents, as also of all Prisoners taken of the Enemy; and is
to see the executions of Justice to be duly performed.

In the rank above him is the Serjeant-Major of a Regiment, who is to be
elected out of the most principal Captains; and his Office is to form and
embattel the Regiment, as he shall be directed by the Serjeant-Major-General:
and he is ranked above all Captains of private Companies.

The Officer next superior to the Serjeant-Major, is the Lieutenant Colonel;
who in the absence of the Colonel, commands as Colonel; and in his presence
executes his directions and commands.

The supremest Officer of a Regiment is the Colonel; and in dignity is as
transcendent to the Captains, as they to the Soldiers. And these Colonels are
ranked among themselves, after their antiquity, or the eminency of their
Regiment; the eldest Colonel (who of due is also to be chief Camp-master)
holding the first and primest place.

Now besides these Officers of a Regiment, there are certain Officers in an
Army-Royal, which though they have a generality of charge, and are superior in
that regard to the Officers of a Regiment, yet are not counted, nor attain to
be Officers of the Field: and these are,

The Master-Gunner of the Army, (who is the meanest amongst them;) and he is an
Officer under the Master or General of the Ordnance. And his authority extends
over all the other Gunners; every one of which he is to overlook in their
several places, and to cause them to perform their Duties.

The next above him is the Trench-Master-General; whose commands extend over
all the Pioneers, and to the laying out their Works: whether they be to be
employed for the Guard or Enclosing of the Camp, or the raising of Sconces, the
casting up of Brest-works, the laying open of the Ways, or any the like
employments.

The Officer next preceding this Trench-Master, is the Master of the Wagons;
and he has a general command over all the Wagons, Carriages, Sledges, and the
like conveyances; and is to order them in their Marches, and to see them
Quartered, and provided with necessary Tools, and the like.

The Officer superior next to the Master of the Wagons, is the
Forrage-Master; being a principal Dependant upon the Lord Marshal; and is to
take charge and to dispose of all manner of Provisions for the Horse; and to
oversee all the inferior Officers of that kind: and to take care that equal
distributions be made of those kinds of Provisions; and to cause deserved
executions to be inflicted and imposed upon the Delinquents of that nature.

The next to him in place and office, is the Victual-Master, or chief
Victualler; to whose care and charge is delivered all the food and sustenance
belonging to the Soldiers: and (by his inferior Officers, termed the
Provant-Masters) he is to cause distribution thereof to be made to the
Soldiers, according to the proportion and allowance appointed by the General.

The Judge-Marshal is the next superior Officer to the chief Victualler; who
is to be well skilled in the Civil and Martial Laws; the which he is to
explain, and to make known unto the Soldiers; and to pronounce the censures
decreed from time to time in the Martial Courts.

The next Officer preceding the Judge-Martial, is the Scout-master-General; who
has the command of all the Scouts; electeth them, and appoints them their
Stations, and gives them the directions which he receives from the Lord
Marshal. He is also a principal Agent in ordering of the Camp, and informs
the manner of the Horse-Parado when the Watch is to be set.

The Officer next above the Scout-master, is the Lieutenant of the Ordnance;
who has his chief dependence upon the Master of the Ordnance, and stands
charged in particular with all the smaller kinds of the Ordnance, and Munition
belonging unto them; and in the absence of the Master, he commands as Master.

The last, but chiefest of these kind of Officers, is the
Muster-master-General; whose duty and office is to take the number and musters
of all the Army. He is also to have a care that they be well armed, and their
Arms in good order, and in point; that the particular Companies be kept full.
He has also under his command and control all the inferior Mustermasters or
Commissaries, and is to give out all the Warrants for full pay; and checketh
all gross defaults. And this Officer, though he be none of the Officers of the
Field, yet is always to be one of the Council of War.

The highest rank of Officers in a Royal Army, are those styled the Officers of
the Field; the lowest of which kind is the Serjeant-Major-General, who is ever
to be of the Council of War: And he has the Supervisorship of all the
Serjeant-Majors of the Army. This Officer in the Swedish Discipline, is termed
the Commissary-General.

The Colonel-General is the next superior to him; upon whom rests the
hearing, and composing, and ordering of all differences of any high nature. And
he also is evermore to be one of the Council of War.

The Lieutenant General of the Horse, is next in order of precedencie; who has
the same Command amongst the Horse, that the Colonel-General has with the
Foot; and by his place is always one of the Council of War.

The chief Treasurer of the Army has the next precedence; and he is under no
command save only the Generals. He is to fix his respect thorowout the whole
Army; and in peculiar, is to have an Eye upon the Auditor, Muster-master, and
Commissary of the Army, in relation to their accounts. He also is by his place
to be one of the Council of War.

The Master of the Ordnance is the next above him, and is a principal Officer
of the Field; as having under his command all the Artillery, Munition, and the
whole Train belonging unto them; and constantly one of the Council of War.

The Lord Marshal has the next place of precedencie; and his commands stretch
every way both over Horse and Foot. He has also the prerogative to make good
whatsoever shall be found fit in point of Matial Law. And I have known him in
the absence of the Generalissimo, to have the command in chief: But this was
when there was no Lieutenant General. He is always a Counselor of War.

The Lieutenant General is as it were the younger brother to the General
himself: for in his absence he has his sovereign authority, and the absolute
command of the whole Army; and at all times is as it were the Superintendent
over all of them.

The General is he that rules all; so that it is to be expected that he should
be every way also as supereminent: And the rather, in regard that in an Army
there is to be but only one Generalissimo. For though it has sometime been
seen that two men have been put in this Command with equal Commission, yet do I
not remember that ever any Army so commanded returned with Victory.

CHAP. III. Of the Exercising of a private Company. Of the giving of Vollies of
small shot. The Swedish way of giving Vollies of shot. How to give Vollies of
shot in a narrow path. The Discipline of Marches. Of the understanding of the
Drum.
HAving thus far made up the body of an Army with Bodies, and fitted them with
Heads, we shall now bring them into action: And in the first place, give some
general Rules concerning the Drilling and Exercising of a private Company, and
so proceed to the whole body of an Army.

To Exercise a Company exactly, it is to be divided into three Corporalships;
and then subdivided into as many Files as the number will bear; and every File
into Fellowships or Cameradoes. The Corporal of every Corporalship is to be the
leader of the chief File thereof; and the Lanceprisado (who in the Corporals
absence, when he is upon the Guard or elsewhere, executes the Corporals duties)
is to lead another File; and the practick and ready men of every Corporalship
are to lead the rest.

The Company being thus divided and ordered, these things are mainly to be
taught: the carriage and use of Arms, Marches and Motions; and the
understanding of the sounds of the Drum, and words of Command and Direction;
which are rightly termed the Soldiers Vocabula Artis.

The carriage of Arms is to be appropriated to the most of comeliness and use.
The use of the Pike, is either in receiving or giving a charge. By being taught
the first, the Soldier learns to withstand the Horse; by the second, to
encounter with the Enemies Pikes, and to understand when and how every man, and
so every rank are to give their push or blow. In the use of the Musket, the
Soldier is first to learn how to present his Piece, how to take his level, and
when to give his Volley with those of his Rank.

Now the ancient and vulgar manner of Discipline for the giving of Volleys of
shot, was, that all the shot of one Corporalship should give fire at once. But
this was absolutely condemnable: for either those in the Rear must hazard the
shooting of their leaders through their heads; or else over-shoot the Enemy,
and spend their Powder in vain. And besides, the Volley thus delivered being
once given, the Enemy may come on without impeachment or annoyance. In stead of
this therefore, a more useful practice has been, to order the first Rank only
to give their Volley; and if the body of the Company march, then that Rank that
has given the Volley to stand; and the second Rank to pass thorough it, and to
give their Volley, and then they to stand; and then the third Rank to advance
and give fire: and so all the rest of the Ranks in order. But if the Company,
or Brigade, or Battaglia stand firm, then the first Rank having given their
Volleys, are to fall back, and the second to come in their rooms; and so the
third, fourth, and the rest. And by this course (the men being commanded men)
the Vollies may be continued, and the Enemy never free from annoyance. And all
this is easily performed, if at the first all the shot be caused to open their
Files to open distance.

But because even this also is defective, in respect that there cannot be
brought up so many hands to give fire at once upon the Enemy, as were to be
wished; that absolute Soldier the late King of Swedeland disciplined his shot
to give fire three ranks at once: and this was done by causing the first rank
to give their Volleys upon their knees; the second somewhat stooping, over
their leaders heads; the third rank standing upright, to give their Volleys
over all their heads: and this to be done at one and the same time. And by this
means and course was poured more Lead upon the Enemy at once, then otherwise
by far, by any of the other ways.

And this manner of giving fire must needs also be very useful and advantageous
in all Wood-Services, and wheresoever an Enemy is to be encountered in narrow
Lanes or Paths, where men cannot be led up but in a single file: for if the
three first men thus giving fire, be instructed after they have given their
Volley to place themselves close up by the sides of the path where the Enemy
presents himself, and so stand there sidelong toward the Enemy, and give
place for three others of their followers to advance and do the like; a
continued Volley of Shot may be thus delivered, although the whole file of men
should consist but of fifteen in all.

As for the Discipline belonging to Marches; after every man once knows his
proper place, and understands how to observe his file and rank, there is no
difficulty at all in a plain march. In a Countermarch also, if the leaders of
the files be well chosen, and that every man observe his leading man, there is
no great difficulty neither. As touching motions, some are performed without
change of place, by turning only their faces to the right hand, or to the
left, or about, as the Enemy is found to charge either in Flank or Rear: Some
require a change of place, and these motions are performed by removing from one
rank to another; and then some move, and some stand still. And these kinds of
motions are called doublings of ranks, and doublings of files, as the Enemy or
Ground shall give cause, to make the Front or Flank greater or lesser. There is
besides these another kind of motion to be taught, in which all do move, and
yet none do march: And this is done by the opening and closing of files; and is
practiced not only when one rank is to pass through another, or the whole
Brigade to make a Countermarch; but also when there is an intention to draw
the Troop together in haste, and yet in order more to the one hand then the
other. And thus far only shall be spoken in this place touching Motions;
intending to speak more at large of the use of them hereafter.

Concerning the understanding of the sound of the Drum; the Soldiers are to be
taught not only to know and observe what the Drummer beats, but what time he
keeps in beating; that accordingly they may hasten or slack their marchings: As
by the voice they are called upon to all other motions, of which likewise we
shall say more, as occasion shall require.

CHAP. IV. Of great Guns due to an Army-Royal: of the kinds and choice of
them. Of the number of Horse to draw great Guns. The best way of drawing heavy
Guns.
WE have gone thus far toward the proportioning of the body of an Army, as to
bring the Men or Bodies together, to fit them with Chiefs and Commanders, and
to give them some knowledge in the use of their Arms: We have likewise spoken
in the beginning of our first Book, of such kinds of Arms as are fitted for
the persons of men, and are portable in their hands. It remains that we give
some advertisements touching those sorts of Arms or Weapons which are to be
carried with Armies, but are not portable by the men. And these are
comprehended under the name of Artillery, or great Guns; of which though we
have spoken somewhat in the former part of our Treatise, yet it was only of
such as were to be lodged in Forts and Towns of War, and to be employed against
them; and not of those to be used in the Field, and to accompany and march with
an Army.

We shall therefore in this Chapter and the next, take notice of the great Guns
requirable for an Army-Royal; together with their kinds, carriages, casting,
numbers and choice. And we will propound this Army to consist of forty thousand
men; of which, thirty four thousand to be Foot, and sixth housand Horse: which
is a repartition that may hold proportion with all other numbers, if reduced
answerably.

As for the number therefore of great Guns requirable for such an Army in its
march: It has been regulated (after much debate) by some experimented
Commanders, that for every thousand of Soldiers there should be allowed one
piece of Ordnance; and so for forty thousand men (as here propounded) forty
great Guns. But for mine own part, I find not how this can be brought to any
certainty: for who knows not but that several occasions, different ways, and
particular accidents may, and must alter the proportion? so that herein no
other Law or Rule can be precisely prescribed, then what opportunity offers,
and necessity urges. Nevertheless, if I should be put to it, to set down a
strict and precise number of great Guns for an Army of forty thousand men, I
would sooner propound thirty pieces then forty. And my reasons are: First, in
that thirty great Guns disponed and well ordered, at the Angles of the Armies
Front, shall sufficiently serve upon all approaches of an Enemy, either
whilst the Army marches, or when it is to be ordered to a fight. Secondly, in
that these thirty pieces shall be sufficient also, (duly chosen) for the
besieging and battering of any place, though there should be a constraint of
raising two Batteries, having each of them three Camerades in six mounts. And
lastly, in that by thus lessening the number of the great Guns, as much as may
be, there may withal be a lessening of the number and Train due unto them, with
the expense for the furniture, and the charge of the Draught-horses, and their
Forage: together with the like rest of the unavoidable pressures.

Touching the kinds of such great Guns as are most proper to answer all the
occasions of an Army-Royal: they are (in my opinion) to be Cannons of Battery,
Demy-canons, those called (by the French) Quart du Cannons, Culverins, and
Fieldpieces: thus to be repartited; Of the Cannons nine, of the Demy-cannons
eight, of the Culverins (or Quart du Cannons) six, and of the Fieldpieces
seven. The Cannons to be employed for battery only at Assieges; and the rest,
as well for the scowring of the Campagnia on all sides, as to play upon all the
Avenues of the Enemy when they come near. And besides, being thus ordered into
these kinds, they cannot be so over-topped in the largeness of their bores,
but that the Enemies bullets sent upon them, may from some of these pieces be
returned upon those that sent them; and hereby that scarcity and default of
bullets supplied, which by many occasions and accidents may befall the best
provided Army that is.

And an example of the neglect hereof, and the ill that succeeded upon it, we
have in the Wars between Charles the fifth and the French King; where the
Emperor getting Intelligence that the Artillery belonging to the French Army
were all of them of the smaller kinds, gave order to the Master of his
Ordnance to furnish his own Army with such Guns, whose calibers or bores were
greater then those of the Enemies; whereby it came to pass, that in a long play
of the Ordnance of both sides one upon another, the French fell into a want of
bullets, whereas the Imperialists had abundance; these being able to retort and
make use of the Enemies bullets, but not those of theirs: whereby the
Imperialists at that time obtained a remarkable Victory.

As for the number of Horse requirable for the draught of these several kinds
of great Guns formerly mentioned: For every Cannon there are to be allowed
three and twenty Horse in fair and level ways; and in foul and uneven, thirty.
And this is also when the Cannon is to be drawn in a Wagon or Cart: for if it
be to be carried in its proper Carriage, there are never less to be allowed
then thirty Horse in the evenest and fairest ways. For a Demy-cannon are to be
provided fifteen Horse at the fewest; and seventeen in foul and hilly ways. For
the Culverin and the Field-piece, nine Horse in fair ways, and ten in foul. But
withal, give me leave to give this caution, that for the Cannon, Demy-cannon,
and those heavy Guns, it is far more commodious and safe always to employ the
long kind of Wagons with lofty Wheels, then to have those Pieces drawn
mounted in their proper Carriages. And the reasons are: That there shall not
need to be so many horses for the draught of a great Gun in a Wagon, as when
it is in its Carriage: That the Wagon, by reason of the height of its Wheels,
and its lightness, is fitter and better able to pass through all foul, sandy,
moorish and moist ways, then the Carriage can possibly be: That these kind of
long Wagons are not only commodious for the portage of the great Guns, but
(if need require) for the conveyance also of many pieces of Timber for the
building of bridges, and the carriage of them, or any other the like occasions.
And besides, if an Enemy should attempt an assault, or to give on upon any
encampment; these Wagons may most aptly and advantagiously be used for the
Barricadoing of all Avenues, and surrounding of all the Quarters of the Camp;
and that on a sudden, in the nature of a slight Trench: so that the Enemy, and
especially the Enemies Horse, shall not be able to charge home, but with great
disadvantage and loss.

And if against this portage of these Guns in Wagon, it shall be objected,
that they cannot be so readily employed upon sudden Alarms and Onsets of the
Enemy, as when they are drawn in their own proper Carriages; it may be
replied, that all such sudden alarms may as well be answered by the lesser
sorts of Guns, which at all times may march in their own Carriages, as by the
Cannons and higher pieces: for these perform the work as well afar off as the
Cannon does. And besides, whenever the march of an Army is duly marshalled,
and the Avant-couriers providently ordered, an Army cannot be so assaulted on a
sudden, but that intelligence may be gotten, and a sufficiency of time found
to mount and order these great Pieces upon their proper Carriages, out of the
Wagon, by Gins and the like Engines, which are constantly to accompany them;
and so be brought timely enough to the angles of the great divisions, and with
all freedom perform all executions upon the assailing Enemy. And whilst this
is in agitation, the lighter and lesser pieces carried mounted upon their
proper Carriages, may play at random, and so retard, amuse, and annoy the
assailing Enemy, and gain time. And thus much concerning the kinds, number,
and portage of great Guns fitted and appropriated for a Royal Army consisting
of forty thousand men. We shall in the ensuing Chapter prescribe some rules
how to cast great Guns, and to find where they are faulty, that they may be
refused: how to avoid the accidental causes of their shooting awry; how to know
when they are sufficiently fortified; how they are to be cooled and cleared;
what quantity of powder belongs to the due lading of every Piece; and what the
weight of their shot is: with some other particulars of that nature.

CHAP. V. Great Guns, how to be cast, and chosen. Of Guns unequally poised, and
cast with Honey-combs. The accidental causes of shooting awry of great Guns.
How to shoot at a moving Mark. How to fortify great Guns: how they may be
discharged without cooling. Of Guns lying long charged. The due charge of
Powder and shot for great Guns. The Dispart of great Guns, how to be taken.
Touching the laying of Platforms. Of the necessaries dependant upon great Guns.
SUch great Guns therefore as are cast Taper-bored, that is, not carrying an
equal bore, or having the metal thicker on the one side then on the other, are
to be refused: for with such, no Gunner can make a straight or certain shot;
neither can such pieces be any ways rectified but by a new casting. And if a
necessity force the use of any such, care is to be taken that the choice of the
shot be made under the size of the bore, lest it stick upon the crooked side or
part, and endanger the breaking of the Piece. And in making of the shot, or
ranging of the level, consideration is to be had to the side of the Piece that
the crookedness enclineth unto. In such Pieces likewise whose bores, though
they be straight, are yet more inclinable to one side of the metal then the
other, great heed is to be taken that they be not laden to the full of their
powder; for so they will undoubtedly break: nor is it possible to make a right
shot in any such Gun, by reason that the aim or level cannot be taken from the
midst of the bore, unless a due allowance be given to that part and side
toward which the bore and concavity is most placed, and so to be ordered and
aimed thereafter. And in respect that many pieces of Ordnance, and especially
such as have been much used, become sometimes more enlarged at the muzzle or
mouth then in any other part of the bore; it is therefore a necessary
providence, that for a sudden service, the shot to be used in these Guns, or
suchlike Guns, be not chosen to the full height of the bore at the mouth of
the Piece, but rather a size under; lest in a hasty lading, the shot stick by
the way, before it fall up close with the powder: in which case it cannot be
stirred but with art and time, nor the Gun to be used without extreme danger in
the mean time.

Such great Guns also as are unequally and improperly poised, are to be held
faulty; and such whose Trunnions are not duly placed: for hereby they either
become too weighty at their breeches, and so upon every discharge start up with
their muzzles; or else over-heavy before, and then under-sink as much that way:
so that no Gunner whatsoever, be he never so true an Arts-man, can make a sure
shot with any such. For it must necessarily follow, that the shot will hereby
be carried either over-high or over-low toward the mark that is aimed at.

Those great Guns likewise that are cast with pores, cracks, or small holes,
(which are termed Honey-combs) within their concavities, are by all means to be
avoided: for unless upon every discharge they be thoroughly washed and sponged
with water or vinegar, whenever occasion requires a sudden recharging of
them, the Gunners that lade them become in eminent peril, by reason that some
sparks of fire may and are likely to lie hid within these holes, and thereby
the Ladle full of Powder fired, as the Gunner is conveying it home into the
chamber of the Piece. Now the ways to find out and discover these Honey-combs,
may be (if the weather be fair, and the Sun shine bright) by traversing the
mouth of the Piece directly against the beams of the Sun, and then holding a
Looking-Glass in such a manner between the Sun and the mouth of the Gun, that
it may carry the reverberation of the Suns beams into the hollow of the Piece,
that by the light thereof these pores and holes may thus be visibly discerned.
A second way there is to this purpose, by taking a Wax-candle, and fastening it
to the end of a strait staff, and lighting the candle, so to put it into the
bore or cylinder of the Gun. And by any of these means, these Honey-combs may
be thoroughly discovered, wheresoever they are, by the eye.

As for the accidental causes of shooting awry out of great Guns, they are
many; of which the Gunner is to take notice: As, when the Trunnions of a Piece
are not placed directly one against another: when the platform lies unequal,
with the one side more elevated then the other: when one of the wheels of the
Carriage is any thing higher then the other; for then the shot will incline to
the lower wheel: when one wheel is more straight upon the axle-tree, or more
greased then the other: when one wheel stands upon softer ground then the
other: when the opening of the Carriage is more on the one side then on the
other: when the Carriage is over-large, so that the piece lies not firm.
Consideration is also to be had of the Wind, and an allowance to be made of the
weathering of the mark. Care is likewise to be taken, lest some stone or the
like impediment lie in the way of the wheels reverse. In all which particulars,
a considerate Gunner is to be very observant: for any one of them being
neglected, will assuredly deceive in the point of shooting right. And by this
also it is apparent, and must be confessed; that touching the certainty in
shooting right and direct out of great Ordnance, though it be much to be
affected, it is nevertheless very hazardously attained.

It is likewise to be observed, that in making of any shot out of any great
Piece, and especially when it is intended upon Squadrons, or main Bodies,
either of Horse or Foot, standing fixed, it is more behoofful to under-shoot the
mark, then overshoot it: for so, if the place afford any stones or the like
rubbish, the fall and beating of the bullet upon these, will effect far more to
the Enemies damage, then the shot it self can, though it hit the very mark that
is aimed at; whereas the over-shot executes not at all any way. And in the
making of a shot at a moving mark, be it at a Boat, or Ship under sail, or a
body of Men or Horse in a swift march, consideration is to be taken whether the
motion be toward you, direct upon you, or in passing by you; and the Gunner is
to lay his Piece accordingly, and to give fire, that the shot may fall just in
the way.

An especial care is also to be taken in the casting of great Guns (by such as
are either to overlook them, or to make choice of them) touching the point of
their being sufficiently fortified. Of which I will give instance in the Cannon
extraordinary, and the Cannon ordinary; and in the extraordinary Culverin, and
the ordinary Culverin.

The extraordinary Cannon in the circumference at the chamber, is to be of 8
calibers, at the Trunnions 6, and at the neck 5. The ordinary Cannon is to be
in the circumference of the chamber 7, at the Trunnions 6, at the neck 5 8/9.
The Culverin extraordinarily fortified, is to have in circumference (...) at
the chamber, (...) at the Trunnions, (...) at the neck. The ordinary Culverin,
at the chamber (...) calibers, at the Trunnions (...) and at the neck (...). As
for the lesser pieces, they may all of them be regulated by these proportions,
according to their several kinds and quantities. Only it is to be observed,
that the lesser the Pieces be, they are always to be so much the longer, and
the better fortified in their metals; and this as well to provide against an
over-violent reverse, as to preserve them from lying over-short in their Ports;
and also that by their extraordinary fortifying, they may the better endure
often discharges.

As for their Ports, we shall only add here, that they are to be in their
sizes according to the greatness and size of the Guns that are to be placed in
them. And thus for a Cannon, the innermost part of the Port is to be three foot
in the largeness; the outermost, twelve. For a Demy-cannon, the innermost part
to be 2 of feet, and the outermost nine; and so of the rest proportionably. And
to give a competencie of place upon the Platform where these Guns are to lie,
and be conveniently managed, charged, and refreshed, there ought not to be less
distance then twenty foot between Port and Port; so that the wheel of the
Carriage of one Piece, of one Gun, may be fifteen foot in distance from the
wheel of the other. And these Ports are on their insides to be raised from the
floor of the Platform as much in height, as they are in largeness; and on
their insides to be as much slented down, that so the Pieces may be traversed
to play downwards upon all the Avenues of the Enemy.

As touching the number of discharges that great Guns may endure, suddenly one
after another: It is held that in such of them as are extraordinarily
fortified, and reinforced, (as aforesaid) ten shot may be allowed for a
convenient number to be made out of one Piece, in one hours space; and eight
out of those that are less fortified. But with this caveat, that after forty
shot given even in this manner, the Guns are to be refreshed; for there is
nothing that more causes the decay of great Ordnance, then the often heating
of them: in which regard, it is very good providence that they be refreshed
often, and especially in hot weather, or a hot Country.

Now the ways to refresh them, are by the use of fair water mixed with vinegar;
and upon urging occasion, to wet Sheepskins or the like herein, and so to lay
them on the outside of the metal of the Gun, and there to let them lie until
the heat of the Piece be sensibly found to be allayed. The use of Lie also is
very commendable in this case.

Gunners are likewise to take notice, that such great Guns as have layen long
charged with their shot in them, are not to be given fire unto on the sudden as
they lie, because the shot may in all likelihood be rusted within them, and so
in the discharge may hazard the breaking of the Piece. They are therefore first
of all to draw out the wad lying before the shot, and then to loosen the shot
with the Ladle, and if it may be, to get it out. But if the shot be so rusted
as not to be stirred by the Ladle, the course then is to abase the muzzle of
the Piece, and to pour into the touchhole so much water as may drain away the
force and best part of the strength of the Powder, and then to put into the
concavity of the Piece by the touchhole, so much fresh powder as may only
serve to blow out the shot: the which may thus be done, with all security.

Having thus delivered some cautions touching all these particulars, we will
conclude this Chapter with giving some advertisements touching the due quantity
of the powder, and the weight of the shot belonging to all these kinds of
great Guns formerly mentioned: together with their several lengths, and the
lengths of their Carriages; as also of their several ranges at point blank, and
at their highest elevation: mentioning withal, some necessary observations
touching their Disparts and their Platforms, and the proportionable necessaries
due unto them all.

And we will begin with the whole Culverin, which shoots a bullet of twenty
pounds in weight; and the Powder as well gross as refined, after the said
proportion of four or three fifths: the length of the Piece being of thirty two
Calibers, which make sixteen Geometrical feet; the level range six hundred
steps; the farthest range seven thousand one hundred and forty steps.

The Demy-Culverin carries a bullet of ten pounds in weight, with weight of
fine powder, that is, eight pounds: the length thereof thirty three calibers,
which make thirteen feet; the level range four hundred and fifty steps; the
highest range five thousand three hundred seventy three steps.

The Saker shoots a shot of five pounds in weight, and as much of fine powder:
it carries a length of thirty five calibers; the range point blank three
hundred and fifty steps; by elevation, four thousand one hundred thirty nine
steps.

The Falcon carries a shot of two pounds and an half, with the like weight of
powder corned: the length thirty six calibers; the level range, two hundred
seventy nine paces or steps; by elevation, three thousand three hundred
eighteen.

The double Cannon shoots a ball of ninety six pounds in weight, of corned
powder forty pounds. It is to be in length seventeen calibers; the level
range, six hundred paces; at the highest elevation, seven thousand one hundred
and forty paces.

The single Cannon carries a shot of forty pounds, the powder twenty pounds;
the length, eighteen calibers; the level range, five hundred steps; at
elevation, five thousand nine hundred sixty eight steps.

The Demy-Cannon shoots a shot of twenty four pounds, with twelve pounds of
powder; the length, twenty calibers; the level range, four hundred twenty five
paces; at elevation, five thousand seventy steps.

The double Culverin, being of Brass, its charge of powder amounts to forty
pounds, when serpentine; of corned powder thirty five pounds; the weight of
the shot, forty pounds: the length of the Piece, one and thirty calibers; the
level range, one thousand three hundred sixty four steps; at elevation, eight
thousand one hundred sixty seven steps. And these kinds of Brass double
Culverins, I believe carry the farthest of any others: for the farthest range
of the most renowned Pieces that ever I heard or read of, has not been
observed to have been much above three English miles; and therefore these steps
formerly mentioned, must be understood of single strides only, and not paces,
which are as much again.

Touching the dispart of great Guns; he cannot be any true pretender to
Gunnership that knows it not; it being the disparity betwixt the circumference
of the Piece at the breech or chamber, and that of the muzzle. Hence is it that
in the laying of the Piece upon the level range, a consideration is to be had,
that the muzzle of the Piece be so much abased, as may answer to the
over-thickness it has at the breech, beyond that of the mouth; that so the
concavity or cylinder of the Piece may be brought to shoot in a level line
right forwards.

Now this dispart may be taken diverse ways; of which one of the most ready is,
by putting a small twig or piece of wire into the touchhole of the Piece
before it be laden, and so to take the precise depth from the superficies of
the metal to the bottom of the Bore or concavity of the Piece; and then setting
that measure at the mouth of the Piece upon the lower side of the cylinder, so
much of the measure as appears above the metal of the muzzle, is to be received
for the dispart of the Piece; and so the Gun being to shoot right forwards in a
strait line, to be so much abased as may bring the very top of the measure with
a direct level upon the mark that is aimed at.

But because even this way of taking disparts (and indeed much more all other
ways) will take up more time then can be allowed in a sudden and hot service;
it is the part of a true Gunner to carry the several disparts of all kinds of
Guns so well fixed in his mind and consideration, that without any more ado,
he may be able to allow every kind of Piece the due dispart; that is to say, a
sufficient underlay at the muzzle, to answer the thickness of the chamber. And
this to be done only by discretion and judgment.

As for the laying of the Platforms whereon great Guns are to be mounted upon
their Carriages, in respect they are very essential to the point of their quick
use and employment, as well as to their shooting right; some Gunners have
advised that the hinder part of a Platform should be raised far higher then the
forepart, to facilitate the traverse of the Gun into the Port after its
discharge and reverse. But for my part, I shall not wish it to be elevated
above one foot at the farthest; for hereby the balls will be caused to fall
short, by reason that the mouth of the Guns must needs be swayed downwards in
their reverses, and the Piece it self so thrown upon the Port with its own
weight, that for the recharge, much both of time and labor will be required to
reduce it. And besides, if the Enemy have any great Guns in a counter-beating
upon the Ports at the same time, they must needs execute dangerously upon all
such as are to attend and manage these Pieces, and are to stay any length of
time at or about the Ports. And therefore (as I said before) a moderate
elevation of the hinder part of a Platform may be commendable, but by no means
to be over-high nor lofty.

Touching the proportions of necessaries requirable for great Guns (with which
we will end this Chapter) they are as follows. To every Piece of Ordnance, of
what kind soever, belong the Charger or Ladle, the Sponge, the Coins, the Bed;
and these besides the body of the Carriage. As concerning the Carriage it self,
an especial heed is to be had that the Axle-tree be sound and strong; that the
wheels be perfect and fit, with a convenient quantity of Grease or Tallow due
unto them, to facilitate their reverses.

And for the use of the Guns, in point of shot and powder, the proportion of
one hundred great shot for every Piece may be held convenient, with an
answerable quantity of powder; the which is to be proportioned after the sizes
of the Pieces, as was formerly noted.

And thus we have run through all the particulars belonging unto the Train of
the Artillery requirable for an Army consisting of forty thousand men. It
remains only, that we advertise somewhat touching the Officers and other
attendants due unto this Train.

CHAP. VI. The Officers belonging to the Artillery: their peculiar duties. Some
advertisements for Gunners.
THe peculiar Officers of a Royal Train of Artillery, are these; the General or
the Master, his two Lieutenants, the Treasurer, the Play Master, the Master of
the Munition, and a Muster-Master. And these being the prime Officers, are to
be nominated either by the Prince himself, or the General of the Army.

The inferior Officers to these, are the Gentlemen of the Artillery, the which
in an Army of forty thousand men, with the Train of Artillery answerable to
it, ought not to be fewer then fifteen: and this proportion may be held
according to the number of any Army. The Conductors are to be twelve, the
Constables four, the Gunners fourscore, the Porters two, the Farriers two, the
Smiths two, the Carpenters in ordinary four; to which, as aids, are to be added
the Carpenters extraordinary, with their chief, in number thirty; the Miners,
with their Commander, fifty; the Engineers for fireworks, two; the Engineers
for Fortification, two; the Petarders, six; the Provost, one, with his
Lieutenant and Halberdeers; Quartermaster, one; Physician, one; Chirurgions,
two; Apothecary, one; Pioneers to lay smooth the ways and make them passable,
at least one thousand. And if there be any passages by water to be expected, it
will be necessary to have one hundred Seamen, or at the least, men used in
some reasonable manner to those affairs. And for the comfort of all their
souls, there is to be a Minister of Gods Word, to take the charge of them in
that nature.

Concerning the peculiar duties of these forementioned Officers, those of the
prime sort are sufficiently known, and are to be of ability to oversee all the
rest, and as well to direct them, as to take and give account of them; and some
of them have been forementioned. As for the rest, the charge belonging to the
Gentlemen of the Artillery, is to take the care of all the Train, and
especially of the Guns themselves in a march; to be always in guard thereof in
the Quarters: and in point of Battle and Service, they are each one of them to
take two or three Pieces into his particular care: they are to solicit the
Gunners to plie their Ordnance, and to bestow them well and profitably. In the
planting of the Batteries they are to attend the General; and being well armed,
to advance in all places of danger, and not to suffer him to be over-engaged in
his own person. They are to inform themselves thoroughly, as well of all the
Defenses of the Enemy, as of the means of disabling them. And lastly, they are
to overlook the Pioneers, and such as labor at the Batteries, and to cause
them to act their parts diligently and usefully upon all occasions.

The peculiar duties of the Conductors of the Artillery, are to take the charge
of the Wagons and Carriages belonging to the whole Train, and to cause them to
be ordered according to instructions from the General. They are also to see all
the powder and shot to be safely lodged and guarded. They are all of them,
every one in his allotted place, to be present at the Batteries, and there to
execute duly and diligently whatsoever the General shall appoint.

The parts and duties of the Constables of the Artillery, are to lay out and
describe all the Ports of the Batteries; to visit all the great Guns when they
are in their Quarters, and to see them in point; to see them conducted to the
Batteries, and delivered up to the Gunners, with all the appurrenances
belonging to them; as Coins, Levers, Ladles, Sponges, Rammers, Shot, Powder,
Wads, Tackling, and the like. They are likewise to take a survey, and to
advertise all the due Refreshings of the Pieces, and to make them known to the
Lieutenant and the Gentlemen of the Ordnance. They are to Caliber and fit all
the shot to the bore of every great Gun, and to see them laid on heaps by every
Piece. They are also to have a care that the Gunners be sufficiently fitted
with Linstocks, armed with their short swords, provided with their Powder-horns
and priming irons of all sizes, and with their Compasses, Quadrants, and the
like necessaries. They are also upon the casting of any new Piece to visit them
carefully, and to cause them to be every way ordered according to commands and
directions from the General.

As for the Office and duty of the Gunners, it being generally known what they
are to do, and some printed Pamphlets teaching how to do it, I shall not
enlarge my self farther that way, then only to give some few Caveats: And
shall in the first place advise, that before any admittance be made of any
such, the pretenders be thoroughly and impartially examined and put to the Test
by the Master of the Artillery, or some able and honest men, substituted to
that end. And for the ease of these Substitutes, I shall presume to put them in
mind to observe unto their Gunners these few particulars following, which
perhaps are not so carefully heeded as it were fit and behoveful in these
cases. As,

That in the lading of their Guns (especially if time and leisure may allow)
after the second Ladle-ful of powder is conveyed into the chamber of the Piece,
and there well settled by the Rammer, care be taken that the concavity of the
Piece be thoroughly cleansed by a dry Sponge, or convenient Wad; lest by the
remainder of some grains of loose powder in the way, there accrue some peril by
the rolling down of the shot, which may fire by the way, and fire the rest of
the powder in the chamber, to the spoil of the Gunner: That in the letting fall
of the shot into the concavity of the Gun, when it is charged with powder, an
especial care be had that the shot be first well cleansed; and that no piece of
any sandy or stony substance be fixed unto it; the which may procure danger,
both by lodging of the shot by the way before it get home to the powder, and by
hindering the free issue of it upon the discharge: That the Gunner in the
lading of his Piece, stand not before the mouth of it with any part of his
body, lest he be spoiled by some accidental firing of it, caused by some secret
hony-combs, or the like.

And thus much touching the peculiar duties of the prime Officers belonging to
a Train of Artillery. As for the rest of them, their very names speak the
nature of their duties, and therefore deserve no farther description.

CHAP. VII. How an Army is to be conducted in a march. Of the Horse and Foot,
and great Guns marching in the Van. Of the Horse and Foot and Guns marching in
the Battle and Rear. How to march, the Enemy being in view. Of the Artillery,
when forced to march apart. Of the conveyance of the Carriages in general. Of
the conduction of an Army over Rivers when the Enemy follows in the Rear, or
lies on the further side. Of a Bridge for the passing of an Army over Rivers;
and of passing by a Ford. The best kind of Bridges for the passing of Armies
over Rivers.
WE are now come to the conduction of an Army in a march, wherein, in the first
place, it is requisite that the Conductor be well informed of the nature of the
Country through which he is to carry the Army: as, whether it be Champion or
Mountanous, whether subject to Marshes or not. And especially he ought to be
careful to be well provided with siklful and trusty Guides. And upon the
consideration of the nature and condition of the Country, he is to determine
the order of the march.

As for example: an Army made up of forty thousand men (which number was
formerly propounded) being to march in a Champion Country in order of battle,
and the Enemy near, may be thus marshalled: First of all, in the point before
the Foot may march five hundred Horse, being Corslets or Cuirassiers,
repartited into more or fewer divisions, as occasion shall require: And these
are in the nature of a Forlorn-hope, to make discoveries upon all the passages
on all sides, and to clear the Woodie places of all ambushments. Next after
these, may march two thousand Foot, divided into more or fewer bodies,
answerable to the Horse in the point: And they are as well to serve for a
Second or Reserve to these Horse, as to defend that part of the Artillery
marching in the Vantguard. After these two thousand Foot, the division of the
Artillery for the Vantguard of the Army is to be ordered, with the requisite
Wagons of great shot, powder, coins, and the like necessaries; accompanied
with a sufficient number of Pioneers, to prepare and lay open the ways and
passages, and to make needful defenses. And in this division there are to be of
great Guns, four Fieldpieces at the least, mounted on their proper Carriages,
and attended with one Wagon of powder, and another of shot, with all things
answerable, commanded by an experienced Lieutenant, with some of the Gentlemen
of the Ordnance and their Gunners.

After this division may march four Culverins, with a Wagon of powder and
another of shot, with the appurtenances.

After these, four Demy-Cannons by pairs, with their Gins, Powder, Shot, and
other necessaries.

And in the Rear of all these may march four whole Cannons, with all that
belongs unto them: as, four Wagons of Powder, eight Wagons of Shor, with all
things answerable. And these are the repartitions of the Artillery, which are
to be ordered to march in the Van of an Army of forty thousand men.

After this body, and division of these Ordnance, three thousand Light Horse or
Dragoons are to be ordered to march; and after them, ten thousand Foot. And in
the Rear of these, all the Munitions belonging to the one half of the Army; as,
Bridges, Planks, Powder, Shot, Cordage, Pallisadoes, Pikes, Shovels, Crabs,
Coins as well of Wood as Iron; together with all the Tools belonging to the
Carpenters, Smiths, and the like Artificers. All which are to be handsomely
lodged in Wagons.

The Victuallers or Sucklers of the moiety of the Army, are to be ordered to
march in the next place, with the Hospital, followed with the Carriages and
Wagons belonging to the General, and the other Commanders in chief; and after
them, that part of the Baggage belonging partly to the Vant-guard, and partly
to the Battle.

After these, may march twelve thousand Foot, ordered into small Bodies, having
in the Rear of them a Body of Wagons of Baggage, whereof part is to belong to
the middle-Guard, or Battle, and part to the Rear-Guard; followed with the
Generals Life-Guards, and the suit of the Ambassadors.

Next again after these may follow the Munitions and Engines serving for the
use of the Rear, with the Artillery, Bridges, and the like appurtenances; and
after them, eight thousand Foot, making the Gross of the Rear.

Then (as formerly in the Van) may be ordered to march four Cannons, four
Demy-Cannons, three Culverins, or Quart du Cannons; and lastly, three
Fieldpieces, with all that belongs unto them, both of Powder, Shot, and other
necessaries, with the requisite attendants.

And after them, two thousand Foot, to serve as a defense and coverture to all
the Artillery of the Rear.

And last of all, are to march five hundred Horse, answerable to the like
number in the point of the Van; who are to bring up the Rear, and to discover
that part of the Campagnia that way; that so no un-foreseen Alarms may be given
by the Enemy, to any considerable loss.

And in this order may an Army on all sides be sufficiently provided in a march
against all attempts; especially when the Enemy is not in view, but somewhat
remote.

But if the Enemy be in view, and an assault to be expected, and the Army
nevertheless of necessity to march, and this befall in a large Plain or
Champion Country; this order now described is to receive some alterations. For
it will be needful to have a large Front of Pikes, being ten or six deep in
File, with wings of Shot on each side, the which all together are to make an
equal Front; between which Shot and Pikes the Artillery is to march in the
intervals. And in the midst, right behind the Cannon, or Artillery, may march
two Bodies of Pikes, and betwixt them the Carriages or Baggage. And last of
all, in the Rear of all, may be ordered a Body of Pikes, with divisions of Shot
on each side, equalizing with those of the Front; and on each side of them,
some Troops of Horse, to serve as wings to this Body of the Rear.

And in this Form and Order an Army may both march, and if need be, fight,
without being disordered or much impedited in its way. For if the Enemy shall
charge in Front, this order may be maintained, and receive the Enemies charge,
be it either of Horse or Foot, by the Front of Pikes; and the Shot in the wings
shall oportunely gall them in the mean time, and the Artillery also give them a
Salve as they make up; and both Shot and Cannon be well secured, either by the
Pikes, if the Enemies Foot shall charge; or by the Horse in the Rear, which are
to advance if the Enemy charge with his Horse. And if the Enemy charge in any
of the Flanks, it may be sustained by those Pikes which march there, if his
charge be with Foot; and withal, he shall be galled by the shot both of Van and
Rear: and if his charge be with Horse, it may be opposed by the Horse marching
in the Rear, who are to advance to that end. And if the Enemy give on in the
Rear, his Foot may be received (with Faces about) by the Body of Pikes which
are ordered there, and also be much annoyed by those Shot flanking those Pikes;
and the Shot well secured, as well by their own Pikes, as the Pikes in the
Flank; and especially by the Horse marching in the Flanks of this Rear. And all
this while, the Carriages of Baggage and Munition may likewise be very
sufficiently secured, by their being ordered to march in the very center of the
Body of Pikes.

But because it may fall out upon occasions either of passages, or ways, or
present work and employment, that the Train of Artillery may be forced to march
by it self apart, and severed from the main Body of the Army; in this case the
order and conduction of it may be, that half the Pioneers and Laborers make
the Van, marching under their Chiefs and Commissaries, and to be freed from the
trouble of any strangers not belonging to their Train, nor with any of their
Wagons. After which Pioneers, all such Wagons are to march, as carry the
Spades, Mattocks, and the like Utensils. Next unto these, the Fieldpieces are
to follow; after them the Culverins, then the Demy-Cannons, and lastly the
Cannons. And thus ordered marches the Vant-Guard: and in the very same order
may also march the Rear. And after the Cannons in the Rear, may follow all the
Furniture belonging to the Artillery; and with it the Bridges, the Boats, the
reserve of the Munitions, and especially the Magazine of Powder, the Tents in
general, and the Generals Tents. Though true it is, that these are sometimes
ordered to march in the Van, that so they may be first in the Quarters, the
better to be fitted for receipt and entertainment. After these are to march all
the Fireworks, all the Ladders, Planks, Chains, Nails, and Sacks, and the like
implements. And after them, the rest of the Pioneers and Miners, followed with
the Wagons of small shot, with the Store of Lead, with those of the Pikes and
Arms to spare. And then the Wagons of the great shot; the which, though
properly they are to be ordered to march next after the great Guns, yet in
respect that the small shot, and other small parcels, are more subject to the
pillage of the Common Soldier, they may best be secured in this manner. And in
the last place are to come up the Wagons belonging to the General of the
Ordnance, his Lieutenants, with the Gentlemen and Officers of that Train. And
then again the Smiths and Carpenters. And in rear of all, the Provost of the
Artillery is to march, together with the remainder of the Baggage, and the
Victuals of the whole Train.

And thus may the Artillery belonging to a great Army march in good safety, in
all common passages, and in a large and open Country, several and apart by it
self. And if it shall be thought that the Train will hereby be over-lengthened,
it may be helped by dividing it into three parts; but in such a manner, that
the Vant-Guard may take the right hand, the Battle the left, equalling the
Front with the Van; and the Rear-Guard, with the Ordnance and their
appurtenances, to march betwixt them both. And hereby also, the whole Train
marching the more closed, shall become the stronger and readier; and every man
prepared to know, and fall into his proper rank and place, without the least
confusion.

As for the conduction and ordering of the general Carriages and Baggage
belonging to an Army when it is to march: It has been found (as well with the
Ancients as Moderns) to be disponed in five several parts: As, either before
the Army, when there was a suspicion of the Enemies charging in the Rear; or
behind, when the Army was led toward the Enemy; or on the one Flank, when
there was an expectation to be charged on the other; or in the center of the
Battle, when a charge was looked for on all sides. And thus much touching the
ordering of an Army in its marching thorough a plain and champion Country: it
remains to speak somewhat about the conduction of an Army over Rivers, and
the like. In which case, if the Enemy be in appearance, or near unto the Rear,
it will be fit in the first place to pass over some six or eight Pieces of the
smaller sorts of Ordnance, and so to lodge them on the other side of the River,
under good covertures, that they may fully discover and play upon that part
whence the danger is expected. But withal, a large half Moon is to be raised on
the opposite side; wherein the rest of the Ordnance are so to lie mounted, that
they may play upon all the approaches of the Enemy, and withal flanker their
friends, and so favor them in their passage: during the which interim, those
Pieces on the further side are likewise to be kept in continual play; that so
the Enemy may not, without apparent hazard, approach the Rear of the Army. And
if there be any suspicion of the Enemies falling upon the very tail of the
Rear, some small entrenchment is to be made, wherein some small Pieces may be
lodged, and guarded with a convenient number of Musketeers, who are there to
stay and make good the place, until the Army be passed over the River; and then
themselves are last of all to take their passage in the last Boats, under the
favor of those Guns planted at the first on the further side of the River.

And in this manner did that famous Prince of Parma make his passage with his
Army over the deep River Wale, when Henry IV. of France with his Army followed
him a long march in his Rear.

Thus I say may an Army make his passage over a River with Boats, with good
security, though an Army of Enemies follow it in the Rear. But if an Enemy lie
on the further side of the River, of purpose to hinder the passage of an Army
over it, then that course is very approvable, which in the like case was put in
practice by that super-eminent Commander the King of Swedeland (when Tilly was
on the further side of the River to oppose him) who to that purpose made choice
of a point of land, (so made by the serpentine bending of the River that he was
to pass over) the bank whereof, on the side where the Kings own Army lay, being
a Pikes length higher then was that on Tillies side; being also plain and
without covert, but the Enemies side Woodie and close. Upon this point the King
caused a running Trench to be cast up round about; wherein Musketeers were so
lodged, that out of it they might with good security give fire into the
opposite Wood, where Tilly with his Army lay in covert. And the same Line or
Trench had a great Battery besides at each end of it, whereon some Demy-Cannons
and Culverins were mounted, with many lesser Batteries betwixt them, for some
smaller Pieces all along the point; the which also were every where lined and
intermingled with Musketeers. The Bridge for the passage of the Kings Army
(for by a Bridge they were forced to pass) was made with Planks and the like
materials. The means to support this Bridge, was by certain strong Tressels,
whose feet were long enough to fathom the depth of the River. And these
Tressels had great stones made fast to their legs, wherewith to sink them: and
the length of the Tressels were proportioned to the just depth of the River in
every place where they were to be placed: so that the Planks upon the uppermost
part of the Bridge were to lie almost even with the surface of the water.

The Bridge thus fitted and laid over, the Kings Pioneers were instantly
commanded to pass over upon it, and cast up a small Half Moon, with a Pallisado
fitted unto it upon that side of the River: the which works were so contrived,
as that they did answer in every particular those of the Enemies made for his
Musketeers; and withal served to cover the Bridge, and to latch such great
shot as should be made upon the Bridge. And these Pioneers were secured in
their workings by the Cannons and Musketeers of their Party, lodged on the
opposite side of the River.

Now the reasons inducing to the choice of the Part, and the manner of the
Works, were, in that the crookedness and serpentine course of the River did
afford a conveniencie, by flanking it on every side to defend the Bridge, being
laid over just upon the point of land; so that it could not be touched by any
of the Enemies Batteries, though they were on each side thereof: because by the
sudden shouldering away of the bank of the River at either end, none of the
Enemies Cannon could bear or beat upon the Bridge, but that either the bullets
fell short, being latched by the Half Moon aforesaid, and the height of the
bank of the River; or else flew quite over the Kings Leaguer, and so did no
execution. By which means the Kings Army passed over safely; and being over,
routed the Enemy, and killed their General, that brave old man.

And thus you have some rules and advertisements about the conduction of an
Army over Rivers, by Boats and Bridges. But if an Army be to pass over a River
by a Foord, and an Enemy ready to resist on the further side; As it is to be
known that that Army runs a great hazard which is thus put to it, so is it not
to be practiced but upon most urging causes, and then with all cautions
possible; among which, I shall propound these following: That in the passage,
the most of the Horse be ordered to pass in the Front, and the Foot to march
close up after them; for the Horse are better able and provided to sustain the
Enemies resistance at their landing then the Foot; who must needs be much
encumbred and tired by their wading through the water, and especially if the
Foord be broad or deep. And besides, the Horse thus marching in Front, shall
oportunely discover the condition of the passage, where it is at best and
worst; and may also be ready to relieve and succor any of the Foot that by any
accident may be endangered in the water. And this was Caesar's order in his
British War, in his passage over the River of Thames; and at the River Sicoris
in his Spanish War. And if the Foord be deep, and withal of a swift current, it
will be necessary to place a great number both of Horse, and other great
Cattle, as well above the part where the Army is to Foord it, as also below;
for hereby the Horse that stand above, will break the force of the Current; and
the Horse that stand below, may succor and take up any such as shall happen to
be overswayed by the force of the stream; and withal, add courage to the
Soldiers in general to adventure. And this course was practiced by Hannibal in
a passage of his Army over the River Po, where in stead of Horse, his Elephants
were thus ordered to this purpose.

A second course to this end (but requiring more time, though with less peril)
may be, to abate the depth of the Foord, and violence of the Current, by
dividing the River into many Channels. As Cyrus did the River Euphrates, when he
took Babylon from Baltazzer; and Semiramis the same River (if we credit
Herodotus) long before: as afterward Alexander. Neither has this practice
been altogether amongst the Ancients; for at the last siege of the Town of the
Borse, when the States took it in, that small River that ran through the Town,
was so diverted, that the Town was not only straightened in point of water, but
all such Passages and Avenues drowned, as might have facilitated a Relief from
abroad, and the approaches upon the Town it self made by far more easy and
accessible.

As for the kinds of Bridges proper for these conveyances of Armies over
Rivers, whereof we spoke of one even now: Of these there are many sorts; but
those most in use, and indeed most commendable, as are made upon flat-bottom
Boats or Punts, wheresoever these are to be procured. But withal, whatsoever
the Bridges be, or howsoever contrived, it is to be received for a Maxim, that
whenever an Army is to pass over any of them, and the Enemy within the
distance of half a days march; no part of the Army ought to be severed from the
main Body, that no advantage may be taken by the Enemy, to intercept or come
between them and their Friends. And this holds not only in the passages by
Bridges, but by Boats, or Foords, or any other.

And thus you have directions for the marshalling of Armies in a march. And
these well observed, though an Army should be forced to march even by night,
need no other additions, save only that extraordinary care be had in providing
a sufficient number of able Guides, which are to be distributed throughout the
whole Army: That a well chosen Watchword be given, whereby every Piece and
individual Person may be known one to another: That many Altes be made, to hold
all the parts together, and no Stragglers lost: That the quantity and length of
the march be so laid, and with that discretion limited, that the Soldiers be
neither disabled by overlong journeys, nor oportunities lost by sickness: and
lastly, that especial endeavor be practiced to procure good intelligence of
the Enemies proceedings.

As for such marches as are to be made over Mountains, through Woods, and Boggie
and Marish grounds, and the like; it is not to be expected that any certainty
can be prescribed, as touching their forms; for they are to be accommodated to
the ground and ways that necessity throws them upon; and commonly are extended
in great lengths, made passable by the labor of Pioneers, but best secured by
vigilancie.

CHAP. VIII. Of the ordinary way of ordering a Royal Army to Battle. The
Leaders in this order, where to place themselves, and who to be. A censure of
the defects of this order formerly described. Of the Generals placing himself
betwixt the Battle and the Rear. The best place for the General in a battle. Of
the lining of the Horse with the light-armed, or Musketeers. Of the long-Bowe,
how to be ordered and employed: wherein it is preferable, and has the
advantage of the Musket. How the Horse are most advantagiously ordered and
placed in a battle. The best Forms and proportions of Horse-battels. The
censure upon these Forms, and the use of them. The depth that Horse-battels are
to be ordered into. Of some words of Command both to Horse and Foot. Of
doubling Files and Ranks, and the use of them. A modern form of ordering a
Fight, much approved of. Why an Army is thus to be ordered. Objections answered.
IN the last foregoing Chapter we propounded some directions how Armies were to
march. In this we shall speak of the forms of embattelling them to fight; and
shall purposely omit many sorts of them, as being to little or no purpose, save
to express the cunning of a curious Serjeant-Major-General, and to please
wanton Spectators; but shall apply my self to such as are most of use.

The customary way of ordering an Army-Royal to a Battle, as well Anciently as
more Modernly, has been to divide it into three Battaliaes, or main Bodies:
and these three Bodies have been, and yet are, (by some Nations) ordered into
one joint Phalanx: by others distributed into maniples, or small divisions.
Between which divisions, for the prevention of some confusions, they leave
intervals or distances, that by them, and through them, one Battle or Body may
the more conveniently second the other. And the breadth and depth of these
maniples are to be made answerable to the Enemies forces, and the nature of the
ground; but with such distances, that if the Vant-guard should happen to be
broken, it may conveniently retreat through them behind the Battle; which
thereupon is to join and advance, and so to renew the Front, and receive the
Enemy afresh. And in the like manner, upon the like occasion, is the Battle to
do behind the Rear. And as the one Body is thus relieved by another, so may one
maniple by another, and that without either the advancing or retire of the
whole Body.

As for the Leaders of these several Bodies, those of the Vant-guard are to be,
the Lord Marshal, with the one half of the Colonels, and half of the Captains,
having the best men in the Front. And in a retreat, the same men are to bring
up that Rear.

The Leaders of the Battle, and of the Rear, are to be the other half of the
Colonels and Captaius. As for the Generalissimo's place (according to this
order) it is to be between the Battle and the Rear; and that as well in regard
that it is the place of most security, as that upon all occasions his advice
and command may there be best given and taken. And the Ensigns are to be
ordered into the midst of the Maniples, or somewhat nearer the Front. As for
the Artillery, it is to be ordered before the Front, without the corners of the
Vant-guard, upon the most elevated ground, that it may the better play upon all
parts. Only if the Enemy be expected to charge on all parts, then is the
Artillery to be placed on all parts: and such Pieces as are not for the present
employment, to be bestowed between the Battle and the Rear; unless the fight be
before a Town, or Camp entrenched, and then it is left either in the Town or
Camp; and so is the Baggage likewise, and all the unprofitable persons.

But this ordering of an Army for a Battle, has not passed without
reprehension in diverse particulars.

As first of the Phalanx, and indeed all other overgreat Bodies: for it being
an undeniable Maxim, that those Troops stand in best order which can bring up
most hands to fight at once; it as undeniably follows, that the smaller
Troops and divisions must needs do this best, and therefore are preferable:
Because in great Squadrons or Phalanxes, many men are drowned in the depth of
the Files and Flanks, and never appear but when the breaking of the great Body
does present them to the Butcherie. The great Squadrons are also reprovable, in
regard that they are unmanagable, and cannot be preserved in order but when the
ground is large and plain, and withal of an even and perfect level; otherwise
they must either stand immovable, or upon the least motion be subject to
shaking and disorder; whereas the lesser Bodies are scantled for all places,
champion or woodie, level or uneven, of what condition soever. Again, if two or
three ranks only of the great Bodies happen to be broken, or any way
disorderdered, the whole Body is equally interessed in the disorder, and has
far less means to rally it self, then a small maniple: whereas on the contrary,
if any violence rout or disorder a maniple, it proceeds no further then to
that part where it takes; the disranking of any one of these small Bodies, not
at all, or very little extending to the confusion or disorder of any of the
rest: by reason that their intervals and separations or distances serve to cut
off such inconveniences, and yet no way hinder the general uniting of all
their strength into one Body. And these are the exceptions against great
Bodies, and united Phalanxes.

The second exception against the former order, is about the placing of the
General himself between the Battle or Middleguard, and the Rear-guard, as the
former order prescribes. Concerning which, notwithstanding many opinions are to
be found, and various Presidents; Vegetius (in his third Book and eighteenth
Chapter) says, that the General of the Army is accustomed to be in the right
Wing, betwixt the Horse and the Foot. And he adds, This is the place which
governs the whole Battle, as from whence all sallyings out are direct and
free; so that (says he) the General resting thus betwixt the Horse and Foot,
may best govern them with commands and directions. Now of both these there have
been found examples: of the first, Diodorus Siculus affirms that it was the
manner of the Scythians, that the King should be in the middle of the Phalanx.
And Arrian (in his first Book and thirty sixth Chapter) affirms that Darius
took the same place. And Leo also ( cap. 4. Sect 63. and 67. and cap. 12. Sect.
66.) gives the middle of the Battle to the General. And Plutarch reports, that
Timoleon in his fight against the Carthaginians placed himself in the very
midst of the Battle.

On the other side, we have it in Xenophon (Cyrop. lib. 7. fol. 176.) that
Cyrus in his Battle against Croesus, took his place in the right Wing, betwixt
the right hand of the Battle, and that of the Horse that were ordered in the
Wing. And Alexander the Great (though bred amongst the Phalangers) did the like
in most of his Battles. And for the Moderns, I find the valiant King of Sweden
at the battle of Liptzwick, in the right Wing, in the Front of some Brigades of
Horse; and at the Battle of Lutzen, in the very Front of the right Wing of his
Vant-guard, consisting of six Horse-Squadrons, lined with five Bodies of
Musketeers.

For mine own part, as (amongst these various opinions) I cannot approve of the
Generals placing himself in the midst of the Middle-guard or Center of the main
Body of Pikes, in regard that it neither expresses valor, nor can he see
about him to discover any advantages or disadvantages, and to direct
accordingly; so on the other side, I shall not advise to have any General to be
over-hazardous in adventuring his person in the very height of the Front,
especially when the Army falls up to the charge, lest the loss of the best
blood of that body, procure the languishing of the whole. And thus I am sure
was lost at Lutzen the best General of the World, though (to the wonder of the
World) that headless Army got the day in a fury.

In mine opinion therefore, though a General may place himself (at the time of
a battle) in the right Wing of his own Middle-guard, yet ought it to be with
some Brigades of Reserve: and by no means in the very Point or Post of the Van.
For questionless it is a great error in a General, when his courage shall not
suffer his judgment to distinguish betwixt the duties of a common Carabine and
the General of an Army.

As for the lining of the Horse with Musketeers, or at the least with the
lightarmed, (whereof we gave a touch before) it was not uncommon with the
Ancients. And it was always held, that Horse being thus charged, could not
resist both. And we have a notable example hereof in Hirtius (de Bello Afric.)
when Caesar having a march to make, and but a small number of Horse with his
Legionary Soldiers, was set upon in his way by the Enemy, abounding with
Horse, and light-armed Numidians amongst them. And when Caesar's Soldiers fell
out to charge, the Enemies Horse retreated, and the Foot stood fast, until
their Horse with a short wheeling about, returned upon the Rear of the Enemy to
their rescue: by which way of fight, Caesar himself confessed, that he was so
perplexed, that he found no other course to save himself, then to recover some
hills of shelter near at hand; and that had it not been for them, he must have
fared worse. And for those Musquereers wherewith the King of Swedens Horse at
the Battles of Liptzwick and Lutzen were lined, they were so shadowed from the
Enemy by these Horse, that when those of the Enemies came up to the charge,
they did a very great execution upon them before they were aware, and were a
main means of the attainment of those two famous Victories.

Nor can I apprehend any objection that may (with any reason) be made against
this form of order; since hereby these Musketeers are well secured by their
own Horse, and the Enemies Horse in extreme danger to be terribly galled by
these Fire-weapons before they can get up to charge home, or so much as to
approach within the reach of their Pistols. And therefore it seems to me very
worthy both of acceptance and imitation.

And these ways of lining of the heavyarmed with the light-armed, have not been
found to be practiced with the Horse only, but with the Pikes also; and that
as well with the Ancients, as those of our time. True it is, that these
light-armed with the Ancients, were the Slingers and Darters, and were
variously ordered; sometimes before the Front of the Phalanx, or main body of
the Pikes; sometimes on the Wings, sometimes betwixt the Files of the armed,
fronting in a right line with them; sometimes in the Rear of the Battle of the
Pikes (and of these Aelian makes mention, chap. 42.) and sometimes also in a
quite contrary way; as when these light armed were drawn into the midst of the
battle it self. As for the usual Modern ways, they are (as all know) to place
and order the light-armed men, which are the Musketeers, in the Wings, and
sometimes in the Front of the Battle of Pikes. And the Swedish Discipline
introduced an intermingling of the Musketeers with small bodies and maniples
of Pikes; the which, nevertheless, were so bestowed in the Sections and
Divisions of those bodies, as not to be discovered by the assaulting Enemies
until they felt them.

And surely (if the Garb of the Time would allow it) I see not, why some of our
long-Bowe-men (which, as the World knows, have been the fame of our Nation)
might not be employed in these services, mixed together with our Musketeers;
nor why they should not execute to great purpose, especially upon Horse. And if
some of them were ordered in the very Rear of the body of Pikes, they would not
only be shadowed from the view of the Enemy, but might be drawn up without any
confusion or trouble to any other part, as occasion should require; nay,
standing firm in the very Rear of all, they may, questionless, do very great
service, (and especially before the Armies join) by delivering their Vollies of
Arrows over all that stand before them; the which, as many of them as fall upon
any Horse-Troops, and with their barbed heads stick and hang fast where they
fall (as they will certainly do) they cannot choose but cause a mighty
confusion: nay, their very sticking in the ground, in the way of a Horse-Troop,
must needs dazzle their sight, and amaze them. For I am clearly of their
opinion, who hold that the long-Bowe is preferable to the Musket in these
respects: In that many ranks of Archers, yea all of them, should they stand ten
in depth, may deliver their whole Vollie at once; whereas the Musketeers can
do this with one rank only at once; or at the most (after the Swedish way)
with three: as also, in regard that the arrow strikes as well in descent, as at
point blank, the bullet only at point blank: In that the Bow may far better
be used in wet weather then the Musket, and is withal surer to take, whereas
the Musket oftentimes fails in taking fire: In that the Bow is undoubtedly
more prevalent against the horse then the Musket; for though a horse be shot
through with a bullet, he is yet for a while able to bear his Rider, and to do
service; but if a barbed arrow do but hang in any part of a horse, he becomes
altogether unmanageable, and so unserviceable. And lastly, in that (as
aforesaid) though the arrow should miss its mark, yet its very sticking in the
ground (and especially when a whole Volley does so) proves not only terrible
to the horse, but cumbersome both to horse and man; and that in all grounds,
and at all assaults.

I know well, that in some particulars the Musket also is preserable to the
Bow; as behind a Rampart, and through loopholes; and in that a good Musket
duly charged, will carry point blank to the distance of twelve score, whereas
an Archer (especially now adays) can scarce shoot so far at random. It may be
also that the Musket is more terrible, and scareth an un-accustomed man, more
then the Bow. But for all this, I know not but that they may both pass in
Cameradeship; nor do I know (all things considered) why the new invention of
the Pike and Bow united, should find so little entertainment amongst us as it
has done; unless it be, that now adays we have given over our selves to take
up all things upon mere trust rather then reason, though evidenced by
demonstration.

But because we have spoken much of the lining of Horse with Musketeers in a
battle, it may well be expected that somewhat should be said touching the
placing and ordering of these Horse: and of this I find the common and usual
way to be, to dispose them in the Wings. Thus did Alexander at his passage over
the River Granicus, as Arrian records, ( lib. 2.) and Curtius (lib. 3.) So
did Antigonus, as Diodorus Siculus has it ( lib. 19.) And so Ptolomie in his
battle against Demetrius, as the same Author says in the same Book. And in
brief, all the Macedonians and Grecians, unless some especial cause urged an
alteration, did the like. And so the Romans also, since them. And indeed so it
has continued almost in all ages, even to this.

Nevertheless, I hold it not amiss, upon many occasions, to place and order
some Troops of Horse in the very Rear of the Army; provided that some large
intervals be left in the divisions of the bodies of the Foot, that through them
these Horse may be drawn up to charge, when need requires: for hereby these
Horse shall both be shadowed from the Enemies sight, and may be drawn to a
charge in any part of the Army wheresoever. And of this also, we find both old
and new examples; as of old in the War between the Romans and Spaniards
mentioned by Livie (Cecab. 3. lib. 9.) wherein the Ausetanes, the Illergetes,
with some others, are said to leave broad intervals betwixt the Wings and the
middle part of their Battle, to give passage to their Horse to come up to all
charges. And I find the like likewise to be practiced by the King of Sweden in
the battle of Liptzwick, where he ordered diverse Reserves of Horse in the
Rears, whence they were drawn up, and did very good service, toward the
achievement of that famous Victory. Sometimes also it has been found, that
the Horse have been ordered in the Front of the body of Pikes. But I believe
that this was only done when that side did much exceed the other in number and
strength of Horse, and when there was some distrust in the worth of the Foot.
As in that battle between Eumenes and Craterus, mentioned by Plutarch (in Vita
Eumenis) where Eumenes placing the Horse before his Foot, did it (says the
Author) because he held them the prime of his strength; and therefore put upon
them the hazard of the day: and herein showed himself both in counsel and
action, a brave and well-experienced General.

As for the best forms and fashions of Horse-battels, the most ancient, and
then the most common, was that of a Rhombe. And this was in special account
with the Thessalians, (witness Aelian, cap. 18.) who were reckoned for the best
Horsemen of Greece, (as Xenothon reports them in his Hist. Graec. lib. 7. 644.
D.) and held that account to the time of King Pyrrus. And for this form, these
reasons are given: That it was fittest for all Encounters, because the Horse
thus postured, were ready to turn Faces about any way, upon all occasions: That
it could not be surprised in Flank or Rear, as having the best and choice men
in the Flank, and the Commanders in every point of the Rhombe.

But the practice of our days consists most in the ordering of the Horse into
square Bodies. And the grounds hereof are, That these forms are with most ease
and facility to be put in order: That they are aptest for the joint movings of
the Horse: And that the Commanders do jointly charge the Enemy in the Front;
which in no form can be done but this.

To speak freely of both these forms, I opine with them who hold that the
Rhombe in point of piercing, and artificial breaking into the battle of an
Army, is the most proper, (unless perhaps that a Wedge be in the same case to
be preferred;) for being narrow and pointed in the Front, it naturally forces
a passage with the point, and withal makes way for the rest of the Body to
follow; and so without much ado, piercing farther and farther, it must
necessarily hazard the breaking of the adverse Battle, and so disperse it, that
afterward execution may be done at pleasure. On the other side, the square
Horse-battel in respect of doing execution, and violent overthrowing of all in
its way, is to be preferred before any other; for it brings more hands to
fight, and bears down all things before it. So that I see not but both these
forms of Horse-battels may be held in use, even in these times; the one for
entrance, the other for bearing down; this for a through execution, that for a
dispersion.

But there is one thing more in the ordering of Horse-battels of especial
observation, and that is their depth; of which Leo his opinion was ( cap. 12.
sect. 40.) that a Horse-battel was only to be four in depth; and his reasons
were, that (bearing Lances) the fifth was unprofitable, because from thence
their Lances could not reach to the Front; neither (says he) can Horse (as
Foot) with their thickness or depth, thrust one another forwards from behind;
and therefore in his opinion, the number of four was sufficient for the depth
in File. And yet we find in Polybius, that the Horse was for the most part in
his time, ordered eight in depth. But this was in the Age of Lances. In our now
Pistol-world, I find the King of Swedens Horse which were ordered in the Wings
of the Van at the battle of Lipzwick, to be four in depth: And those that were
in the Wings of the Rear, to be five in depth; and so likewise were Tillies
Horse. In the battle of Lutzen the King of Swedens Horse were in no place above
three in depth; whereas Walsteins Horse were every where six.

It seems therefore, that there can be no certain rule touching this
particular; but that it must be varied according to the number of Horse, and
the necessity of enlarging the fronts: so that Aelians proportion may be
received with most approbation for the general; which is, to double the number
of the Front, to the number of the Flank; and as the number of the Troop
arises, to enlarge the length of the Front and the depth of the Flank
proportionably one to another: yet would I not have it to exceed the number of
eight at any time in depth, nor under four; for the one extreme loses the
fighting of some hands by reason of their over-depth, and the other is
over-weak to sustain any great shock.

I shall add one thing more, which may concern both Horse and Foot, concerning
words of Command; touching which, I find, that it was the ancient use, (witness
Polyen. lib. 4.217. sect. 2.) that when the Horse were commanded to turn to the
right hand, the word of Command was, Turn to the Staff; that is, to that side
where the Staff or Lance was then carried: and when they were to turn to the
left hand, the word was, Turn to the Reins; because the Reins were born in the
left hand. And so to the Foot, the words of Command were of old, To the Pike,
when they were to turn to the right hand; and to the Target, when they were to
turn to the left. Now the present words of Command to this purpose both to
Horse and Foot, are, To the right hand, To the left hand; To the right hand
about, To the left hand as you were; To the left hand about, To the right hand
as you were.

Touching which, I shall only offer it to the consideration of our present
Commanders, whether it were not safer in this case to take up some other words
of Command, then those that are now in use. And this in regard that our present
words of Command, To the right hand, To the left hand, are subject to be
mistaken, as being of too alike sound, and may very well be taken one for
another. And all mistakes of this kind must needs be very disadvantagious, and
carry with them much of peril, as all judicious men will readily confess. So
that we may do well to be herein presidented by our Seamen, who in their
Sea-words of Command for the Condeing of a Ship, use not to say Larboard the
Helm, but Port the Helm, when they would have it to be put to the left side of
the Ship; lest by the affinity of the sound, it should be taken for Star-board
the Helm, which is to have it to be put on the contrary side, and that in many
cases to a certain ruin. And this also may be the better perfected by Aelians
rule, that the particular be placed first; as to say to the Horse, To the right
hand turn your Face, when you would have them turn to the right hand; To the
Reins or Sword turn your Face, when they should turn to the left hand. And to
the Foot, to say, To the right hand turn your face, when they are to move that
way: and To the Sword turn your faces, when you would have them move to the
left hand.

As for the words, Double your Files, or Ranks, or Length, or Depth: The
doubling of the length is to be used, either to over-wing the Enemy, or to
avoid the over-winging of the Enemy; or else to make the fairer show and
outside of an Army; whereby to dis-hearten the Enemy, and withal to deceive
him. The doubling of the Files or Depth, to be done either in respect of the
straitness and narrowness of the place, or for the better strengthening of the
battle, or to draw an Enemy to fight when you have the advantage of him.

And thus have you the Genuine uses of both these kind of doublings, as well
in length as depth; wherein, nevertheless, due heed is to be taken, that in
doubling of the Front there be not given so much length that it fail in its due
depth; nor so much depth, that the Front be over-narrowed, and so subject to be
environed: the want of length and depth in an ordered Army for a battle, being
equally disadvantagious and reprovable. For when it is embattelled
over-shallow, it can endure no shock; when over-deep, it is easily encompassed,
and in danger to be utterly ruined that way.

To comply therefore with all these advantages, and provide against the
defects, I shall describe a modern form of embattelling an Army for a fight,
that has received a very general approbation, and deserves as general an
imitation. And it is in this manner (supposing the Army to consist of twenty
thousand men, all other numbers being to be proportioned accordingly:) in the
Front of the Van are to be Wings of the best Troops of Horse, to be somewhat
advanced before the main Front of the foot of the Van: These Horse to be
divided into several maniples or small bodies, and the Divisions to be well
lined with Musketeers. The Van of the Battle or Middle-Guard to be ordered
into four Brigades of Pikes and Musketeers, the middle Front of every Brigade
being to be somewhat advanced; before which part the Artillery is to be placed;
and to secure it, three divisions of Musketeers, with some Troops of Horse
near unto them, are to be ordered immediately behind these four Brigades: and
all these bodies are to be well lined with Musketeers in every one of their
Divisions: and for a strength to these also, some Cannons may be placed in the
Rear of them all. In the Rear of the right Wing, is to be placed rwelve Troops
of Horse, and as many in the Rear of the left Wing. As for the Rear of the main
Battle or Middle-Guard, it is to be ordered into three Brigades of Foot; the
which are to serve for a Reserve of that Body. And every middle Front of each
Brigade to be somewhat advanced, as those in the Van. And in the Rear of all
these, two half Regiments of Horse, of five Troops apiece.

Now the grounds of this order of embattelling of an Army for a battle, are
these: That every part of it consisting thus of several maniples, and small
Bodies, if any one of them should happen to be broken, yet is there not so much
danger any thing near, as when an Army is ranged into great Battalions; because
they may with far more ease (by reason of the agility of their motion, as being
little Bodies, and the small piece of ground which they take up to move in) be
restored and supplied, then a main great Body can possibly be. Secondly, In
that though the thinness of the Files (which are said to be at the best, when
they are not above six in depth) may not perhaps be able to endure any main
shock or force; yet by this order shall more hands be brought up to fight at
once, then can be in great Bodies; and shall also be more able to do execution
on the sudden. Thirdly, In that in this order every part so fenceth, flankers,
and backs one another, and is so apt to second, relieve, and support one
another; so ready either to send out supplies, or to receive them, as that the
whole Body looks like some Masterpiece of Fortification; and indeed, becomes
so, having (as it were) its Bastils, Towers, Bulworks, and several Retreats. So
that though many several and individual persons may chance to be laid on the
ground, yet shall the whole order be preserved from being dis-joynted, and much
more the great Body of the Army from being routed.

Thus I have laid down a form of ranging an Army for a Battle, which some have
styled Admirable. And yet I must tell you, that it has not been free from
objections; and those made by some old Soldiers, or at the least, Soldiers of
elder time. For first, they say, that in respect that private Companies cannot
hold long in their full strength and due numbers, being in the Field, by reason
of sickness, slaughter, and the like accidents; that thus to order an Army into
small bodies, and as it were into private and particular Companies by
themselves, their Vollies of shot can neither be great, nor the harm great that
the Enemy shall receive by them. But to this it may be answered, that we speak
not here of the ordering of particular Companies by themselves, but of small
Bodies made up of private Companies, as cause shall require: so that though it
be true that the strength of the Army may be weakened by these accidents of
death, or otherwise, yet the divisions may stand fast and full: Though it is as
true, that there will be fewer Divisions; which makes nothing against the order
in general.

Secondly, these Objectors say, That the mixing of the Shot and Pikes together
in distinct Companies, weakneth and disableth the whole Body: for (say they) by
casting off the Shot in this manner, the intervals and streets are made so
empty and wide, that the Enemies Horse are enabled to break in and disorder
them. And if the Shot be not thus cast off, but kept close, and so made to
discharge in Countermarch, they are hereby apt to be thronged together by the
Pikes; and the distance of place being taken from them, the use of their
weapons also must needs fail them, and so all come to ruin.

But to this Objection also it may be answered, That all this may be helped by
the uniting of these bodies into one, as shall be found necessary: nor need
these Shot be so removed from their Body of Pikes by any casting off, but that
they may be reunited with ease on a sudden; nor shall they be thronged by their
Pikes, or deprived of their distances of place; because they shall not need
(holding this order) to discharge at all in Countermarch.

Thirdly and lastly, it is objected against this foresaid order of embattelling
an Army into small Bodies, that in what manner soever the Shot be employed,
there must needs be a weakness in the Rear, so that the Enemies Horse may break
in at pleasure. But to this it is again replied, that the uniting of the small
Divisions being carefully observed, assures against all these assaults and
perils: And that all these objections fall rather upon the embattelling of a
single Regiment, then the forming of a Battle or Army made up of ten or twenty
thousand men. And thus much of the ranging and ordering of Armies for a fight:
we shall in the ensuing Chapter give some Advertisement touching the
Dislodgings, Retreats, and Entrenchments of a Camp-Royal.

CHAP. IX. Observations upon the certainty of Orders for dislodging a Camp. Of
Retreats, when to be made in a Campaign, and when to be made in narrows: How to
be ordered, and the Reasons. Of an Army forced to lodge in open Fields. Of the
encamping of an Army. Of the forms of Trenches. Of Guards due to Entrenchments,
and where to be placed. Forms of Entrenchments when an over-powerful Enemy is
very near.
BEing in this Chapter to speak of the Dislodgings, Retreats, and Entrenchments
of a Camp-Royal, we will first begin with the first of them.

An Army being to dislodge, and the General having given notice hereof to the
Lord Marshal; he the Marshal is to do the like to the Quarter-master-General,
and the Quartermaster to the Provost-Marshal-General, and he to the
Quartermasters of the Regiments, and they to the Colonels and Captains, and
those to their subordinate Officers, who are to warn the common men.

Now in the first place the Provost-Marshal-General is to give order to the
Provost-Marshals of the Regiments, that they give Command to the Pioneers,
Sucklers, and the rest that are not Soldiers, to be in a readiness, and employ
themselves in the filling up of the Trenches that they are to forsake, and in
the firing of the Quarters (and this to be done whilst the whole Camp are
putting themselves into their Arms;) that so nothing may remain entire, to give
relief or any way to serve the Enemies turn after they are forsaken by
themselves.

This being done, and the one half of the Scouts sent before to make
discoveries, that Corner or Wing of the Army which lay next to the Enemy, is
first to stir, seconded by the Body of the Vaunt-guard. Then succeeds the
other Wing, and then marches the Battle, followed by the Artillery and
Baggage, covered with the Rear-guard, closed with Troops of Horse, serving
withal as Scouts to the Army, and to beat up Stragglers.

This has been received for a general order of dislodgings. But surely this
cannot be so precisely and punctually observed, but may and must suffer
alterations according to the quality and condition of the Country and Ground
that the dislodging is to be made in: for hereby an Army may sometimes be
forced to march in broken ranks, at another time have liberty to do it in an
entire body; neither can the place of the Baggage be so ascertained to be
either before or after the Middle-guard, but that in some cases it may better
be ordered in the Flank of the Army: provided that that Flank be the securest
part: for the place of most security is always the most proper for the placing
the impediments. And thus much touching dislodgings of an Army.

As for the ordering of Retreats, it is to be done in Battalia if the ground
will allow it, when the Enemy is in sight, and in Front. And in the first place
the Rear is to march off; and whilst they turn faces about from the Enemy, the
Van and Battle are to stand their ground, as ready to receive all charges. This
done, the Battle or Middle-guard is to move, and in all points to observe the
orders and manner fore-practised by the Rear: and in the mean time the Van to
make a stand; and when the Rear and Middle-guard have again made Alt, the Van
it self is to retreat, and to have the Wings of the Horse at the same time to
move and flank with it. And lest the Enemy should charge upon the Rear, some
numbers of Musketeers, with some Cornets of Horse, are to man it. And thus may
a whole Army maintain and continue a Retreat, so long as the Enemy shall
continue in a pursuit, and the ground be a Champian.

But if an Army in the retreat, the Enemy following, be to pass through any
narrows, as upon Dikes, through Lanes, over Bridges; in this case, as soon as any
considerable part of the Foot is entered any of these streights, the Horse are
to pass in the Rear of that first Division: and in the room whence these Horse
departed, a strong stand of Pikes well flanked with Musketeers are to make it
good against the Enemies Horse, and to stand firm and keep their ground. And
for the bringing off of these Pikes and Shot, it will be necessary that some
Brest-work, or half Moon, or both, be cast up at the point of the entrance upon
the narrow, wherein Musketeers are to be lodged; and if cause require, some
small Fieldpieces, as Drakes or the like, to beat upon the Enemy at his
approach, and make good the entrance. The which small Pieces may be brought off
upon the Narrow in the Rear of all, upon their proper Carriages, with their
muzzles toward the Enemy, and upon all occasions to be guarded and secured by
the Pikes, in whose Rear they retreat.

Now the grounds and motives of this Order, are, That though during a retreat
in a champian and open ground, the Horse may be ordered to come up and retreat
in the Rear; because with a small wheeling about, they may advantagiously
charge the Enemies Horse in Flank, if they should attempt to fall on upon that
Rear; and the Rear of the Foot also, with faces about, may the whilst receive
the Enemies charge with the Body of their Pikes, and gall them with the Shot
wherewith they are lined: Yet when an Army is to pass in any straight, these
Horse shall then best secure themselves by wheeling about into that Rear of the
Division of Foot which has first entered upon that straight; for hereby a
stand or alt may be made good against the charge of the Enemies Horse by the
rest of the Pikes which are not entered upon the straight; and these Pikes
brought off under the favor of the Fieldpieces and Musketeers in the half
Moon, and behind the Brest-work formerly mentioned; and they themselves brought
off under the protection of the last Rear of Pikes, and the Drakes, or
Fieldpieces in the Rear of them; to be secured partly by their own beating
upon the Enemy as they retreat, and partly by the last Reserve of Pikes and
Shot, when he charge home.

And the want of the making use of this order in our retreat at the Island of
Rey, was the visible cause of our miscarrying in it. For all the while we
marched in open ground, though all our Horse retreated in the Rear of our Foot,
and the Enemy both in Horse and Foot doubled our number, yet meddled they not
with us, but made alt when we did, and marched when we did. But our Forces
being got up to the narrow of the Dike betwixt the Salt Pans, and our Van and
Middle-guard well entered upon the Dike, and the Front of our Rear so close up
with them, that our Horse could not wheel to put themselves betwixt the Rear of
them, and the Front of our Rear; the Enemy did then furiously, French-like,
charge with their Horse upon ours, and being by far the greater number,
instantly routed them: forcing such of our Horse as sought their safety by
flight, to break in upon our own Foot, to their utter disorder; and the rest of
our Horse, that could not do so, were all either taken or slain. The execution
likewise upon our Foot became hereby very great; and the greater, by reason
that there were no kinds of Works cast up to command the entrance of the
passage upon the Dike: So that the Enemy was emboldned to charge home all
along the way of our march, upon the very Dike it self, even to the very
Bridge that we were to pass over; where also, by reason of the improvidence in
making it without rails on the sides, our men in the haste and terror of their
disorder, thrust one another into a Creek of the Sea, and were there smothered
in the water and mud. And here it was that we lost the most and best of our men.

Now because in these Retreats it may fall out, even with the most provident
Generals, that an Army may be forced to lie and lodge in the open Field very
near unto an Enemy; it will not be amiss to propound some courses touching this
particular. And in this case it has been practiced, that every Regiment should
lie down and lodge in the very same order that they marched all the day before,
with all their Arms by them: the Pikes to stick up an end close by the bearers
as they lay; and every Rot or File (that is, every six) of Musketeers, to
bring their Muskets to their Rot-masters or leaders of their File, who were to
see them set with their mouths upright, and so bound together with a piece of
Match, that they might stand ready at hand upon all alarms. As for the person
of the General himself, and the Officers of the Field, they were to bestow
themselves in their Coaches, or the like; and the private Captains to make use
of such kind of frames of wood as in the Low Countries are termed Horses,
being very proper for that purpose; and of which, it is good for every Captain
to have one. Touching the Horse-Regiments, every man was to ease himself and
his Horse, by alighting, and resting himself on the ground, and by feeding his
Horse near unto him: And in this posture to take repast and sleep; and so to
attend the light of the ensuing morn, for the pursuance of their intended
retreat. And thus having given some notes touching the Dislodgings and Retreats
of an Army, we will finish this Chapter with some Rules touching Incampings.

In these Incampings the General Quartermaster is especially to observe these
particulars following: That friends (as near as may be) be lodged by friends;
and this as well for preventing of tumults, as the faithful seconding one of
another: That such Horse as are most unready and unfit for sudden occasions, be
covered with Foot for three parts of them at least: That no impediments, as
Merchants, Victuallers, Artificers, be lodged amongst the Soldiers: and That
the Camp be well entrenched.

And because an Army, be it never so well entrenched, lying thus, will be
forced to send Forragers abroad, it is a necessary Providence, (and especially
if the Enemy be any thing near) that some convenient number of Troops do by
turns stand by their Arms, that they be always ready to answer all alarms:
which is greatly furthered, and a Rescue the sooner and with less dismay
performed, when some Captains are thus found always in point, and ready to
march at the first word of Command. And hereof we have a punctual example at
Caesar's first landing in this our Island. For he having received a great loss
in his Shipping by a Tempest, the which encouraged the Britains so much the
more to oppose him; the which himself also suspecting, he caused his Army to be
strongly entrenched: And sending out one of his Legions in its turn to fetch in
Corn, the Enemy on a sudden assaulted it; the which being discovered by an
unusual dust, Caesar instantly took two Cohorts (which might amount to the
number of 720 men) which were in station before the Ports of the Camp
(commanding that other two should supply their places) and led them on to the
succor of the Legion that was abroad; the which he found in a dangerous fight
with the Enemy: And without this oportune supply, had in all likelihood been
cut off; and was thus relieved.

As for the Forms of Trenches, they are to be regulated, either by the
advantage or disadvantage of the site. Their flanks are to be distanced about
seventy Paces one from another; Their depth, breadth, and height, according to
the time and intention of stay in that place, and the expectance of an Enemy:
In them entrances or passages are to be laid out for Horse, Foot, and
Carriages: And to be covered with Ravelins without, and Bars within. And these
Trenches are to be furnished with convenient Artillery, so ordered and mounted,
that being well flanked, they may command the Campagna round about. And besides
all this, the Camp is to be secured by strong and vigilant Guards; some whereof
are the main Guards; the rest the petty Guards. One main-Guard is to be near
the Generals Quarter, and the Commander thereof is styled, The Captain General
of the Watch. Another main-Guard is to be in every Regiment, which has
likewise its Captain; by whom the Rounds are laid out, and the Rounders sent
abroad to visit the Guards of the Companies: and out of the Main-guard by the
Generals Lodging, the Rounders are taken out to visit all the petty Guards.

And because it may be dangerous when in one Discipline two Rounds meet in
their Circuit, that they which speak first in taking the Word of the other, may
hereby help the Enemy to rob the Word; To prevent it, it has by some been
thought a provident course, that the two elder Rounders should make an exchange
of their Companions, and so proceed to finish their Circuit without giving or
taking the word of any Round at all. The which I only offer to our present
Commanders to take into their consideration.

As for the petty Guards, they are of two sorts: for either they consist of
many persons, and are then termed a Corpse du Guard; or of one single man, who
is called a Sentinel. A Corpse du Guard may either be of Horse (which is a Guard
without the entrenchments of the Camp) or of Foot, who watch within, before or
at the Ports of the Trenches, or any where else where the Ser jeant-Major shall
hold it fit. In the setting out of the Sentinels, it is to be observed that
they be not placed over-far from any Corpse du Guard, lest by being surprised by
an Enemy, the secrets of the Army be discovered.

And because it cannot choose but be full of hazard, and subject to many
casualties, for an Army to be brought up any thing near to an over-powerful
Enemy; a General being to be exceeding circumspect, and sure of some advantage
also, either by the place, or his own virtue that shall adventure to do it: If
nevertheless necessity force hereunto, it is a fit course for such an Army to
encamp and entrench it self round about some good Town being to friend,
especially if that Town be withal a place of a pass, and by its situation and
vicinitie unto some other parts in amity with it, any other way advantageous;
for by this means both the Army and the Town may be well secured, and by the
pass both of them continually supplied with Victual and Munition.

As touching the fashion and form of the entrenchments to be practiced in this
case: In the first place the ground and circumvallation of the utmost lines are
to be well viewed and considered, whether it be capable for the whole Army to
lodge in. And all such higher grounds or hills as are any way near unto this
circumvallation, are to be taken in and included, to prevent the Enemy from
planting his Cannon upon them, and so to beat upon the Leaguer, or into the
Town. These entrenchments also are to be conveniently stored with Bastions, and
guarded with Flanks. And if there be any River passing thorough the part, both
sides thereof are to be commanded and well secured with Forts, or at the least
Bastions: And (if it may be) the whole Work to be joined to some Fort erected
within the Town it self, or at the least some Suburb thereof. And all these to
be well defended with half-Moons and Horn-Works: The Suburbs themselves
likewise (especially those that lie most in the Enemies way of approaches)
being to be entrenched and guarded with some Works answering one unto another,
and joining one upon another. The main Highways also leading unto the Town are
to be secured by some Forts, and some Batteries to be erected here and there
between them, furnished with good Ordnance to play upon all the Avenues of the
Enemy. As for the Graft or Moat encompassing the whole circumvallation of the
Trenches, it ought to be twelve Foot in the breadth, and eight in depth; and at
the head-Works, eighteen feet in wideness, and twelve deep.

And thus much concerning the Incampings, Quarterings, and Entrenchments of an
Army; purposely omitting the ordinary ways of lodging a particular Regiment;
which is only the diminutive of the other, and after the common way commonly
known. And thus we conclude our second Book.

A DISCOURSE OF The Requisites in making of a War by Land. BOOK III. Of
Discipline.
CHAP. I. Of considerations to be taken before the entrance into a War, in
point of Strength, Treasure, Country, Shipping; also in point of
confederations, and the true justness of the War. Considerations to be taken in
a defensive War. How a defensive War may be best-made and maintained.
WE are in this third Book (according to our Method propounded at the first) to
give some Animadversions about the third Necessary requirable in the making of
a War; which consists of matter of Counsel, Advice, Stratagems, and Martial
Courts. Touching which, in regard of their variety, and the answerable
dependants, I shall only speak of such as may afford the most general use, and
be most properly drawn into imitation.

And in the first place I shall begin with some considerations needful to be
taken before the War be entered upon.

The Attempters of a War are therefore to deliberate concerning both their own
Forces, and those they are to deal with. They are diligently to inform
themselves of their Enemies Treasures as well as their own; how raised, how
maintained: and chiefly they are to consult by what means he may be deprived of
them, or of any part of them; and thereby weakened in those main sinews of
Military strength.

The Enemies Militia as well by Sea as by Land, is likewise to be enquired
into. And herein notice is to be gotten not only of the number and value of
his Shipping and Boats, but of his Mariners and Sea-Commanders: and concerning
his Land-force, what numbers of Horse and Foot he is able to bring into the
Field; how armed, how disciplined, of what confidence and spirit; and to what
Climate and Country enured, and how bred and brought up.

Diligent and heedful enquiries are also to be made of what condition the
Enemies Country is that is to be invaded: As, whether it be strong by Nature,
by reason of Woods, Mountams, Seas, Lakes, Rivers, Marshes; or artificially
strong, by Forts, Castles, and strong Towns: of all which, the number, the
site, the quantity of Munition, the number of the Defendants in every strength,
and whether they be strong by Nature or by Art, or by both, or by neither, are
as much as may be to be known beforehand; that so the preparations may be made
accordingly.

All these particular discoveries being thoroughly made upon those who are to be
invaded, no less diligence is to be used by the Invader concerning his own
preparations; and especially in Moneys, Munition, and Victual.

And he may be said to be well provided in the point of Victuals, when neither
his Army in the Field need complain of scarcity, nor his Towns and Forts remain
disfurnished. And of Munition, when he has not only a sufficiency of great
Guns for the Field, Sea, Batteries and Forts; but also Armor of all usual
kinds, with the Utensils due to a War, as Powder, Fireworks, Match, Engines,
Balls, Gabions, Carriages, Beasts for draught and labor, Bridges, Ladders,
Planks, Spades, Shovels, Axes, Sacks, Baskets, Timber, Cables, Ropes,
Handmills, etc.

But besides all these, fit and provident confederations are to be made with
all such foreign Princes and States as may either assist or hinder the War;
either for Benefit, or Traffic, or for States-sake, or for necessity of
dependence, or for alliance and consanguinitie. For these considerations being
duly observed and provided for, the difficulties will prove less, either for
the maintenance of the War, or the making of a Peace, as occasion shall at any
time be presented.

The Justice likewise of the War ought to be divulged; and that for a
satisfaction as well to the natural Subjects, as the neighbour-nations. And
this may be done by a publication of the original causes: that War being to be
allowed for Just, which is (indeed, without false pretenses) made for the true
Religion, for just Liberties, for repelling of public wrongs by a foreign
State after refusals of redresses, in defense of Friends violently and
injuriously oppressed: And that War Un just, which is taken up for private
Ends, Ambition, Revenge and Empire.

As touching such Invasions as are to be attempted by Sea and Shipping;
whosoever intends them, is to assure himself beforehand of some commodious and
sure Landing-places, that neither the Ships suffer wrack or eminent danger in
approaching the coast, nor the Soldiers incur manifest hazard at their
dis-imbarqueing. And of the same importance is the fore-casting of a safe place
of retreat; if peradventure the Army should be repelled by extremity of
weather, contagion of sickness, or the strength of the Enemy.

And thus far concerning such considerations and Counsels as are aforehand to
be taken in point of an Invasive War.

As for such as are to be practiced in a War Defensive, (though the surest
Defense is Offense) yet such as are forced unto it, are by all means to assure
themselves of their neighbors by Leagues, or by provision of Treasure to
defray all charges, or by an Army so governed by discretion, that no fight be
admitted in heat and rashness; and yet so avoided, that the Army may not seem
to forbear the battle for fear (which may utterly discourage the common
Soldier, or encourage the Enemy) but rather as done out of policy. And
withal, that the Country be on all sides wasted where the Enemy is to pass; so
that nothing may be found for him to make use of. And in the interim, the
defensive Army to be commodiously entrenched, having withal a guard upon the
Enemies Army on all sides; that no relief, or as little as may be, may be
brought unto it.

This defensive War may also be maintained by the erecting of Forts, and the
fortifying of Towns: for hereby the Defendants may not only secure their lives
from all sudden irruptions, and keep short the Enemy from relief, but defer
battles at pleasure, and thereby abate the Enemies heat and pride.

As for the parts where these Fortifications are to be raised, they are those
which may give the most impediment to the Enemies attempts, and most security
to the Defendants; as upon the Seacoasts, the Ports and Landing places: and in
the Mid-land parts, upon Narrows, and straight passages, and the Capital
Cities. And these Forts are not to be so great, but that they may be manned and
furnished, as well with Munition as Men, without the weakening of the main Army
in the field; nor to be so small, but to be sufficiently capacious to receive
the Peasants, and the best of their substance, in case of necessity.

CHAP. II. Of a Defensive War, how best made and maintained. That when a
Victory may be gained without blows, a Battle is not to be admitted. How Troops
suspected either for courage or Loyalty, are to be ordered in Battle. What part
of the Enemies Army is first to be charged. Requisite considerations in and
after battle.
IN the foregoing Chapter (occasionally only) we made some mention touching
the avoiding of Battles in case of a defensive War. But in this, we shall
enlarge our advertisements concerning that particular.

It has been always a sure maxim of War, that whenever by foresight well
grounded, Victory comes toward one without blows, or wounds; as either by
blocking up the passages, and so cutting off all supplies, or by any the like
means; that in such cases an Enemy is not to be assaulted, nor admitted to the
terms of a Battle: for it suits better with the worth of the spirit, and the
essence of our nature, so to direct the course of an action, that an Enemy may
be conquered rather by Wit then War.

And hereof we have an example in Caesar's Commentaries: where Caesar having
shut up Afranius and Petreius in a place of advantage, although he might have
cut them to pieces by an assault, yet finding the Victory sure without a fight,
without blood, and without hazard; he thus answered his Captains who urged him
to storm them, Cur secundo Praelio aliquos ex suis amitteret? Cur vulnerari
pateretur, optime de se meritos milites? Cur denique fortunam periclitaretur?

And indeed, before the falling upon a battle at any time, these following
particulars are constantly to be received:

That a view be taken of the strength of the Army, and impartially compared
with that of the Enemy.

That the place of Battle be near some safe Retreat, either of a Camp well
entrenched, and sufficiently left with Guards; or some Town of defense near, to
friend.

That all courses be taken to give courage and confidence to the Soldiers;
either by some fit applied words of exhortation, or by some encouraging
stratagems, or by shows of contempt of the Enemies strength, or augmentation of
his own, or by making show of some secret intelligence from the Enemies Camp,
or reporting some rumors of their fears and diffidence.

That in the ordering of the Army to the Battle, the Enemies order be heedfully
observed; as also the site and form of the place and ground where the Battle is
to be fought: to which an answerable accommodation is in every respect to be
observed, as well in relation to the form as number of Divisions: as also for
the ordering of the Artillery to the best use, and most annoyance of the Enemy.

And if there be any new Troops that may be suspected in their worth, and
especially loyalty; That they be placed rather in the Battle, or Middle-Guard
it self, then any of the Wings: for being thus ordered, they shall neither be
so put to it in point of courage, if they be wanting that way; nor can they
find means or scope to fling out, or to take advantage to a mischief, as if
they were ordered in the Wings: for the Wings in a set Battle, are the strength
of it, and the principal instruments; and it has ever been found, that as long
as they stand firm, the day stands fair: for by them the Enemy is kept from
surrounding the main body of the Army. And the same Army in the mean time has
the advantage of charging the Enemy in the Flank upon all occasions and
oportunities.

Consideration is also to be had, whether it be for the advantage to charge, or
to attend the charge. If to charge (which is most approvable in an open
Country) that then it be performed with the whole Front at once, rather then by
light skirmishes in the Wings and Corners; lest such of these as may chance to
be rebutted upon the Main-Vant-guard, strike a terror, and perhaps disorder
through the whole body of the Army: of which there have been infinite examples.

An especial observation is likewise to be made touching the part of the
Enemies Army which is first to be charged. With the Ancients and many of the
Moderns it was a Maxim, that it was to be the weakest part. And this was
practiced by Caesar in his first Battle with Arionistus, and by Scipio in
Spain. And the motives hereunto seem to be, in regard that men's judgments are
favorable to that which happens well at the first; the sequel of every action
depending for the most part upon the beginning; neither can there be a good end
without a good beginning: for though a beginning be often disastrous and
unlucky, and the end fortunate and happy, yet before it came to that end, there
was a fortunate beginning. And therefore that an Army might foresee a happy end
in a good beginning, it was the ground of this Maxim, that the beginning of
the assault should be with the best of the Army upon the weakest part of the
Enemy.

And yet contrary to this Axiom, that absolute and glorious Soldier, the
brave King of Sweden, in the battle of Lutzen, gave order to have the strongest
part of the Enemies Battle to be first charged. For seeing the Cuirassiers of
the Enemies Horse in one Division by themselves in the Front, and the Crabrats
the light-armed in another; Charge home (says he to one of his prime
Commanders) these black companions in their complete Arms, for these are they
will put us to it; as for the Crabrats, I care not for them. By which it is
manifest, that the ground of this his direction was, that the flower of the
Enemies Army being well put to it at the first (and this was likeliest to be
done best, when his men were at the freshest) if they should once be routed, it
would not only occasion a dismay to the part where they were, but leave an
easier task for the routing of all the rest behind. Neither for my part do I
find less reason for this, then the Ancients and the others did for their
practice.

Lastly, Care is to be taken before the charge be given, that a Watchword, or
rather some particular sign and visible token, or both the one and other, be
imparted to the whole Army, that in all medlies they may be known one to
another, and distinguished from the Enemy: and then to give the signal of
Battle. And the rather, if either any fear or disorder be perceived amongst the
Enemy, or a forward desire and heat to the fight with his own men. And these
are the observations and directions requirable before a battle be accepted and
joined.

The requirables in, and after it, are these following: That during the heat of
the fight a vigilant eye be carried upon all mutations, that so all disorders
may in due time be either prevented or repaired: That if the General (after the
fight) find his side to have the worst of it, he act according to that which
shall be observed in the Enemies order, and the courage of his own men; and so
apply himself either to rejoin or retire, executing accordingly with virtue,
industry, and providence: That if after the fight he find himself to have the
best of it, he thoroughly to his uttermost prosecute his Victory; and take from
the Enemy all means of reuniting his Forces: That he equally distribute the
spoil, with a due respect to the quality of the persons, and virtue of the
deservers; lest (as now adays in the disordered discipline of the age) those
come to most gettings which come to least blows: That (over and above the
common distributions) all eminency of worth, wheresoever it be found, be
rewarded. And herein were to be wished a renovation of that Roman way, to give
some portable marks of honor, together with a sufficiency of competent
subsistence: That (on the other side) all Cowardice be punished, even to the
least touch of it, wheresoever it shall be found: That mercy be used to
Captives, and good Quarter given them: That the dead on both sides be buried:
That the acceptable sacrifice of thanksgiving be offered to the great giver of
Victories, as the gift earnestly and humbly craved of him, before, at, and
after the attempt.

CHAP. III. Of the pursuit of a Victory. Reasons for pursuing a beaten Army,
rather then taking in Towns. Of mercy to Captives, termed, Giving of Quarter.
Of Quarter to be given to Neuters. Orders to be observed in the taking of
Prisoners.
HAving in the last foregoing Chapter made only a mention of the pursuing of
Victories, and the showing of mercy to Captives (in the very latter end of the
Chapter) we shall in this enlarge our selves touching both these particulars,
as being points of main consequence and concernment.

Touching the pursuing of a Victory after the gaining of a Battle, it has been
much controverted amongst the greatest Commanders, whether after the routing of
an Enemies Army, the broken Army should be thoroughly pursued; or the
Conquerours should apply themselves to the taking in of some Frontier Towns
belonging to the beaten side.

Those that hold for the taking in of Towns, have delivered these reasons: That
the great astonishment that generally befalls to such as are beaten out of
the Field, does commonly so extend it self to all the Members of that party,
that mere fear may procure a rendry of a strong place at the very first
summons, or within two or three days; which at another time would not be
carried in twelve months, or perhaps not at all. Secondly, That the taking in
of one strong Town is many times of as much importance as the routing of a
fresh Army of the Enemies; and especially when hereby the Enemy shall be
deprived of all Retreats in those parts. Thirdly, That a routed Army thinks of
nothing but flight; and therefore is not to be overtaken and staid without
great difficulties, and much harrasing and toil of the pursuers. Fourthly, That
a beaten Army thus flying, falls to pieces of it self, and deserves not any
great regard; much less are any important oportunities to be neglected upon
this consideration. On the other side, such as argue for the through pursuit of
a beaten and flying Army, allege that hereupon the one of these two effects
must necessarily follow, either that the Enemies Army shall hereby be
absolutely defeated, or that they shall be constrained to capitulate for their
Retreat: whereas if they shall be quietly suffered to pass without a perfect
Rout, their able Commanders may find means in a short time to become once more
able to march.

For mine own part, when I consider of the reasons on each side, I am made the
most inclinable to those that hold for the through pursuit of the beaten Army.
For though a Victory by the gaining of a battle, may perhaps strike some
terror amongst Besognes and fresh water Soldiers, and with such procure an
easy rendry of such Towns as are manned with such men; yet with old Soldiers
(though beaten) having true Commanders, who always sell themselves dear, it
procures a quite contrary effect, and obstinateth them to all kinds of
possible defense. Besides, though the taking of some one strong Town may (as it
may be sited) prove as gainful as the routing of an Army of the Enemies, yet
whenever the taking of any such place shall cost much time, it shall not
only weaken the Victorious Army that besieges it, and retard it from making
use of the Victory lately gotten, but give the beaten Enemy liberty and
opportunity to reinforce their Troops, safeguard their Ordnance, and either by
way of diversion, as falling upon some other part, or by making head against
the besieging Enemy himself, and cutting him short from Victual, quite alter
the Face and fortune of the War. Again, though a routed Army may perhaps for
the time think of nothing but a flight, and this may hasten it so, as may cost
some time and labor in the pursuit; yet being hotly pursued by the Horse only
of the Victorious side, it must needs suffer extremely, and especially the
Infantry part, and ten to one in the loss of their Artillery and Baggage. And
all this done without any great or remarkable disturbance, or harassing to the
pursuing Army, whose very Horse alone is to put hard to it upon the chase; the
foot having liberty to march fair and easily after, and may come time enough
nevertheless to fall up with the flying Enemy, being thus retarded by the Horse.

And I am confirmed in this opinion by sundry presidents, (amongst which, two
are very punctual) set down by that able French Commander La Noue in the
domestic Wars of France during his time; being the one of them, that Siege of
Poitiers, which became the ruin of the Army of those of the Religion, after
their Victory at Rochebelle: the other, that of St. Jean d'Angelie, which
proved the like to the French Papistical Army, after their Victory at the
battle of Moncontour. Whereas on the contrary, the King of Sweden after all his
gained battles, did hotly and thoroughly pursue the utter overthrow of his
Enemies scattered Troops; and in regard of that, neglected, or at the least
suspended the taking in of any of the neighbor Towns, whereabout the battles
were fought. And by this course prevailed, to admiration.

And thus much touching this great controverted point, Whether after a Victory
in the field the routed Army be to be pursued to an utter ruin, or the Victory
to be made use of by the besieging of some Towns belonging to that beaten side.

As for the mercy that upon the attainment of a Victory is to be showed to the
Captives, generally received under the name of giving good Quarter, and by the
French called Bonne Guerre; it prohibits not only the killing and murdering
of any, much less of women and children, or the slaying of any in cold blood,
or the not receiving such to mercy (that is, the not giving of them their
lives) who shall give up themselves and their Arms prisoners after the fight is
over; but also all base and bar barous ravishments of women, and the like
cruelties. And withal (as it is now in practice in our neighbour-wars) all
prisoners, being enrolled Soldiers, are to be freed at the ransom of a
months pay, according to their several conditions.

But this general rule is not without some exceptions: for if the Governor of
a besieged Town or Fort shall defend the place he commands so obstinately, that
it be stormed and entered by force, and so by an assault taken, and hereupon he
yields himself after the heat and violence of the fight be over, to a private
Soldier; it shall nevertheless be lawful (without any breach of Quarter) for
the General of the assaulting Army to make him die; because this his obstinate
and wilful defense was a trespass against the person of the General and the
whole Army, and cannot be privileged by any condition with a private person.
Also if a private Soldier shall give Quarter to any Fugitive or Spy, or any
one that has at any time practiced foul War, or broken Quarter; or to any
other which has formerly deserved death for some capital offense; it is at the
Generals pleasure whether this shall be made good unto him or not. Likewise, if
during the fight of a Battle, many prisoners have Quarter given them upon the
routing of some parts of that Army, and afterward some parts and divisions of
it, as the Battle or the Rear, holding firm, give on so stoutly, as that the
fortune of the day inclines to a change; and those that had the best of it at
the first, begin to be shaken and in danger: it shall in this case be held no
cruelty nor breach of Quarter, though those prisoners that were taken at the
first, and had Quarter promised, be presently slain in the field by such as
took them; because otherwise they may endanger those that took them, or at the
least ask more hands for their safe keeping then the exigent will allow to be
idle. And thus befell it in one of our bravest battles with the French in
France; where the French prisoners which were taken at the beginning of the
battle upon Quarter, which were very many, and many of note, upon a second
charge given by the Duke d'Alenzon, were all commanded to be slain; which cost
the French doubly dear, the loss of all their prisoners, and the utter routing
of their puissant Army.

It is thought also by some, that the subjects of a State Neutral that shall
entertain Traffic with an Enemy to another State, may by that State be made
prize, and no Quarter to be given them, at least least in point of goods. For
(say they) though they do not this out of any affection of either love or
hatred, but only to make their benefit, and not to any proposed relief; yet
does this transport of Merchandise prove a plain and direct aid: And in that
regard, howsoever brought to the Enemy, deserves to be punished with
confiscation at the least; because that out of them Customs and Imposts are
raised, whereby their War is maintained. But of the right of this I make a
Querie; thinking it rather to be understood only of Munition, and Materials of
that nature; for otherwise it must necessarily overthrow all manner of Trade,
and set the whole World together by the ears.

Touching such orders as are to be observed in the taking of Prisoners by those
taht take them, I find them to have been these, by those of our own Nation.
That if any Common Soldier did take a prisoner, and another coming up at the
same time should challenge the half of his ransom, or else threaten to kill
the Prisoner, the menacer was to have no part at all of it; no, though the
taker of him had made him any such promise. And if the Menacer did kill the
Prisoner, he should be under Arrest with the Marshal until he compound with
the party for the loss of his Prisoner: and besides, he was to forfeit his
Horse and Arms to the Constable.

That if any Soldier in any fight did beat down any one of the Enemy, and so
leaving him, pursue on in the chase or fight, and another come up after him and
take the same man prisoner; this Prisoner thus beaten down, and thus taken,
when he was to be ransomed, was to pay the one half of his ransom to him that
first struck him down, and the other half to him that took him prisoner.

That whosoever he were that took any Prisoner, he was, as soon as possibly he
could, to present him to his Captain or Commander, upon the penalty of losing
his part of the Prisoners ransom to the said Captain or Commander; and the
Captain or Commander to present this Prisoner to the General, Constable, or
Marshal of the Army, before any other speak with him, that so his examination
might be duly taken. And this to be done under the penalty of losing his
Thirds of the Prisoners ransom (which otherwise was due unto him by his place)
unto him that did first discover the default unto the Constable or Marshal. And
that every one in whose custody this Prisoner should chance to be, was to be
careful to conceal from him all the secrets and Avenues upon the Camp. To which
end, he was not to be suffered to walk at large, nor to range about without a
good Guard upon him; and this upon pain of losing his Prisoners ransom; whereof
the one third part was to be allowed to his Captain, the other third to the
Constable, and the last to the Informer: And the person also of the Delinquent
to be under arrest at the Generals pleasure. Neither was any man to ransom his
Prisoner without License of the General, or the Constable, or Marshal; nor any
private person to give any safeconduct to any Prisoner, upon pain of forfeiture
of all his Goods, and his body to be under arrest during the Kings pleasure.
And whosoever violated the Kings or Generals safe conduct, was to be hanged,
drawn, and quartered.

And being thus fallen upon the punishments of Delinquents in a Martial way, we
shall in the next Chapter say somewhat of Martial Courts.

CHAP. IV. Of the Martial Courts in an Army Royal: the manner of Trials in
them. Of the punishments inflicted upon Delinquents in these Courts. Of
punishments in crimes not capital.
IN a well disciplined Army three several kinds of Martial Courts are to be
instituted: for it is a noveltie to have Martial Law denied in the Government
of an Army in the Field, and an absurd one.

The first Martial Court consists of all the Commanders in chief, with the
Colonels, and Judge-Marshal General. And this Court, after due notice taken of
the offense, pronounces sentence accordingly. And from this Court lies no
Appeal; but to it may Appeals be made from any of the other two.

In the second rank are those Courts which are Weekly held in every Regiment,
and oftener if cause require. And the Colonels of the Regiments, with the
Judge-Marshals, here sit in their several Courts, and pronounce sentence upon
the Delinquents of their several Regiments.

Of the third rank is that Court where the Judge-Marshal of the Army, and the
Judge-Marshals of the Regiments sit, and only they. And this Court takes
notice of all Causes both criminal and civil; and is instituted for the ease of
the Commanders. And into this Court the offenders and their offenses are
presented by the Provost-Marshals of the Regiments: whose office also it is to
produce the accusers, and to attend the trials and censures; the which they are
also to see executed.

Touching the manner and form of the Trials in all these Courts, they are not
much dissonant from those in Courts Criminal ordinarily practiced: for the
accusers are heard upon their oaths, as also the witnesses. And the accused
have full liberty to speak for themselves, and are to be heard with patience
and equanimitie. Only the Decisions, in stead of common Jurors, are passed by
most voices, being the Votes of such Commanders as sit Judges in the several
Courts; and the Censure pronounced for the most part by the Judge-Marshal; or
in his absence, by the President of the Court for the time being, who is
commonly the most eminent Officer amongst them. And these Forms and courses of
Trials seem to me without exception; and are so proper and essential to the
well regulating and Government of an Army, in regard that delays of execution
upon Delinquents in many cases cannot be endured without thousands of varieties
of danger; that for my part I cannot understand how an Army can subsist without
them

As for the punishments inflicted upon Delinquents by these Courts; in capital
causes, they are, Shooting to death, which is held the fairest; Hanging, and
sometimes Empaling. That Delinquent is to be shot to death, who kills any man
in Duel within Cannon-shot of the Camp; or that makes any attempt upon the
Enemy without direction or leave from his superior Commander.

He is to be hanged that Robs, Murders, desperately and obstinately
Blasphemes; that is a Mutineer or an inciter of Mutinies; that rescueth
offenders from the execution of a Censure: That strikes his Commander: That
wilfully discharges his Piece to give a false alarm in the night, or in any
ambush by day: That licenseth Soldiers for money to leave the Army, without
leave of the General: That takes pay of two Captains: That fights or quarrels
in the instant of service, or upon the expectation; in which case also it is
permitted for any Soldier to kill such a Soldier: That absents himself from
his Duties: That abandons his Colors in danger to be lost: That disperseth
false News or Reports, of purpose to discourage his Companions: That straggleth
from his Colors in a march, or keeps not his appointed place: That gives not
the Alarm to the Camp upon just cause when he stands Sentinel: That answers not
all Alarms: That goes out of the Camp or Trenches by any extraordinary way save
the common ones: That sells his Horse or Arms when Service is expected: That
succors not his General or Captain being in danger: That quits a place
committed to his charge being not enforced by the Enemy.

That offender is to be Empaled, that willingly and of purpose changes the
Watchword, or makes it known to the Enemy: That commits treason against the
person of the General, or Army in general: That poisons the Artillery, or by
any ways maliciously makes it unserviceable, or endeavors to make it so: And
lastly, That entertains any secret intelligence with the Enemy. And these are
the capital punishments for capital offenses.

As for the inferior and less capital: He is to be imprisoned that fights,
swaggers, swears, couzens, drinks drunk: That is a common Gamester, absents
himself from his Quarter by night: That pays not the Merchants, Artificers, or
Victuallers their dues: That either by negligence or folly discovers any
purpose or intention of the Army: That strikes or beats any Soldier without
cause: That neglects Divine Service.

He is to undergo the Cudgel, that is contumax or insolent toward his
Commanders: That keeps not his Arms clean and in point: That either sells or
pawns his Arms; or buys or takes any Arms to pawn.

He is to be disarmed or banished the Army, or Strappadoed, or Whipped, (but
this last is seldom to be given to a Soldier) that shall obstinately persevere
in any crime whatsoever. And these, and such as these, are the crimes
punishable in Martial Courts: And indeed any other crime whatsoever, which
shall tend to the disturbance of the Army, or the debanching of the Soldier.

CHAP. V. Of the laying and preventing of Ambushments. How a discovery upon an
Enemy may best be made. Of the fittest places for Ambushments. Of the service
of Horsemen and Footmen, which to be preferred.
WE shall in this Chapter give some advertisements (and that very briefly)
about two particulars not yet mentioned; Touching the laying out of
Ambushments, with the prevention of falling into them; and the comparing of
Horse and Foot in the advantages and disadvantages they have one of another;
that so the discreet Commander may make use of them accordingly.

As touching the laying out of Ambushments, the especial point to be aimed at
and heeded, is, That it be done in such a part as may least be suspected; and
in such a manner, that the Enemy may fall within the danger of them. To give
color whereunto, one common trick has been, to pretend aforehand (in such a
kind, that the Enemy may so conceive it) some fear, and so a flight; or some
want of necessaries, and the like; whereby the Enemy may be drawn to a more
eager and bold pursuit, and so the more heedlesly and unrecoveredly fall within
the danger of the Ambush. And many other the like practices of this nature may
be thought upon to this purpose.

As for the courses of prevention from falling into these Ambushes, it is a
good general rule to suspect all sudden removes and fallings off of an Enemy.
In which case an exact and cautious discovery is to be made, even to the very
place where there is any intention to lodge. And the manner observed in these
discoveries have usually been, to send out Parties in three Companies or
Divisions: the first to consist of a small number, to beat the way at ease, and
to range about from place to place, where any danger may be expected. The
second Party to be somewhat stronger, the better to second and bring off the
first upon all occasions. And the third to be so strong as to make head
against, and to engage a strong Party of the Enemy, if he shall present it.
And thus did Cyrus in his so famous descent dispose of his forerunners and
discoverers in the like case, (as Xenophon lays it down) and that with very
good success.

And it is to be noted, that these discoveries are ever to be made with the
light-armed Troops. For it being a point of no small concernment, to be
thoroughly informed of the true distances of the places, the condition of the
ways, the nature of the hills, and the course and passages of the Rivers where
the Army is to pass; this cannot better be performed (nor so well) as by the
light-armed. And being by them thoroughly done, afforded incomparable
advantages; good discoveries being the very eyes of an Army, whereby the
resolutions of providence are guided, and the path of safety delineated, that
so there may be no stumbling upon casualties. And all this is attained by a
perfect intelligence of the true face of the Country, and in knowing the
motions of the Enemy. And the face of the Country is best known by the use and
employment of the native Guides of the Country; provided that they be always
associated with some faithful Scouts of ones own, that so there need not be an
absolute reliance upon a strangers information. And as for the motions of the
Enemy, they may be surest had by the light armed Horse; who nevertheless are
not to be over-forward in informing upon every new trifling motion, but to have
their intelligence confirmed unto them by diverse and various ways and means;
lest some error and mistake befall them thorough passion or affection: as to
those in France, who thorough the passion of fear took a field of great
Thistles, for a mighty Body of Pikes.

As touching the fittest persons to be laid out in Ambushes: It is to be
considered, that all Ambushments are made use of either to endanger and ensnare
the Enemy in a fight in the Field, or to entrap and hinder him in his march.
And examples of each sort are found frequently practiced by that subtle
Hannibal in his Italian Wars: In the first whereof, he constantly employed as
well the heavy armed Soldiers as the light. In the second, the light-armed
alone; whose agilitie and expedition gave them opportunity and advantage with
their missive weapons to assault and annoy the Enemy, though the ground were
never so strait or uneven. And these also might be more easily lodged without
discovery.

As for the parts and places most proper and fit for the receipt and lodging of
these Ambushes; they are such as are most removed from the view, as Woods,
Mountains, Forests, Rocks, Banks of Rivers, Hollow and deep ways: In short, any
place or piece of Ground, wherein some numbers and Troops of Soldiers may best
lie obscured and hid. And thus much touching the ordering and disposal of
Ambushes, with the use of them.

We are now to fall upon a comparison between the Cavalrie and Infantrie in
point of War; with respect to the advantages or disadvantages they have one
above another, according to the several services and occasions they may be
employed in. Touching which, such as prefer the Footmen or Infantrie before
the Cavalrie or Horse, give these Reasons: That the Foot may be employed in all
places, and upon all occasions; whereas the Horse in craggie and rough ways are
of little or no use at all: That the Foot are more ready and less chargeable;
and being well led and armed, endure the shock better then the Horse can: That
in the guarding of Towns, and all places of strength, Footmen have the
prioritie of Horsemen, in respect of the point of Provisions; it being more
difficult and troublesome for a Commander to feed his Horses, then to feed and
discipline his men: That at assaults of Towns, Horsemen are of small use, if
they leave not their Horses; and then they are no longer Horsemen: That at set
Fields and Battles, Footmen having means to entrench themselves, and having
good Pikes and store, have always been found more then equal to Horsemen. In
Levies, Footmen are more speedily raised, and led and lodged with more
facility: They are paid with less charge then the Horse: They fight more
safely, rally themselves more certainly, and easily: And lastly, Horse are hard
to be found in any great numbers; for it may be believed that there are twenty
men to one Horse in the World. And these are the proper priorities of Footmen
over Horsemen, which have been observed, as well by the Ancients as the
Moderns. To which also (in mine opinion) may be added, That the Foot are by far
more fit for all sorts of Ambushments then the Horse can be, in regard they may
be lodged more secretly; and especially in respect that Horse are very subject
to discover themselves by their noise and neighing. And besides, the best man
of courage that breathes, is in a fight subjected to the disorder and
unmanageableness of his Horse that he rides upon.

On the other side, those that prefer Horsemen before Footmen, give these
instances: That a Horseman has stouter and better legs then his own: That he
charge more furiously: That he has more force and breath then a Footman:
That Horse have the advantage in long marches and hasty pursuits: That they
have more means to surprise an Enemy: That they have more oportunities to
approach, to seize upon, to cut off, and to hold all passages; to invest Towns
on a fuddain, to answer Alarms and to give them; to command the Field, to make
a spoil, to cut off all supplies, either of Victuals or Munition, then any Foot
can possibly have.

And thus we have done with these two particulars, and finish the Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of Stratagems of War. How to breed a causless fear, or the contrary.
To give assurance to the besieged being in fear. To draw an Enemy to an
overdaring, or into an over-security. To discover whether a Town lately
received to Quarter be to be trusted. How to appease an Army mutinying for pay
upon a fight. To avoid Battle when an Enemy is far too strong: or to entice
him to Battle when too weak. Of desperate attempts in a desperate condition:
they are to be charily and warily handled. To prevent partial respects in
giving of Counsel.
IN the last Chapter having laid down some rules for the ordering and disposing
of Ambushments, we shall in this take occasion from them to intimate somewhat
concerning Stratagems of War. And because these are so diversified and varied
upon several occasions, that for the most part they are in that respect beyond
any set rules; we shall only particularize in such as being of the most
general extention, may happily be made use of by way of Renovation and
Imitation.

And we will begin with a stratagem, whereby a besieged Enemy may be couzened
and terrified by a supposed Mine when there is none. And this was practiced by
Philip King of Macedon, (not the father of the great Alexander, but he who was
afterward vanquished and subdued by the Romans) who besieging the Town of
Prinassus, attempted it by a Mine; but finding the earth and part so stony,
that it despaired him of success that way, he caused his Pioneers to continue
the semblance of working, and to make an extraordinary noise under ground: and
the more to add a belief of their working, he caused a great quantity of earth
to be brought secretly in the nights from elsewhere, and so laid in heaps at
the entrance and mouth of the supposed Mine, that the Enemy might well discern
it, and suppose that it was taken and dug out of the Mine. And after some
time spent in this manner, he summoned those of the Town to a rendition;
sending them word that by his underminings, their Towns Wall, to the quantity
of two acres of ground, stood only upon wooden props; to which whenever he
did give fire, that part of their Wall would lie flat on the ground: the which
if they did attend, and cause him to enter by a breach, they were not to expect
any Quarter or Mercy; and therefore wished them to consider of their
condition, and to do as they found cause. Now the Prinessians little thinking
that these heaps of earth which they saw, had been brought from other places,
but that it had been taken out of the Mine; so lost their courages, as that
they suffered themselves to be outbraved, and thereupon gave up their Town upon
a mere panick fear.

And as this was a Stratagem to occasion and work upon a false fear; so these
three following were to recover from the like.

The Soldiers of Alexanders Army being on the sudden in a great fear, of they
knew not what, Alexander at that very instant caused them all to be disarmed;
whereby they became assured that this would not have been commanded, if there
had been any present danger.

Clearchus to pacify a foolish consternation and uproar of this nature amongst
his men, proclaimed a reward to him that could tell who had sent the Ass into
the Camp. And thus by doing somewhat quite contrary to that which the peril
would have required had it been true, he gave a full assurance against that
which was false, and which his men had only fashioned in their amazed
imaginations and conceits.

The third example to this purpose (which withal also expressed a magnanimity,
which both sustained Reputation, and augmented it) was that act of the Romans,
which was done when Hannibal made his bold approach upon the City of Rome,
whilst the main of the Roman forces were at the Siege of Capua. For the
Commanders at Rome finding that the City by reason hereof was subject to Fears
and Tumults, at the very same instant caused a supply that had formerly been
appointed for Spain, to march out of the City at one Gate in pursuit of their
first Resolution, whilst the Carthaginian Army lay before the other; whereby
they not only checked the bold confidence of the Enemy, but took off that
fear which clouded their own Valor.

To which purpose also that very piece of ground on which the Carthaginian
Army lay encamped, was at the same time sold in Rome; and bought (says the
Story) nothing at all under the Value, but at the same rate as if it had been
in the former times of peace. The which act and sale, so madded even Hannibal
himself, that to make a show of being even with them, he made a Port-sale of
all the Silver-Smiths Shops which were near about the Market or Common place in
Rome: As if he would seem to think that his own Title and Interest to those
Shops within the Town, was no jot worse then any Roman Citizens to that piece
of ground where his Tent stood.

But this Counter-piece of Hannibals was not of so good stuff as that of the
Romans: for their act was indeed a thorough manifestation of an assurance
grounded hopefully, and was only acted to stir up the courages of their men;
whereas Hannibals was only a passionate show, and an angry Brave of a
continuance in a hope which he well knew was already past: His Victuals being
at the same time so near at an end, that of all those Hopes and Ends which he
had propounded to himself by this his approach so near unto Rome, the fame
only of his much daring is left to posterity.

It is true that Hannibal partly was quit with these Romans by a Stratagem of
another nature, that he put in practice at Tarentum; when having surprised the
Town, and entering it at two several Gates, so that the Roman Garrison with the
Governor were forced to retire themselves into the Citadel, the which it
behooved Hannibal speedily to take in, in regard of the Vicinitie of the Roman
Army: he addressed himself against it in such a manner of Brave, as was likely
to provoke the Garrison to a Sallie; hoping hereby to give them such a blow as
might disable them to defend the piece any longer.

And according to his expectation, the Romans not enduring in such a slighting
fashion to be approached upon, sallied out in a heat of fury with most of
their bravest men, and charged them home. But Hannibal having ordered
beforehand that his men should thereupon fall back as if they were terrified,
until he had drawn out as many of the besieged Romans as he could, and as far
from their strength as he could; he then gave the signal to his Carthaginians,
who lay prepared and ambushed for the purpose, and suddenly and fiercely
setting upon the sallied Romans, not only forced such as were nearest home to
retire themselves into their Hold, but laid on the ground all the forwardest
and best of their men; so that they durst not issue out a second time, but were
constrained to suffer Hannibal to make his approaches at pleasure, whereby he
forced the place.

And as this was a Stratagem to draw Soldiers into an over-daring, so that
which follows is to win them into an over-securitie; and was acted in this
manner:

Antiochus the Great, in his Minority was wholly governed by one Hermias, an
ambitious man, and a maligner of Virtue. At the same time one Molo the Kings
Lieutenant in Media was broken out into a Rebellion, and sought to make himself
Lord of that Province. Antiochus being entered at the same time into a War with
Ptolomie Philopater the Egyptian King, was counseled by his Minion Hermias
(who had put him upon the Egyptian War) to send against this Rebel, who was but
a Captain, a Captain that was faithful; but himself to go in person against the
King of Egypt, who was a King like himself. Hereupon one Xenetas an Achaean (by
Hermias his choice and preferment) was sent with an Army against the Rebel
Molo, whilst the King Antiochus himself marched against the Egyptian.

This Xenetas drawing near unto the River Tigris with his Army, on the other
side whereof the Rebel lay to hinder his passage, made a show as if he would
pass the River by Boats in the very face of the Enemy; but leaving so many
only as he thought sufficient to defend his Camp, he himself, with the flower
and strength of his Army passed over Tigris in a place ten miles lower then
where Molo lay entrenched; who hearing of it, sent out his Horse to give
impediment: But finding that Xenetas could not be stopped, he practiced this
ensuing Stratagem to draw his Enemy into a snare of security. He no sooner
found that Xenetas with his whole Army marched toward him, but presently he
dislodged, making a show of taking a hasty journey homewards: and to possess
the Enemy that it was done in a fear, he withal left all his Baggage and
Victual behind in his Camp. Xenetas hearing of this his Retreat, easily
suffered himself (more like a Courtier then a Soldier) to believe that the
Enemy durst not so much as look him in the face; and the rather, in that he
was informed that he had left his forsaken Camp well stored with Victuals and
Booty: whereupon hastily marching thitherward, and finding it to his
expectation, he not only suffered his men to feast and drink to their full; but
invited and commanded them to do so, making proclamation that they should
cherish up themselves against the march that he intended to begin the next day,
in pursuit of the flying Rebel. But Molo, who removed no farther the first day
then he could easily make back again the same night, understanding what good
rule the Kings men kept with his Victuals, made such a speedy and oportune
return, that he came upon them early in the morning whilst they were yet in
their Wine and Cheer, with his full force; and giving them a lusty Camisado, so
confounded them amidst their pots, that their General Xenetas, with a very few
besides, dying fighting, the rest were slaughtered ere they could find their
Arms, and the most of them before they were perfectly awake and recovered of
their Wine; leaving by their over-securitie an absolute Victory to their subtle
Enemy.

And because it is a requirable providence, after a General has obtained a
Victory, and received his Enemy upon Quarter, be it either in a Town newly
taken in, or in the Field, to be wary of an over-confidence in their Faith and
Loyalty (especially when the Enemy is near) but rather by all searching ways
to discover, if it were possible, their very hearts: That Stratagem which to
this purpose was practiced by the Spaniards at their taking of the City Verona
from the Venetians, may serve for a president for the future in the like case;
which was this:

The Venetian Army lying near unto the Town, which was not long before taken
in by the Spaniard upon Composition; the Spanish Governor aiming to understand
how the Burgers and Citizens in general stood affected to their old Patrons the
Venetians, gave secret order to the Spanish Garrison that was in Guard of the
Town, that in the dead of the night when the Townsmen were asleep, they should
run to and fro about the City, and cry out, St. Mark, St. Mark, as if the
Town had been surprised by the Venetians. The which cry being readily answered
by as many of the Citizens as secretly favored the Venetians, and were ready
to receive them; the Spaniards observing their Houses, marked their doors with
some Chalk, or the like: And being thus discovered, the Governor the very next
mornning imprisoned the chiefest of them, and confiscated all their Goods;
whereby he not only secured the Town, but contented the Garrison with the
confiscations; the Soldiers being at the same time inclinable to a mutiny for
want of pay.

Nor is there any thing of a more dangerous consequence, then for an Army
(especially upon the point of Action) to be found in this condition of a
Mutiny for pay. And the ill effects thereof have many times sorted to an
absolute ruin; and above all other parts, in the Wars of Germany, and chiefly
of late years; where the common cry, even at the exigent of a Fight, has
been, Ghelt, Ghelt, Money, Money: And sometimes occasion taken thereupon by the
Soldier to seize upon the persons of their Commanders, and to deliver both
them and themselves to the Enemies mercy. For the cure, or at the least
Palliation of which desperate disease, some brave Commanders have been forced
(with good success) to practice this Stratagemical course: To borrow of their
chief Officers, upon fair and promising terms, such sums of money as could be
gotten and spared on the sudden: whereby was attained not only some
satisfaction for the Common Soldiers, by letting them feel some piece of a
Pay, and making them to apprehend that their General had a care and love of
them, by thus engaging of himself to give them content: but also a Tie upon all
the Officers that made this Lone, causing them to be true and faithful unto the
General who had borrowed these moneys of them; that so they might be in the
better possibility to reimburse their lent moneys, with the usury of a
thankful acknowledgment.

And an example of this we shall find punctually practiced by Caesar (recorded
by himself in his Commentary of the Civil Wars between him and Pompey, cap.
14.) For being to pass suddenly into Spain, and to pay a great Army, which
required much present money; he borrowed all the money he could of his
Centurions and Tribunes, and gave it out presently and publicly to his
Soldiers: whereby (says he of himself) Caesar both engaged his Captains to a
dependencie upon him, in respect of their Lone; and won the affection of his
Soldiers by his Largess, and made them willing to fight.

Now though an Army be never so well affected to their General, and as willing
thereupon to engage their lives in his Quarrel and under his conduction as can
be wished; yet when an over-powerful Enemy is to be encountered, and ready for
a battle, it is the wisdom of an able General by all means to seek to avoid it.

Toward which this Stratagem following much conduces, and may be drawn into
President, as it is set down in Polien. (lib. 4. in vit. Antig.) and practiced
by Antigonus, when he was encamped in the face of Enmenes his Army, but with
an Army by much inferior in number. At what time Messengers (or rather Spies)
being interchangeably sent from one to another; Antigonus at the receipt of a
Messenger from the Enemy, which he expected, had fore-appointed that one of
his Soldiers should come running, and as it were breathless, and all to be
dusted and sweaty, and tell him that all his Confederates were arrived. Upon
which Tale Antigonus expressing much joy, presently dismissed the Enemies
Messenger without more ado. And the very next day he brings his Army out of his
Trenches, doubling the length of his Front, to make his Army carry the greater
show. The which the Enemy seeing, and having heard the report of their
Messenger, and observing the breadth of Antigonus his battle, and imagining
that the depth was answerable to it; he suddenly dislodged, and was afraid to
join battle with him; which was the only thing that Antigonus desired.

And as this is a Stratagem to shun and decline a Battle when the Enemy is
found too strong; so this other succeeding is very pertinent, on the other
side, to draw and entice him to a fight when he is known too weak.

And this Stratagem also is mentioned by Polienus (Lib. 2. in Cleandridas,
Sect. 4.) where Cleandridas making War upon the Thurians, and having double the
number of men in his Army to that of his Enemy; and conceiving that if he did
but know so much, he should never bring him to a battle: To deceive him, and
embolden him by his ignorance, in the embattelling of his Army or Phalanx, he
ordered it into an extraordinary depth: whereupon the Enemy apprehending by
the narrowness of the Front that Cleandridas was very weak in number,
contemning his small strength, drew out his Forces in breadth, with an intent
to environ him. The which Cleandridas perceiving, commanded the one half of his
Files to march up and rank with their Leaders; and thereby so over-fronted the
Enemy on a sudden, unexpectedly assaulting him withal with missive weapons on
all sides, as he utterly routed him.

As touching the practice of desperate attempts in Military Actions upon
desperate exigents: It may prove sometimes a profitable Stratagem to attempt
and put that in execution, which otherwise in it self were contrary to Reason
it self, and the very Art of War: which may be grounded upon this:

That in regard a wary and able Commander and General not only passes upon
tried and sure Grounds himself, but even from thence and the very same Rules
expects the like from others; upon finding the contrary practiced by his
Enemy beyond his apprehension and expectance, he may thereby be happily so
disturbed in his set Resolutions and Courses, and be so new to seek, as may
(before he can recall himself out of his amazes) give opportunity to the
desperate attempter to free himself out of his desperate condition.

And Examples proving thus much are to be found put upon even Caesar himself by
the Nervii, (registered by himself in his Commentaries, cap. 10.) as also in
that battle of his with Pharnaces. And in our Modern Wars this practice has
proved successful more then once, in those violent Civil Broyls in France.

True it is, that these ways and stratagems are to be charily and very
sparingly handled; and only upon most urging, if not desperate occasions: For,
Temeritas non semper Foelix.

Since therefore there is so much of Advice and Counsel requirable in all
Actions of War, we will conclude this Treatise with a preventative Policy or
Stratagem for the taking away of false or flattering respects in the point of
delivering opinions. For it being over-commonly found, that through the
obsequious dependence upon some Favorite or great Man, a general consent and
compliance is produced, to say as he says, or vote as he votes (a fatal
disease in all great Assemblies) though perhaps it be either the worst that can
be, or at the least, none of the best; and by this means the truest judgments
remain concealed:

To remedy this dangerous and deadly mischief, the wise Cosmo di Medici (and
herein also imitated by Philip the second of Spain) used to propound his most
difficult and important Causes and Propositions in Writing; and so delivered
them to every one of his Counselors apart, commanding them to return their
opinions in the same manner to him, together with their reasons; and (upon his
highest displeasure) not to communicate any piece of them with any other,
before his first view. And after the receipt of them all, he would cause them
all to appear in Council with him, and in his presence to defend and maintain
their several Judgments and Opinions with their best Arguments. A course
certainly full of excellent freedom, and for many respects far better then
that the youngest Counselor should speak first; who sometimes may be so
skilful in Courtship of this nature, as to be led by looks.

And besides, it allows these Counselors a fit time of deliberation to
think upon what they have to say; it being dangerous in these Cases, or any of
weight, either Divine or Humane (be the Speakers never so able) to be too
forward to put themselves upon Extempories.

FINIS.

