A CAVEAT TO THE Three Kingdoms: OR, A Summary Account OF THE Most Miserable
and Deplorable Estate and Condition of England in the Reign of King John,
occasioned by his bringing in infinite Multitudes of Foreign Forces: TOGETHER
With the Base Treachery of Lewis, the French King's Son, and his Great Men,
intended against the Barons, who invited him in to their Assistance: Very well
worthy to be seriously considered by all True Englishmen at this time of Day.

Translated out of MATTHEW PARIS, One of our most Authentic Historians, who
lived at that Time.

LONDON* Printed for ^. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

A CAVEAT TO THE Three Kingdoms.
JOHN King of England, Matt. Paris, Fol. 268. Line 32.
repenting of his granting of Magna Charta in the 17th year of his Reign, after
three Months stay breaking forth from the Isle of Wight, sailed up to Dover,
whither his Messengers, whom he had sent into Parts beyond the Sea, resorting
to him, they brought with them out of diverse Countries a multitude of Soldiers
and Armed Men, which struck all such as beheld them with Fear and Horror: For
there came from the Parts of Poictou and Gascony Noble Persons and Warriors:
Savaric of Malcon, Geofrey and Oliver of Buteville, Brothers, accompanied with
very Great Forces of Soldiers and Armed Persons, who promised faithful
Obedience to the King. There came likewise from the Countries of Louvain and
Brabant very courageous Men, Walter Buck, Gerard, Sotin, and Godeschal, with
Three Legions of Armed Men and Slingers, such as thirsted after nothing more
than Humane Blood. Besides there repaired to the said King out of Flanders, and
other Foreign Countries, all such who were greedy of other Men's Goods,
Debtors, Exiled and Excommunicated Persons, Murderers, all such to whom their
Country was a Banishment, not a Refuge; such as these adhering to him, gave
this desperate King very great hopes of making Resistance [against the Barons.]

There likewise came Hugh de Boves, a stout Soldier, Ibidem, 268, 269.
but proud and wicked, to the Port of Calice in Flanders, with an Innumerable
multitude of Armed Persons to the Assistance of the King of England, where
having taken Shipping with all his Company, he earnestly desired to sail for
Dover; but a sudden Tempest arising, before they could reach their desired
Haven, they suffered Shipwreck, and were all drowned in the Sea; insomuch that
as not one of 40000 Men escaped alive. This great number of Men all came with
their Wives and Children for England, for this purpose, that the Natives being
expelled this Kingdom, and utterly exterminated, they themselves might possess
this Land by a perpetual Right. For the beforementioned cruel King, to the
Leader of them, yea, this cruel Tyrant, had given (as it is reported) by his
Charter to the aforesaid Hugh de Boves, that Seducer, that Fugitive, the
Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk.

Matt. Paris* 274, l. 20.
The King contrived how he might confound his Enemies, namely, the Barons of
England, and how he might provide Stipends for those foreign Nations which
served under him; at length the King got together two Armies, that with one of
them he might suppress the Eruptions of such Barons as were resident at London,
and that with the other he might destroy the Northern Provinces of England with
Fire and Sword, by laying waste whatsoever should come in his way. These things
were transacted at St. Albans the 13th. of the Calends of January. The Army
which he left behind him was commanded by Warlike Men, as W. Earl of Salisbury,
Falcasius the King's Brother, who had no Bowels of Compassion, Savaric de
Malcon a Warrior, and bloudy-minded, with his Pictavians, William Brievere, an
expert Warrior, with his whole Power, Walter Buck, a Villain, and Blood-thirsty
Man, with his most impious and ignoble Flemings and Brabantines, noted for all
kind of Wickedness: There were also others with them whom, to avoid Prolixity,
I for a time omit to mention.

Ibidem. King John lays waste the Northern parts of England.
King John being now of a King become a Tyrant, from a Man transforming himself
into Brutish Cruelty, went from St. Albans, taking with him toward the North
William Earl of Albemarle, Philip of Albin^t, John Marshal; and of Foreigners,
Gerard of Sotin, Godeschall, with the Flemings and Slingers, and other
desperate People, who neither feared God nor Man: Who, when for that Night he
had rested a little at Dunstable, rising before Day, he took his way toward
Northampton, wasting all the Houses, and burning the Seats of the Barons with
his divided Forces, in an Hostile manner, he plundered, taking Spoils and
Cattle; and thus destroying all things, he made a miserable Spectacle to all
such as beheld it. And to heighten this Desolation and Malice of his, the King
commanded his Incendiaries to burn the Fences and Villages, by casting Fire
into them all along as they went, that he might take pleasure in the sight of
the Losses of his Enemies (if they may be called Enemies, who endeavored to
bring him to a sense of Clemency and Justice) and by Rapine enrich those most
outrageous Instruments of Iniquity whom He had under Him. All Persons of
whatsoever Condition, Age, or Rank they were, were taken, whosoever were found
without the Church or Churchyard, and being tormented after several ways, were
compelled to pay a most heavy Ransom, according that of the Poet -- Quicquid
delirant Reges plectuntur Achivi.
Kings scruple not what Outrage they commit;
But it is their Subjects who must pay for it.


Such as were in any of the Fortresses of the Barons, when they had
Intelligence of the King's Approach, leaving the Castles destitute, and
consulting their own Safety, fled to secret Places, quitting their Provisions
with great Spoils and variety of Furniture as a Prey to their Enemies: But the
King placing his own People in the disfurnished Castles, as has been above
related, with his most wicked Followers hastened to Nottingham.

In the mean time, William Earl of Salisbury and Falcasius, The Southern Parts
of England depopulated.
with their Soldiers, whom the King had dismissed at St. Albans, appointed the
Garrisons of Windsor, Hartford, and Berkhamsted, with a strong armed Body, to
have a watchful Eye upon such as passed to and from the City of London, and to
take care to cut off the Barons from Provisions: Which being done, they
marching through the Counties of Essex, Hartford, Cambridge, and Huntingdon,
were intent upon plundering and ravaging, like Holofernes, Fol. 275.
Commander of the Assyrian Army, made the Villages Tributary, took the Men
Captives, burned the Houses of the Barons, destroyed their Parks and Warrens,
cut down their Orchards; and at last, even in the Suburbs of London, they set
Fire, and carried away an inestimable Booty. And when Messengers from diverse
Places recounted these things to the Barons, they looking upon each other,
said. The Lord has given; The Lord has taken away: These things must be born
with Courage. And when amongst other Abominable Outrages committed by the King,
and his most wicked Accomplices, they heard likewise that their Wives and
Daughters were exposed to scorn, they sighing said, These Things does the
Pope's most beloved Son in Christ, who protects his Vassal in subduing so Free
and Noble a Kingdom after this unheard of manner.

The King having divided his wicked Forces entering into the Northern Parts, by
setting Fire to the Seats of the Barons, Tyranny.
driving away Preys of Cattle, making Spoils, wasting all things with the
Sword, contemning God, nor regarding the Poor, destroyed whatsoever came in his
way: For these Soldiers of Satan, Ministers of the Devil, and they also who
were gathered together from the more remote Parts for this purpose, like
Locusts, covered the Face of the Land. It was a sufficient Cause of Death for
the poor Inhabitants, if they were but thought to have something; and they
which had nothing, were constrained to confess they had something; and he who
had it not, was grievously tormented as if he had, to enforce him to pay the
same. These Murderers ran up and down, blooded with human Slaughter,
Night-wanderers, Incendiaries, Sons of Belial, with their drawn Swords, that
they might extirpate, from Man to Beast, all things necessary for humane Uses;
and, with their drawn Knives, thoroughly searched Towns, Houses, Churchyards,
Churches, despoiled all People, Fol 276.
insomuch as they spared neither Women, nor Children, nor such as were Aged.
And what they could not consume themselves, they set on Fire, or otherwise
rendered it unfit for Man's Use. And such as were altogether unblameable,
calling them the King's Enemies: Wheresoever they were found, they were hastily
cast into Prison, fettered, and at last forced to pay a most grievous Ransom.
The Priests also standing at the very Altars, carrying the Sign of the Holy
Cross in their hands, or handling the very Body of our Lord, venerable in their
holy Vestments, they thus standing at the Altars, who ought to be respected for
the sake of Religion were taken, tormented, despoiled, wounded: Nor was there
any, Bishop, Priest, or Levite, who might pour fourth Wine or Oil into these
Wounds so inflicted upon them. Soldiers also, and other Persons of what
Condition soever, they tormented in like manner, hanging up some by the Reins
and Privy-Members, others by the Feet and Legs, some by the Hands, and Thumbs,
and Arms; they did spit in the Eyes of these miserable Sufferers Salt mixed
with Vinegar, not at all understanding that they were created after the Image
of God, and signed with the Character of Christ. Others they forced either
wholly to expire, or scarcely to be able to draw their breath, putting them in
Vessels, and upon Gridirons over hot burning Coals, and then dipping their
roasted Bodies in Water covered with Ice, Assata Corpora.
that they might as it were with Hellish Torments pass from too much Heat into
the extremity of Cold; and whilst they miserably cried out in the midst of
Torment, and horribly groaned for the excessive Anguish of their Punishments,
no body pitied them; nor did their Tormentors cease from exacting Money, which
these suffering Persons had not, neither was any Credit given to them who were
thus afflicted. Some, who had nothing, promised great things, that so at least
for some very short time they might deserr the Cruelties which had been thus
experienced. This was a general Persecution in England, whilst Fathers by their
Children, Brothers by their Brethren, Citizens by their Fellow-Citizens were
sold to be tormented.

Matt. Paris, Fol. 278. Anno 18 Regis Johannis.
About this time, when at length the Barons (who had now lost all which was most
desirable in this World, and were utterly destitute of hope of better Fortune
how of themselves they might recover their Losses,) were inwardly touched with
grief of Heart, and what to do they knew not: Cursing the Subtilty,
Backslidings, and Infidelity of the King; and saying with repeated Sighs, Woe
be to you, John, thou last of Kings, the Abomination of English Princes, the
Confusion of the English Nobility! Oh, England, who art already laid waste, and
must yet still farther be wasted! Oh, England, England! who in the Eyes of all
good Men have hitherto been the chief of Provinces, art now made Tributary; not
only made subject, and reduced to Fire, Famine, and the Sword, but must be
governed by mean Slaves and Foreigners: Since nothing can be more unfortunate
than to be subjected to the Slavery of such Vassals.

We have read of many Kings and inferior Princes, who have fought even until
Death for the Deliverance of their Countries under their Obedience; but thou,
John, (of unhappy Memory to future Ages) that this your Land, which from all
Antiquity has been free, might be enslaved, have bestowed thy Thoughts and
Pains to draw others with thee into Bondage, not unlike the sliding of a
Serpent, have first withdrawn thy self from this Firmament; being become of a
most free King, a Tributary, a Farmer, and a Vassal of Slavery: Thou has
linked this most Noble La^d to perpetual Bondage, never to be freed from these
servile Fetters, unless He, who had Compassion over us and all the World, when
anciently they were enslaved under the yoke of Sin, taking pity, shall at some
time or other condescend to deliver us. And what shall we say of thee, O Pope?
Who being the Father of Holiness, the Pattern of Piety, the Tutor of Justice,
and the Guardian of Truth, ought to shine for an Example to the whole World;
Art thou consenting to such an One? Do thou praise and defend such an One?
But it is for this reason that Thou defendest this Exhauster of English Money,
and the Imposer upon the British Nobility, who inclines himself to thy side,
that all things may be swallowed up in the Gulf of Roman Avarice. At length it
was decreed, that they would elect some powerful Person to be their King, by
whose means they might be restored to their ancient Possessions, believing that
none could reign more cruelly than John, and framing this sorry Argument.

-- Fortuna miserrima tuta
Nam Timor Eventus deterioris abest.
When Fortune has her utmost Malice spent,
We cannot then dread any worse Event.
And when for some time they had hesitated whom to Elect, they at last agreed
in this, that they would set over them Lewis the Son of Philip the French King,
and advance him to be King: And their Reason was because that if by the means
of Lewis, and his Father, the foreign multitude, with which King John was
surrounded, being the greatest part of them their Subjects, should desert him,
when he should likewise be deprived and destitute of his own Forces at home, he
himself would remain in a manner alone without Power; and, making a Virtue of
Necessity, would hearken to more wholesome Counsels. And afterward this
Resolution being pleasing to them all, they sent by solemn Messengers, namely,
the Lord S. Earl of Winchester, and Robert Fitzwater, to King Philip and Lewis
his Son, Letters Sealed with the Seals of all the Barons, earnestly beseeching
the Father, that he would send his Son into England that he might reign, and
the Son that he would come forth to be Crowned.

Lewis having accepted of their Invitation, comes over for England; and being
joined by the Barons at London, who making War upon King John and his Party, in
which Lewis and the Barons prevailed.

Matt. Paris, Fol. 287. Anno 1216.
Not long after which, it fell out that the Viscount of Molun, a Nobleman of the
Kingdom of France, who came over into England with Lewis, was dangerously sick
in the City of London; who, perceiving that his Death was near at hand, desired
to discourse with such of the Barons of England, as were remaining in the City
of London, for the Safeguard thereof; and he confessed in the hearing of them
all, telling them, I am grieved at your Desolation and Subversion, because ye
are ignorant how many Dangers hang over ye: For Lewis has sworn, and sixteen
more Earls and Barons of the Kingdom of France with him, that if it shall be
his Fortune to subdue England, and to be Crowned King, he would condemn to
perpetual Exile all those who now serve in the War under himself, and those
who are the Followers of King John, as Betrayers of their Master, and would
extirpate all their Race out of the Land. And that you may not doubt of this, I
my self, who now lie in continual expectation of Death, do, as I hope my Soul
shall be saved, affirm unto ye, that I was one of those who with Lewis have
sworn it. Wherefore I now earnestly advise ye, that for the future ye provide
for your Safety; and that these things, which now I have related unto ye, be
kept secret. And having thus said, this Nobleman forthwith expired. And when
these Words were spread among the Barons, they were very much grieved to find
themselves thus every way distressed. For Lewis had given their Lands and
Castles, which he had in diverse places subdued, to Frenchmen, which they
murmured at; and that which troubled them the more was, that he gave out as if
they were Traitors; and it farther increased their Sorrow to find that they
were every Day excommunicated, and deprived of all Earthly Honor, whereby they
fell into the greatest Affliction both of Body and Mind. Many of them therefore
had Thoughts of returning to be obedient to King John; but they were much
afraid, whether he, whom they had so much provoked to hate them by their
Revilings, would receive them upon their Repentance.

But by the timely Death of King John, which shortly after happened, and the
setting up his Son to be King, to whom the Barons resorted, the villainous
Design of Lewis, and his Adherents, became abortive, as the Historian tells us.

FINIS.

