The CASE of Walter Kennedy Esquire; and Lettice his Wife Eldest Sister, and Robert
Haldanby Esquire; and Katharine his Wife Youngest Sister, and Coheirs of Robert
Knollys Esquire; lately deceased.
WIlliam Knollys Esquire; deceased, Father of the said Robert Knollys, made five
several Leases or Mortgages of several parts of the Manor of Rotherfield
Greyes in the County of Oxon, for considerable Sums of Money borrowed of
several persons, and died.

The said Robert Knollys his Son and Heir, after his death to discharge these
Mortgages, and other Encumbrances of his Estate, borrowed of Richard Hoper Esquire;
5000 l. and these Mortgages were all assigned unto John Hoper his Son in trust
for him, 12 and 13 Nov. 19 Car. II.
and the Inheritance of the said Manor, and all Lands thereto belonging were
by Lease and Release, and Fine thereupon, levied, conveyed and granted unto the
said Richard Hoper, and one John Honghton Gent. his Trustee for Security of the
said 5000 l. and to be reconveyed on payment thereof with Interest.

Robert Knollys being in some Arrears of Interest, and having occasion for more
Money, borrowed 5500 l. of Robert Pleydall Esquire; since deceased, 14 and 15 Dec.
25 Car. II.
and the five Leases or Mortgages were assigned to him, and the Inheritance
conveyed by Mr. Houghton ( Richard Hoper being then dead) unto John Snell Esquire;
and Henry Culpepper in trust for Robert Pleydall, by the direction of John
Hoper Executor of Richard.

Robert Pleydall made his Will, In Dec. 1676.
and Robert his Son Executor, and died.

Robert Knollys being again in Arrears of Interest, and having occasion for
more Money, borrows 1500 l. more of Robert the Son, 16 Dec. 1678.
and by Indenture then made declares that the aforesaid five several Leases or
Mortgages made to his Father, and now vested in him as his Executor, and also
the Inheritance granted to Snell and Culpepper in trust as aforesaid, stand and
remain as a Security as well for the 1500 l. then lent, as the 5500 l. formerly
lent.

Robert Knollys being sick and weak, and considering the Encumbrances upon his
Estate, by Indenture grants and conveys unto John Lord Lovelace. 2 April 1679.
and Sir John Borlase Baronet, the Equity of Redemption of his said Estate, and
directs them to sell and pay Mr. Pleydall, and afterward to dispose of the
Surplus arising by such Sale to such Uses as he by any Deed, or by his Will
should direct and appoint.

About three weeks after the said Robert Knollys had executed this Deed, he
died intestate, and without making any Disposition by Deed, April 79.
Henry Culpepper died before Mr. Knollys, and John Snell survived.

Katharine Haldanby, youngest Sister of Robert Knollys, being of full age, by
Deed before her Marriage confirms the Deed made by her Brother to Lord Lovelace
and Sir John Borlase, and directs them to sell: Lettice by Letter being then at
a remote distance does the like; 15 May 79.
but before she sealed the Deed, Married with Mr. Kennedy, who is also under
age.

And so neither he nor Mrs. Snell can join in any Legal Act either to convey or
join in the Sale of the Estate for payment of the Debt to Mr. Pleydall, and
other Debts of Robert Knollys, nor can he or Mrs. Snell join in any Act for
making Leases to any Tenants; and if the Estate cannot speedily be sold to pay
off the Mortgage before Mr. Kennedy and Mrs. Snell are of age, it will be in a
great measure wasted and eaten up with Interest, and Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs.
Haldanby be very much injured; which if sold now, would be very considerably
advantageous unto them, and their Fortunes very considerable after all their
Brothers Debts paid.

John Snell died, In August 79.
and left Dorothy Snell his sole Daughter and Heir a Minor of about the age of
17 years; so she cannot reconvey until of age, upon payment of the Mortgage
money.

It is therefore prayed that the Inheritance of the said Estate may be Vested
in the Lord Lovelace and Sir John Borlace, that they may be enabled to make
Sale of the Estate to pay the Mortgage, and other Debts of the said Robert
Knollys, by Act of Parliament; and the rather, for that the Heir of Mrs. Snell
(if she dies under age) lives in Scotland, and cannot be bound by any Decree
here in Chancery, or other Act.

And it is also prayed that it may be Enacted, That the Moiety of the Surplus
of the Money arising and belonging to Mrs. Kennedy may by such Sale remain in
the Hands of the Lord Lovelace and Sir John Borlase, in Trust for Mrs. Kennedy
and her Heirs, she having a Child already born, and to be disposed of from time
to time by her sole and apart from her Husband, until some Settlement made by
him upon her and her Issue by her said Husband, save only 700 l. for the
Husband for payment of his Debts.


