THE CASE of Susannah Smith.
Humbly Represented to the Right Honorable the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled.
SVsannah Smith, born in London of English Parents, but now an Inhabitant of
Suratt, in the East Indies, was at Fourteen Years of Age married on the 16th of
November, 1680. according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England,
to Henry Smith, Accomptant to the Honorable the East India Company, in the
Island of Bombay, where she then lived, and afterward cohabited with him as
his Wife, till the 27th of April, 1684. at which Time the aforesaid Henry was
sent over into England by President Child, for some ill Practices there, and
left the said Susannah his Wife, big with Child, which died quickly after its
Birth.

At the Time of his Departure from India, the said Henry took not the least
Care for the Maintenance of his said Wife, nor has he ever since sent for her
over into England to him, or returned her any money for her support: And since
the Year 1687. has neither written to her, or given her the least Information
of himself or his Concerns.

In the Year 1690. the aforesaid Henry Smith did in the Church of Dukes-Place,
London, join himself in a pretended Marriage with one Susannah Wycher, by whom
he has had several Children, and with whom he still cohabits as his Wife.

Susannah Smith having certain Information of the said pretended Marriage, did
on the 19th Day of February last past, institute by her Proxy a Cause of
Divorce, by Reason of Adultery, against the said Henry Smith, in the Court of
the Right Reverend Father in God, Henry Lord Bishop of London, in which Court,
upon full Proof of the Premises, she did, on the 18th Day of June following,
obtain a Sentence of Divorce from the aforesaid Henry Smith; and accordingly
now remains Divorced without any Appeal by him interposed.

Whereupon the aforesaid Susannah Smith, does most Humbly Request, That a Bill
may pass this most Honorable House for the Securing and Indempnifying her from
all Pains, Penalties, etc. which she or her Issue may incur, in case she should
happen to Contract Marriage with any person, not otherwise by Law prohibited,
during the Lifetime of the aforesaid Henry Smith.

Reasons Humbly Offered for the Passing the said Bill.
I. Having consulted several very Eminent and Learned Divines, she has been
assured by them, That there is nothing in the Law of God prohibiting a Second
Marriage, the Lawfulness whereof, as they inform her, has been universally
allowed by all Foreign Protestants since the Reformation.

II. She has been informed by her Council Learned in the Laws of this Realm,
that the Statute Primo Jacohi, prohibiting Second Marriages during each others
Life, has a particular Exception as to Persons Legally divorced: And likewise,
That the High Court of Parliament has passed Acts in Favor of such Second
Marriages.

III. Having advised with Persons skilled in the Civil Law, they tell her, that
such Marriages have been all along allowed by that Law, under Emperors that
were Christians.

IV. As to the Canon Law, She has likewise been informed, that till the
Council of Trent (which was never received even by Papists themselves on this
side the Alps) those Canons which have been made against such Marriages, have
been generally Advice and Counsel, rather than Express Prohibitions. And that
the Canon of the Church of England is not Declaratory of any Unlawfulness in
such Second marriages, but only prohibits them upon Penalty of a Bond given at
the time of passing the Sentence of Divorce. And likewise, That a book, called,
Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, appointed to be made by Authority of
Parliament, in the Reign of K. Henry the 8th, and actually compiled by the most
Learned Persons in all Professions, in the Time of K. Edward the 6th, does in
the Title conterning Divorces, Chap. 5. give leave to the innocent person,
Divorced by reason of Adultery, to marry again, affirming, That such a
Remarriage is allowed by our Savior. Cum alter Conjux Adulterii damnatus est,
alteri licebit innocenti novum ad Matrimonium, si volet, progredi. Nec enim
usque adeo debet integra persona crimine alieno premi, celibatus ut invite
possit obtrudi: Quapropter integra persona non habebitur Adultera, si novo se
matrimonio devinxerit, quoniam ipse Causam Adulterii Christus excepit. And
indeed the Reason not only of this, but of all Laws, seems to forbid, the
Compelling of an innocent person to suffer for another's Offense.

V. Besides these General Reasons, she humbly conceives there are some peculiar
and proper to her self, which may not happen on any other Occasions. As,

Her Age, which was but Fourteen at her marriage, and Eighteen when her Husband
left her.

The Length of Time since she has been deserted, which has been Twelve Years.
And she is informed, That it is the General Opinion of Foreign Divines, That a
Re-marriage is lawful, after a Desertion of a much shorter continuance, and
particularly as to her own Country. That the forementioned book, in the Title
of Divorces, Chap. 9. does allow of it after Three Years Absence.

The Cruelty of such Desertion, leaving her among Infidels, big with Child,
without money, and taking no care for her Relief afterward.

His Second Marriage, by which his Life is Forfeited to the Law.

His having several Children by that Second Marriage.

The Impossibility of any Reconciliation to be made between him and her, not
only on account of Cruelty, Desertion and Adultery, but of his present Wife and
Children, which he ought to maintain.

Her having no Issue by him, who might otherwise be prejudiced by her
Re-marriage.

And Lastly, There being no Alimony assigned her by the Sentence of Divorce: So
that she can have no prospect of any maintenance from him for ever.

Wherefore, She Humbly hopes, That in consideration of the Premises (which are
such in this Case as may never probably happen in another,) This Most
Honorable House will be pleased to Relieve her, by passing the Bill she now
most humbly Offers to their Lordships.


