CASTOR and POLLUX: OR, An Heroique Poem Upon his Majesty's Victorious, and
Princely Generals, The Dukes of Cumberland, and Albermarle.
TO equal You, Great Heroes, we must fly,
And fetch a Constellation from the Sky.
Castor and Pollux are the fittest Pair
To make a Parallel, For as They are
The most admird Example how one Mind
May rule two Bodies, and their Judgments bind,
So in this Martial Expedition
Two Heads, two Hearts concenter all in one.
That Heavenly Twin bear also chiefest Sway
Upon the Ocean, and his rage allay:
For when They cast their Influence, and look clear,
The doubtful Pilot needs no Shipwreck fear:
They Lord it ore the Maine, And so do you,
Beating the German waves from white, and blue
To a Red Sea, while the Batavian Boor
Swim's in's own blood, and runs for life ashore
To fire his Beacons, and to make the bells
Ring backward in confusd alarming knells
Which made the Rebel Provinces all quake,
And Foggy Holland like a quagmire shake
A Country questiond in Geography
If of Gods making or of Man's it be
Forcd from another Element, (And King
Where Fish should spawn, And Spain should spread her wing.)
Poor Boors, presume no more Great Charles to Face,
Unless it be to impetrate his Grace
That you may fish for Herring, Cod, and Cunger
To keep your Vrouws, and Kinderen from hunger:
Take heed of English Oak, and let your Broom
With the Red-Cross no more to grapple come,
Lest that your Lion which you bear half drowned
Sink to the bottom quite, and nere be found.
Go on Brave Amirals, may You have still
Like that Celestial Pair one Mind and Will: Cast. Poll.

May They still steer your Course on Sea, and Strand
Till you complete the Mighty York in hand:
May Heaven with Trine Aspect (...) ^air and clear
To keep Charles Wayne still glorious in his Sphere,
The Famous Prophecy of Grebnerus (Reflecting upon the Norwest Isles) paraphrasd
in Verse, and Englishd.
A Carolo Carolus, si quid Presagia very
Contineant, Magno major erit Carolo.
Charles, Son of Charles, if Prophecies contain
Some truth, shall Greater be then Charlemaine.
J. H.

London: printed for Samuel Speed at the Rainbow Fleetstreet, 1666. 1o 7bris


