THE Coffee-Mans Granado DISCHARGED UPON THE Maidens Complaint AGAINST COFFEE.

In a Dialogue between Mr. Black-burnt and Democritus; Wherein is Discovered
several Strange, Wonderful, and Miraculous Cures performed by COFFEE, (the
like never heard of since the Creation.) With the names of the Persons, and
Places of their abode, who were cured when left off by the Physicians.

ALSO Some Merry Passages between Peg and Cis, two Merry Milk-maids of
Islington, touching the rare Virtues of CHOCOLATE.

Written by Don Bollicosgo Armu^haz, to confute the Author of that Lying
Pamphlet.

LONDON, Printed for J. Johnson, 1663.

A Dialogue between Democritus, and Mr. BLACK-BURNT.
Black-burnt. WEll over-taken, whether now so fast?


Democtitus. To see how that Book seels I Printed last.


Black. What Book is that, good Sir, you late did sell?


Democ. The Maids Complaint, I hope you like it well.


Black. So well E'faith, that had I my desire,
I Would burn thy self, and Book in scorching fire.

Democ. I hope not so, for now I do recant,
And will its worth beyond Rich Alegant,
Or Nector raise, so that the World shall think,
It is for health beyond all Cordial drink.

Black. If so you do, then will I raise five pound,
To gratify thy worth in shillings round.

Democ. You are the Man Sir; Money is the Thing
That does a POETS Wits to Bondage bring:
I like your promise; now my Pen shall crack,
And raise thy Coffee higher far then Sack;
I Will cause the gods themselves that drank before
Nector, Ambrosia, thy Drink to adore;
Coffee shall now make Bacchus poor, and he
Shall beg, whilst all his Custom comes to thee.

Black. O happy is this day that I thee met,
Who was before near drowned in a Sweat;
Thy very promise made to me has cured
That Agony, which I before endured;
For now my gains will be a hundred more
By Coffee-drinking then it was before.

Democ. Give me your Money, and I will be bound
To make each penny that you gained a pound:
If that you do not by your Coffee get
More in a day, then I by twelve months wit.
For in its praise such worth declare I shall,
Will make your Drink Infallible to all.
All Europe shall believe (though black as Ink)
It is like Crystal; and no other Drink
Will health preserve, so that in time you will see,
Your Coffee-House shall never empty be.

Black. If it be so, here Earnest take to day,
And Quarterly I will allow thee pay.

Democ. I thank you Sir, I hope you by and by
Will show the Cures, as they in Order lie.

Black. But first, a little to tell thee of thy Errors Democritus, for I must
give thee a gentle Lash or too for thy ambition since thy Planet-stricken brain
caused thee so to abuse us, and that contrary to so many Authors who have in
Large Volumes discovered the worth of this Liquor for cure of all Maladies.


Demock. I know 'its good for the Dropsy, and those that are not of a hot
Constitution.


Black. But thou say again, that it is made of Old Crusts, and shreds of
Leather burnt and beaten to powder.


Democ. Why, to tell you truth, the scent to any reasonable man will seem no
less then some such compound; Old Hewson being a likely blind Cobbler to plot
any thing against the English to be revenged for his Exilement.


Black. But we can show Patterns of the Berries to convince thee of thy Error.
Then thou say we gain ten pence in the shilling; well we may, for if
Mountebanks can take ten pound for what cost but two pence; and it may be Kill
instead of Cure the Patients; who would grudge a penny a dish for their healths
sake for that which is Infallible for all Maladies. Thou might better
complain of the Long-Lane Jews, who take 6. d. a month for use in the pound,
and a good pawn, which amounts to above 30 l. per an. beside Bill money; and
many times 6. d for an odd day if it lie above a month; nay, some of them 12
d. a month, which is 60. l. per annum besides the bill.


Democ. I have an old black Cloak can testify that well enough, for some of
those Moth-eating Cormorants have knaw'd as much Wool off from it in
Chater-house-Lane, as is worth 25. s. when it cost but six and twenty at first,
so that it will hardly yield five groats in a foreign Country, if sent for a
Venture.

Now I would fain hear the rare Cures that have been performed by Coffee, as I
may hereafter give a better account to the drinkers of that Liquor.


Blac. First, Benjamin Bad-cock drank Coffee in Layden, and his Wife Mis.
Wood-a-mores daughter of that Town remained barren four years, after which he
left drinking Coffee, and in three quarters of a year she had a goodly chopping
boy.


Democ. I confess then it is better for barrenness, then against it.


Black. Anthony Lamley of White-chappel being troubled with a Priapismus a long
time, drank Coffee, after which he had nothing ever seen to stand but his Ears.


Democ. This is also Probatum Est, I was not so good a Doctor before. But have
you any more.


Black. Yes, Helsen a Leather-weaver in Dalmacia was troubled with a
Consumption four years, and fell to Coffee a long time, by which he was so
cured, that his pocket was as bare as a Birds-arse.


D^m^c. I profess my Cloak is e'ne sick of the same disease, and I think as
well cured it is also Probatum Est.


Black. Another named Richard Banco of Catolougo lay of a dead Paisie three
years, and drinking Coffee, was so perfectly cu^'d, that the next day he was
seen to go throrow the Highstreet upon 4. men's shoulders, to the admiration of
his Neighbors who had not seen him some years before.


Democ. This is a strange cure, but I suppose he was some great Giant, in
regard he went upon four pair of Legs.


Black. Another called Calobra in Spantego, was troubled with a dimness of
sight, and drinking Coffee, an hour after he broke his Fast with a Mess of
Milk-Pottage, and the white of his Eyes dropped into the dish.


Democ. I should not wish mine there, though his Cure was Probatim Est.


Black. Anne Marina of Rotterdam was troubled with a Corn on her upper Lip, the
more it was cut, the bigger it grew, so that she at the last drank Coffee, and
the Corn dropped into the Dish as she held it to her mouth, as clean as an Acron
out of the Shell.


Democ. I should like this Cure best, if Coffee would bring the Corns so easily
from my Toes.


Blac. In Spellantego, Johannes Delmonack drank Coffee for the Morbus Gallicus,
and the bridge was so dried, that (as he lay a sleep at night with his mouth
open) his Nose dropped in and choackt him.


Democ. This was a rare Cure, but for that trick I Will have mine sowed on faster.


Black. One Rose Bulborne being troubled with the blew Jaundies, and drinking
Coffee, took her bed, turned black, and the Searchers coming the next day to
view her, inserted her in the Clerks book, to be put in the Bill of Mortality
the next week.


Democ. This was a strange cure, and I wonder the Dyers do not prove good
customers to you, for there is but little good Black in England.


Black. Theodore Flashbooth of Lime-house being stopped with phlegm, drank Coffee
till he was so dried up, that an unskilful Mountebank gave order to let him
blood, instead of which issued forth dust and vapor, that he was smothered to
a perfect cure. And is intended to write a book in praise of Coffee, which when
published, will cause much admiration to the Reader.


Democ. I shall buy one of those books to increase my Library; but these are
cures I never heard of before. I know Coffee is good for some things, but not
for hot bodies.


Black. For most diseases it is good, though not for Constitutions that are dry
and hot.


Democ. What, have you no other Liquor but Coffee?


Blac. Yes, we have Bracket, China-Ale, and pure Cider.


Demo. Truly those Liquors are admirable, I could live
In a Spring from whence such Liquor flows,
Although I had but room for Mouth and Nose.

Black. But what say thou to Chocholate?


Democ. I like that well for Lads and Lasses, therefore I Will leave it to them
to dispute of.

Come Mr. Black-burnt let us no longer stay,
Yonder comes Pris and Cis, let us away.

Blac. Democritus I thank thee for thy pain
We Will leave the Milk-maids in a merry strain.

Democ. The Maids by me shall never be perplexed,
I know that Chocolate is their Text.

Cis. Well met honest Peg; whether away so fast.


Peg. I Am going to Old Bullocks to speak with his man Roger that I may hear
what news he brings from the Coffee-House.


Cis. Fogh, Coffee-House, what, does he drink that black, nasty, Hel-burnt
Liquor. he will ere long bring himself to nothing as our Man Tom has done already.


Peg. No, he drinks Chocolate, which is a rich drink indeed; 'twil make him as
strong in the back as a Lion; he is as nimble as a Squirril, as brisk as a
body-Lowse, and as lively as an Eel, only by the virtue of that Liquor; i'ts a
brave pleasant Liquor, for I have drank of it my self.


Cis. Prithee Peg tell me what manner of Liquor that is?


Peg. Marry such Liquor as would make your teeth water to taste it, for I Am
sure it made me come to it so lustily, that I shall never forget it.


Cis. Thou makst me long for some of that, what is it made off?


Peg. Efaith Cis, its made of good new Milk (with which I serve a Coffee-house
every day) which is well boyld with yolks of Eggs, store of Sugar, and a dainty
sweet tasted thing called Chocolate.


Cis. Marry Peg that cannot choose but be good indeed.


Peg. I have found it so, to the cost of poor Roger, and some pain to my self,
but sweet meat must have sour fawce.


Cis. Prithee Peg tell me the whole story.


Peg. In truth I Will deal plainly with thee; our man Roger after dinner about
this time twelve month persuaded me to go to a Coffee-house, where we drank
store of this Chocolate, and in the afternoon going toward High-berry-barn to
milk the Kine, I met Roger, who was grown so lusty by the virtue of that
Liquor, that he gave me a green gown, tumbled me on a bank, and after some
amorous kisses, I could not deny any courtesy he desired: so that at last
(like a mettlesome Lad) he stole away my Maidenhead, which to my sorrow proved
a Timpany in my belly, and in three quarters of a year I fell in Mother
Midnights hands, and was cured of the Tinpany, which had two Legs, and lies now
at Rogers charge, ten shillings a month, besides Blankets, Linen, and Cradle;
but yet he is so kind, continuing at this Liquor that I have little cause to
repent my bargain, in respect of his Love and Loyalty.


Cis. Say thou so Peg, Efaith I Will see what I can do to persuade our Tom to
leave Coffee, and drink Chocolate, that I may enjoy a little of the blessing
other Maids have, though I sell one of my Fathers Cows to draw him to it.


Peg. And so i'ts best dear sister Cisly try.
Although you by the walls a month do lie.

Cis. The charge shall lie upon my Fathers score,
Though, when I Have tried, I lie a month or more;
I Have now learned wit^ the thanks I Will give to you,
And till we meet again, dear Cis, adieu.

In Answer to the Poscript of the supposed Mountebank DEMOCRITUS.
DEmocritus was drowsy when he writ
In Dialogue, the Fragments of his Wit,
If not asleep, or else he would have sought,
And found these Cures that were by Coffee wrought;
Both for the Palsy, Madness, Morbus, Ptifick,
So that they will need no Mountebank or Physic
For Gout or Scurvy, it does do no less
For Jaundies, Timpany, and Barrenness,
Which are in order in this Treatise writ,
To prove Democritus besides his wit.
He often Writes of the Stigyon Lake,
As though he would to Hell a Voyage make,
Old Charon can (for's Labor) grant no more,
But quit a penny for his passage ore:
Thus to confute him, if this will not do,
I Will pawn my Coffee-House and Coffee too,
Till when, Democritus I bid farewell,
I Will to my Chamber, you over STIX to HELL.
FINIS.

