REASONS OF A FAST, Appointed by the Commission of the General Assembly: To
be kept through all the Kirks of this Kingdom, on the LORDS DAY; December 22.
1650.
THe Commission of the General Assembly, seriously considering, That
how-so-ever this Land lies under the Guiltiness of many-fold Provocations of
al sorts, against the Co^mandeme^ts of the Law of GOD, abounding, in all Rancks
and Conditions of People: Yet, that the despysing and refusing of the Gospel,
and of the Rich Free Grace of GOD in CHRIST held forth therein, is the Great
National Sin of this Kirk and Kingdom, against which the LORD is most
evidently and remarkeably, pleading a Contraversie in His present judgments
upon the Land: And, that this is the very Fountayn and Cause of so great
abounding of all other sins. Considering, also, that this Sin having been
often mentioned and held forth amongst the Causes of former Fasts, has been
little, or no ways at all, laid to heart. Yea, nor well understood what it
means by the most part of People. And, therefore, having appointed a Fast and
Humiliation to be kept especially for this Sin, on the LORDS Day, December
xxij. 1650, throughout all the Congregations of this Kirk, it is thought fit,
to the effect, That all may have the more clear and distinct apprehension of
the foresaid Sin, and be helped the better, to discern their guiltiness
therein; To hold forth unto People, the Mayn Branches thereof, in this Paper
which is desired to be read in all Congregations.

Sins relating to the Gospell-Ordinances.
FIrst: To the WORD. Neglecting to come and attend on the Preaching of the
Word, both on the LORDS Day, and on week days, in these places where such
Exercises, are on these days.

2 Not coming to the Preaching of the Word, for the right end, viz to find
communion with Christ, and a taste of His goodness and excellency, and to be
built up in the most holy faith: but either out of custom or to eschew
censures, or to satisfy and hold off the challe^ges of a natural conscience;
or some other by-respect. And not preparing the heart before hand in secret, to
come with Godly fear and reverence, humility, spiritual hungring and thirsting
after the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and desyring as new
born babes the sincere milk of the Word, to grow thereby,

3 That when People are at the preaching of the word, besyds great carelesnes,
overlines sleeping, wandering of the heart, and in advertencie to what is
preached; the Word is not heard as an Ordinance and mean appointed of God to
work upon, and carry in grace and comfort unto the heart, but is only reguarded
as other discourses proceeding from men's ability and parts, and is accordingly
esteemed by the most part, or at most is only made use of, as a mean of
informing the judgment.

4 That in the preaching of the Word, neither does Ministers speak the same as
the Oracles of God, not remembering themselves to be the ambassadors of Christ,
speaking in Gods stead: nor does people present themselves in so immediate a
way before God Himself as to receive the Word not as the Word of man, but as the
true Word of God; whence it comes to pass that there is little trembling at
the Word, and so little rejoicing in it.

5 That people in the hearing of the Word, contents themselves with man's
teaching, and does not in the conviction of their own blindness and utter
inability of themselves to perceive the things of the Spirit, and of the
insufficiency of the outward means without Gods immediate work therewith upon
the heart; employ Him self to teach them inwardly by His Spirit, joining with
the outward means, according to the promise of the Covenant. They shall be al
taught of God: whence it comes to pass that there is so much Preaching, and
so little profiting, so much Learning, and so little speed coming in the
knowledge of GOD.

6 The not mixing of the Word preached with Faith, while as in the hearing
thereof; even these who seem to give most heed thereunto do for the most part,
rather employ the judgment, to consider and judge of the pertinencie,
coherence, the way of uttering of the doctrine delivered; or in a mere
speculatiue way to apprehend the matter and truth of what is spoken than they
do labor, with the heart to close with, embrace and apply to themselves the
Truth preached.

7 No care to lay up, and hyde the words of CHRIST in the heart, to remember
the same for use making: But letting them slip and run through; which the
Apostle accounts a neglecting of the Great Salvation of GOD, (HEB. 2.1.3.)
Nor employing the Spirit to bring the Word that has been heard; but forgotten,
to remembrance: Not making conscience to confer on the Word Preached, and to
whet it on, upon an other. Not taking payns, nor delight in it, in private, to
read, and meditate on it.

2. IN relation to the Sacraments. And first in general and common: Not making
use of them as Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and promises thereof made to us
in Christ; but laying all the weight of confidence upon the^ selves and being
content with the deed done, which was the ordinary sin of the Jews in the use
of Circumcision, and other Rits and ceremonies of the Law, so often charged
upon them in Scripture. Then particularly.

In Baptism. 1 In Parents bringing their Children thereunto, either out of
mere fashion and custom, as merely to have a difference put between them, and
vnchristned people, or in effect as unto a mere ceremony: and not from any
sense that they are unclean from unclean, born dead in sins, and children of
wrath of themselves, defiled with original guilt and corruption, nor from a
desire that they may be spiritually regenerated, incorporated unto Christ, to
be made partakers of the virtue of His Death and Resurrection, to be washed
from their filthiness in the blood of Christ, and to get interest in the
Covenant of grace, and promises thereof, sealed up unto them. 2 Not setting
themselves in the administration of this Sacrament to consider and pryze the
free love and grace of God, which has prevented us, and our seed in provyding
such a fountain for sin and uncleanness in Christ, making such a Covenant with
us, so well ordered in all things, and sure preventing us and our seed with the
seall thereof; nor to apply the Covenant and the promises thereof for our
selves and our seed, and this Sacrament as the seall of the same. 3. The great
and evident slighting of the administration of this Sacrament, while as few in
the Congregation joyneth therein either for their own edification, or to hold up
the baptized to God, that He might bless His own ordinance to them, and receive
them in amongst His Children in Christ: and many with-draweth themselves from
the administration thereof, as if it did not concern them* and only the
Minister and Presenter were to be actors in it. 4 Parents not making
conscience, to make known unto their Children when they come to years of
Capacity their Baptism, the ends and use thereof, and the obligation thereby
lays upon them as consecrated to Christ. 5 The not making use of this
Sacrament all a-long the course of our, life for renewing and strengthening our
comfort in the Faith and assurance of our Regeneration and Adoption; and of our
interest in God, as our GOD and Father in CHRIST: and for strenthening through
Christ our resolutions and endeavors of Mortification, and newness of life.
Which is a great despysing of this Ordinance.

In the Lords Supper, 1. The great profanation there of, by the coming and
admitting there unto: of many gross Ignorants, who cannot discern the Lords
Body, nor knows how to examine themselves, ma^y profane Ones, Godless Livers,
without the Worship of GOD, in private, and into many places al sorts of
persons promiscuously without making a difference between the precious and the
Vile: whereby the Blood of Christ, is much profaned (although the constitutions of
our Kirk were they well observed* does sufficiently guard against these evils)
Which no doubt is one of the mayn sins, for which GOD has been provoked to
suffer so much of our blood to be shed. See 1, Cor. 11.30.

2. The little or no care or payns that is taken for preparation to so high and
holy an Ordinance, wherein we are called to the nearest and most familiar
Communion with Christ, that is: here upon earth: most part contenting
themselves giving their presence at a Preparation Sermon, many not making
conscience of so much as this. Very few separating themselves, as is needful
to examine themselves; that being sensible of their Guiltyness, Spiritual
inlacks etc. They might come with humble, broken, and contrite Spirits, with
Spiritual hunger and thirst, for Christ Crucified. And sincere purposes of
heart, to forsake their former sinful courses, and to renew their Covenant
with GOD, in the strength of CHRIST'S Grace.

3 The great and lamentable Blockishness of the most part, in the participation
of this Ordinance, who may be, have some kind of amazement at the Solemnityes
thereof, but does no wise therein exercise themselves in remembering the Lords
Death, till He come again to apply the same to themselves: for peace with GOD,
and mortifying the Body of Sin, for working deep Repentance, and Gospel sorrow
for Sin, and getting the Love of Christ, more kindled in them, and their hearts
enlarged with greater thankfulness toward Him, Who loved us, and gave Himself
for us. And on the other hand the great heartless sinful Dejection of many
sensible Souls, who at no time are readyer to be plunged in legal heavyness;
and feeding as it were on gall, and Wormwood: then at this Ordinance, wherein
they ought to be most rejoicing through Faith, on the propitiation in the Death
of Christ, so familiarly set forth therein to them.

4 That the time and occasion of this Sacrament, is used by the most part, only
for some outward restraint of grosser sins, for a day or two before and after;
but all such goodness being as a morning clowd, no constancy nor real
reformation: but presently turning to wonted, natural, worldly, and carnal
courses; Notwith-standing renewed remembering of the Death of CHRIST, and
Profession of renewing Covnants with GOD.

3. IN Relation, To the Ordinance of Discipline: 1. Which partiality in the
administration of thereof, with respect of persons, and according to affection;
which appears in that, while as Offenses and Scandalles, in meaner persons,
are taken notice of, challenged and censured: There is not the like
Christian-Freedom, Faythfulness and Zeall used, toward such as are more
eminent for Wealth, Place, or Dignity, in the World.

2 Want of a Spirit of Meekness, sometimes in the administration thereof;
whereby men, if GOD peradventure would give them Repentance, might be
recovered out of the Snare of Satan. And, on the other hand, want of Zeall
often times, to save others with fear, plucking them out of the Fire.

3 Much Vilifying, Contemning of the Censures and Exercise of Discipline: Yea,
hateing thereof, and the Officers of the Kirk for it.

4 Not making use of it, as a Spiritual Medicine, and Means of Salvation: but
as a mere Punishment, which as it is in it selff a miss-apprehension and abuse
of this Ordinance: So is (no doubt,) the cause of so much impatience and
indignation against it in people; and of so much inaequality, and mixture of
selfish affection, in the administration thereof.

5 The great Formality, that is every where, in the use thereof, while as, so
be it, that persons under censure continue out their set time and days of
censure, little care or respect is had of the effects for which it was
instituted: To wit, Humiliation of hearr, and Godly sorrow, bringing forth
Repentance, not to be repented of; which makes the administration thereof, to
look too like the way of Popish Penance.

4. IN Relation to Prayer: 1. Great neglect thereof by most part of persons and
families throughout the Land in private and secret.

2 Many more imminent persons in the World, accounting the performance thereof
in their families, (although this be incumbent to them, by their Place and
Station,) a disparidgement; and therefore turning it over upon others, as a
Service be low them.

3 In the public Prayers of the Kirk, Peoples lying by, from joining therein,
al along with their Spirits, which should be stryving together with the
Minister; either mutering words of their own; or taking liberty to themselves,
to be idle in the work, and raving in their thoughts: As if the Minister only
were to be an Actor in that Service.

4 Not using this Ordinance, as a mean of communion with GOD, and of obtaining
blessings from Him: But using it merely as a Duty; and many as a matter of
mere task. Whereof many may be convinced by this; That they do not make
conscience, nor sets themselves to observe what comes of their Prayers;
how they are taken off their hand, what speed they have come, and what answer
they get.

5 The little care that is had either by Ministers, or others, to pray in the
Spirit; or to employ the Spirit of Grace, and Supplication for this Service:
The most part in their performa^ces thereof, too evide^tly acting merely their
own memory, invention, wit, etc. And that often times with apparent affectation.

5. RElating more immediatelye to CHRIST Himself, and the Free Grace of GOD in
Him, which is the Matter and Object of the Gospel, as:

1 Gross ignorance in the most part, and great short comeing of the best in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ His Person, offices, His blessings and benefits, of
the Covenant of grace; established in Him and the way of making use of Christ
and the covenant of grace.

2 Undervaluing and misprysing of Christ, communion with Him, and His spiritual
graces and blessings. Which appears most evidently, by the great neglect of the
use of these means and exercyses, public, private and secret wherein He
offers Himself to be sought and found: the great wearying of them: great
willingness and readiness to bestow time and payns upon things worldly even
vanities and trifls than on these; preferring the interests of creatures to the
interests of Christ; and not giving Him the pre-eminence above al: by the
readiness which appears in people in times of trial to co^ply with sinful
courses; to the prejudice of Christ's causs and the hazarding of their own peace
with God, for maintayning their case; temporary safety and worldly commodities
rather then to deny themselves: take up their cross and follow Him.

3 Not receiving of Christ, nor making use of Him as He is held forth in the
Gospel, in His fulness of grace, nor living in faith by Him, more especially in
Not receiving and making use of His free gifted and imputed Righteousness for
Justification, acceptance before God, and for peace of conscience. while as
most part securely rest on mere outward church privileges: many confyde in
their own Moral Honestly, performances,; and Duetyes. So going about to
establish their own Righteousness, and following Duetyes this way to make their
Peace, and Reconciliation there by with GOD: AND even the Best Professors no
not so purely and inteirly rest on his righteousness as the Gospel requires:
as well appear by these things amongst many others: heartless fears,
miss-be-lieff, I carring to apply Christ, and to make use of the promises, not
rejoicing in Christ, and His propitiation with humility, when there is a
discovery, challenges and apprehensions of want, short coming and failing of
duetyes, which in effect is in a degree, and in part an establishing our own
righteousness and not submitting to the Righteousness of GOD. Not making use of
Christ, for Sanctification, according to the promises of the Covenant, and not
acting in a way of dependence on Him, in all the performances of our common
Christian calling, and of particular lawful vocations, for direction,
quickening, strength to mortify corruptions, to every duty and to carry us
through against discowragements, and tentations: but acting only or most part
by the strength of our own wits, abilityes, and payns

In not making use of the Mediation and intercession of Christ, in approaching
to the Throne of Grace, in prayers, supplications, and thanksgivings: while as
many does neglect prayer altogether albeit they have some course of
performancce of this duty, yet knows not what it is to put their prayers up
to GOD through the Mediator, tho they may perhaps name His Name, but does as
that Uzziah who would offer incense himself, neglecting the high priest: and
even believers themselves does not directly, distinctly, and steadfastly in
their approaches to God, eye Christ, to offer in all their service through Him,
nor do come with that humble boldness and full assurance of faith in God as a
Father, where with the intercession of Christ warrandeth them to come, Heb.
10.19.20, 21, 22

4 Not walking as becomes the Gospel of Christ, in Righteousness, godliness,
and sobriety: many not-withstanding their profession of the gospel, and
claming interest in Christ, and His grace, yet living loose, profane, godless,
carnal, and earthly in their way, in effect turning the grace of God, unto
wantoness and securety, and taking liberty to sin, because grace does abound.
And even best not so constrained with the love of Christ, to live to Him, who
dyed for them, not stryving to keep the thoughts of the love of Christ, and the
free grace of God, in Him, upon their hears, so fresh and constant, as they
should be, to keep the^ watchful, tender zealous, and enlarged for God, and
His Honor.

6. In relation to the operations of the Spirit wherein the Gospel is the
Ministration, and makes it effectual, as:

1 Profane mocking, miscalling, and mis-interpreting the tender and acurat
wolking of the Godly in the ways of God; as unnecessary and proud precyseness:
And their Spiritual exercyses, as fantastickness, melancholy, or madness.
Which is a horrible sin, sib to that which is unpardonable: yet, very frequent
amongst carnal and natural people.

2 The mere natural and moral way of living, in a civil honesty, and sitting
down contented therewith, of the most part of people not laboring in their
conversation, to walk after the Spirit: i. e. upon Spiritual Principles,
according to the Spiritual Rule, (of Gods revealed Will in His Word,) nor for
Spiritual ends the Honor of God, Glory, and immortality.

3 Not observing and yielding unto the knockings of the Spirit, whereby Christ
makes tender to come in to hearts, that He may sup with them, and they with
Him: resisting and quenching His motions, whereby He stirs up to Duetyes
stiffling or putting by His challenges, whether in public or secret, which
tends to repentance, humiliation, or with-draw-ing from sin; not being tender
of His presence and consolations, to entertayn the same; but grieving Him, by
mispryzing them, refusing them, careless walking, in not attending on His
direction and guiding, in giving way to known sinful thoughts, and lustings in
a continued tract, although not growing up to a full accomplishing of them; and
sometimes in giving way even to grosser out-breakings, and in not watching
against predominant corruptions, whereof even the best are much guilty.

4 Not delighting in, nor improving Spiritual company and spiritual exercises.

7 Of Ministers, in relation to their preaching of the Gospel, as:

1 Many not laboring to set forth the Excellency of Christ in His Person,
Offices, and the unsearchable Riches of His Grace, the new Covenant, and the
way of living by Faith in Him: nor making this the mayn and chief Theme, and
matter of their preaching, as did the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3.2. 2. Cor. 4.5.
Coloss. 1.28. Nor preaching other things with a relation to Christ; To wit, Not
preaching convictions, reprooffs, discoveries of sin, and of short commings in
Duetyes, and threatenings, to lead to Christ, to pryze Him the more highly, and
to embrace Him the more earnestly; especially for justification; and pressing
Duetyes, in a mere legal way; not urging them, as by the authority of Gods
Commandments; so from the love of Christ, and the grace of the Gospel, nor
poynting and directing people to their furniture for them in Christ: often
times craving hard, but giving nothing wherewith to pay.

2 What they preach of Christ, and the matters of the Gospel, not preaching
the same in a Gospel way whereof. See 1. Cor. 3. from the beginning at length.

3 Not commending as they ought, neither their own work, whether of meditation,
or delyverie, nor their hearts to Christ, that He might give the increass: but
going about the work, either altogether in their own strength, or much that way.

4 Often times not speaking, because they believe, and many not seeking for
communion with Christ, in their own personal estate; and to feel the power of
the Word, upon their own hearts: that they might speak so.

These branches of contemning and abusing of the Gospel, are thought fit for
the better Information of all to be held forth at this time, as being most
obvious, recommending with all to Ministers, to apply themselves, to make a
more full and particular discovery thereof; as is not doubted, but they will
do, according to their wisdom and understanding, in the Gospel; and the
experience they have by observation of their own hearts, and of the ways and
consciences of people.

It is also found needful and appointed, that in reguard it is not one or two,
but many provocations of the people of God in this Land. which have drawn on
the present sad calamities and judgments: and that the servants of God, tho
they have condescended upon many sins of the King and his Family of
Iudicatories and of the people as undoubted Causes thereof: yet are persuaded,
that there is need of a further discovery. Therefore upon the foresaid day of
Humiliation, and at other times both in public and private earnest
supplications to be made to God, for light and unanimity to His servants in
this matter; that the causes of Gods wrath being more fully and thoroughly seen;
and the hearts of al humbled accordingly before God, we may be yet set in a
Way to find the Lords Mercy in due time.

FINIS.

