THE CIVIL ARTICLES OF LIMERICK, Exactly Printed from the Letters Patent.

Wherein they are Ratified and Exemplified by their MAJESTY'S, under the Great
Seal of ENGLAND.

THE Civil ARTICLES OF LIMERICK.
GULIELMUS and Maria Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex
and Regina, Fidei Defensores, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem:
Inspeximus Irrotulament. quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren.

Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die Februarii, ultimi Praeteriti in
Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba.
WILLIAM and Mary, by the Grace of God, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas certain Articles, bearing Date the third Day of October last past,
Made and Agreed on between Our Justices of Our Kingdom of Ireland, and Our
General of Our Forces there on the one Part; and several Officers there,
Commanding within the City of Limerick in Our said Kingdom, on the other Part.
Whereby Our said Justices and General did undertake that We should ratify those
Articles, within the Space of eight Months, or sooner; and use their utmost
Endeavors that the same should be Ratified and Confirmed in Parliament. The
Tenor of which said Articles, is as follows, viz.

ARTICLES Agreed upon the third Day of October, One Thousand Six Hundred and
Ninety One.
Between the Right Honorable Sir Charles Porter, Knight, and Thomas
Conningsby, Esquire Lords Justices of Ireland; and his Excellency the Baron De
Ginckle, Lieutenant General, and Commander in Chief of the English Army; On the
one Part.

And the Right Honorable Patrick Earl of Lucan, Piercy Viscount Gallmoy,
Colonel Nicholas Purcel, Colonel Nicholas Cusack, Sir Toby Butler, Colonel
Garret Dillon, and Colonel John Brown; on the other Part:

In the Behalf of the Irish Inhabitants in the City and County of Limerick, the
Counties of Clare, Kerry, Cork, Sligo, and Mayo.

In Consideration of the Surrender of the City of Limerick, and other
Agreements made between the said Lieutenant General Ginckle, the Governor of
the City of Limerick, and the Generals of the Irish Army, bearing Date with
these Presents, for the Surrender of the said City, and Submission of the said
Army: It is agreed, That

ART. I. THE Roman Catholics of this Kingdom shall enjoy such Privileges in
the Exercise of their Religion, as are consistent with the Laws of Ireland; or
as they did enjoy in the Reign of King Charles the IId. And their Majesty's, as
soon as their Affairs will permit them to summon a Parliament in this Kingdom,
will endeavor to procure the said Roman Catholics such farther Security in
that Particular, as may preserve them from any Disturbance upon the Account of
their said Religion.

ART. II. All the Inhabitants or Residents of Limerick, or any other Garrison
now in the Possession of the Irish, and all Officers and Soldiers, now in Arms,
under any Commission of King James, or those authorized by him, to grant the
same in the several Counties of Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork and Mayo, or any
of them; and all the Commissioned Officers in their Majesty's Quarters, that
belong to the Irish Regiments, now in Being, that are treated with, and who are
not Prisonners of War, or have taken Protection, and who shall return and
submit to their Majesty's Obedience; and their and every of their Heirs, shall
hold, possess and enjoy, all and every their Estates of Freehold, and
Inheritance; and all the Rights, Titles and Interests, Privileges and
Immunities, which they, and every, or any of them held, enjoyed, or were
rightfully and lawfully entitled to, in the Reign of King Charles II. or at any
Time since, by the Laws and Statutes that were in Force in the said Reign of
King Charles II. and shall be put in Possession, by Order of the Government, of
such of them as are in the King's Hands, or the Hands of his Tenants, without
being put to any Suit or Trouble therein; and all such Estates shall be freed
and discharged from all Arrears of Crown-rents, Quit-rents, and other public
Charges, incurred and become due since Michaelmas 1688, to the Day of the Date
hereof: And all Persons comprehended in this Article, shall have, hold, and
enjoy all their Goods and Chattels, real and personal, to them, or any of them
belonging, and remaining either in their own Hands, or the Hands of any Persons
whatsoever, in Trust for, or for the Use of them, or any of them: And all and
every the said Persons, of what Profession, Trade, or Calling soever they be,
shall and may use, exercise and practice their several and respective
Professions, Trades and Callings, as freely as they did use, exercise and enjoy
the same in the Reign of King Charles II. Provided, that nothing in this
Article contained, be construed to extend to, or restore any forfeiting Person
now out of the Kingdom, except what are hereafter comprised: Provided also,
That no Person whatsoever shall have or enjoy the Benefit of this Article, that
shall neglect or refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance, made by Act of
Parliament in England, in the First Year of the Reign of their present
Majesty's, when thereunto required.

ART. III. All Merchants, or reputed Merchants of the City of Limerick, or of
any other Garrison now possessed by the Irish, or of any Town or Place in the
Counties of Clare or Kerry, who are absent beyond the Seas, that have not bore
Arms since their Majesty's Declaration in February 1688. shall have the Benefit
of the second Article, in the same Manner, as if they were present; provided,
such Merchants, and reputed Merchants, do repair into this Kingdom within the
Space of eight Months after the Date hereof.

ART. IV. The following Officers, viz. Colonel Simon Lutterel, Captain Rowland
White, Maurice Eustace of Yermanstown, Chievers of Maystown, commonly called
Mount-Leinster, now belonging to the Regiments in the aforesaid Garrisons and
Quarters of the Irish Army, who were beyond the Seas, and sent thither upon
Affairs of their respective Regiments, or the Army in general, shall have the
Benefit and Advantage of the second Article; provided they return hither within
the Space of eight Months from the Date of these Presents, and submit to their
Majesty's Government, and take the above mentioned Oath.

ART. V. That all and singular, the said Persons comprised in the second and
third Articles, shall have a general Pardon of all Attainders, Outlawries,
Treasons, Misprisions of Treason, Premunires, Felonies, Trespasses, and other
Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever, by them, or any of them, committed since
the beginning of the Reign of King James II. and if any of them are Attainted
by Parliament, the Lords Justices, and General, will use their best Endeavors
to get the same repealed by Parliament, and the Outlawries to be reversed
Gratis, all but Writing-Clerks Fees.

ART. VI. And whereas these present Wars have drawn on great Violences on both
Parts, and that if Leave were given to the bringing all Sorts of private
Actions, the Animosities would probably continue, that have have been too long
on Foot, and the public Disturbances last: For the Quieting and Settling
therefore of this Kingdom, and avoiding those Inconveniences which would be
the necessary Consequence of the contrary, no Person or Persons whatsoever,
comprised in the foregoing Articles, shall be sued, molested, or impleaded at
the Suit of any Party or Parties whatsoever, for any Trespasses by them
committed, or for any Arms, Horses, Money, Goods, Chattels, Merchandises, or
Provisions whatsoever, by them seized or taken, during the Time of the War. And
no Person or Persons whatsoever, in the second or third Articles comprised,
shall be sued, impleaded, or made accountable for the Rents or mean Rates of
any Lands, Tenements, or Houses, by him or them received, or enjoyed in this
Kingdom, since the Beginning of the present War, to the Day of the Date hereof,
nor for any Waste or Trespass, by him or them committed in any such Lands,
Tenements, or Houses: And it is also agreed, that this Article shall be mutual,
and reciprocal, on both Sides.

ART. VII. Every Nobleman and Gentleman comprised in the said second and third
Article, shall have Liberty to ride with a Sword, and Case of Pistols, if they
think fit; and keep a Gun in their Houses, for the Defense of the same, or for
Fowling.

ART. VIII. The Inhabitants and and Residents in the City of Limerick, and
other Garrisons, shall be permitted to remove their Goods, Chattels, and
Provisions, out of the same, without being viewed and searched, or paying any
Manner of Duties, and shall not be compelled to leave the Houses or Lodgings
they now have, for the Space of six Weeks next ensuing the Date hereof.

ART. IX. The Oath to be administered to such Roman Catholics as submit to
their Majesty's Government, shall be the Oath abovesaid, and no other.

ART. X. No Person or Persons, who shall at any Time hereafter break these
Articles, or any of them, shall thereby make, or cause any other Person or
Persons, to forfeit or lose the Benefit of the same.

ART. XI. The Lords Justices These Lords Justices were then Lords of the
Regency in Ireland, as there was no Lord Lieutenant there.
and General do promise to use their utmost Endeavors, that all the Persons
comprehended in the above mentioned Articles, shall be protected and defended
from all Arrests and Executions for Debt or Damage, for the Space of eight
Months, next ensuing the Date hereof.

ART. XII. The Lords Justices and General do undertake, that their Majesty's
will ratify these Articles, within the Space of eight Months, or sooner, and
use their utmost Endeavors, that the same shall be ratified and confirmed in
Parliament.

ART. XIII. Lastly, And whereas Colonel John Brown stood indebted to several
Protestants, by Judgments of Record; which appearing to the late Government,
the Lord Tyrconnel, and Lord Lucan, took away the Effects the said John Brown
had to answer the said Debts, and promised to clear the said John Brown of the
said Debts; which Effects were taken for the public Use of the Irish, and
their Army: For freeing the said Lord Lucan of his said Engagement, passed on
their public Account, for Payment of the said Protestants, and for preventing
the Ruin of the said John Brown, and for Satisfaction of his Creditors, at the
Instance of the Lord Lucan, and the rest of the Persons aforesaid, it is
agreed, That the said Lords Justices, and the said Baron de Ginckle, shall
intercede with the King and Parliament, to have the Estates secured to
Roman Catholics, By Articles and Capitulation in this Kingdom, charged with,
and equally liable to the Payment of so much of the said Debts, as the said
Lord Lucan, upon stating Accounts with the said John Brown, shall certify under
his Hand, that the Effects taken from the said Brown amount unto; which Account
is to be stated, and the Balance certified by the Lord Lucan in one and twenty
Days after the Date hereof:

For the true Performance hereof, We have hereunto set our Hands, Present,
Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Char. Porter. Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De
Ginckle.


AND Whereas the said City of Limerick has been since, in Pursuance of the
said Articles, surrendered unto Us, Now know ye, that We having considered of
the said Articles, are graciously pleased hereby to declare, that We do for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, as far as in Us lies, ratify and confirm the same,
and every Clause, Matter and Thing therein contained. And as to such Parts
thereof, for which an Act of Parliament shall be found to be necessary, We
shall recommend the same to be made good by Parliament, and shall give Our
Royal Assent to any Bill or Bills, that shall be passed by Our two Houses of
Parliament to that Purpose. And whereas it appears unto Us, that it was agreed
between the Parties to the said Articles, that after the Words, Limerick,
Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, or any of them, in the second of the said Articles,
the Words following, viz. And all such as are under their Protection in the
said Counties, should be inserted, and be Part of the said Articles: Which
Words having been casually omitted by the Writer, the Omission was not
discovered till after the said Articles were signed, but was taken Notice of
before the second Town was surrendered: And that Our said Justices, and General,
or one of them, did promise that the said Clause should be made good, it being
within the Intention of the Capitulation, and inserted in the foul Draught
thereof: Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby ratify and confirm
the said omitted Words, viz. [And all such as are under their Protection in the
said Counties] Hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, ordaining and
declaring, that all and every Person and Persons therein concerned, shall and
may have, receive, and enjoy the Benefit thereof, in such and the same Manner,
as if the said Words had been inserted in their proper Place, in the said
second Article; any Omission, Defect, or Mistake in the said second Article, in
any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, that
these Our Letters Patents shall he enrolled in Our Court of Chancery in Our
said Kingdom of Ireland, within the Space of one Year next ensuing. In Witness,
etc. Witness Our Seal at Westminster, the twenty fourth Day of February, Anno
Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae Quarto per Breve de Privato
Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. Predict. Ad Requisitionem Attornat.
General. Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae. duximus
exemplificand. per Presents. In cujus Rei Testimonium has literas nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes. Testibus nobis ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die Aprilis,
Annoque Regni eorum Quarto.

BRIDGES. Examinat. per nos S. Keck In Cancel. Magistros Examinat. per nos
Lacon Wm. Child In Cancel. Magistros


FINIS.
The Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance required by the second Article of this
Treaty.
I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, that I will be faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So Help me God.
LES ARTICLES CIVILES DE LIMERICK, TIREZ DES Lettres Patentes.
Par lesquelles ils sont Ratifiez and Prouves par leurs MAJESTEZ sous le Grand
Seau d'ANGLETERRE.

LES ARTICLES Civiles DE LIMERICK.
GULIELMUS and Maria Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Rex
and Regina, Fidei Defensores, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem:
Inspeximus Irrotulament. quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren.

Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die Februarii, ultimi praeteriti in
Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba.
GUILLAUME and Marie par la grace de Dieu, etc.
a tous ceux qui ces presents verront, salut.
Comme de certains Articles en date du troisieme Octobre dernier, faits and
conclus par nos justiciers de notre Royaume d'Irlande, and le General de nos
armees dans le dit pais d'une part; and plusieurs officiers commandans dans la
ville de Limerick dans notre dit Royaume de l'autre part: par lesquels Articles
nos dits Justiciers and General se seroient engagez, a ce que nous ratifierions
les dits Articles dans huit mois ou meme plutot, and qu'ils feroient tout leur
possible pour les fair aussi ratifier and confirmer en Parliament. La teneur
des dits Articles est il s'ensuit.

ARTICLES Faits and passez le troisieme Octobre 1691.
Enter le Chevalier Charles Porter, le sieur Thomas Conningsby Ecuyer seigneurs
Justiciers d'Irlande, and son Excellence le Baron Ginckle, Lieutenant General,
and Commandeur en chef de l'armee Angloise d'une part.

Et le seigneur Patrice Conte de Lucan, le sieur Piercy Viconte de Galmoy, le
sieurs Nicolas Purcel Colonel, Nicolas Cusack Colonel, le Chevalier Theobald
Butler, le sieurs Garret Dillon Colonel, and Jean Brown Colonel, d'autre part.

Et stipules pour les habitans Irlandois de la ville and Comte de Lymerick, les
Comtes de Clare, Kerry, Cork, Sligo, and Mayo.

En consideration de la reddition de la ville de Limerick, and autres
stipulations passees enter le dit Lieutenant General Ginckle, le Gouverneur de
la ville de Limerick, and les Generaux de l'armee Irlandoise, de la meme date,
que les presents, a cause de la reddition de la dite ville and soumission de
la dite armee, ou est convenue que,

ART. I. LES Catholics Romans de ce Royaume jouiront dans l'exercise de
leure religion de tous privileges non contraires aux Loix d'Irlande, ou comme
ils en ont jouis sous le regne du Roy Charles Second. Et leurs Majestez, aussi
tot que la situation de leurs affairs leur permettra de convoquer un Parliament
en ce Royaume, tacheront de procurer aux dits Catholics Romans toutes les
autres seuretez necessaires pour empecher qu'ils ne soient aucunement inquietez
ni molestez pour cause de Religion.

ART. II. Tous les habitans and autres qui resident a Lymerick ou dans aucune
autre des garnisons actuellement dans la possession des Irlandois and tous
officiers and soldats portants arms par commission du Roy Jacques, ou de ceux
par luy authorisez pour cet effet dans les Comtez de Limerick, de Clare, Kerry,
Cork, and Mayo, ou dans aucune Comte d'icelles, and tous les officiers en
Commission qui se trouvent dans les quartiers de leures Majestez, and servent
dans les regimens Irlandois qui sont actuellement en pied and avec lesquels se
fait le present traitte, and ne sont pas prisonniers de guerre, ou ont accept
sauvegarde ou protection, and qui voudront revenir and se soumettre a
l'obeissance de leures majestez, tous and chacun de leurs heritiers tiendront,
possederont and jouiront de tous and chacun de leurs terres biens en fond and
autres biens and heritages, and de tous les droits, titres, interests,
privileges, and immunitez ou franchises, don't eux ou aucun deux ont jouis ou
avoit droit de jouir sous le regne de Charles Second, ou dans aucun autre tems
du depuis selon les loix and ordonnances alors en force; and seront mis en
possession par order du gouvernement, paisiblement and sans process ni autres
diligences, de tells parties de leurs biens qui se trouvent enter les mains du
Roy ou de ses fermiers. Et tous les biens de cette nature seront libres and
dechargez de tout arrerage de rentes royales and autres rentes ou impos publics
establis and echus depuis la saint Michel de l'annee 1688 jusqu'au jour de la
datte du present traitte: Et toutes les persons comprises dans cet article,
auront, tiendront and jouiront de tous leurs biens meubles and immubles a eux
ou a aucun d'eux apppartenans and restans, soit enter leurs propres mains ou
les mains de ceux par eux employez par fidei commis and confiance, pour menager
leurs interests. Et toutes and chacune des dites persons de quelque
profession, metier ou vacation qu'elles soient pourront suivre and exercer
leurs dites professions ou metiers avec la meme franchise and liberte qu'elles
ont eu sous le Regne de Charles Second, pourveu que rien du contenu de cet
article ne puisse s'etendre ni estre explique pour retablir les persons
actuellement horse du Royaume don't les biens sont sujets a Confiscation, a
l'exception neanmoins de ceux cy apres compris. Pourveu aussi que person ne
puisse participer des avantages portez par cet article qui negligera ou
refusera de pretter lorsqu'il en sera requis le serment de fidelite port par
act du parliament d'Angleterre la premiere annee du Regne du Roy and de la
Reine d'aujourd'huy.

ART. III. Tous marchands ou reputez marchands de la ville de Lymerick, ou
d'aucune autre garnison a cette heure dans la possession des Irlandois, ou
d'aucune autre ville ou place dans les comtez de Clare and Kerry, qui sont
absens au de la des mers, and qui n'ont point port les arms contre leurs
Majestez depuis la declaration de leurs Majestez publie au mois de Fevrier
1688. auront and participeront des avantages du second Article tout comme s'ils
avoient ete presens; pourveu que les marchands ou reputez marchands s'en
reviennent au Royaume dans l'espace de huit mois a comter de la date des
presens.

ART. IV. Les officiers, don't les noms s'ensuivent, scavoir, le Colonel Simon
Luttrel, le Captain Roland White, les sieurs Maurice Eustace de Manstown,
Chievers de Maystowne communement appelle le Lord Montleinster servans
actuellement dans les Regimens qui sont dans les susdites garnisons and
quartiers de l'armee Irlandoise, qui ont ete envoyez horse du pays pour les
affairs de leurs Regimens respectives ou de l'armee Irlandoise en general,
recevront and profiteront des avantages de l'article second pourveu qu'ils s'en
reviennent au Royaume dans l'espace de huit mois, and qu'ils se soumettent au
gouvernement de leur Majestez and qu'ils prettent le serment cy dessus specify.

ART. V. Que toutes and chacune des dites persons comprises dans le 2d and
3me Articles auront une amnestie ou pardon general de toutes sorts de
convictions, proscriptions, condemnations par contumace pour crimes de leze
Majeste, de tous crimes punissables de mort de toutes autres transgressions des
loix par eux ou aucun d'eux commis depuis le commencement du Regne du Roy
Jacques II. Et que si aucun d'eux soit condemn par Arret du Parliament, les
seigneurs de la Regence and le General tacheront de fair annuller cet Arret de
condemnation en Parliament and de revoquer les proscriptions gratis, except ce
qu'on doit payer aux clercs ecrivains.

ART. VI. Et d'autant que les presents Guerres ont attire sur les deux parties
opposees beaucoup de torts and de violences, and que s'il etoit permis aux
particuliers d'intenter des procez sur les dites violences; les animosites, qui
ont deja dure trop long tems, pourroient encore continuer au dommage du public:
Pour donc retablir le repos and la paix de ce Royaume, and pour obvier aux
inconveniens qui seroient la consequence immanquable de tells procedures, il
est stipule qu'aucun de ceux qui sont compris dans les susdits articles ne sera
poursuivi en justice, ou aucunement moleste a la requisition de qui que ce
soit, pour aucunes transgressions des loix, pour aucun enlevement ou saisies
d'armes, de chevaux, d'argent, de hardes, meubles ou marchandises, provisions
par eux faites durant la guerre; ny ne sera aucun de ceux qui sont compris dans
le second ou troisieme Article, assign cite en droit, ni rendu responsable des
rentes usufruits, and possessions d'aucunes terres, biens en fonds ou maisons
par eux ou aucun d'eux receus ou saisis depuis le commencement de la present
Guerre jusques au jour de la datte des presens; ni d'aucun degats,
deperissemens ou desordres par eux ou aucun d'eux commis: Il est aussi stipule
que cet Article sera mutuel and reciproque aux deux parties.

ART. VII. Tous Seigneurs ou gentilshommes compris dans les second and
troisieme Articles cy dessus auront la liberte d'aller par tout avec l'epee and
une pair de Pistolets, and d'avoir un fusil chez eux, soit pour la deffense de
leur maison ou pour la chasse.

ART. VIII. Il sera permi a tous les habitans and autres qui resident a
Limerick ou dans les autres Garnisons d'emporter leurs biens, meubles, hardes
and provisions sans etre visitez ni fouillez, and sans payer aucuns droits, and
ne seront tenus de quitter les maisons ou logis qu'ils occupent actuellement de
six semaines, a compter de la datte du present Traitte.

ART. IX. Le serment que l'on fera preter aux Catholics Romans, qui se
soumettront au gouvernement de leures Majestez Regnantes, sera celuy cy dessus
specify and point d'autre.

ART. X. Si quelqu'un contrevient aux presens Articles ou a quelqu'un d'iceux,
il n'excluera pas par la aucune autre person des avantages y portez.

ART. XI. Les Lords Justiciers Les Lords Justiciers etoient alors seigneurs de
la Regence en Irlande par ce qu'il ^'y avoit pas de Viceroy.
and le General promettent de fair tout leur possible pour que toutes les
persons comprises dans les Articles cy dessus soient protegees and mises a
couvert contre tous arrests, poursuites, ou executions pour dettes ou dommages,
durant huit mois apres la datte des presens.

ART. XII. Les Lords Justiciers and le General s'engagent que leurs Majestez
ratifieront ces Presens Articles dans huit mois d'icy, ou meme plutot, and
feront de leur mieux pour qu'ils soient aussi ratifiez and confirmez en
Parliament.

ART. XIII. Finalement, Comme le Colonel Jean Brown se trouva endette a
plusieurs protestans par jugemens enregistrez, and que le dernier gouvernement
en fut inform, les Lords Tyrconnel and Lucan enleverent les effets que le dit
Jean Brown avoit pour payer ses dites dettes, don't ils promirent de le fair
decharger, and ces effets furent employez a l'usage and au service commun des
Irlandois and de leure armee. Pour liberer donc le dit Lord Lucan de son dit
engagement contracte pour leure cause commune, comme aussi pour satisfaire les
dits protestans and empecher la ruin du dit Jean Brown, and contenter ses
creanciers, nous sommes convenus a l'instance du dit Lord Lucan, and des autres
persons cy dessus mentionnees que les dits Lords Justiciers, and le dit Baron
Ginckle, intercederont aupres du Roy and du Parliament pour conserver par
Articles and capitulation aux Catholics Romans dans ce Royaume leur biens
meubles and immeubles, chargez and egalement affectez au payement des dites
dettes, jusqu'a la concurrence de ce que valoient les dits effets enlevez au
dit Jean Brown, suivant le certificat qu'en donnera par ecrit sign de luy le
dit Lord Lucan apres avoir compte avec le dit Jean Brown; le dit Compte sera
dress and la balance d'iceluy certify par le dit Lord Lucan dans vingt and un
jours de la date des presens.

Pour l'accomplissement de tout ce que dessus nous avons signez, Presens,
Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Char. Porter. Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De
Ginckle.


ET comme la dite ville de Limerick nous a ete livree du depuis suivant les
dits Articles, scavoir faisons que Nous ayant considere les dits Articles avons
bien voulu declarer par ces presents, que nous ratifions and confirmons, tant
pour nous que pour nos heritiers and successeurs autant que de nos depends, les
dits Articles and chaque clause and condition y portees. Et quant a ce qui en
requiert un act confirmatif du parliament nous en recommanderons
l'accomplissement au dit parliament and donnerons notre agreement and
approbation a tous act ou acts qui passeront a ce sujet dans les deux
chambres de notre parliament, and comme il nous appert qu'il a ete convenu enter
les parties stipulantes qu'apres les mots Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo,
ou aucun d'iceux specifiez au deuxieme article, les mots suivans scavoir, and
tous ceux qui sont sous leurs protections dans les dites comtes seront inserez
and feront party des dits Articles. Lesquels mots ayant ete omis casuellement
par l'ecrivain, l'omission n'en a ete appercue qu'apres que les dits Articles
furent signez, mais on s'en apperceut avaunt qu'on eut livre la second ville;
and comme nos dits Justiciers and General ou l'un d'eux ont promis que la dite
clause auroit lieu ainsi qu'etoit l'intention des parties stipulantes, and
qu'elle etoit de meme inseree dans le brouillon de la capitulation, notre
plaisir, de plus, est, and par ces presents nous ratifions and confirmons les
dits mots omis, scavoir, and tous ceux qui sont sous leurs protections dans les
dites comtes, declarant and ordonnant par ces presents tant pour nous que pour
nos heritiers and successeurs que toutes les persons comprises dans les dites
clauses and conventions auront, recevront and jouiront des avantages d'icelles
ainsi and de la meme maniere qu'elles l'auroient fait, si les dits mots eussent
ete inserez dans leur propre place, au dit second Article; and ce non obstant
toute omission defaut ou inadvertence a trouver dans le dit deuxieme Article a
la charge, toujours ainsi que notre volonte and plaisir est que nos presents
lettres patentes soient enregistrees dans notre cour de Chancellerie de notre
dit Royaume d'Irlande dans un an du jour and datte des presents. En foy de
quoy, etc. Nous signons a Westminster le vingt quatre Fevrier, Anno Regni Regis
and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae Quarto per Breve de Privato Sigillo. Nos autem
Tenorem Premissor. predict. Ad requisitionem Attornat. General. Domini Regis
and Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae duximus exemplificand. per Presents.
In cujus Rei Testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Testibus
nobis ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die Aprilis, Annoque Regni eorum Quarto.

BRIDGES. Examinat. per nos Examinat. per nos S. Keck In Cancel. Magistros.
Examinat. per nos Lacon Wm. Child In Cancel. Magistros.


FIN.
Le serment de Fidelite ou Allegiance requis par le second Article de ce
Traitte.
Je A. B. promets avec sincerite and jure, que je fidelite and vraye Ligeance
porteray a leures Majestez le Roy Guillaume and la Reine Marie.

Qu'ainsi Dieu me soit en aid.

