royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSEThe Kings Majesty's
PROCLAMATION, Concerning the Carriage of His Subjects, during the late Troubles.
CHARLES R.

CHARLES, by the grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To all, and sundry Our Subjects, whom these do, or may concern, greeting.
We being now, by the special blessing of Almighty GOD, returned to the
exercise of Our Royal Power and Government of Our Kingdoms; And, being desirous
to improve this Mercy to the best advantage of Our People; Have thought fit to
call a Meeting of Our Estates of Parliament of this Our ancient Kingdom of
Scotland, as a ready mean after so long troubles, for settling a firm and
lasting Peace, for confirming the just Liberties and Privileges of Our
Subjects, for vindicating of Our Honor, and asserting Our ancient Royal
Prerogative, by which alone the Liberties of Our People can be preserved: And
as We do herein rely upon the Loyalty, Prudence and Care of Our Parliament; So
We do absolutely leave and commit to them the Trying and Judging of the
carriage of Our Subjects during these troubles. Concerning which, We will from
henceforth receive Information and Addresses only from Our Parliament, or
Committee of Estates; to whom, in the mean time, We have recommended the
preparing and ordering of that Affair, and to whom alone any of Our People that
are interessed, may freely, and canonly make their applications; And which We
have thought fit hereby to make known to all Our public Ministirs and
Subjects, whom it does concern, and who may now find, that We have hereby
given an undoubted evidence of Our affection to, and confidence in, Our People,
by making themselves judges, of what may concern both Our and their own
interests: And further, We do hereby assure them, That Our own Honor, and the
Honor of that Our ancient Kingdom being vindicat, and the ancient Prerogative
of the Crown being asserted, We will grant such a full and free Pardon and Act
of Indemnity, as shall witness, there is nothing We are more desirous of, then
that Our People may be blessed with the abundance of Happiness, Peace and
Plenty, under Our Government. And, We do hereby command you Our Heralds,
Pursevants and Messengers of Arms, to pass and make publication hereof at the
Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places medfull; And in Our Name and
Authority to command, charge and inhibite all, and sundry our Subjects of
Scotland, That none of them presume to go out of the Kingdom without License of
Our Committee of Estates, under the pain to be esteemed and pursued as
contemners of Our Authority and Government.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the twelfth day of October, in the twelfth
year of Our Reign, 1660. Record. A. PRIMEROSE, Cls. Reg.
By His Majesty's Command, LAVDERDAILE.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
Anno Domini, 1660.


