The City of London's present Danger.
THere being so great a Murmur, and so much discourse, That the Charter of this
City of London is to be made Forfeit, or else Surrendered by a Common Council,
it is fit for every Member of the City to understand, that the meaning or intent
of such a Forfeiture or Surrender, is to dissolve the Body Corporate or
Politic of the City, to spoil it irrecoverably of all its Ancient Government,
Laws, Customs and Rights, which have been its Glory throughout Europe near two
thousand years, to bring it into the same state with the Country Villages, only
capable to be Created a new Body ^ollitick, by the Crace and Favor of his
Majesty, and to obtain such Privileges as the Crown can grant, which are
infinitely inferior to the Customs, Franchises, Rights and Government it now
holds, by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom.

If then there be any danger, either of a Forfeiture or Surrender of this
City's Charter, every Member of it is concerned, not only in Interest, but in
Duty, to contribute what assistance he can to preserve and secure it.

For that purpose every Citizen upon taken his Freedom is Sworn To maintain the
Franchises and Customs of the CITY, and to keep the CITY harmless to his Power;
and whatsoever Citizen shall openly attempt, or contrive the destruction of the
Corporation, or any of its Franchises, Customs, or Privileges, betrays the
Community, and violates his said OATH, from which no Power on Earth can absolve.

The means at present projected for the forfeiture of the Charter, and the
utter ruin of this Ancient body Pollitick, is the prosecution of a Quo Warranto
against it, assigning thereupon some ACTS of Common-Cauncel, made and intended
for the Citys welfare, whereby is pretended a forfeiture of all its
Privileges, Authorities and Wealth, and its very being. As if it were
reasonable that a mistake in a Common Council in the extent of their Authority
(if any such be) should bring so great a City, and all its Membes no way
concerned in such mistake, to suffer such a hevy, dreadful and unheard of
Judgment.

The mischievious and fatal Consequencies of any Dissolution of this ancient
Body Politic, are so many, that the wisest and ablest Lawyers cannot number
them, nor foresee the evils that may attend it, some of the most visible, are
these that follow, (viz.)

First, Whatsoever the City has claimed and enjoyed in all Ages by Customs and
Prescriptions, as their great Inheritance will be so extinguished, that they
can never be again revived by any grant from the Crown, as

Tolls in their Market aed Fairs, for Goods not sold, payable by Freemen or
Foreigners.

Water-baylage, and all Duties thereby growing.

Meetage, Weighage, Scavage, Hallage.

Such Customs likewise will be for ever Extinct, as are belonging to the
'everal Courts in London, and are different from the Common Law.

The Jurisdiction of the Ancient Court of Hustings will be lost in many things
of great consequence (viz.)

In holding Pleas of Land.

In all real Actions whatsoever.

Bargains and Sales Enrolled, which have the force (...) Feme Coverts.

Inrolments of last Wills and Testaments, granting Repleoms, etc.

The Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

The whole Court of Orphans, and their Power and Jurisdictions about their
Estates and Marriages, and all Authorities relating to Orphans, and their
Protection and Punishing by Fines and Imprisonments, all Offenders, etc.

The Provision of Widows and Orphans, by the Customs of which they are Judges.

Their Jurisdiction over all Companies, Fellowships and Brotherhoods, to make
them all consistent each with other, and useful to the whole Body.

In the Mayors Court.
The whole Court of Equity and its Jurisdiction in all matters whatsoever,
whereby such a multitude of meaner Traders, are speedily relived with small
Expenses.

All their Customary proceedings to Arrest without Warrants.

To Arrest upon Plaints entered for Debts without Summons.

All Attachments for speedy Recovery of Debts.

Actions upon Concescit solvere, without proving any consideration.

The Plea Cognovit scriptum sed Petit quod Inquiratur de Debito, and thereupon
the Jury to find upon the Bond the just Debt and Interest, and no more, whereby
the People enjoy the benefit of Law and Equity by the Jury at once.

The Custom which prevents Wager of Law, return of Juries by Inquests of the
Ward.

Reading of Affidavits of Persons absent, as Evidence within a Trading City, is
of great use.

Levetur, and all other Customary Proceedings.

All proceedings for Discharge or Relief of Aprentices, for immoderate
Chastisement, and not Inrolling.

Punishments of Offenders for breach of Bylaws, by Actions or Informations.

Disfranchisement by Informations.

Informations for ascertaining the bounds of Wards, and many other customary
proceedings there.

The Sheriffs Court.
The like JurisdiAion as in the Lord Mayors Court, as to Pleas, Arrests,
Attachments, and many other proceedings, for speedy and easy Justice within the
City, which has advanced the Trade, Wealth and Growth of the same.

The Wardmote and their Jurisdictions.

The Court of the Chamberlain, for making Freemen, binding Apprentices,
Correcting their Ossences, Turning them over, with many other useful Powers
thereunto belonging.

The Court of Conservancy of the River of Thames and the Waters of Medway, has
many Ancient Privileges and Jurisdiction.

The Court of Conscience because to be held before Commoners to be apappointed
by the present customary Court of Aldermen.

The Court of Policies of Insurance, though not held by custom, because the
Commissioners thereof cannot act till Sworn, before the now customary Court of
Aldermen, by 34. Eliz. Cap. 12.

There are also many Privileges, Exemptions and Immunities, belonging to the
Persons or Estates of Freemen, by the Custom of London, not enjoyed by Grant,
nor to be restored to be restored by Charter.

That none but Freemen shall exercise any Trade in London, or keep any Shop to
buy and sell.

This Privilege may beckoned the general Estate of the Citizens, upon which
they greatly depend; it is the fruit of their Freedoms, which they obtein by
their Money or their Service, or their Fathers Coppies.

It Is this Custom that Refrains all that are not Free of the City from having
Shops and Trading there, puts a value upon every Citizen, advances them in
their Marriages, and induces many to give good Sums of Money with their Sons to
be Apprentices, and the rather because many other Privileges are by G^stom
annexed to the Freedom, as

That a Freeman of London may use his Trade in any other part of England.

That a Freeman bound to one Trade, may set up any other and use the same.

The Custom of Feme sole Merchants, whereby the Industry of the Wise may
provide for the whole Family, and with all so useful to support poor Widows and
Orphans.

Every Shop in London is a Market Overt for the Trade of the Owner.

Creditors may Arrest before Day of Payment for better Security.

Citizens may devise in Mortmain.

Debts on simple Contracts amongst Citizens are equal to Obligations under Hand
and Seal.

The Custom of an Infant being bound bound by his Covenants of Apprenticeship.

The Persons of Freemen are Exempted from all Tolls in any place in England.

From most Duties in London, which Foreigners are subject to, from serving on
Juries out of London.

To be discharged of Wharfage, and many other Privileges, all which must be
lost for ever, though a new Charter should be obtained.

There are also other general Privileges depend upon the Custom, not
restorables by Charter; as, That

The Customs of this City shall be tried in the Courts at Westminster, by
Certificate of the Mayor and Aldermen, made by the Mouth of the Recorder.

Custom to punish Whores by the Civil Magistrate.

The Forfeitures to the City of Goods Foreign bought and Foreign sold.

The Customary Powers of the Common Hall.

Entering into a House upon suspicion of Bawdry.

To call a Woman Whore, Actionable The Offices of Chamberlain, Common Sergeant,
and Common Crier, as to the principal part of their Offices relating to the
Orphans.

2ly. All the Authorities, Liberties, Immunities and Privileges vested in the
present Corporation, and their Successors, by several Acts of Parliament, are
not transferrable to, or upon another Corporation, but by the same Authority,
and will all be lost. Some of which follows: As,

37. Hen. 8.12. Gives the Mayor of this old and present Corporation of the
City, Power to Determine Controversies of Tithes.

3. Jacob. 15. Lord Mayor and Aldermen are to appoint two Aldermen and twelve
Commoners to be Commissioners for a Court of Conscience, for recovering of
small Debts, as is before mentioned.

3. Jacob. 18. The Mayor Commonalty and Citizens, and their Successors, shall
make have and maintain, a new Cut or Stream of Water, from Chadwel, Anwel, etc.
to London.

22.23.25. Car. 2. The several Acts for Rebuilding of London, so much thereof
not yet executed, as relates to the Mayor. etc. (viz.) Lord Mayor and Aldermen
to determine Appeals concerning Maintainance-Money, Assessed in lieu of Tithes.

Power to value and sell unbuilt Grounds, to determine Controversies about
Lights Ways and Party-Walls, to give satisfaction to Owners.

43. Eliz. 12. The Court of the Policies of Assurance, for the Reasons
beforementioned.

But above all, there can be no Revival of that Solemn Confirmation of the
Liberties, Franchises, Free Customs, and Privileges of the City of London, by
MAGNA CARTA, which have been since renewed and confirmed thirty times in
Parliament, many of which were accompanied with the Invocaion of Vengeance upon
the Infringers of the same and their Posterity.

In Correcting Errors in the Sheriffs Courrs.

In passing Lands by Recoveries.

3dly. Many Privileges held by Antieet Chartert of former Kings, if Lost or
Surrendered, can never be restored by any new Charter from the Crown.

The Citizens by ancient Charters are exempted from the Duty to the Crown of
Prisage of Wines; but if the Corporation be dissolved, every Citizen is
Dis-franchised, and thereby made liable to pay it; and the like exemption
cannot be regranted by the King, at least till the determination of a long
Lease of the same duty in being, because his former grant will prevent it
during the Term.

In like manner the Citizens of London are very anciently exempted from Tolls
throughout England, aut if the Corporation be dissolved, the Crown is barred
from regranting the like qy many Grants of the Tolls to others, from which no
new exemption can be given.

Let such as read this small Collection consider, that the ancient and
excellent Composition of Customs, Laws and Liberties in this City, made by the
Wisdom, and approved by the Experience of so many Ages, confirmed by 23 Kings
and 33 Parliaments, must for ever be broken to pieces, with the loss of its
Charter.

And let them think, whether it be possible for any Man, or number of Men to
foresee the Distraction, Dis-orders, and Mischiefs, that may be the Event of
such a fatal stroke, to so great a Body Pollitick?

The Children unborn may groan under such Consequences of it, as are not now
intended, nor can be imagined; who can tell when the Cries of the Widows and
Orphans will cease? the supposed Provision made for Citizens Wives and Children
is void and null, if the Corporation be dissolved.

No new Charter can give them any Right to their Customary Shares (...)
Divisions of their Husbands and Fathers Estates, so much depended upon in
Marriages.

The deluded Fathers must be vexed with new Cares, who have given great
Portions with their Daughters to Citizens, upon consideration only of the City
Custom, without taking Joyntures for them, or Prospect of any other Dower.

How great will be the Distraction and Confusion in and about the Courts of
Justice, notwithstanding any Provision which can be made by my new Charter for
other Courts.

All Causes and Actions depending in the present Courts, and the proceeding
therein must cease, as if they had never been; and all Judgments obtained not
executed, will be void and no Citizen will know where, or how to seek his
former wanted Releif, either in Law or Equity.

All the Offices belonging to the City Courts of Justice must perish with the
Courts; and all the Officers belonging to them, who have obtained their places
by purchase, or otherwise; must seek out new ways for Themselves and Families.

The same sad Fate will attend all the Officers whose Offices depend upon the
Government of the City or its Magistrates or its Revenue, and if any of them
should hope by Grace and Favor to obtain some new Office a new Charter, they
can never claim their old Customary Fees.

The present Orphans to whom the City owes their Portions must be turned to be
going, or starving, or to live upon the future Charity of a new Corparation,
when the Body Politic of the City shall be Dissolved, no Creditor can Implead
it for any Debt, neither can any of its Debtors be Impleaded.

The Death of a Corporation reduces it to nothing, and 'twill then be, as if
it had never been in respect of Debts or Credits, their can be no Successor,
Heir, or Executor to demand, or answer for the Body that was.

Therefore all the Goods and Chattels of the City must fall to the King, to be
given and disposed of, as he pleases.

And all its Lands and real Estate in the Exchange, Guild Hall, etc. must of
right revert unto the Heirs of the Donors if thern be any, or Eschear to the
Crown for want of such Heirs.

But the Face of Confusion is so full of Horror, that 'twill appear after the
Dissolution of this mighty Body by Forfeiture or Surrender of its Charter, that
I tremble to look upon it a far off.

The Lord Ceok says, It would require a Vollumn of it self, to Treat of the
great and notable Franchises, Liberties and Customs of this City, and no less a
Volumn would be necessary to discribe the Dis-orders, Losses, Distractions,
Mischiefs and Confusions, that must attend the Destruction and the Death of so
great a Body Politic.

And the City of London by this means, which is now one of the Antientest
City's in the whole World, will at the time of such Surrender be the youngest
City and Corporation in England.

London, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill.


