Harvard College Library

VERITAS
Harvard seal

FROM THE BEQUEST OF JOHN HARVEY TREAT OF LAWRENCE, MASS. CLASS OF 1862

ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY Given by the Right Reverend Father (Fleetwodd in God famos
Lord Bishop of Wort. and delivered to the Churchwardens, and Sidemen, to be
considered and answered in his Visitation, holden in the Year of our Lord God,
16

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed.

see a different Copy of A^y used by him at his visitation in 1676.

The Oath to be Ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOU shall swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of Churchwarden
within your Parish for the Year ensuing according to the best of your Skill and
Knowledge; and also present such things and persons as to your Knowledge are
Presentable by the Laws Eccesiastical of this Realm. So help you God.

ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY About the CHVRCHES and CHAPELS: And all things thereto
pertaining.
IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient Repair? Are the
Roofs, Walls, Pavements, and Windows well Repaired? And is the Church decently
kept, as befitteth the House of God? Is your Churchyard sufficiently fenced
and maintained with Walls, Rails, or Pales, as has been accustomed? Or by
whose fault are they decayed? Has any thing belonging to your Church been
aliened, embezelled, or sold?

2. Is there a Font of Stone for the Administration of Baptism, in the usual
place appointed for it? And does your Minister publicly Baptize in the same
Font only? Is there a convenient Table, for the use of the Lords Supper? Is
there a Carpet of Silk, or decent Stuff to lay upon the Table in time of Divine
Service; and a fair Linen Cloth to lay upon the same in the time of the
Communion, according to the eighty second Canon: Have you a Communion Cup, with
a Paten for the Bread: and is the Wine brought to the Communion Table in a
clear standing Pot or Flagon of Pewter, or of purer Metal?

3. Have you a Reading Desk and Pulpit conveniently set up, and placed, for the
use of public Prayer, and Sermons?

4. Is there in your Church or Chapel the Common Prayer Book, of the largest
Volume, according to the Act of Uniformity, 1662. The Bible in Folio, of the
last Translation; the Book of Homilies; [the Book of Canons, and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, made in the Synod, 1603.] And a Table of Degrees, wherein
Marriage is prohibited, publicly set up in your Church? And is there a decent
Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his public Ministration in
the Church?

5. Have you a Register Book in Parchment, wherein to Register the
Christenings, Marriages, and Burials in your Parish? Is there a Book; wherein
to write down the Churchwardens Accounts, and a strong Chest, with Locks and
Keys, wherein to preserve your Church Furniture; and also for the Parishioners
to put in their Alms for the relief of the Poor?

6. Is the House and Outhouses of your Minister in good and sufficient Repair?
Does he preserve the Gardens, Orchards, and Glebe belonging to him, without
embezelling, changing, or any way damnifying the same?

Inquiries about the Clergy.
1. IS your Parson or Vicar Ordained Priest, according to the Order of the
Church of England? Or does your Minister, or his Curate not being so Ordained
Priest, consecrate the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

2. Is your Minister legally Instituted, and Inducted into his Benefice? Did he
within two Months after his Induction, publicly in the Church upon some Sunday
or Holy Day, read the thirty nine Articles of the Church of England, and
declare his assent thereunto? And also on some Lord's Day read both Morning and
Evening Prayer, and after his reading publicly declare his unfeigned Assent
and Consent to the use of the things contained in the Book of Common Prayer?
And within three Months after his Induction, on some Lord's Day in your Parish
Church read a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Archbishop, or Bishop
of the Diocese, of his Subscription to the Declaration required in the Act of
Uniformity?

3. Does your Minister read the full Service, according to the direction of the
Common Prayer Book on Sundays, and Holy Days, at Morning and Evening Prayer;
and in ministering the Sacraments, solemnizing Matrimony, burying the Dead, and
Churching of Women, use all the Rites and the whole Forms of Prayers, according
as they are prescribed in the Common Prayer Book without omission, alteration,
or addition? Or does he negligently, or in contempt of the Order of the Church,
omit or add to the same?

4. Does he usually read the Book of Cannos once every Year, and wear a
Surplice in the time of his Ministration?

5. Does he Preach a Sermon on every Sunday, or procure a Sermon then to be
preached? Or else sometime read one of the Homilies which the Church has
appointed? And does he diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the
Church Catechism? And does he endeavor to prepare them to be Confirmed by the
Bishop?

6. Is your Minister constantly resident upon his Benefice? Or how long has he
been absent? And in case he be licensed to be absent, whether does he cause his
Cure to be supplied by a sufficient and licensed Preacher? And is your Curate
conformable to the Ecclesiastical Laws?

7. Does your Minister or Curate read the Service appointed for the Fifth of
November, the Thirtieth of January, and the Twenty ninth of May? And does he
give notice upon the Sunday of the Holy Days, and Fasting-days, which will be
the Week following, and observe the yearly perambulation in Rogation Week?

8. Does your Minister or Curate, celebrate the Lords Supper in the Church so
often, that every Parishioner may receive the same at least thrice in the year?
Does he give warning of it, and read the Exhortation the Sunday before, that
thereby the Parishioners may be stirred up to the worthy Receiving thereof?
Does he deliver severally the Bread and Wine to every Communicant kneeling?
Does he admit them to the Communion, which be openly known to live in sin
notorious, without repentance, or to have maliciously and openly contended with
their Neighbors, before they be reconciled? And if he has repelled any person
from the Communion, does he give account to the Ordinary within fourteen days
after?

9. Does he Baptize such Infants of his Parish, according to the Order of the
Common Prayer, as upon warning given before, are brought upon Sundays or
Holy Days to the Church? And upon lawful summons does he Baptize Infants at
home, in case of danger and necessity? Or through his fault does the Infant die
unbaptized?

10. Does he neglect to visit the Sick at their Houses when he is required?
Does he pray with them, and exhort them to Faith and Repentance; forgiveness of
Injuries, and liberality to the Poor, and comfort them in their distress? And
does he give them that profess sorrow for their sins, the Holy Communion if
they desire it?

11. Does he marry any within the Degrees prohibited? Or without License, or
Banes published three several Sundays, or Holy Days, in the Parishes where the
Parties dwell? Does he Marry in any other place than in the Church? Or not
betwixt the lawful Hours of eight and twelve? And does he, if the Banes have
been thrice asked, Marry any under the age of twenty one years, without their
Parents or Guardians consent?

12. Has he taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophesyings, or Exercises, not appointed by Authority, without License from
the Bishop under his Hand and Seal first obtained: Or does he, or any other
person, hold any Conventicles, or Meetings in private Houses, or elsewhere
within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort unto, under
pretense of Preaching, or Praying?

13. Does your Minister write and record in your Register Book, the Names of
all persons Christened, Married, and Buried within your Parish; with the day and
year of such Christning, Marringe, and Burial? And does he with the
Churchwardens, take care duly to send in a Transcript of the Register every
year to be kept in the Bishops Registry?

14. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer a man of a sober, unblameable,
and exemplary life: and spares not to present him or them that are not every
way examples of godliness? If you have a Curate, is he allowed by the Bishop
under his Hand and Seal: If you have a Lecturer, is he licensed by the Bishop
according to the Act of Uniformity? And does he read the full Divine Service of
Common Prayer once a month at the least? And does your Parson, Vicar, Curate,
and Lecturer, (to your best understanding) preach sound Doctrine, tending to
the Edification of the people, in knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ, and
obedience to Gods Command? Or does be Preach any heretical, seditious, or
schismatical Doctrine, derogating from the Glory of God, and prejudicial to a
pious life, or tending to the disturbance of the public peace and unity of
Church or State? If there be any such, present them.

Inquiries concerning the Parishioners.
1. IF there be any Persons that have offended by Fornication, Adultery,
Incest, Drunkenness, or by common Swearing, Ribaldry, filthy Speaking, or any
other uncleanness, and wickedness of life, Sorcerers, or resorters to
Sorcerers, you shall present all and every such Offenders.

2. If there be any known to be hinderers of the Word of God to be read and
sincerely Preached, or of the Exeution of the Ecclesiastical Canons in force,
any Fautors of any Usurped and Foreign Power-taken away by the Laws of this
Realm, any Defenders of Popish Doctrine, they are to be presented.

3. Are there any Disturbers of Divine Service or Sermon, by walking, talking,
or otherwise? Are there any that have stricken and quarrelled with any person
in your Church or Churchyard? Do you Parishioners, in time of Divine Service
and Sermon, behave themselves reverently, Men and Youth uncovering their Heads?
do all kneel, stand up, make Answers in time of Divine Service, as is appointed
in the Rubricks of the Common Prayer Book? Or are they public Depravers of the
Common Prayer, and the Orders and Rites of the Church of England?

4. Do all your Parishioners resort diligently to Service and Sermons in the
Church on Sundays? and other days appointed to be kept or Holydays? Do any
commonly come but to some part, or near, or at the latter end of Divine
Service, or to the Sermon only? Do they continue tippling and drinking during
the Service and Sermon, profanely neglecting, or despising the Duties of
Religion? Or do any separate from the public Worship of God in their Parish
Church, and frequent unlawful Conventicles?

5. Do any occupy themselves in their ordinary labor, or permit their Servants
so to do? do they keep open their Shops, and sell Wares on Sundays, or
otherwise profane the said days, contrary to the Orders of the Church of
England? Or do any Victuallers, Innkeepers, Ale-house-keepers, or others
permit any to lie tippling in their Houses on those days?

6. Are there any in your Parish being above sixteen years of Age, and well
instructed in Religion, who do not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper at
least three times in the Year, of which Easter or thereabouts to be one? Or is
there any who refuse it Kneeling, and from the Hand of their own Minister,
repairing for it to other Parishes, and Ministers abroad?

7. Are there any in your Parish who keep their Children unbaptized? Are there
any who cause them to be Baptized privately, by any whom your Minister does not
allow, or after any other Form and Manner than is prescribed by the L^turgy? Or
any that procure themselves to be Married privately, or after any other manner
than the Church prescribes? Or any who being admonished refuse to send their
Children and Servants to be Catechized? or any who refuse to be Catechized?

8. Are there any Women in your Parish, who after their delivery from
Childbirth, have refused to make public Thanksgiving to God, according as is
prescribed in the Common Prayer Book?

9. Do your Parishioners bring their Dead to be buried according to the Order
of the Church? Or have any been carried away to some other place to be buried,
without the Ministers leave?

10. Are there any who refuse to pay their Easter Offerings, and Ecclesiastical
Duties accustomed then to be paid? Or that refuse to pay the Rates assessed on
them for the repair of Your Church or Chapel, or for the providing of Books,
Vtensils, or necessary Ornaments, or defraying such Charges as are by Law or
Custom required?

11. Are there any in Your Parish Married within the Degrees prohibited by the
Laws of God? Or any that being lawfully Married and not separated by course of
Law, do not co-habit together? And do any withold the Stock of the Church, or
any Goods, or Things given to Charitable Uses?

Inquiries concerning Church Officers, and other Persons.
1. Does any keep a public or private School in Your Parish who is not
licensed by the Bishop of the Diocese? And does he breed his Scholars
religiously, and teach them the Church Catechism?

2. Have You a Parish Clerk of twenty Years of Age at the least? Is he of
honest life and conversation? Is he chosen by Your Minister: and sufficient for
Reading and Singing? Is he allowed by the Ordinary? Are his and the Sextons
Wages paid without fraud, according to the Custom of your Parish? or who
withholds them?

3. Have you any Physician, Surgeon, or Midwife that practice without
License?

4. Are the Churchwardens of your Parish Yearly chosen, according to the Canon
or Custom of the Parish? Have the late Churchwardens given up a just Account,
delivering up to the Parishioners the Money remaining in their hands, and other
things of right belonging to your Church or Chapel? Are the Alms of the Church
faithfully distributed to the use of the Poor? If any be faulty, present them.

5. If any Stranger come to preach in Your Church on any occasion, you must
demand to see his License to Preach, and if he have none, you must inhibit him
from Preaching; and if he has a License, cause him to subscribe his Name in
Your Book, with the Name of the Bishop who licensed him.

6. Is there provided against every Communion a sufficient quantity of fine
white Bread, and wholesome Wine, according to the number of the Communicants,
by the Advice of your Minister? And is the Wine brought to the Communion Table
in a sweet standing Pot or Flaggon?

7. Do you know, or have you heard that the Churchwardens, or Sidemen, which
were your immediate Predecessors, have refused or neglected to do the duty of
their Office during their time; and wherein are they faulty?

8. Do any persons trouble you for presenting any that offend in the Premises,
and who they are?

FINIS.

