AULICUS HIS DREAM, OF THE Kings sudden Coming TO LONDON.

Printed, Ann. Dom. 1644.

AULICUS HIS DREAM.
Hollow me Fantasy where have thou been?
At Court I have been towering,
The plains I have been scouring,
On an Errand for the Queen.

MY critical part corrects my fantasy, as the sage Father did his Son Ovid
for making Verses; but my fantasy having borrowed an argument from my
Intellectus agens (as they lay in bed together, taking counsel of their
pillow) Replied; Why what do ye think of the Poets, had they no Judgment?
Yes sure, says Crisis, they that write in Verse, are to be reckoned next to
them for judgment and wisdom who write in prose. But to tell you the truth,
before the dispute was ended there was one sent with a black rod (not to
dissolve the Parliament at Westminster, but) to charm my senses, and I fell
asleep fast, for I was weary of trotting up and down in my Pilgrimage on the
errand aforesaid, and yet my Pilgrimage was no penance because voluntary. In
the midst of my refreshing sleep, I fell into a pleasing dream.

First, I began to conceive that there was a free passage from Oxford to
London, for any Lord, Lady, Laundresse, etc, as if Col. Tompson our learned
Littletous Agent, were bribed to make legs and faces for them.

Then I pleased my self with the thoughts of the Citizens Propositions for the
raising of 20000 men, such as our good friends thought to hire men that would
have done the Queen service enough had they never been pressed to it or
rewarded for it, with the Auxiliaries victuals: Perchance some may say that
Aulicus does tell lies, and dream truths. But as sure as can be, the
Auxiliaries were the confiding men, and yet some good simple Citizens were
willing to withdraw that one meal from these trusty Auxiliaries, who made
fourteen meals upon that one meal, that they might disarm, nay starve their
friends, and feast their enemies; the truth is, I laughed so heartily at this
jest that I had almost awaked my self with laughing.

Not long after, there came to my thinking a gallant Trumpeter to London (their
grand Garrison) with C. R. upon his breast, who had the favor to ride
unblindfolded as far as Pindars pride or Fishers folly, and that very night
Henry of the Low Countries, I say, not Holland rid out of London toward the
Royal Quarters at Reding; I hope no body hears me, for I dream as softly as
if I did whisper, yet I am not willing to whisper some secrets of my dream for
fear of being overheard; the Rebels have more whispering places then that of
Gloucester, a City that God has blessed the more because our Cavalry have so
often cursed it.

This dream being over, I fell into a gentle slumber, and afterward into a
melancholy dream, I dreamed full sadly, that Alderman Pennington was to be
sent on shipbord, and Sir John Conniers restored to his old Lievtenantship of
the Tower by whose motion, I leave to the Reader to consider: pardon me if I
dream waking.

I remember that Bellarmine (as that Italian said) dreamt once upon a time that
he was in Purgatory, but he awaked and found that he was beshit: the Italian
spoke plain, and so must I. It is confessed that I have dreamt my self into a
Fools Paradise, I fancy our condition better and fairer then indeed it is; for
I hear that the Citizens begin to grumble, and fear that there is some
design upon them, they will have the Tower secured their Outguards doubled and
trebled; nay, they are offended that some Ladies are at liberty, some Prisoners
released and some confiding men imprisoned. But the last part of my dream
pleased me best: I saw (what within these two days some hope to see by day
light) the Kings Majesty riding into London in State, attended with -- etc. he
posted by White Hall and Saint James's, and came directly to the House of
Peers, the Speaker of the House of Commons was sent for, and his Majesty
bespake them after this manner.

My Lords, and you Mr Speaker shall see that fulfilled before your eyes upon
this happy day, which you have so often begged with prayers and tears. We are
now returned to our beloved Parliament of England, and are welcomed hither by
the good affections of our Lords and blessings of our People. You may remember
that in our Message on the 8 of April 1642. we did assure you of our Princely
resolution to go into Ireland, (not declining any hazard of our own Person)
that we might perform that duty which we owe to the defense of Gods true
Religion, and our distressed Subjects, and might settle the peace of that
Kingdom and security of this by chastising those wicked and detestable Rebels
odious to God and all good men. We offered to raise two thousand foot and two
hundred horse in the Counties near Westchester, where we desired that they
might be armed from our Magazine at Hull for a Guard for our own Person when
we should have come into ^reland, but we could not then prevail with our
Parliament to defray the charge of raising and paying that our forementioned
Guard; And therefore we have since been forced to make use of some of those
Catholics for our necessary defense, against Anabaptists and Brownists, men we
trust equally odious both to you and us. For we have reason to believe, that
you do now at last see your own error which you fell into by your caus^esse
jealousies, and some unworthy suggestions of necessity and imminent danger; for
we defy the Devil to prove that there was any design with our knowledge or
privity for the dissolution of this Parliament, which we have been ever
careful to preserve according to our Act of Grace, our Act for the continuance
of this Parliament. We understand that you have now prepared twenty six
Articles to treat upon for the settling of a blessed peace in this our Kingdom
of England: we desire to hear them read, and we are ready to subscribe them
all, which in our understanding (of which God has surely given us some use)
seem fit to be subscribed.

Upon this gracious speech, it was expected that some dutiful Answer should be
returned: but the Speaker of the House of Peers was no Speaker pro tempore,
and the rest of the Lords were in as deep a dream as mine own.

The Speaker of the House of Commons was dismissed, and when he came to his
Chair, he sat ammused; but there started up a Western Spark, and cried,
What Mr Speaker? his Majesty in the House of Peers? a dream or not a dream?
Is this the fruit of all our expense of blood, treasure, pains, time, spirits,
and lives? Is this the end of all our treating and covenanting? no reformation
of religion Mr Speaker? durus sermo; are all the Privileges of Parliament, and
liberties of the subject lost in a moment? shall we and our posterity be
condemned to a perpetual slavery? is there no remedy? I hope you will have
such a care of his Majesty as no Delinquents shall have access to his person;
I humbly conceive we must desire something which is safer for you to think,
then for me to speak.

The Speech was ended, but my Dream continued: His Majesty went from the House
of Peers to White Hall, and then all his old Friends (whom Britannicus calls
Malignants) made their humble addresses to him, and desired him not to hearken
to the Propositions for Peace, they assured him that now he had the greatest
advantage of the Parliament that ever he was blessed with; for he could not
want Lords, and there might be a quick course taken with ten or a dozen of the
House of Commons and then all was cock sure; they certified him that he had a
greater interest in the affections of the City then he imagined, for now all
Neuters and indifferent men were ready to declare themselves against the
Parliament; the zealous men would grow colder and colder every day. But amongst
the rest, one in a Fox-surred Gown, whose gray hairs made even his iniquity
it self venerable, having scratched his crafty pate, and stroaked his beard,
cried, Sir, if it may please your Majesty to confide in your good Catholic
Subjects, all will be well; for there are a considerable number of them lurking
about this City, and their number is well increased since your Majesty came
safe to Town. Moreover, our Priests have an interest in some Ladies, who call
themselves Protestants, and you will find them active for her Majesty; diverse
of them came from Oxford on purpose to serve her at a greater distance where
they might be least suspected. But one word more: Draw up your Army, especially
your Irish Regiments as near the City as you can, there will be a course taken
to encourage them with money, and in time of Treaty they may march far in a
night without a safe conduct: You understand my meaning, I have opened my self
to fat to so wise a Prince.

I would feign have stepped into the City, but my pleasant fantasy sent my
man Morpheus thither, who taking a piece of transparent Glass, and standing
close in the Exchange soadred the backside of the Glass with a kind of
silver-lead, and brought me all the species of the Merchants minds represented
in a fixed and well proportioned image.

First there came a Merchant, who in his zeal and gravitie, with eyes exalted
heaven-wards, seemed to bless God for answering all the good prayers powered
forth in the monthly Fasts, for his Majesty's happy return to his great
Council. Next came a rude, but understanding fellow, who interrupted him in
his devotions with an untimely jogge, and told him he did but offer up the
Sacrifice of Fools: for believe it Sir (says he) unless we take some speedy
course, within these 24 hours at farthest, all is lost, all is lost; for (Sir)
you know the Committee of both Kingdoms is not now sitting, and you know the
conjuncture of sad symptoms: and then he run over all the former parts of my
unhappy Dream from point to point. His brother Merchant was clean put out of
his gravity, and began to talk Treason as readily as they use to do at
Salters-Hall: Well (says he) if we had been wise enough to have prevented the
Kings coming, all had been safe, but now we must play an after-game: Well,
call a Common Council, consult the Militia, petition the House of Commons, be
wise and valiant, or else all is lost indeed.

Just about this time I awaked, and saw the Auxili^ri^ drawn up into a body by
an avowed order, I asked the cause, but could not learn it some said, that
diverse men of honor and honorable men had engaged their honor that there
should not be any Tumults or insurrections whilst his Majesty thought fit to
stay at White Hall, and though this sudden appearance or men in Arms looked
like an Insurrection; yet the truth was they were raised in an orderly way to
prevent all Tumults and Insurrections of any part whatsoever that were
disaffected to King or Parliament.

But his Majesty was somewhat displeased with this appearance and only sent to
his Agents to know what considerable party he had in both Houses and in the
City, and bid them send in what money they had ready for the encouragement of
his Army, for he knew by sad experience that the City would be backed by all
the Adjacent Counteys. Hah am I yet awake, or do I dream still. No sure I am
awake and all the City of London fast asleep, I will sing and awake them: O the
pretty wily Fox,
With her many Tricks and Mocks,
We will earth her, if you will but follow:
With a prithee treat prithee treat, prithee, prithee, prithee treat,
No your treaties are but hollow:
We Will not treat, you will but cheat,
Advance, advance, they will retreat:
Treaty is treachery,
We Will not treat, no not we.


Now, they are awake, we will pray, God grant that some men be not punished by a
grant of their very prayers: Lord, let not the Lords be seduced, the Commons
surprised the City overreached the Kingdom betrayed, by a deceitful Treaty
and a false peace: Quantas O quantas evertere domos optantibus ipsis, Du
faciles, etc. --

Oxford, Wallingford, Winchester, Basing, Reading, London, be wise, and be not
undone, May 15. 1644.
FINIS.

