A Choice TABLE to the BIBLE of the most Eminent PERSONS contained in the OLD
and NEW TESTAMENT both Good and Bad; Directing to the Book and Chapter wherein
they are Recorded; of special use for all sorts that delight to Meditate in
Sacred HISTORY.
GOOD MEN.
ADAM Created perfect, fell in Paradise, and in him All Men, Genesis 2.3. Abraham
The Friend of GOD, and Father of the faithful, Genesis 12.13, 14, etc. Aaron The
Saint of the Lord wrought wonders before Pharach, Exodus 4.5, 6, etc. Abel His
sacrifice accepted, Genesis 4. Aholiab in whose heart GOD put wisdom to work all
manner of curious work, Exodus 31. Agurs two requests, neither Poverty nor
Riches, Prove. 30. Apollos A mighty man in the Scriptures, Acts 18. Appelles
approved in Christ, Romans 16.10. Achaicus a supplier of Paul's wants, 1 Cor. 19.
v. 17. BEZALEEL was called of GOD to Devise cunning works in Gold, Silver, etc.
Exodus 31 Boaz was first courteous, and after Husband to Ruth, Ruth. 2. Bildad
one of Job's three friends, Job 2. Baruch Dismayed, is comsorted by Jeremiah,
Jer. 45. Blind Bartimeus calls Aloud to Jesus and receives his sight -- Mark
10. Barnabas was separated by the Noly Ghost a teacher to the Gentiles, Acts
13. CALEB one that searched Canaan and encouraged Israel -- Numb. 14. Cyrus
King of Persia stirred up by the Lord to build the Lords house at Jerusalem,
Ez. 1. The Centurion whose servant was dear to him is healed by Christ, Luke 7.
King Darius decrees to search the rolls concerning the house of God -- Ezra 6.
Demetrius was well reported of by the true record epistle, Joh. 3.12. ENOCH the
7th from Adam walked with God and was translated, Genesis 15. Jud. 14 Eli hearing
of the death of his two sons and the ark of God took, falls back, etc. 1 Samuel
2. Ezra a ready scribe in Gods Law and prepared his heart to seek the Lord,
Ezra 7. Elijah was fed by Ravens, raised the Widows son, by prayer obtains
rain, 1 Kin. 17 was taken up to heaven, 2 Kin. 1.2. Eliphaz one of Jobs three
friends, Joh 2. Elihu reproves and salsely accuses Job. Chapters 32.33, 34,
35, 36. Ebed-melech the Ethiopian procures Jeremiah out of the dungeon, Jer.
38. HIRAM a worker in Brass, 1 Kin. 7. ISAAC the son of the promise used to
meditate in the field at eventide, Genesis 25. Jacob obtained the birthright and
blessing from Esau, he wrastleth and prevails with God, Genesis 27.30. Iethro
father in law to Moses and Priest of Midian gives him council, Exodus 3.18.
Ithamor Aarons son is commanded not to mourn for the destruction of Nadab, and
Abihu, Levit. 10. Jonathan King Saul's son and David's loving companion and
brother, 1 Samuel Chapter 23.31. 2 S. 1. Joseph Jacobs beloved hated of his brethren
sold to the Ishmalites was seur to provid for them, Genesis 440 Judah Joseph's
brother that saved Joseph from being murtherd, Genesis 35. Job tempted by his wise
accused by the devil and by his friends sins not Job. Chapter 1.2, 3, Julius a
centution of Augustus bands saved Paul and disappointed his enemies, Acts 27.
LAMECH the father of Noah, and the son of Methusael, Genesis Chapter 4. and 5. Lot a
righteous person in Sodom, is saved from that destruction. Genes. 19. Laban
brother to Rebeckah Isaaes wise lived in Nahor, Genesis 24. Levi Jacobs son was
cruel to the Shechemites that ravished Dinah his sister, Genesis 34. Lazarus that
was dead four days is raised by Jesus, John 11. MISHAEL and Elzaphan Vzziels
sons carried out Nadab and Abihu -- Levit. 10. Moses chooses affliction before
preserment, is made a God to Pharaoh is so^rty days in the mount receives the
Law, was the meekest man. Exodus 2. Exodus 24. Exodus 7. Number. 12
Medad one of the 70 Elders prophesied in the camp, Numb. 11. Manoha the Father
of Sampson -- Judges 13. Micaiah opposel 400 false Prophets before King Ahab, 1
Kings 22. Memucan Prince to King Ahashuerus gave council against Vasthi the
Queen. Est. 1. Morde^ai a captive Jew would not reverence wicked Haman, Esther
2. Me^odach-baladan the son of Baladan K. of Babylon sent presents to K.
Hezekjah, Isa. 39. Melzar was set over Daniel, consents to Daniel that resused
the Kings portion, Dan. 1. NOAH walked with God and was perfect in the old
world and saved in the flood, Genesis 5. Nathan the Propher reproves David for his
great sin in the matter of Vriah, 2 Samuel 12. Nathanial a true Isralite without
guile so pronounced by Jesus, Joh. 1.45. etc. Nicodemus first came to Jesus by
night, after pleads for Christ and at his burial spared no cost. Joh. 3. Joh.
19. Joh. 7.
Obed-edom entertains the Ark of God, and he with all his are blessed, 2 Samuel
6. PHINEAS the priest in his zeal slew Zimry, and Cosbi in the Act of
uncleanuess, Number. 25. Peter that denied Christ, Mat. 25. after converts 3000 at
one Sermon, Acts 2. Paul once a persecuter obtained mercy, preaches till
midnight and is willing to dye for Christ Acts 20. Acts 24.
Agabus a phrophet could not diswade paul from going to Jerusalem, Acts 21.
Acts 20. Acts 24.
The Rechabits are blessed for their obedience to Jonadab their father -- Jer.
35. Shesbazzer prince of Judah carried up 5400 vessels to Jerusalem from
Babylon. Ezra 1. Old Simeon having seen Jesus rejoices for that salvation, Luk
2. Thomas one of the XII, would not believe Christ was tisen till he saw it,
John 20. Vriah refuses to go to his house while the Ark and Israel are abroad,
2 Samuel 1^. ZERUBBABEL A chief Father in Israel and eminent in finishing the
Temple Ezra 5. and 6. Zophar one of Jobs three friends falsely accused Job, Job
11. Zacharias promised a son by the Angel, requires a sign and is struck dumb,
Luke 1. Zacheus is called out of the Sycamore tree by Je^^s and made a son of
Abraham, Luke 19.
GOOD WOMEN.
ABIGAL saves Nabals lise by her council and present he gave to David, 1 Samuel
25. Achsah for her blessing has given her the upper and nether springs by
Caled her Father, Josh. 15. Anna a Prophetess a widow about 4 score years old
prophesied when she saw Christ, Luke 2. Dinah Jacobs daughter was ravished by
the Shechemites -- Genesis 34. EVE the mother of all mankind tempted by Satan ears
of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3 Esther the Q. by fasting and prayer saves her
own lise and all the people of the Jews, Est. 8 Elizabeth saluted by Mary the
mother of Jesus the babe leaped in her womb, Luke 1. HANNAH spoke in her heart
only her lips moved when Ely thought her drunk, 1 Samuel 2. Jael with a hammer
smote a nail into Sisera's temples that he died, Judge. 4. MARY chose the better
part the one thing necessary, Luke 10. Martha was reproved for being cumbred
with many things, Luke 10. Miriam for her sedition is leaprous but healed by
Moses prayer, Numb. 12. Naomi persuades Orphah and Ruth to continue in Moah but
Ruth clave to her, Ruth RAHAB for concealing the two spies, saves her self and
family, Josh. 2. Jam. 2. Rebeckha Chooses to become Jsaac^s wise and Leaves her
country, Genesis 24. Rhoda is over joyd at Peter's voice when by prayer he was
delivered Acts 12. Tabitha is raised from death by Peter's prayer, Acts 9. Sarah
bears Isaac at 90 years old, she called Abraham Lord, Genesis 21. 1 Pet. 7. Queen
of Sheba hearing Solomon's wisdom consesses one half was not told her, 2 Kin.
Samaritan woman is convinced and converted by Christ's discourse, John 4.
BAD MEN.
ABIMELECH King of Gerar takes Sara Abraham's wife and is severely reproved,
Genesis 21. Abihu Aarons son is destroyed by Fire for offering strange Fire,
Levit. 10. Abiram for Rebellion is swallowed up of the Earth, Numb. 16.
Abimelech by conspiracy slew 70 of his brethren, is himself slain by a Woman,
Judge. 9. Absalon David's Son conspires against his Father and is slain by Joab,
2 Samuel 14. Achan for Theft with all his, are Burnt, Joshua. 7. Amalek was
utterly to be destroyed, for what they did to Israel, Exodus 17. The Amalekite
that slew Saul brings David his Crown and Bracelet yet is slain, 2 Samuel 1.
Aehithophel Absalons oracle his council is deseated and he hangs himself, 2 Samuel 13. Ammon for defiling his Sister Tamar is murdered by Absolon 2 years
after 2 Samuel 13. King Agrippa desiring to hear Paul is persuaded almost to be a
Christian, Acts 26. Ananias converted by Peter, after for lying against the
Holy Ghost is ^ruck dead, Acts 5. Alexander and Hymeneus make shipwreck of
faith, and Paul delivers them to Satan, 1 Timothy 1. BALAAM is hired by King Balak
to curse Israel but God would not suffer him, Josh. 24. The Baker and Butler as
Joseph interpreted their dreams find the event, Genesis 40. King Belshazzer
impiously feasting is the same hour greatly troubled at the hand, writing, Dan.
3. Corah and Dathan for rebellion against Moses, are swallowed up of the Earth,
Numb. 10. Demas forsakes Paul when he was before Nero the second time, 2 Timothy
4. Darius the King by a decree causes Daniel to be cast into the Lions den,
Dan. 6. Er and Onan the sons of Judah were both wicked and the Lord flew them,
Genesis 38. Esau a cunning Hunter sold his Birthright and lost his Blessing, Genesis
27. Elymas the sorcerer the enemy of righteousness is struck blind by Paul,
Act. 13. Felix trembled at Paul's reasoning, but put him of till a convenient
time, Act. 24. GAALS conspiracy with the Shechemites is defeated by Zebul,
Judge. 9. Gehazi Elisha's servant for his falschood is leprous white as snow, 2
Kin. 5. Goliath defied Gods Host but David a stripling slew him with a sling, 1 Samuel 17 Gog the Prince of Mesheche, and Tubal prophesied against by Ezekiel,
Cha 39. Hophni and Phineas Aarons two sons die both in one day by the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 4 Hanua shaved off one half of David's servants beards and
cut of their garments 'ith middle, 2 Samuel 10 Haman contrives the destruction of
Mordecai, and all the Jews but is hanged on his own Gallows, Est. 14 Herod
being reproved by John Baptist added this above all to shut John in prison,
Luke 3 Herod the King being mocked of the wise men slew all the male children in
Bethelem, Mat. 2. Act. 12.2 Jonathan rejects the prophecy of Jeremiah and
accuses him of falschood, Jer. 43. Ishmael Hagars son a persecator or I^aac --
Genes 16. with Gal. 4. Ishmael of the seed ^cyal treacherously slew 71 persons,
Jer. 41. Judas the betrayer (...) Jesus for 30 pieces of silver hangs himself,
Mat. 26. Kain murdered Abel and i^ cursed -- Geres, 4. The Lawyer that tempted
Jesus when he asked his question, Luke 10. Micah when there was no King in
Israel had a house of Gods, and a Priest, Judge. 17. Nadah Aarons son for
offering strange fire is by fire destroyed, Levit. 10. Nabal denis Dacids young
men relief and sends him a churlish message, 1 Samuel 25. Nebuchad-nezzar has
his dream interpreted and confesses Daniels God, Dan. 2. Naaman by the
appointment of Elisha is healed of his Leprosy by washing 7 times, 1. King 5.
Nebuzaradan burnt the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, Jerem. 52. OG King of
Bashan was only lest of the remnant of Giants, Numb. 21. King Pharaoh increases
his cruelty to Israel is hardened and after drowned in the red sea, Exo. 15.
Pashur su^ites Jeremiah and put him in the stocks, the next day hears his doem,
Jer. 20. Pilate though admonisht by his wise, delivered Jesus to be crucified
faultless, Mat. 27. Rabshakeh a blasphemous messenger is sent by Senacherib K.
of Assiria, Mar. 15. Luke 23. Senacherib the King of Assiria in one night
185000 was slain in his camp by 2 Kin. 18. Shemei of Saul's house curses David
and threw stons at him, 2 Samuel 16. an angel 2 Kin. 19. Sheba rebels against
David, and in the city Abel his head is thrown over the wall, 2 Samuel 2.
Sanballat scoffs at the repair of Jerusalem, Nehe. 4. Simon the sorcerer offers
money, for the gift of the holy Ghost, Acts 8. Tertullus accuses Paul before
Felix to be a pestilent sellow, Acts 24. Ziba falsely aceuses his master and
obtains his inheritance, 2 Samuel 16. and Chapter 19.
BAD WOMEN
Cosbi is thrust through by Phineas in the act of uncleanness, Numb. 25.
Delilah betrays Sampson to the Philistines, Jud. 16. Herodias obtains of Herod
John Baptists head -- Math. 14. Jezabel contrives Naboths death, but by Jebus
command she is thrown out of a window and the dogs lick her blood, 2 Kin. 9.
Michol despises David for dancing before the Ark and is childless, 2 Samuel 6.
Saphirah for lying against the holy ghost is struck dead, Act. 5. Jobs wise
tempts Him to Curse GOD and dye -- Job. 2. An Harlet Subtle of heart Catches
young men void of understanding, Prove. 7.
Here Is Life and Death, here is Evil and here is Good,
Compared together where before they stood,
Dispersed in Scripture, they deserve your look,
As it were a Copy of the Doomsday Book.

LONDON, Printed for T. Cross. 1660.


