THE DOCTRINE Of the SACRAMENT, With the right use thereof Catichistically
handled by way of Question and Answer.

By Mr. CHARLES CHANCY sometimes Minister of Ware.

ANCHORA SPEI printer's device of George Miller

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Thomas Underhill at the sign of the Bible in
Wood-street, 1642.

THE DOCTRINE Of the SACRAMENT.
Q. WHat is it to receive?

A. It is to lay hold on Christ by faith.

Q How do we receive by faith in the Sacrament?

A. As it is the nature of faith to apply and rest upon other Promises in the
justification of a sinner, Gal. 3.22. Heb. 11.13.
so to receive by faith in the Sacrament, is in the act of receiving to apply
and rely upon the Promises that concern each Sacrament,

Q. What are the Promises that concern the Sacrament of Baptism?

A. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mar. 16.16.
as many as are baptized into Christ, do put on Christ, Gal. 3.27.
and the very word of institution, when we are baptized in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19.
include a Promise, that all the Persons in the God head do enter into
covenant with us to wash away our sins.

Q. What are the Promises that concern the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

A. They are plainly laid down in the words of institution, this is my body
which is broken for you, 1 Cor. 11.24
this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for you and for many for
the remission of sins Mat. 26.28. Luke 22.20.
,

Q. What is the meaning of that promise, this is my body which is broken for
you?

A. It is as much as if Christ should say in particular to every faithful
receiver, as surely as I deliver and give this bread unto thee, so I bestow
this my crucified body, with all the merits of my death upon thee.

Q. What is the meaning of the other promise this cup is the new Testament?
etc.

A. It is as much as if Christ had said in particular to every believing
receiver, as surely as I deliver this cup unto thee, so I do make good and
assure the whole covenant of grace unto thee and seal the free pardon of thy
sins unto thee by my precious blood.

Q. When are we to apply these promises to our selves?

A. Especially in the very act and time of receiving, we are to apply these
promises by faith, and so we are to draw comfort from them afterward.

Q. What is meant by the word Baptism?

A. It signifies dipping or washing in water, and is applied to signify that
dipping or washing which is used in the first Sacrament of the new Testament.

Q. What is the benefit of the Sacrament of Baptism?

A. The benefit of the Sacrament of Baptism is the sealing to the true
believer, and the assuring to him all the benefits of Christ that concern his
regeneration or new birth, as in particular, the putting on of Christ Gal. 3.26.
, the washing of his soul from sins Ephesians. 5.26.
, the pardon of his sins Lu. 3.3. Act 22, 16.
, fellowship with Christ in his death Romans 6.3, 4.
, eternal life and salvation 1 Pet. 3.21.
.

Q. What does the Sacrament of Baptism bind the party baptized unto?

A. It binds him by a solemn oath or vow when he comes to years of
discretion, to enter into a sure covenant with Almighty God, and to perform the
condition of the covenant of grace Genesis 17 7, 9.
, which is faith Act 8.36, 37, 38. Act. 2.38
; as also to repent him unfainedly of all his sins Mat. 3.5.
, to walk in newness of life Romans 6.4.
, to walk in love and unity with his brethren 1 Cor. 12 1 Cor. 1.13.
, to give up himself to labor for saving knowledge and a good conscience 1
Pet. 3.21.
, and to live altogether for the obedience, worship and service of the holy and
undivided Trinity Mat. 28.19, 20.
.

Q. What are the duties required to the right receiving of the Sacrament of
Baptism?

A. Some are required of the Parents, others of the infant baptized when he
comes to years, others of the Congregation present at this Sacrament.

Q. What are the duties required of the Parents of the party baptized?

A. They are to humble themselves for the corruption they have conveyed to the
infant, Job 14.4.
and seek for the pardon of it, they must call to remembrance Gods gracious and
free covenant Act. 2.37, 38, 39. Genesis 17 7, ^.
, and so get assurance that they themselves are within this covenant, they must
press it by hearty and fervent prayer 1 Samuel 1.27.
and renew their covenant with God in behalf of themselves and their children,
and to offer themselves and their children unto God to be his obedient servants
and children all their days 1 Samuel 1.28.
.

Q. What are the duties required of the Infant baptized when he comes to
years?

A. As he is to know that the virtue of baptism is not bounded only to the
time of receiving this Sacrament, because it is a seal of the righteousness
of faith To. 4.11.
, and of Gods covenant which is everlasting Ier. 32.40.
, so he is still to make use of his Baptism, both as a bond to bind him to
perform all the former duties, and as a sure ground to apply all the former
benefits of the pardoning and washing away of his sins, and to comfort himself
that the Lord will be his God in the worst times Genesis 17.7.
, and all sufficient for him Genesis 17.1.
, in providing all necessaries for his body and soul, and deliver him from all
dangers, and certainly save his soul 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.
, and raise up his body to eternal life at the last day Col. 2.12.
,

Q. What duties are required of the assembly at this Sacrament?

A. They are to abide till the Sacrament of Baptism, and all other public
duties be ended Ezekiel. 46.10.
, to join in prayer and thanksgiving to God for it Act. 22.16.
, to remember their own covenant with God and their former breaches of it with
unfeigned sorrow and resolution to keep it afterward.

Q. What are the duties required for the right receiving of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper?

A. They are of 3 sorts, some concern our preparation to that Sacrament, some
that holy disposition that is required in the time of receiving, and others our
holy carriage afterward.

Q What are the duties required for our due preparation to this Sacrament?

A. They are especially two, 1 Cor. 11.28.
through examination of our selves, and a right behavior afterward.

Q. Wherein consists the through examination of our selves before receiving?

A. We must try our selves concerning those several graces that are required
to the right receiving of the Supper of the Lord, whither they are truly
wrought in us or not, which are sound knowledge 1 Cor. 11.29.
, saving faith Romans 4.11. Mark. 16.16.
, true repentance for all our sins 1 Cor. 11.31.
, unfeigned obedience Pro. 9.5, 6.
, entire love to God and man Mat. 5 25. 1 Cor. 12.13.
, earnest hunger and thirst after Christ Ioh. 7.37 Lu. 22.15.
, and lastly the sincerity and uprightness of our hearts 2 Chr. 30.18, 19.
.

Q. How may we know that our knowledge is sound and sufficient to receive?

A. By the measure and properties of it.

Q. What is the measure of sound knowledge required?

A. A Christian must know all the principles of the doctrine of Christ, which
are chiefly these Heb. 6.1.
, he must understand the 10. commandments with the spiritual meaning thereof,
to work repentance from dead works, and he must be able to conceive the true
meaning of all the Articles of our Christian faith, together with the nature,
use and end of each Sacrament.

Q. What are the marks or properties by which our knowledge may be tried?

A. Sound knowledge makes a Christian humble 1 Cor. 3.18. Pro. 26.16.
, and ready to render a reason of the hope that is in him with all meekness 1
Pet. 3.15.
, and willing to receive every truth revealed out of the word of God 1 Timothy 6.5.
, and carefully to put in practice whatsoever he knows already 1 John 2.3,
4, 5.
, and painfully to increase the knowledge already attained Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.
Hos. 6.3.
.

Q. What are the marks the Scripture gives of saving faith?

A. Saving faith in the least degree is ever wrought and preserved in the heart
by the word of God preached Rom 10.14.
, whereby we are weary and heavy laden with sins, Mat. 11.28.
, and utterly rid of all confidence in our own righteousness Romans 10.3, 4.
, and restless in desiring after Christ till we find comfort in the promises
of the pardon of our sins Mat. 6.5.
, withal it mak^s us to look at sin as the greatest evil, and the grace of
Christ as the greatest good in the world Heb. 11.24. -- 28.
, it purifieth and cleanses the heart Act. 15.9.
, will, thoughts and affections from all love and allowance of sin, and so
works inward sanctification Act. 26.18.
, it wrastles against temptations of unbelief Mar. 9.24. Lu. 22.31, 32.
, and works by love of God and our brethren Gal. 5.6.
.

Q. What are the marks and trials of true repentance?

A. True repentance may be known by our willingness and gladness to have any
sin discovered Psa. 141.5.
, and hearty love of those that discover and reproove it 2 Samuel 12.13.
, an inward godly sorrow for all known sins, as they are a breach of Gods
comma^dements and are displeasing unto God 2 Cor. 7.10.
, a forsaking of all known sins Ezekiel. 18.5, 6. etc. Psa. 119.3.
, out of a perfect hatred of them, and care to avoid all the occasions of them
2 Cor. 7.11.
, and an universal turning to God Deuteronomy. 30.10.
, and constant cleaving to him in all his revealed will, and the practice of
all known duties of obedience.

Q. What are the trials of unfeigned obedience?

A. Unfeigned obedience may be known thus, that it is grounded only on the word
of God Ephesians. 2.10.
, and not on the traditions and inventions of men Mar. 7.6, 7.
, that it has respect to all Gods commandments without partiality or
exception Ps. 119.6.
, that it aims always at a right end, the praise and glory of God Phil. 1.11.
, and not at any private advantage, that it is always accompanied with zeal
Gal. 4.18.
, humility Mich. 6.8.
, and constancy Ps. 106.3.


Q. How may we know whether our love to God and man be entire?

A. We may be sure that our love to God is entire if that no commandment of
God be grievous unto us 1 John 5.3.
, if it weanes our hearts from the love of the world 1 John. 2.15. 1 John 4.20,
21.1 John 5.1. 1 John 4.12.
, and if it make us love the children of God.

Q. What are the marks of entire love to Gods children?

A, Entire love to Gods children makes us love godly men for godliness sake 2
John 1.2.
, that is, it will make us love all the Saints Ephesians. 1.15.
, whether rich or poor, strangers or kindred, and that constantly Pro. 17.17.
, and communicates it self in doing good to their souls and bodies 1 John
3.17, 18.
.

Q. How may we know entire love to our Neighbor?

A. Entire love to our neighbor will make us willing to forgive wrongs Col
3.13.
, and to seek peace, Romans 12.18.
and to make satisfaction if we have wronged them Romans 13.10.
, it will cause us to love their souls, and not suffer sin to lie upon them,
Lovit. 19.17.
it will make us to overcome evil with good, Romans 12.17, 20, 21.
by heaping offices of love upon them.

Q. What are the trials of our earnest hunger and thirst after Christ?

A. True hunger and thirst after Christ will make us seek him with our whole
heart in the diligent and constant use of all the means, Prove. 13.4.
so that nothing else will satisfy us without Christ, Ps. 73.25.
it longs after Christ for himself, so as to part with any thing for him, Mat.
13.44.
and to be content to have him upon the hardest conditions, Phil. 1.21. Phil.
3.8.
it is ready to entertain with great thankfulness, whatsoever mea^es or
messenger shall bring him home unto the soul, Romans 10.15.
it seeks after him for holiness Isa. 51.1.
, as well as for happiness.

Q. What are the trials of the sincerity and uprightness of our hearts?

A Sincerity and uprightness of heart shows it self in the reformation of
our delightful and bosom corruptions Psalm 18.23.
, and careful endeavor to find them out, and gladness when they are
discovered Psalm. 119.59. Psalm 141.5.
, by the denial of our selves in parting with any outward comfort, to keep a
good conscience Job 27.2. Heb. 11.24, 27.
, by making conscience of the fruitful performance of holy duties Romans 12.11.
, especially in secret Mat. 6.6.
, and l^stly an earnest desire and endeavor of growth unto perfection Phil.
3.12. -- 14.
.

Q. What duties are required of a Christian after examination that he may
finish his preparation to the Sacrament?

A. If he shall find any of these graces to be wanting in him he is bound
for the present to abstain from the Sacrament Ex. Chapter 12.48. Numbers 9.
from the 6. to the 12.
, if he doubt whither they be wrought in him or not, he is likewise to absent
himself Romans 14.23.
, unless his conscience by some means may be resolved and settled, that he
has them; if he shall find them wrought in him, though in much weakness,
he is to repair to this Sacrament for further strength 2 Chro. 30.18, 19.
, yet with practice of other duties still required to preparation,

Q. What are the duties required of a weak Christian after examination?

A. He is carefully with bitterness of spirit to remember the manifold
rebeilions of his unregene^ate estate Psalm 25.7. 1 Timothy 1.13.
, the wants and weaknesses of his present estate Romans 7. The whole Chapter.
, that so he may stir up earnest desires and thirst after Christ in the
Sacrament, and he is to renew his faith in Christ Hebr. 11.28.
, and his repentance for all known sins, especially committed since his
former receiving, and his love to God and man, and he is to renew his
resolutions and purposes of better obedience to God for the time to come Isa.
1.16, 17, 18.
.

Q. How is a Christian to renew his faith in Christ?

A. He must labor to sue out a new pardon of his sins 2 Chro. 30.6.
, especially that most trouble the peace of his conscience, and press the
promises that concern the Sacrament 1 Cor. 11.24.
, and the death of Christ 1 John 1.7.
, by Prayer and Meditation strive against carnal reason John 6.38.
, the grea^est enemy of Faith, bewail his unbeleefe Mar. 9.24.
, ponder and weigh well the nature of the Sacrament, that it is Gods oath to
secure his promises unto us Heb. 6.16, 17.
, and a pledge and seal of the righteousness of faith Romans 4.11.
, and consider Gods Commandments to receive and enjoy the merits of Christ's
death offered to us in this Sacrament 1 Cor. 11.24.
.

Q. How is a Christian to renew his d^sires after Christ in the Sacrament?

A. He that would renew his desires, or hunger and thirst after Christ must
acquaint himself thoroughly with his own wants and emptiness Prove. 27.7.
, and take heed of a presumptuous imagination of more grace then he has
attained unto Revel. 3.16, 17.
, he must have a through view of the wonderful excellency and fulness that is
in Christ John 4.10. Col. 1.19.
, and the promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
, and the worth of Gods favor and loving kindness that is better then life it
self Psalm. 63.3.
, and his own utter insufficiency to bring his heart to any true hunger and
thirst after these things Phil. 2.13.
.

Q. How is a true Christian to renew his repentance?

A. He must examine himself strictly concerning particular sins, especially
most lately committed 1 Cor. 11.31.
, and by the serious consideration of them, and the circumstances of them, to
renew a more bitter sorrow for them Lam. 3.40.
, he must renew his free particular and humble confession of them 1 Samuel 7.6.
, with hearty prayer for the pardon of them Ps. 51.1, 2.
, and strength against them 2 Cor. 12.8.
, make restitution and satisfaction in case that he has wronged any one to
the utmost of his power Luke 19.8.
.

Q. How is a Christian to renew his resolution of better obedience?

A. He is with humble acknowledgement of his own weakness Ps. 119.106.
, to resolve without further delay, Ps. 119.60
to walk in new obedience (God assisting him with his grace) and to this end
he is earnestly to crave strength from God that he would enable him thereunto
Ps. 119.117.
.

Q. How is a Christian to renew his charity before receiving?

A. He is out of due consideration and sense of Gods love to him in Christ, to
get his heart inflamed with love to God 2 Cor. 5.14.
, and man 1 John 4.11.
, to forgive injuries freely, if any man has wronged him Ephesians. 4.23.
, and to seek reconciliation with others, if he has given them any occasion
of offense Mat. 5.24, 25. Romans 12.8.
.

Thus far of the duties before receiving.

Q What are the duties required of a Christian in time of receiving?

A. First, every one is to give diligent attention to that which is publicly
done not only when he himself is to receive, but during the whole action 1
Corin. 14.16.
, to behold and look upon both the elements themselves Exodus 24.8.
, and all the Sacramental actions in the administration of this Sacrament 1 Corinthians. 14.40.
, he must use such reverent behavior and gestures as may be free from
superstition, yet fit to stir up and express inward faith and thankfulness
Heb. 13.16.
, and as he has received such inward pledges from God of his love, so he is,
according to his power in testimony of his thankfulness to offer the Sacrifice
of alms cheerfully for the relief of the poor members of Christ,

1 Corinthians 11.10.
Q. What should be the meditation and disposition of our hearts in the time of
receiving?

A. When you see the bread and wine consecrated and set apart for this holy
use, then we must call to mind and consider the eternal love of God the
Father in sanctifying and setting apart his son Jesus Christ in his secret
counsel, to be the Redeemer and surety of his people John 10.36.
, and the tender mercy of Christ in undertaking this hard service for us Hebr.
7.26. Hebr. 10.9.
, when we see the bread broken, and the wine powered out, we are to mourn
over him whom we have pierced by our sins Zach. 12.12.
, and remember the infinite justice and wrath of God against sin that could
never be satisfied but by this means Romans 3.25.
, when we see the bread and wine delivered unto us by the Minister, we are to
meditate upon the gift and application of Christ crucified to our own souls
in particular, and to every believing receiver Gallat. 2.20.
, when we take the bread and wine at the Ministers hand, we are to stir up
our souls by Faith to lay hold upon, and to apply to our selves all the merits
of Christ's death 1 Cor. 11.24.
, and so joyfully to feed thereupon, that we may feel our souls satisfied
thereby Mat. 11.26.
, and strengthened against all temptations Ioh. 6.35. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
, when we behold the rest of the Congregation communicating with us, we are
to stir up our hearts to loving and kind affections toward them and all the
people of God.

Q What is that holy carriage that is required after receiving the Sacrament?

A. After the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, a Christian must
try himself whither ^ee has been made to drink into one spirit with Christ
and his members or not 1 Corinthians. 12.13.
, and what growth he has gotten by the Sacrament in assurance of Gods favor,
in strength against corruptions, in power to walk with God in, obedience unto
him, and in all other graces of the Spirit, and fruits of Christ's death, and if
he cannot find these fruits in himself, he must humble himself for his
own sins and failings as the cause thereof 1 Corin. 11.31.
, and though he finds not that comfort and benefit, yet if he be truly
humbled for the want of it, he may be comforted in this as a fruit of a worthy
receiving 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19,
; if he shall find upon examination the former benefits truly wrought in his
heart, he is to give God the glory, and to desire the continuance and increase
of the same grace with all holy endeavors to that end 1 Chronicles. 29.13, 14, --
18.
, and as he has received Jesus Christ, so he is to walk in him Col. 2.6, 7.
, and to keep the covenant that he has made with the Lord at the Sacrament,
and to increase in love and fellowship with Gods children 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
, and out of the sense of the comfort and benefit of this Sacrament to resort
the oftener, and with more earnest desire unto it 2 Chronicles. 30.21, 23.
.

Q What are the notes whereby we may discern the Regenerate from the
Reprobate?

A. There are these three notes: First if the child of God be enticed and
drawn away from God, he grieveth for it and gives not ready consent unto the
temptation.

2. If through frailty he be over-carried to give consent, yet it is not full
content, but does it against his will and purpose, for his purpose is not to
sin.

3. If he put his lusts in execution, he lies not in them, he will not walk
after them, but recovereth himself, because ^ee is incorporated into Christ,
he has the root of grace which shall not utterly dye in him, the seed
abides in him which at last shall sprout up to Repentance and amendment of
life, Gallatians 3. v. 10. As many as are under the works of the Law are under
the curse: Therefore we hence conclude contrary to the Doctrine of our
Adversaries, that if all men be condemned by the Law, then is no man able to
keep and perform the duties of the Law which it requires.

Diverse Marks and notes of an Hypocrite, which we may observe out of the first
book of Samuel, and the 15. Chap.
FIrst, He is very forward in boasting of his obedience, and to have a very
high esteem of himself by reason thereof, though it be nothing so; as we may
see in the 13. verse, says Saul there to Samuel, after he was come from the
slaughter of the Amalekites, the very first word he utters to him, I have
performed the commandment of the Lord, though it was nothing so, as Samuel
shows there unto him; for says he to him, What then means this bleating of
Sheep and this lowing of Oxen in my Ears: For Gods commandment to him was, to
slay all, man and woman, young and old, infant and suckling, Ox and Sheep,
Camel and Ass, but these he had saved alive.

Secondly, He makes Religion a cloak for to cover and hide his sin, or at
least to lessen it when it is discovered; So Saul here when Samuel had begun
to tell him of his sin, why? as if he should say you have no cause to blame us
for this, for the people took of the best of the Sheep and the Oxen to
Sacrifice unto the Lord thy God, etc.

Thirdly, He is obstinate and obdurate in his sin, and will not endure to be
convinced of it though it be never so plain, and so we see here that when
Samuel had showen Saul his sin in saving the Sheep and Oxen alive, the which
God had commanded him for to destroy* yet for all that he justifies himself
and says I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way the Lord
sent me.

Fourthly, The Hypocrite when he is told of his sin he will extenuate and
lessen it, and shift it off upon others; so Saul here, verse. 21. The people
took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the things which should have
bin destroyed, to Sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in G^lgall, as if he should
have said, thou have no reason to lay all the fault upon me, it was the people
that saved these alive.

Fifthly, Hypocrites when they are convinced of their sins, and they humble
themselves for them, and do confess and acknowledge them, it is of
constraint, not because they are grieved for that they have offended God
thereby, but because they see some evil or judgment is like to befall them
for the same, as in the 23. and 24 verses, Saul would never be brought to say,
I have sinned, till such time as Samuel told him what would come of it,
saying, Because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, therefore he has
rejected thee from being King, then he says, I have sinned, for I have
transgressed the Commandment of the Lord and thy words, all the time before
nothing could be gotten from him, but this, I have obeyed the voice of the
Lord, etc.

Sixthly and lastly, Hypocrites when they see that their sin and hypocrisy is
discov^red, they do not so much desire to get into Gods favor, and to make
their peace with God, as to keep it from the eyes of the world, that it may
not turn to be a reproach and a scandal upon them, but that still the world
may think well of them and may have them in high account, and this was that,
which as may appear in the 30. verse, did most trouble Saul. For Saul he had
made a fair show and had professed a great deal of love and obedience to God,
but now he was caught tardy, and his hypocrisy discovered, fearing this should
turn to his shame in regard of his former great profession, after a slight
confession that he makes of his sin in general, saying, I have sinned, says
he, honor me yet now I pray thee before the Elders of my people and before
Israel, whereby it appears that this was the chief and maine thing that he
stood upon, his credit and reputation in the world.

FINIS.

