HIS MAJESTY'S PROPOSITIONS To the Lords at York.

Also Proposition made by both Houses of PARLIAMENT. to the Kings MAJESTY The
Declaration of both houses of Parliament to his Majesty concerning the Militia.
June 20.

And now Printed by Order, with the former faults amended.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Par. D. Com.



Likewise the Lord Pagets Letter to the Honorable House of PARLIAMENT.

The Earl of Bristole Speech in the High Court of parliament.

LONDON, Printed June the 20. for William Gey 1642.

YOur Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords nd Commons in
Parliament, having nothing in their thoughts and desires more precious, and of
higher esteem (next to the honor and immediate service of God) then the just
and faithful performance of their duty to your Majesty and this Kingdom; And
being very sensible of the great distractions, and distempers and of the
imminent dangers and calamities which those distractions, and distempers are
like to bring upon your Majesty and your Subjects, all which have proceeded
from the subtle insinuations, mischievous practices, and evil Counsels of men
disaffected to Gods true Religion, your Majesty's honor and safety, and the
public peace and prosperity of your people. After a serious observation of
the causes of those mischiefs, do in all humility and sincerity present to
your Majesty their most dutiful Petition and advise, that out of your
Princely wisdom, for the establishing your own honor and safety, and gracious
tenderness of the welfare of your Subjects and Dominions, you will be pleased
to grant and accept these their humble desires and propositions, as the most
necessary effectual means, through Gods blessing, of removing those
jealousies and differences which have unhappily fallen betwixt you and your
people and procuring both your Majesty and them a constant course of honor,
peace, and happiness.

1. That the Lords and other of your Majesty's Privy Counsel, and such great
Officers and Ministers of State, either at home or beyond the Seas, may be put
from your Privy Council, and from those Offices and employments, excepting
such as shall be approved of by both houses of Parliament. And that the persons
put into the places and employments of those that are removed, may be approved
of by both Houses of Parliament. And that all Privy Counselors shall take an
Oath for the due execution of their places, in such form as shall be agreed
upon by both Houses of Parliament.

2. That the great affairs of this Kingdom may not be concluded or transacted
by the advice of private men, or by any unknown, or unsworne Counselors; but
that such matters as concern the public, and are proper for the high Court of
Parliament, which is your Majesty's great and supreme Counsel, may be
debated, resolved, and transacted only in Parliament, and not elsewhere; And
such as shall presume to do any thing to the contrary, shall be reserved to
the censure and judgment of Parliament; and such other matters of State as are
proper for your Majesty's privy Counsel, shall be debated and concluded by
such of the Nobility and others as shall from time to time be chosen for that
place by approbation of both Houses of Parliament; And that no public Act
concerning the affairs of the Kingdom, which are proper for your privy
Counsel, may be esteemed of any validity as proceeding from the royal
Authority, unless it be done by the advice and consent of the major part of
your Council attested, under their hands. And that your Council may be
limited to a certain number, not exceeding twenty-five, nor under fifteen.
And if any Counselors place happen to be void in the Intervals of Parliament,
it shall not be supplied without the assent of the major part of the Council,
which choice shall be confirmed at the next sitting of the Parliament, or else
to be void.

3. That the Lord high Steward of England, Lord high Constable, Lord
Chauncellor, or Lord Keeper of the great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy
Seal, Earl Marshall, Lord Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, chief
Governor of Ireland, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the Wards,
Secretaries of State, two chief Justices and chief Barons, may always be
chosen with the approbation of both Houses of Parliament: And in the
Intervalles of Parliament by assent of the the Major part of the Council, in
such manner as is before expressed in the choice of Counselors.

4. That he or they unto whom the Government and education of the Kings
Children shall be committed shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament,
and in the Intervalls of Parliaments, by the assent of the mayor part of the
Counsel, in such manner as is before expressed in the choice of Counselors; And
that all such servants as are now about them, against whom both Houses shall
have any just exception, shall be removed.

5. That no Marriage shall be concluded, or treated for any of the Kings
Children, with any foreign Prince, or other person whatsoever abroad, or at
home, without the consent of Parliament, under the Penalty of a praemunire unto
such as shall so conclude, or treat any Marriage as aforesaid, and that the
said penalty shall not be pardoned, or dispensed with, by the consent of both
Houses of Parliament.

6. That the Laws in force against Jesuits, Priests, and Popish Recusants,
be strictly put in execution, without any tolleration, or dispensation to the
contrary; And that some effectual course may be enacted, by authority of
Parliament, to disable them from making any disturbance in the State, or
eluding the Law by trusts or otherwise.

7. That the Votes of Popish Lords in the House of Peers may be taken away,
so long as they continue Papists. And that His Majesty would consent to such a
Bill as shall be drawn for the education of the Children of Papists by
Protestants, in the Protestant Religion.

8. That your Majesty will be pleased to consent that such a reformation be
made of the Church-governement, and Liturgy, as both Houses of Parliament
shall advise, wherein they intend to have consultations with Divines, as is
expressed in their Declaration to that purpose. And that your Majesty will
contribute your best assistance to them, for the raising of a sufficient
maintenance for Preaching Ministers through the Kingdom. And that your
Majesty will be pleased to give your consent to Laws, for the taking away of
innovations, and superstition, and of Pluralities, and against scandalous
Ministers.

9. That your Majesty will be pleased to rest satisfied with that course that
the Lords and Commons have appointed for ordering the Militia, until the same
shall be further settled by a Bill. And that your Majesty will recall your
Declaration, and Proclamations against the Ordinance made by the Lords and
Commons concerning it.

10. That such members of either House of Parliament, as have during this
present Parliament been put out of any place and Office, may either be restored
to that place and office, or otherwise have satisfaction for the same, upon the
Petition of that House whereof he or they are Members.

11. That all Privy Counselors and Judges may take an Oath, the form whereof
to be agreed on and settled by act of Parliament, for the maintaining of the
Petition of Right, and of certain Statutes made by this Parliament, which
shall be mentioned by both Houses of Parliament. And that an inquire of all the
breaches and violations of these Laws may be given in charge, by the Justices
of the Kings Bench every Term, and by the Judges of Assize in their Circuits,
and Justices of peace at the Sessions, to be presented and punished according
to Law.

12. That all the Judges and all Officers placed by approbation of both Houses
of parliament, may hold their places Quam diu been se gesserint.

13. That the Justice of parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether
they be within the Kingdom or fled out of it. And that all persons cited by
either House of parliament, may appear and abide the censure of parliament.

14. That the general pardon offered by your Majesty may be granted with such
exceptions as shall be devised by both Houses of parliament.

15. That the Forts and Castles of this Kingdom may be put under the command
and custody of such persons as your Majesty shall appoint, with the
approbation of your parliament. And in the intervals of parliament with the
approbation of the major part of the Council in such manner as is before
expressed in the choice of Counselors.

16. That the extraordinary Guards and military forces now attending your
majesty, may be removed and discharged. And that for the future you will raise
no such guards or extraordinary forces, but according to Law, in case of
actual rebellion or invasion.

17. That your majesty will be pleased to enter into a more strict alliance
with the States of the united provinces and other Neighbor princes and States
of the protestant Religion, for the defense and maintenance thereof against all
designs and attempts of the pope and his adherents, to subvert and suppress
it, whereby your majesty will obtain a great access of strength and
reputation, and your Subjects be much encouraged and enabled in a parliamentary
way for your aid and assistance, in restoring your royal Sister, and the
princely issue, to those dignities and dominions which belong unto them, and
relieving the other distressed protestant princes, who have suffered in the
same cause.

18. That your majesty will be pleased by Act of parliament, to clear the Lord
Kimbolton, and the five members of the House of Commons, in such manner, that
future Parliaments may be secured from the Consequence of that evil president.

19. That your majesty will be gr^ciously pleased to pass a Bill for
restraining peers made hereafter, from sitting, or Voting in Parliament;
Unless they be admitted thereunto, with the consent of both Houses of
Parliament.

And these our humble desires, being granted by Your Majesty, we shall
forthwith apply ourselves to regulate your present Revenue, in such sort as may
be for your best advantage; and likewise to settle such an ordinary and
constant increase of it, as shall be sufficient to support Your Royal dignity,
in Honor and plenty, beyond the proportion of any former Grants of the
Subjects of this Kingdom to your Majesty's Royal predecessors.

We shall likewise put the Town of Hull, into such hands as Your majesty shall
appoint, with the consent and approbation of parliament, and deliver up a just
account of all the magazine; and cheerfully employ the uttermost of our power
and endeavor, in the real expression and performance of our most dutiful and
Loyal affections, to the preserving, and maintaining the Royal Honor,
Greatness, and Safety of Your majesty, and your posterity.

A NEW DECLARATION OF THE LORDS And Commons in Parliament, Concerning the
execution of the Militia, 20. June, 1643. ALSO Concerning a Writ sent to the
high Sheriff of Essex, by his Majesty for the publishing of His late
proclamation.
WHereas Robert Smith Esquire, now high Sheriff of the County of Essex, has
lately received a Writ bearing date the 27. day of May, in the eighteenth year
of his now Majesty's reign, thereby commanding him to publish a Proclamation,
whereby all his Majesty's Subjects belonging to the Trained Bands or Militia of
this Kingdom, are forbidden to raise, March, Muster, or exercise by virtue of
any Order or Ordinance, of one or both Houses of Parliament, without consent or
warrant from his Majesty upon pain of punishment according to the Laws. And
whereas the said high Sheriff has now addressed himself to both Houses of
Parliament, for advice and directions therein concerning the said Proclamation
to be contrariant and repugnant to the Ordinance and Judgment of both Houses
of Parliament concerning the Militia.

It is therefore Declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament (they
intending nothing by the said Ordinance, but the protection and security of his
Majesty's person, the defense of the Kingdom against Foreign invasion, and
preservation of the public peace against intestine Rebellions and
Insurrections here at home, the maintenance of the Privileges and Authority of
Parliament according to the protestation.

That the said Writ is illegal for that the constitution and policy of this
Kingdom, and the King by his Proclamation cannot declare the Law contrary to
the resolution of any of the inferior Courts of Justice, much less against
the high Court of Parliament. And likewise for that this Writ forbids that
to be done which they are obliged unto by their duty to God, their allegiance
to his Majesty, and the trust reposed in them by the Commonwealth, (the Law
having entrusted them to provide for the good and safety thereof.) And that the
said high Sheriff has done nothing in forbearing to publish the said
proclamation, but according to his duty, and in obedience to the Order of both
Houses. And he is hereby required not to publish the said proclamation, or any
other proclamations or declarations of the like nature, that concern the
parliament, without first acquainting the said Houses.

And it is further declared that the said high Sheriff and other Sheriffs of
other Counties within this Kingdom of England and the Dominion of Wales, for
their obedience to the orders and ordinances of parliament: Or that have, or
hereafter shall do any thing in the execution thereof, shall be protected by
the power and authority of both the said Houses.

His Majesty's proposition to the Lords
SIS,
I Conceive my Lord of Linsey is Admiral of England, and the Lord of Ormond
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. The King has this day made diverse Propositions to
the Lords here; As

First, to have the Declaration of both Houses of the Ninth of May to be
disavowed;

Secondly, To have Justice in Hull.

Thirdly, to have the Militia declared to be his right.

Fourthly, to have tumults punished.

Fifthly, To have the Parliament, adjourned to Oxford, Cambridge, Winchester,
York, Coventrey, Bristoll, Nottingham or any of those places where his
Majesty shall command, and other things which I have not leisure to add.

Tomorrow they meet again, and I believe the maine question will be, whether
a Declaration shall be made here, or the Lords to agree here, and Vote in the
House, and in what equipage to go. Our Court increases daily, and we believe
notwithstanding the offer of a hundred thousand pound by the Common Council;
that the King may have as much money from the Citizens as they, and I believe
here is ground for such a conceit. Here is no possibility of the Kings sudden
remove hence, though some think he may step hence to Lincoln, for 3. or 4.
days to settle that Country, but I am not of that opinion.

The Lord Pagets Letter to the Honorable House of Parliament.
IT may seem strange that I, who with all zeal and earnestness have
prosecuted in the beginning of this Parliament, the Reformation of all
disorders in Church, and Commonwealth, should now in a time of such great
distractions, desert the cause. Most true it is that my ends were the common
good: And whilst that was prosecuted, I was ready to lay down both my life and
fortune: But when I found a Preparation of Arms against the King, under the
shadow of Loyalty, I rather resolved, to obey a good Conscience, then
particular ends, and am now on my way to his His Majesty, where I will throw my
self down at his feet, and die a loyal Subject.

PAGET.

The Earl of Bristoll Speech in the High Court of parliament.
My Lord,
MY zeal to the peace of this Kingdom, and my apprehentions of our near
approaching miseries do cause me to speak of the subject of Accommodation.
This Ki^gdome exceedes all the Monarchies of Europe, both for situation,
plenty, rich, commodities, and power both by Sea and Land, continued reign of
Queen Elizabeth, who not only impeached the Monarchy of Spain, protected the
United Provinces, and relieved the French in misery, but also was reverenced
by all the Princes of Germany, flourishing in the tranquilty of this Kingdom,
which which peace prospered in King James his Government, and continued down
to the Reign of his now Majesty, till these late unhappy interruptions. Now
if in stead of this happy condition, we impartially inquire into the now
distractions hereof, we shall find ourselves reduced to the brinke of misery.
These enemies are not foreign, but of our own House, such as our jealousies
and dissentions have raised, and civil discord is a plentiful Sourse, from
whence all miseries flow into a Kingdom. Our former distempers have grown
from the conduct of evil Ministers invading the subjects just liberty, and a
State is never sound, till Sovereign power, and common right are equally
ballenced by just rules: but the sickness thereof is rather continued of
fears and jealousies, then out of any real distemper, the King has
condescended unto many excellent petitions presented by many Noble Lord, and
has offered to concur with us in the settling all libet^ies for the propriety
of our goods: and willing to all our reasonable propositions: and for the
establishing of the true Protestant Religion he woes us to it. We on the other
side make profession, that we intend to make his Majesty a glorious King, to
support his Dignity, Regality, and Prerogatives, and to pay uno his that duty,
and obedience; which by our allegiance, several Oaths and protestations we
owe unto him.

So that we being both thus reciprocally united, which would make both the King
and people happy, shall be most unfortunate if we shall not brtng both
inclinations together. But it is the greatest difficulty to compose the
variances betwixt a King and his people dis-united: For it is much easier to
compose differences arising from reason, yea even from wrongs, then ir is to
satisfy jealousies, which arising out of the diffidence and distrust will grow
upon every occasion greater, if not removed. Nay mutual replies are grown to
those direct terms of opposition, that they will pass farther then verbal
contestations, if not stopped. The most plentiful Countries of Europe have
been brought to unexpressible calamities by a civil War. It is better
keeping out of them, then getting out of them, and in a State the wisdom of
prevention is infinitely beyond the wisdom of Remedies. Nay, if for the sins
of this Nation, Forces and Armies should be mutually raised, The very charge of
maintaining them would consume the wealth of the Kingdom: And of this we had
lately a costly example in those unhappy troubles betwixt us and Scotland,
where the keeping of the two Armies cost this Kingdom a Million of pounds. And
if two Armies be once on foot here in England, either a sudden encounter must
destroy one of them, or the keeping them both on foot must destroy the
Kingdom. Let us hearken in moderation to the wise advice of our Brethren in
Scotland, that all means may be forborne, which may make the breach wider, and
the wound deeper, that no place be given to the evil Spirit of division, which
at such times works uncessantly, and rests not: but that the fairest way be
taken by so wise a King and parliament, as may make his Majesty and his
posterity more glorious, and his Kingdom more happy, then ever. The best way
hereunto in my opinion is, That there may be a select Committee of choice
persons of both Houses, who may reconcile first those differences, and then
descend to the particulars, which may be expected from each other, either in
point of our supporting him, or his relieving us: and lastly, how all rhese
conditions being agreed upon may be so secured, as may stand with the honor of
his Majesty, and the satisfaction of the Subject. The Ordinance of parliament
commands all persons in Authority to obey it according to the fundamental
Laws of the Land: The King declares it to be contrary to the fundamental
Laws, and commands all his Subjects upon their Allegiance not to obey the
said Ordinance, as they will answer it to their perils. The King commands
also diverse of us to attend his person, whereunto we are oblidged by our
several services and oaths: in case we comply not with his commands, we are
liable to his displeasure, and the losses of those places of honor which we
hold under him, if we obey his Commands without the leave of parliament, we
are liable to the censure of parliament, therefore until it shall please God
to bless us with a right understanding betwixt the King and the parliament,
and a conformity in their commands, neither the Kingdom in public, nor
particular men in private, can be reduced to a safe and comfortable condition.
And I doubt not (whatsoever success this proposition may have) it will be
accompanied with the good wishes of your Lordships, and of all peaceable and
well-minded men.

FJNJS.

