THE MUSES JOY For the recovery of that Weeping Vine HENRETTA-MARIA, The most
Illustrious Queen Mother, and Her Royal Branches.

London, Printed in the year, 1660.

TO THE Virtuous and Right Honorable, ANNA-MARIA, Countess of Shrewsbury.
Madam,
YOU might upon the first view condemn this Oblation (coming so late) as
unvoluntary; and therefore unacceptable; did it not bring with it an Apology,
which common charity cannot refuse, the truth is, this Poem has struggled for
life with no less opposition than Mortality it self; the honest Printer who
undertook to give it birth, dying in the very act of its Delivery: where it
has remained these three weeks wrapped in a dead man's sheet, striving for birth
like one of those preternatural Issues of the Sun upon the slime of Nilus, part
shaped and alive, part without form or motion, and it had deservedly expired
with him, had it not born in the Front of it two sacred Signatures of my duty
to Her Majesty, and my respect to Your Ladyship. You must needs beg me the
Queens pardon for being guilty of an innocent Homicide, for Her Majesty's sake;
which accident has added to my presumption. What the Ambition of others aims
at in their high addresses, I shall not determine; whenever I put on Eagles
wings, the Augury of my design is (the natural effect of distance) by soaring
high to lessen my own merits, and magnify my obligations. And although I never
had the honor to be related to those noble Families the Shrewsburies and
Brudenals (now in a happy conjunction) yet when I hear the high Expressions of
both from a Brother and a Sister, I cannot be unconcerned in their debt of
duty, or passive in their transportations: but as I am warmed, so I must admire
by reflection. This (the greater Her presumption is my Muses second Service to
your Ladyship; though yet she never brought an Embassy of ill news, never put
your fair eyes to the expense of one pearl. Before she solemnized your
auspicious Nuptials: perhaps the dress of that Poem might, the subject could
not be troublesome, which was so pleasing to your Ladyship. At this time my Muse
celebrates the new espousals of a Royal Widow to her Crown, I wish I could say
to her King. Now though your Ladyship be entertained in the Porch, the
Dedication of this Poem; yet the fabric, namely the Subject, is part of her
Majesty's Revenue; unto whom I need no nearer Access than your Ladyship, your
person being as near the Queen as her shadow to her Body, or rather as her Body
to her Head; joined not only by propinquity, but by influence also. And now;
Madam, I have unbosom'd my whole design, which is, that the world by me, and
her Majesty by you may know, how much I am her Majesty's loyal Subject, and

Your Ladyships humblest Servant, JO. CROVCH.

THE MUSES JOY For the Recovery of that Weeping Vine HENRETTA MARIA.
THe Queen returned! more wonders still! a Troy
Of spoils and blood has built a Greece of joy!
Dull Age! thy long imprisoned faith release,
Believe, nay see, that miracles do not cease:
Heavens arm has broke the cloud, made bare and bright
Has eased our faith, turned vision into sight.
But is the Queen arrived? come safely over?
Then Calice mingle Cliffs, and kiss thy Dover?
Then France and Christendom be joined to Kent,
Not by a fast League, but firm Continent.
But Waves made not this wonder, there has stood
'Twixt her and us a wider Sea of Blood:
This Sea dried up, the Queen might freely pass,
Her ship moved on a pavement, smooth as glass:
The waters sensible (as those we please)
Smile to transport the Queen of the Narrow Seas.
Phoebus if ever thou deserved a Bow,
Or Occidental Sacrifice, it is now;
The East-world to thy perfumed Rising kneels,
But now the West thy Healing virtue feels:
The glorious splendour of thy Golden Rays
Has winged the Hours, and hastened happy days.
All ominous Meteors spent, this Sixtieth Year
The Stars drop honey in our Hemisphere.
Never was Spring so verdant, spruce and gay;
For Mildews, Manna fell last Month of May:
Three sent from Heaven to curb unbridled Men:
One out of Gratitude went to Heaven again:
Resolved, what careless Subjects lest undone,
The Fathers Funeral should be his Son.
But the auspicious Powers above conclude
To mollify this hard Vicissitude:
Send us fresh Balm to heal that sharp Rebuke,
Mother for Son, a Queen instead of Duke.
Venus a Golden Apple sent before,
A pledge of her Arrival on our shore:
Brings in her Arms Henretta too the fair;
Princes and Princesses a Double pair,
Exeters Angel breathed here but a while,
Babe, Jesus-like, an Infant in Exile!
Is this that Queen whom a Rebellious Crew
Sent Bullets after for a kind adieu?
One bored the place where Majesty did sit,
And came as near as Heaven would suffer it:
Had you been present there, you might have seen
The King of Terrors prostrate to a Queen.
Such Iron pills the sons of Death and Fate,
Prescribed to cure the Fevers of a State!
Is this that living Martyr so hard pressed
With Injuries, would split a vulgar Breast?
Wh' endured Affronts, Indignities and Force,
An unjust Exile, more unjust Divorce?
Such a Divorce the worlds great eye never saw,
Writ by the Sword, and sealed by Canon Law;
Whose Act might past, and future times outdo,
When Law and Gospel were divorced too:
A strange Divorce! where the whole guilt was Love,
And constancy the cause of such Remove:
Divorce more monstrous yet! which rends the wife;
Not from her Husbands Bosom, but his Life.
You Loyal Shepherdesses, who these Floods,
Have lived amongst Wolves and Satyrs in the Woods;
Amongst Ladies of all Trades, without respect,
Compelled to use their ruder Dialect;
Spring out with your Diana, O break forth,
And show the blessed world, not your height, but worth.
To your long clouded Firmament resort,
And shine like bright stars in your British Court:
You Have now a Mistress, an auspicious Guide,
To teach you modes of Modesty, not Pride:
To make you Wise, not in a narrow sense,
But measured by a Queens circumference.
Be like your Gems, not sleek'd up for mere sight,
But Influential too, as well as bright:
Of which some help the head, some heart, some spleen;
One Lady cures all these, that is like the Queen.
Welcome great Princess, by good Prov'dence sent
Home to us, from your Native Banishment!
Delight to see your Royal Branches twine
Their Arms about you, their Beloved Vine;
(That fruitful Vine, whose goodness made it smart;
That lives, and yet so long has bled at heart.)
On your Just Throne in serene safety sit;
Forget all past, except the Benefit.
The Heavens and Earth rejoice at your return.
You cannot gratify their Joys, and mourn.
Madam, let no past sufferings make you sad;
When three Realms now conspire to make you glad;
Your triumphs bound not here; the general voice
Of more than Christian World echoes, Rejoice.
London (long Widow) was espoused last May,
But till you came kept not her Nuptial day.
Share Empire with your Sons, our King, and Brother;
They shall command one Sex, and You the other.
And now since Cromwell (by a fatal Boon)
Gasp't in his bed too late, and yet too soon!
Since Bradshaw could not so much mercy win
To live to Hang and suffer for his sin:
(Though his and Cromwels blood together spilt
Were both too black to expiate their guilt)
Since divine Justice (so severely kind)
Has scourged their Drudges, too long left behind!
Since Nolls whole Reign was but a Dream at best,
We'ill wind his story up into a Jest.
When this swollen Phaeton in the full Carreer
Of his usurpt dominion amongst us here;
Must in a brave his foreign Prancers rule,
(As if an Ass grown proud would guide a Mule)
When this Suns Son fell from his hot Caroach,
Then the blessed hours prepared the Kings approach:
His panting Heart presaged his tumbling down,
Not from his Chariot, but a Triple Crown,
I say a Triple Crown, for that was all,
(He gave the other to the Cardinal:)
Whose Diadem never girt his brow, till Dead;
O thus may Death still crown a Traitors Head!
He Is now below the Earth, there let him lie,
There rot, and once more in our Memories die.
But let our joys bless Heaven for this rich Change,
A King, Queen, Duke, and virtuous Orange,
Henretta too; who left her native Air,
Not to be greater, but more Debonair:
Wh' abroad like injured Pilgrims did converse,
Here chained, there Tenants of the Universe.
Great England! Great, not in thy breadth or length;
Protected more by Providence than Strength:
Thou, in thy little Circle do contain
Princes too mighty both for France and Spain.
O may thy People washed in so much blood,
Be humble, thankful, loyal, wise and good!
And may our good Queen never weep again,
Unless it be for joy she once had pain,
That once her blessed Womb with a Charles did teem,
Should both a Crown Inherit and Redeem.
Let proud Rebellion, sunk as low as Hell,
For ever There, in its own Region, dwell.
FINIS.

