THE COPY OF A LETTER From an Vtter-Barrister to his special Friend,
concerning Lieutenant Col. LILBVRN'S Imprisonment. Sept. 1645.
Kind Sir:
OUt of the firm confidence and certain knowledge which you seem to have of the
integrity and honesty of Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne, and that his Letter of
the 25th. of July, contains nothing but truth, I send you here my Sense and
Opinion concerning his Imprisonment.

And for the clearer explanation of what you demand, and our better
understanding of one another, I conceive it necessary that we be at a point
upon these two things: First, what the House of Commons is: Next, for what end
and purpose they are conveened and called together.

I believe you agree with me, that the House of Commons is nothing less, then
the representative Body of the People, elected and sent up, by the several
Shires and Buroughs respectively (and joined with the two other States) of
capacity to make, alter, abrogate Laws, as occasion shall require; to hear
and relieve the Grievances of the people, and to reform what is amiss in the
Commonwealth.

Here is the Character and description of the House of Commons (which
themselves (I think) will allow of) and here is the end and purpose for which
they serve.

In this description you may plainly see, two Bodies of the people, the
representative and the represented, which together make up the Body of the
Commonwealth; and of this latter, Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne is an eminent
member.

Now, for any man to imagine that the shadow or representative is more worthy
then the Substance; or that the House of Commons is more valuable and
considerable, then the Body for whom they serve, is all one as if they should
affirm, that an Agent or Ambassador from a Prince, has the same or more
authority, then the Prince himself, which in matters of Proxy for Marriage, I
believe no Prince will allow of.

I will not undertake to define the limits of power or extent of Parliaments,
having found the practice in my reading more or less, lengthned or shortened
(like a pair of Stirrops) according to circumstances, and current of times, or
the weakness or power of the Prince under whom they serve, who has for the
most part subjected them to his will, and made them act his Designs.

Neither will I go about to cast the apple of Division betwixt the People and
their agents, who should be linkt together by common interest and mutual
respects of common preservation; yet this much I cannot forbear to intimate,
that the one is but the servant of the other, the House of Commons, I mean of
the People elected by them, to provide for their welfare and freedoms, against
all inbred tyranny or foreign invasion, which by reason of their numbers,
they cannot conveniently do in their own persons without hazard both of
confusion and desolation.

But to come to our business, Mr. Lilburne complains, that Three times since
the first of May last, he has been imprisoned by Authority from the House of
Commons, before he knew the Accuser or Accusation, or was suffered to speak one
word in his own defense: Certainly, Thieves and Murderers, taken in Flagranti
delicto, in the very act of a heinous crime, are not thus hardly dealt withal.

This calls to my mind the very words of a Member of the House, Mr. Edward
Stephens by name, uttered with passion openly in Westminster hall, in a case of
the like injustice, viz. That we have not withdrawn our selves from our
obedience to the King, to yield our selves slaves and vassalls, to the tyranny
of our fellow subjects.

But you will say, how shall we amend our selves, we have given our selves,
lives, liberties, and all into the Parliaments power?

To this I answer, That this free and abandoned confidence of ours, whereby
they are entrusted with all that is dour and precious unto us, ought the rather
to oblige them to a tender and conscientious care of the dispensation of that
power.

Besides this sovereign or legislative power (which they make use of) is not
lent them for the ruin and destruction of our Laws and Liberties (no more
then the Kings Prerogative) but for the edification and strengthening of the
same in particular, as well as general.

The abuse and overflowing of this power, is odious to God and man; for
Princes, or what State soever, when they arrogate to themselves an unlimited
jurisdiction, to degenerate into Tyrants, and become Hosts humani generis,
enemies of mankind.

And the Angels (which would be like the most high) were by his just judgment
changed into the most wretched of all creatures: It belongs to God, and to God
alone, to rule the law of his blessed will.

As for Princes and States, when they break out into exorbitancy, and will be
imitators of the power of God, in governing by an uncircumscribed authority,
they run themselves into inevitable mischiefs, and the people (whom they serve)
into unavoidable inconveniences, and this comes to pas^e of necessity; for
every State governed by fantastical and Arbitrary power, must needs be
floting, inconstant, and subject to change; besides, man is naturally ambitious
and apt to encroach and usurp upon the liberty of his inferiors.

Hence is derived that excellent maxim, Melsus sub inquissima lege, quam sub
aequissimo arbitro vivere; It is better to live under a rigorous and unjust
law, then an Arbitrary government though just, the reason is, because by the
first, he is at certainty, and knows what he must trust too, the last leaves
him uncertain, and so in danger.

But to return to Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne, who stands imprisoned by a Vote
of the House of Commons for refusing to answer to the Committees
Interrogatories, before cause showed of his former imprisonment.

I am informed by some Members that this Vote was obtained by Bastwicke
surreptitiously, when the House was thin and empty; and therefore I conceive he
may appeal from the House thin and empty, to the House full and complete, if
this will not be accepted of, why should he not appeal to the people?

For Buchanan an author without reproach in his Book ( De jure regui apud
Scotos, concerning the Scottish Laws) does boldly and positively affirm,
Supremam potestatem esse in Populo, the Supreme power to be in the people.

And before Buchanan, the Commonwealth of Rome (which remains a pattern and
example to all ages both for Civil and Military government) I say this
Commonwealth in its best perfection did allow of this refuge or appeal to the
People.

To this purpose, Titus Livius an unreproveable Author, speaks in these terms,
Decad. 5. of his History. C. Flaminius was the first (as one of the first) that
understanding the Majesty of Rome to be indeed wholly in the people, and no
otherwise in the Senate, then by way of delagacy or grand Commission, did not
stand highly upon his birth and degree, but made his address to the multitude,
and taught them to know and use their power over himself, and his fellow
Senators in reforming their disorders: For this the Commons highly esteemed
him, and the Senators as deeply hated him, etc.

But I hope the Wisdom and Providence of the Parliament will prevent these
extremities; yet I cannot but put them in remembrance, that small sparkles do
oftentimes occasion great fires.

And that the English Nation is sensible of nothing more then the breach of
their liberties, and of violence offered to the freedom of their persons.

Witness the Magna Carta thirty times confirmed by the Princes of this Hand;
and witness the cheerful readiness of the people to serve the public in
this present great quarrrell.

And let no man dream that the Parliament may trench boldly thereon without
check. A silly conceit, and aggravating the offense: For a dog that devoureth
his own kind, we account more unnatural then a Lion or a Bear of another
kind; besides the heart burning which is easily kindled when our own fellows
domineer over us.

There are but two things of ruining a people, either by fear or love, the
first may be more agreeable to Master Corbit, as suitable to his gallant and
imperious nature, or to Sir Robert Pyes Canine humor, but is brittle, and will
last no longer then the fom^ which supports it. The second, of love, is safe
and durable.

Camillus the Roman speaks of it in two words, Firmissimum imperium quo
obedientes gaudent, the most stable lasting government under which the people
rejoice and live cheerfully.

But Lilburnes case is singular, that a member of the body represented, a free
born subject, in life and conversation without exception. Considerable both in
his actions and sufferings in this great cause, that such a subject contrary to
the tenor of Magna Carta, contrary to the late Covenant and Petition of Right,
yea and the direct rule alleged in Scripture, should be three times
imprisoned without showing cause by a Parliament professing Reformation, and
defense of our Laws and Liberties, and without any urgent or apparent
necessity of State enforcing it.

This I profess is to me a riddle beyond all that this monstrous age has
brought forth; I need not say how much the public liberty is wounded in the
injury doubled and trebled upon their fellow member, nor the consequences
thereof, which if drawn into president, who can count himself free? Nor the
consequences of a wicked sentence (which as Chancellor Bacon says) is
infinitely worse then a wicked fact, as being held a president or pattern,
whereby oppression beginning upon one, is extended as warrantable upon all.

And this conclusion he draws out of this place of Scripture, Font turbatus
pede et vena corrupta, est justus cadens coram impio. A just man falling into
the hands of the wicked, is like a fountain troubled with the foot, or the
urines corrupted in the body.

The horror of this sentence has stricken the generality of the people with
amazement, to behold the Kid seething in the milk of the Damme, that is to
say, the Chambers of Justice ordained for our comfort, preservation, and
safety, unkindly wrested to enslave, ruin, and destroy us.

Surely after ages when they shall ponder these proceedings in cold and sober
blood, will be ashamed to own the actors for their parents or predecessors: And
it is to be feared that the stones from the pavement, will rise in judgment
one day against the abusers of the trust committed unto them.

And let no man deceive himself, to think with senseless and frivolous
distinctions to award the dishonor and danger, which may arise to the
Parliament hence; as to say that the Great Charter is but suspended as to
Lilburne, but not abrogated; and that the duty of the Parliament is to provide
for generalities, but is not at leisure to attend particular greevances: these
answers satisfy none but Idiots, or those that suck profit under their command.

I mentioned before the danger and dishonor arising to the Parliament hereby,
which of necessity must ensue; for seeing that Omne Imperium in consensu and
assensu parentium fondatur Plinius, Paneg. All lawful Empire or Sovereign
command has its basis or firm foundation in the consent, approbation and good
liking of the people; a rule without exception.

What consent or good liking can be expected from those who daily see
themselves abused in their liberties, and ruined in their Estates? Nay, what
hope of redress, when as our Petitions will not be accepted without great
friends in the House? To be short, it is not credible that either people or
person, in any outward condition under which they mourn, sigh, or groan, will
continue any longer therein, then they have occasion of good terms to be
delivered, according to the saying of Live. lib. 8. Non credible est illum
Populum, vel hominem denique, in ea condition, cujus cum poeniteat, diutius
quam necesse sit mansurum. Hence it must necessarily follow, that the multitude
touched to the quick in their liberties and means of living, will be easily
persuaded to shake off all Bonds of obedience, so necessary to the Magistrate,
and to cast the blame of their sufferings upon the Authors, either as false to
their Trust, incapable of the great weight of Authority committed unto them:
For who but a mad man will yield obedience unto those, who are regardlesse of
their Laws and Liberties, or negligent of the means of their Subsistence,
Livelihood, and Safety? the maine and only ends for which they are conveened
and called together; and not to provide Offices for themselves, or to solicit
the Causes of their particular friends, sometimes the greatest Enemies of the
State.

I beseech you, pass not lightly by these Considerations as idle and vain
fears; for who shall hinder the multitude, if stung with a lively sense of
their lost Freedoms, and means of subsisting; they shall endeavor the
re-gaining thereof by some sudden attempt, seeing that (if the worst happen)
they cannot be in much worse condition then they now are: As to the Committee
for Examinations (mentioned in Mr. Lilburns Letter) which ought to be the
Touchstone, whereby to discern Gold from counterfeit: And in equity and reason
ought to be free, equal, and open as well to the Plantiffe, as Defendant,
especially in Criminal Causes: But in cases of Treason, or which concern the
Public safety, ought rather to lend an attentive care to the Delators or
Accusers, then any way to discourage them: For if these necessary evils shall
be disheartened, who will watch over the safety of the State? Besides, it is
more safe and tolerable in the condition wherein we now are, that a mischief
should happen to one man, then a ruin to a whole Kingdom.

As to this Committee, I wish from my soul, that Lieutenant Colonel LILBURNE
were the only complainant against them: Let Westminster Hall, the Exchange, and
other places of public meeting, inform you; What making of sides, browbeating
of witnesses, baffeling of evidences, facing, and out-facing of the truth? What
impertinent distinguishing and abusing the formalities of the Law, is there
complained of? And all this noise and turmoil to help a knave out of the
briers.

It were more for the honor of their justice, and the satisfaction of the
people, if the usual forms of proceeding in cases of charge of Treason were
observed: That is, that the person accused, were secured; and the accusers
heard with all equanimity, patience and attention: Whereas on the contrary, the
accused is permitted to sit down covered, as Peer and companion with the
Commissioners, and to arraigne his accusers.

O wretched times! O miserable England! which do labor with all the
symptoms, marks, and tokens, of a declining and dying state! Injustice avowed;
Treason countenanced; Oppression, become familiar, almost legal; Oaths,
Protestations, and Covenants solemnly made in the presence of God and man,
slighted, and set at naught: Then to fill up the measure of our sorrows, a
Civil War within our own bowels, nay almost in every family: And last of all,
a general corruption of manners, which assures us the malady will be lasting,
if not incurable: What will be the end and issue of all this? Seek to that
Oracle which cannot lie.

Propter injustitiam, and injurias, and contumelias and diversos dolos: Regnum
agente in gentem transfertur, Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 10. verse 8. Because of
unrighteous dealings, injuries and riches got by deceit, the Kingdom is
translated from one people to another.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, having a vacant place for some few lines, I have made bold
to use some of Major George Withers his verses out of VOX PACIFICA, page 199.

Let not your King and Parliament, in One,
Much less apart, mistake themselves, for that,
Which is most worthy to be thought upon:
Or, think, they are essentially the STATE;
Let them not fancy, that, the Authority
And Privileges upon them bestown,
Conferred, to set up a Majesty,
A Power, or a Glory, of their own.
But, let them know, 'twas for another thing,
Which they but represent; and, which, ere long,
Them, to a strict account, will, doubtless, bring,
If any way, they do it wilful wrong:
For, that, indeed, is, really the Face,
Whereof, they are the shadow, in the glass.
Moreover, thus inform them, that, if either,
They still, divided, grow from bad to worse;
Or, (without penitence unite together)
And, by their sin, provoke him to that course;
GOD, out of their confusions, can, and will
Create a cure; and raise a lawfull-power,
His promise to his people to fulfill;
And, his, and their Opposers, to devour.
Yea, bid both King and Parliament, make haste,
In penitence, united, to appear:
Lest into those Confusions, they be cast,
Which will affright them both; and, make them fear,
And, know, there is on earth, a greater-thing,
Then, an unrighteous Parliament, or King.
FINIS.

