The Curtezan unmasked: Or, THE WHOREDOMS OF JEZEBEL Painted to the Life.

With ANTIDOTES against them; or Heavenly JULIPS to cool Men in the Fever of
LUST.

Prescribed by a Spiritual Physician.

-- Sanctum nihil est and ab inguine Tutum, Non Matrona Laris, non Filia Virgo,
neqque ipse Sponsus lavis adhuc, non Filius ante pudicus.

Juvenal. Satyr. 3. London, Printed for Henry Marsh, at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane. 1664.

PROVE. 3. verse. 3, 4. The lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and
her mouth is smoother then oil: But her end is bitter as wormwood, and sharp as
a two-edged sword.
THe Text here presents you with a strange woman; with whom though I desire not
to procure you a familiar acquaintance, yet I Will give you such cognizance of
her, and excite that abhorrency of her baseness in all your minds, that if any
have heretofore been sick for want of her company, he shall now be as sick of
it; after I have made it appear that this Mu^ier formosa superne desinit in
piscem. Hor. de art Poet.
beautiful Siren, having a Woman's face, ends in the Serpents tail; and
discovered, not only the Virgins-face of this unsatiable Harpye, but her cruel
talons also shrouded under her wings. That you may therefore (as 2 Samuel 13. 18.
Amnon did upon Tamar) bolt the door upon this strange woman, and no longer
endure the whoredoms of this painted Jezebel; I Will endeavor to characterize
her to you, and by the infallible clue of Truth conduct you through all her
intricate and winding Labyrinths. Be pleased therefore, for the explication of
the word [Strange] to take notice, that this Epithet was by the Graecians
attributed to their common Prostitutes, which they called (...), strangers: And
hence, I conceive, it was that the Comoedian called Terent. in Glycerio.
Glycerium, who was thought to live by the unlawful submission of her body,
Peregrinam, a stranger, a strange woman. But I have only hitherto told you her
name; I shall now therefore proceed further to describe her to you by her
fordid actions, which will ascertain you of those miseries which are her
constant waiting-women or attendants. That I may therefore speedily prosecute
my design, She is one whom not Argus's hundred eyes, nor brazen walls, nor the
most vigilant Guards can secure from her lascivious incontinency: the bars and
(...). Homer.
hedges which Nature has made for her tongues confinement are not sufficient to
restrain it within the limits of a modest discourse, and should we lock up her
impure lips with a command of silence, yet could we never limit the in
finiteness of her lascivious tho^ghts, with which she would as freely commit
fornication, as if she were at liberty, and in the enjoyment of the greatest
voluptuary; and we may say of her what Scipio in another case said of himself,
Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus. ^ull. de Offi^.
She is never less alone than when alone. She tricks her self up with such
variety of g^uderies as if she were to expose her body to bring the Devil to
her lure, and tempt the Tempter himself to love her; and were that opinion of
Tertullian true, That the Devils and fallen Angels had carnal commerce with the
Daughters of Men, and they should desire one to satisfy their lustful
appetite, I Would recommend the strange woman in the Text unto them; who (like
Circe) is an amiable Sorceress, and when she has once charmed her Gallant with
youthful blood sparkling in his veins, and beauty dancing in his face, into the
endless Circle of her lust, he will find a difficult Sed revocare gradum
superasque evadere ad aurut -- Hic labor hoc opus est -- Virg.
recovery. Bartholin in Tractatu de mo^u Chyli.
Physicians tell us, that the reason we have in Feverish distempers our
Paroxysme but every second, third, or fourth day, and not at every circulation
of the blood about the body, is, because the blood when it arrives to the heart
must acquire such a degree of corruption before it can effect it, and therefore
because this corruption is not sen^^ble before many circulations have been
performed, it cannot so soon create a Paroxysme: But in this impure and
libidinous strumpets heart it is far otherwise; for she endures the Paroxysmes
of the F^ver of Lust every hour and moment, and the circulation of her lusts in
her heart is sooner perf^rmed then that of, her blood. Medea had not more
damnable Arts to preserve youth and beauty then she, who has perfectly attained
the Art of making new beauty, new hair, and counterfeit teeth; and not thinking
she has charms enough to render her amiable, has recourse to the Merchants, as
unto Natural Magic, to buy there what Nature would not give her, and to make
her self liked in spite of Nature's disfavours; and being accustomed to
varnish over her decayed Cheeks, and the ruins of a good Face, with the fresh
colors of an adventicious Paint, she by her licentiousness seems to usurp the
power and liberty of Painters, who (according to the Poet) -- Pictoribus --
Quidlibet audendi s^mper suit aequa pot^stas. Hor. de art Poet.
were priviledg'd to do what they pleased; and (to say truth) she is an exact
Painter in all her actions; for she varnishes over the deformed and execrable
Name of Whore, with the flourishing Title and Color of a Lady of pleasure: and
whilst she discours^s to her Gallant of the unlawful use of her body, she
colors it over with the title of a great and incomparable favor; and
(Mahomet-like) persuades all her adorers, that there is no Paradise but that of
carnal fruition, and the gratification to a domineering Lust: But I fear that
this Paradise she puts them in will prove but a Fools Paradise; for I believe
they will quickly conclude, That the sulphurous flames which Aetna's fiery paunch
continually vomits into the Air bear not so forcible and durable a heat as the
Calentures of her lustful blood; and that the poisoned garment dipped in the
Centaurs blood, which caused Hercules to burn in living flames, had had not
such vigor and vehemence as her enflamed Lust. Whilst I hear one Historian
talk of Sempronia, and give her this character, Saepius petiit viros quam
peteb^tur. Salust.
That she oftener courted men to her embraces then she was courted by them, I
fancy he makes mention of the strange woman in the Text: and whilst I hear
another report, that Julia arrived to that height of licentiousness, Nihil
quod turpiter facere aut pati poss^t inf^ctum re^^qu^ret, qu^^quid lib r^t pro
licito judicans. Suet.
That she would leave nothing undone which she could basely c^mmit, either by
Action or Passion, judging that lawful which pleased her humor best, me thinks
he characterizes our strange woman to us. King Solomon (understanding a hot
Prostitute) tells us, Prove. 6. 27. a man cannot take fire into his bosom, but
he must be necessarily burnt; and I believe that many of the Gallants of our
time, who have thought only to warm and cherish their lusts at this she-fire,
have at last been soundly burnt by taking her into their bosoms: for this
strange Woman is not like the Glowworm, that carries only a counterfeit heat,
nor of so cold a constitution as the Moon was when she embraced Endymion; but
he that embraces her shall find the same entainment the Satyr did, that kissed
the fiery coal and burnt his lips; and we may say of her, what the tyrant Nero
once said of himself and his mother Agrippina, Sueton. in vit. Neron.
That there can nothing come of her into the world but what is detestable and
accursed. This Helena is hot enough to inflame Troy; this Hecuba can bring
forth nothing but a Firebrand. Though the Toad has a precious Stone in her
head, yet her body is poisonous: And so, though this Strange Woman may wear a
handsome countenance, and for her superficial and skin-deep beauty seem an
inestimable Jewel, yet, if we view her thoroughly, we shall discover the venom
of her impure body; for, though her lips drop as an honey comb, and her mouth
is smoother then oil, yet her end is bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a
two-edged sword. Upon which two Verses of the Text, as upon two pillars, I
build this practical Proposition,

That the short and transitory pleasures which the strange woman affords us,
are accompanied with the sharpest and most permanent evils.

And that, First, Because she will wound and stain our reputation. How full is the
adulterer of fears and jealousies, scorching desires, and impatient waitings,
tedious demurrs, sufferance of indignities, and amazements of discoveries, and
his uncleanness is ever attended by shame which is its eldest daughter; for let
us consider how infamous it has ever been, to be noted for a common Pathick or
a lustful Amoretto, how oppr^briously Adulterers have been used by most
Nations. The Law of the Egyptians was to cut off the Nose of an Adulterer; the
Locrians put out the Adulterers Eyes; and (the more notoriously to intimate his
effeminacy) others clothed him with wool; and Solons Law was this, If any man
take an Adulterer in the fact, he may use him how he pleases: And in the Twelve
Tables, Moechum in adulterio depreh^nsum impune neca* to.
If you take a man in the act of Adultery, you may kill him without danger of
punishment; Impunity was intailed upon the murder of him. You may observe,
that this sin of Adultery is in Scripture called a sin of darkness; intimating
to us, how the Adulterer, ashamed of the light, sneaks up and down in obscure
recesses, and is only active and vigilant when others are quiet and taking
their repose. Other sinners iniquities are in Scripture numbered by the hairs of
the head; but we cannot number the Adulterers so, because as his sins increase
his hairs do fall; the Spring of his sins is his hairs Fall of the leaf. The
second account upon which the Adulterer will conclude, That the transitory
pleasures which the strange woman affords us are accompanied with the sharpest
evils, is,

2. Because he will find she will impair the health of his body; for though her
Lips drop as an Honeycomb, and she distill the Quintessence of Rhetoric in
every expression; though she does amorously caress and embrace him, yet it is
but as the encircling Ivy does the Oak, to make him rot, wither, and decay.
Though he may think himself in Heaven, and imagine her curled Arms about him to
be his Celestial Zodiac, yet he will (at length) find them but as chains and
fetters to enslave and captivate him to her insatiable Lust; the gratifications
whereof whilst he endeavors to show her, he must undergo as many gripes in
his guilty Conscience, as Aches in his impure and vicious Body. She, it may be,
will foment and cherish the flames of his Lust with these pleasing Blasts, by
telling him that the Virgin Spring does not appear less chaste because many
thirsts are there quenched; and that those Waters stink soon that continue long
in one place, but remain sweet and wholesome whilst they leave one bank and
kiss another. But let us (like a prudent Ulysses) stop our ears to the fatal
voice of this dangerous Siren, least, while we sail in the Ocean of this World,
we suffer shipwreck of Grace and a good Conscience: Don't let us stand to
dispute the case, and parley with her, but rather fly from her, and avoid her
company: For, we must be extremely cold, not to be warmed by so fair a fire,
and very strong, to make defense against so charming an Enemy. Nor can we touch
Pitch with our hands, but a foul impress will be received from it: One rotten
kernel of the Pomgranate infects the fellows; and St. Paul made that Verse
Canonical, Evil communication corrupts good manners. And it is noted of Joseph,
that as soon as his Mistress had laid her impure hands upon his garment, he
leaves it behind him, that he might be sure to avoid the danger of her
contagious touch. And we shall assuredly find, that she who but now compared
her self to a pleasant Spring, will at last serve us with the bitter Waters of
Marah. For I appeal to the common Adulterer, Whether he be not a walking
Hospital and Pesthouse of Diseases? Whether he is not always possessed with a
(...), a Devil that first tempts him to all Uncleanness, and afterward
terrifies and exanimates him with the greatest horror imaginable? and whether
the violent and fervent heat of his lustful appetite be not as unquenchable as
Hell-flames? Could we have Lynceus his eyes, and look through the decayed walls
of his Body, what rottenness should we discover in his exhausted Bones? how
would the whole Fabric of his Body appear invalid and unnerved, and represent
it self to us as the Emblem of a Sack of dry Bones, whose every part, were it
anatomized and opened, it would corrupt and infect the Air, and store the World
with as many Diseases as the opening of Pandora's Box: insomuch that he who
shall be besotted with so Lethargick a stupidity as to harbor and caress this
strange woman, He (like the Hyrcanians) may be said to keep a Dog to devour
himself, or (like the mad Romans in Arrian) court the Fever of his own Lust,
that will soon consume him, and render him as meager and pellucid as the
meerest Skeleton; causing withal a no less decay in his Estate then in his
Body; and this I conceive induced Solomon to say, Prove 6. 26.
That by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread, and the
adulteress will hunt for the precious life. But if this be not sufficient to
deter the Adulterer from this Prostitutes company, Ple advance a step higher,
and press him with a third Argument, to prove, That those transitory pleasures
the strange Woman affords us are accompanied with the sharpest and most
permanent evils: and that

3. Because by her means an irreparable and irrecoverable damage will accrue to
his immortal Soul. And in this St. Paul shall be my President, who 1 Cor. 6. 9.
bids us not be deceived, assuring us, That neither fornicators, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate persons, shall enter into the Kingdom of God. Rouse
in Archaeolog. Attic.
It was not permitted to a Dog to enter into the Acropolis, because of his
excessive heat in Venery; and so neither will it be permitted to those that
(like the Dog) indulge themselves in the excessive heat of Venery, to enter
into Heaven, which may for its height be called an Acropolis, which (being
interpreted) is, a City built upon a Hill. Let us consider how impossible it is
that our Prayers and Oblations should be acceptable to God, when they are
offered with impure hands, reeking in lust: How can we expect to look God in
the face (whose eyes are purer then to behold iniquity) with our impure eyes?
How can we hope to be Eagle-ey'd enough to look up to God, whose eyes are ten
thousand times brighter then the Sun, when we have so weakened our eyes by the
Works of Darkness, that (like Night-birds) we dread to behold the Light? How
should Chamberings and Wantonness hope to get room in Heaven, whence all kind
of Marriage is excluded? When the two opposite Poles of the World meet
together, and two Contradictions at the same time prove true, then, and not
till then, will I believe that the Fornicator and Heaven can kiss each other.
How can we call God Father, who utterly renounces those spurious offsprings of
our sinful lusts, which have not their Original, nor derive their Pedigree from
God, but the World and our depraved Natures? Which S. John 1 John 2. 16.
intimates to us; who making an Inventory of the Goods, or rather of the Evils
of this World, besides the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, he tells us,
that the Lust of the Flesh is not of God, but of the World.

It remains now that I should prescribe you some few Recipe's and Antidotes;
which if you will make use of, I Will warrant to cure you of the Fever of Lust, into
which the Strange Woman will endeavor to cast you: And my first is this.

First then, Let every one make a Covenant with his eyes, never to look upon
any object with a lustful and impure inclination. Job 31. 1. I have made a
Covenant with my eyes, why then should I look upon a maid? Shut your Eyes,
those Windows of your Soul, through which you receive the Species from all
sinful Objects; for, through those windows a little sin (like a little Boy) may
creep in, and open the Door of your Heart to the rest. An eminent Historian of
our own Nation tells us, That whilst the Earl of Salisbury was at the Battle
of Orleance, opening a little window of the Castle, where he was to view the
Enemy, a little Lad killed him with a Cannon planted and discharged against the
Windows. So, it may be, whilst thou openest thy Souls windows, thy Eyes, to
look upon a beautiful Object, a small Lust may chance to shoot thee with a
temptation, and leave thee dead in sin for ever. Scipio and Alexander both of
them are reported to have taken fair Captives: Scipio would not suffer his to
come into his sight, lest he himself might be captivated by their beauty; but
Alexander gave his Captives admittance into his presence: And though Alexanders
was the greater continency, yet Scipio took the wisest course; for, Periculosum
est illud per quod quis aliquando captus sit videre; prope se consequuntur
proponi formam and exponi pudicitiam. Senec.
It Is dangerous to look upon that by which we may at length be ensnared; the
exposing of Beauty to be seen, and the loss of Modesty and Chastity follow one
another. Let us therefore attend to our blessed Saviors words, who tells us,
Matthew. 5. 28.
That whosoever looks upon a woman with an intention to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart. When we come into the
presence of moving Beauties, we must do as men usually do when the Summer Sun
grows potent and vehement; though we admire their Beauties greatness, yet we
must shun it is heat; each place can afford us a shadow to hide us from it. The
Poets tell us, that when some young men had beheld the three equal beauty'd
Gorgones, they were thereby deprived and divested of their human shape, and
metamorphosed into stones: So, if we be not cautious how we too lasciviously
gaze upon powerful Beauties, who knows how soon we may be so callous and
obdurate, and our hearts be rendered so stony, that without the least regret or
remorse we may first fall into the profound Abyss of Adultery, and thence to
that bottomless one of Hell. We must not do by a beautiful Object as by the
Crocodile, but quite contrary; for we must be sure not to look first upon it,
and then we shall remain secure from its killing glances: for, he who is still
looking, and always gazing, acts like him who drinks Wine in the very height
of a Fever. But if still men will look upon fair Objects, let the same use be
made of them which the wiser sort of Catholics do of Pictures; let their
beautiful features serve to raise our Devotion to God, and make us admire his
curious workmanship. And since Women are of late grown so proud and licentious
as to expose and prostitute themselves to the eyes of men in unseemly and
immodest gestures, and they only show themselves true Britains in this, that,
like the ancient Britains, they delight to paint their bodies, and (like the
Rainbow) display their transient and fading colors; let us, when we see such
as these, call to mind these Considerations to allay those inordinacies which
may otherwise arise in our thoughts from the contemplation of so vicious
objects. Let us consider, That they are but vain Dames, to bestow such curious
cost on so woeful and sordid a piece of dirt, which (it may be) would otherwise
resemble the clay Prometheus used before it was informed and animated; That
it is their folly to guild a clay Wall, and enamel a Bubble, when they can give
no other then a Woman's Reason for it. Let us consider, That Women have no
beauty but what we are pleased to give them; and that if we call them fair,
it is but in the way of Poetry or Complement: And that these dim Cynthia's would
be very obscure, if they borrowed not that light they have from the Sun of men's
favor. Or suppose we are so candid and ingenuous as to grant them beautiful,
yet we may see by experience, that their Beauty is like a sweet and much
coveted Banquet, which is no sooner tasted but its delicious Luxury is
swallowed up by Oblivion. Let us think with our selves, That there is no
conformation of lineaments, no composition of features, no symmetry of parts so
exactly combined and compacted in one person, but a critical eye may discover
some imperfection: fairest Cynthia is not without her spots, nor beautiful
Venus without her moles.

2. If you would be cured of the Fever of Lust, into which the Strange Woman
will endeavor to cast you, use a moderate, slender and ascetick Diet: Be
content with that with which Nature her self will be contented, and then Natura
p^ucis contenta. Sen.
a little will suffice you; and if you do this, Nunquam aliud natura aliad
sapientia dicit. Hor.
you will act according to the Rules of Discretion and Prudence. Use Fasting
and severe Abstinence, which are the proper Abscissions of the instruments and
temptations of lust. And to this is reducible a restraint from all morose
delectation, and looser banqueting: You must not desire to be fed at Vitellius
his board; you must not desire Nero's effeminate baths, nor Tiberius his naked
Pictures to incite your lust; you must not hunt all grounds, draw all seas,
search every brook and bush, or dispeople the four Elements to please your
wanton lusts, and try experiments upon your judicious palates; but as you must
abstain from Vt s^mper abstineas ab illicitis aliquando etiam a licitis. Sen.
things unlawful, so also from lawful too: You must not only take care you
transcend not the Bounds of Temperance and Moderation, but you must sometimes
abridge your selves of your necessary repast; assuring your selves, That the
more Quanto quisque sibi plura neg averit a diis plura feret. Horat.
you deny your selves, the more you shall receive from God. It Is storied of
Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, (styled also Make-King,) that in the great
Battle at Ferrybrigg between Henry the Sixth and Edward the Fourth, when he
perceived his side almost worsted by Henry the Sixth, he slew his Horse with
his own Sword, and then uttered these Heroic expressions, Let all that will
fight stay with me; and then (according to the Ceremony of those times) kissing
the Cross upon his Sword, he fought with singular courage and prowess: So in
the conflict between our Lusts and us, let us kill and mortify our Bodies,
which (in the language of Socrates) are our Soul's Horses, and then excite
every Faculty of our Souls with these words, Let all that will fight stay with
me; and when we have done thus, let us kiss and take up our Cross, and fight
stoutly under Christ the Captain of our Salvation against our Lusts; it being
impossible to keep the Spirit pure, whilst it is overburdened with too much
Flesh, and exposed to all entertainments of Enemies by fomentations and
pamperings; remembering the divine counsel of the (...). Hierocl.
Philosopher, That we must not take care for the Body simply as the Body, but
as subservient to the Soul. And that you may be the better induced to do this,
remember (as the forecited Author (...).
has well said, That your Soul is your self, but your Body yours; for it is the
Soul which uses, but that which is used by it is the Body: And by this
separation of the Soul from the Body, you will preserve your nature from
confusion, nor think that things (...) which are without concern you, nor
contend for those as for your self, and so consequently avoid too much care of
your body; not resembling those, that, so that Sumpter-horse the Body be hung
with gaudy Trappings, and pampered, care not with what rags they cloth the
Soul. We may also consider that these high pamperings and feasting our selves
have no real pleasure in them; and this I am sure was the Orators judgment,
when he said, Nolim mihi fingere asotos, qui in mensam vomant, and qui de
conviviis auferantur, crudi^ se postridie rursus ingurgitent, qui Solemn (ut
ajunt) n^^ Occidentem unquam viderint nec Orient^m, qui consumptis patrimoniis
egent, nemo nostrum istius generis asotas jucunde putat vivere. Tull. de
Finibus Bonor. and Malor.
I would not fancy or imagine with my self as if luxurious gluttons lived
pleasantly, and such who vomit upon the table again what but now they took off,
and with their crude stomachs, carried from Feasts, the next day ingurgitate
themselves into them again; who, by reason of their laziness and surfeiting,
see the Sun neither rise nor set, and are in indigency of those Estates which
they have profusely expended: none of us (says he) ever thought such gluttons
as these live a pleasant life. And the same Author tells us, In tenuissimo ego
victu, i. e. escis contemptissimis and potionibus non minorem voluptatem
percipi arbitror quam rebus exquisitissimis ad epulandu^. Tull. ibid.
That there is no less pleasure to be taken in a slender and spare diet, then
in the most exquisite dainties; there being no less delight in the Persian
Nasturtium, then in the richly furnished Syracusan Tables, so much cried down
and discommended by Plato. Put this shall suffice for the second Recipe: and my
third is this.

3. Secure your Heart so well that no ill thought creeps into it, and proves an
incentive to lust; let not the smallest ventricle of your heart conceive an
evil thought, lest at last it bring forth sin. One little Fly will taint and
corrupt a great quantity of flesh; and so one little thought hovering about thy
heart (like a little Fly) will quickly taint it. Be sure therefore (like the
Emperor Domitian Sueton. in vit Domitian.
always to be catching and killing these Flies. Consider, that if you indulge
your selves in wicked thoughts and lustings, there wants nothing to the
consummation of the act but some convenient circumstances, which because they
are not then attainable, the act is for a time impeded, but the malice nothing
abated: For Lex non concupiscendi, origines d^lictorum, i. e. concupiscentias
and voluntates non minus quam facta cond^mnat. Tertull. de Pudicit.
the Law of Not coveting no less forbids sinful desires and concupiscences then
sinful actions; for no man desires of lusts after any thing but what pleases
him: But every complacency or delight in an unlawful matter, although short and
transient, nay, although at last repulsed and cohibited from breaking out into
an external act, has contracted by that very motion the blemish and spot of an
internal sin. And hence S. Augustine, following the Doctrine of S. Paul,
affirms, Peccatum est, quia illi inest inobedientia contra dominatum mentis.
Aug. lib. 5. c. 3. contra Julian.
That the concupiscence of the flesh is sin in a good man, Because he has in
him a disobedience and reluctance against the government of the rational
faculty. Again, He sins that inwardly lusts or desires, although he follow
not those desires by a consequent act, Because such motions are not pure
passions, but involve negations of due acts which ought to have been in lieu
thereof: A man may be incestuous Incesta est sin^ stupro anima quae stup^um
quae* rit. Sen.
that never bodily commits the act; and from these impure fires, which men
kindle and cherish within them, they are usually in love with their deformed
lusts, as Alcaeus was with the warts Naevus in vul^u delectat Alcaeum, erat
deformitas, at illi placebat. Cic.
in his Boys face, though they are deformed marks. When Brutus and Cassius
assaulted Caesar with a design and resolution to murder him, we read* that as
soon as he saw Brutus he cried out, (...); And art thou here my Son, my
Darling? and opened his breast to him. So when any Lust comes to assault us
with a design to make us dead in sin, we court and caress it in Caesar's words,
Art thou here, my Darling? and open our hearts and breasts unto it; whereas we
should always be prepared with preservatories against it.

4. Let your discourse be always chaste and pure: Decline with great care all
undecent obscenity in your language, chastening and confining your tongue, and
restraining it with Grace; for, as St. James tells us, Jam. 3. 2. If any man
offend not in word (tongue) the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle
the whole body. Either be silent, or speak those things which are better then
silence, is a good Rule here. Every bad tree is known by its bad fruit, and an
unclean man may be traced by his unclean discourse; it being a shrewd symptom
the Will is depraved, when our Discourse is unchaste and obscence. And in this
(...). Hierocl.
Hierocles concurrs with me; The Will of man (says he) adhering long neither
to Virtue nor Vice, utters forth expressions inclining to both, as resembling
the contrary affections in it. This advice therefore of Tyrius Maximus is very
sovereign; (...). Tyr Max^m.
I require such a pleasure in words which Virtue may not disdain to make her
Waiting Woman and attend upon her. St. James calls the Tongue a fire, Jam. 3.
6. And the Schoolmen call the Lusts of the Flesh (Fomes) Tinder. Let us
therefore be careful that the Fire of our Tongue light not upon this Tinder,
and kindle it. Modesty and a becoming Blush is the Fence of all Virtue; and
when this is broken down by obscene talk, the Banks will over flow with impure
Streams. A Rose, when it has lost its blush, and begins to look pale, by those
symptoms you may conclude that it is a dying. It has ever been accounted a true
Rule, Qualis Vir, talis Oration. We know the Bird by the Tune, the Beagle by his
Mouth, and a Man by his Words. We cannot expect that he that has lost his
voice with his Chastity should sing Praises to God so melodiously as another
that is chaste, virtuous, and continent. A stinking breath is not a more sure
symptom of putrid Lungs, then an obscene Tongue of an unclean Heart. 'Twere
better that this Clapper stood still, except it could give a purer sound; it
were better this Clock never struck, except it were for other ends then to
awaken our Lusts, and put them in motion. And I look upon obscene discourse but
as an impure Breath coming out of the mouth, which is fit for nothing but to
make an Exhalation or Ignis fatuus, which (if we follow it) will lead us into
Bogs and precipices of Uncleanness; but if we fall down, and prostrate our
selves before God in Prayer, it will quickly be dissolved: Wherefore,

5. Let us use frequent and earnest Prayers to God, to give us the assistance
of his holy Spirit; for this Devil of Lust sometimes cannot be cast out but by
Prayer. When the Romans were in great distress, and surprised with a sudden
assault of their Enemies, they ran to the Temple to get Arms, which were laid
there against an extraordinary occasion: So, if we shall be at any time
assaulted by our Lusts, let us have recourse to the Temple of God, and take up
the Arms of the Church, which are Prayers and Tears. We must not (as Nero did
at the burning of Rome) sing Paeans and rejoice, when our Bodies (those Temples
of the Holy Ghost) are burning with the flames of Lust. Numa Pompilius, when
news was brought him that his Enemies were ready to surprise him, put off the
Messenger with this ready memorable speech, (...), I am offering a sacrifice to
God: So, when we have any news of being surprised by our Lusts, we may return
the same answer; It Is enough if we are at our Prayers, which will secure and
guard us from them. Plutarch reports of a Boy, who though he was burnt with a
coal that fell from the Altar, yet continued his oblation of Sacrifice without
intermission: So let us (though we are sometimes burned with the fire of Lust)
be so fervent in our Prayers to God, that the fervency of them may exceed and
draw away the heat of our Lusts, as a great Fire does the heat which was caused
by a less.

6. Avoid Idleness, and be sure always to be well employed. I may give an idle
man that character one Simul ac se remiserat, nec causa suberat quare laborem
ferret luxuriosus, dissolutus, libidinosus, ac intemperans reperiebatur.
gives of Themistocles when out of employment, That he will be luxurious,
dissolute, lustful, and intemperate. Man's heart is a Mill ever grinding some
grist or other; and I may add, If there be no grain for it to work upon, it
sets it self on fire with lust. Let us consider, that whilst we are idle, and
not employed, we can expect no assistance from God, if we should be assaulted
by Lust: according to that of the Historian, Ubi socordiae atque ignaviae te
dederis, nequicquam Deos implores, irati atque in festi sunt. Salust.
When we once give our selves over to idleness, we shall in vain implore the
aid and assistance of God, for then he is angry and offended at us. No, no, let
us rather be in continual action and employment, and be diligently conversant
in our several lawful vocations: For (as the same Author tells us) Non votis
neque supplicationibus muliebribus auxilia Deorum parantur, vigiland^, agendo,
been consulendo, prospere omnia cedent. Sal. de Bell. Lat.
We cannot by a few weak Prayers only and faint Supplications obtain aid and
assistance from God; but by watching, and being in continual action and
consultation, all things will succeed prosperously unto us. It was a saying of
Appius Clodius, Negotium melius populo Romano qu^m otium committi quod imperia
praepotentia agitatione rerum ad virtutem capessendam excitarentur. Flor. l^b 3.
That it were better for the Romans to be busied and employed, then remiss and
idle; Because great Empires by agitation and motion are excited to Virtue. And
it was another complaint, Res disciplinae inimicissima otium mil^tes corrupit.
Pater^ lib. 2.
That Idleness (that great enemy to Discipline) corrupted and spoiled the Roman
Soldiers. And so may we complain, that Idleness hinders us in our Spiritual
Warfare against our Lusts. Whilst Atalanta was employed in hunting with Diana,
she kept her Virginity pure and immaculate; but when she fell into Idleness,
she indulged her self in the gratification of her insatiable Lusts: So, whilst
our Souls are employed in hunting after knowledge, and other things which are
commendable and praiseworthy, they may preserve themselves from Lust and
Uncleanness. It was a saying of a Latin Poet, Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis
arcus. Ovid. de Remed. Amor.
Take away Idleness, and you break Cupids Bow: And I may say, with more then
Poetical Authority, Take away Idleness, and you break the Devils Bow: for
Idleness is the Bow out of which the Devil shoots the fiery Darts of his
Temptations at us. And if, after all these Means used, you cannot contain your
selves within the bounds of Chastity, then

7. Enter the sacred Bonds of Matrimony: It Is far better thou should marry
then burn. Take St. Paul's counsel, who, 1 Cor. 7. 2.
to avoid fornication, bids every man have his own Wife, and every woman have
her own Husband. And though I cannot but esteem a single life and holy
Caelibate (which was consecrated by the holy Jesus in his proper person) to be
an excellent Virtue; yet since every one has not that gift of continence which
our Savior had, and God has instituted Matrimony as an Ordinance, and the
holy Jesus hallowed it and made it honorable with the expense of the first
Miracle (we read) he ever performed on Earth, and made it more sublimate by
making it a Representation of the Union betwixt Him and his Spouse the Church;
it is a thing highly commendable in it self, and to be made use of as a great
Preservative against inordinacies in our Affections and unruly Passions: And a
Learned Author puts it in the Catalogue of such Arts Sine quibus vita commode
duci nequit. Grot. de Jur. Bell. and Pac.
without which a man cannot live well and happily; and says, That although to
live a single life is not totally repugnant to Humane Nature, yet it is
repugnant to the Nature of most Men; Because a single life and caelibate are
only fitted for the most excellent Minds, and such as are refined from the
dross of impure concupiscence. And another Author brings in Romulus speaking to
his neighboring Nations, Ne graventur homines cum hominibus genus and
sanguinem miscere. L^v Decad. lib. 1.
That they would not grudge to mix themselves together in a joint Alliance and
Consanguinity. And though the Roman State seemed to countenance a single life,
because they afforded Dignities to certain Vestal Virgins, yet the number of
those Vestals was but small; and then the Dignities and Privileges which they
had were no other but that they were made equal in State to married Wives; they
were preferred before all that lived unmarried, but not before married persons.

But whilst I am speaking of this Order of Vestal Nuns, I cannot but endeavor
to excite in you an abhorrency of those destructive Nunneries into which the
Papists cast their Virgins in their infancy, and before they come to maturity
of years, or are (which they can never be) able to judge of the strength of
their own continency. Into what Stews have these Nunneries been frequently
converted, by reason of restraining those from the sacred Ligament of Marriage
who have not so absolute a command over themselves as to abstain from unlawful
carnality? How is that sacred Fire, which among the Romans of old was preserved
by their Vestal Virgins, by these changed into Flames of Lust, which all their
Holy Water will never allay or extinguish? Oh! that these sottish abusers of
the Holy Ordinance of God called Marriage would but call to mind how the
blessed and immaculate Virgin (our Saviors Mother) was betrothed to Joseph,
lest honorable Marriage might be disreputed, and seem inglorious, by a
positive rejection from any participation of that transcendent honor! I could
heartily wish that these our Romanists would but imitate the brave example of
the old Romans, who thought none eligible to be Jupiters Priests but such as
were Married; and (as Tacitus and Suetonius tell us) set a Fine upon their
heads who refused to be united in the holy Bonds of Matrimony. It was out of
respect to this, that the Emperor Augustus sent for Germanicus his Children,
and hugging and caressing them in his Royal breast, signified by his
countenance, and other signs of his hand, that others ought to imitate
Germanicus in marrying with joy and alacrity.

And thus you see I have asserted and maintained the laudable Privilege and
Ordination of Marriage; and now cannot but be convinced that you think, in this
my last Recipe of Marriage I have prescribed you pleasanter Physic then in any
of the former: If therefore you cannot obtain a cure from them, you may from
this joined to them. Suetonius tells us, that Galba selected a Jewel to
beautify and adorn the Goddess Fortune; which (on the sudden) as if it
deserved a more sacred Deity, he dedicated to Venus. But I hope, that we, after
we have selected those Pearls of price our Souls for Gods service, shall not
dedicate them to Venus and our sensual appetites, for we are most certainly
informed by the Text, That the end thereof is bitter as wormwood, and sharp as
a two-edged sword.

FINIS.

