A CONTROVERSY Between the Quakers and Bishops, OCCASIONED By the Bishops
summoning them to their Courts, and calling them in question for Matters of
Religion: Contrary to the Practice of Christ and the Apostles, who never forced
any about Religion and Worship: and contrary to the Kings Promises, Speeches
and Declarations, which says. No man shall be disquieted for different
Opinions in Matters of Religion, they living peaceably under the Government;
which the Quakers do, and no man can charge them to the contrary.

TOGETHER With several Religious Reasons recorded concerning the conscientious
Nonconformity of the Quakers, to those things, that are by the Bishops Courts
imposed upon them.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1663.

TO the Bishops, and all others, that call us in Question for matters of
Religion, contrary to the Kings Declaration at Bredah, and contrary to his
Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, and contrary to his Speech to
both Houses of Parliament, Feb. 18. 1662. being the first day of their Meeting
after their prorogation; in which he refers them to his Declaration set forth
upon the 26. of December. not doubting (as he says) of their concurrence
therein: where he further says, The truth is, I am in my nature an Enemy to
all severity for Religion and Conscience, how mistaken soever I be, when it
extends to a capital and sanguinary punishment.

Now are they Friends, or Enemies, to the King and his Subjects, that act thus
contrary to his Declaration and Speech? let your fruits judge. Also the King
says, That if the Dissenters in matters of Religion, will demean themselves
peaceably and modestly under the Government, I could heartily wish I had such a
power of indulgence to use upon occasion, as might not needlessly force them out
of the Kingdom, or staying here, give them cause to conspire against the peace
of it. Now has not our peaceable deportment been manifested both to the King
and Council, and to all men? and has not your deportment in afflicting his
best and peaceablest Subjects, been to the forcing of them out of the Land, and
for the forcing of others to conspire and plot against you? which practice is
contrary to us and our Principle, for our Practice and Principle has been, and
is, to suffer; and when you strike us on the one cheek, we can turn the other
to you, and show forth a peaceable Christian life, though you act contrary both
to the Kings Nature and Word; who would not have capital and sanguinary
penalties imposed upon his good Subjects, which you do, about matters of
Religion, and differences of Opinion.

And whether do you not act contrary to the Act of Parliament, made against
those that meet, under pretense of religious Worship, who are enemies to the
King and hold dangerous Opinions? which practices and carriages we are against:
Yet does not this Act allow four to meet besides the Family where such Meetings
shall be? So consider, and see whether in your practices you mind this Act of
Parliament, or whether you use not more severity, than is agreeable to the
Kings mind and Declaration: For we have the Word of a King, that we shall not
be disturbed, nor called in question in matters of Religion, living peaceably.
And since the King in his Declaration on the 26 of December. 1662. has renewed
his former Word of a King, in his Speeches and Declarations, saying, As
concerning the nonperformance of our Promises, we remember well the very words
of those from Bredah, (to wit) says the King, We do declare a Liberty to
tender Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted or called in question,
for differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the
peace of the Kingdom; and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to us, for the full
granting of that Indulgence. We remember well the confirmations we have made of
them since upon several occasions in Parliament: And as all these things are
still fresh in our Memory, so we are still firm in the resolution of performing
them to the full. For (says the King) we do conceive our selves so far engaged
both in honor, and in what we owe to the peace of our Dominions; which we
profess we can never think secure, whilst there shall be a color left to the
malicious and disaffected, to inflame the minds of so many multitudes upon the
score of Conscience, with despair of ever obtaining any effect of our promises
for their ease.

Now do not you in your actions go about to make the Kings Word of none effect,
and his Speeches and Promises, which is to tender Consciences and peaceable
people? does not your fruits and actions against the Kings peaceable Subjects,
and tender Consciences in matters of Religion, declare a contrary mind than the
King intends? Is not your actions and fruits judged by his Words and
Declarations, which is put forth to the public view of his Dominions, how
contrary they are to the Word of a King and his Speeches and Declarations. You
have disquieted peaceable people in matters of Religion, and called them in
question: Are not these actions of yours like to inflame the minds of people?
Also the King says, I hope you have all so good an opinion of my Zeal for the
Protestant Religion, as I need not tell you, I will not yield to any therein,
not to the Bishops themselves, nor in my liking the uniformity of it, as it is
now established, (which being the Standard of our Religion, must be kept pure
and uncorrupted, free from all other mixtures;) yet if the Dissenters will
demean themselves peaceably and modestly under the Government, I could heartily
wish I had such a power of Indulgence to use upon occasions, as might not
needlessy force them out of the Kingdom, nor give them cause to conspire
against the peace of it.

And thus you may see the Kings Zeal to his Word and Promises, you that act
upon his Subjects contrary to his Word and Promises and Speeches: And does not
your actions show that you have not love to him, not his Subjects, but to your
selves? How can people be subject to you, who go against the Kings Word and
Promises? Is not this the way to draw away the love and affections of all
people from you?

From us the peaceable people of God, called Quakers, in the behalf of the
Kings Speeches and Declarations to them that break them.
Written the 19. day of the 8. Month 1663.
Bishops and Commissaries Queries to the Quakers.
B. WHen were you at Church?


Q. Where is my Accusers? Paul called for his Accusers, when he was called
before the Judgment Seats of the Heathens and Jews.

Churchwarden. I accuse you.


Q. What Neighbor, Art thou my Accuser? Do thou not know that the Church is
in God? Had not Priseilla and Aquilla a Church in their house? Neighbor, Art
thou not a Christian? Do thou not know this?


B. and Com. Have you received Sacrament? Were you married with a Priest? Do
you hear Divine Service? Was your Children signed with the Sig of the Cross? Do
you pay your Tithes to the Minister?


Q. Where is my Accusers? Let them appear in open Court before my face. I am
not to accuse my self, it is contrary to Law.

Churchwarden. I am thy Accuser.


Q. Then I will hold forth my Testimony. I was married according to the
Scriptures: And the Scripture speaks of no Sacrament, nor Signing with the Sign
of the Cross, nor paying of Tithes to Gospel Ministers, nor sprinkling of
Infants, nor Godfathers nor Godmothers: If you can prove me these things in the
Scriptures of the New Testament, then I Will conform to them.


B. and Com. When did you hear your Minister? and when received yon the
Sacrament? Was you married with a Priest?


Q. Where is my Accusers?


B. and Com. Here is none answers to the Question.


Q. It is contrary to Law to examine me upon Interrogatories, or that any
should accuse themselves, or bear witness against themselves. Do thou not
know that it is 100 l. penalty upon any that shall cause any to accuse
themselves; either under pretense of Letters Patents under the Great Seal, or
other wise? See the Stature in 1642. for taking away the High Commission Court;
which clause was never yet abolished.


B. Why do you not come to the Church? give a reason why you will not come.


Q. I demand of thee the Kings Pattent, with his Seal, and his Hand and Arms,
for keeping thy Court, before I speak to thee any more, for many may keep
Courts, and not show their Authority, and by that I may be brought into
bondage; so I would see thy Pattent, with the Kings Seal, and Hand, and Arms:
And secondly, I would know the reason of thee why you forsook us near about 20
years ago, and left your Church, that by this time I might have turned an
Heathen, a Turk, or a Jew, and my soul might have been lost for you, for who
has watched over me, and been my Keeper about this 20. years? but you have
left me, and I have had neither Sermon, nor Exhortation, nor Epistle, nor
Collect from you, though the Lord God has been my Watcher over me, and my
Overseer, who is now my Teacher; and do you think that the Lord will not
require his Flock at your hands, which you left almost 20 years to the Wolves
and Dogs, to tear out fleece and flesh, and to destroy the sheep? and then will
he not require the fleece, if he require the sheep and his flock, which you
have left to Wolves and Dogs, to tear the fleece off the backs of them: For how
have Anabaptists, and Independants, and Presbyterians, torn the flesh off the
backs of the sheep, and imprisoned the sheep to death; and you in the time of
persecution, neither sent Epistle, nor Collect, nor Exhortation to the sheep,
nor mattered not for them, nor cared not for them: For if a man hire a man to
keep a flock of sheep, and have so many delivered into his hand, and the
Hireling-Shepherd has so much a year, will not the Master or the Lord require
both sheep and fleece of the hireling-Shepherd, if he see a Wolf or a Dog,
which may be called, the usurping Power, come to worry the Sheep, and he fly
away in time of persecution, is not this an Hireling that flies because he is
an Hireling, and does not care for the sheep; and not like David, who defended
his sheep from the Bear and the Lion: and so if the Shepherd suffer any of the
Sheep to be worryed, or fleece to be torn off, will not the Master or Lord
require both his fleece, and his sheep of the Shepherd? for does not the Lord
say, He will require both the sheep, and the fleece; so consider, and judge
your selves in this case, and do not ask me a reason why I do not come to the
Church, but answer me this, Why you left me as a Sheep to all the Wolves; for
we have the Kings Speeches, and Declarations, and Promises, and Word of a King,
for Liberty of Conscience, that none should call us in question, if we live
peaceably under his Government: Therefore what have you to do to call us in
question, contrary to the Kings Speech and Declaration and Word of a King, we
being peaceable? as you may read his late Declaration. And there is an Act,
that four may meet; so I may meet with my own Family by the Act of Parliament.
And so if you will give me a reason why you forsook us, and prove all your
Practice, Worship, and Religion, by Scripture; and whether or no, Paul and the
Apostles, and Timothy and Titus the Bishops, had Tippits, Hoods, Rayls, Altars,
Surplices, in their Worship: And whether or no did John Baptize Christ in a
Font, and signed him with the Sign of the Cross? and whether or no, had he a
Godfather and Godmother? yea, or nay: And whther or no, those several thousands
that Peter Baptized, were Baptized in a Font, and signed with the Sign of the
Cross? And whether had all those Godfathers and Godmothers? And whether or no,
the Eunuch, when Philip baptized him, whether he baptized him in a Font, with
the Sign of the Cross? And if so, who were their Godfathers and Godmothers? and
where stood the Font? and who Commanded the Cross? Answer me these things by
Scripture, and convince me by Scripture of these things; for we are to search
the Scriptures, whether these things be so as you speak; and to try all things,
and hold fast that which is good. And we are to lay hands on no man suddenly,
nor to presume above what is written. Thou know this is Scripture. Read the
Corinthians, and the other Epistles. And whether or no, if the Wolf come again,
that you will set your hand to a Paper, that you will never forsake the Flock
again, but that you will suffer imprisonment with us, and send us Collects, and
Epistles, and Exhortations from Scripture? And whether or no, the Apostles, or
Christ, or Timothy or Titus, had Pa^iters to summon in people to hear them? and
if they would not hear them and come to their Meeting Place, excommunicate them
before they were of their Religion, or knew what it was, and before they had
convinced them by sound Doctrine, and good conversation? And whether
Excommunication be not to such as be of their Church, and knows their
Principles, and which does some bad thing, for which they are excommunicated,
and put out of their Assembly? And is this reason to excommunicate such as was
never of their Church, and do not know their principles or Doctrine, nor cannot
be charged with a bad Conversation, and before they be convinced by sound
Doctrine, or good conversation, concerning your Religion and Worship? Answer me
these things, yea, or nay.


Friend:
THy Carriage, and Behavior at the Town of Vlverston, the 24. day of the 8.
Month, 1663. was not becoming a Christian, not becoming the Gospel, as thou and
thy Company was taken notice of by most of the people, and was judged not to be
civil, nor wise, not becoming a spiritual man, nor a spiritual Court; for when
thy Patent, and the Kings Broad Seal was demanded for keeping thy Court, thou
causedst a thing to be read in an unknown Tongue, amongst simple illiterate
Country men, which the people knew not what it was. Is not this contrary to
Paul's Doctrine, who said, he would not speak in an unknown Tongue? And when the
people could not understand, thou calledst them silly fellows and pitiful
fellows, in a deriding way. If thou had been the wiser man, thou should
have read thy Paper in English to them, that they mighty have known what thou
had said, and that would have manifested to the Auditors that thou had been
a wiser man than they; but thou did manifest the contrary, whose words was to
trap and catch and ensnare, and caused some to be haled away from before thee,
and to have their Hats pulled off, and to be smitten on the mouth, (Like the
high Priest Ananias, when he sat as Judge of the Apostle Paul) when they would
not answer to thy ensnaring Questions. And this thou did to the people of God
called Quakers, publicly, as a reproach upon them; but those of other
persuasions thou did take into a private place, and so actedst partially. And
further to ensnare them, thou askedst of them. Whether the King had not power
to appoint places for public Worship, and to give forth Laws to force or
compel people to come to them? and whether such Laws was not grounded upon, or
agreeable to the Law of God? requiring them to answer either yea, or nay; and
thou sat as Judge, to put those Laws in Execution upon offender, and
endeavored to make a man an offender for a word, when he was not convicted of
the transgression of any known Law, nor no accuser heard to speak to his face
in the Court.

Now does the Law of the Spirit of Life force or compel any by an Arm of flesh,
outward weapons, or corporal punishments, to Religion or Worship? If so, does
it not contradict the practice of the Apostle, who said, Let nothing be done
through strife; but in love and in meekness instruct, etc. And whether or no,
Timothy and Titus, who were Bishops, had any such Courts and Laws to force and
summon people before them, and to threaten them with Houses of Correction, and
other penalties? If so, Whether was not the Law of love abolished, and Jews
Laws set up? for he that loves, is of God, and he that loves not, is not of
God. And this is to thee to answer thy self.

And as for the Kings giving forth Laws to force people, he has sufficiently
declared his mind, both by Promises, Speeches, Declaration, and the Word of a
King, several time, which the people are not ignorant of, but think it strange
to see that thou should so slight his Speeches, and make light of them, and
cry Law, Law, but show none; and ask tempting Questions, Whether the King might
not make Laws to force people? and so goes by Ifs and Queries and Doubts, and
lays away instruction.

Wherefore did Cain hate and persecute his Brother Abel? was it not about
Religion and Sacrifice, or Worship? And did not the Apostle, a spiritual man
say, Love not as Cain? Now judge thy self and thy love.

And thou said, That the Quakers had forfeited their Liberty by many
misdemeanors, and some was in prison for it: But we know of none that was
imprisoned upon that account, but for Conscience sake toward God: Oh Lord, for
righteous Judgment thou judge righteously: For if one or two had gone forth
from the Truth, and their peaceable Principles, would thou judge all the body of
that people? Would the Lord have destroyed Lot with the Citizens of Sodom? or
did he destroy all the Jews because some of them transgressed? Did Christ judge
all the Disciples, be cause of one Judas? Oh unrighteous Judgment! Will thou
accuse a people openly in sight of a Country, with the forfeiture of their
Liberty, and cannot prove it. Consider of this, and do as thou would be done
by; and do not cast away the Law and the Prophets. Would thou be forced to be
an Independent, or a Presbyterian, or an Anabaptist, or a Papist, or a Turk, or
a Jew, or to worship the Gods of the Heathen? Was not these upheld by the
Ordinances of men? and are not some of them so upholden at this day? and
whether thou would submit to any of these Ordinances, if put to thee by any
of the upholders of them, according to thy own Argument, so often urged to the
Quakers? And, was not Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, that would not bow to
Nebuchadnezars Image; And Mordecai, that would not bow to Haman; and the Jews
that would not bow to the Laws of the Heathen; and those that would not bow to
the Beast, that compelled all, both small and great, to worship him: was not
all these transgressors of the Ordinances of men? which thou so much speaks of,
Being subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. Which Scripture
relates not to Religion and Worship, not forcing people to Religion contrary to
their Consciences, but to the punishment of evildoers, and the praise of them
that do well: And this, is the Will of God. And the Apostle says, Touch not
the Ordinances of men, when he speaks in matters of Religion: For the other was
a civil thing, and in such cases we are subject for the Lords sake. And the
Apostle denied the Ordinances of the Jews, and the Ordinances of the Gentiles,
and witnessed Christ come for the blotting out of the Ordinances of the Jews.
And did not the Disciples transgress the Ordinances of men, when they were
commanded, to speak no more in the Name of Jesus, by the Jews? And has not
all the Christian and Protestant Martyrs, that have suffered since the Apostles
days, transgressed, the Ordinances of men? and whether or no had they
suffered, if they could have submitted to the Ordinances of men in matters of
Religion, seeing thou make no difference between matters of Religion, and the
Ordinances that are appointed for the punishment, of evildoers, nor between
the temporal and spiritual, that which commands temporal things, and that which
commands in matters of Worship; but cryest, we have a Law? we have a Law; Like
as the Jews did to Christ, If any man say he is a Son of God, etc. Also did
not the Christians transgress the Ordinances of men, when Saul went with his
Packet of Letters from the high Priest, to hale men and women before their
Judgment Seats? And who is like him in this work at this day? And whether or
no, ever any of the Martyrs did suffer for disobeying temporal Ordinances, that
commands temporal things, or for disobeying such as was for matters of
Conscience, Religion, and the Worship of God. Answer these things, and make a
clear Distinction between spiritual and temporal transgressions, and between
spiritual and temporal Ordinances.

And now whereas that Scripture was so often urged, Submit to every Ordinance
of man for the Lords sake: Whether those Ordinances, now so much pleaded for,
(which you have forsaken and left near twenty years,) be the Ordinances of man,
which are to be obeyed for the Lords sake? And whether you have not disobayed
God in forsaking them so long? And whether or no, your leaving the people
first, and the Flock, in times of persecution, and perilous times, and times of
the Wolf, has not manifested you Hirelings, and your Gospel to be of men? And
you thus leaving the people and the Flock, might they not all have turned Jews,
Turks and Heathens for you?

And so for you now to cite and excommunicate young people for not being of
your Religion, that never knew the grounds of it, and many others, and to put
them out of your Assemblies before they had got in, and before you had by found
Doctrine and good Conversation convinced them to be of your Religion, is
contrary to the Kings Word, which says, they should not be called in question
for matters of Religion, they living peaceably; and you cannot accuse any of
the Quakers for unpeaceable lives, whom thou call in question.

And the Independents, Presbiterians, and Baptists brought the same Scripture
to us for subjection to their Ordinances, and made no more distinction than
thou do, of Ordinances of men, for the Lords sake, and those which are for
the punishment of evill-doers. And did not Presbyterians, Independents, and
Baptists, bring Scripture to you? Submit, etc. And whether you did well in
disobeying it, or not? For the Lord may suffer men to give forth Ordinances for
the trial of his people, which may not be in truth; as may be seen in the
Scriptures of truth in many places; and may come from such as thou art, which
is contrary to God and the King. Read the Scriptures of the New Testament, and
the Kings Speeches and Declaration.

From the People called Quakers, occasioned by their appearance before the
Commissary for the Bishop of York, in Chester; before whom they were brought as
Offenders, for the tenderness of their Consciences in matters relating to
Religion, and the Worship of God, and not for the transgression of the Law,
which is for the punishment of evildoers, and Profane persons; for we are one
with the Law that takes hold of such.

A Direction from the Apostle to Timothy, to try Bishops and Ministers, before
they were to administer, whose Rule is left upon Record to this day, for all
Christians to do the same.
Ow if a man covet the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. And

First A. Bishop must be blameless.

Secondly, He must he the husband of one Wife. Take notice of the Apostles Rule.

Thirdly, He must be sober, discreet, mannerly, harberous; is he indiscreet? is
he unmannerly? does he not harbor strangers? then he is besides the Apostles
Rule, if he do not these things.

Fourthly, He must be apt to teach, not given to much Wine; if he be given to
much Wine, and not apt to teach, he is besides the Apostles Rule.

Fifthly, He must be no fighter, not given to filthy lucre, but gentle;
abhorring fighting, abhorring covetousness, abhorring strife. Now we and all
People are to mark the Rule which a Bishop is to be ruled and measured by, the
order of the Apostle to Timothy.

Does he abhor covetousness? does he abhor strife? does he abhor fighting? for
wars, strife and fighting, comes from the lust; does he not strive with the
People of his Parish? does he not covet the Peoples gold, nor silver, nor
goods, nor apparel? does he abhor this? is there no noise of the sounding of
Platters, Pans, Pots and Kettles, nor no lowing of Oxen, nor bleating of Lambs?
is he not given to filthy lucre? is he gentle? if he be out of these
particulars, let him minister; if he be in those things, he is besides the
Rule, and out of the Apostles Order.

Sixthly, Bishop must rule his own house honestly, else how shall he take care
for the Church of God, if he cannot rule his own house well: Mark the Rule, his
own house must be ruled honestly, having obedient children, see his children
must be obedient and honest; and if he and they be not found in she Rule of the
Apostle, then they are judged by the Rule in the sight of all People.

Seventhly, A Bishop must not be a young Scholar, lest he swell, and be puffed
up, and fall into the judgment of the evil speaker. Mark; is he a young
Scholar? is he puffed up? does he swell? does he fall into the judgment of the
evil speaker? then he is besides the Rule, and judged by the Apostles Order.

Eighthly, A Bishop must also have a good report of them which are without,
lest he fall into the rebuke, and share, of the evil speaker. Mark, are they of
good report among them that are without? do they not fall into the rebuke and
snare of the evil speaker? Now all you Bishops and Ministers, mark whether you
be in the Apostles Order, and walk according to their Rule; for the eyes of
People are upon you, and the Apostles Rule and Order, to try you by it, whether
you be according to the Apostles Rule and Order, which was in the Primitive
times among the Christians before the apostasy, by which they made and tried
Bishops; and by the Order and Rule the Apostle gave to Timothy, to try
Ministers, even they the Ministers must be honest; they must not be double
tongued, nor evil speakers, but sober; they must not be given to much Wine,
neither greedy of filthy lucre. Mark your Rule and Order, which was before the
apostasy in the Primitive times among the Apostles. Now if they be not honest,
if they be double tongued, if they be evil speakers, if they be given to much
wine, if they be greedy of filthy lucre, then they are out of the Apostles Rule
and Order.

He must hold the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience. And let the Ministers
and Bishops first be tried, and if they be found blameless, then let them
minister. Now mark, ye Ministers and Bishops, are you proved and found
blameless concerning the particulars in the Apostles Charge above mentioned to
Timothy, concerning the Ministers and Bishops before the apostasy, for we
understand they were to be proved, according to the Apostles Charge in his
Order to Timothy, before they were to minister.

Also their Wives must be honest, not evil speakers, but sober, and faithful in
all things. Take notice of this Order; are their Wives honest? are they not
evil speakers? are they sober, and faithful in all things? if not, they are out
of the Apostles Rule and Order, and proved not to be blameless. And let the
Ministers or Deacons, be every one the Husband of one Wife, such as rule their
own children well, and their own households, for they that minister well, gets
themselves a good degree, and a great liberty in the faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

Now they whose Wives are evil speakers, not honest, not sober, nor faithful in
all things, who rules not their own childres, and households well, are out of
the Apostles Order to Timothy in the Primitive times, and has not gotten to
themselves a good degree, not liberty in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
And the Apostles Command to Timothy, who was a Bishop in the Primitive times,
was to forsake all ungodly, and old Wives fables, and cast them away. Now if
these Commands had been observed among Christians since the Apostles days, it
had been well; and it would be well if all People were reformed into this
Order, for it is they that rule well, that have the double honor, 1 Timothy 1.3,
4, 5.

Did Christ or the Apostles in the Primitive times, who preached the
Foundation, did they do it by Swords and Clubs, and Goals and Prisons, and
houses of Correction? did they plant Vineyards, and gather Congregations with
Swords and Pistols, and Muskets, and Clubs, and by summoning, and fineing, and
imprisoning, and excommunicating such as would not come to them, that are not
of them? was these their weapons that they gathered their Churches withal, and
set up the Primitive times was spiritual weapons, then are not you degenerated
and apostatized from the spiritual, into the carnal, and then you may say, In
the beginning it was not so, as it is with us; and so is not the weapons like
the men? if the men be carnal, their weapons carnal; if the men be spiritual,
their weapons spiritual; and does not all carnal-weaponed men build wood, hay,
straw and stubble upon the foundation, and then will not their works burn, and
they suffer loss in the day of Gods fire? and can any build any thing else,
but wood, hay and stubble upon the spiritual foundation that was laid in the
Primitive times, but spiritual weaponed men? and has not all Christendom
dishonored God, and Christ, and themselves, with their carnal weapons one
against another? and can the City of Christendom ever fulfill the Command of
Christ, which is to love one another, and to love enemies, with their carnal
weapons? Is not Christendom yet to learn this lesson, to love one another, and
to love enemies?

To Priest Bennet, or any other whom it may concern.
THis day being the 24 of 8. Month, 1663. I being called in question before
Joseph Cradock Minister of the Law, as he says, by Order from the King of this
Nation, to demand and know of me a reason why I come not to the place of
public Worship, set apart by the Law of the Land, and that I was enjoined
thereunto according to the Scriptures, to be subject to the Ordinances of man,
for the Lords sake. To which my answer was, prove the same for the Lords sake,
and I would be subject to it: And then he stopped, and referred me to the
Minister of the place where I do belong, which they said was Mr. Bennet, and
that thou might give me an answer to what I was not informed in, as to the
Law and matter in question; and in writing, my Questions and thy Answers, might
be brought to him John Cradock the 17 day of the next Month. Now that thou
might not be ignorant of the thing spoken of thee from J. Cradock to answer,
it hastens my writing herein.

And first I question, Whether those Houses, to which we are required to come
to worship, was builded by Command from God to worship in? Secondly, Or that
thou, or any other man in this Age, was called of God to wear Hoods, or Vails,
Tippets, Girdles, or Surplices, and to have the highest places there, and to be
called of men Master, and to take a Text of other men's words to speak from, and
take money of the people for the same and other like Offices, as speaking words
over people when they are dead, and to have a Bell to ring for them, or to
sprinkle Infants with water in a Font, and sign them with the Sign of the
Cross, and to have Godfathers and Godmothers answer? Whether these be Commands
of God, and ordained by him, and so to be obeyed for his sake, yea, or nay?
according to the Apostles words instanced to me by J Cradock. Now as thy Office
is to convince the gainsayer, according to the Scripture of truth, without
adding or diminishing, or any private Interpretation, answer me, that thereby I
may be convinced if I have erred from the Scriptures of truth, which ever was,
and is my delight to read and practice; and it was a grief to my spirit often
to see the same professed, and never regarded to practice; having found the
Teachers in this Age contrary to that in Timothy, how they should be qualified
that took upon them the Office of a Bishop or Deacon, or the like. So having
found men (whom I took for to be Teachers, and took upon them to teach)
contrary to what they spoke and read to me, I began to question whether they
were sent of God, or not, because I found them in the false Prophets steps,
bearing rule by their Means, and preaching for hire, devining for money, and
making a prey upon people, forcing them by a Law to pay them; I saw it was for
the Fleece they preached, for theirs, and not for them, for they might live
like wild Asses all the Week, if come to hear and pay them, that turns like the
Weathercock with every wind. Whether we are not to question such Teachers,
being found in this Age, and their spirits, that lead them to pride, pleasure,
drunkenness, envy, wrath and covetousness, striking and fighting? yea, or nay;
And to deny them, and their Worship, and Ordinances, now so much pleaded for,
which you have forsaken and left near 20. years, and your Flocks left in these
perilous times, when we could not tell whom to believe, there was so much
changing and alteration in matters of Worship and Religion, that no eye pitied
us; and then was the time of love from God to us the people called Quakers, who
was at our wits end, and had none to fly unto, but the Lord alone, who by his
promise so fulfilled to us, teaching his people himself (who is a Spirit) in
and by his Spirit put into our inward parts, his Law in our hearts, guiding his
people, and leading them by the same. And whether is any taught of the Lord,
but by his Spirit in them? yea, or nay: And whether this Spirit leads any
contrary to the Scriptures of truth? yea, or nay. And so now to prove unto me
all these practices of yours before mentioned, to be agreeable to the
Scriptures of truth, and that you can really say, you are led to what you do by
the Spirit of truth, which leads into all truth? And whether in this Age any
can worship God acceptably, but in this Spirit? And what Ordinances are they
the Apostle speaks of, Touch not, taste not, handle not, for they perish with
the using? And what handwriting of Ordinances are they, that by the Cross of
Christ was abolished and blotted out?

And whether the Ordinance Jos. Cradock speaks of, which is, to to be subject
to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, for the punishment of evil doers,
which the Apostle speaks of, Pet. 1.2. whether this Ordinance be an Ordinance
for the Worship of God and Religion, or for civil things? yea or nay. And so
distinguish to me, the Ordinance that is to be touched, and the Ordinance that
is not to be touched? And whether the Apostles and Martyrs did not suffer for
not obeying Ordinances in matters of Religion? And whether they did not obey
the Ordinances that commanded civil things, for the punishment of evildoers?
And whether he that will turn to any thing to save his means, and says he must
obey every Ordinance of man, be a Minister of Christ, or serves his own belly
and pocket, and turns from Power to Power, and shifts from place to place, to
get more means to save himself, be not the Fox that runs into holes? yea, or
nay; and watches for souls or means.

And whether I must obey any thing, but what is of Faith? and whether or no the
Apostle set up an Ordinance, that we should observe days and times, and
holy days, and Saints days, and some days we should eat no flesh, but fish?
And whether this Ordinance is to be obeyed for the Lords sake? yea, or nay.
Prove me these Ordinances by Scripture out of the New Testament. And whether
all the Ordinances of men in the world is to be submitted unto for the Lords
sake, seeing the Apostles words are general to every Christian man? And whether
then I must not be subject to the Turks Ordinances, the Popes Ordinances,
Presbyter John's, Tartars and Moguls Ordinances; for the word is, to every
Ordinance of man, and this word is general, without any limit. Now divide this
to me aright; for the Apostles were travelers up and down the Nations, and
their Epistles was general Epistles. And so is not this general subjection?
yea; or nay. And there is particular Epistles, and general Epistles.

And whether did John Baptist baptize Christ in a Font, and Sign him with the
Sign of the Cross, and had Godfathers and Godmothers? And whether Peter, who
baptized so many thousands, baptized them in a Font, and signed them with the
Sign of the Cross, and had Godfathers and Godmothers to them? yea, or nay. And
whether Philip baptized the Eunuch in a Font, and signed him with the Sign of
the Cross, and had Godfathers and Godmothers? and whether this was an Ordinance
among the Apostles? yea, or nay. And whether those be Gospel Ministers, that
was Hirelings to oversee the Flock, that went away from us 20. years ago, when
the Wolf came, by which our fleece was torn, and bodies cast into prison by the
Presbyterians and Independants, till some dyed. And yet the Hireling that went
from us, neither gave us Sermon, nor sent us Collect, nor Epistle, and now
summons us to hear them, or else excommunicates us because we will not hear
them, and many that does not know them, nor is not of their Church: And now
whether the Lord will not require both Flock and Fleece of him that left it?

And whether you will not set your hand to a Paper, that you will not forsake
us if the Wolf should come again after that you have made proof of these things
above mentioned by Scripture? for you know the Scripture says, We must try all
things, and hold fast that which is good: And lay hands on no man suddenly; for
we must search the Scriptures, whether those things be so or not: And we must
not presume above what is written. You know this is Scripture. And are not
these Ordinances to be obeyed? And whether Christ, Timothy, and Titus, and the
Apostles, had Pa^iters, and Courts, and took Fees of people, and said, Pay your
Fees, and be gone. Let me see Scripture for these things. And did Christ or the
Apostles summon up all that would not hear them? and excommunicated they all
that would not hear them? or whether they were to excommunicate them that were
of their own Church that had done some bad deed? yea, or nay. And whether those
be spiritual men, that read things in an unknown Tongue, and them that
understand it not, miscalls them, and gives them Names? And whether these be
spiritual, that vilifies men, and calls them out of their Names? yea, or nay.

Answer me these things, that I may not be deceived, and go into error.

JAMES LANCASTER.

Righteous and Religions Reasons grounded upon Scripture Arguments, recorded
and returned by way of Reply to the Bishops Officers, concerning the
conscientious nonconformity of the People of God, for which they are now
called in question, and cited in that called a Spiritual Court; and
particularly concerning their appearance upon citations before Joseph Cradock,
the 24. day of the 8 Month 1663. in the Parish public Meeting Place at
Ulverstone.
NOw the ground of proceedings was doubtful in the first place, being but the
negative Oath of those called Churchwardens, concerning a thing they neither
heard, nor saw; so that no plain proof can be produced against any, or all the
People called Quakers, whether they were at the place appointed for public
Worship, not unless they will accuse or excuse themselves, which would appear
ridiculous, and unreasonable, and contrary to the known Laws of England, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical, (so called) for any to accuse themselves in any case,
neither do we know that any Bishop, Chancellor, Commissary, Vicar, or Vicar
General, has any power, either under pretense of Letters Pattents under the
great Seal of England, or otherwise, to administer an Oath ex Officio, to
examine any man or woman or woman upon Interrogatories, whereby he, she, or
they, shall any ways accuse themselves; and therefore we shall not willingly
answer to any thing contrary to Law, Reason, Religion and Righteousness, to
our own prejudice, upon your importunity, under pretense of Legal Plea, when
nothing can be proved against us.

Nevertheless, least any should think that no Reason can be alleged, for
refusing to come to the Parochal, or Parish-Churches, as they are called; we
have for satisfaction to the simpler sort of People, set down something by way
of Reply, to this following general Question, so frequently propounded to the
People called Quakers, and others, the day above mentioned, (to wit)

Quest. What is the Reason that you do not come to the place appointed for
public Worship, to hear Divine-Service, and to be present at the performance
of several Offices, there to be performed according to His Majestyes Laws, etc.

Answ. 1. We understand the place prefixed and intended, is that Church or
Temple made with hands; and we know, that God who made the world, and all
things in it, dwells not in Temples made with hands; and that is one Reason
why we come not to it, because God dwells not there.

Secondly, The Lord has established the Mountain of his House in the top of
the Mountains; therefore neither at Jerusalem, not in Samaria's Mountain, nor
in Temples made with hands, is the places where men ought to worship, nor in
the Jews Synagogues, nor in the Ephesians Temple Diana, nor in the old Mass
Houses; but the hour comes, and now is, in which the true Christians do
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, and they are the Circumcision that
worships God in the Spirit. And this was the practice of the Primitive
Christians, who denied the Jews Synagogues, and Ordinances, although commanded
of God.

Thirdly, The Lord reproved Israel when she had forgotten her Maker, and began
to build Temples, saying, What House will you build for me, or where is the
place of my Rest? Is not the Heavens my Throne, and the Earth my Footstool?
yet will I look to this man that is humble, and of a contrite heart, that
trembles at my Word, and with this man will I dwell. And he has promised that
his Tabernacle shall be with men in the days of the New Covenant, saying, I Will
dwell in them, and walk in them, and I Will be a Father unto them, and they shall
be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God Allmighty. And these promises we
witness fulfilled; therefore we cannot be limited to time or place; for
wheresoever two or three are gathered together in the name of the Lord, he is
present in the midst of them.

Fourthly, The manner of receiving in, or making Members of your Church, is not
agreeable to the practice of the Primitive Christians, as may thus appear; they
were baptized by one Spirit, into one Body, but you baptize Infants by
Tradition, for which there is no president in the Scriptures; for we do not
read of any Fonts they had, or signing Children with the sign of the Cross in
their Foreheads, nor no Godfathers nor Godmothers; but since we came to years
of discretion, we see all these Ordinances to be of the Popes invention, and
therefore we come not to these Churches as Members of them.

Fifthly, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. And therefore every man ought to
be fully persuaded in his own mind in matters of Religion, and the Worship of
God; and we do not believe that God requires it at our hands, to command
worship in those Temples made with hands; neither do we believe that what is
there practiced, is agreeable to the declared Will of God; and therefore we
refuse to join in Worship with them, who worship the unknown God ignorantly.

Sixthly, The Masters of those Assemblies that serves the Cure so called, are
nor called, and appointed for that work as the Ministers of Christ was in the
Churches of the Christians; therefore we do not own their Ministry, nor join
with them in their Worship. Christ's Ministers had their call and command from
him to go and teach all Nations; these have their call from men to a certain
place; Christ's Ministers preached that which they received by the Revelation of
Jesus; and they gave freely, as they had received; these preaches that which
they receive from other men, and Authors, and the writings of ancient Fathers,
and they sell it for money, and has a certain Sallery for their work, some by
the day, and some by the year; and where people are poor, and can advance but
little toward maintaining a Priest, there are few or none called thither, but
where there is a fat Benefice there is striving to be the Minister of such a
place, and many drunken Priests that never heard the voice of God, can come at
the call of earthly Angels; and these evils with many others have we seen,
therefore we cannot conform to their Religion and Worship, whose hearts are
exercised with such covetous practices.

Seventhly, They teach fear toward God by the Traditions and Precepts of men,
and the Lord has said, In vain do they worship, whose fear toward me is
taught by the Precepts of men; and therefore we cannot join in Worship with
them, who are thus taught; for the Lord is our Teacher, which can never be
removed into a Corner.

Eighthly, Both Priest and People says, They err, and stray from the ways of
God, like lost sheep; but since you left us, we are turned to the chief
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls; and therefore we cannot err, nor go astray,
nor follow the multitude to do evil, for we are of that little Flock that have
heard the voice of the good Shepherd, and a stranger we cannot, nor will not
follow; neither have we any need now to hear the Hireling, for when he sees
the Wolf he flees, and leaves the Flock, because he is an Hireling; having
had so large experience of the deceit and hypocrifie of these crafts-men, that
teach for hire, and divine for money, and flee for fear when any danger
approaches; therefore we deny their Church and Ministry, and turn from them to
him who carries his Lambs in his arms, and gently leads them that are with
young.

Ninthly, Both the Priest, and the whole Congregation, says, There is no
health in them; if so, we have good reason to refrain their company for fear of
catching a bad disease; for its prudence in times of the Plague, for people to
keep far from the Pesthouse; and can any blame them, whose diseases are
healed, to refrain the company of them that are infected, and has no health in
them?

Tenthly, We are commanded in Scripture to withdraw from every brother that
walks disorderly; and we know many that walk disorderly frequents these places
appointed for public Worship, out of Custom, Tradition, and for fear of
punishment; and because of that great mixture of disorderly walkers, we have
reason to withdraw from those places; for they that goes, leaves undone that
which they ought to do, and does that which they ought not to do, and we can do
no worse, if we never come more among them; and they confess themselves to be
miserable offenders against Gods holy Laws, so that we account it better to
worship elsewhere, contrary to man's Law, than to come among you to break or
offend against Gods Law.

Eleventhly, We have the Promise and Word of a King, in several Speeches and
Declarations, That we shall not be disquieted, disturbed, molested, or called
in question for our difference of opinion in matters of Religion, while we
behave and demean our selves civilly under the Government, and while we do not
disturb the peace of the Nation; so it being our declared and known Principle,
to live peaceably and demean our selves civilly under the Government; therefore
we perform our devotions toward God, according to the full persuasion of our
minds, and as we are guided by the Spirit of the Lord; and having some
indulgence from the King for so doing, therefore we join not with you in your
will worship.

Twelfthly, We are not convinced that the places for public worship, are for
that purpose appointed of God, or by command from God; and therefore we come
not to them, nor shall not, until we be so convinced by solid Reasons, and
Scripture proof; for all that own those places for Churches, proves turn-coats,
and turns with every wind of Doctrine, and to every Government that is
uppermost in the Nation, for fear of persecution.

Thirteenthly, We know not that the Law by which, we are enjoined to come to
these places, is grounded upon, and agreeable with the Law of God; and
therefore unless this be proved to the convincing of us, that it is the Lords
requiring, we are not careful to answer you in this matter.

Fourteenthly, We do not believe that the Bishops Courts are set up or holden
by Divine Authority, or that there are competent Judges in them of spiritual
transgressions, seeing the Lord has committed all Judgment unto the Son, and
he is the fittest to judge in all cases of conscience.

Fifteeenthly, We have no mention made in the holy Scriptures of any
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Courts, or Lord Bishops, or that Timothy or Titus
had either Courts, Commissaries, or Parrators; or that they cited any of the
unbelieving Jews or Gentiles, for nonconformity to the Christian-Religion; or
that they used any compulsion to force people to their faith, but in meekness
instructed them that did oppose, until God brought them to the knowledge of the
truth; neither do we see president in Scripture for your present practice of
persecution about Religion; therefore we cannot conform to your injunctions,
which are not agreeable to the Scriptures of Truth.

Sixteenthly, We are persuaded that you do not so much endeavor to bring us
into conformity to your way, out of your zeal to it, as the right way and
worship of God, as out of State Policy or for self ends, that your
Ecclesiastical Officers may make a Market to enrich themselves upon the ruins
of Religious People, that out of tenderness of Conscience, cannot conform to
your Worship and Ordinances.

Seventeenthly, We do not own your Order and Discipline, to be the Order and
Discipline of the Church of Christ, because it was prevailed against, and
utterly extinguished in this Nation; and the Scottish Directory, and
Presbyterian Government set up in its place near 20 years; and yet your zeal
led few or none of you to suffer imprisonment singly upon the account of your
Religion.

Eighteenthly, We believe your Church is not the Church of Christ, because it
has been prevailed against; for the Church of Christ cannot be prevailed
against, neither by the power nor policy of any Sect or Schism whatsoever for
it has such a firm foundation, that the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against
it: And we are Members of this Church; therefore we cannot come to yours,
because it will not stand when the floods comes, and the rain descends, being
builded like a house upon the sand.

Nineteenthly, We do not understand, that either the true power or form of
godliness, or the true practice of Christianity appears among you, or is
approved of by you, and therefore we turn away from you, and can have no
fellowship with you in your worship.

20. You have neither convinced us by sound Doctrine, nor good Conversation,
that your Ministers are the Ministers of Christ, and their Doctrine, the
Doctrine of Christ, and their Practice, the Practice of Gospel Ministers, but
the contrary, and therefore we turn away from you, and cannot join with you in
worship.

21. Because as appears to us you trust in man, and make flesh your arm, and
make more use of the Magistrates power to protect you in the way of your
worship, than of the power of God; and of an outward Law to compel people to
your Religion, than of sound Doctrine, and good Conversation to convince the
gainsayers; and therefore we cannot deny the true Religion, and turn to you
for fear of persecution.

22. Because the hand writing of Ordinances is blotted out, which was in force
in the first Covenant, and a better Covenant come; therefore we cannot be
subject to Ordinances of Divine Service; for the Jews had a Law of
Commandments, which made not the comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to
the Conscience; they had a worldly Sanctuary, and Ordinances of Divine Service,
imposed upon them, until the time of Reformation. But we are not under the Law,
but under Grace: Therefore not subject to Ordinances of men in Religious and
spiritual things. And whereas that Scripture was so often urged to the people
called Quakers, and others, that appeared upon suspicion of Nonconformity, Be
subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, etc. To this we answer,
We are subject for the Lords sake to every Ordinance of man, according to the
true intent of the Apostle in that place, and according to the practice of him
that spoke those words; but we understand the Apostle speaks of civil things,
and in such cases we are subject, and that for Conscience sake: As may thus
appear.

First, We are subject to all such Laws and Ordinances of man, as are agreeable
with, and grounded upon the Royal Law of God, which are for the preservation of
personal proprieties, as Life, Liberty, and Estates.

Secondly, We are subject to all Ordinances and Laws, that are for the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well: And our souls is
subject to the Higher Power, not for wrath or fear of punishment, but of a
ready mind, and for Conscience sake.

Thirdly, No man can charge the people called Quakers with the actual
transgression of the Laws made in Cases of High Treason, Petty Treason, or
misprision of Treason; and therefore we are subject to all such Ordinances of
man, for the Lords sake.

Fourthly, We are no transgressors of, therefore one with, and subject to all
Laws and Ordinances of man made in Cases of Murder, Felony, Fighting, Fraud,
and all other misdemeanors whatsoever.

Fifthly, We are a peaceable people, and so subject to all Laws and Ordinances
of man, made against Routs, Riots, Duels, and such provocations to wrath and
envy.

Sixthly, We are no transgressors against, therefore subject to, all Laws and
Ordinances of man made against Rapes, Adultery, Fornication, and Uncleanness of
all sorts.

Seventhly, We are one with, and so subject to all Laws and Ordinances of man
made against Swearing and Drunkenness, and all manner of Profaness whatsoever.

Eighthly, We subject to all Laws and Ordinances of man made concerning Debtor
and Creditor, that relates to the recovery of all just Debts.

Ninthly, We do submit to all Laws and Ordinances of man that relate to the
payment of Tribute, Taxations, Custom, Excise, Subsidy money, and all things of
this nature, as becomes Saints and Subjects to Superiors. And concerning
these things, no man can justly accuse the people called Quakers; and therefore
we may in reason say as the Apostle did, For this cause pay we tribute, that
under them we may live a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, as
becomes Saints and true Christians.

Tenthly, We do not actually resist, but are subject to all Laws and
Ordinances of man, as is manifested upon all occasions, either by our active or
passive obedience: And hereby it may appear to all people, that we are subject
to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake. And if we be called in question
for any thing that can be accounted contempt of any Ordinance of man, it is
concerning the Law and Worship of the living God; and for our Nonconformity
in such cases we are compassed about with a cloud of true and faithful
VVitnesses, whose sufferings and faithfulness is left as a President unto us,
upon whom the ends of the world are come. And if the people called Quakers
cannot for Conscience sake conform to all Ordinances made by man in matters
relating to Religion and the Worship of God, they have examples and presidents
from their Predecessors, that could neither receive the mark of the Beast in
their Forheads, nor in their right hands; who had the trials of cruel mockings,
yea moreover, bonds and imprisonments for the Testimony which they held; and
the same God to plead their Cause, that said, Touch not mine anointed, do my
Prophets no harm; and who said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And may
not the people of God now be justified of him in the transgression of man's
Ordinances, that are neither grounded upon, nor agreeable to the Law and
Ordinance of God.

Was it an offense against God or his Law, that the Jews scattered in all the
Provinces of King Ahasuerus his Dominions, was not conformable to the Laws and
Ordinances of the King? And does our Law condemn them for their practice? and
are they not justified both of God and good men, for their faithfulness and
perseverance in times of persecution? And was not their adversary that wicked
Haman, justly judged and condemned for procuring an Edict against them, to have
destroyed them because of their difference in Opinion or persuasion in matters
of Religion and Worship? And did not Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego disobey
an Ordinance of man, when they would not bow to the Image that Nebuchadnezar
the King of Babylon had set up? And were they not justified of God and good men
for their faithfulness; and preserved from the violence of that fire, which
made the Executioners of the penalty enjoined by that Ordinance, the dreadful
examples of Gods indignation and wrath? Did not Daniel disobey an Ordinance of
man, and an unalterable Decree, that none should make a prayer or supplication
for thirty days to any God or man, but unto the King? And yet he prayed as at
other times, and made supplication three times a day, his window being open
toward Jerusalem: And was he not justified of God and good men for his
faithfulness to God? And did not the Lord stop the mouths of hungry Lions, and
reserve their wrath for the punishment of Daniels persecutors in their legal
prosecution of the penalty enjoined by that Ordinance of man, which Daniel
would not submit unto? And did not the Apostles Peter and John transgress and
break an Ordinance of men in Authority, when they would not forbear speaking in
the Name of Jesus? And whether it is better to obey God or man, let our
adversaries and persecuters judge. And did not all those Episcopal Protestant
Martyrs in the days of Queen Mary, suffer for denying the Sacrament of the
Altar, and for disobeying other Ordinances of men made in relation to Religion
and Worship? And are they not now justified both of God and good men for their
faithfulness? And is not their sufferings accounted persecution for
righteousness sake? And if we suffer Bonds, Imprisonments, or the spoiling of
our Goods, on the like account, concerning the Law and Worship of the living
God, our sufferings are for righteousness sake, and therefore we commit our
righteous Cause to the Lord in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

And this is recorded for the Information of such as have hated us without a
cause, to prevent persecution for the future, or at least to leave them without
an excuse, when the Lord makes inquisition for the blood of all the Prophets
and righteous men that have suffered for Conscience sake, since the days of
righteous Abel, unto this very day. And as for them that injure us ignorantly,
we can heartily say, Father forgive them, they know not what they do.

Let the Bishops, Chancelors, Commissaries, Parish Priests, and all, or any of
their Ecclesiastical Officers, receive this with meekness, and peruse it with
patience, and read it with understanding: And if a reply can be returned to
convince us that your Way, Worship, and Religion, is the Lords requirings,
contrary to all the Reasons here rendered; then deliver it to any of the people
called Quakers, or convay it with care to the hand of

Thomas Salthouse.
Written the 2. day of the 9. mon. 1663.
THE END.

