a fool wading through water carrying two goslings in his hand and several in
his belt A Fool sent out to fetch the Goslings home,
When they unto a Rivers brink were come,
Through which their Passage lay, was in much fear
His Dames best Brood might have been drowned there,
Which to avoid he thus did show his Wit,
And his good Nature in preventing it,
He underneath his Girdle thrusts their Heads,
And then the Coxcomb through the Water wades.
His Folly we deride, and yet may be
Guilty of Fooleries as great as he.
Therefore to Beasts and Birds we here are brought,
Morality and Wisdom to be taught.


Delightful FABLES In Prose and Verse. None of them to be found in Aesop; But
Collected from diverse Ancient and Modern Authors; With Pictures, and proper
Morals to every Fable, some very pertinent to the present Times. Published as a
means which in all Ages has been found useful for pleasure, and likewise for
Instruction in the prudent conduct of our Lives and Actions.

By R. B.

Licensed and Entered.

printer's device showing a bell

London, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1691.

To the READER.
FAbles in all Ages, and by many wise Men have been accounted excellent ways of
instruction; Neither ought we to think that they were invented only to please
Children, since if well considered, we may find many excellent Precepts in
Philosophy, Morality and Policy contained in them. But that which gives a full
answer to this Objection is the many Parables* or Fables contained in Holy
Writ, and wisely contrived for convincing Men of their Folly and Impiety.

What else is that of the Thistle which sent Ambassadors to the Cedar that was
in Lebanon, saying, Give me thy Daughter in Marriage to my Son, and to punish
this pride of the Thistle, a wild Beast of the Forest coming thither trod it
down and destroyed it?

Or that which passed among the Trees when they assembled together to choose a
King? Judges 9.8. The Trees went forth on a time to choose a King over them, and
they said to the Olive Tree, Reign thou over us; But the Olive Tree said unto
them, Should I leave my Fatness wherewith by me they honor God and Man, and go
to be promoted over the Trees? And the Trees said to the Fig Tree, Come thou
and Reign over us; but the Fig Tree said unto them, Should I forsake my
sweetness, and my good Fruit, and go to be promoted over the Trees? Then said
the Trees unto the Vine, Come thou, and Reign over us; and the Vine said unto
them, Shall I leave my Wine which cheereth God and Man, and go to be promoted
over the Trees? Then said all the Trees to the Bramble, Come thou and reign
over us; and the Bramble said unto the Trees, If in truth you anoint me to be
King over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow; and if not, let Fire
come out of the Bramble and destroy the Cedars of Lebanon.

And what was the Message that God sent by Nathan to David after his Adultery
with Bathsheba, and his Murder of Uriah, to convince him of his great Crimes,
when the Prophet tells him, That there was a Rich Man who had exceeding many
Flocks and Herds, but the Poor Man had nothing, save one little poor Ewe Lamb
which he had brought and nourished up, and it grew up together with him, and
with his Children; it did eat of his own Bread, and drank of his own Cup, and
lay in his Bosom, and was unto him as a Daughter; And there came a Traveller to
the Rich Man, and he spared to take of his own Flock, and of his own Herd to
dress for the Wayfaring Man that was come to him; What were these but
mysterious Relations whereby the Divine Spirit touched the Heart of that great
King, and brought him to repentance?

In short, when our Blessed Lord was upon Earth, what were his discourses to
the hard-hearted and rebellious Jews, but only Parables, for it is said,
Without a Parable spoke he not; so that Jesus Christ who was Truth it self
thought fit to make use of this method, as knowing that Truth could be no way
more n^bly, nor profitably represented than by them. And though Fables may seem
ridiculous for their bringing in Beasts, Birds and Trees speaking to each
other, yet they are to be highly esteemed for the Wisdom and Knowledge
contained in them.

And therefore the Famous Orator Demosthenes, when he observed the careless
demeanor of the Judges of Athens at the Trial of Capital Offenders; He by a
Fable did sharply reprimand their unconcernedness; And suddenly cried out
aloud, O ye Judges, I will tell you a very strange Story, if you please, of the
shadow of an Ass; At which the Judges gave great Attention, and commanding
silence bid him proceed. There was a young Man, says the Orator, who in an
hot Season hired an Ass to carry some Goods, and about Noon being very faint
with the heat, he took off his Load intending to lie down and refresh himself
under the shadow of the Ass, which the Owner, who went with him to bring back
his Beast would not permit, alleging, that though he hired the Ass, yet he had
paid nothing for the shadow of him; The young Man pleaded, that having given
him Money for his Ass the whole day, he might make what use of him he pleased;
The controversy at length grew high, which at last ended in a quarrel, wherein
they both severely beat each other, which yet could not determine the matter,
so that they resolved to bring it to a Trial at Law. When the Orator perceived
the Court very attentive to the Fable he suddenly stopped, and was going away,
but being recalled, and desired by the Judges to proceed in his Story; Are you,
said he, so willing to hear an idle Tale of the shadow of an Ass, and yet so
negligent in regarding a Cause wherein the Life of a Man is concerned. Which
severe Reproof so affected the Judges, that they were afterward very diligent
in examining the matter before them.

As to the ensuing Fables I have related none that are to be found in Aesop,
but they are collected from diverse Ancient and Modern Authors, which I have put
into easy English both in Prose and Verse, with Pictures to each Fable,
whereby they may delight and profit ingenious Readers both old and young, and
not only occasion them to laugh, but give them wholesome Instructions for the
prudent government of their Lives and Actions; so that neither they nor I may
have cause to repent our pains, which is the desire of

R. B.

FAB. I. a monkey and a cat by a fireplace The Monkey, the Cat, and the
Chestnuts.
A Monkey observing his Master to lay some Chestnuts in the Fire to roast, he
was very desirous to taste some of them, but yet was likewise much afraid to
burn his Fingers, so that though he often attempted to rake them out, yet he
was as often discouraged by the heat of the Fire; Whereupon he was a long time
contriving with himself how to attain his end; At length he perceives a young
Kitling lie sleeping by the Fire, whereupon he presently resolves that Puss
shall be his instrument to gain his purpose; And catching her up in his arms,
notwithstanding her squalling, and all the resistance she could make, yet Pug
being stronger takes her fore-foot in his hand, and thrusting it into the Fire
gets out the Chestnuts, which he with much greediness soon eats up; The poor Cat
had her foot miserably burnt, and asks him weeping why he would use her so
cruelly without any provocation given him; The Monkey knew he had wronged her,
and could say little in his own vindication, yet willing to make a lame defense
rather than none, impudently replies. I must confess the jest was somewhat
severe, but yet it is not so much as you justly deserve to suffer, considering
the wicked, slothful and sleepy life that you lead.

MORAL.
Some men care not what abuses they put upon others, nor what troubles and
dangers they bring them into, so they can but compass their own ends and
purposes; And how many were lately made use of to bring about the Designs and
Contrivances of ill men, who when their turn was served, were so far from
gratifying them, that they scoft and laughed at their easiness and folly.

FAB. I. The Monkey, the Cat, and the Chestnuts.
A Monkey saw his Master roast
Some Chestnuts by the Fire,
And Pug being very licorish
To taste them did desire;
Yet was afraid to burn himself
Neither could he contrive
Which way, he without trouble might
To his design arrive.
But seeing Puss lie by the Fire,
He was resolved, that she
The pain and danger should endure
His instrument to be,
And catching her into his arms,
He with her foot does get
The roasted Chestnuts out, which he
Most greedily does eat.
The Cats foot is severely burnt
Who weeping with the pain
Against the Monkeys cruelty
Does woefully complain;
Quoth she, why have thou used me thus,
What mischief have I wrought
To thee or thine, that thou have now
This misery on me brought?
Pug knew that he had wronged her,
And little had to plead
In vindication of himself
For this injurious deed;
Yet like a Villain, he replies,
You need not cry and roar,
Since for your slothful wicked life,
You ought to suffer more.
For you and all your kindred too
Most idly spend your time,
Yea but to wet your foot forsooth,
You think a grievous crime;
For these and other faults, whereof
I an account could give,
If you but your just merits had
You don't deserve to live.
MORAL.
Many ill men do never care
Wha hazards others run
On their behalf, so that they can
But have their business done.
FAB II. a house by the sea, outside which a mouse sticks its head inside an
oyster shell The Mouse and the Oyster.
A Mouse had dwelt many years in an ancient Mansion house by the Seaside, and
enjoyed plenty of all things without danger or fear, feeding daily upon Bacon,
Cheese, and crumbs of Bread which fell from the Masters plentiful Table; But not
knowing her own felicity she grew wanton, and having heard that there were
dainty bits to be found in other places, she began to disdain her course fare,
and longed to taste of those choice rarities, and pleasant viands, thinking her
self to be very foolish that she had lived so long upon such homely food, and
did not yet understand true eating; She therefore resolves to travel with the
first opportunity, and search about till she met with some new Ragoust, to
indulge her appetite therewith; Whereupon the next day she marches toward the
Seaside, and upon her arrival finds a great quantity of Oysters lying upon the
shore, and among the rest one of them gaping to take in the Salt water; the
Mouse peeps into the shell, and seeing the Oyster, pleased herself very much to
think of her good fortune, and what a delicate morsel she had got, and then
eagerly thrusts in her head to seize her prey; She no sooner touched the Oyster,
but the shell immediately closed with such force, that catching the Mouse by
the neck it gave her a mortal squeeze; Who finding death approaching, cried
out; Let all Belly-Gods take warning by me, who if I could have been contented
with my own safe condition, might have lived many years longer, but am come to
an untimely end merely to gratify my foolish taste.

MORAL.
How many men have lost their Estates, Health, yea Life it self, by
voluptuousness and indulging their nice palates?

FAB. II. The Mouse and the Oyster.
NEar to the Ocean there stood,
An ancient Mansion house,
Wherein there lived for many years
With much content a Mouse,
Plenty of all things she enjoyed,
And took no pains nor care,
There neither Cats, nor Mouse Traps were
That might occasion fear.
Bacon and Cheese, and crumbs of Bread
Which from the Table fell,
Her daily entertainment were
And pleased her wondrous well.
But ease and wantonness at length
So pampered her blood,
That she begins to loath and slight
Her former wholesome food.
And hearing what delicious bits
She otherwhere might find,
Resolves her fortune she will try,
And satisfy her mind.
Then to the shore she travels, where
Plenty of Oysters lay,
And sees one gaping which she soon
Resolves to make her prey,
And instantly thrusts in her head
With joy thereon to seize,
But the shell closing suddenly
Gives her a mortal squeeze.
The Dying Mouse too late does find
Her miserable state,
Caused by her foolish appetite,
And thus deplores her fate.
All Belly Gods be warned by me
Not to indulge your taste,
Which Wealth and Health, yea Life it self
Does prodigally waste;
Could I with my old country fare
But have contented been,
I might have still prolonged my life
And more good days have seen.
MORAL.
How many may be said to dig
With their own teeth their graves.
Their Palates pleasing; And unto
Their Appetites are slaves?
FAB. III. a fox inside its den, with a lion outside The Fox and the Lion.
A Fox being very sick, shut himself close up into his hole; The other Beasts
missing him in his usual haunts, come to visit him, and inquire of his health;
Among the rest the Lion, the King of Beasts repairs to him, pretending to have
much care of him, and great trouble for the pain he endured: Yet quoth he, Dear
brother be not discouraged, nor disheartened, for if you will take my advice, I
doubt not but in a few days to make you as whole as a Fish, for I have an
Infallible remedy, which I obtained in my travels from the chief Physician of
the King of Utopia, that never yet failed in any disease whatsoever, I cure all
though spoiled, abused and left off by others, so that mine may be called the
Universal Medicine and the true secret of the Philosophers, and no distemper
can stand before it; Thus the Lion like a right M untebank boasted of his
mighty skill in Physic; The Fox humbly entreats his Highness to impart his
help to him; With all my heart, quoth the Lion, let me but come into your hole,
and you shall soon find that your cure will be speedy, safe and pleasant, for
if I only lick your body all over, there is such sovereign virtue in my Tongue,
that all diseases fly before it. I humbly thank your Highness quoth the Fox,
neither do I at all question the excellent quality that is in your Grace
Tongue, only one thing much discourages me, that your Teeth, which are so near
Neighbors to it, appear so terrible as it will rather increase than abate my
malady; And if your Grace please but to remove that inconvenience, I shall be
very ready to use your admirable Remedy; The Lion finding himself discovered
went away much discontented.

MORAL.
Though some by fair words and specious pretenses, endeavor to ruin and
destroy honest men, yet their wicked designs are often discovered and prevented.

FAB. III. The Fox and the Lion.
A Fox being very sick and weak,
Within his hole was hid,
The other Beasts soon missing him,
Came to see how he did.
Among the rest the King of Beasts
The Lion did repair
To visit Reynard, and of him
Pretends to have great care;
Quoth he, I pity much your case
That you are in such pain,
Yet hope, if my advice you take
You Will soon be well again.
My Medicine is Infallible,
Saffold's an Ass to me.
It Is I alone who all can cure
If curable they be.
The Lion like a Mountebank
Thus Magnifies his art.
The Fox his Highness humbly prays,
He would his help impart.
Most willingly, the Lion cries,
It Is pleasant, safe and sure,
Let me but come into your hole,
I Will soon your health procure.
I have such virtue in my Tongue
That if I come but near,
And only lick your skin all over
You need no sickness fear.
The Fox replies, I doubt not but
A Sovereign quality
Is in your Graces Tongue, whereby
You cure each malady.
I only dread that your sharp Teeth
Which such near Neighbors are,
Will fright and terrify me so
That I shall die for fear.
That inconvenience once removed
I should most willingly,
Throw my self at your Highness feet,
And use your remedy.
MORAL.
Though some do treacherously contrive
Their Neighbors overthrow,
Yet wise men often their Plots descry,
And so prevent the blow.
FAB. IV. a grasshopper and some ants at the foot of a tree The Ants and the
Grasshopper.
THE industrious Ants had wisely provided and laid up store of Provender in the
Summer, whereby to maintain themselves in Winter; but toward Autumn violent
Rains happening, their Provisions were almost spoiled with the wet, but a
Sun-shiny day coming soon after, every one of these little Animals with a Grain
of Corn in its Mouth crept out of their dark Cell, and laid it upon a Bank to
dry, thereby to prevent its being moldy and spoiled; while they were thus
profitably employed, a Grasshopper almost starved with hunger and cold, having
observed what they were doing, comes toward them, and humbly beseeches them to
give him some relief, or else he should unavoidably die in a short time with
Famine; One of the most ancient Ants, hearing him make this lamentable
complaint, asks him, how he spent his time in the Summer, that he had laid up
nothing before hand, whereby he was already reduced to such miserable necessity
even before the Winter was well begun; Truly quoth he, I played away the
Summer, and sung Tunes to all that walked in the Fields; At which the Ant
laughing aloud, cried out, Nay then you justly suffer need, and deserve little
Charity, and therefore I would advise you that as you have sung away your
Harvest time, so you would dance away the Winter, for which by the slenderness
of your Diet your Body will be very well prepared.

MORAL.
Those that waste the Summer of their Youth, and Strength in Folly, and
Debauchery, are very often brought to much penury and want in the Winter of Old
Age.

FAB. IV. The Ants and the Grasshopper.
THE painful Ants that carefully
Their Winter store provide
In Summer, and within the Earth
It diligently hide;
After a sudden violent Rain
which toward Autumn fell,
Each loaded with a Grain of Corn
Marched out from their dark Cell;
And on a Sunny Bank next day
They their provision lay,
That being dried again, it might
Not perish, nor decay.
A Grasshopper who was almost starved
With hunger and with cold
Was present, and with longing Eyes
Their Victuals did behold:
And humbly begs of them they would
His pressing wants supply,
Else he for lack of Sustenance
Must miserably die.
One of the gravest Ants who heard
This Beggar thus lament,
Cried; Surely you in idleness
The Summer past have Spent.
Else, like us, you might have laid up
Some provender in store,
And not have known this poverty
To beg from door to door.
The Grasshopper cries; All the day
I merrily did sing,
And in the Ears of Passengers
I made my voice to ring.
The Ant then laughing, said, Since you
The Summer spent in play
And singing; It is just that you
The Winter dance away.
Your Body for that exercise
Now being very fit;
Your slender Diet having much
Contributed to it.
MORAL.
Those that their Youthful time do waste
In play, and vanity,
Often in the Winter of Old Age
Do come to poverty.
FAB. V. a wolf and a goat, with a goatherd in the background The Kid and the
Wolf.
A Wanton Kid wandering carelessly away from her Mother, into the adjoining
Woods, happened to meet with a terrible Wolf, who being very hungry was walking
his rounds to search for his prey; The Kid was much astonished and surprised at
the sight of him, expecting nothing but present death, and saw no possibility
of escaping; But at length recollecting her Spirits, she resolved if possible
to deceive the Wolf, and coming up briskly to him, Sir, quoth she, I
acknowledge I am your Prisoner, and do not doubt but you intend to make a meal
of my body, I only beg one kindness of you; What Is that, says the Wolf, tell me
quickly for my Stomach is up, and I cannot spare time to talk; Only, quoth the
Kid, that you will please to let me have but one dance before I dye, and that
you would assist me therein with your voice, who I hear have excellent skill in
Singing; Well, says the Wolf, if that be all I will do it, though I never heard
my voice commended before; but pray be brief then and dispatch instantly; The
Kid stands up on her hind legs, and dances, the Wolf sings or howls, whereat
the Kid redoubles her dancing; At which the Wolf is so pleased that he strains
his voice louder, so that he might be heard a long way; And so he was for the
Dogs in the village hard by hearing and knowing his cry, they come with all
speed to seek and pursue their Enemy, whom they seized unawares, while he was
performing his part; The Wolf finding how soon the case was altered, and that
he must be sacrificed to the fury of the Dogs; Well says he, this is nothing
but what I deserve, who having been born and bred a Cook and a Butcher, must
needs pretend to be a singing Master.

MORAL.
It is often seen that if persons leave the employment wherein they were bred,
and have knowledge, and pretend to new inventions they usually miscarry and are
undone.

FAB. V. The Kid and the Wolf.
A Kid who carelessly did stray
Out of her Mothers eye,
A Wolf that watched for his prey,
Did in his walk espy.
The Kid her danger soon perceived,
And what her doom would be,
And since she wanted strength contrived
To practice policy.
She therefore humbly begs the Wolf,
That since she now must dye,
To sing a Song, because his voice
Made such sweet melody,
And would permit her but to have
One dance before her death,
And then she should more willingly
Resign her dying breath.
The Wolf who never heard before
His voice commended so,
Valued himself upon his skill
And proud thereof did grow;
He then begins to howl or sing,
The Kid does skip and dance,
Whereat the Wolf so pleased is
His voice he does advance.
The Dogs within a Village near
Soon hear and know his cry,
And all with open mouth repair
To seek their Enemy.
The Wolf now finds though he designed
The innocent Kid to slay,
Yet he himself was to the hounds
Like to become a prey.
And turning to the Kid he cries,
Justly I suffer ill,
Because in what I did not know
I have pretended skill.
My Father and my Grandfather,
Both Cooks and Butchers were,
But I their Son must Piper turn,
For which I now pay dear.
MORAL.
Who leave the Trades they know, and strive
New Projects to contrive,
Do very often lose their aims,
And very seldom thrive.
FAB. VI. a sheep, a dog, and a man carrying a long stick The Sheep and the Dog.
WHen Sheep could speak, one of them came to his Master, and desired to ask him
one civil question, wherein he would willingly be satisfied; I observe quoth
he, that notwithstanding you receive so many and so great advantages by us
Sheep both living and dead, who furnish you with Wool, Lambs, Milk, and at
length with Mutton, yet you take no care to make provision for our eating, so
that we are forced to wander up and down the Fields every day, and are often
put to very hard shifts to get food; whereas your idle lazy Dog who affords you
none of these benefits, is fed daily from your own Table with Varieties, and
without taking any pains or care; The Dog being present, and hearing the Sheep
scandalize him at this rate, began to swell with anger, his Eyes grew red, his
Hair stood an end, and his rage was so great that he could hold no longer, but
in a mighty fury replies; Thou silly Hen-hearted Creature, how ridiculously
do thou argue, and what a senseless grievance do thou complain of for want
of wit rightly to understand the matter? Thou chargest us Dogs with idleness,
as if we did not deserve our Bread, whereas if thy pastures were never so
plentiful, and thy food never so easy to attain, yet thy cowardly Spirit would
never suffer thee to eat it quietly, if we were not continually watchful and
ready to defend you against ravening Wolves that would tear you to pieces, and
from Thieves likewise who would steal and kill you at their pleasure; But this
it is to do good turns to ungrateful Wretches, who can neither protect
themselves, nor will acknowledge the kindness of those without whose assistance
they would certainly be destroyed.

Moral. Some People are apt to think that their Rulers lead too easy lives,
and though without Government they would be soon ruined, yet are they often
very ungrateful to the best of Princes.

FAB. VI. The Sheep and the Dog.
WHen Sheep could speak, one of them to
His Master did complain,
They were unjustly dealt withal
Who brought him so much gain.
Quoth she, we cannot but admire
That since from us you take
Both Lambs, and Milk, and Wool; yet you
Us no allowance make.
But we are forced continually
To wander all about
The Fields; and with much care and pains
Our daily Food seek out.
Whereas your lazy Dog, that does
Afford you none of these,
Has from your Table Meat and Drink,
And lives at his ease.
The Dog was present, and with much
Impatience did hear
This charge; and to defend himself
No longer could forbear.
Ye silly Sheep, quoth he, observe,
How foolish and how vain
This your pretended grievance is,
Whereof you thus complain.
You charge us Dogs, as if our lives
In idleness we led,
And eat and drank continually
Yet never earned our Bread.
Whereas if we did not secure,
And guard you by our power,
Your lives would be in jeopardy
And danger every hour.
Pray who are they which you defend
From Wolves that would you tear,
And from, Thieves too, whereby you may
Feed freely without fear?
You are such Cowards that without
Our help you cannot live,
Yet so ungrateful, you no thanks
To your Preservers give.
MORAL.
A People without Government
Will quickly ruined be.
Yet to the best of Princes, some
Ungrateful we may see.
FAB. VII. a cat sat beneath a parrot in a cage The Parrot and the Cat.
A Gentleman going through the Market heard a Parrot prating and singing very
loud, with whom he was so much taken, that demanding the price, he at length
agreed, and buying it sent it home to his house, ordering it to be hung up in
the midst of his Hall in a Cage; Poll to whom all places were alike, was no
sooner come, but he began to prattle and talk as loud as before; A Cat that
belonged to the House, hearing this strange and unusual noise was wonderfully
amazed, and could not imagine from whence it should come; At length happening
to look up, she saw a Bird in a Cage, and perceived the voice to proceed from
thence; Hey, quoth Puss, pray whence came you, what is your name, and what
business have you here? The Parrot replied, I came from a very far Country, my
name is Parrot, and I am of a worthy Family, whose Livery is Green and Red, and
happening to be taken captive I was put into this Iron Grate to be sold, and
was just now bought by your Master in the Market. Methinks, says the Cat, that
being so lately come hither you should not have the confidence to make such a
bawling as you do; I am sure had I caused but half this disturbance, I had been
in danger to have my brains beat out, for though I was born and bred in this
House, yet if I do but cry, and beg for a little victuals, my Master, Mistress
and all the Family are ready to kill me; Why, quoth Poll, sure Mistress Puss
you will not compare my singing and prating wherewith Persons of the best
quality are delighted, to your squalling which is so odious and ungrateful to
the ears of all that hear it.

MORAL.
We must not make ridiculous comparisons of things that differ in their own
nature, and between which there is no similitude and agreement.

FAB. VII. The Parrot and the Cat.
THE Master had a Parrot bought,
Which he no sooner brought
Into his House, but Poll began
To prate as he was taught.
This sudden bawling and loud noise,
Poor Puss did so surprise,
She could not think what it should be
But casting up her eyes,
She sees a Bird hang in a Cage,
And cries, Hey! what are you,
How came you hither pray Sir, and
What have you here to do?
Quoth he I am a dainty Bird,
And Parrot is my name,
And being by your Master bought
Just from the Market came.
Your impudence and confidence
Is very much I fear,
Quoth Puss, to talk so boldly when
You are but just come here.
I in this house was bred and born,
Yet scarce durst ever cry,
Although I only begged for meat
My hunger to supply.
But if I like your worship had
So insolently squal'd,
I by my Master and the rest
Had cruelly been mauled.
Poll soon replies, good Mistress Puss,
Much liberty you take
Me to abuse, because between
Us you no difference make.
My singing and my talking sure
You never will compare,
Unto your mewing which is so
Ungrateful to the ear,
Whereas my Master does his ear
Unto my talk incline,
And though he will not hear your noise
Yet he is pleased with mine.
MORAL.
We should not make comparisons
That are ridiculous,
Nor must compare Polls prattle to
The squalling of a Puss.
a fox being taken up a ladder to the gallows FAB. VIII. The Fox going to
Execution.
AN old Fox who had spent his whole life in Theft and Rapine, was accused by
the Hens, Geese, Ducks, and Turkeys, of committing many Robberies and Murders,
upon their Wives, Children, Brothers, Sisters, and other Relations, who all
Petitioned the Lion their King that he might be brought to a Legal Trial for
the crimes he had committed, and receive condign punishment for the same; The
Lion granted their request, and gave Sergeant Puss a Warrant to Seize and
Arrest Reynard in the Kings Name; and to commit him to Prison without Bayl,
till he should be delivered by due course of Law; The Cat in pursuance of his
Commission, goes with other Officers to the Foxes hole in the Forest, where
they take him, and tying his hands behind him carry him to the common Jayl;
From whence soon after he was brought before the Lion and the rest who sat in
Judgment upon him; The Witnesses proved the matter against him very fully, so
that he could say little in his own defense, only with Lies and Equivocations
denied, and extenuated his faults, but in conclusion the Lion was fully
satisfied of his guilt, telling him, Certainly you are one of the most
notorious Rascals that ever lived in the Forest, and a greater Malefactor than
the Golden Farmer, and for your many Villainies and Murders deserve like him to
be hanged in Chains, but the Court is so kind that you shall only be hanged,
and this is your Sentence; what have you to say why it should not be put in
Execution? I will say nothing quoth the Fox, against your Justice, only I
desire one favor, that I may not be carried to the Gallows through the high
Street, but on the back side of the Town; This the Lion thought was some subtle
trick of his, and asked him his reason; Because, quoth he, I know there are
great store of Hens and other Fowl that way, whose sight and pleasant cackling,
will much comfort me in that sad hour, when I think how many pleasant Meals I
have made of the Flesh of some of their Relations.

Moral. Wicked men take a pride and pleasure in remembering their vile actions,
from which even the fear of death cannot deter them, but they are then willing,
though not able, again to repeat them.

FAB. VIII. The Fox going to Execution.
THE Geese, the Hens, Turkeys and Ducks,
And several Creatures more,
With diverse crimes charge Reynard, and
The Lion do implore;
That he their King would Summon him
Before him to appear,
Where they their accusation
Against him would make clear.
Who being come, a numerous Train
Against him there complain,
That he their Fathers, Mothers, Wives,
And Children had slain.
The Facts were proved so clear and plain,
He little could reply,
Only with Lies and Impudence
The matter did deny.
But yet the Lion and the rest
Before whom he was tried,
Hearing the proofs; they of his guilt
Were fully satisfied.
And for his Crimes and Villainies
They fully do agree,
That he deserves to die, and that
He hanged ought to be.
The Fox was then demanded what
He had to say why he,
According to this Sentence, should
Not Executed be.
My Lord, against your Justice I,
Quoth he, have naught to say,
One favor only when I die
I humbly of you pray;
That through the high-road of the Town
I may not carried be,
But on the backside I may go
Unto the Gallow Tree.
Because I know full well I there
Good store of Hens shall see,
The very thoughts of whose sweet Flesh
Will comfort give to me.
MORAL.
We often find, wicked men, so much
Delight in Villainy,
They would act mischief had they power
Even when they came to die.
FAB. IX. a cockerel and a cat in the foreground, and a mouse in the background
The young Mouse, the Cock, and the Cat.
A young Mouse and an only Son, had been so carefully bred up by his Mother,
that she would never permit him to go beyond the mouth of her hole. But growing
up, the young creature had a desire to look about into the World, which his
Mother was very fearful he should do; Alas Child, says, she there is so much
treachery abroad, that if you once go out of my sight I never expect to see you
again; Dear Mother quoth he, fear nothing, I will only go and look through the
crevice of the door, and come back instantly; His importunity prevailed, and so
he goes into the next Room and peeps into the Yard, where he saw a Cat walk
very demurely by the door, who laid her self down in the warm Sun; the young
Mouse much wondered at her gravity, and was extremely taken with her shape and
sober carriage; Soon after a Cock comes by very briskly, who clapping his wings
set up a loud crow, whereat our young Traveller was so affrighted that all pale
and trembling, he runs back to his Mother, who glad of his return hugged him
very tenderly, demanding the cause of his great surprise and fright; Ah Mother
quoth he, I saw a dreadful Creature with a red piece of Flesh on his Head like
a Crown, and the like under his Chin, and Horns on his Heels, who with things
like Arms beating his sides, made such a horrible noise as almost scared me out
of my wits; Just when I was admiring a very fine Creature, of so modest a look,
and so cleanly and neat, lying in the Sun, that I could hardly forbear running
to kiss and hug her; the old Mouse perceiving his mistake; My Dear says she,
that proud strutting thing will never hurt thee, but be sure to avoid the other
modest one, who will certainly be the death of thee with the first opportunity.

Moral. We must not always judge of men by their looks and carriage, neither
are some roaring Sparks so much to be dreaded as some demure and sober Knaves.

FAB. IX. The young Mouse, the Cat, and the Cock.
A young Mouse, and an only Son,
With tenderness and care,
Was by her Mother bred, who still
Of his life stood in fear,
And kept him close within her hole
Till grown; who then does creep
Into the adjoining Room, where through
A Crevice he does peep.
And in the Yard he there espies
A Cat demure and grave,
With whom he wishes that he could
But some acquaintance have.
Soon after he observes a Cock
That by the door does go,
Who with his Wings did clap his sides
And cheerfully does crow.
At which the Mouse was almost scared
Out of his wits, and run
Post haste unto his Mother, who
With joy receives her Son.
Demanding what the reason was
Of his so great affright;
Oh Mother, I have seen, quoth he,
A very dreadful sight:
A Monster with a Crown on's head,
And horned heels marched by,
Who with his arms clapping his sides
Sent forth a hideous cry.
Whereat I was surpised, being then
Admiring of a Creature,
Sober and modest in her look,
And of a handsome feature.
With whom I was resolved to make
A League of amity.
The Mother finding by his talk
Her Sons simplicity;
She tells him from that strutting thing
He need no danger fear,
But for his life, he never should
That serious one come near.
MORAL.
By modest looks we scarce can judge
What really men are,
For the demure are often more false
Than Huffing Sparks, by far.
FAB. X. a wolf watching a horse eat a pile of corn The Horse and the Wolf.
A Wolf in his Rambles happened to come to a place where he found a large heap
of Corn, which when he had thoroughly viewed, well, says he, I am very hungry,
but yet this dry Victuals will never go down with me; Oh that I had but a Lamb
or a Kid now in exchange for it! what a hearty meal could I make; yet now I
consider of it, since I cannot eat it my self, I think I were best make a
Friend with it, and assure him, it is not but that I like it very well, only
out of great kindness and respect I present it to him; Then going on he at
length meets with a Horse: Well met, my Friend, quoth the Wolf, you may reckon
it a happy minute that you have so luckily encountered me, for I was just going
to seek you, to make you as gallant a^ Entertainment as ever you had in your
life Come, come along with me, and I will show yo^ such a heap of dainty Corn
as shall make you Mouth water again, and where you may ea^ your Belly full at
free cost; The Horse went a long with him, and coming to the place; Her^ says
the Wolf, see what dainty cheer I have provided for you, fall to heartily, and
spare not you are welcome to it, and I assure you, I spare^ it out of my own
Belly on purpose to fill yours. The Horse falls greedily to his meat; Wel^
quoth the Wolf, methinks you make such a pretty noise with crumping the Corn in
your Teeth that I am mighty glad I had this Banquet for you; The Horse says
little till he had done, but then replies; Brother I give you many thanks for
this good meal, but yet I am of the Opinion that if Wolves could eat Corn, I
should hardly have made such a plentiful Dinner, and I believe you would have
preferred the pleasure of your stomach in eating, before that of your ears in
hearing my grinders crump the Corn.

Moral. Those that are naturally vicious, though they sometimes do a good
action, yet we are apt to think it is only by chance, and not from an honest
Principle.

FAB. X. The Horse and the Wolf.
A Wolf in Rambling chanced to find
An heap of Wheat, which he
Knew with his constitution
Would never well agree;
Who for such dry and husky meat
As that did never care,
But thought raw Mutton, or a Lamb
Was much the better fare.
Therefore resolved to make a Friend
Of what he could not eat,
And meeting with the Horse he does
Invite him to the Treat.
Quoth he, pray come along with me,
And I discover will
To you, a parcel of rare Wheat
Where you may eat your fill.
Which out of love and kindness I
Do now to you make known,
To fill your Belly, though I do
Save it out of my own.
The Horse him thanks, and they at length
Arrive unto the place,
And find the Wheat lie on the ground,
Of which he eats apace.
The Wolf stands by and does protest
That nothing to his Ear
Is more delightful, than the Corn
Ground by his Teeth to hear.
The Horse does little answer make
But lustily feeds on,
Unwilling to lose time until
He had his Dinner done.
But then replies, To you, Sir Wolf,
I much obliged am
For this good Banquet which to me
Most seasonably came:
But yet I think if Wolves could eat
Corn, that you would prefer
The filling of your Belly to
The pleasure of your Ear.
MORAL.
If men are naturally bad,
Though some good deeds they do,
We cannot think their honesty
Inclines them thereunto.
FAB. XI. a bear whispering in the ear of a huntsman The Huntsman and the Bear.
A Huntsman whose usual Employment it was to chase and kill wild Beasts, comes
to a Tanner, and asks him whether he would buy a large Bears Skin of him; Yes
quoth the Tanner if it be worth buying, pray let me see it; Nay says the
Huntsman, I have it not by me; but I would willingly know what you will give
when I bring it; Sure quoth the Tanner, you would not have me buy a Pig in a
Bag, for so I may be cheated as the Man was, who when he came to look in his
Sack found a Puppy Dog therein instead of a Sucking Pig which he thought he had
purchased; To tell you the truth says the Huntsman, there is a great Bear in
the Woods hard by, and to Morrow Morning I intend to go and find him out, and
when I have killed him, I will strip off his Skin and bring it you; Well, says
the Tanner, when this is done I will give you the full value, and I care not if
I go with you to see the Sport; Next Morning the Huntsman and the Tanner went
toward the Wood, and coming near, the Tanner gets up into a Tree to be out of
danger; The Huntsman goes on courageously with his Dogs, and rouzes the Bear
out of his Den, who comes with mighty fury toward him, the Hunter makes up to
him with his Sword, but missing his stroke he falls upon the ground, and was
not able to recover himself, so that the Bear was just ready to tear him in
pieces; But he knowing that Bears never prey upon the dead, holds his Breath,
so that the Beast smelling about his Mouth and Ears, and finding no life, went
away, leaving him in a terrible fright, but the Tanner seeing the danger past,
coming down calls to him, and bids him rise, and then asks what the Bear
whispered in his Ear; Why, quoth he, he advised me that hereafter I should
never venture to sell the Bears Skin till I had killed the Bear.

Moral. We ought not to reckon any thing our own till we have it in possession,
neither should we boast of the Victory till the Battle be ever.

FAB. XI. The Huntsman and the Bear.
A Huntsman to a Tanner came,
Demanding whether he
Would buy a Bear-skin of him, which
Both good and cheap would be.
The Tanner asks to see the Skin
E're he a bargain make.
The Hunter says, he had it not
But he next day would take
A cruel Bear that in the Woods
Adjoining did reside,
And having killed him he would then
Flea him, and bring his Hyde.
Next day the Hunter and his Dogs
Go out to rouse the Bear,
The Tanner from a Tree observes
Him marching without fear.
The Bear with fury issues out
The Huntsman to assail,
Who with his Sword approaches him
Not doubting to prevail.
But his first stroke at him he mist,
Whereby the enraged Bear
Got such advantage that he was
Just ready him to tear.
The Hunter knowing that the Bear
Of The dead does never prey,
Falls on the Earth, and holds his Breath,
As if for dead he lay.
The Bear smells to his Face and Mouth
And finds he did not breathe,
And then retires, yet in great fear
The Hunter he does leave.
The danger past, the Tanner comes,
And bids him rise and tell
What the Bear whispered in his Ear,
When on the ground he fell.
Quoth he, he did advise me, that
If wise I would appear,
I never sell the Skin again
Till I have killed the Bear.
MORAL.
That only which we do possess
We ought to call our own,
Nor should we boast of Victory
Before the Fight be done.
FAB. XII. four apes making a fire The Bird and the Apes.
A Company of Apes in a cold Winters night were got under a Tree, consulting
how to make a Fire to warm themselves; at length one happened to spy a Gloworm
lying under an Hedge, and with great joy calls out to his Companions that he
had found a Coal of Fire, they all run to see it, and concluding it to be so,
they instantly gather a number of small sticks, to lay upon it, and then take a
great deal of pains in puffing and blowing to cause it to burn into a Flame; a
Bird that sat upon a Tree over against them, and had earnestly observed all
their actions, perceiving their fruitless toil and labor, calls to them and
tells them that what they were doing was to no purpose, and that they took
pains for nothing, seeing it was not a Spark of Fire as they imagined, but only
a Gloworm which they made such a stir about; but they were so busily employed
that they regarded not her admonitions; therefore out of her double diligence,
thinking they did not hear her, she flies from the Tree, and sits down by them;
crying, Pray, Gentlemen, hear reason, you trouble your selves in vain, I am
ashamed to see your ridiculous Folly; an Ape discreeter than the rest, and who
laughed at their actions, seeing the mighty care and concernment of the Bird,
comes to her and admonishes her, that she should be cautious, not to endanger
her own life, while she was over sollicitous about their affairs, but she would
take no warning, persisting in counselling and advising them so long, till a
sly Ape approaching near, suddenly leaps upon her, and catching her in his
hand, tears her instantly to pieces, and eats her up, whereby she found too
late her own Folly in giving Instructions to those who had not the sense to
receive it.

Moral. Many are so busily employed in the Affairs of the Public, and of other
Men, that they neglect their own, and very often endanger their lives into the
bargain.

FAB. XII. The Bird and the Apes.
IN a cold Winters night some Apes
Were got under a Tree,
Contriving how to get a Fire,
That they might warmed be.
At length one does a Gloworm spy
Which shined in the dark,
And joyfully cries, Fire, Fire,
See I have found a Spark.
His Brethren were glad of it,
And all soon thither came
To gather sticks and pile thereon
Whereby to make a Flame.
They puff and blow with all their strength,
And mighty pains they take,
But all to little purpose was
For they no Fire could make.
A little Bird observed them
From an adjoining Tree
And cried aloud, That all they did
Was but mere foolery.
But they so busy were that none
Regarded her; so she
Flies down, and cries, Pray, Gentlemen,
Be but advised by me.
An Ape discreeter than the rest
Calls to her to be wise,
And not to hazard her own life
While she did them advise.
Yet she will not this warning mind,
But still great pains does take,
To make them sensible of this
Their folly and mistake.
Until at length a roguish Ape
Suddenly leaps upon her,
And tearing her in pieces, he
Then makes his Supper on her.
Whereby this prating Bird too late
Her folly did perceive,
To give good counsel unto Fools
Who will it not receive.
MORAL.
Many of other men's affairs
So very careful are
That they their own neglect; yea of
Their safety take no care.
FAB. XIII. Jupiter with some animals before him Jupiter and the Creatures.
THE Poets relate, that Jupiter hearing some Creatures were discontented with
their own shapes, he summoned them before him, freely to declare what defects
they thought were in their Bodies, and they should be instantly remedied; and
the Ape being next him, says Jupiter, pray observe the Beauty of your Fellow
Creatures, and compare them with your own, and then tell me what you would have
amended, and it shall be done. Sir, quoth the Ape, I am well pleased both with
the Elegancy of my Shape and Wit, but said be, here is my Brother Bear cannot
much boast of his admirable Figure, I am sure should he see his Picture he
would scarce be in love with it. For my part, quoth the Bear, I envy not the
handsomness of any other Beast, being satisfied with my own. But I think it
would be well if the Elephant had some addition to his Tail, and his Shape were
made more comely; The Elephant was very angry at this Character, not desiring
to have any alteration, but says he, I really pity the Whale who is so bulky
that he can hardly manage himself; The Whale protested in a rage, that he liked
his bulk very well, and would by no means be less. But I must confess quoth he,
I very much pity the little Ant, who takes such extraordinary pains, and is
continually laboring for its Meat, and yet his strength does not seem
agreeable to his Wit and Industry; you might have spared your Remarks upon me,
Don Elephanto, quoth the Ant, since I have strength and ability sufficient for
my Employment, neither am I so very small but if compared to a Mite, I appear
like a Giant. Jupiter having pleasantly censured them for the good Opinion
every one had of himself, and yet could espy defects in other Creatures,
dismissed their further attendance.

Moral. We are too apt to observe faults in other men, and to censure them very
severely, but can hardly be persuaded to own any Follies in our selves.

FAB. XIII. Jupiter and the Creatures.
THE Poets do relate, that some
Jupiter did acquaint,
That diverse Creatures of their form
And shape made much complaint.
Who thereupon did Summon them
Before him to appear,
That their defects and grievances
They might to him declare.
The Ape was near, to whom Jove said,
Look on these Beasts I pray,
Then tell me what defect you have
And I Will take it away.
Sir, quoth the Ape, I am well pleased
Both with my Shape and Wit,
But here is my Brother Bear whom I
To be reformed think fit.
The Bear grows angry and replies,
He did no mending want,
But thought more Tail would well become
The bulky Elephant.
The Elephant cries, Say no more,
I like my Shape and Tail,
But for his monstrous bigness I
Do pity much the Whale.
The Whale enraged cries, Of my size
I Will no abatement make,
But yet methinks the little Ant
Far too much pains does take.
The Ant says she no pity wants
But was extremely pleased,
And of her care and trouble she
Desires not to be eased.
And for the smalness of her Shape
She no concernment has,
Since if compared to a Mite
She like a Giant was.
Jove heard, and gently them reproved
That they so soon could spy
Defects in other Creatures, but
None in themselves descry.
MORAL.
In censuring other people none
Are more severe than we,
But in observing our own faults
As blind as Moles we be.
FAB. XIV. a wolf dressed as a shepherd, with a man lying on the ground beside
him The Wolf turned Shepherd.
A Wolf that was grown old and feeble, and so unable to pursue and take his
prey as in his former youthful days, was long contriving how to maintain
himself in his decrepit Age; at last he found out a subtle invention, whereby
he did not in the least doubt but to live as plentifully and happily as ever.
To which purpose he seeks out a convenient place near the side of a Forest,
where large flocks of Sheep and other Cattle usually fed. In the next place he
gets a Coat and Breeches, fitted to his body, and in all points exactly like a
Shepherd, with a Cap on his head; and then walking upon his hind-feet, he
carried a Shepherds Crook upon on his shoulder; and to make himself absolutely
complete, he ties a pair of Bagpipes to his girdle: Being thus thoroughly
accommodated, he goes confidently toward the flocks, and when he approached
them, finds the true Shepherd and his Dogs with most of the Cattle sleeping,
but yet durst not attempt to seize any of the Sheep for fear of waking the
Shepherd and Dogs; and therefore thought upon another stratagem, which was to
draw one or two of them toward the side of the Wood, where he might without
danger kill and eat them; And to that end he resolves to counterfeit the
Shepherds voice and call, but this utterly ruined the whole project; for
instead of whistling, he set up such a loud howling, that the adjoining Hills
ecchoed again with the noise, which likewise soon roused and alarmed the sleepy
Shepherd and his Dogs, who instantly pursue him with full cry; and he being
much incommoded and hindered in his flight by his new Accoutrements, they soon
run him down, and so he became an easy prey to his Adversaries, who uncasing
him of his deceitful Clothing, make a quick dispatch of this Sham Shepherd.

MORAL.
A Wolf will always be a Wolf; neither is falsehood and treachery usually
concealed long, but will in time be discovered to the confusion of the Actors.

FAB. XIV. The Wolf turned Shepherd.
A Wolf with age grown weak, so that
He could no longer take
His Prey as usual, and to live
Many hard shifts did make.
Set his invention at work
To gain by policy
A livelihood, and by his Wit
His craving wants supply.
He then takes up his residence
Nigh to a Forest side,
Where Flocks of Sheep and Cattle did
Most commonly abide.
Next he puts on a Shepherds Hat
And Coat, that thereby he
Might under that disguise be thought
The true Shepherd to be.
And walking on his hinder Legs
A Shepherds Crook does bear,
And ties a Bagpipe to his side
His calling to declare.
And then demurely walks along
Toward the Flocks of Sheep,
Finding the Shepherd and his Dogs,
And Cattle all asleep.
Yet fears to wake them, but contrives
How he by some device
Might from the Flock a single Sheep
To the Woods side entice.
At length resolves to imitate
The Shepherds voice and call,
And then a hideous howl sets up
Which Shepherd, Dogs, and all
Does soon alarm, who pursue
This Cheater with full cry,
Whose Coat and Breeches hinder him
So that he cannot fly.
But by the Dogs is quickly seized,
Who him in pieces tear,
'Cause he a Shepherd would be thought
But did a Wolf appear.
MORAL.
A Wolf will be a Wolf, though he
Another Shape put on,
And treachery though never so close
Cannot be concealed long.
FAB. XV. a river scene with two people in a boat and one in the water The
Impertinent Trifler.
A Poor Man lived at the side of a Forest, whither he usually went to fetch
Wood: But on a time going upon the same account, he found such plenty, that he
grew very curious, and one stick did not please him, nor another, but he cried,
Well, I will go further, and there I shall find better choice; wandering along
upon this foolish account, it happened that a crew of Wolves came howling
through the Woods, with the sight of whom he was so dreadfully affrighted, that
he ran with all imaginable speed toward a River, where finding neither a Bridge
nor a Boat to help him over, he threw himself into the stream to avoid his
pursuers; but having little skill in swimming, before he was half way cross,
the force of the water carried him away with such force, that he sunk to the
bottom, and had certainly been drowned, but that some Fishermen near hand
observing it, threw their Nets into the place, and took him up in one of them,
and carrying him ashore, as soon as they had dreined the water out of his Body
they set him under an old Wall, seeming rather dead than alive, at length by
the warmth of the Sun he began to recover his senses, but then instead of going
home to refresh himself, he lay there impertinently relating at large to all
that passed by the strange Misfortunes, and terrible dangers which had befallen
him that day, together with all the circumstances thereof, and how narrowly he
had escaped with his life; Thus he continued his trifling discourse a great
while, till at length the Wall being crazy, fell down and knocked him on the
head, in the ruins whereof he was buried.

MORAL.
He that neglects his affairs for Trifles, and spends his time in idle and
impertinent discourse, makes himself ridiculous to wise men, and is often
unfortunate to himself.

FAB. XV. The Impertinent Trifler.
A poor man to the Forest went
To gather Wood, and found
Such plenty of all sorts which lay
Scattered upon the ground
That he stood trifling, and none
Could see which pleased his mind,
But forward went, crying, he hoped
Yet better choice to find.
Wandering along, a crew of Wolves
Came howling in his way,
Threatening with open Jaws that they
Of him would make a prey.
Whom to avoid he with all speed
Toward a River flew,
Where finding neither Bridge nor Boat
Himself therein he threw.
Where he had soon been drowned, but that
Some Fishermen at hand
Fling in their Nets, and catching him
Brought him again to Land.
They drein'd his Body, and him laid
Under a ruined Wall,
Where more a dead man than a live
He did appear to all.
At length his senses did return,
And he to speak began,
But there instead of going home,
He tells to every man
Who passed by, the story of
The dangers of that day,
And how he hardly with his life
Made his escape away.
Thus he lay long, continuing
His fond impertinence,
Neither could he persuaded be
To go away from thence.
Until at length the Wall fell down
And knocked him on the head,
And in the ruins of the same
He there was buried.
MORAL.
Those that in trifling and vain talk
Foolishly spend their days
Into great mischiefs run, and often
Suffer by their delays.
FAB. XVI. a hedgehog and a fox beside a river The Hedghog and the Fox.
A Fox going through a River, when he came to the other side it was so steep
and slippery that though he often endeavored to get up, yet still fell back
again, so that he was forced to lie in the mud, and to aggravate his
misfortune, a great number of stinging Flies fastened upon his Head and Eyes,
and put him to very great torment; an Hedghog that stood on the Rivers brink
perceiving what a wretched condition he was in, very charitably offered his
assistance to drive them away; The Fox gave him many thanks for his kindness,
but told him, he thought it would be more convenient to let them continue where
they were; The Hedg-hog stood in admiration to hear the Fox give such an
answer, who was always thought to be one of the wisest and most discreet
Persons that inhabited in the Forest; Pray, Sir, says he, be pleased to give
me a reason, why you would not be glad to be rid of such troublesome guests;
Brother, quoth the Fox, since you are desirous to know, I Will tell you, I have
considered that these Blood-suckers have been there so long, that their Bellies
must by this time of necessity be almost full, but if they should be driven
away, a fresh party will immediately succeed them, who I am afraid will come on
so eagerly that they will suck out all the remainder of Blood that is left in
my Body, and so make an end of me. The Hedg-hog hearing the notable forecast of
the Fox approved of his great discretion and so left him.

Moral. Those People that are so unfortunate, and miserable as to live under
Viceroys and Governors, who are changed usually in two or three years, as it
happens in many Countries in Europe, would be more happy if they continued
longer, since those that stay some years, having already squeezed the people
are grown rich, and therefore spare them, whereas the new one that comes poor
and hungry, practices all manner of Rapine and Oppression to enrich himself.

FAB. XVI. The Hedg-hog and the Fox.
THE Fox a River passing came
Unto the other side,
But in attempting to get up
Into the mud did slide.
Where he stuck fast, and though to free
Himself he took much pain,
Yet when he was almost got out
He still fell back again.
And his misfortune to increase
A multitude of Flies
So stung his head and face, he feared
They would put out his Eyes.
A charitable Hedg-hog saw
In what distress he lay,
And kindly asked him if he should
These Vermin drive away.
I give you thanks then, quoth the Fox,
But though I feel great pain,
Yet I conceive it will be best
To let them still remain.
The Hedghog marvell'd very much
To hear the Fox speak so,
He being thought discreet and wise,
And would his reason know.
Why, says the Fox, I do suppose
These almost have their fill,
And much more Blood they cannot suck
Let them do what they will.
But if these should away be driven,
Then soon a fresh supply
Would in their rooms succeed, who will
Renew my misery.
Nay worse; for I not only fear
I must endure more pain,
But that these new ones will suck out
What Blood does yet remain
Within my Body; and when that
Cannot their thirst supply,
My Blood being dreined out I must
Inevitably die.
MORAL.
Who under cruel Governors
Do live, were better far
To keep their Old than change for New
Who like Horse-leaches are.
a monkey throwing money from an upstairs window to people down below FAB.
XVII. The Monkey and the Miser.
AN old Usurer who scarce allowed himself meat or drink, and had heaped up much
riches by extortion and oppressing the poor, was so extreme miserable that he
kept no servants, but only a Mastiff Dog to drive beggars from his door, and a
Monkey to make him sport and pastime, who was chained in the Yard before his
house; One time the old Gentleman having occasion to go abroad, to receive
twenty in the Hundred for his money at Interest, left these two faithful
stewards to take care of his concerns, but his trusty servant the Monkey by
often leaping and jumping about, happened to break his Chain, and finding his
heels at liberty, skipt and danced for joy, and looking up he saw a Window
open; Pug being kept like his Master, with very short commons, resolved to
climb up and go in at the Window, to seek for what he could find to appease his
craving Stomach; Being entered it happened to be his Masters Closet, where his
Soul, and his Gold were hoarded up together; The Monkey soon unties one of the
bags, and taking out thence a handful of that yellow metal, throws it out into
the street upon the Stones, where it made a great noise and jingling in the
fall; Pug was so well pleased at the music, that he threw it out with both
hands, until he had quite emptied the bag; several Passengers going by, made
bold to pick up these golden crumbs, and putting them into their Pockets, went
away laughing at the conceit to think what this covetous wretch had raked
together out of the bowels of the indigent, and without any fear of God or man,
should now be so lavishly squandred away by a ridiculous Monkey.

MORAL.
How many are there who compass Sea and Land, and live miserably all their
days, not enjoying the necessaries or conveniences of life, only to leave great
Estates to their Sons and Heirs, who very often do as prodigally waste it, and
to as little purpose, as this wanton roguish Monkey did the Misers Gold.

FAB. XVII. The Monkey and the Miser.
A wretched Miser who did make
An Idol of his Gold.
And for mere covetousness did
Hunger endure and cold.
Neither would any servant keep
Only a Mastiff Dog,
To fright the beggars, and for sport
A Monkey with a Clog.
One day this Usurer went abroad
His Money to receive,
And with these trusty servants does
All his concernments leave.
He was no sooner gone but Pug
Leapt up and down amain,
Until at length by jumping often
He chanced to break his chain.
Finding his heels at liberty
He quickly seeks about,
Being very hungry where to find
Some belly timber out.
And sees a Window open stand
Into which he does creep,
Which was the place where the wretch did
His gold and silver keep.
He opens then the bags, and down
The gold does freely fling,
Pleasing himself how pleasantly
It on the Stones did ring.
Thus he continued until
He all had thrown away,
Which was to those that passed by
A very pleasant play.
Who did with much delight pick up
Those golden crumbs, and then
Went away laughing at the thought,
How miserable men
Deny themselves of what is fit
Or necessary; and
To make their Heirs Rich and Great,
Compass both Sea and Land,
Whose vast Estates soon wasted are
And prodigally sold,
As vainly as the Monkey lost
The Usurers old Gold.
MORAL.
There is an ancient Proverb which
Is generally sure,
Estates by evil means obtained
Do seldom long endure.
a man and a lion in the foreground, with a horse and oxen in the background
FAB. XVIII. The Young Lion and the Old.
AN ancient Lion among other good instructions to his Son, gave him an express
charge, that though for his strength he might engage against any other Creature
in the Forest, yet he should always be very cautious not to fight with a Man,
who was so full of subtilty and craft, that it would be very difficult to
Conquer him; the young Lion heard his Fathers discourse, but in process of time
finding himself grow bigger and stronger, he was fully resolved to encounter
with a Man on the first occasion, since he found no Beast durst stand before
him, but trembled and fled at his presence and roaring; passing along he met
with a Yoke of Oxen plowing in the Field, and coming near them demanded if they
were Men; no, say they, but a Man has put this yoke upon our necks; going
farther, he saw a Horse bridled and sadled, with all accoutrements for a
Battle, of whom he demanded, art thou a Man? no, quoth the Horse, but I am
subject to a man, and serve him to fight against his Enemies, to which end he
put this bridle in my mouth, and a saddle and pistols on my back; proceeding on
he observed a Carpenter cleaving a Tree, to whom he hasted, crying out, art
thou a Man? yes, says the Carpenter, I am so; quoth the Lion, I am very glad of
it, for I have been long seeking one, and must now fight with you; With all my
heart, says he, but first pray help me to pull this Tree in pieces, that I will
says he, and so with his paw plucked it open that the Wedge fell out, upon which
the Tree closing held his foot fast within it, the man calls out for help to
kill the Lion, who seeing his danger with a sudden spring gets out his toes,
but leaves his Nails behind, and running home bleeding to his Father; ah, cried
he, had I taken your advice I had never come to such damage and pain as I now
endure.

Moral. Though young Persons think themselves wiser than those that are old,
yet they often find by their misfortunes, that ancient people are more
experienced in the deceits and treacheries of the World than themselves.

FAB. XVIII. The Young Lion and the Old.
A Lion charged his Son that he
Should very careful be,
Not to fight with a Man, since he
Was full of subtilty.
The young one heard; but yet resolved
That he his strength would try
Against a man, and doubted not
To gain the Victory.
And as he traveled along,
He happened to meet
A yoke of Oxen in the Field,
Whom he does kindly greet,
And asked them, pray are you two Men?
The Oxen answer no,
But Man this yoke put on our necks
Wherewith you see us go.
Traveling on he spies a Horse,
Tied fast unto a Tree,
Sadled and Bridled for the War,
In all his gallantry,
And cries to him, Art thou a Man?
The Horse replies, Not I,
But I obey a Man, and fight
Against his enemy.
He passes on, and near a Wood
A Carpenter does find
Cleaving a Tree, to whom he goes
And says, Pray be so kind
To tell me if you are a Man;
Yes quoth the Man, I am;
Then you must fight me, for to that
Intent I hither came.
Content, says he, but with your paw
Pray sever first this Tree,
The Lion trying, fast is caught
And hardly could get free.
At length with loss of Nails he does
Unto his Father go,
Crying had I been ruled by you,
I never had known such woe.
MORAL.
Young men believe Old men are Fools,
And that they nothing know,
But Old men by experience
Know young men to be so.
a dog and a wolf fighting, with an ass in the background FAB. XIX. The Dog,
Wolf, and Ass.
A Dog receiving a great affront from a Wolf, resolved on revenge, but though
his heart was good, yet thinking he had not sufficient ability, he intended to
procure a second, who might assist him in his design, and after he had
considered what beast he should engage to aid him, upon mature deliberation he
concluded the Ass to be the fittest, both by reason of his great strength, whom
he had often seen to carry very heavy burdens, and likewise for his voice which
was mighty loud, and as he fancied, like the warlike sound of a Trumpet; to him
then he goes, and relates the matter, earnestly requesting him to engage in his
quarrel, who he was sure must needs be very valiant and (...) hearing such
commendations of himself, was not a little elevated, and readily promised to
perform his request, saying; dear brother Dog, since you have such confidence
in my courage, I hope I shall never fail your expectation, for I am resolved to
venture my life in your cause, and doubt not of success against your brutish
enemy; The Dog was extreme joyful at his gallant resolution, and so they both
went immediately toward the Wolfs Den, and the Dog called out to him, to give
present reparation for the injuries he had offered him, or else prepare to lose
his life, for he was resolved with the assistance of his brother Ass to fight
him instantly; the Wolf not used to such language comes out with great fury,
snarling and grining with his cruel Teeth, at the sight of whom the Ass was so
terribly affrighted, that he ran instantly away, leaving the Dog alone to
combat with his enraged enemy, who finding the match unequal soon after fled
away likewise, and then recollecting himself; well, quoth he, I find there is
no trust either in strength or voice, for both these this dull Ass had, and yet
wanted true courage, and showed himself as much a coward as the rest of his
kindred.

Moral. It is often seen, that the Bullies and Huffs of the Town, who make such
a bustle with their Red Coats and Feathers, are upon Trial very far from being
truly valiant and stout.

FAB. XIX. The Dog, Wolf, and the Ass.
AN angry Dog a quarrel had
Against a Wolf, which he
Resolved to revenge, but found
Himself too weak to be.
Therefore a second he will have,
Who in his cause may fight,
By whose assistance he does hope
To put the Wolf to flight.
At length he met the Ass, whom he
Had very often seen
Great Burdens bear, and thought he strong
And valiant had been,
His voice was likewise great and loud,
And like a Trumpet shrill,
Therefore entreats that against the Wolf
He now assist him will.
The Ass proud that he was thought stout,
Replies, most willingly
Dear Dog, I will your cause espouse
And in your quarrel dye.
The Dog now thought himself cock-sure
Of Victory and Success,
And boldly challenges the Wolf
His injuries to redress,
The Wolf comes grinning toward them,
Which struck the Ass with dread,
So that with might and main away
He from the combat fled,
And basely leaves the Dog alone,
His cruel Foe to fight,
Who finding an unequal match,
Makes his escape by flight,
And then reflecting thereupon,
He cries, I find if we
Of valor judge by strength or voice,
We may mistaken be,
For both of these this dull Ass had,
But yet a Coward he
Was bred and born, which is entailed
To all his progeny.
MORAL.
Huffing Red Coats and Feathers, may
Make men look big and brave,
Yet upon Trial we often find
They little courage have.
FAB. XX. an old woman surrounded by a number of skulls The Old Woman and the
Men's Skulls.
AN Old Wan traveling far from her own house, happened to come to a certain
place, where several years before, a terrible battle had been fought between
two mighty Armies, and a multitude of men slain, and observed a great number of
skulls to lie scattered about the Fields; The Woman being very devout and
superstitious, imagined it to be a work of humanity and charity to have them
decently buried; she therefore fills her Apron with many of them, and with much
pains and labor, carries them a long way to find a convenient place for their
interment, which before she could discover, she had occasion to go down a very
steep hill, where missing her footing, all the Skulls ran out of her lap down
the Hill, some one way and some another, at a great distance from each other;
After she had recovered her self from her fall, instead of vexing at her
misfortune; she burst out into a loud laughter, and calling after them; nay,
nay, quoth she, I do not at all wonder that every one of you runs a different
way, so far from one another, no question it is but just as you did when you
were alive, for I believe that you could never agree then, or else you had
never knocked one another on the head; according to the Old Proverb, so many men
so many minds; After the Old Woman had pleased her self for some time with
these moral considerations, she very contentedly gathered the Skulls up again,
and digging a hole in the earth she there buried them together, saying, you
were best agree now, for if you should quarrel I shall not come to part you.

Moral. It is very foolish, ridiculous, and unreasonable for one man to impose
his sentiments and opinions upon another in discourse; much more to ruin and
destroy men for not thinking as they do, which is yet altogether out of their
own power; according to the Proverb aforementioned, Quot homines, tot
sententiae. As many men, as many minds.

FAB. XX. The Old Woman and the Men's Skulls.
A Woman did a Journey take,
But had not traveled far
Ere to a spacious Field she came,
Where in the time of War,
A bloody battle had been fought
And in the mortal strife,
Many a stout and valiant man
Had been bereaved of life,
While the Old Woman viewed this place.
Around; at length she found
A number of men's Skulls, which lay
Scattered upon the ground,
And being much concerned that they
Unburied there should lie,
Resolved to take them up, and so
Inter them decently,
And gathering many in a heap,
Puts them into her lap,
But going down a steep descent
She met with a mishap,
For down she fell, and then the Skulls
Out of her Apron fell,
And all about in different ways
Ran swiftly down the hill,
The Woman never vexed her self,
But laughing said, nay, nay,
I do not wonder that you all
Do take a several way,
For I suppose that when you lived
You seldom could agree,
But of as many minds as men
Commonly used to be,
Else you had never come to this place
To be knocked on the head,
And in the open Field to lie
So long unburied.
When she had this reflection made
She takes them up again,
And digs a hole where they at length
Quietly did remain.
MORAL.
It Is foolish and ridiculous
That we should angry be
With others, 'cause they with our own
Opinions disagree,
And worse to ruin men if they
With our eyes cannot see,
Which never will Converts make, but does
Increase Hypocrisy.
FAB. XXI. a hidden lion watching an ass and a fox The Lion, the Ass, and the
Fox.
A Lion marching furiously through the Forest, as if he would destroy all the
Beasts therein, happened to fall into a Pit, from whence he had little hope of
freeing himself, and thereupon roars so terribly for help, that his voice made
all the Wood tremble: The Ass being nigh, comes to the Pit, to see what had
befaln His Sovereign, who earnestly entreated his assistance, by letting him
take hold of his Tail, thereby to save himself, and in requital he solemnly
promised upon his Royal word, not only to spare his life, though he was never so
hungry, but likewise to free him for the future from the slavery he had
formerly endured, and that he and his should hereafter enjoy all the Liberties
and Privileges of freeborn Subjects. The simple Ass, who had a great
reverence for names and Royal promises, seemed very inclinable to believe and
aid him, but the Fox coming by at that instant, and being informed of the
matter; Sure, quoth he, to the Ass, you are not so great a Blockhead to credit
the Lions engagements in his extremity; can you imagine he will ever change his
brutish nature, or will regard any obligations made in his necessity? Is it not
the great happiness of us all that we may now feed securely in the Forest,
without being endangered either in our Persons or young Ones by the cruel and
arbitrary dealings of this barbarous Tyrant? The Ass, though of a dull and
unthinking temper, yet seemed to open his eyes at the discreet reasoning of the
Fox, and so they went both away together, leaving the Lion to shift for
himself, and get out as well as he could.

Moral. When a People have been delivered from the Arbitrary Government of a
Tyrannical Prince, either by their own valor, or his withdrawing from the
exercise of it, it is certainly the greatest stupidity and folly to recall him
again, though upon never so specious promises and pretenses, since he will
surely Reign more tyrannically than before.

FAB. XXI. The Lion, the Ass, and the Fox.
A Lion marching furiously
Along the Forest, fell
Into a Pit, and how to get
From thence he could not tell;
He therefore roars aloud for help,
Whose voice did so resound,
It made the very Fowls and Beasts
To tremble all around,
The Ass was near, and quickly heard
This terrible Alarm,
And goes to see whether the King
Had gotten any harm,
The Lion does entreat him, he
Will his assistance give,
For which he will be his faithful Friend
As long as e're he live,
Neither will tear nor eat him, though
He famished should be,
But he and his from slavery,
For ever shall be free.
The Ass who great ones promises
And Titles did admire,
Within himself concluded to
Accomplish his desire,
But the Fox coming by, to him
He does his mind declare,
The Fox cries what are you so dull,
To think he wont you tear?
Do you imagine that he can
His natural temper leave?
Therefore with Oaths and Promises
Do not your self deceive,
I think we may be rather glad
To see the Lion there,
Who now are free, and never need
His Teeth nor Claws to fear;
The Ass at this discourse began
His folly to perceive,
And going with the Fox; their King
They in the Pit do leave.
MORAL.
When from a Tyrants Government
A People are set free,
By valor or by policy,
And gain their Liberty,
It may be counted madness, if
They him again restore,
Who then will surely them enslave
More than he did before.
a man and his dog meeting a serpent in a forest FAB. XXII. The Man and the
Serpent.
A Great overgrown Serpent striving to pass through a hedge, was catched in a
snare which held him so fast by the neck, that he was almost strangled. A man
passing by, he begged of him to unloose him, or he must instantly perish; the
man pitying him, said, If thou will swear not to poison me either with thy
teeth or tail, nor do me the least hurt, I will release thee; the Serpent swore
he would never harm him while he lived; whereupon the man set him free, and
they traveled together a great way; at length the Serpent growing hungry,
endeavored to kill him; What, quoth he, have thou so soon forgot thy Oath? No,
says the Serpent, but famine which breaks through stone walls forces me to it,
and makes void all vows. Well, says the man, but pray then let me live till the
matter be decided by the next honest Passenger; content, quoth the Serpent, so
they traveled on, and met with the Raven and her Son, to whom the Serpent
related the matter, who hoping to come in for a snack, presently cried, The
Serpent ought to eat the man: He that is a Robber, and lives by blood, is not a
fit Judge, says the man, let us proceed further. Next they meet with the Bear
and the Wolf, who expecting a part like the Raven, were of his opinion;
hereupon the Serpent spits at him to destroy him, saying, I have had Judgment
twice against thee, Ay, says the man, by murderers themselves; let us expect
better Arbitrators. Soon after they met with the Fox, to whom they likewise
appealed; I cannot well decide it, says the Fox, unless you let the man fasten
you as you were when he released you: The Serpent suffered himself to be tied
fast; Now, says he to the man, if you will again untie him you may; no, quoth
the man, there let him lie and die like an ungrateful wretch as he is, and so
went away laughing at the Serpents folly.

Moral. Ingratitude is the worst of all vices, and ought to be the most
severely punished, neither should Thieves and Robbers judge or determine the
Cause of their Confederates.

FAB. XXII. The Man and the Serpent.
A Mighty Serpent through a hedge
Endeavoring to slide,
Was taken in a fatal snare,
And certainly had died,
Had not a man just at that time,
Happened to pass him by,
To whom the Serpent for his help,
Most mournfully did cry,
The man compassionating him,
Came quickly to his aid,
But yet e're he reelased him
Unto the Serpent said,
Upon condition you will swear
Me never to assail,
Neither with your envenomed Teeth,
Nor with your poisonous Tail,
Out of the danger you are in
I then will you relieve,
And from inevitable death,
Your life I will reprieve,
He freely swore, and was untied,
But like a treacherous snake,
Finding himself at liberty
He to the man thus spoke,
The vow I lately made did from
My danger then proceed,
And against law and reason was
Extorted in my need,
But now my hunger is so great,
I of necessity
Must eat you, or with Famine soon
Shall miserably dye,
Then quoth the man, I pray admit
This difference to be tried
By the next honest Passenger,
Who may the same decide,
Content says he, and then they meet
The Raven and the Bear,
And after that the Wolf, who all
Against the man declare,
He cries, these all are Murderers,
At length the Fox comes by,
Who hearing them, says let the man
Again the Serpent tie,
Which done he tells the man now him
You may again untye,
No quoth he, for his treachery
He there deserves to dye.
MORAL.
They that ungrateful are deserve
No help nor charity,
Neither should Thieves and Murderers of
Their own crimes Judges be.
a wolf and a fox following a mare and her foal FAB. XXIII. The Wolf and Mare.
THE Fox and the Wolf traveling together, they met with a Mare which had a
Fool by her side, that was very fat and smooth; the Wolf was almost famisht
with hunger, and desired his Cousin Reynard to go and ask the Mare what she
would have for her Colt; truly, says the Mare, I am in great want of money,
and would willingly sell him; and what do you value him at, quoth the Fox? why
Brother, says she, the price is written in my hinder foot, and if you please
you may read it; Excuse me Brother, cries the Fox, for I cannot read, neither
do I desire to buy your Fool for my self, but am only sent as a Messenger from
the Wolf, who has a great mind to him; Well, said the Mare, let him come
himself, and no question but we shall bargain: The Fox went to the Wolf, and
carried this answer, asking him if he could read written hand; Read, quoth he,
Do you doubt it? let me tell thee, Cousin, I can read both Latin, French,
Dutch and English; I have studied at the University, and disputed with several
Doctors; I have seen many famous Plays, and heard diverse Trials in Courts of
Judicature; I have taken my Degrees in the Laws, and there is no writing but I
can readily understand; Well, come along then, quoth the Fox, and read the
value of the Colt in the Mares foot behind: Away he goes, and desires to read
the price, she lifts up her hinder foot, which had a strong Iron Shoe newly put
on, with many sharp-headed Nails; and while the Wolf was earnest to see the
writing, she struck him so full in the forehead, that he fell over and over,
and lay a long while for dead, all bloody and sorely wounded, while the Mare
went trotting away with her Colt, and laughing at his folly and stupidity. At
length recovering, Cousin Reynard, quoth he, what a Roguish trick has the Jade
served me? for thinking the Nails had been Letters, while I was reading them,
she hi^ me so strongly on the face, that I am afraid my skull i^ broken. Alas
Cousin, quoth the Fox, I find the Proverb true in you, That the greatest
Scholars are not the wisest me^

Moral. Those that pretend to most Learning, and are much conceited of their
own Knowledge, do many times fall into great misfortunes, and are made a scorn
of by those that bring them (...) mischief.

FAB. XXIII. The Wolf and Mare.
THE Fox and Wolf together walked
Along the Forest, where
They saw a fat brisk wanton Colt,
Which sucked a lusty Mare,
The Wolf was almost starved, and so
He Reynard does entreat,
To ask the price of him, that he
Might something have to eat,
The Fox goes to the Mare, and asks
If she her Foal will sell,
And if she willing be to trade,
The lowest price to tell,
The Mare cries, I will sell him if
I can a Chapman find,
And for the price it is plainly writ
Upon my foot behind,
He knowing the Mares subtilty,
Pretends he could not read,
And so desires to be excused,
Declaring that indeed
It was not for himself, that he
Did come the Colt to buy,
But at his uncle Wolfs request,
Who was but just hard by.
Then let him come himself, quoth she,
That he the price may see,
And if he my proposals like,
We quickly shall agree,
The Fox goes to the Wolf, and cries,
Uncle if you can read,
The Colt will soon be yours, and you
On him may sweetly feed,
Read, quoth the Wolf, Cuz, doubt not that
I all my time have spent
In learning, and in all known Tongues
I am most excellent,
He then goes to the Mare, who had
Been newly shod, to read
The Nails which he thought words, but whilst
He holds close his head,
The treacherous Mare upon the Skull,
Gives him so smart a blow,
As the poor Wolf had almost killed,
And backward did him throw,
The Fox then cries. Uncle I find
The ancient Proverb true,
Great Scholars are not always wise,
As now it is seen by you.
MORAL.
Those that pretend to understand,
More than they truly know,
Are often abused and mocked by them
That seek their overthrow.
a wolf and a nightingale by a tree FAB. XXIV. The Nightingale and Wolf.
A Wolf being almost famisht with hunger traveled many Miles, and could find
no' booty, at length, as he passed through a Wood he heard a Nightingale sing
very loudly and harmoniously: The Wolf was mighty glad of the adventure,
concluding with himself that this must needs be some large Fowl, and that he
ought to spare for no pains nor labor to obtain her, since he did not question
but the purchase of such a delicate Banquet would sufficiently recompense all
the care and trouble he could be at in getting her. Pursuant to this resolution
he follows the pretty Bird by her voice, since by the thickness of the leaves
he he could not see her. Thus with unwearied diligence he continued many days
hearkening to the melodious strains of poor innocent Philomel, as she flew from
tree to tree, and from bush to bush, little suspecting the treachery that was
designed against her. At length by his constant and continual watchfulness, the
Wolf takes an opportunity to surprise and seize the unfortunate Nightingale
e're she was aware: But when he had got her, he was more surprised than she:
Sure, quoth he, my eyes are not my own; certainly it is impossible that so
small an Animal as thou art should make so great a noise, who art nothing but
tail and feather; I did expect that thou had been as big as a wild Goose or a
wild Duck at least, and reckoned upon it to have made a hearty meal of thee;
but alas, how strangely am I disappointed, and what a slender requital shall I
have, for the watching and fasting which I have patiently endured so many days
in pursuit of thee, when instead of a bellyfull, I find thou will only be a
mouth-full, and therefore utterly incapable to satisfy my hungry appetite?

Moral. Great men do many times make large promises, and pretend to effect
mighty mutters for others, but their performances too often vanish into words
and air only, to the loss and disappointment of those that put confidence in
them.

FAB. XXIV. The Nightingale and the Wolf.
AN hungry Wolf walking his rounds,
He happened to hear
A Nightingale within a Bush,
Which sung both loud and clear,
And by the shrilness of her voice
He doubted not but she
A stately Fowl was, and to him
A gallant prize would be;
He follows her from bush to bush,
And then from tree to tree,
Being directed by her voice,
Though her he could not see.
Thus diligently he pursues
The poor Bird many days,
Who of her danger ignorant,
Sings her delightful lays.
At length when with unwearied pains,
He her destruction sought,
By lying close in ambuscade,
Poor Philomel he caught,
But when he was possessed of her,
And well observed his prize,
His mind was so disturbed, that he
Could scarce believe his eyes:
Art thou, quoth he, that Animal
Which so much noise did make?
And have I been at so great toil,
And trouble for thy sake?
I hardly can believe that thou
Can possibly be she,
Who with so strong and clear a sound,
Sung thus melodiously,
But if it real be, I find
Thou nothing art but voice,
And that I little cause have, at
My bargain to rejoice,
Because I doubted not to make
A Belly full of thee:
But to my grief I now find, thou
Will It scarce a mouthful be.
MORAL.
Great men do often others feed
With hopes, and with fair words,
Yet their performance is so small,
It naught but air affords.
a stag carrying an injured dog on its back, and a fox FAB. XXV. The Deer and
Hound.
A Deer inhabiting in a large Forest, had one time the fortune to see a couple
of Hounds coursing a Hare over a great field; but being eager in their pursuit,
one of the Dogs leaping very eagerly over a hedge, broke his Leg, whereby poor
Wat made his escape, because the other without his fellows assistance was not
able to seize her: The Stag having observed all from her shelter where she was
safe, ventured out, seeming much concerned that the Hound who had showed so
much briskness in the Chase, should perish for want of help, and therefore much
pitying his condition, she offered to carry him to the next Village, and
accordingly took him upon her back, in order to convey him to the Town
adjoining: In the way the Deer was discoursing how happy he and his fellows
should be if the Hounds would not maliciously follow them by the scent to
destroy them, and how unreasonable it was for them to make war upon those who
never offered them the least injury, nor gave them any occasion for that severe
treatment which they received from them, while this communication lasted, they
were overtaken by a Fox, who having overheard what they had been talking of,
came up to the Stag, and said, Sir, by your discourse you seem to be a sensible
Creature, and have rightly argued against the injustice of the Hounds, and yet
directly contrary hereunto, you now carry one of the greatest Enemies you have
upon your back, who is at open hostility with you and all your Race; and if
your life were in his power, as his is in yours, I dare assure you, he would
show you no mercy: The Stag was a little concerned at this reasoning of the
Fox, and began to think of throwing him off his back, but recollecting himself;
Well, quoth he, though what you say may be true, and he should be so ungrateful,
yet since I have given him my word to assist him, I am resolved to leave him in
a place of security.

Moral. A generous Person who has his unknown Enemy in his power, when he has
once passed his word to protect and save him, will certainly keep his Faith
with him.

FAB. XXV. The Deer and Hound.
A Deer in a large Forest dwelt,
Where he once chanced to view
A Hare, which through a spacious Field,
Two Hounds did close pursue,
But one more eager was, who as
He over a hedge did leap,
Happened to break his Leg, whereby
Poor Wat made his escape,
The Deer the whole observed from
The Covert where he was
Secure, and coming out, upon
The Hound compassion has,
And cries, what pity it is that he
Which showed himself to be
So brisk even now, by a mischance,
Should live in misery,
And therefore out of kindness, he
Offers his help to carry
Him on his back to the next Town,
For fear he should miscarry,
The Fox this loving Porter meets,
Thus loaded by the way,
And cries, dear Brother do you know,
What you are doing? Pray
Consider that upon your back
Your greatest enemy
You bear, who if he were not lame
Your death would quickly be,
Since he and all his race against you,
Do open War proclaim,
And how to murder you and yours
Continually do aim.
The Deer was somewhat startled at
This his discourse, but yet
Quoth he, I have a promise made
In safety him to set,
Therefore if he ungrateful be,
And against me combine,
The villainy lies on his side
And not at all on mine.
MORAL.
A Generous Man who gives his Faith
For the security
Of one, who afterward he knows
To be his Enemy,
Yet scorns to break his word with him,
But will perform the same,
And though indamaged thereby
Yet still preserves his fame.
a wolf and a fox, and some apes in a cave FAB XXVI. The Wolf and Apes.
A Wolf in the midst of Winter was ready to die for want, but happening to meet
with a Fox, whom he observed to be fat and in good case, he asked him how he
came to live so well in that hard season: The Fox showed him where the Ape and
her young lay in the Den, saying, If it had not been for that charitable
creature, I should have wanted as much as you, but there I have often been
invited, and found kind entertainment, witness the fragments of my Supper last
night, and therewith gave the Wolf some remains of his meat, which he eat up
with much greediness, desiring the Fox to tell him how he might get into favor
with the Ape; That is not very difficult, quoth he, it is only by framing your
self to flattery and lying: If that be all, quoth the Wolf, I can soon practice
it, and thereupon runs with all speed to the Den, but was no sooner in e're he
cried out, Ah fough! what a nasty filthy stink is here? and then seeing the Old
Ape hugging her deformed young ones; Surely, quoth he, in my whole life I never
saw such ugly creatures as these are; whereat the Apes being enraged, they all
fell upon him together, one biting him by the Nose, another by the Neck, and
the rest in other places, so that he was forced to run out with all speed to
save his life; and finding the Fox, related his misfortune to him; You are well
enough served, quoth he, since you forgot my counsel, and spoke truth when you
should have told lies: Why, do you think I had lost my smelling and eyesight?
and yet I told the Ape that her house was perfumed with sweet Wood, and that I
was mightily pleased to see such a beautiful Lady have such a fine offspring
of young ones to keep up the family; upon which the best in the house was set
before me, but during Supper I was very careful not to speak a word of truth,
and hereby I was treated so gallantly; or else might have starved as you are
like to do, e're you have any relief from her.

Moral. Most men are too much pleased with flattery, and nothing is more
disobliging than to tell them their faults, or impartially to censure their
actions.

FAB. XXVI. The Wolf and the Apes.
A Wolf in Winter almost starved,
Who nothing had to eat,
Neither could possibly contrive
Provision how to get,
Happened to meet a Fox, who looked
So fat, and plump and well,
That the Wolf cries, I prithee Cuz,
Be but so kind, to tell
How thou do thus maintain thy self,
And art in such good plight,
Ah quoth the Fox; the Ape's my friend
Who often does me invite.
Into his Den, who nobly lives
And where I need not fear
To meet with Turkies, Geese, and Hens,
And other dainty cheer,
But says the Wolf, can you tell how
I may her favor get,
And thereby be partaker of
This plenteous store of meat?
Yes Uncle, says the Fox, if you
Can lie and flatter well,
But have a care what e're you see,
The Truth you never tell.
That Is quickly learnt quoth he, and then
Into the Den he goes,
And cries, Foh, what a nasty stink
Is this offends my nose?
Then seeing how the young Apes were
Embraced by the old,
They are the ugliest things, quoth he,
That e're I did behold.
The Cubs enraged upon him fell,
And wounded him all over,
So that to save his life, with speed
He run out of the door,
And meeting with the Fox, he does
His sad misfortune tell,
Who cried, you for your folly do
Deserve it very well,
What do you think I could not see,
And smell as well as you?
Yet I the old one Lady called,
And praised the young ones too.
MORAL.
Most men love flattery, and scarce
Can ever truly love
Any, that plainly of their faults
Or vices them reprove.
FAB. XXVII. one dog barking at the moon and one dog hung from the branch of a
tree The Dog and Moon.
A Surly ill natured Dog, in a Moon-shiny night bark't and bawled incessantly
at the Moon, to the great disturbance and vexation of the Neighborhood, who
hearing him make such a violent noise, came out of their Houses to see what the
matter was, and perceiving the ridiculous occasion thereof, one of the men
coming up and calling to him, what an insipid and senseless Cur art thou, quoth
he, to spend thy Lungs and thy labor in such an unprofitable employment? for
if thou should tear thy heart out with yelping, yet the Moon is so far above
thy rage or malice, being placed in so high an Orb, and at such a vast distance
from thee, that she will still continue her course and cannot receive the least
interruption or disquiet by thy foolish and filthy howling; but all this good
counsel was utterly thrown away upon this inconsiderate Whelp, who still
continued his ungrateful barking; so that at length he became such a nuisance to
the people, as they all unanimously concluded he deserved to be hanged, and
accordingly catching him, they resolved to silence his noise, lest his example
should encourage other Curs to join in the consort, and so make a universal
distraction; accordingly this just Sentence was executed upon him, and so this
silly animal lost his life in projecting to perform improbable as well as
impossible attempts.

Moral. The only argument to silence and convince those ill natured, ambitious
and discontented People who bark and murmur against the best of Princes, and
the best of Governments, (which is faulty in nothing but in being too mild and
too merciful, to such ungrateful wretches) is certainly that which quieted the
Cur before mentioned, that is a Halter; which is the only way to prevent them
from disturbing others, as well as ruining themselves.

FAB. XXVII. The Dog and Moon.
A snarling ill bred Country Cur,
In a cold Winter night,
Against the Moon, which then shone bright,
Did bark with all his might,
Whereby he such a noise did make,
The neighbors went to see,
What the occasion of his rage
And fury then should be,
But when they came and saw the Whelp
Such mighty pains to take,
And to so little purpose, such
A bellowing, to make;
They cry; Thou senseless Puppy Dog,
Why do thou show thy spite
Toward the Moon? against whom thou
Can only bark not bite,
Who in her Orb beyond thy reach,
Is placed in the Sky,
And all attempts of whifling Curs
Does utterly defy,
But this good counsel on the Dog
Had no effect at all,
So that he still continued
Incessantly to bawl:
Which so disturbed the People, that
They all concluded, he
As a seditious Mutineer
Deserved the Gallow Tree,
And in pursuance of this just
And Legal sentence, they
To present execution
Did carry him away,
Lest others should encouragement
From his example take,
Whereby a great distraction
Among them it might make,
And so this silly Animal
Like a dull fool did die,
Vainly attempting to hurt those,
That were for him too high.
MORAL.
Those dangerous Persons who conspire
And rail against their Prince,
Although the best of Kings; there is naught
More proper to convince,
Of their great folly, than the means
Used to this bawling Whelp,
For if all other Medicines fail,
A Halter sure will help.
two men clubbing a bear, and a fox in the background FAB. XXVIII. The Bear and
Fox.
THere happened a quarrel between the Bear and the Fox; but being seemingly
reconciled, the Bear one day meeting the Fox, cried, Cousin, how do you? are
you in health? Truly, quoth the Fox, not very well, for I am afraid I got a
surfeit lately by feeding on meat I do not usually eat: Pray what might that
be, quoth the Bear? That, quoth the Fox, which some Great ones count a dainty,
but I had rather taste a limb of a Hen. In short Uncle, it was Honey-combs
whereof I eat so freely, that I have been ill ever since; Honey-combs, quoth
the Bear! sure it is the best victuals upon Earth: Nephew, I hope you don't
slight Honey; if you could help me to some, you would for ever oblige me: Sure
you do but jest, quoth the Fox; No, says he, I am serious, give me but my belly
full of Honey, and command me as you please: Well Uncle, says the Fox, I Will
soon carry you where there is enough to serve you seven years: The Bear was
even ravished for joy, and instantly they went together toward a place where
there was a large old Tree, wherein a Carpenter had drove two wedges in order
to cleave it; Reynard resolving on revenge for former affronts, cried out, Look
there Uncle, get but into that cleft, and you will find Honey enough, but pray
don't over-eat your self: I warrant you, quoth the Bear, I Will take care, and so
with much haste entered the Tree with his two feet forward, thrusting his head
into the cleft quite over his ears; which the Fox observing, instantly ran and
plucked out the wedges, so that he locked the Bear fast therein; who unable to
free himself, made so much noise and houling, that the Carpenter coming out,
and finding such a prize, called all his Neighbors to kill the Bear; who
perceiving his danger, with much struggling got out his head, but left the skin
of his ears and claws behind him, and so ran bleeding away, being laughed at by
the Fox for trusting to the friendship of a reconciled Enemy.

Moral. Some will venture their necks to fill their bellies. Again, if you have
once offended an evil man, it is very dangerous trusting him any more.

FAB. XXVIII. The Bear and Fox.
THE Bear in traveling the Woods,
The Fox did chance to meet,
And all old quarrels laid aside,
He Reynard thus did greet,
How is it with you, worthy Friend?
Are you in health or not?
No quoth the Fox, I am afraid
A surfeit I have got,
By eating of unusual fare
Which with me don't agree,
Though by Great Ones I know such food
Much valued to be.
Sir I desire, quoth the Bear,
That you would let me know,
What kind of victuals it might be
That you offended so,
'Twas only Honey, Sir, of which
Cloying and fulsome meat,
I doubt too great a quantity
I happened late to eat,
Honey, quoth Bruin! Sir, but that
I know you to be wise,
I your discretion should suspect
If Honey you despise:
And if of that delicious food
Enough you me will give,
Your Servant, yea your Slave I Will be,
As long as e're I live,
Well quoth the Fox, go but with me,
And I will show you where,
You soon may get your belly full,
And have enough to spare,
The Bear goes joyfully, the Fox
Shows him a hollow Tree,
Wherein a Wedge was, and affirms
Honey therein to be,
The Bear thrusts in his head, the Fox
The Wedge plucks out, whereby
The Tree does close, and the poor Bear
Surprizeth instantly,
Who roaring loud the men come out,
And many blows do lay
Upon him, so that he with life
Hardly escaped away.
MORAL.
None but dull Fools will dangers run
Their taste to gratify,
Nor will a wise man trust him, who
Was once his enemy.
an ape sitting on a dolphin FAB. XXIX. The Dolphin and Ape.
A Ship Sailing from Athens full of Passengers, was bound to some other Port in
the Mediterranean Sea, but a storm arising the Wind blew so very hard that the
Ship was driven against a Rock with such violence as she seemed to be split
into a thousand pieces; however the leak was not so great, but the People had
time to shift for themselves, and the ship breaking in a little time, some
endeavored to save themselves upon the Mast, others upon the broken Ribs, and
other pieces of the Vessel; among the rest an Ape which was in the company, got
upon a board and swom along till he was met by a Dolphin, which Fish being
generally thought to have a natural love and affection for mankind, seeing the
Ape in this posture, and supposing him to be some little man who had made his
escape out of the Shipwreck, he swims toward him, and the Ape glad of his
assistance, leaps upon his back; the Dolphin then made toward the Shore to land
his Passenger, and in the way, falling into discourse with the Ape, inquired
what countreyman he was; I am a Gentleman of Athens quoth he, descended from
one of the most honorable Families in that Country; then you know Pireus very
well, says the Dolphin, which was the name of the chief Port or Haven belonging
to the City; but the Ape mistaking it for a Gentleman's name; know him, quoth he
ay, very well, he is my first Cozen on the mothers side, and a person of great
worth and quality, with whom I am very intimately acquainted: I find Sirrah,
says the Dolphin, that you are a very impudent lying rascal, and fitter to be
drowned than saved, being sorry I have already taken so much pains to preserve
you; but to rid the World of such a Villain, I will instantly dispatch you, and
therewith sinking to the bottom carried poor Pug down with him, who there left
his life and his lying together.

Moral. Vanity and lying do often bring danger and destruction upon those that
are addicted thereunto.

FAB. XXIX. The Dolphin and Ape.
A Ship from Athens Sailed, and by
A Tempest run aground,
Before she could arrive unto
The Port where she was bound:
Then every man shifts for himself,
Striving with might and main,
On boards and pieces of the Ship,
The nighest shore to gain.
Among the rest an Ape was there,
Who on a board was got,
And by the fury of the Waves
He up and down did float:
A Dolphin, who is said to be
A lover of mankind,
In this most dangerous estate
Happened poor Pug to find,
And thinking him a little man
By Shipwreck cast away,
He kindly offered him to land,
In safety to convey,
The Dolphin then asks who he was,
And from what place he came,
I sailed from Athens Sir, quoth he,
A City of great fame,
Where it is well known, I am a man
Of wealth and dignity,
Being descended of an high
And noble Family,
Then, quoth the Dolphin, you well know
Pireus; yes cries he,
He is my kinsman, and a man
Of worth and quality,
Ah, quoth the Dolphin I much doubt
That you a villain are,
And am concerned that I to save
Your life took so much care;
For Pireus no man's name's, but
A Haven of that Town,
And for your knavery and lies
You instantly I Will drown,
And therewith sinking, carries Pug
Down with him too, where he
His lying and his life both left
In The bottom of the Sea.
MORAL.
Falsehood, and lies, and vanity,
Do commonly undo
Those idle foolish men, who are
Addicted thereunto.
a vulture on a throne with other birds before it FAB. XXX. The Magpies,
Vulture and Eagle.
THE Birds being destitute of a King, they at length concluded to advance the
Vulture to the Throne, though they were not insensible of his fierce and cruel
temper: But the Solemn Oaths and Promises he made that every Bird should enjoy
his own Nest, as before, without the least disturbance, prevailed so much upon
the Falcons, Herns, Storks, and other high flying Birds, but especially with
the Magpies, that they admitted him to the Government: He was no sooner settled,
but he made it apparent how quickly he had forgot his Obligations; and by the
Advice of the Ravens he drove diverse of the Storks and Magpies from their
ancient Nests, and bestowed them upon the Ravens: This so incensed them, that
they resolved to call the Eagle to their assistance, who no sooner appeared,
but the Vulture being sensible of the injuries he had offered them, fled in
great fear to a thick Wood adjoining, and sheltred himself in the Dragons Den,
and the Eagle was made King with the general consent and applause of the Fowls
and Birds, and governed the feathered Nation with great Justice and Valor.
After a while some few Storks, Magpies, Buzzards, Owls and Batts grew
discontented, pretending that they could not build their Nests so high as they
desired, for they now expected to lodge themselves in the Cedar Trees, and not
in such shrubs as they formerly were used to: Hereupon they secretly assemble a
number of Birds, declaring their grievances, and that nothing would relieve
them but to recall the Vulture again, and depose the Eagle: One of the Magpies
then stood up and demanded what security the Vulture could give that he would
not treat them as bad, if not worse than he did before, if ever he should
return again: For, quoth he, The Vulture has already forfeited his honor and
word to us, and what has he now left, especially since his converse with the
Dragon, who is the declared Enemy of all the feathered Race, and according to
the nature of that venomous Serpent, resolves to burn and destroy all before
him? These reasons convinced the generality of the Birds, only three or four
Storks, Magpies Buzzards, Owls and Batts, upon the discovery of their ill
designs fled to the Vulture; of which the Eagle having notice, and perceiving
their fickle and perfidious humor, he proclaimed them and their Adherents
Enemies to the whole Society; and thereby defeated their foolish and ridiculous
Attempts, exposing them as the most senseless and ungrateful of all the Fowls of
the Air.

Moral. When a Prince has broken his Oaths, and thereby lost his Reputation
with his Subjects, they ought never to regard any future Assurances he can give
them; and those who would persuade them to recall and trust him, should be
reckoned the worst of Enemies to their Country and Posterity.

FAB. XXX. The Magpies, Vulture and Eagle.
THE Birds and Fowls without a King
Being left, the Vulture chose,
Justly to govern them, and to
Defend them from their Foes;
And though they his fierce temper knew,
Yet since he was allied,
By blood and consanguinity,
Unto their Prince that died,
They make him King upon his Oaths
And Promises, that he
Will let each Bird enjoy his nest,
From all disturbance free:
But he his vows forgot, and to
The Ravens did adhere,
And from their ancient Nests, the Storks
And Magpies driven were,
And Crows and Ravens placed in them,
Who were abhorred by all
The Fowls and Birds within the Wood,
The great as well as small:
Then secretly the Princely Bird
The Eagle, they implore
That he will his assistance give,
From the adjoining shore,
The Eagle hears and soon arrives,
Whereat the Vulture flies
Away unto the Dragon, and
Within his den he lies,
They then declare the Eagle, by
A General Decree,
To be their King, who ruled them with
Justice and Equity,
Yet some few Storks and Magpies, do
Against their Prince complain,
Plotting to drive him out, and bring
The Vulture back again,
Crying, they disappointed were
Who did believe that now,
They should have higher rose, and not
Still build their Nests below.
A Magpie wiser than the rest,
To them does represent
The danger and stupidity,
Of this their ill intent;
That the Vulture his Faith has broke,
Quoth he, to all is plain,
And why should you believe, that he
Will Not do the same again?
Since by the Dragon he is taught,
That he should never care
To perform any thing, which he
Shall either say or swear?
These Arguments most of the Birds
Did fully satisfy,
Only some Buzards, Storks and Pies,
Did to the Vulture fly,
The Eagle soon their treachery
And folly too does see,
And traitors to the common wealth
Of Birds, declares they be.
MORAL.
He that his Faith and Honor both
Has forfeited before,
By none but Fools and Madmen will
Be ever trusted more.
a fake astrologer with his audience FAB. XXXI. The Mock Astrologer.
A Pretended Astrologer that wanted neither ignorance nor impudence, and
boasted to read the fate and fortune of all Princes, States, and Persons in the
Book of the Stars, yet gained so little reputation for his Skill in that
sublime Science, that had he not published his Mountebank Bills, and fixed them
upon every Post, he would never have been heard of, nor found out: But his
Lying Libels of resolving all manner of Questions, past, present, and to come,
drew in some silly creatures of both Sexes, whereby he sometimes cheated them
of a shilling, by promising to tell them by his Art, whether one absent be dead
or alive; whether they shall be Rich or Poor; whether a person shall live long
or not; if one shall have Children; if they should marry rich; if a Damsel be a
Maid; if a Woman be chaste; if it be good to take Physic; if the sick party
shall die; if it be a good time to marry; if a Ship shall come home safe;
whether a Marriage promise shall be performed; if the Thief shall be taken, and
twenty other idle and impertinent stories. At length when the money came in by
this canting knavery, the fellow began to have a good conceit of himself, and
there happening a great Eclipse of the Moon one night, he invited a number of
people into the Fields, pretending he would discover to them the Destinies of
all the Potentates in the World proceeding from the Effects of this notable
Eclipse; but while he was very earnestly observing the Moon and Stars through
his Telescopes and other Instruments, he happened to fall into a deep Pit full
of water, where not being relieved in time, he miserably perished; whereat the
people could not forbear laughing, to think that he who boasted to have the
knowledge of the good or ill fortune of others, should yet be ignorant of his
own wretched fate, like his old Friend Will. Lilly, who could foretell what
would befall others, and yet did not know who perfumed his own Door.

Moral. Some persons pretend much knowledge and skill in other peoples affairs,
and yet are utterly strangers to that which concerns themselves.

FAB. XXXI. The Mock Astrologer.
A Mountebank Astrologer
Who did pretend that he,
The Fate of Princes and of States,
In The Stars could plainly see;
Yet so obscurely lived, he scarce
Was to his Neighbors known,
But by the lying bills which he
Still scattered up and down,
And fixed on every pissing post
Boasting at large, he will
Resolve the hardest Questions, by
His learning and his skill.
One cries, pray Sir, will my dear Friend
Continue true to me?
And when you do believe, that he
And I shall married be?
Another says, I now could soon
A second Husband have,
Pray sir, is he that run away
Alive, or in his Grave?
A third complains, I lately have
Been robbed by a vile Thief,
Pray sir, inform me, how I may
In this case find relief.
And thus poor silly wretches were
Abused by this Cheat,
Who of their money and their hopes,
At once does them defeat:
At length the Fool grows confident,
And does abroad declare,
That by the Moons Eclipse, he will
Make wonders to appear.
The people met to hear what this
Pretender had to say,
But as the Moon and Stars he did
Intentively survey,
Into a Pit of water he
Happened at length to fall,
And there was miserably drowned,
E're he for help could call,
The people laughed to think that he
Should know their destiny,
And yet was ignorant of his own,
Although so very nigh.
MORAL.
There Is nothing new in this, but what
We often have heard before,
That old Will. Lilly could not tell,
Who 'twas perfumed his door.
FAB. XXXII. a captain and his sons with some puppies The Captain and Puppies.
A Country Captain, who had more money than wit, and more honor than courage,
having diverse Sons, it happened that a Bitch in the house brought forth several
Puppies, and the Captain equally distributing to every one a Whelp; it seems,
the Eldest Son would have his called Captain; the Boys being ambitious of their
Fathers Title, began to quarrel, each alleging that his Puppy should be the
Captain: This Controversy at length grew so high, that the Lads were ready to
fight with one another; so that the Father was forced to come and quiet them;
and understanding the occasion of the disturbance; You are a company of idle
Boys, quoth he, to vex one another about so ridiculous a matter as this is:
Well, I Will soon end this business; and for preventing any difference for the
future, I am resolved that henceforth every one of the Puppies shall be a
Captain, so that you shall never have occasion to teize one another hereafter:
The Boys were very well satisfied with this discreet determination of the
Father, since hereby every Lad had a Captain and a Puppy of his own both at
once.

Moral. How many idle and ridiculous quarrels are there in the World about
Titles and Pre-eminence of Place or Office? and how many weak men appear
extremely ambitious of Honor and Dignity, and are mightily pleased when they
attain thereto, although as incapable and as little deserving it as the Boys
Puppy-Dogs merited to be made Captains? Whereas a generous and gallant spirited
person is sensible of the vanity of empty Names and Titles without suitable
Qualifications, and is so far from pursuing Honors and Preferments, that he is
often courted and entreated to accept of them by those who do really understand
what value is to be put upon the conduct and prudence of men of true worth and
courage.

FAB. XXXII. The Captain and Puppies.
A Country Captain, who to be
Thought great did much desire,
And for his Wealth and Office, did
Greatly himself admire,
Had several Sons, and happening
One time some Whelps to have,
He did distribute them, and to
Each Son a Puppy gave,
The Eldest being his Fathers Heir,
His Whelp would Captain call,
Which did disturbance cause, and mad^
Them quarrel, fight and brawl.
One Boy cries, Captain is my Dog,
No quoth the other, he
Shall not be called by that name,
My Whelp shall Captain be.
A third says, mine the prettiest is,
And Captain is his name,
This makes the Father angry, who
Cries he will decide the same.
What idle Boys are you, quoth he,
To make a noise for naught,
Since this great controversy, may
Soon to an end be brought,
For this my resolution is,
Each Whelp I do intend
Shall be a Captain, that you may
No longer thus contend.
This pleased the Boys, that each should have
A Captain of his own,
So every Lad a Puppy had
And Captain, both in one.
MORAL.
How many idle quarrels and
Contentions, have we seen
About pre-eminence, and what
Great mischiefs have there been
Occasioned, by those who to gain
Great places to k much care,
Though as unfit to manage them,
As the Boys Puppies were,
Whereas a well deserving man,
The vanity does see,
Of empty Names and Titles; if
True merit wanting be.
Neither does he preferments nor
Great Offices pursue,
But is content till to his worth,
Others shall think them due.
two beds, both occupied, and some servants FAB. XXXIII. The Flea and Gout.
THE Gout and the Flea traveling together, there, came to a Town, where it was
concluded between them, that the Gout should go and lodge in a Poor man's
house, and the Flea in a Noble-man's Palace, and the next morning they were to
meet again, and give an account how they liked their entertainment: accordingly
the Gout went and seized upon the Poor man's Toe, expecting to rest quietly
there, but to his astonishment, the man started started up, ran about with his
naked feet, and plunged himself into a Pond, and had almost choked or drowned
the Gout; and the Flea fastening upon the Noble-man's arm, thinking he had been
fast asleep, who soon awaked, and calling for a Candle, ordered his Servants to
search diligently for the villainous Flea that had bit him, so that had he not
been very nimble, he could not possibly have escaped with life: Next morning
the two Travelers met again, but in a most deplorable condition; the Gout
looked as if he were half drowned, and the Flea like one frightened out of his
wits; therefore they next night resolved to change their Quarters; whereupon
the Gout took possession of the Noble-man's Foot, and was presently entertained
with honorable attendance, comforted with Plasters, covered with Scarlet and
Flannel, laid upon Down-Beds and Cushions, and fed with the choicest Meats and
Wines; and the Flea, when the Poor man was in Bed, presently fell a biting and
sucking his Belly-full, who slept and snored so soundly, as not easily to be
awaked, neither took any care to catch him, but left him safe in the Blankets
till night again; so these two Friends meeting next morning, congratulated each
others happiness, and resolved for the future to remain in the same station;
the Gout continuing with the Rich man, and the Flea with the Poor.

Moral. Many times the Poor man sleeps quietly, and at ease, while the Great
lie roaring with the pains and distempers occasioned by their voluptuousness
and plenty.

FAB. XXXIII. The Flea and Gout.
THE Gout and Flea together met,
And jointly did agree,
They Friends and Fellow Travelers
Would to the next Town be.
Arriving they their lodgings take,
Concluding that next day
They would each other see, and tell
How quietly they lay.
Accordingly the Gout unto
A poor man's house does go,
And finding him in bed, he takes
Possession of his Toe.
The man who never yet had felt
Such cruel pain before,
Out of his bed leaps in a rage,
And running out of door,
He throws himself into a Pond
In hope relief to gain,
And almost drowned the Gout, some small
Remission to obtain.
The Flea goes to the rich man's bed,
And thinking him asleep,
With mighty care and caution he
Into the same does creep.
But had no sooner bit his arm
His supper thence to take,
E're the rich man starts up, and bids
His Servants they should make
Strict search about the bed, to find
And Kill that villainous Flea,
Who had she not been nimble, never
With life had got away.
Next day they meet, and of their fate
Both woefully complain,
And change their Quarters, that they may
A settlement obtain.
The Gout then to the Rich man goes,
And on his foot does seize,
Wherewith much care he treated is
And always lies at ease.
The Flea goes to the poor man's house,
Who sleeping without care,
He sucks his belly full, and him
To wake need never fear.
MORAL.
The man that is poor and temperate
Sleeps without pain or grief,
When rich men roar in Misery
And cannot find relief.
various animals in the foreground, and some people in the background FAB.
XXXIV. The Fox and Ape.
AN Ape meeting a Fox well clothed with hair and a large tail; ah, how happy
are you, quoth he, to be so handsomely adorned? Whereas I for want of a tail
and hair am almost naked and very deformed to my great trouble and vexation;
the wise Fox to convince her of her mistake, desired her to walk with him;
truly quoth the Ape, I am almost ashamed to be seen in your company in this
ragged condition, when you are so well clad, however I will wait on you; going
together they met an Elephant that had lost his Teeth; brother, quoth the Fox,
what mighty force wa that which could break your Teeth? It wa men's
covetousness, quoth he, who furiously pursuing me, I broke them off between two
Trees for them to take up, and thereby ransomed my life; traveling on, they
saw a Beaver bleeding that had lost his Testicles; the Fox inquiring about his
misfortune, understood he bit them off himself, being sensible that it was for
them men sought his destruction; a little further they observed a Peacock
stripped of his Wings and Tail, so as hardly to be known; The Fox pitying him;
They were men, quoth the Peacock, who being pleased with my glorious Plumes,
plundered and left me in this woeful condition, to promote their own Pride and
Vanity; walking on they found a Vulture whose breast was all raw and the skin
torn off; sure says the Fox, you have met with very barbarous usage of late; it
was from men, quoth he, who desirous of the Down on my breast, caught me
deceitfully, and abused me as you see; scarce were they parted from the
Vulture, but they met a man with several little bundles, his Wife and Children
in rags following him; whence come you pray with this Troop, quoth the Fox, I
come, wretch that I am, says he, from a Conquered City where I was but
yesterday, rich and abounding in all things, be the Enemy having ruined the
Town, this is all I have left, being reduced to the extremity you see; the Fox
turning to the Ape, see now brother, says he, what little happiness there is in
the best things of this World; whereas thy deformity secures thee, that thou
need not fear being robbed of any thing, but may live as happy as thou will.

Moral. The greatest beauties have oftentimes the greatest misfortunes, and it
is often seen, that the deformed live more happy lives, than those of more
admired accomplishments.

FAB. XXXIV. The Fox and Ape.
THE Ape the Fox does meet, and cries,
You are well clothed with hair,
Whereas for want thereof, I am
Naked almost and bare,
Which to my grief does make me so
Deformed as you see.
Reynard says, Pray don't grieve your self
But walk along with me.
Passing along they chanced to meet
An Elephant by the way,
With both his Teeth out, unto whom
The Fox cries, Brother pray,
By what strange fortune have you lost
Your Teeth? It was to save
My life, quoth he, which men did seek
That they my Teeth might have.
Next they a Beaver met who had
Himself an Eunuch made,
And by loss of his Testicles
To save his life was glad.
A Peacock then comes in their way,
Who strives himself to hide,
Ashamed that men had robbed him of
His Feathers for his pride.
A Vulture then they met, whose breast
Was miserably rent,
Crying, men for my Down did me
This wrong and detriment.
At length a man approaches them
Who wretched did appear,
And several bundles of small worth
Upon his back did bear,
His Wife and Children followed him
In a most sad estate.
The Fox cries Brother, your ill fate
Be pleased to relate.
I from a City came, quoth he,
Where I was rich and high
But yesterday; now ruined by
A potent Enemy.
The Fox turns to the Ape and cries,
Brother you here may see
Your happiness, since none will rob
You of Deformity.
MORAL.
They that have any Excellence
In danger often are,
Whereas those in a mean estate,
Are happier by far.
FAB. XXXV. a man with one bird at his feet and two others in cages on either
side of him The Lapwing and Parrot.
A Lapwing having observed a Parrot to hang in a fine gilded Cage in the Kings
Palace, and that his meat was provided for him without any pains or care, he
began to be a little envious, and coming up to the Parrot; I admire, says he,
at your good fortune, that you are so much honored, whereas I am very well
satisfied that my Feathers are as beautiful as yours, and that my voice is
altogether as pleasant, and for honor and dignity, I do assure you, I account
my self much your superior, who seem to be born to dominion, since Nature has
put a Crown on my head, well, I am resolved I will go the King and offer him my
service, and doubt not of acceptance; accordingly he goes and presents himself
to the King, and is admitted into Court, where he his put into a new Golden
Cage, and wantoned in ease and luxury, being fed every day with meat from the
Kings own Table; the Lapwing at first thought his condition altered much for
the better, since he was now put to no trouble to seek for his living faring
gallantly every day; but though new things may seem delightful for the present,
yet at length he began to consider, that for enjoying a little Luxury and
Pleasure, he had forfeited what was of a thousand times more value, namely his
Liberty, being now confined to the narrow limits of a small Cage, and made a
Prisoner for life, who formerly used to range through the Woods and Forests
without any control. These reflections had so great an influence upon him,
that they threw him into a deep Consumption, and soon after he broke his heart
and died for grief.

Moral. Liberty is an invaluable Jewel, and for which we ought to count nothing
too dear, nor to murmur at the best of Princes, though for our own security and
preservation, we are at some extraordinary charge to preserve our selves from
Tyranny and Slavery.

FAB. XXXV. The Lapwing and Parrot.
A Lapwing coming to the Court,
A Parrot did perceive
In a Gilt Cage, and at his own
Misfortune seemed to grieve.
Quoth he, I marvel how this Bird
Such honor should obtain,
To live in so much state, and feed
Without all care and pain,
When though my Plumes are fairer, and
I sing as well as he,
Yet I never could arrive unto
So great felicity.
Well, I unto the King will go
And tell him, if he please
I Will be his Servant; and then hope
That I shall live at ease.
He goes, the King accepts him, and
Commands that they should make
A Golden Cage, wherein he is put
And daily does partake
Of all the Dainties of the Court,
Which were at his command,
Yea often, does receive his meat,
Even from the Kings own hand.
Thus revelling in all delights,
He judged himself to be
The happiest of the feathered race,
And from all trouble free.
At length when he began to think
That he was now confined,
Within the limits of his Cage,
It much disturbed his mind.
It Is true quoth he, in riot I
Do live, and Luxury,
But miserable wretch, thereby
I lose my liberty.
And now a Prisoner am for life,
And never shall see the Grove
And Forest where with much delight,
I freely use to rove.
This thought seized on his heart, and made
Him so unsatisfied,
That with mere grief and sorrow, he
Soon pined away and died.
MORAL.
It was the advice of the valiant Scot called
William Wallace to his Son at his death.
Remember Son that Liberty
Is a most happy thing,
Take heed that into slavery
Thy self thou never bring.
FAB. XXXVI. a fox in a well and a wolf peering over the side The Fox and Wolf.
A Fox in seeking his prey, happened to come to a place where there was a Well
that had two Buckets, into one of which he leapt, hoping to meet with something
in it, but was no sooner there, e're the Bucket suddenly carried him down to
the bottom, where he was in great danger of being murdered, starved or drowned;
in this desperate condition he made a sad noise and howling, which a Wolf hard
by hearing, came to the Wells mouth, and cried, who is below there? It is I dear
Uncle, quoth the Fox, but why do you make such pitiful moan? says the Wolf,
have you broke your Leg or hurt your self? Oh, no, quoth the Fox, the quite
contrary, for having notice that at the bottom of this Well there was a very
great quantity of Fish, I went down to fill my belly, where I have been fishing
ever since, and have got such a multitude, and eaten so heartily, that I think
I shall burst, and yet there is enough left to serve you and your young ones a
month together, though you feed never so heartily; I am glad of that, quoth the
Wolf, but all the craft will lie in getting them up; Uncle, says the Fox, they
are all in the Bucket with me, therefore do you but leap into the other Bucket
that hangs above, and you will be with me instantly; the Wolf presently leaps
into the Bucket, and with his weight soon brought up the Fox in the other, who
in passing by him cried out, good night Uncle, this is the fashion of the
World, some go up, and some go down, and so skipping out run away leaving the
Wolf at the bottom of the Well, where he continued till some Shepherds coming
for water drew him up, and finding what he was, fell upon him with Clubs and
Staves, so that he hardly escaped with his life.

Moral. It is very difficult to avoid being deceived and abused by those, who
are naturally of a treacherous temper; and Covetousness often brings men into
great peril and danger as it did the Wolf, who was desirous of getting a great
deal of Fish.

FAB. XXXVI. The Fox and Wolf.
A Fox in seeking of his prey
Unto a Well he came,
And found two Buckets on one Rope,
Belonging to the same.
And into that above, himself
In hope of food he throws,
But was no sooner in e're down
He to the bottom goes,
From whence how he might make escape
No likelihood he found,
But there must either starved be,
Or murdered, or drowned.
A Wolf at length came by, and heard
His lamentable cry,
And to assist him to the Well
Approached speedily.
Who Is there? quoth Isgrim; it is I,
Says Reynard, who heard tell
That I a multitude of Fish
Should get within this Well.
Which I found true, and eat so much
I am in grievous pain,
The Wolf cries, That is brave, but how
Shall I some Fish obtain?
Uncle, quoth he, that easy is,
For if you do but get
Into the Bucket hangs above,
You need not want for meat.
The Wolf believed him, but he was
No sooner got within
E're he sunk to the bottom, and
Reynard came up again.
And leaping out, he laughed for joy,
And said, the World goes so,
Dear Uncle, that when one does rise,
Another falls as low.
At length some Shepherds thither came
Water to draw, and found
They had brought up the Wolf, on whom
They fasten many a wound.
Whilst the sly Fox at distance sees
His Uncles misery,
And smiles to think how he escapt
The like calamity.
MORAL.
Those who by nature treacherous are,
Should never trusted be,
For they perfidious will prove
If in extremity.
FAB. XXXVII. a shepherd playing the bagpipes approached by a wolf and a fox
The Shepherd, Wolf and Fox.
A Shepherd who usually diverted himself while his flocks were feeding, with
playing on the Bagpipe, happened one day to see a Creature appear at a great
distance, which seemed to dance to the tune of his Pipe; next day he took
notice he did the same, which while he was observing, he perceives a Fox
approaching him with a smiling countenance, who told him that he came with a
Message, which he doubted not would be very acceptable, namely, to propose
terms of friendship and accommodation between the Wolves and the Sheep, being
sent by the Wolf who did much condemn the cruelty of his Parents and Kindred
that were so bloody to the poor innocent harmless Sheep; whereas he is resolved
to live peaceably and neighbourly with them, without the least disturbance,
especially if you would please to teach him to play upon the Bagpipe, wherewith
he is so much delighted, that when ever you strike up he cannot forbear
dancing, and therefore would willingly keep company with you and your sweet
Lambs, that he might be partaker of that pleasant diversion; the Shepherd who
knew the strict League of Rapine and Robbery between them, replies, well,
though I much suspect the Ambassador, yet I should be glad of a lasting peace,
whereby I shall save many a fat Sheep and Lamb, therefore upon condition he
will permit me to pluck out his Teeth and cut cut off his Nails, I am willing
he should come and converse with the Flocks, and dance with them to my Music,
because he will have no occasion for those offensive Weapons, while he is in
such honest company as we are. The Fox finding himself outwitted in his own
Politics, sneakt away ashamed, without any further reply.

Moral. A man's honesty and integrity may be very much discovered by the company
he keeps and the Persons he imploys; neither should we trust an Enemy till he
is disarmed of the Weapons, wherewith he uses to do mischief.

FAB. XXXVII. The Shepherd, Wolf and Fox.
A Shepherd to divert himself
Did on his Bagpipe play,
Whilst his poor Sheep and Lambs for food
About the Fields do stray:
And at a distance, to his tunes
A dancing Beast does see,
But so far off he could not guess
What creature it should be.
Now while the Shepherd this odd sight
Intentively did view,
The Fox comes toward him, and cries,
News Sir I bring to you,
Which I suppose will welcome be,
Who from the Wolf am sent,
To tell you that to make a peace
With you he is fully bent;
And the ill usage of his Friend;
And Parents does condemn,
Toward the harmless Sheep and Lambs,
Who never injured them.
And for the future does oblige
And bind himself, that he
Will come and dance with them, and live
In love and amity.
Who with your Pipe is so much pleased
That when thereon you play,
He to your pleasant music falls
To dance without delay.
The Shepherd who well understood
The close affinity
Between the Wolf and Fox, who lived
By Theft and Robbery,
Replies, I should be very glad
A lasting Peace were made,
And that the Wolf my innocent Flocks
Would not henceforth invade.
Yet I can hardly credit him,
Unless he let me take
Away his Teeth and Nails, of which
He little use can make
In dancing, or in converse with
My Sheep. The Fox then saw
He was outwitted, and for shame
Did presently withdraw.
MORAL.
By his companions a Man
May best discovered be,
Nor will a Wise Man ever trust
An armed Enemy.
FAB. XXXVIII. an ape working as a carpenter, and a man watching it The Ape
turned Carpenter.
AN unlucky Ape sitting over against a Carpenters Yard, took much notice how he
wrought, and was mighty desirous to imitate him, discoursing thus with himself;
certainly I could easily be Master of this Trade without seven years slavery to
learn it, as no doubt this dull Fellow has had; for I am of opinion that it is
only for want of practice, or else we Apes could soon out do men in all Acts
and Sciences; and I remember a notable King in India having taken several of my
elder Brethren, called Baboons, Prisoners, he was resolved to put them to Plow
and Sow, and to make Soldiers of them, alleging that they would not speak,
because they were Idle and unwilling to work; well, I have a great inclination
to try my skill, but hope I shall have better fortune than a Nephew of mine,
who living in an house over against a Cobbler, and often observing how he cut
his Leather to pieces to Soal the Shoes, when the Cobbler was absent, he leaps
into his Stall and strives to imitate him, who returning and finding his
Leather all mangled and spoiled, resolved to be revenged; and one day when he
saw my Cosen Pug look earnestly at him, he took up his sharp cutting Knife, and
drew it over his Throat diverse time, and then going away, my silly kinsman
skipt instantly into his Shop, and taking the Knife, thinking to do the same,
he cut his own Throat therewith and died; but I Will take more care; and so
getting into the Carpenters Yard he began to handle his Tools, and to split
Wood therewith, but on a sudden his foot was caught in a cleft piece of Board,
and held there so fast that he could not stir, but crying out, the Carpenter
came, and perceiving his folly, with many scoffs and blows dismissed him. This
comes of it, quoth the Ape, to be over conceited of our own wit, but I now find
it is not so easy to be a workman as I at first sight did imagine.

Moral. Some persons have so great an opinion of their own ingenuity, as to
imagine they can soon attain to the most curious inve^^^^s, but upon trial,
there appears more difficulty and danger than they could possibly foresee.

FAB. XXXVIII. The Ape turned Carpenter.
A wanton Ape who over against
A Carpenter did sit,
Observed how he wrought, and was
Extremely pleased with it,
And did resolve to try if he
Could not perform the same,
Quoth he, sure this dull fellow is
Not wiser than I am.
For I believe it is for want
Of use, else Apes would be
As apt, and knowing as men are
In every mystery.
For a great Indian King who some
Baboons had Prisoners made,
Believed them men, and did resolve
They should be taught some Trade.
Alleging he was sure that they
Could speak as well as he,
But 'cause they would not work were dumb
Out of mere policy.
Well, I intend to try, but hope
I better luck shall have
Than one of our fraternity;
Who like an idle Knave,
Resolved to learn the Cobblers trade
But did his Leather spoil,
Which to revenge the man, poor Pug
Did fatally beguile.
Who striving him to imitate
In handling of his Knife,
Cut his own Throat, and thereby was
Trepan'd out of his life.
The Ape then leaps into the shop,
And strives to use the Tools
As he had seen the Carpenter,
And imitate his rules.
But as in splitting of a board
He with much labor wrought,
For want of skill to manage it
His foot therein was caught.
The man thus takes him, and with scoff^
And blows does him dismiss,
And Pug finds that a Carpenter
To be not easy is.
MORAL.
Those that are curious oftentimes
Much damage reap thereby,
And many things may easy seem
Until we come to try.
FAB. XXXIX. a panther attacked and then pursuing some cattle The Panther and
Peasants.
CErtain rude Country Peasants happening to find a Panther in a Pit, into
which he had accidently fallen, they with much malice and fury fell upon the
poor distressed Creature, whom they knew to have long frequented the
neighboring Fields, and yet had never offered them the least wrong nor injury;
however they with Clubs, Staves and Stones endeavored to destroy him in the
bottom of the Pit, and then left him, expecting to find him dead the next
morning; but several charitable Shepherds happening to come by soon after, they
took pity upon him, and finding him yet alive, though very dangerously wounded
and bruised, they gave him meat, and used all means possible for his recovery;
by this relief, his Spirits began a little to revive, and making a brisk
attempt he happily leapt out of the Pit, and with a great deal of rejoicing,
made have to his own dwelling. In process of time, he regained the use of his
Limbs, and his former vigor, and then marching with much fury into the
Forest, made horrible slaughter among the Cattle of those surly Boors, who had
so villanously abused him, in revenge of their cruelty and ingratitude; so that
the people trembled for fear of him, yea those that had been compassionate to
him, much doubted the loss of their Flocks, nay, were afraid they should hardly
escape with their Lives; which the Panther perceiving, fear nothing my friends,
quoth he, I will not do you the least damage, who only design to make those
wretches that used me so barbarously sensible of their baseness toward me in
distress, who lived peaceably among them, and always treated them as Friends;
for I can easily distinguish between those who gave me bread, and others that
gave me blows.

Moral. It is very inhumane to be severe toward those that are in distress;
neither does charity toward the miserable seldom miss of a suitable reward.

FAB. XXXIX. The Panther and Peasants.
A Panther while he wandered
For food the Feilds around,
Happened to fall into a Pit,
Where he was quickly found
By some rude Country Boors, whom he
Entreats to help him out,
But like ill natured Clowns, they all
Compass the Pit about,
And then with Clubs they him assault,
And massy Stones do throw,
Resolving that from thence with life
He never again shall go.
Thus is he cruelly abused
Till they were wearied,
And then retire, concluding they
Next day should find him dead.
But some good natured Shepherds, who
Came thither the next day,
Finding life yet remain in him,
They carefully convey
The poor Beast thence, who with all speed
Retires into his Den,
Where he lay long before he could
Regain his health again.
At length he did recover, and
Then furiously does run
About the Fields, which made the Clowns
Cry out, they were undone.
For he their Cows, their Sheep, and Lambs,
Does miserably rend
Without control, since none of them
Durst with him to contend.
Yea those that did relieve him, were
Struck with a pannick fear,
But unto them, the Panther cries,
My friends, I yours will spare,
And only will revenge my self
On those base villains, who
I never wronged, and yet to me
Such cruelty did show.
For I Will near so ungrateful be
Not to distinguish those,
Who helped me in my great distress,
From them that gave me blows.
MORAL.
We ought not to insult over those
That are in misery,
But aid them, and so reap that gain
Which follows charity.
FAB. XL. a man holding a sword over a bear, watched by a wolf The Bear and
Wolf.
THE Wolf and the Bear traveling through the Forest, the Wolf asked the Bear
why he always held down his head toward the ground, I cannot well tell the
reason of it, says he, but I suppose it proceeds from the stiffness of my neck;
why then do not you get Horns to your Head? quoth the Wolf, as Bulls, and
Stags, and Rams, and other Creatures are armed with; whereby you may defend
your self against your Enemies, and they will likewise be a great ornament to
your forehead? I would have Horns with all my heart, says the Bear, but since
nature has not been so kind to bestow any upon me, I am afraid it will be very
hard to procure them, why, says the Wolf, I believe it may be done, if you will
but apply your self to a Man, for they are so ingenious that nothing almost is
too hard for them to contrive. The silly Bear did as he counseled him, and at
length he met with a Man who undertook the business, but first he demanded what
he would expect for a reward? I can see nothing quoth the Workman, that is of
any value about you, except your cropped ears; take them freely, cries the Bear,
for a gallant pair of Horns will become me much better than they, and so
suffered his Ears to be cut off with much torture; now, says the Operator, I
must boar two holes in your Head, that they may be strongly fastened into your
thick Skull; What do you think I am mad, quoth the Bear, to have holes made in
my Head, sure you intend to murder me; it is impossible to be done otherwise,
says the Surgeon; well then, quoth the Bear in a rage, though I have been such
a blockhead to lose my Ears, yet I had rather want Horns than lose my Life; and
so went away very much discontented.

Moral. Those dull insipid Fools, who are ambitious of being great and famous
without desert, are often imposed upon by others, and many times suffer much
damage and danger thereby.

FAB. XL. The Bear and Wolf.
ONE time it happened as the Wolf
About the Forest went,
He met the Bear rolling along,
And asked him what he meant
To hold his head so near the ground,
Quoth Bruin, you must know,
It is the stiffness of my neck
That makes me bow so low.
Methinks says Isgrim, you your Head
Do dangerously expose,
By that ill posture to the rage
And malice of your Foes.
I wonder you don't Horns procure
As other Creatures have,
Which from innumerable wrongs
Not only you may save,
But likewise to your head will be
A Gallant ornament.
Sir, quoth the Bear, with Horns I could
Be very well content.
But am afraid since nature has
Denied them unto me,
The purchase of them will a work
Of difficulty be.
It may be not, says Isgrim, if
Your self your do apply
Unto a Man, for they are full
Of Ingenuity.
The stupid Bear believing him,
Unto a Man does go,
And whether he could fix on's head
A pair of Horns would know,
Who tells him that he did believe
The business might be done,
But his reward desired to know,
E're he the work begun.
What ever you demand i will give,
Replies the joyful Bear,
Then quoth the man, i will have your ears,
'Cause them you best can spare.
He cuts them off, then tells the Bear,
That he a hole must bore
Into his Skull, to fix the Horns
Fast on his head before.
Nay, quoth the Bear, though such a Sot
I was my Ears to loose,
Yet Horns to want than to be killed,
I will much rather choose.
MORAL.
Those sordid fools who much desire
To be thought Great and High,
Are often abused under pretense
Of Love and Amity.
FAB. XLI. two men, a wolf and a fox The Wolf, Fox and Ape.
THE Wolf accused the Fox that one day when he was abroad, Reynard came into
his Den, and stole from thence a large quarter of mutton, which he had left of
a Sheep the night before, and reserved for his Dinner. The Fox utterly denied
the matter, with many protestations and imprecations; at length they concluded
to bring the controversy before the Ape, and make him the Arbitrator and Judge
between them; Being come, the Wolf pleaded, that the wicked thieving Fox there
present, who was known to live by spoil and rapine, had feloniously robbed him
of his provision in his absence, and when he desired him to restore his stolen
goods, he like an impudent Rascal forswore it; and that it was not the first
time by twenty that he had served him, and many other Creatures in the same
manner, he therefore hoped his Worship would now do him justice against this
common Thief. The Fox replies, what this bloody ravenous Wolf alleges against
me is altogether false, as well as very improbable, for first he never saw me
near his hole, nor has he any witness to prove a word he says; and in the next
place, he is such a devouring hungry villain, that he never leaves any thing
over night against next day, but is continually lying in wait to murder the
innocent, therefore I hope your worship will clear me of this scandal, and
punish this false accuser; well quoth the Ape, I find the old Proverb true,
that Two of a Trade can never agree, and Thieves are seldom honest to one
another; I do not perceive the Wolf has lost any thing, and yet I believe the
Fox has stolen somewhat; let me therefore advise you to go home and live as
peaceably as people of your Calling can do, but be sure never to trust any
farther than you can see one another.

Moral. Ill men are always jealous and suspicious of each other, and the
Spaniard says, he that is often suspected has some guilt.

FAB. XLI. The Wolf, Fox and Ape.
THE Wolf the Fox does charge, that he
Feloniously had stole
A quarter of a Sheep, which he
Had left within his hole.
The Fox this slander against him, does
With vehemence deny,
And boldly tells the Wolf it is
A Scandal and a Lie.
At length all quarrels to compose
They mutually agree,
That the wise Ape shall in this case
Their Arbitrator be;
Before whom like some Lawyers, they
Each other do abuse,
And of great crimes and villainies
One the other does accuse.
Quoth Isgrim, this sly thieving Fox
When I was out of door,
Robbed me of all my Provender,
I had laid up in store;
Nay, to this wicked course of life
He so addicted is,
He robs all other Creatures, and
To him naught comes amiss.
Good Justice Ape; quoth Reynard, pray
Observe this cruel Thief
Who rails at robbery, and yet
Of Felons is the Chief.
And cries, I wronged him of his meat,
Yet cannot make it appear
By any evidence he has,
That ever I was there.
Besides, it is known the Wolf is so
Voracious by his kind,
It Is very strange that he should leave
Such store of flesh behind.
Well, quoth the Ape, by this I find
The Proverb to be true,
Two of a Trade can never agree,
As now it is seen by you.
Therefore I would advise you both
To live as quietly
As may be; But still to suspect
Each others honesty.
MORAL.
Ill men of their Companions have
A fear and jealousy,
And he that often suspected is
Can scarce from guilt be free.
FAB. XLII. two foxes and a bear The Fox and Bear.
THE Beasts of the Forest meeting together, had a solemn consultation how they
should free themselves from the danger and slavery whereinto many of them were
often brought by Men, whose strength was much inferior to theirs; The Fox
alleged that men were so subtle and politic, as it would be very difficult to
secure themselves against their Wiles though they were much stronger; this put
the Bear into a great fury; who cried This is a good plea for such a Coward as
Reynard is, when without doubt it is nothing but our want of courage, and our
meanness of Spirit that gives men such advantage over us; for consider the
Horse or the Elephant, whom twenty men were not able to manage if they were
sensible of their own abilities, and yet these suffer one Man, yea a Child to
have dominion over them; therefore my advice is, that we should lay aside those
unnatural quarrels among our selves, whereby we destroy one another, and all
unanimously unite against our common enemy Man; and then I do not Question but
we shall preserve our Liberties, and bring them in subjection to us; the Bear
having roared out this courageous speech, had few that seconded him, since it
appeared impossible to be effected to the generality there present, so that the
Assembly broke up without concluding upon any thing; Soon after the Bear was
caught in a snare, and had rings put into his Nose, being taught to dance, and
was led about the streets to get money for his Master; whom the Fox meeting,
uncle quoth he, I wonder how you come to be in this condition who talked so big
the other day; ah, quoth the Bear, Cuz, I find it is one thing to talk and
another to do; and so past along very heavily in performing his daily drudgery.

Moral. Those persons who are most insolent in prosperity are commonly most
dejected in adversity neither is the huffing of braging fellows to be minded or
regarded.

FAB. XLII. The Fox and Bear.
THE Beasts met in the Forest, to
Consult how they might free
Themselves from Man's Dominion, who
kept them in slavery,
Reynard alleged men cunning were
And full of subtilty,
And what in strength they wanted, did
Supply with policy.
The Bear cries, Sirs, I hope that you
Will little notice take
Of what this Coward does allege,
Or the Plea he does make.
For if the Horse and Elephant
Their own strength did but know,
We quickly should the Wit of Man
By valor overthrow.
Then let all quarrels cease, that so
We mutually may join
Against our Enemy man, which ought
To be our main design,
Which if we with true courage shall
But strenuously pursue,
Instead of ruling over us,
We shall the men subdue.
Thus Bruin his opinion did
With open mouth declare,
But to the rest the matter still
Does difficult appear.
And so the Court broke up, without
Concluding any thing;
But in a while this very Bear
Was taken; and a ring
Put through his nose, and so along
The streets was led all day,
And for his Masters profit forced
To dance, and tricks to play.
In this sad posture Reynard chanced
To meet the Captive Bear;
Alas, quoth he, poor Uncle, who
Could think you should be here?
Ah Cuz, says he, I to my cost
Your words find to be true,
And see that it far easier is
To talk than it is to do.
MORAL.
Proud huffing fellows often pretend
Great things to undertake,
But in performing of the same
Themselves they Coxcombs make.
A merry Story.
Having been conversant with Birds and Beasts I will add one true story
thereunto, which demonstrates that stupidity and ignorance possess some humane
Souls to such a degree, that they seem to have no more knowledge nor
understanding than the Beasts that perish.

IN the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, a Fellow who wore his Hat buttoned up on one
side, and a Feather therein like a Tooth Drawer, with the Rose and Crown on his
Breast for a Badge, had obtained a License from the then Lord Chamberlain to
make a show of a great Ape, about the Country, who could perform many notable
tricks; and by going to Markets and Fairs, his Master picked up a great deal of
Money; the Ape usually rid upon a Mastiff Dog, and a Man beat a Drum before
him; it happened that these four Travelers came to a Town called Loo in
Cornwall, where having taken an Inn, the Drum beat about the Town to give
notice that at such a place was an admirable Ape with very many notable
qualities, if they pleased to bestow their money and time to come and see him;
but the Townspeople being a sort of poor Fishermen who minded their own
employments, none of them thought it worth their while to see this worthy
sight; at which the Fellow being vexed, resolved to put a trick upon them
whatever came of it, and thereupon he contrives a Warrant, which he sends to
the Mayor to this effect. These are to will and require you, and every one of
you, with your Wives and Familes, that upon sight hereof, you make your
personal appearance before the Queens Ape, for he is an Ape of rank and
quality, and is to visit all Her Majesty's Dominions, that by his converse and
acquaintance with Her loving Subjects he may be the better enabled to do Her
Majesty service, in discovering their fidelity and loyalty. And hereof fail not
as you will answer the contrary at your utmost peril.

This Warrant being brought to the Mayor, he sent for a Shoemaker at the
further end of the Town to read it, which when he had heard, he assembled his
brethren the Aldermen to the Common Hall to consult of this weighty affair;
being met, they all sat silent at least a quarter of an hour, no man speaking
a word, not knowing what to say; at length a young man who had never served any
Office said; Gentlemen if I might speak without offense, and under correction
of the worshipful, I would give my opinion in this matter. Pray Neighbor speak
freely, quoth the Mayor, for though you never yet bore any Office, yet you may
talk as wisely as some of us; then says the young man, I am of the mind that
this Ape carrier is an insolent saucy knave, who designs to make our Town
ridiculous to the whole Kingdom, for was it ever known that a Fellow should be
so audacious to send a Warrant without either name or date to a Mayor of a
Town, who is the Queens Lieutenant, and that he and his brethren, their wives
and children, should be all commanded to appear before a Jackanapes, therefore
my counsel is, that you take him and his Ape, with his Man and his Dog, and
whip the whole tribe of them out of the Town, which will be much for your
reputation and credit.

At which words a Grave Alderman being much disturbed, replied; Friend you have
spoke little better than Treason, remember it is the Queen Ape, and therefore
be careful what you say; you speak true, brother, quoth the Mayor, I wonder how
this saucy fellow came into our company, pray friend, depart, I think you long
to have us all hanged; the young man being put out of doors; well now,
Brethren, says the Mayor, what is to be done in this troublesome business?
Marry, quoth another old Senior, we may see by the Feather in his Cap and the
badge he wears, that he is the Queens man, and who knows what power a Knave may
have at Court to do poor men in the Country an injury? therefore let us e'ne
go and see the Ape, it is but two pence a piece, and no doubt the Queen will
take it well if it come to her ear, and think that we are very civil people to
show so much duty to her Ape, what may she imagine we would do to her Bears if
they should come hither; Besides, it is above two hundred mile to London, and
if we should be complained of, and fetched up by Pursivants or Messengers, I Will
warrant it would cost us at least ten Groats a man, whereas we may now come off
for two pence a piece.

This wise speech was thought so pertinent, that the whole drove of Townsmen
with their Wives and Children went to see the Ape, whom they found sitting on a
Table with a chain about his neck, to whom Mr. Mayor put off his Hat and made a
Leg, to show his respect to the Queens Ape, yet Pug let him pass unregarded,
but Mrs. Mayoress coming next in a clean white Apron, with her hands laid upon
it, she to show her breeding makes a low Curtsie to him, and Pug like a right
Courtier, though he did not mind the Man, yet to show his respect to the Woman,
put out his paw to her and made a mouth, which the Woman perceiving; Husband
quoth she, I think in my Conscience the Queens Ape mocks me, whereat Pug made
another wry face at her; which Mr. Mayor observing, grew very angry, crying,
Thou Sirrah Ape, I see thy sauciness, and if the rest of the Courtiers have no
more manners than thou have, I am afraid they have been better fed than taught,
but I Will make thee to know before thou go out of Town that this Woman is my
Wife, an ancient Woman and a Midwife, and one that for her Age may be thy
Mother; and then going in a rage to the Door where the Apes Tutor was gathering
up his pence; sir, says he, do you allow your Ape to abuse my Wife; no, by no
means, quoth the Fellow; Truly sir, cries the Mayor, there is sufficient
witness within, that saw him make mops and mows at her, as if she were not
worthy to wipe his Shoes; Pugs Schoolmaster replied, sir I Will presently give
him severe chastisement for his impudence, and thereupon talking his Whip and
holding Jack by the chain, he gave him half a dozen smart lashes, that made
Pugs teeth chatter in his head like Virginal Jacks, which Mr. Mayor espying,
runs to the Fellow and holding his hand, cried out, Enough, enough, good sir,
you have done like a Gentleman, let me entreat you never to give correction in
your wrath, and pray sir, when the Play is done, be pleased to come along with
your Ape to my house, and both of you take a small supper with me and my Wife.

A Table.
A.
ANT and Grasshopper. page ^3 Ape turned Carpenter. page 149
B.
Bird and Apes. page 45 Bear and Fox. page 109 Bear and Wolf. page 157
C.
Captain and Puppies. page 125
D.
Dear and Hound. page 97 Dolphin and Ape. page 113 Dog, Wolf and Ass. page 73
Dog and Moon. page 105
F.
Flea and Gout. page 129 Fox and Ape. page 133 Fox and Bear. page 165 Fox to
Execution. page 29 Fox and Lion. page 9 Fox, Wolf and Mare. page 89 Fox and
Wolf. page 141
H.
Horse and Wolf. page 37 Huntsman and Bear. page 41 Hedghog and Fox. page 61
I.
Impertinent Trifler. page 57 Jupiter and Creatures. page 49
K.
Kid and Wolf. page 17
L.
Lion, Ass and Fox. page 81 Lapwing and Parrot. page 137
M.
Magpies, Vulture and Eagle. page 117 Man and Serpent. page 85 Monkey and
Miser. page 65 Mock Astrologer. page 121 Monkey and Chestnuts. page 1 Mouse,
Cock and Cat. page 33 Mouse and Oyster. page 5
N.
Nightingale and Wolf. page 93
O.
Old Woman and Skulls page 77
P.
Panther and Peasant. page 153 Parrot and Cat. page 25
S.
Sheep and Dog. page 21 Shephard, Fox and Wolf. page 145
W.
Wolf, Fox and Ape. page 161 Wolf and Apes. page 101 Wolf turned Shepherd. page
53
Y.
Young Leonard Old. page 69
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultry near
Cheapside.
HISTORY.
I. ENglands Monarchs: Or, A Compendious Relation of the most Remarkable
Transactions, from Julius Caesar to this present; Adorned with Poems, and the
Picture of every Monarch from King William the Conqueror, to K. James 2. With a
List of the Nobility; The Knights of the Garter; The number of the Lords and
Commons, who have Votes in both Houses of Parliament: And many other useful
particulars. Price One Shilling.

II. THE Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland; containing a particular and
Impartial Account of all the Battles, Sieges, and other Remarkable
Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents which happened from the beginning of
the Reign of K. Charles I. 1625. to His Majesty's happy Restoration; The
illegal Trial of K. Charles I. at large, with his last Speech at his Suffering.
And the most considerable matters till 1660. With Pictures of several
Accidents. Priec One Shilling.

III. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and Present State of
London and Westminster; showing the Foundations, Walls, Gates, Towers, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Companies, Government, Courts, Hospitals,
Schools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Privileges thereof; with an
account of the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other
occurrences, for above 903 years past, in and about these Cities, to the year
1681. Illustrated with Pictures, and the Arms of 65 Companies of London, and
the time of their Incorporating. Price One Shilling.

IV. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders in England Scotland and
Ireland; or an account of many remarkable persons and places; and likewise of
the Battles, Seiges, prodigious Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Thunders,
Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable Occurrences and Accidents
for many hundred years past. Together with the natural and artificial Rarities
in every County in England, with several curious Sculptures. Price One Shilling.

V. THE History of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, containing, 1. An
Account of the most Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Scotland for
above 1200 years past, during the Reigns of 68 Kings, from 424. to K. James the
first in 1602. 2. The History of Ireland from the Conquest thereof to this
time; with the Miraculous Persons and Places, Strange Accidents, etc. And a
List of the Nobility and Great Officers of State in both Kingdoms. Illustrated
with several Pictures of some extraordinary Observables. Price One Shilling.

VI. THE English Empire in America, or a prospect of his Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermuda's, Barbuda, Anguilla,
Monserrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers,
Barbados, and Jamaica; with an Account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product; The Religion and manners of the Indians, and other excellencies of
these Countries; To which is Prefixed a Relation of the first Discovery of this
New-World, and of the Remarkable Voyages, and Adventures of Sebastian Cabot,
Sir Martin Frobisher, Captain Davies, Capt. Weymouth, Capt. Hall, Captain
Hudson, Sir Thomas Cavendish, the Earl of Cumberland, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and
other English Worthies to diverse places therein. Illustrated with Maps and
Pictures of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, Serpents, and
Monsters found in those parts of the World. Price One Shilling.

VII. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guinea and the East Indies. With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpents,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries. And among others, the Life
and Death of Mahomet the Grand Impostor, with the Principal Doctrines of the
Turkish Religion as they are displayed in the Alcoran. Two Letters, one written
by the Great Mogul, and the other by the King of Sumatra in the East Indies, to
our K. James I. of an unusual and extravagant style; The cruel Executions in
those Parts; With the manner of the Women's burning themselves with their dead
Husbands. Together with a Description of the Isle of St. Helena; And the Bay of
Souldania where the English usually refresh in their Voyages to the Indies.
Intermixed with pleasant Relations, and Enlivened with Pictures. Price one
Shilling.

VIII. THE English Hero: or, Sir Francis Drake Revived. Being a full Account
of the Dangerous Voyages, Admirable Adventures, Notable Discoveries, and
Magnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Renowned Commander. As, I. His
Voyage in 1572. to Nombre de Dios in the West Indies, where they saw a Pile of
Bars of Silver near seventy foot long, ten foot broad, and twelve foot high.
II. His incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in Two years
and Ten months, gaining a vast quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage
into America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. Jago, St. Domingo,
Carthagena, and St. Augustine. IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in
1595. with the manner of his Death and Burial. Revised, Corrected, very much
enlarged, reduced into Chapters with Contents, and beautified with Pictures. By
R. B. Price One Shilling.

IX. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An Account of the Travels of
two English Pilgrims some years since, and what Admirable Accidents befell them
in their Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. 2. The Travels of
14 English Merchants in 1669. from Scanderoon to Tripoly, Joppa, Ramah,
Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Jericho, the River of Jordan, the Lake of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and back again to Aleppo. To which is added, a Relation of the great
Council of the Jews assembled in the Plains of Ajayday in Hungary 1650. to
examine the Scriptures concerning Christ. By S.B. an Englishman there present:
With the notorious Delusion of the Jews, by a counterfeit Messiah, or false
Christ at Smyrna in 1666. and the event thereof. Lastly, The Extirpation of the
Jews throughout Persia in 1666. Epistle of King Agbarus to our Savior with our
Savior's Answer; Beautified with Pictures. Price One Shilling.

X. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men; with the strange Events,
and signal Mutations and Changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious places
and persons in all Ages; Being an Account of a multitude of Stupendous
revolutions, accidents, and observable matters in diverse States, and Provinces
throughout the whole world. With Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XI. THE History of the Nine Worthies of the World; Three whereof were
Gentiles; 1. Hector Son of Priamus King of Troy. 2. Alexander the Great King of
Macedon and Conqueror of the World. 3. Julius Caesar first Emperor of Rome.
Three Jews. 4. Joshua Captain General and Leader of Israel into Canaan. 5.
David King of Israel. 6. Judas Maccabeus a Valiant Jewish Commander against the
Tyranny of Antiochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthur King of Britain, who
courageously defended his Country against the Saxons. 8. Charles the Great K.
of France and Emperor of Germany; 9. Godfrey of Bullen King of Jerusalem. Being
an account of their Glorious Lives, Worthy Actions, renowned Victories and
Deaths. Illustrated with Poems and the Picture of each Worthy. By R. B. Price
One Shilling.

XII. FEmale Excellency or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Worthy Lives
and Memorable Actions of Nine Famous Women, who have been renowned either for
Virtue or Valor in several Ages of the World: As, I. Deborah the Prophetess.
II. The Valiant Judith. III. Queen Esther. IV. The Virtuous Susanna. V. The
Chaste Lucretia. VI. Voadicia Queen of Britain in the reign of Nero Emperor of
Rome. Containing an Account of the Original Inhabitants of Britain. The
History of Danaus and his Fifty Daughters who murdered their Husbands in one
night; Of the arrival of Brute. Of the Two Giants Corineus and Gogmagog; Of
King Lear and his three Daughters; Of Belin and Brennus who took the City of
Rome; Of the manner of Julius Caesar's invading Britain, and of the Valor of
Voadicia under whose conduct the Britains slew seventy thousand Romans, with
many other remarkable particulars. VII. Mariamne Wife to King Herod. VIII.
Clotilda Queen of France. IX. Andegona Princess of Spain. The whole adorned
with Poems and Pictures to each History. By R. B. Price One Shilling.

XIII. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories, containing, 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and perjured Villains. 2. The miserable ends of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable predictions and presages of approaching death, and how the
event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers, and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a future state after this Life. Imbellished
with diverse Pictures. Price One Shilling.

XIV. Unparalled Varieties, or the Matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind;
displayed in near 400 notable instances and examples; Discovering the
transcendent effects; 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude, 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage, and Fidelity. 3. Of Chastity, Temperance, and Humility, And on the
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences. 4. Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude.
5. Of Cowardice, Barbarity, and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with proper Figures. Pr. 1. s.

XV. THE Kingdom of Darkness: Or the History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions, Possessions, Disturbances, and other wonderful and supernatural
Delusions, Mischievous Feats, and Malicious Impostures of the Devil. Containing
near Fourscore memorable Relations, Foreign and Domestic, both Ancient and
Modern. Collected from Authentic Records, Real Attestations, Credible
Evidences, and asserted by Authors of Undoubted Verity. Together with a Preface
obviating the common Objections and Allegations of the Sadduces and Atheists of
the Age, who deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With Pictures of several
memorable Accidents. Price One Shilling.

XVI. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in 2 parts containing, I. The
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and Prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; With an Account of the most famous
Comets, and other Prodigies, from the Birth of Christ to this time. II. The
Miracles of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, and other curious
Inventions in all Ages; as, the Seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
Pictures. Pr. 1 Shilling.

XVII. THE Scarlet Whore, or the wicked Abominations, and horrid Cruelties and
Persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome displayed. Being a brief Relation
of their Bloody Practices, and Inhumane Tortures inflicted upon Protestants for
many hundred years past to this present, in all Countries where they had
Authority and Dominion; namely, in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany, Poland,
Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Holland, Scotland, Ireland, and
England; Containing among many other particulars, The Original and Practices of
the Spanish Inquisition, The Massacre at Paris; The bloody Massacre in Ireland
1641. wherein above two hundred Thousand innocent Protestants were barbarously
murdered, and the Prophecy thereof by Archbishop Usher Forty years before it
happened; The Spanish Invasion; The Gun-powder-Treason, with the several Plots
and Contrivances of the Priests and Jesuits for Extirpating the Protestant
Religion, till the time of our Glorious Deliverance from Popery and Slavery, by
the Accession of their most Excellent Majesty's King William and Queen Mary to
the Throne of these Kingdoms. With an Abstract of the Cruel Persecutions lately
exercised upon the Protestants in France and Savoy, in the years 1686, and
1687. Together with a short Account of Gods Judgments upon Popish Persecutors.
Published for a Seasonable Warning to all Protestants, to inform them what they
must expect from that bloody Generation of Antichristians. Price One Shilling.

Miscellanies.
XVIII. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select and choice Emblems
Divine and Moral, Ancient and Modern, Curiously Engraven upon Copper Plates;
with Fifty delightful Poems and Lots, for the more Lively Illustration of each
Emblem; Whereby Instruction and Good Counsel may be promoted and furthered by
an honest and pleasant Recreation. To which is prefixed, An Incomparable Poem
Entitled, Majesty in Misery, or an Imploration to the King of Kings written by
his late Majesty, K. Charles I. with his own Hand, during his Captivity in
Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight, 1648. With a curious Emblem. Collected
by R.B. Pr. 2 s. 6 d.

XIX. EXcellent Contemplations Divine and Moral Written by the Magnanimous and
truly Loyal A.L. Capel Baron of Hadham; Together with some Account of his Life,
and his affectionate Letters to his Lady the day before his Death, with his
Heroic Behavior and last Speech at his Suffering; Also the Speeches and
Carriages of D. Ham. and the E. of Holl. who suffered with him: With his pious
Advice to his Son Price 1 s.

XX. WInter Evenings Entertainments in 2 Parts Containing, 1. Ten Pleasant
Relations of many Rare and Notable Accidents and Occurrences; with brief
Remarks upon every one. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with their Explanations,
and useful Observations; and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60
Pictures, for illustrating every Story and Riddle. Excellently Accommodated to
the Fancies of Old or Young, and useful to cheerful Society and Conversation.
Price One Shilling.

XXI. DElightful Fables in Prose and Verse, none of them to be found in Aesop,
but collected from diverse Ancient and Modern Authors; with Pictures and proper
Morals to every Fable. Several of them very pertinent and applicable to the
present times. Published as a means which in all Ages has been found useful
for pleasure and likewise for instruction in the prudent conduct of our Lives
and Actions. By R. B. Price Bound One Shilling,

Divinity.
XXII. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion,
Representing the several steps and degrees of the Sorrow and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost; As, 1. His Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely Accused, Smitten, Buffeted and
Spit upon before Caiaphas the high priest. 4. His Condemnation, Scourging,
Crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be Crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing his Cross to Golgotha. 6. His Crucifixion and bitter Passion. 7.
Our Saviors Institution of the Blessed Sacrament. Together with brief
Resolutions to all those Scruples and Objections usually alleged for the
omission of this important Duty. With Eight curious Sculptures proper to the
several parts, with Graces. Imprimatur. Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Epis. Land. a
Sacris. Price One Shilling.

XXIII. A Guide to eternal Glory: Or, Brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts; As
I. Saving Faith discovered in three Heavenly Conferences between our Blessed
Savior and 1. A Publican. 2. A Pharisee. 3. A Doubting Christian. II. The
Threefold state of a Christian. 1. By Nature. 2. By Grace. 3. In Glory. III.
The Scriptures Concord, compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of
Question and Answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation, and
Spiritual things compared with Spiritual. IV. The Character of a True
Christian. V. A brief Directory for the Great, Necessary and Advantageous Duty
of Self-Examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day Examine himself.
VI. A short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. VII. Beams of the
Spirit, or Cordial Meditations Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul.
VIII. The Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God. With short remembrances
and Pious thoughts. IX. History Improved or Christian Applications and
Improvements of diverse remarkable passages in History. X. Holy Breathings in
several Divine Poems upon diverse Subjects and Scriptures. Price One Shilling.

XXIV. YOuths Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into common English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each Story;
very delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of Young Persons,
and preventing vain and vicious Divertisements. Together with several Scripture
Hymns upon diverse occasions. Price 8 d.

XXV. THE Young Man's Calling or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations, namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their youth. On the Martyrdom of seven Sons and their Mother. Of
Romanus a young Nobleman, and of diverse Holy Virgins and Martyrs. On the Lives
of King Edward VI. Queen Jane, Queen Elizabeth in her youth, Prince Henry
Eldest son of King James, and the young Lord Harrington, etc. With twelve
curious Pictures, Illustrating the several Histories. Price 1. s. 6. d.

XXVI. THE Vanity of the Life of Man represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; With Pictures and Poems exposing the Follies of every Age. To which is
added, Verses upon several Subjects and Occasions, Containing, The History of
the cruel Death of Cassianus Bishop and Schoolmaster of Brescia in Italy, who
suffered Martyrdom for the Profession of the Christian Faith by the hands of
his own Scholars in the Bloody Reign of Dioclesian an Heathen Emperor of Rome;
With diverse other Poems compiled by Mrs. Ann Askew and Mr. John Rogers whilst
they were Prisoners in Newgate, and afterward burnt in Smithfield, In the
bloody Reign of Queen Mary. By R.B. Lcensed and Entered. Price Eight Pence.

XXVII. MOunt Sion, or a Draught of that Church that shall stand for ever.
Together with a view of that World which shall be broken in pieces and
consumed. By William Dyer, Author of Christ's Famous Titles, and a Believers
Golden Chain. Price One Shilling.

XXVIII. DIstressed Sion Relieved, or, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness. A Poem. Wherein are Discovered the grand Causes of the Churches
trouble and misery under the late dismal Dispensation. With a complete History
of, and Lamentation for those Renowned Worthies that fell in England by Popish
rage and cruelty, from the Year 1680 to 1688. As the Lord Russel, Colonel
Sydney, Alderman Cornish, and diverse others; With a Relation of the cruel
proceedings, of the late Lord Chancellor Jefferys in the West. Together with an
account of the late Admirable and Stupendous Providence which has wrought
such a sudden and wonderful Deliverance for this Nation, and Gods Sion therein.
Concluding with the Trial and Condemnation of Mystery Babylon the Great Whore;
and diverse Hymns of Praise and Thanksgiving: with Sighs for Ireland. Humbly
Dedicated to their Present Majesty's. By Benjamin Keach, Author of a Book
called, Sion in Distress, or the Groans of the True Protestant Church. Price
One Shilling.

XXIX. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon
the Great Whore, Revel. 17. by many and undeniable Arguments Answering all the
Objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
Ancient and Modern Divines, and most Eminent Writers about the Mystical Numbers
in Daniel and Revelations, concerning the rise and final ruin of the Beast and
Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age. Together with an Account of
the Two Witnesses, who they are, their Slaying, Resurrection and Ascension,
with the probability of their being now upon their Rising; showing also what
their Ascension is, and the glorious Effects thereof. With an Account of many
strange Predictions relating to these present Times. By Benjamin Keach. Price
One Shilling.

XXX. THE Devout Soul's Daily Exercise in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week;
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all conditions, and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksgivings before
and after Meat. By R.P.D.D. Price bound Six Pence.

XXXI. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces when they draw nigh to God in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Lords Supper. By Jo. Flavel Minister of Christ in Devon. Pr. 1. s.

FINIS.

