A Copy of a LETTER; Written to one of the Members of Parliament now sitting:
Wherein is contained a serious reflection, upon the fallacies and
disingeniousness of the Army, in their seven Unalterable Fundamentals, lately
published. As also a seasonable Caution to all Governors, for their better
securing themselves and the Nation, from being made any more a prey to the
lusts and will of the Army, and their Adherents.
SIR,
HAving lately perused those few Principles, agreed on (as it was said) by the
General Council of Officers, and published for the people's view, under the
Title of, Unalterable Fundamentals; I thought it my duty, as a Member of this
Commonwealth, to give in my sense hereof, together with these Cautions
following. Providence having so ordered it, (I hope for the best) that after
this second, and therefore most shameful defection of one part of the Army,
you are now in a hopeful way of being established, in that fullness of power
you have laid claim to, and I hope will improve, through grace, to the
establishment of the Laws of God and the Nation, and the vindication of the
people from Oppression and Tyranny. For God having done so much in mercy for
you, it is now in the expectation of all men, what you in duty will do for him
and his people.

Before I come to the Fundamentalls here mentioned, I shall premise this
Quaerie touching the Authors thereof, Whether they are not the unfittest men to
be makers of unalterable Fundamentalls, that have been the greatest Breakers of
Fundamentalls themselves, and such too as were thought as Unalterable, as both
by the consent of the People, and the Wisdom and authority of Governors, could
be effected.

That there shall be no Kingship exercised in these Nations. But because I know
not how to answer Tautoligies, I shall join this, and the Proposition following
together, viz.

That they will not have any single Person, to exercise the Office of chief
Magistrate in these Nations. For what is Kingship, but a single Person
exercising the Office of chief Magistrate in these Nations; and if there be no
single Person, there can be no King. To these two then I answer, It is not the
Formal part in the word, King, or in that single number, One, which has been
so long engaged against; but the Substantial part, in that latitude of Power,
and Arbitraines of Government, the Spirit and life of Tyranny; which, be it in
one, or in two, or in twenty, is the same burden and oppression, to the free
born people of this Commonwealth. Monarchy being rejected and laid aside,
rather as an opportunity and fitness for Tyranny to seat it self in, than as
Tyranny it self; which doubtless may be found in any form, which is farthest
distant from it, where Persons are corrupt, and Laws be defective.

That an Army may be continued, and be conducted, so as it may secure the Peace
of these Nations; and not be disbanded, nor the Conduct thereof altered, but by
consent of the said Conservators appointed. I answer, That forasmuch as
Authority of it self is but a name, and mere formal thing, without the soul
and spirit of Government, which is strength to compel, whatsoever Authority
shall command. Therefore I must assert these two Positions, as unalterable
Maxims.

1. That the Parliament, which is owned as the Supreme Authority of the Nation;
and their Army, which, in truth, is the strength and sinues of this Authority,
must be so much one, as that the Army, our of that interest and influence which
the Parliament has over it, by way of necessity, must acknowledge and yield up
thereunto the right, of giving definitive sentence, and power of juding what is
fit and reasonable, for the people of this Nation, usurped of late by part of
the Army, and their Adherants.

2. This must be done so really, without any more contradiction or opposition,
than any private man, who is not of the Army, shall use, in his own behalf,
who is only passive herein. Otherwise, to own any Supreme Power above the
Army, is a gross contradiction.

That no imposition may be upon the consciences of them, that fear God. This,
because it is unalterable, it has need to be more fully and plainly expressed;
that is to say, That no imposition shall be upon the consciences of those, whom
the Supreme Authority shall adjudge to fear God, and not what the Army shall
determine herein.

That their be no House of Peers. Observe what care is taken, to make up their
Fundamentalls of words only, that they may keep themselves loose in the things
themselves. It is not another House they resolve against, but a House of Peers:
It Is a House of Lords, forsooth, and not a House shall Lord it over us, that
they will venture for ever to declare against. As long as they will not have a
House of Peers, although they have the same, and far greater power exercised in
other persons, and names, it is sufficient and fair enough.

That the Legislative and Executive Powers shall be distinct, and not in the
same hands. That any may see of what mettle their Fundamentalls are made of.
This Sixth Proposition has broken the neck of the Fifth already; for there,
they declare against a House of Peers, and yet here, they say, they will have
another Assembly distinct from the Parliament; to whom, if you give no more
power than the House of Peers had, then are they as needless as you March 19.
1648. An Act for abolishing the House of Peers.
Voted the House of Peers to be: If you give them more power than the House of
Peers had, then what becomes of your privileges of Parliament? Then let me
tell you, Your Rump (as they call it) is not worth a --

That both the Assemblies of the Parliament shall be elected by the people of
this Commonwealth, duly qualified. The Army should have made one Fundamental
more, that is to say, That the Army should be for ever deemed, the only duly
qualified people of this Commonwealth; and then the next Fundamental comes in
plainly and sincerely, without any fraud or juggling, viz. That both the
Assemblies of the Paliament shall be elected by the people of this
Commonwealth, duly qualified; that is to say, with Red-coats, Muskets, Swords,
and Pikes. Otherwise, we have great cause to fear, that they who have so long
assumed this Title, as peculiar to themselves, will never disclaim it at the
election of Parliaments.

Now, Sir, Fearing that Party, which has so shamefully fallen away from you,
has yet too great an interest in many persons among you; yea, seeing daily so
many of them, as to outward appearance, admitted into grace and favor with the
Parliament, and thorough the carelessness of some, into places of chiefest
trust in this Commonwealth, I cannot but give you, as already a brief account
of their unalterable Fundamentalls, so now, likewise a short and seasonable
Caution for your future dealing with them.

It is no less wise, then old saying, First try, and then trust; God has
given you a fair trial, both of your Friends and Enemies, if you make not
aright advantage, Destruction will come upon you without pity.

Take notice, there are many now, will come in unto you daily, compelled by
necessity, not affection, who will by consequence no longer remain with you,
then that bond of necessity lasts; Be well advised, concerning those that
have appeared against you, though now they cry you up never so loud, it is to do
themselves good, and not you, that they now carry a face of friendship toward
you.

They will now be treating with you a pace, but treat with no more then you
must needs; You are now able to stand upon your own legs, it will engage the
Nation the more for you, the less you comply with the Enemies of their Peace,
their Religion, their Laws, and their Liberty: besides, by this means you pay
the Defected party all their Arrears, without putting the Nation to any further
charge, which will be accounted as a just punishment upon them, who have
interrupted you; and in you a fatherly care, and provident respect to the
purses of the People, (so much already exhausted) which they will draw the
freelier, (as being the better able) to pay off all those that have been
instruments of your re-establishment; Remember what Principles they are of, and
then consider, what faith they are like to keep with you.

As first, they do affirm, That Laws, Acts, and Statutes, vid. Army's Plea for
their present Practice
are binding or not binding, as they appear to the Army, to relate or conduce
to common and public right or wrong, page 3.

2. They absolve the Commonwealth from their obligations to your Laws, which
they shall adjudge to be destructive to their interest and advantage, ibid.

3. That as all Laws, Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances; so all Covennants,
Engagements, Promises, and Protestations; all Acknowledgments, Subscriptions,
Vows, and Oaths; all and all manner of Obligations and Expressions thereof, are
only binding unto the Public safety, not at all to the persons of Governonrs,
or Governments, but with reference thereunto. Of which Public safety, these
men have affirmed, That it belongs to themselves, whom they call the People,
and not to the Parliament, who are their Governors, to judge of, which their
late proceedings do sufficiently testify. page 4.

4. That the Soldiery may lawfully hold the hands of their General, if they
shall say, he turns the Canon against them; though it appear to their General,
and all the world besides, he does not so, page 6.

5. That it is no resistance of Magistracy, for an Army to preserve the
public, natural, and undoubted rights of the People, against their lawful
Magistrates, page 6.

6. That they ought not to deliver the Sword out of their hands, for the
sacrificing of that cause, which God, by his Providence, has put into their
hands, for its protection and defense, page 23.

7. That the making of an inconditionate Promise and Engagement, is sin; and
that the keeping of it is sin also, page 24.

8. That the Parliament are not proper Judges of what is convenient to he done
for common interest, in the case of the Soldiery, but that common in erest
must be the only judge, page 26.

9. That though in other cases you are the only Judges, as in that of Sir
George Booth; yet, in their cases, you are not to be Judges, as in that of the
nine Officers of the Army, page 27.

10. That by a Parliament must be meant the Major part of a Parliament, and not
the Minor, page 28.

11. That they may as well be Judges to turn you out of the House, as they were
allowed to be Judges, to turn the Major part out before, page 29.

12. And lastly, I shall cite you this one more out of their Declaration,
October. 27. 1659. viz. That the People, by electing Members to represent them in
Parliament, had cut that Knot with their own Sword, which by no other ways was
capable to be dissolved or broken.

Out of this brief Collection, you may easily inform your self, what obedience
they are like to give, what faith they are like to keep, and what safety you
are like to have among this disobedient, and faithless crew of Mutiners; who
owning no other Law then their own Will, no other power then their own Sword,
will never become subject to the Laws of the Nation, or the sword of the
Magistrate, until the body of them shall be dissolved into their first
Principalls.

Nor can I think, I leave you safe here, without putting you in mind of those
their adherents, whom they call the Sectaries; These indeed are the men, have
effected your interruption more then any, opposing your Principles as much as
your Power. Who thorough some men's Carelessness, and their own Diligence, have
crept unawares into the most considerable places, both of Trust, and Power in
these Nations; And who could not but read your Destiny, that beheld this
oversight in you. Grow wise, then by Experience, and Remember to put those
into places of Trust and Power, that are of your own principles; This is your
Duty, your Honor, your Safety, your Interest. And you have good reason to
believe, that they that think themselves above the Ordinances of God, will
never cordially submit to the Ordinances of Man. Religion among those that are
zealous, is counted their chief interest, for this they will not stick to
venture their Estates, their Reputation, and all that is dear unto them; so
that their shall be neither Oath, nor Covenant, nor Promises, but this like the
Pope, shall be always ready, with some to give them a dispensation who it is
feared, have too many among them of the Jesuits crew, who will easily dispute
them into this belief, that they do God good service, (when occasion shall
serve) to keep no faith with you, whom they esteem as Heretics.

Men of different principles, can never unite at the heart, though with
flattering Lips, and a double Tongue, they may speak every one to his
Neighbor, yet they will discover themselves in their proper seasons.

Divide not the victory with them, who would fain get a hank upon the
Government, not that they intend to be with you any longer, then under your
shadow, and present protection; they may provide for themselves, and their
friends safety, till in time they may grow up, to overtop you again, (as ill
weeds grow apare). What ever leaves they may now put forth, their natural
fruits will not bear proportion to.

And now I hope, having known what it is to be kept out of the house your
selves, and having made such bitter complaints against them that were your
Disturbers; Now I say, I hope you will pity your brethren of the Long
Parliament, and not do to them, as you would not have others do unto you:
Though they are not Majores natu, yet they are Majores numero, to whom the
birth right, in the natural course of the Law, undoubtedly belongs. The very
essence of former Parliaments, and what is it indeed among your selves? what is
it among every private Committee, or meeting of men of Authority, that
challenges to it self the Authority of doing, without any contradiction; but
the greater number: till you acknowledge your backslidings in full, as the Army
did theirs but in part, and call in the Major part of the house, as they did
the Minor part only, till your Repentance be unfeigned, and your Reformation
perfect, you will never be established in the peoples Love, and what security
can you have in the peoples Fear? which must be maintained by the power of an
Armies inconstancy, who can with the same breath, both bless, and curse their
Masters.

God has set you once more in your places, it may be, to see if you will set
others in theirs also. Remember your Repentance in the day of your distress;
There were some of you, when the Army had turned you out, condemned your selves
for not taking the rest of your fellow Members in. As the Army gave you that
Opportunity, to see your faults, so God has now given you his opportunity,
wherein you may mend them.

Do not then falsely imagine your selves at your journies end, nor take up your
rest in your imperfect number; but know that you are not set up as the summary
end, and perfection of Government, but only as a fit opportunity, and probable
way, wherein a more perfect Government may be obtained and established; which,
as it is your duty to endeavor to effect, so it will be your chiefest glory to
bring to Perfection.

FINIS.

