The Court of Curiosities, And the Cabinet of RARITIES With the New Way Of
WOOING.

cupid

This may be Printed, R. P.

Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye-corner.

The Court of Curiosities, OR, The New way of WOOING: And the Cabinet of
RARITIES, etc.

Containing Rules and Directions, for the most exact and courtly manner of
Behavior toward Superiors, Equals and Inferiors, as how to enter a Room or
other place, to pay a Respect, or make a Complemental address with suitable
expressions upon those and such like occasions; indifferent to either Sex, etc.

AS ALSO, The Art of making Love, and how to know when one is beloved and the
means in that Case to obtain ones desire. Set out with Pleasant New Songs,
Complemental Expressions, Letters and other pretty conceits.

To which are added choice Rules and Directions for Carving Flesh and Fowl; As
also to order Fish and to know the best part of any of them.

Together, with the Signification of Moles; Interpretation of Dreams, and
choice Rules of Palmestry, or the way of knowing good or bad Fortune in man or
Woman, by the Lines, and marks of the Hand, etc.

This may be Printed R. P.

Printed for P. Brooksby.

THE Court of CURIOSITIES, OR, The Cabinet of Rarities. With the New Way of
Wooing, etc.
The Introduction.
AS Knowledge and Understanding are the greatest Ornaments: In like manner
ought they to be prized and improved to advantage, nor can they be attained to,
without care and diligence; and in this Case, diverse things are to be
considered: but not to go from the intended Subject. I shall proceed to lay
down such choice Rules and Instructions, as will be wonderful useful and
profitable to Men or Women; but especially to the youngest sort, and first as
to Carriage and decent Behavior with Expressions suitable on sundry Occasions.

CHAP. I. How a Youngman or a Maid ought to behave themselves in entering a Room
or others Place to pay respects to their Superiors, etc.
AS good Breeding greatly sets of the Person of a Youngman or a Maid; so it
ought to be observed by them on all occasions; and for those that do not
understand the true Grounds of Dancing, to enable them herein, let them observe
these following RULES.

A Youngman, upon entering the Room where his Superiors are, ought with his
Hat in his hand or under his arm to make his approach, and at some distance,
setting one leg a little before the other, bend his Body without moving his
Feet, then advancing three steps do the like, waving or turning his head in
bending that he may seem to pa his Respects to more then one that is in the
place then advancing to the Party to whom he intends to speak, upon a third
Congie, looking steadfastly, he may express himself as the occasion requires:
If only in a Complement to a Man thus, Viz. Honored Sir, thus low I bend to
kiss your hand, and return you many thanks for permitting so great a Favor to
him who is yours to serve you in what he may; (or thus,) Sir I am extremely
happy in having this opportunity to pay my Respects to a Person of your Worth:
and return you thanks for the many Obligations you have laid upon me. Or the
like, as the Quality, Place and Occasion does require; and so to proceed to
other discourse. Stand still with your Hat under your arm, or retire in the
manner you advance. If it be to a Gentlewoman observe the same Rule diffeing
only in your Expression and offer a modest Salute, if you may do it without
offending, and that must be on the right Cheek for in such Cases to kiss the
mouth that is too vulgar, your Expressions may be these or such like:

Madam, I am the admirer of your Virtues, and therefore thus humbly intrude to
tender you my Service; Fair Mistress, pardon my boldness that I thus approach,
your Virtues and Beauty attracted me to beg the favor of being numbered amongst
your admirers; or so forth: for in this Case there can be no certain
Expressions set down, the Causes of the Addresses being so various.

If a young Gentlewoman approach her Superiors, she must approach by
Curtzying, bending her Body a little forward and then drawing it backward her
Head being kept upright and her hands placed decently before her and by three
Curtzies make her approach stooping a small time at each, casting her Eyes
somewhat downward, which will set her off with a modest Grace, and if it be to
Men she approach; let her not speak first, unless she have some Message to
deliver or some Request to ask; which when she has done, let her stand or
retire in the same manner, unless she be desired to sit, but if to Women she
may pass a Compleinent as the occasions requires.

As for our Equals we must use them with all the obliging Terms of modesty and
Civility as not to put our selves before, nor do any thing, whereby they may
suppose themselves wronged or affronted: and use toward them such obliging
Offices of Kindness that by your Humility, you may gain a good Esteem: be not
in this Case too Familiar nor too reserved, but in all Cases hold a medium or
middle.

To Inferiors by Charitable and Respectful, flying Pride or Contempt by all
means doing them all the good Offices you can; both upon your own account and
by interceeding on their behalf with others, in whose power it lies, and in so
doing you will gain a good repute.

CHAP. II. Directions for Behavior, and the management of Discourse, and at
the Table before their Parents or Strangers, etc.
LET a Youngman or Maid, in his or her Discourse, be sparing; especially the
latter, least by over-lavishness or speaking unseasonably, they be counted
impertinent and troublesome to those to whom they direct it, and in any wise be
cautious how they extol themselves and their Abilities, but ever leave that to
some other: Let them not be effected with their own discourse or laugh at a
Story they tell themselves if they can avoid it, nor be seen upon any occasion
to be given to unseemly or overmuch laughter.

Above all, let them be respectful to their Parents, and when they come to the
Table seat themselves last in a place suitable to their degree, not contending
therein, nor seeming dissatisfied, though they sit below their inferiors. And
if they Carve, serve themselves last; but if Carved to by others, rest
satisfied with what is dealt 'em; and if at any time they find a convenient
Opportunity to begin a Discourse, let it be about innocent matters and such as
by Reflection or otherwise, will give no offense to the Company.

CHAP. III. Directions for making Love, and how to know whether one is beloved,
and to obtain the Party desired, etc.
IN Case of Love, our Youth after he has fixed his mind upon the Virgin he can
fancy, must, e're he lets her know his Passion or that lets it take too deep
Root, find by observing or discoursing her, whether her Heart be not inclined
another, way too much to be recalled, least in such a Case he destroy his own
Quiet, and this may be done by observing the motion of her Eyes, for if your
Mistress when you discourse with her, look downward or carelessly cast her eyes
another way, seeming restless and uneasy, yet now and than cast forth a sigh
unwittingly, her heart and mind is at that time somewhere else, and she is as
deep in Love with some other, as your self is or may be with her: or if she
seem careless and reserved, putting of your passion Story with some other
Discourse of a Contrary Nature: then is she cold I desire, and will not soon
take Cupids fire, yet by seasonable addressing and obliging Courtship, may be
softened and brought to a Compliance.

Again, if you would know when your Mistress oves you, though she will
dissemble her passion by her Carriage and protest the contrary with her Tongue:
look steadfast on her and take notice of her Eyes for they silently speak the
language of the Soul and cannot easily dissemble, if with them she steadfastly
gazes on you; insomuch that they sparkle on you by turns and at other times
seem cloudy, as also to shut as though dazzled or weakened with too much
steadfastness or that speaking suddenly she stammers or misses of a ready
deliverance of Words, and that her blushes come and go, then is she in Love, If
upon a parting Salute she meets you with earnestness or squeezing your fingers
hard, presently snatches off or unlooses her hand, as if she had injured her
modesty, then she is in love with you, and wants but an opportunity to let you
know what Intrests you have in her Affections which if you be any thing of a
Courtier, you ought to study, in order to bring it to pass.

These and many other Symptoms there are in Virgin-Love, yet oberves these
Rules, never trouble your Mistress with too early or too late Visits, nor
Attempt to surprise her undressed or in an unseemly manner, least you undo all
you have done but at a seasonable time: To delight her you may tune your Voice;
good Singing, being very acceptable in such Cases, and for want of a Song, this
may well serve.

A SONG.
To the Tune of, Joy to the Bridegroom.
MY lovely Caelia whose bright eyes
All hearts at distance do surprise
O smile and save your Strephon then,
Who without you must be undone
O smile, etc.
O Cure your wounded Shepherds Grief
By smiling him a quick relief
Be kind as you are fair, and he
Will never doubt's Felicity.
Be kind, etc.
As for the Courtships of a Widow young or old, briskness, a prompt ingenuity,
a Face not easily to be dashed out of Countenance, are the best proof, nor must
you be tedious in your Courtship; for Widows being seasoned for Love entertain
it with less fear than Virgins, nor stand upon such nice punctilio's; therefore
as this firstmust be won by obliging Complements and sometimes tedious Service,
the latter must be gained by good humor and seasonable Caress, without
omitting any opportunity to clap up the Match, and for her diversion this Song
may be apt enough.

To the Tune of, the well approved Doctor.
IN faith my dear Silvia,
I tell you I love
Believe me, you will find
That I constant will prove
O doubt not my dearest
to give me thy hand
Since all that is about me
is at your command.
As for quaint Complemental Expressions, these on fit occasions may serve.

Madam, your Eyes enthrall my Heart, and make me your slave.

Fair Lady, what shall I say to gain belief that I love you? be witness your
self and all that is good in you.

Madam, I am your Creature and live but by your smiles.

Beauteous Mistress, pity a Languishing Lover who scarcely dares tell his pain
least you should frown him death.

As for a Letter you may frame it thus.

To his admired Mistress,
FAirest of Creatures, being made a Prisoner to your beauties and many singular
virtues, and not having the opportunity, or to say rather the boldness to tell
you it in person, I have presumed to address your fair hands with this Paper,
as the Interpreter of the mind; entreating you out of that tender Compassion
you have ever expressed for afflicted Mortals, to send him a Cordial, though it
be but Hope to give some ease to a feavourish Soul, that meditates on you next
Heaven, and the Obligation will revive him who is your languishing slave to
wear the soft Chains of your Love.

P B.


To which an Answer may be thus framed.

SIR,
I Received your Letter, the Contents of which, are as strange to me as your
self and therefore know not how to return an answer to your satisfaction, but
that I am compassionate to those that are in affliction assure your self, and
should be loath to be the occasion of your suffering, yet till I know further
must remain a friend to my self, and no enemy to you.

A. G.


THus Love and Courtship brought is to an end,
And now to other things my Pen I bend,
Which may as useful prove, if not exceed
Then to be satisfied, good Reader Read.
CHAP. IV. Rules and Directions for Carving Fish or Flesh, after the Courtly
manner: as also what relates to Fish, and the choicest part of either, etc.
SInce the managing of a Feast, is in many cases, as difficult as Marshalling
of Armies; I have thought fit to give a brief Account of it: as also of
carving, and of the best pieces, in case of difference of Persons in Respect
and Quality: which, take as follows.

As for the Flesh, Fish, Fowl, etc. They are to be observed, as they are in
season, in the first and second Course, each month amongst the Curious,
differing in that particular; wherefore supposing all things plentiful o^ the
Board, and in good order served with their particular Sawces, a thing too long
to be inserted; I proceed to give directions so Carving, a thing wonderful
necessary and commendable, and though in Butchers Mea^ there is no Masterpiece
required in Carving yet observe to cut a Loin of Veal in the middle and give
the Nut-piece to those you mos^ esteem.

In boiled or roasted Beef, the part interlined or interlarded with Fat, is
most acceptable.

In a Leg of Mutton, thrust your Knife a considerable depth, and begin to cut
it from the handle on the inside as if you were about to split it in the Joint,
and on the other side there is a little bone, which, present as the choicest
piece.

A Leg of Pork ought to be cut Round, on the top: and in like manner, a Haunch
of Venison.

A Sholder of Mutton, must be cut Semicircle, between the Handle and the Flap,
or on the inside; as for a Rabbit or Hare: the legs and Wings must be first
taken off, and then cut in two, the back-piece presented as the best: A Pig
must be chin'd and placed upon the Sauce, the best part of which is reckoned
the Ear or under Jaw.

As for Fish, there is no certain directions because they need little Carving;
only in Salmon, Sturgeon, Pike, Carp and Codfish, the head and that part next
it, is most approved: wherefore passing them over, I shall come to Fowl, the
most curious part of Carving.

The Carving Term of a Swan is Lifting; wherefore if you lift a Swan, slit her
right down the middle of the breast, and so through the back from the Neck to
the Rump lay the slit side downwards, and set forth your Sauce in Sawcers apart.

To cut up a roasted Goose; rear her and cut fair the Legs, then Belly-piece
round, and lace the Breast with your knife, a thumbs breadth from the
Breast Bone; and in that manner take off the Wings, raising them cleverly from
the Bone, and then proceed to take off the Merry thought; when having cut off
the Breast Bone, turn the Carcass up and split it on the Backbone, take off
the Rump and lay them in order.

To cut up a Turkey or Bustard, raise the Legs very fair, opening the Joint with
the point of your Knife, yet take not off the Leg, but lace down the Breast on
both sides and open the Wings or Pinions, but take them not off; then raise up
the Merry thought and lace down the flesh on both sides the Breast Bone, and
raise up the flesh called the Brawn turn it out on both sides, but neither
break it nor cut it off; then cut off the Wing pinion at the Johnt next the
Body, and stick on each side the Pinion or Wing, in the place you turned out
the Brawn, but cut off the Sharp ends and take the middle-piece that will just
fit the place: and thus you must use a Capon, only laying the Gizzard divided
in the place where the Pinions of the Turkey were ordered to be put.

In dismembring a Heron, you must take off both the Legs and lace it down the
Breast raising up the flesh, and taking it off clean with the Pinion, then
stick the head on the breast and lay the Pinion, on the contrary side of the
Carcass, and the Leg on the other side, so that the bones ends may meet over
the Carcass, and the other Wing cross over about the top of the Carcass.

To unbrace a Mallard, raise up the Pinion and the leg, but take them not off,
raise the Merry thought from the Breast and lace it down slaopingly on each
side the Breast and turn the back downwards.

In alaying a Pheasant or wrining a Partridge cut them up as a Hen or Pullet,
but if you mince your Partridge, Sauce it with Wine Powder of Ginger and Salt
and keep it not on a Chasing-dish of Coals in the like manner, use a Quail.

To display a Crane take off his Wings after you have unfolded his Legs, which
must be done by the body Joints: then take up his Wings and Legs and sauce them
with powder of Ginger, Mustard, Vinegar and Salt.

And thus have I shown you the difficulty of Carving such Flesh and Fowl as
requires; as for what remains of lesser moment I leave to your Discretion and
proceed to other Curiosities.

A TREATISE Of MOLES; OR, An account of their signification on the Bodies of
Men or Women, relating to good or bd Fortune.
A Mole on the right side the Forehead, near the Eye-brow, signifies the Person
wise and fortunate. A Mole on the left side the Forehead near to the middle,
betokens Riches, though obtained with difficulty. A Mole on the middle of the
Forehead betokens sound Judgment and good Conduct in Affairs. A Mole on the
Eyelid, betokens a quick sight and vivacity. A Mole on the Nose, betokens the
Party much given to Venery or the desire of enjoyment. A Mole on the right
Cheek, betokens happinests in Marriage. A Mole on the left, the contrary. A
Mole on the upper lip, betokens the Party to be greatly beloved. A Mole on the
under lip, betokens Riches by Marriage or the Death of Friends. A Mole on the
Chin, betokens many Children and prosperous days. A Mole on the Right breast,
betokens sudden advancement. A Mole on the Left breast, signifies the Party not
desirous of Marriage. A Mole near the Navel of a Woman, signifies Fruitfulness.
A Mole on the right Thigh, signifies Honor; on the left, pain and disgrace. A
Mole on the right Foot, signifies a Man shall gain much by Travel. A Mole on
the left Foot, signifies the contrary. A Mole on the right Hip of a Woman,
signfies easy Labor; and on the left, danger in Childbearing.
OF DREAMS, AND THEIR INTERPRETATIONS; As they signify good or Evil to the
Party.
TO Dream ones Friends are dead, signifies they are well. To Dream of a Coffin
and that one is put into it alive, signifies Marriage. To Dream of a Rings
being put on ones finger, signifies a loss of Suitors or the breaking of a
match, especially if the Ring seem to vanish. To dream one rides on Horseback
signifies promotion. To dream of flying in the air signifies hasty news. To
dream of Eggs signifies Riches. To dream of telling small pieces of Silver or
finding them, signifies want. To dream you met great Persons, and they kindly
salute you, signifies sudden advancement. To dream one sees the Sun Rising,
signifies, approaching prosperity. To Dream of fire, signifies Anger. To Dream
of strange Monsters, signifies traveling into distant Countries. To Dream of
furious Beasts, and that they assault one, betokens violence to befall by the
procurement of open Enemies. To Dream of Serpents, signifies private Enemies or
fraudulent Friends. To Dream of Embracing, signifies marriage or the meeting of
Friends. To Dream one sees a Party unawares, and wonderfully likes, signifies
the Party shall marry a stranger. To Dream of dreadful Fights in the Skies,
signifies Sickness. To Dream of a Reconcilement with one, with whom they have
been at Variance, signifies the return of a Suitor or the renewing of Love with
Success.
PALMESTRY displayed; OR, Some choice Rules and Directions to know good or bad
Fortune, by the Lines and Marks of the Hand.
THE Party who in the Hand has the Line of Life large and full, has Health and
long Life promised thereby.

To have the Girdle of Venus fair, signifies a desire of Marriage, and that the
Party shall be prosperous.

To have the Ball of the Thumb or Mount of Venus fair signifies Riches and Love.

To have a Star between the two middle joints of the forefinger or Figure of
Saturn, signifies Riches and Wisdom. The figure of a G on the little finger or
finger of Mercury, denotes Inconstancy.

A bloody Line in the hollow of the Hand or plain of Mars, denotes the Person
to be Fortunate in war.

The figure of Moon as thus C on the Mount of the Brawn of the Hand, denotes
the Party fortunate in Navigation, and by Traffic. Three crosses on the root
of the Thumb, betokens diverse Marriages.

A pleasant New Song, Sung before the King at Newmarket.
To Horse brave Boys, to Newmarket to Horse
You Will loose the Match by longer delaying,
The Gelding just now was led over the course
I think the Devils in ye for staying,
Run and endeavor to bubble the Sporters
Bets may be recovered lost at the Groom-porters
Follow, follow, follow, lead down by the Ditch
I Will take the Odds, and then youl' be rich
For I will have brown bay if the blewbonnet ride
I Will hold a Thousand pound on his side, SIR,
Dragon could scour it, but Dragon's grown old
He cannot endure it, he cannot, he will not,
Now Run it as lately he could,
Age, Age, has hindered his Speed Sir,
Now, now, now, see they come on!
See! see! the Horse leads the way, still,
Full three lengths before at the turn of the land
Five hundred pound upon the Brow Bay still
But a Pox of the Devio, I fear we have lost,
The Dog the Blew Bonnet, has Run it,
(A murrain light on it)
The wrong side of the Post,
Odds Bobs, was ever such Fortune.
An Excellent New Song on King Charles the II. and King James.
To a pleasant new Tune.
Let Caesar live long and his Temper abide,
Who twenty years plentiful seasons has tried
Let twenty and twenty be counted too few,
Still every season consisting of new:
Till tired with joys which this world can afford
He retires to be made a more Glorious Lord.
Let Royal Almansor great Caesar succeed
And England from Fctions for ever be freed
Through endless successions may his life ever run
By Sea and by Land, who such wonders has done
May his Issue increase, and these Nations rule over
Until Ages last period and time be no more.
A SONG. To the Tune of, Hail to the Myrtle Shade.
HAil to my Love that is fair,
Hail to the Nymph I adore:
Then banished be sorrow and care
They never shall trouble me more:
Since she I admire does prove kind,
and tells me in smiles she does love,
I Will scatter my care in the wind,
and as joy ial as any i will prove.
A SONG To the Tune of, Joy in the Morning.
LOvely Maid why are you sad
Swains enough are to be had,
If he is gone, pray let him go,
Come dear Nymph why sits thou so
Alas! most Men when we pursue,
Do slight our Charms, and bid adieu;
Hasty yielding, ruins Love,
You longer should Men's passions prove,
Ah what glory can he gain,
Although he Victor does remain
Over a poor and helpless Maid,
Whom her kindness has betrayed.
FINIS.
gentleman and lady holding hands


