The Cries OF Westminster.
Or the Parliament Pedlar, with his whole Pack of Knavery opened, and set to
sale. Come Customers, come: Pray see what you lack,
Here Is Parliament Wares of all sorts in my Pack.

WHo buys any Parliament Privileges?
My new Privileges.
'Twill reach you many pretty things,
And raise you above Gods or King^*
These are the Cries of Westminster,
That are heard both far and near.
But a while I pray stand by,
And you shall hear another cry.
Who buys the Parliaments Declaration against the King: New, new, new.
'Twill surely unblinde your eyes,
That you may read a hundred lies.
Thus go the Cries, etc.
Buy a new Ordinance to repair Churches:
A new Ordinance, new, new, new.
The Achans now restore the Wedge,
To salve their Saintships Sacrilege.
Thus go the cries, etc.
Buy a new Ordinance of the Commons, against Sage-players. New-lye printed, and
new-lye come forth.

Saints now alone must Act for Riches,
The Plott out-smells old Atkins breches.
Thus go the Cries, etc.
Buy a new Order of Parliament, That none shall make any more Adresses to the
King, or ^^ceive any Message from him, upon pain of High Treason, Imprisonment,
death, or plundering: But when these shall swing in a string, true Subjcts will
obey their King.

Challonner, Mildmay, Martin, Vein,
Are fitting of their crowns to reign.
These are the Cries, etc.
Buy a new Plot^, found out by Sir John Wray, to blow up the Thames, or the
city to betray, it is as true as all the rest, before nere known by man nor
beast.

Twill keep you still in Jealousies and Fears,
And sets you all together by the Ears.
Thus go the cries, etc.
Buy the Four Bills sent by the Parliment, from Seldom and my Lady Ken^; after
long Debate of this blessed Parliament; Who buys the Four Bills here. Great
CHARLES he will not betray his Trust unto such as they; his Honors still
entire; his Conscience tried nine times in the Fire; the Devil give all his foes
their hire; and raise them toward heaven above a halter nyer.

Let all the People say, Amen.
For we shall never have Peace till then.
Thus go the cries, etc.
Who byes any Bishops Houses, or their goods, Books, household stuff or hoods;
here are good pasture grouds, corn, hay and grass in all our Rouds, if it be
not all good, the Devil confound's. Amen.

May all the Trees to gibbits turn,
Or firing make, to hang or burn,
Thus go the cries, etc.
Have you any old Arrears for the Army, i will give you tickets for em; have you
any Subsidies, Poll-money, Loanes or Contributions, have you any Plate, Horse,
or Arms, old bodkins or Thimbles or wedding Rings, have ye any; Have you any
more Irish Adventures for sale of lands, or a trick for one meal a week. City
Loans have you any; or Assessments for the Sco^t^; have you any Five and Twenty
Parts, weekly or monthly Assessments for Essex, Fair-fax, Manchesters, the
Scots or Irish Army; Free Quarter have you any. Have you any of his Majesty's
Revenue to sell, Old Sequestrations or Plunder: have you any more Exizes, or
Fortification-money, or Fynes for Delinquents Compositions, etc. or a new
Ordinance for 400000l. the month.

This is our Liberty for to pay
The Saints that now King ^harles betray.
Thus go the cries of Westminster,
That are heard both far and near,
But a wile I p^ay stand by,
And you will hear another cry.
The Second Part, To the same Tune.
MY New Articles of Faith, who buys the Parliaments new Faith? You may see by
their WORKS, they are worse then Jews or Turks; let their faith be what it
will, their Religion is to Kill.

Thus go the cries, etc.
Who buys any Parliament jugglings of the newest fashion, Hocus Pocus never
showed more to cheat the Nation; here is a trick, by Martins ring, shall
suddenly depose a King; Tom shows you a ptitty trick also, and at New-maret and
St. Albanes tells us what he means to do: Trusty Thomas, thus keeps his
Promise with his King; grace forsake him, devil take him, may all such false
Knaves swing.

Thus go the Cries, etc.
Who buys the Army's Proposalls; customers pray draw near, the Devil in his
pack had nere such geere; Here Is Cromwells mamaster-peece, 'twill blind your
eyes, and fill your head with Fifteen hundred Lies.

Thus go the cries, etc.
Here Is a fine Order, was the like ever seen, shall murder all that Love their
King or their Queen, a knot of such Traiterous Regicides were surely never
seen, as Challoner, Mildmay, Martyn and Vein, all Parliament Kings, that over
us reign: They are all glutted with their fellow subjects blood, and yet
pretend their good; but pray let it be understood, for all Burleys blood,
before Ienkins shall die, a hundred thousand in the City of London will try, to
make Martyn, and all such Roagues to fly.

These be the cries of London Town,
Some go up Street, some goes down,
But a while I pray stand by,
And you will hear another cry.
A new Ordinance pray come and buy, to establish the Presbytery; what Religion
next, put's me beyond my text? if this wont please you, see another, pray Sir
try, for I have a hundred more, here in my Pack, for you to buy.

These be the cries, etc.
Who buys a new Order, to new dip the Kings ships, and to their eternal
fames, give them all new names; the Parliaments Ships forsooth; the Royal
Sovereign must be the Royal Traitor, the Prince, the Parliament Pinck, and
the whole Fleet the Parliaments Navy; O brave pirates, whether are you bound,
let cross wind toss you, whilst you all are dround.

Thus to the world they make it known,
Crown, Scpter, ships, and All Is their own,
These be the cries, etc.
Who buys a new Petition from Tanton, that the Devil brought the last great
wind, and the Traytos now vant on. New, new, new, but as fase as God is true;
and so you juggling Devils all, Adue.

Thus go the cries, etc.
An Execration to all that hate King CHARLES.
May God forsake ye, may the Devil, take ye, May the pox eat up your bones,
consume your rotten Members, and burn up both flesh and bones to embers; may
the palsy shake your hands and heads, and bloody visions hant your beds; all
Egypts plagues and ten times more wait on you all at either door; May all your
wives turn arrant jads, and you live (...) trades* may the gowt be in you toes,
and no end be to your wooes, may no Surgeon hear your moans; and all your joys
be sighs and groans may the running of the Reins, or the Quinsie ceaze your
brains; May the toothach, and the fever, to plague you still do their
endeavor; May the Strangullion be your best friend, and nere forsake you till
your end; May you be the peoples scorn, and curse the hour that you were
borne; May Bedlam or Bridewell, be all the house you have to dwell; May your
childrens children beg from one door to another, bereft of Parets, friends,
Father and mother; May a guilty Conscience always affright ye, and no earthly
joys delight ye; May you have aches in your rotten bones, gravel in your
kidneys and your stones; May your Daughters all turn Whores, and their Fathers
keep the doors, May they never sleep in quiet, and fear Poison in their diet;
May they never Cursing lack, and so the Peddler shuts his pack. Only when as
they die, ('cause they were never true) And that their souls depart, Devil
claim thy due.

The second Edition, corrected and amended: printed in a hollow-^ree, for the
good of the State.


