A COMPENDIUM, CONTAINING Exact RULES to be Observed in the COMPOSING of Two or
more PARTS, Either for VOCAL or INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC.
MUSIC is an Art of Expressing perfect Harmony, either by Voice or Instrument;
which Harmony arises from well-taken Concords and Discords.

In the Scale there are Seven Notes, G, A, B, C, D, E, F, for their Eighths are
the same in Nature of Sound.

Of these Seven, some are called Concords, and others Discords. The Concords
are Four in Number, viz. a Unison, a Third, a Fifth, and a Sixth.

The Discords are Three in Number, viz. a Second, a Fourth, and a Seventh.

The Third, Fifth, and Sixth are either Perfect, or Impefect. The Imperfect is
less than the Perfect by half a Note: As,

^ Unison. Imperfect 3d. Perfect 3d. Imperfect 5th. Perf^ct 5th. Imperfect 6th.
Perfect 6th. Eighth. Second. Fourth. Seventh.

In Composing of Two or more Parts, the Parts do either stand still. As,

^ Or the one does stand still, and the other move: As,

^ Or they both ascend together: As,

^ Or both descend together: As,

^ Or one does ascend and the other descend. As,

^ The RVLES following will direct how the Concords are to be taken, or applied
every one of these ways:
RVLE I.
You may have as many Thirds, Fifths, Sixths, or Eighths as you please standing.

RVLE II.
When one Part stands still, and the other moves, the moving Part may move to
any Concords: As,

RVLE III.
When Two or more Parts ascend or descend together, they ascend or descend
either gradually, or by Intervals.

If they ascend or descend gradually, they do move by Thirds, you may have as
many Thirds as you please: As,

Or ascend or descend by Sixths. As.

Take no more than two or three Sixths; Or they move by a Fifth or a Sixth: As,

You may have as many Notes as you p^ease.

If two Parts ascend by Intervals, then you may move from

A 1 to a 3 or 6

A 3 to a 3 or 6

A 5 to a 3 or 6

A 6 to a 3 or 6

RVLE IV.
If two Parts do descend together gradually, then as in the Third Rule: if by
Intervals, you must move from

A 1 to a 3 or 6

A 3 to a 3 or 5 or 6

A 5 to a 3 or 6

A 6 to a 3 or 6

RVLE V.
If two Parts do move diversely, as one rising and the other descending: Then
thus,

Or thus,

Or upon the Third, your Bass must begin in the Key, and end in the same Key.

Of Taking Discords.
Discords are either taken by way of Pass, or Binding.

RVLE I.
Discords by way of Pass are taken thus:

So thus you see, a Discord is placed between two Concords.

RVLE II.
A Discord is bound three several ways; first, between the Third, and some
other Concord: As,

The first Note of the upper Parts may be any Cord to the Bass, the second Note
of the upper Part must be a Third to the Bass, the third Note must be a Second
to the Bass, the last part of a third Note must be a Third to the Bass, and the
closing or fourth Note must be a Third or Eighth to the Bass, as in the Example.

The first Note of the Bass must be any Concord to the upper Part, the first
part of the second Note of the Bass must be a Third to the second Note of the
Treble or upper Part.

The last part of the second Note of the Bass must be a Second to the upper
Part, the Third Note of the Bass must be a Third to the second part of the
third Note of the Treble, and Close as in the aforesaid Example.

This Binding is seldom taken in a Close in more Parts than Two; but in the
middle of a Lesson it is to be taken as often as you shall see occasion. This
Binding is seldom or never taken in other Notes than in the Example.

RVLE III.
The third way of taking a Discord by way of Binding is when the Fourth is
taken between Second Thirds: As,

So that you see the Discords is thus taken, viz. the first Note of the upper
Part may be any Note to the Bass, the second Note of the upper Part must be a
Fourth to the Bass, the eight Note of the upper Part must be a Third to the
Bass, and the Close must be an Eighth or a Third, as in the Example.

This Close may be used in any part of a Lesson of two or more Parts, either
beginning, middle, or ending; but seldom it is to be omitted in the ending of
a Lesson: This Close is seldom or never taken in longer or shorter Notes than
in the Example.

RVLE IV.
The fourth way of taking of a Discord by way of Binding, is when the Seventh
is taken between the Sixth and Eighth: As,

The first Note of the upper Part may be any Cord to the Bass, the first part
of the second Note of the upper Part must be a Sixth to the Bass, the last part
of the second Note of the upper Part must be a Seventh to the Bass, the fourth
Note of the upper Part must be a Sixth to the Bass, and the Close must be an
Eighth or a Third to the Bass.

The Bass must descend four Notes, the two first Notes must be but half the
quantity of the third Note, and the last Note as long or as short as you please.

This Close is used in the middle strain of three or more Parts, and for the
final Close many times of two Parts.

To conclude; When you make one or more Parts to a Bass, you may begin your
Bass in the Key, and end the Bass in the same Key. The middle (if you have more
than two) may end in a Third, Fourth, and Fifth, from the Key. End your Lessons
always with the Discord, according to the second Rule, that is, the Note before
the Close must be a Fifth, if you fall to the Close, or a Foutth, if you rise
to the Close. Your upper Part must begin in the Unison, Third, or Fifth, but
not in a Sixth.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for William Gilbert at the Half Moon in St. Paul 's-
Churchyard, 1673.


