Concerning a Treaty: TO RECONCILE THE DIFFERENCES, AND UNITE THE SPIRITS OF
GODLY MJNJSTERS. WHO Have hitherto stood for a Reformation.
Three things offer themselves to be considered in a Treaty of this nature, at
this time. 1. What should induce conscionable men now to desire such a Treaty.
2. What the proper Aim and Design of the Treaty should be. 3. By What ways
and means it may become effectual to reach that Aim and Design.


Of the Inducements to a Treaty.
IF either the respect which is due to God, or the consideration of our own
safety, or the desire and hope of a happy issue to our public undertakings,
can move and affect conscionable and rational men, to a matter of duty which is
easily performed, then upon these inducements a Treaty between godly Ministers,
who have hitherto sought jointly for a Reformation; but now are divided about
the way of advancing it, should be set a foot.

For first, in respect of Gods Commandments, and of the Ministerial work of
the Gospel: there is nothing so much recommended to us in the Word; as the way
of Love, of Unity, of Peace, and of brotherly kindness; whereby we are obliged
to provoke one another unto all good works, and to avoid all occasions of
offenses which are dishonorable unto the name of God, and to the Holy
Profession: now to bring this to pass amongst us, nothing can at this time be
so effectual as a Treaty, to bring godly Ministers together, that they may
understand rightly one another, and be joined in one spirit, and one mind, for
their mutual edification.

Secondly, in respect of our own safety, there is nothing that can prevent the
imminent dangers, whereinto unavoidably we must fall, by these divisions, and
heart-burnings if they continue, but an amiable Treaty; that same better
assurance being had of each others intentions: thereby a reconcilement may be
wrought in our broken affections; for if this distance wherein we stand
continue, it will not only grow insensibly greater and greater, through the
working of our corruptions; but through the practices of common enemies, who
cunningly blow the Coals of our discontentments, it will soon break forth
into open hostility, and prove in end our final overthrow and desolation:
whereat our adversaries will Triumph, as at the revenge of all the evils, which
by our former Conjunction, did befall them.

And thirdly, in respect of the issue of our hopes in these undertakings: as it
is not rationally possible to expect any comfortable success therein, without
the settlement and quieting of the spirits of those that are to be the
joynt-actors thereof: so it is not imaginable, that their spirits can be settled
or quieted toward each other, except they understand one another, and be
satisfied in each others aims, better then of late they have been; and this
cannot be effected any other way but by a Treaty: all the comforts then which
we can rationally expect in the purchase of our liberty, from all these
endeavors, and all the credit which amongst Forraigners, is to be wished for
toward our undertakings, depends wholly upon a better settlement of our
Affairs: this upon a better intelligence with one another, and this upon a
friendly Treaty to reconcile differences and divided affections, which only
can frustrate the enjoyment of our hopes.

Of the proper Aim and Design thereof.
AS our Aims are, so our Designs will be contrived in some proportion
thereunto, if then in this Treaty our first Aim be above all things to advance
the glory of God in the propagation of the Gospel, by our unblameable walking
before him in his ways of Truth, Love, and Peace, and our next Aims
subordinate hereunto, be to remove offensive Cariages, to rectify mutual
mistakes, to beget a good intelligence, in reference to common and necessary
concernments, to agree upon means and ways of mutual edification; to seek a
Concurrence to uphold the holy Profession in things wherein there is a full
agreement: Then the design of the Treaty should not be to dispute and debate
matters of particular interest, and to justify our selves, or condemn others
in things past; but to deliberate and consult about the undoubted means and
ways, how according to the will of God, the forementioned Aims may be
advanced with joint consent and brotherly correspondency in time to come better
then heretofore: notwithstanding some latitude of different opinions and
practices, which in circumstantial matters will fall in, and mutually ought to
be tolerated, without giving or taking offense thereat.

How the Treaty may become succesfull toward this Design.
TO work out this Design toward those ends, there must needs be some
Preparatives used toward the bringing on of the Treaty; and some Rules settled,
how to proceed therein suitable to the Aims of Truth and Peace.

Concerning the Preparatives.
It is in many things a certain Truth: Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet,
and to begin a work of this nature well, there is nothing so material as to
prevent sinister impressions; and again, a rational confidence of the sincerity
of each others intentions toward it, and thereupon to lay an obligation upon
both parties to be constant toward the prosecution thereof, and to do all
this, I shall humbly offer these following Expedients.

1. Both parties must be made thoroughly acquainted with the real design, and
fully assured, that nothing is pretended, but what is really intended, as in
the presence of God. Now to acquaint them with the real Design, and beget this
confidence in them; some choose moderate, known, and godly men, which are of
repute for judgment and integrity with both sides; are to be made use of, to
insinuate the Design unto them: as from themselves by the dictates of their own
Conscience, lest it seem to proceed from some plot in the State upon them,
which to prevent means should be used to bring some of each side together, to
set them upon the drawing up, or upon the approving of a platform of a Treaty,
conducing to these ends: obliging them to acquaint their Brethren of each side
therewith, as a matter of necessary advice which they think themselves obliged
to suggest; for nothing but this will prevent objections, and dash jealousies.

2. When the minds of moderate and leading men are thus somewhat prepared,
and the fiercer sort taken off from the edge of their fearful suspiciousness;
then some form of a Declaration should be at hand, to be presented to those
that should approve of the design, that setting their hands to it, they may
show their willingness to concur with others in a Treaty of Reconcilement, and
to be engaged in the prosecution thereof by way of Council and advice.

3. The subscriptions of both sides being gained severely to the same draught:
the Ruling power should be made acquainted with the free inclinations of both
parties to a Treaty among themselves, and his countenance and concurrence
should be desired toward the advancement thereof; not only that he may not be
possessed with any jealousy against it; or receive sinister and false
informations concerning it; but that he should be entreated to depute some of
the Council of State to be present at it, as well to assist with advice toward
the furthering thereof, as in the outward form of proceeding and carriage of
businesses to give countenance thereunto, that it may be of a public nature,
and freed from disturbances and contempt.

4. When the ruling power should have approved of the Design, and appointed
some to be present at it to these effects: the first meeting should be
appointed for a Fast wherein both parties should humble their souls jointly
before God, confessing their sins and miscarriages, praying unto him for grace
in time to come, etc. And at the end of that Action they should ratify and
declare unto each other, as in the presence of God their willingness to be
mutually reconciled, as Brethren in the Gospel ought to be according to Gods
will; and to that effect, that they are resolved not only to treat ingenuously
and lovingly to rectify things that are amiss; but that they will endeavor
in all their private and public Cariages toward each other, and in reference
to the work in hand, to be without offense, and not to suffer any animosities,
clamors, or complaints to break forth, especially in a public way of preaching
or writing; and in case any unexpected matters of grievance should fall in on
either side, that they should not be instantly imputed unto, or laid open
before all; but that on each side some should be appointed, to whom such
grievances should be opened; that a friendly course may be taken to rectify
the same, and to make these Resolutions more valid; some Act might be drawn up
containing these promises, and the names of those that should be the hearers of
grievances on each side; which Act should be subscribed by all the Members of
each side, and delivered to the other party as a mutual assurance of their
voluntary engagement thereunto, nor would it be amiss that they should join to
entreat the Ruling power, that he would by his influence over the public, take
notice of such as should be offensive in any such kind, and to appoint some who
should call them to an account of such proceedings, wherein they should seem
to disturb the peaceable inclinations of Brethren who are seeking the ways of
mutual Reconciliation.

Concerning the pro^^^ution of the Treaty
THe Dutch have a Proverb to his effect, That a business Well geordoneert is
gedaen werck.
well ordered is finished. There is much truth in this saying: If then we can
forecast the way of ordering all things so justly and equally toward the
forementioned common aims of the Treaty, that neither side shall find any
cause of exception thereat, we may hope that God will bless this design, and
not suffer it to miscarry. And to this effect I shall offer these following
thoughts, as an humble advice to be considered by those that shall think
themselvees concerned therein.

I conceive then, that this Treaty (that it may reach the ends forementioned,
and be subservient to the design in hand) should be ordered in respect of the
places of meeting; and in respect of the proceedings of parties in those places.

The place of meeting should be such wherein both parties may have a distinct
chamber to meet by themselves, and a common room wherein to meet and appear
before the Deputies of the ruling power. In the common room there should be
three Tables: one where the Deputy or Deputies of the State should sit at; and
the other two set opposite to one another where the treating parties should sit
at.

The proceedings of the parties in each of their places, should be regulated by
the same Rules as well of actions as of conferences.

The actions are of two sorts; some are to be of each party within it self;
some of both parties toward each other.

To regulate the proceedings of each party within it self, that it may not be
subdivided, and clash about its own proceedings, I would advise thus:

First, that all who should have subscribed the first Declaration and the
second Act, to meet and to treat; should come together to choose from among
themselves one or two Scribes; and three or four who should be called Treaters
in the name of the rest.

Secondly, they should determine a Directory for the actions and duties of
their Scribes and Treaters, lest they take too much upon them over their
brethren, and their misbehaviours in their places, redound to the disturbance
of the Treaty. And I suppose this Directory might be to this effect:

1. That nothing should be counted an act of the Treaty; but that which passes
from one party to the other in the name of all in writing.

2. That no writing should be given by either party to their Treaters to be
offered to the other side as an act of their Treaty, but that wherein all the
subscribers to the Treaty on that side from which it is offered, do agree,
nemine contradicente: for if any do contradict, it cannot be counted an Act of
the whole party; and neither party should be divided within it self.

3. That to draw those writings whereunto all of each side within themselves
should agree; or from which none should disagree, the method should be this: At
the end of every meeting let a point of deliberation be named, which shall be
the subject of the Treaty at the next joynt-meeting. Let a due time be allowed
to think upon that point: Let every one of the Subscribers be obliged to bring
his advice concerning that point in writing expressed in brief and orderly
Aphorisms: Let all those writings be put into two or three hands, who shall
sum them up in that wherein they all agree: let that summary draught be read at
their peculiar meeting, that all may approve, or at least none be concluded in
that which he might happily disapprove. Then let it be put into the hand of the
Treaters, to be delivered at the common meeting of both parties to the other
side as an act of Treaty.

4. That no Treater be allowed to say or do any thing in the name of all, but
that which he shall be directed to say and do by ali: and if he should say or
do otherwise any thing, it shall be free for any to stand up and disclaim that
which he shall say and do, declaring it not to be valid in the name of all.

5. That all the appointed Treaters should be obliged to be always present at
all the meetings, and in case of necessary absence, to get some body of their
brethren to supply their places, lest the Treaty might be prejudiced thereby.

6. That the Scribes of each side should keep all the writings which every one
shall give in upon all matters of deliberation; and that a double of the
summary collection of Suffrages, shall be in a readiness for every one who
will take a copy of it.

7. That in the peculiar meetings no constant and perpetual Chairman shall be
appointed, but that every one shall preside therein as it falls out to be his
turn according to the order wherein his name shall be found in the List of
subscriptions unto the first declaration for a Treaty.

8. That the Chairmans office shall be, 1. to begin and end the peculiar
meeting with a prayer, 2. To receive the suffrages of deliberation in writing,
and get a Committee of two or three at the most, to make a summary draught of
consent, 3. to get the peculiar times of peculiar meetings appointed, so that
all things may be prepared for the common meeting with the other side.

To regulate the proceedings of the one side toward the other at the common
meeting, let both parties at the time appointed appear with their Scribes and
Treaters: Let the Treaters deliver to each other (after a public reading of
that which they are to deliver) the acts of their advice upon the point whereof
the Treaty is to be at that time. Let the precedence in reading and delivering
acts be vicissitudinary, as also in beginning and ending the common meeting
with prayers, viz. that the side whose turn it shall be to pray, shall be last
in delivering its act and advice to the other. Let a new point of deliberation
be nominated immediately after both acts are delivered, and some proposition
made by way of Querie agreed upon and put to paper concerning it: and to do
this, some two of each side should be deputed to draw it up, and offer it to
the liking of both parties: Let the papers which are given by one side to the
other, be read the second time, and an offer made by those that deliver them,
that if any of the other side should desire any terms to be opened, or
doubtful expressions to be explained, that they should make their Querie of
the thing which in the writing should seem to them to be doubtful, and that
the sense thereof should be made plain unto them, Let the papers which at each
meeting are delivered and explained by one side to another, be taken into
consideration by the side which does receive them, to this effect, that it
should return thereupon at the next meeting an answer declaring how far it does
consent thereunto: or in case it should not yield any consent at all; or agree
unto unto the substance thereof; that then it should offer to the side from
which it received the paper at the former meeting, some expedients tending to
bring forth an agreement.

Thus much of the Actions: as for the Conferences they in like manner are to be
of two sorts; some which each party should entertain within it self: some which
may be between both parties at their common meetings.

Concerning the conferences of each party within it self, although nothing can
be prescribed to prejudge the liberty of Brethren, yet advice may be offered
for their edification and prevention of subdivisions, I shall then desire it
may be considered, whether these Rules will not be found expedient to be
oqserved.

1. That all large discourses and speeches be avoided: In multiloquio non deest
peccatum.

2. That no personal matters tending to complaints or reproaches be heard in
any public meetings, but that the persons appointed to redress grievances,
should be made acquainted therewith.

3. That no disputatory conferences by way of contradiction to different
opinions, be entertained, but only declaratory by way of explication of each
his own opinion in thesi and antithesi, and by way of deliberation what is more
or less expedient, be allowed: and that in all such conferences the sum of
that wherein on each side there is an agreement, be noted and put to paper by
the Scribes, that wherein opinions may be different, the Scribes shall not be
obliged to take notice of.

Concerning the conferences which may be between both parties, I would ad
Advise these things:

1. If it should not be permitted to any to make any speech, or large discourse
either in his own name, or in the name of any other, far less to make
complaints of grievances, and oblige others to make apologies and
recriminations these kinds of conferences have ruined our peace, chiefly when
proud men, or passionate talkers have taken upon them to out-wit others, and
manage the affairs of their own party to the disadvantage of the other.

2. That no matter of conference should be mentioned at the common meeting, but
such as in writing is delivered from one side to another.

3. That concerning such matters no conference should be further entertained
than that it shall be free for any one of either side to ask a question of those
that have delivered a paper concerning their meaning of any thing contained
therein; and that it shall be free for the treaters of that side to whom the
question is proposed, first to explain the meaning of the writing which is
counted doubtful; and in case they open it not fully enough, that then any
other of the same side may add to what the Treaters shall have delivered.

And beyond these bounds no conference should be allowed, nor matters of debate
otherwise entertained than in writing, either declaratorily or deliberatively:
Declaratorily in reference to the grounds of our judgment and practice:
deliberatively in reference to the ways and expedients of edification in love
and agreement.

FINIS.

