THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the PRISONERS at TYBURN On Wednesday the 17th
of this Instant May, 1676. Viz.
Henry Seabrook, Elizabeth Longman, Robert Scot,
Condemned the former Sessions. Edward Wall, and Edward Russell.


Giving a full and satisfactory Account of their Crimes, Behaviors, Discourses
in Prison, and last Words (as near as could be taken) at the place of Execution.

Published for a Warning, to all that read it, to avoid the like wicked
Courses, which brought these poor people to this shameful End.

With Permission,

To. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for D. M.

THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION OF THE PRISONERS AT TYBURN On Wednesday the 17th
of May, 1676.
AT the Sessions for London and Middlesex held at Justice hall in the Old
bailey, on Wednesday and Thursday the 10th and 11th of this Instant May, 1676.

There were in all Nine persons condemned to suffer death for their several
Crimes; of which a particular Relation having already been published, we shall
not here wast our own or the Readers time with an impertinent Repetition.

However, Mercy so far interposed after the Sentence of Justice, that only Five
of them actually suffered: Amongst whom was Elizabeth Longman, an old Offender,
having been above a Dozen several times in Newgate: Some time since she was
convicted, and obtained the benefit and favor of Transportation, and was
accordingly carried into Virginia: But Coelum, non Animum mutant, qui trans
mare currunt. She had not been there above Fourteen Months, before she
procured Moneys remitted from some of the Brotherhood here, wherewith she
bought off her Servitude, and over she comes again into England, long before
the term of her Sentence was expired. Nor was she content to violate the Law
only in that point, but returned to her old Trade (for so these people call
stealing) as well as to her Country; and was soon after her Arrival conducted
to Newgate, for mistaking several parcels of Silk, upon which being Convicted,
and pleading her Belly, she was set by the last Sessions before this: But now
it appearing that she was highly accessory (though all the while in Newgate) to
the Robbery of a Person of Quality, and that she was wholly incorrigible, not
to be reclaimed by any Warnings, she was brought down again to the Bar, and
demanded, what she could say for her self, why she should not suffer Death,
according to Law, upon her old Judgment. To which she still pleaded, that she
was quick with Child. But being searched by a Jury of Matrons, they found no
such thing; so that she was carried with the rest into the Hole, and ordered
for Execution. As for her behavior, I am sorry no better account can be given
of it; for truly she did not seem so sensible of her End, or to make that
serious preparation for it, as night be expected from a Person in her
condition: yet were not the charitable assistances and endeavors of the
Ordinary and several other Ministers wanting toward her, though it is feared
they did not make the wisht-for Impressions upon her Spirit.

Two oaths viz. Edward Wall and Edward Russel that suffered, were brought to
this untimely and ignominious End, by the means and seducements of this unhappy
Woman. For they together with one A. M. going after the former Sessions to a
Gentleman's House, to solicit and engage his Interest, in order to the
obtaining of a Reprieve for a Woman that past for one of their Wives, and was
then under Condemnation, they chanced to spy the Maid a scowring a very
considerable quantity of Plate, the glittering sight whereof so much affected
them, that when they came back to Newgate, to give an account of their
business, amongst other discourse, they mentioned what abundance of Plate they
saw. And will you only see it? (says this Besse Longman, being by) then you
deserve to starve indeed, when Fortune puts a Booty, as it were, in your
Mouths, and you are such Cowards, that you dare not take it: With these and
many other words to that purpose, she animated them on so far, till by her
Instigation and the Devils together, they resolved upon the Villainy, and
accordingly went the next Night, broke open the Gentleman's House, and took
thence a great quantity of Plate: But upon description and search, A. M: was
taken next Morning on Saffron-hill, with a Silver Ladle, a Silver Porringer,
and that famous Engine of Wickedness, called a Betty. He was carried for the
present to New Prison, and there kept till he had discovered the other Parties;
and upon his ingenu^u^ Confession obtained the Mercy of a Reprieve from that
Execution, which his Fellow Criminals now suffered.

The other person executed, was Henry Seabrooke: He was condemned the former
Sessions for robbing the Merchant at Dukes place; but upon his pretending to
discover the rest of the Cabal, and other great matters, was kept from the
Gibbet all this while; but now failing to verify those pretentions, he was
ordered by the Court to receive his punishment according to his former
Sentence, with the rest of the Prisoners condemned this Sessions.

Of these poor wretches, two, viz Wall and Russell, as they ingenuously pleaded
guilty to their Indictment at the Bar, so they behaved themselves very modestly
at their Condemnation; and afterward in Prison when Ministers came to visit
and discourse with them, in order to their Souls everlasting good, they
received them with great expressions of joy and esteem, attending with much
reverence and seeming heed to their Spiritual Instructions, who with most
necessary and importunate Exhortations pressed them to a speedy and hearty
Repentance,

Since it stood them so much in hand, being upon the brink of Eternity, they
told them, Their Condition was sad, as being justly sentenced by Men to a
temporal Death; but that was infinitely short of being condemned by God, and
suffering Eternal Death under the fury of his Wrath: that though it was vain
for them to flatter themselves with hopes of ^onger life in this world, yet
there were means left to secure them of Everlasting Life in the ^ext: and that
to such vile sinners as they ^ad been, it was an unspeakable Mercy, that ^hey
had yet a little space left them, wherein ^o make their peace with Heaven; and
what ^ould the damned Souls, weltring without ^ope in Eternal Flames, give or
do for such a ^recious opportunity? With such and many ^ther pious Admonitions
and Prescriptions did ^hese Spiritual Physicians endeavor to cure ^he Ulcers
of their Souls, and excite them to ^hrow off the peccant matter, and wash away
^^^i^ Iniquities with tears of a sincere Repen^ance, proceeding not from a
sense of approaching Punishment, but of trouble for the Evil it self, and their
provoking of God thereby.

To all which they gave very great attention, promising to put that blessed
Advice in practice; and so continued in a very serious and laudable frame till
the time of Execution, which was the 17th of this Instant May, being then
conducted to Tyburn with vast numbers of people following the Carts to behold
the last sad Scene of their deplorable Tragedy.

Being come to the Gallows, and the usual Prayers and Solemnities being
performed, one of them spoke a pretty while to the Multitude, protesting, This
was the first Fact that he was ever actually guilty of, though he had been
accessory to diverse others, and had been all his days a very ill Liver; so that
he could not but acknowledge that he suffered justly. He very much admonished
all persons to consider their ways; especially warning Youth not to misspend
their time in Idleness, or Disobedience to Parents or Masters; and to have a
care of being seduced and drawn away by lewd women, affirming that such Courses
and their Temptations, and to satisfy their Luxury, had been originally the
cause of his destruction, and that shameful death he was now going to suffer.

The rest said very few words, unless to some particular Acquaintance; but by
their Gestures seemed to pray secretly, and so were all Executed according to
Sentence.

FINIS.

