December. 2. 1648.
I Have perused the precedent Discourse of the Life and Death of a virtuous and
godly Christian, entitled Faith and Experience, and a Pious and profitable
Sermon preached at the solemnizing of her Funeral, and approve them both very
worthy the Printing and Publishing,

John Downame.

FAITH and EXPERIENCE: OR, A short Narration of the holy Life and Death of Mary
Simpson, late of Gregory's Parish in the City of NORWICH: Who dyed, Anno 1647.
In or about the thirtieth year of her age, after 3 years sickness and
upwards.

CONTAINING A Confession of her Faith, and Relation of her Experience, taken
from her own mouth.

To which is added, A Sermon preached at her Funeral, upon Romans 14. 6, 7.

By John Collings, M. A.

Phil. 1. 23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which is far better.

Ver. 21. For to me, to live is Christ, and to dye is gain.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Tomlins, and are to be sold at his house at the
Sign of the Sun and Bible in Pye-corner 1649.

To the Glory of her Sex, AND Excellency of her AGE, The truly Noble and
Virtuous Gentlewoman, Mrs Philip Hobart, daughter to Sir John Hobart, Knight
and Baronet, late of NORFFOLKE.
Noblest Lady,
IF it were nothing but the daily Engagement I stand in to that root of which
you are a branch, and to your self as a Member of this Family, It were enough
I trust, to claim a pardon for this Dedication, and I might rather seem to
deserve a check for my so long negligence, than my present presumption: But the
sutablenesse of the subject in these sheets, is such, that I dare be confident,
you will be pleased not only to patronize but also practice it, in what you see
it yet leading you further to perfection. It holds out unto you a precious
Example of one that began so soon to live to God, that she is already living
with him. (Lady) It is a record of the life and death of one (not unknown in
her latter days unto you) one far below you in respect of birth, and
greatness, while she was here, but infinitely more above you now: And of one,
who (I dare say) thirsted not so much afrer your greatness then, as you do
after her grace and glory now. What vanities are the excelling things of this
life? They have a scantnesse in their fullness, a glut in their enjoyment, and
a short time to live. The greatest riches is in the truest poverty, and to be
nothing is to be most. I am confident (Noblest Lady) that you have in some
measure learned, not to call the Proud, Blessed; nor think that true happiness
consists in worldly greatness. It were sweet if we could learn to eye the
creatures as God eyes them, and judge them greatest that are most gracious. How
the world valued this deceased Saint, I know not: Sure I am it was done unto
her, as God uses to do to them whom he delights to honor. Why should not we
look as God looks? and not judge the Peacocke better meat than the Partridge
because he has gayer feathers. Read here (Noble Lady,) the love Christ bears
to his Lambs, and learn from hence, what it is to seek the Lord early. How
many of Gods precious ones, attain not so much peace in threescore, as she had
in thirty years? We use to say, more work is done in two hours in the
morning, than in the rest of the day; She set out early to seek him, and she
quickly found him whom her soul loved. She quickly redeemed her lost time,
because she had not lost much. A young Saint, and an old Devil, is Satan's
slander of the way of the Lord, which (the Wise man says) is strength to the
upright. Learn hence also (Noblest Lady) the benefit which you will in time
reap from your begun practice of seeking the Lord in secret. How often did this
removed Saint meet with God, when she was alone in the Mount? God speaks his
mind more freely to us, and so we may also do to him, when he and we are alone.
Let those whose God is their pleasure, or belly, spend the time in painting and
dressing, which you are better spending in seeking the face of him who will be
found of them that seek him. You will find your face will shine more than
theirs; and what but this has made it already to do it? I cannot but
thankfully admire the goodness of God, which has already so taken off your
Infant-yeares from the Vanities of youth, and I trust fully persuaded you of
the truth of that which the world calls Heresy, That those are most excellent,
who are most holy. The follies of dresses and paints, and dances, are so far
under Religion, that they are below a spirit that is but truly Noble: And I
(rejoice to say it) below yours. (Lady) we are not sent hither to eat and
drink, and rise up to play; we needed not a rational soul for such sensual
emploiments. You will (yea I dare say you have) found more sweetness in an
hour spent with God, than in many spent in such company as do no good, and
such discourses as administer no grace to the hearers. Pursue Interests and
designs, as Noble as your spirit is: remember always that it is a design too
base for a divine soul to pursue Creature-Contentments. Why should we court
the world that is made for our servant? and wait upon a vanity, that will Weary
us to serve it, but never satisfy the expectation of them that pursue it? Go
on (Rarest Jewel) to make Religion your business, and above all, be much in
seeking God: You have the key of Heaven if you have but the gift and grace of
praying. Let it be your design now as much to excel the Saints as it has
been hitherto to excel the companions of your age; pursue it as your work to
get as much love from Christ, as you have honor from the witnesses of your
accomplishments. Let not your ambition rest in indearing your self to
creatures; but as you are already the crown of your noble Parents, and the
honor of those that labor for your soul: so still go on, and rest not till
you be a jewel set in Christ's diadem. As you have been a Noble Example to
this Family, in teaching them, it is no dishonor to learn the Principles of
Religion, (by which as I dare say your humility has excelled the most of your
Equals (if not in age yet in greatness) who too usually can be content to be
ignorant so no body knows it) So you have also discovered more perfection of
Knowledge at thirteen, than the most can boast of at threescore. So now haste
on to perfection, and labor to excel as gloriously in a strict walking with
God. Remember (Noblest Lady) those that walk nearest the Sun have most light
and heat: Perfect the joy of your Noble surviving Parent. And to this end, Let
me humbly crave that you would continue to make the word a light unto your
feet, and a lantern to your paths. Let your eyes be often upon it, and let it
be Sit tibi vel oration assidua, vel lectio, nunc cum deo loquere nunc deus
tecum, ille te praeceptis suis instruat, ille disponat, quem ille divitem
fecerit, nemo pauperem faciet. Cypr. in Ep. 1. ad Donatum. p. 9.
your Eye. Saint Hierome praises Marcella (a godly woman of his age) that he
could never come to her, but she was asking him somewhat about the Scripture,
and had so high an opinion of her, that he says if himself had any doubt, he
would ask her judgment. O let not much reading there be a weariness to your
flesh! They are Gods Counsels, and may well be our Counselors. Walk with God
in their light, write your lines by that rule. Read often, and with judgment,
always carrying your heart with your eye: You will find a glory, a majesty, a
mystery, a depth in those lines, which you will never be weary of fadoming,
though you shall never be able to find the bottom. I here presume to offer to
your hands an Example, which I am sure your goodness cannot despise for the
meannesse of it; She is now more Noble than you, and in this happier, that she
has already been in Heaven a year before you. (Noblest Lady,) your
opportunities are more; your talents of Time, and Parts, are greater. Outstrip
all Examples, and go on to be as unparalled a president of holiness to
others, as you are of other Excellencies. Now the God of Grace fill you with
his fullness, and be unto you both in life and death advantage, and preserve
you, the crown of your surviving Noble Parent, the Glory of your Sex, the
Comfort of your Noble friends, the continuer of the Religious name of your
Family, and the joy of his Saints: Which is and shall be the continued prayer
of him, who is ambitious to be accounted,

Noblest Lady, Your most humbly obliged. and devoted servant in the Lord Jesus,
JOHN COLLINGS.

TO THE Christian READER.
Reader,
THese sheets are partly my own, and partly another: For that part of them
that is not my own, it is a Relation of the precious Life, and Death, of one
that was lately Ours, but both then, and much more now Christ's. The Relation
was brought to my hands many Months since, but my crowd of occasions hindered
me from perusing of it. I shall now give thee a true account of it: The
Relation was penned from her mouth by a faithful friend, nor have I injured
her or thee in the transcribing of it, having only ranked the Articles of
Confession in such order as I conceived most suitable, and made a supply
sometimes both there and in the Relation, of a word or two, where was some
defect through the neglect, or mistake (possibly) of the first Penman; and in
some places where her phrase (though safe if safely understood) was more dark
and subject to ambiguitie, I have given thee her sense in a clearer and less
ambiguous term. I will assure thee, I have neither added nor subtracted any
thing (which I conceive) material. For what is mine in these sheets, It is a
short Copy of a Sermon at her Burial, it was composed in a short time, and
transcribed with as much haste. I had rather profit thee by plainness than
tickle thee with exactness: I am sure the Sermon has rather lost than got by
keeping in my Study. I was willing for thy good to let it wait upon her
memory, who while she lived, we were all so much beholden to. The plainness
and meannesse of the Sermon will tell thee (I hope) I send it not to thee to
beg Honor, but to serve thy soul in the meanest place. Reader, thou have here
a Sermon proved by a fresh Experience. O add another Proof, requite my pains
by letting the truth delivered have a witness in thy bosom. Believe it
Reader, thou have before thy eyes, in these sheets, a Rule, and a President. It
is Gods word to thy soul, Go thou and do likewise. If thou read the
Relation, thou will see what is got by seeking God early, to what a pitch of
grace a Saint may reach; the right frame of a sober Gospellspirit, the picture
of a Saint. If thou read and gainest nothing, thank thy own base heart.
Here Is a description of a true Christian, a sight of him, in a Copy, and a
Picture. Certainly something may be got for thy and my souls profit from
either. If thou gainest any thing, bless thy God, and pray for him, who is,

Norwich, Nov. 20. 1648. Thine in the Lord Jesus, JOHN COLLINGS.

Faith and Experience.
A short Explanation of her self, concerning diverse Articles of Faith;
especially such as are most fundamentally necessary to salvation: Taken from
her own mouth.

Concerning the Godhead.
I. I Believe there is a God, and that this God i^ infinite. 1. In Substance.
2. In Holiness, and in Being, that there are 3 Persons in the divine Being,
The Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, each one God, and yet in being but one
God.

Concerning the way to come to know God.
II. I believe, that this God is made known to us, by his Word and by his
Works: That there is a way of the knowledge of God, by the Scripture; and that
there is a way of the knowledge of God in a more special way, wherein God [by
his Spirit] reveals himself to his people experimentally; yet according to
Scripture.

Concerning the Word of God; the holy Scriptures.
III. I believe, That the holy Scripture is the very Word of God. 1. Because it
declares the Wisdom of God. 2. Because it discovers our vileness and folly.
3. Because it puts us upon purity. 4. Because it reveals to us the great
mysteries of Salvation. I believe, That God by this his Word is made known to
us. 1. As he is in himself by his Nature. 2 By his Names, which are his
Attributes; or, [2. his Names of Relation.]

Concerning Gods works of Creation; and Providence.
IV. I believe, That this God is further made known to us, by his Works of
Creation. I believe His work of Creation, was his Creating of all things in
heaven and earth. I believe, That God did create all things in heaven and
earth: I put a difference between Creating, and Making: To make is to produce
something out of something: To create is to produce something out of nothing. I
believe, that God did make all things in heaven and earth, for man, and man
only for himself and his service.

Concerning the Creation of man in special, and the state of innocence in
which he was created.
V. I believe, That God made man only for himself and his service. I believe,
That man was made in such an estate, whereby he was able to serve God, by that
divine grace which was put into him by God himself. I believe, That man (being
thus created) was infinitely engaged to serve his God, because he had thus
made him, and all things else, for his use and service. I believe, That all
that God made [amongst which was man] was exceeding good, and whatsoever was
afterward not good was through the defect of the Creature. I believe, That man
being thus made and engaged to serve his God, yet was made liable to fall.

Concerning the Fall of man.
VI. I believe, That Man fell, and that wholly from God, and that being thus
fallen, God might justly have taken advantage upon fallen man, and have cast
him and his posterity off, to all Eternity, as he did the fallen Angels.

Concerning Gods works of grace. 1. Of Election.
VII. I believe, There is an Election of Grace; and that according to that
Election there shall be but a few that shall participate of the way of recovery
by Jesus Christ.

Concerning the work of Redemption and Reconciliation.
VIII. I believe, That there was no cause in man being fallen, to move God to
recover him from that fallen estate: but only he was moved from his own
bowels. I believe, [being moved so from himselfe] he found out a way himself
for man's Recovery. I believe, That the way so found out, and the means by
which alone fallen man can be restored, was by a Mediator taking upon him our
Nature, that so he might pacify the wrath of God for the sin of our Nature,
that we might thereby be fit to live with God in our Nature.

Concerning Original sin.
IX. I believe, [That our Nature was sinfull] and that the sin of our Nature
was the cause of all our sorrows temporal, and Eternal; we dyed spiritually
at the instant of the fall, and all shall certainly dye a temporal death, and
only some shall be delivered from dying eternally.

Further. Concerning the work of Redemption and Reconciliation, the sole
Redeemer, the fruit of Redemption, the mystery of conveyance, etc.
X. I believe, That as the whole Trinity did work in the Creation of the
world, so they did also equally work in the work of our Redemption: God the
Father and the Holy Ghost sending, and the Son being sent and coming. [But] I
believe, that Christ has [alone] performed the work of redemption and
reconciliation, fully satisfying the Justice of God to the utmost for all his.
I believe also, that every man in the world is beholding to God for Jesus
Christ, for the enjoyment of their lives, and of the creatures, and that for
the present they are reprieved from hell and damnation. I believe, That
Reconciliation is to be found in no other, but in Jesus Christ, who is the
alone great Reconciler betwixt God and his people. I believe, That the work of
Redemption is a great mystery: for the divine Nature to take upon him the
humane nature, O it is a great Mystery.

I believe also, That it is a great Mystery, in regard of the way of its
particular conveyance. And that Christ has not only purchased this salvation,
but also makes a particular Declaration of it. 1. By his Word. 2. By the Work
of his spirit on the soul. And 3. By the witness of the spirit. I believe,
That in this work, Jesus Christ purchased strength for every believer, to
withstand Sin, Death, and Hell.

Concerning Perseverance in Grace.
XI. I believe, That by the Lord Jesus Christ there is power purchased for
every Believer, to withstand Sin, Death, and Hell [Notwithstanding that] the
fallen Angels, the Devils, as they were the first occasion of the fall, so they
are great hinderers of this work of [Grace and] Restoration, they having us
at such an advantage.

Concerning Death and the Resurrection; and the Immortality of the soul.
XII. I believe, That all men according to Gods appointment must [dye, and]
continue in the Grave. The bodies [I meane] of every Man and Woman, that so
they might be made fit for eternity, some for eternal wrath, others for
eternal glory. I believe, That the souls of all immediately after death, go
to God that gave them, there to give an account for what they have done in the
flesh. I believe, that the Resurrection of the Saints to grace here, and glory
hereafter, is purchased by the Death, Resurrection, and Ascensian of Jesus
Christ. I believe, That the same bodies both for substance and form, every
joint and limb shall rise again, and not a bone shall be wanting. A
substantial body both for flesh and bones, that I prove by Christ's
resurrection who was raised with the same body.

Object. But, you will say, Christ's body lay but three days in the Grave, and
so his body was not rotted in the dust, but ours will lie so long that our
bodies shall be turned into dust.

Ans. I Answer. The same power that made the body of Adam out of the dust, the
same power can raise our bodies again, although turned to dust: So that the
work of Resurrection is a curious work, and secretly wrought in the womb of
the earth, as the child is secretly wrought in the womb of the mother. There
shall be the same matter to make the bodies of in the Resurrection at the last
day that there was when God first formed the body of Adam, viz. The Dust of the
earth. The same power shall raise all our bodies, though turned to dust.

Concerning the day of Judgment.
XII. I believe, That Christ shall come personally to judge the world, and that
with an audible voice, and by the word of his mouth, he shall raise the dead;
And that at the day of judgment all the sins of the godly shall be laid upon
Jesus Christ. They here in the world accuse themselves for sin, and so shall
be excused at the last day. It is the office of conscience to accuse here or
hereafter. Conscience having done its office, there shall be nothing objected
against them at that day, But they shall hear that blessed Sentence, Come ye
blessed of my Father.

Concerning Glorification and heaven.
XIV. I believe, The godly at the day of Judgment shall hear that blessed
Sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
before the beginning of the world.

I believe, In Heaven there shall be no Infant of days, nor old man of years.
The corruptible life of of the creature shall not inherit eternal life; there
shall no weakness, no deformity what ever accompany that life; there shall be
no eating nor drinking in it, but singing Hallelujahs to God for ever. I will
conclude with the Psalmist.

Psalm. 139. I will praise the Lord for I am fearfully, and wonderfully made:
mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.
Reader! Thou have thus far read her Faith; now hear her Story, that was
faithfully taken from her own mouth: And so also was this that follows, being
the Relation of Gods dealings with her.

Psalm. 34. 8. Taste and see how good the Lord is. Psalm. 66. 16. Come and I
will tell you what God has done for my soul. I shall speak nothing but what
God has done in me, and for me.

THe first work that God ever wrought in my soul was a work of conviction.
He convinced my soul of the sin of Sabboth-breaking. I found much opposition to
that work, and it was some space of time before I could get strength against
that sin: but ever and anon I was given up to the sin again, which was
(yet) a burden to my soul. I had no Observe Gods first work in conversion.
strength against it for the present, till at length the Lord was pleased to
discover another strength than that I had from my self, which was the strength
of Jesus Christ, to overcome this corruption. A sight Conviction.
of sin without a sight of Christ Note.
is not saving of it self. But a sight of sin wrought by God, God leaving not
the work till he has shown the soul the sight of Christ. That I conceive
is a saving work.

One time me thought my fancy in the night presented to me sin in a lump,
with a sight of that Christ which afterward I saw more perfectly. It was thus:
me Conviction.
thought I saw sin set out in a market upon a stall. The commodity was vended
to none but it brought shame and confusion of face to those that set it forth
to Sale; and me thought I saw likewise Christ coming, and owning the owner of
the commodity, which in time I saw he fully did in me; and it was a refreshing
for the present to my spirit that I saw he would do it for me, though he came
not presently.

The next thing I apprehended according to the truth of the word was, that A
Christ was come, to do such things as are declared in the word. This I no
sooner apprehended, Illumination.
but I was set upon with temptations; To question whether there was a Christ or
no, etc. Satan wrought Secretly and Subtly. I being ignorant of his
mysteries, was for a certain time given up to Satan's subtilty.
the temptation. But as Satan wrought secretly and subtly, so God wrought
invisibly and mightily, to the suppressing of him. For as soon as God delivered
me out of the temptation, I discovered a Christ, fully according as he is
revealed in the word to be the Christ, the son of God, my Savior; then I could
see my great deliverance out of the temptation, and not till then, then I saw
that if God had deliverd me finally up to the temptation, I had denied God, and
his Christ, and his word, and whatsoever he is necessary to be known by.

The next thing after I apprehended a Christ come, was how he should be made
known to his people to be their Jesus, which in time by the ministry of the
word God was pleased to make known unto me, viz. that God gave Christ, to dwell
in the hearts of his people, by grace, and then my soul began to be panged
with the desires of that grace of Regeneration. I no sooner had a desire of
grace, but I fell to question the truth of Satan's subtilty.
Grace, where the Devil was subtle as in any temptation, but the Lord by his
mighty power overcame him for me, where the wisdom of God appeared to me in
Gods goodness. Note, where it was she met with God.
the time as well as in the strait. I attended much upon hearing the word, by
which God answered all my doubts, and repelled Satan's temptations: Then Satan
tempted me to doubt of the truth of Gods word. I said Blessed be God! if that
word be truth; and no sooner was I from under the noise of the preacher, but I
was as full of doubting as before. God took me out of that condition, by
putting me into another trouble, which was Satan's subtilty (by Gods permission)
for my good. The Devil employed Instruments to taint my soul with monstrous,
and gross errors. But God of his infinite mercy would not suffer me to speak
against the truth (with those Instruments of Satan) though I could not plead
for it. The Errors insinuated were these. 1 That there is free will Observe
her sanctified judgment of some of our new Truths.
in man to do good. 2 That there is no Electtion. 3 That none are
irreconcilably lost. 4 That Christ was not come in the flesh. 5 That most of
the Scriptures were to be understood in an allegory. These opinions they were
very diligent to draw my soul to; I being weak in my self had fallen from
the truth had it not been for the power of God and his rich condescension to
me. I told the parties if I did not give them arguments in one week, that then
I would not speak against, but for, that which they held; and then the Lord
set me abundantly to study the divine Scriptures, which through ignorance or
misunderstanding, I thought some thing in the word was for them, and something
against them, while I thought to attain it only by reading; but when I saw it
was too hard, then the Lord was pleased to help me by meditation Observe the
right way to profit by reading.
and prayer, and strong cries, and then, and not till then, did I know what it
was to pray out of an apprehension of wants. I A right frame of spirit in
seeking direction.
took the truth, and error, with an equal hand, neither cleaving in my
affections to the one, nor to the other, till God was pleased to reveal it to
me; but I desired God to show me which was the truth, and he did accordingly.
Those Scriptures I apprehended made against the truth, he showed me they made
for the truth. Now when the Lord had revealed himself in this to me, I was
earnest with God that I might not only know these truths, but I might be able
to hold out these truths so as to stop the mouths of gainsayers: 2 days after
Gods revealing himself, these parties came, and God gave me to speak that they
were not able to answer, and at that time God gave me a promise Joh. 1. 50.
Jesus answered Joh. 1. 50.
and said unto him, because I said unto thee I saw thee under the figtree,
beleevest thou? thou shall see greater A particular promise applied generally.
things then these; with which my Soul stood a little amazed what should be
the greater things that should be revealed? I found then, that they should be
these truths made known by experience to my Soul. I went away rejoying in hope
to obtain it; from this work of God I concluded that there was a work of grace
begun, which he would carry on to perfection. The next thing I thought upon,
was to set down to account the loss it would cost me to hold out these truths
to the utmost, which was the loss of the favor of friends, disingagment to
creatures, but there was an engagement to God, which made me resolute to stick
to the truth, whatsoever it cost, in the strength of God: and then I saw a
necessity of walking more close Her Progress in Piety.
with God, in the ways of his worship, seeking to him for strength, in every
estate and condition what ever he put me into; whether spiritual or temporal.
When Satan saw that I indeavored to be holy and strict, he set before me a
pattern of perfection, by his showing of me perfection; I by the strength of
Gods grace had such a sight of imperfection, that I was Satan's policy.
lost in my own apprehension, and concluded, that there was no grace because
there was so much imperfection, and then God was pleased for to make me
apprehend that Jesus Christ must come, and take away the imperfections of our
duties, the defilement of sin as well as the guilt, which he did by revealing
those promises which he caused me to rest upon in that 2 Cor. 5. 21. for 2 Cor.
5. 21.
he had made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. Mat. 1. 21. He shall save his Mat. 1. 21.
people from their sins, which I believed should be done for the future, though
they were not done for the present; so that I saw Christ to be of use, to
cleanse me, Sanctification seen before Justification.
before I saw him Justifying my person, which was a great refreshment to my
Spirit; then I began to make use of those weapons that the Apostle speaks of,
which are not carnal but mighty through God for the pulling down strong
holds, etc. and the Lord did give me much sweetness by communion with
himself, so that I could go to him more The spirit of Adoption.
freely then to any creature under heaven, and the more communion I had with
him the more strength I had against temptation and corruption: I found it to be
The benefit of frequent prayer.
the most excellent means under heaven, the more frequent the more familiar
with God; and now I began in some measure to apprehended what a temptation was,
in a time of temptation, which was half a deliverance out of it: this through
the mercy of God in Christ Jesus I found by experience, in prayer, and about
prayer. I found first the subtilty of Satan's temptations, wherein I found him
Satan's malice against the work of prayer.
to be as great hinderer of that work of prayer as of any other; if he cannot
keep from it, he will afflict and discourage in it; and notwithstanding all
this, I was by Satan put upon it to question my Condition again, but God gave
me a word at the same time to stay my Soul upon, it was Gods token to know
Paul by, behold he prays, from which words I saw God took special notice of
those that praid and waited upon him; and when the Devil saw me bent upon
prayer, then he put me upon prayer, which in time I saw was his work, and in
time it proved greatly to the Devils disadvantage, and much for my
encouragement. I found by experience that he is like an Ape imitating what ever
good God does in the Soul: and there is need of much of God to discern his
policy in this particular; he has counterfeit grace as well as God has true
grace; and he has evil Joy, as God has Soule-refreshing, reviving and sweet
consolation, he will have scriptures as well as God, only his are to discourage
from duties, and Gods to encourage; all the ways of Satan are evil, and all
the Note.
ways of God are exceeding good, and his paths are very pleasant. When Satan
saw he could not defile my soul by one temptation, he sets upon me by another,
and with manifold temptations all at once. So that he put my Soul into a dark
mist by his temptations, and I walked sadly for some Days together, to the
wonderment of my friends that were about me. I could not express my self in
any thing because my temptations and tumults in my spirit were so high in many
things, but the Lord at that time did much stay and refresh my spirit with the
word Isay. 50. 10. whereby Isa. 50. 10.
I saw that my condition at that time was no other, then was incident to Gods
own people, and so the Lord carried me on from one condition to another in
straights, and revealed no more to me for the present then this, that my
condition was such as was incident to the Saints. The next thing I saw was that
Jesus More Illumination.
Christ was the Iustifier of his people, and that Justification was conveyed to
the soul in a way of believing: and then my Soul said, oh! that I could
believe on him that Iustifies the ungodly. The more understanding I had of God
in that way, the more I saw of mine own filthiness: I saw filthiness in the
holy things of God, as performed by me, so that I found that word of the
Apostle good That in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing, but to will
is (by the Romans 7.
grace of God) present with me, but how to do good I found not; which (through
the grace of God) wrought in my Soul a restless desire after a Christ in a
way of believing, that so I might fetch strength from Christ, for the subduing
of every corruption, that I might know whether I were in a state of
Justification; this I found, that the more Satan tempted me, that his
temptations were as a weapon put into my hand to fight against himself
withal; through the mighty operation of God, his strength was made known in
my weakness. Still Faith hard.
God put into my Soul such a restless disposition that I could not be
satisfied without Christ, so that I said within my self, give me a Christ or I
die: and the disposition to believing I found very difficult and hard, when God
set me upon it; a work too hard for me, without the power of an Omnipotent God;
which The way of obtaining it.
made me the more eagarly to pursue it, at the hands of him who was able to
give it; God (when his set time was come) wrought every disposition in me
suitable to the grace that he was about to convey to my Soul; and then I saw
nothing in any thing either in heaven or earth that could do me good but the
revealing Jesus Christ to my Soul. Duties would not justify, no; inherent
grace was no Justification in it self, though a fruit of Justification yet no
cause of it. Jesus Christ was the all in all both for Sanctification 2 Cor. 3.
last.
and Justification; and there I saw a way to make use of Christ by way of
Justification; I saw more fully then before that all my righteousness was
imperfect, but in Christ it was complete: when the love of God was thus
discovered to my Soul, then it did constrain me to work out of a higher
principle then before; I thought with my self, were there no hell to punish,
nor Heaven to reward, yet there was comfort enough in God, and in the
refreshments A Gospell-spirit.
of his spirit to carry me on in a way of obedience to his gracious, and holy
Law and Commands; and then though I had matter enough within my self, to
condemn my self by reason that grace which in me was weak, my flesh being full
of all imperfections, yet I knew all was made up in Christ's perfection. I made
use of the Law for a rule to walk by, not expecting Her opinion of the Law, and
of those that reject it.
to fulfill it; So that the law must have Dominion over a man (for a rule) as
long as he lives: who so casts the Law of God behind his back, surely has not
partaken so far as I can conjecture of the saving grace of God; and this I saw,
that Christ came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it; Christ is the end
of the law to every one that believes; we are not to throw it by, as of no
use, but in what we fall short, to make use of him, that is of Christ to make
it up: the more I made use of the Law, the more I saw that it was holy, just,
and good. For we should not walk as do others (as men without a rule;) there
is infinite cause, that we should look to our Lords Commandment, as Christ
kept the Commands when he was upon earth, so doubtless he would have his
people keep them; when we have such a blessed Mediator to stand up in the gap
if in any thing the Christians engagement to keep the Law.
law condemns us, he steps in, and undertakes for us, he gave full satisfaction
for the condemning power of it; but has left the practical part of it for us
to make use of. I was troubled with in my self, if at any time I thought any
thought, A watchful and zealous frame of Spirit.
or did any deed, contrary to the command of God; yea how has my Soul been
grieved because other men kept not the law of God?

I found the actings of God in me and toward me, I prayed in another manner
then before, that Her sense of God.
when I asked any thing for my self or others, agreeable to Gods will,
especially in straights, I found a holy boldness and confidence that God would
answer, and he did answer abundantly beyond what I can express, not because of
my request, but because Jesus Christ Her experience of Gods hearing her prayer,
and her right construction and use of it.
interceded; he took my broken, and imperfect requests, and shattered
expressions, and presented them blameless before God; not because I prayed,
but because he delighted to show mercy; and so engaged and encouraged me to
wait upon him, in his service.

My soul can testify, I have had as much from God, in the way of that
ordinance, as any: I have been filled as full of consolation, by God in that
ordinance, A rare experience.
as my soul could possibly attain unto; I never wanted any thing for my
self, or others, but I went to God for; there was none greater in heaven, or
earth, I could resort unto; I find him to be a fountain never drawn dry; oh!
that none would go to the Cisterne when there is so much in the Fountain! To
look at Cisternes The use of Cisternes.
as they are in themselves, they are nothing, but they may be made use of to
Gods glory; when used by God, and looked at through God the Fountain, whatever
is done by the creature God does (but by a secondary means;) So that it is in,
and from the Lord, that we have all that we enjoy; and when God brought me to
the bed of affliction, then he was pleased to make a report a new of all that
he had done for my soul, which made my heart to burn within me in love to
God, and Sweet apprehensions.
with desire to make known to others how good the Lord was to my soul; all his
dealings with me to soul and body I apprehend are in much love; so that the
place I found experimentally true, Romans 8. 28. Gods gracious Romans 8. 28.
dispensation in fitting me for affliction was exceeding great; so that I may
say with Job that nothing came upon me but the thing I feared. God was pleased
to tell me what he was about to do, and that in a way of answer to prayer. I
could conclude as confidently that affliction should come, as if it had been
upon me already; and God gave me a strong resolution to abide his pleasure
whatever it was: And after some time of prayer he gave a promise suitable to the
condition he was about to bring upon me, the promise was, happy is the man whom
thou correctest, etc. And he has taught me four things necessary Four things
suitable to an afflicted condition.
and suitable to every afflicted condition whatever. The first is to eye the
hand of God in the affliction; for the seeing the hand of God made me silent
in his presence, and made me willing to submit to him. The second thing was,
that he showed me his face and presence, which is better than life. Thirdly, He
brought off my will to submit to him, as to a father, from many special places
of divine writ. Fourthly, He made me more than in an ordinary way to Gods
gracious dealing with her in relation to Affliction. 4 Ends of Affliction
apprehended by her.
draw nigh to God, to know why he did contend with me; one end was for sin;
sin has a being, though not a reigning power in me, for which cause I have
cause to lay low. A second end was for exercise of faith and patience and other
graces. A third end was that I might have liberty to take occasion to make a
report to others what God has done for my soul, that by this means, I might
bring some honor to God. A fourth end was, that I might be set upon that
evangelicall work of setting forth the high praises of God; which work though
I could do it to the utmost here, yet its nothing to what shall be in heaven:
And therefore I desire to bless God that there is an eternity to praise him
in. In my affliction God has verified many places of Scriptures which I see to
be experimentally true that I did not see before; so that I am constrained to
say often, and again, What am I? and what is my fathers house? that the Lord
should bring me hitherto? and with David, Lord what is man that thou art
mindful of him, or the son of man that thou should visit him. Another
Mercy in judgment.
thing I have observed in my affliction, that God has wonderfully chayned up
Satan in this affliction. He was never let loose upon me but twice in all my
affliction: he came forth often like a lion, but in a chain, roaring for his
prey; but God stopped his mouth, that he could get no dominion over me. Those two
times he was let loose, The first time was about my spiritual condition: he
would have troubled me with three things, as he did Christ by queries; First
how I knew that I was a child of God, And secondly how I could make out my
interest in Christ, whether it it was fancy or delusion or whether real: Next
thirdly he would have Her strength against Satan.
persuaded me that I lay under the guilt of some sin, that was not pardoned;
my answer was to the first, I knew I was a child of God, by his Word and Works
God made it out to me: to the second I answered, that God had assured me of an
interest in Christ, by a promise of the spirit, bearing witness with abundance
of of consolation that I was his spouse: thy maker is thine husband etc. To the
third I answered, God pardoned all sins in respect of himself at once. I
only did lie under the guilt of some sins, but God came in abundantly with a
promise that God acquitted me from all. And so Satan's objection was fully
answered; and I abundandly delivered. Another temptation was about the time of
Gods taking away my near relation which was a sister of mine, he took an
advantage by the weakness of my body oftentimes to trouble me with many
thoughts of her death, and the manner of it, (both sleeping and waking) and I
was in some question about her eternal condition: at first I thought it was
rather some piece of Nature than any temptation; but as soon as I saw it was a
temptation, I set my self to seek God against it; And I had this answer from
God, after a few thoughts, in seeking, that the Lord would rebuke the devourer
for my bodies sake; and from this scripture that the God of Satan would bruise
Satan under my feet shortly: and for my sisters condition, and the manner of
her death, God gave this word, Is thy eye evil because mine is good? shall I
not do with mine own what I will; aye (said my soul) if she were his, I could
be the better persuaded to give her up to God; then God told me, he looked not
as man looked; but if there were any work of God he would own his own work,
but however he caused me to leave her Her stooping to Gods sovereignty
to his prerogative royal who judges righteous Judgment.

I saw a necessity of frequenting the best means: once in special I saw
abundance from God, to Her care to honor her Parents in what she might, with
security to her conscience.
encourage me in that way: my Father and Mother commanded me to go one way to
hear, and I was put upon it, to go another way, for which they were very
fierce and violent, the Lord was pleased to put me upon it, to inquire what I
should do in this particular, and while I was thinking, the fifth commandment
came into my thoughts, honor your Father and Mother, etc. Then I began to
Think what honor was due to them, being desirous to give them that honor
that I was commanded; if they commanded with God, I was ready and willing to
obey them, with cherefulnesse: but seeing they commanded contrary to God, I saw
the command of God greater than their command: and I went to the word, and God
met me there, in such a way that he gave me encouragement to go through
opposition and difficulty in time to come, whatever I should meet withal
(though they were stripes) I was willing to give my back to the smiters, rather
than to give up my conscience to be racked; the opposition of the creature is
not much when Gods makes it easy. This and other experiences I have had of Gods
power and goodness, in a way Her resolutenesse for God.
where I met with opposition: So that its good to be resolute for God; though
you may lose some favor with the creature, yet ye shall be double gayners if
you may enjoy the favor of God: the light of his countenance is better than
life. The next thing I saw was, that there was a faith which was according to
sight, like that of Thomas, He believed because he saw: and another faith
beyond sight, which was to believe upon the sight of the actings of grace
plentifully upon my soul. When God withdrew the sense of his love, so that I
did not enjoy the daily incomes of Gods love, I was constrained to live upon
the immutability Strong Faith.
and unchangablenesse of God. Notwitwstanding the great mercy and favor of God
formerly convayed, I was constrained with David to cry out, Restore A desertion.
to me the joy of thy salvation; and then I apprehended that Christ was absent,
at which time I lived solitary, and in the Dark. I looked Her carriage in it.
upon Christ as a husband, but yet as a husband going a Journey, and hid behind
a curtain, so that my soul was as the spouse restless in looking out to
inquire after him: but in time he sent many love letters to me which were these,

To you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise with
healing in his wings: Though I did not fear him perfectly and as I ought, yet
I had some desires to serve him in truth. And another was, He that shall come,
will come, and will not stay; yet sometime by reason of his absence I wondered
what my temper was, and said, what is God about to teach me? oh that I knew his
mind! and I would do it; oh that I knew what my present condition were! and in
time God graciously came in with this scripture, and persuaded me with Gal. 2.
20.
Paul, that the life I now lived was by the faith of the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself 2 Cor. 13.
for me. And that his grace was sufficient Her recovery out of her desertion.
for me: and at last I saw him (behind the curtains) I saw him but could not
enjoy him: at last I found him whom my soul loved.

God has not set me a president, in respect of my bodily affliction, but he
has caused me not to repine against him, if he make me a president to others;
so I may be serviceable and be made isntrumental for the good of any poor
soul, my soul is satisfied, Her sweet Gospell-spirit in her sad Affliction.
and I am abundantly willing to submit, so God may be glorified, and any poor
soul edified: it is satisfaction enough to me, so I may be an instrument in
Gods hand for any spiritual good. The paths of God are pleasant paths, I could
wish it were more and more my meat and drink to do the will of my father. I
fear more that too much impatience should break forth for an earnest desire
for heaven, than any thing: for I found some deceit in my heart, in that
particular, break out once, And I have cause to fear there is more of the
fire, if the Lord do not quench it. I being once in my own apprehension, and
in the sight of many beholders at the point of death, not expecting to live
many days, I apprehended God sending Her impatience of staying here.
forth two messengers, the one was the grim sergeant Death with a commission
from God to arest the body: I apprehended that the rest of the body should but
set the soul at liberty. The other messenger sent from God was the Angel of
God with a commission from God to carry the soul to the place of Just men made
perfect, so that I was persuaded to bid adue to all creature -engagements,
only I was to work while it was called to day, the works of God, for the night
was at hand when I should no more work with the Saints on earth. It was such a
refreshment to my soul, that my time was at hand, that I was glad to be
uncloathed that I might be clothed upon. So that I could say, oh death where
is thy sting? oh hell where is thy victory.

I was taken up much 2 or 3 Her care to dye to the Lord.
days in the work of exhortation of friends that came to visit me; then the
Lord sent a messenger of his who made a new report again of my Fathers house,
which was much illustrated to me by an instrument of his. I could not but
express to them who came to visit me what great things were to be enjoyed in
my fathers house, and said, oh! that they might come to me: and to the
Instrument I said; if God had sent him to make a report of these things to my
ears, I bid him speak on: for I was willing to hear what God would speak to
me by him. I was much conversant in the meditation of these things for twenty
four hours or there about: but before I was out of heaven in my thoughts, I
felt a thorue in my flesh, Satan buffeting of me, arguing thus against Gods
proceedings, by reason of the dispensation of God changing my bodily condition,
promising me some continuance in the Land of the living for a season: here I
found the rebellion of the flesh with the opposition of Satan to quarrel
against God, being unwilling to abide in the flesh, notwithstanding God saw it
was better for me to be in the body for a time. I desire whatever A sweet frame
of spirit.
seem good to God may not seem grievous to me. I had no quiet nor rest in my
soul till I saw this distemper (my unwillingnes to submit to the will of God)
wrought out, and for that the Lord made me to seek him earnestly, and he was
found in the day of my affliction; I said within my self, what good would my
life do me; if God did not take away the evil of sin? my affliction was
nothing, but my sin was my affliction; and the Lord harkned and heard, and took
away my sin, and then I found my affliction nothing; though greater than
formerly, yet Affliction easy.
as easy as ever: then the Lord put me upon it to consider, why he delaid his
coming, in that way wherein I apprehended he was about to Come, and I
apprehended these to be the ends. First, To let me see the evil Her holy
interpretation of Gods dealings toward her.
of my heart, what I was in my self, refractory and rebellious; and another
end was, that I might see the work of Gods grace in the hearts of some, and be
isntrumental to do some thing for their good (if God pleased to incline me)
for the helping forward of that work of his: for I apprehend I shall work no
more for the Saints after this life; though Jesus Christ work for the Saints
in Heaven, as well as when he was on earth, yet the Saints work for the Saints
only in this life. The other end was (as I apprehend) that I might live to take
care for a Child; and to engage some honest man to take him; which is partly
effected. Another end (I apprehend) was that I might take notice of the answer
of the prayers of others.

Again, having been taken up in my thoughts more than ordinary in and about
the differences of the times among the Saints, in these late years, in, and
about some Circumstances about Religion, as I apprehend; and I Her opinion
concerning the differences of the present time.
was persuaded that the circumstance was nothing, in comparison of the
substance: some said this was the way, and some said that was the way: some
were for a separated Church, others for a mixed Church. First this I was
persuaded, that Jesus Christ was the only way to salvation, by a work of grace
in the hearts of his people. But I apprehending that the society of Gods people
was very useful, and that those of the Independent society, as they are
called, did make an improvement of the society of the Saints, more than those
that were out of that way did for the present; It made me to have some
inclination to that way, and thereupon to apply my self to God for his
direction in it what to do; then I saw that the Independent society went into
their way in and by a covenant, which I could not see any ground for: whereupon
I desired their grounds, but found little or no satisfaction. Their scriptures
were Exodus 19. 6. Ezekiel. 16. 6, 7, 8. Jer. 50. 5. Acts 5. 13. Ephesians. 4. 3. Be
Exodus 19. 6. Ezekiel. 16. 6, 7, 8. Jer. 50. 5. Acts 5. 13. Epes. 4. 3.
knit together in love, which say they, implies a covenant: but I could not see
by their light, but did apprehend that that scripture was directed to the
Saints in general, and not to Congregations in particular: then they said they
pressed not their covenant as absolutely Her opinion concerning entering into
Church Fellowship by a Covenant.
necessary, but left it as a voluntary act; then I began to think whether a
voluntary vow were lawful to be taken in matters of Religion, which I find
lawful in scripture; as David did vow against his sin; and its put upon record
in scripture, that if we vow to God we must not deferr to pay it: then I began
to think that the society of Gods people was useful; and if it could not be
enjoyed Note.
without covenanting, its just with God to give us up to covenanting for the
hardness of our hearts, who would not willingly do it without this. And I
conceive that David could not come up to duty as he would till he came to
covenanting; but I began to think wheher this covenant so much pressed was my
duty, viz. to join in a way of Covenant for the enjoyment of the society of
the Saints; and after seeking of God, he gave me this place. If thou do not
vow thou do not Her determination upon it.
sin; and it satisfied me that I might enjoy the society with the Saints out of
the way, and therefore saw no necessity of engaging my self in the way.

And he also gave me these places to satisfy me further, be ye followers of me
as I am of Christ, That is, in this, that I desire to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, and this Scripture, this is eternal life, to know
God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent, and this of the Apostle, Brethren
have fellowship with us, for truly we have fellowship with the Father and the
Son the Lord Jesus Christ. Then I could not but break forth into blessing of
God, that I have had much fellowship with the son the Lord Jesus, and as much
as God has seen good for me with the Saints: so that I have cause to bless
God, and to trust in God who has given me society with the Saints, out of the
way, as much as in the way: so that that which God gives is not in reference to
the way; but to his own love: I see nothing in the way, but what has been
enjoyed out of the way: and therefore not to be so much lifted up, as it has
been and is by some.

I pray God that while others engage themselves by covenant, to watch over so
many souls in a congregation (which is a great work) they be not to negligent
in watching over themselves.

FINIS.
THE LIFE and DEATH OF A true CHRISTIAN: Deciphered in a Sermon Preached upon
the 14 Romans 6, 7 Verse. At the Burial of Mary Simpson; a Religious young Maid,
lately living in the City of Norwich.

BY JOHN COLLINGS, Mr of Arts, and Preacher of Gods Word to Saviors Parish in
the said City.

2 Cor. Chapter 5. v. 2. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed
upon with our house which is from heaven.

Verse 3. If so that being clothed, we be not found naked.

London, Printed for Rich. Tomlins. 1649.

The Life and Death of a true Christian.
Romans 14. ver. 7, 8. For none of us lives to himself; And no man dies to
himself; but whether we live we live unto the Lord, or whether we dye, we dye
unto the Lord: Whether therefore we live or dye, we are the Lords.
COncerning the Author of this Epistle, none is so ignorant but knows it is
Paul. It was written to the believing Romans. For the subject matter of it, it
is an Elaborate discourse, clearing up the Doctrine of Justification; that is
the subject of the doctrinall part of it, in the eleven first chapters: the
ensuing part of it is more practical, in which the Apostle gives several
precepts to the believing Romans, whether in public Offices or in private
relations, Instructing them how to carry themselves toward God, and each
toward another.

In this Chapter he instructs them how to demean themselves toward their
dissenting weak brethren. In those primitive times, there were some Christians
that were stumbled at the present abrogation of the ceremonial law, and were
not so fully as others instructed in the Doctrine of Christian liberty,
purchased by the coming, and suffering of the Lord Jesus Christ. Upon this,
from the too rigid Censoriousnesse of other Christians, there grew a division,
and (as I am apt to believe) a separation in the Church: It seems the stumble
was concerning two points of the ceremonial law; First, The eating of meats
Unclean by the law: Secondly, the other, the Observation of such days as
according to the Jewish law were to be kept holy. Those Christians that were
well instructed in the Doctrine of the liberty purchased by Jesus Christ from
those Jewish ceremonies, rightly conceived, that First, Those beasts which were
Unclean to the Jews were not now Unclean: It was since then that God had
given leave to Peter to kill and eat, with a command to him, to call nothing
Common or Unclean which he had sanctified. And I conceive that piece of the
Ceremonall law did typifie the Uncleanenesse of the Gentiles: till the
Partition wall was pulled down; and 2. They knew that under the Gospel,
Christians were by no moral precept engaged to keep any day holy but the Lords
day: yet the other Christians not seeing with so clear a light, as they saw,
durst not do these things, but still persisted in abstaining from some meats,
and the observation of some holy days, which needed not, had they been but
well instructed. But as the consciences of these were too scrupulous and
Superstitious; So the spirits of the other were too rigid and censorious,
presently upon this to refuse communion with them. The Apostle therefore in
this Chapter writes to them, to mind them how to carry themselves toward their
weak brethren. First, He gives a general precept, To receive them: but wisely,
Not to doubtful disputations: and negatively, Through the weakness of their
faith.
v. 2. not to despise them: we ought not to despise but brotherly to Receive
those that differ not from us in fundamentals though they cannot agree with us
in circumstantialls. For I conceive that the difference was not here a thing
indifferent, it was utterly unlawful, and superstitious to keep Jewish
holidays by virtue of an obligation from the Ceremonial law. It was unlawful
for them to account those creatures Common or unclean which the Lord had
Sanctified, yet says the Apostle, be tender of them. First, despise them not.
Secondly, puzzle them not in doubtful disputations. Thirdly, do not judge or
condemn them. Fourthly, Receive them, into your hearts by love and piety and
affection toward them; Into your Congregations not refusing communion with
them. Now having given them this general Lesson of Exhortation, he presses it
in the ensuing verses, by several Arguments; The first is laid down v. 3. God
has Received him: Received him, how? he has loved his soul in Jesus Christ,
and united him to himself; will ye reject whom God receives? does God think
him worthy of his heart, and do not you think him worthy of yours? will God
receive him to everlasting communion with himself, and is he not worthy to be
received into the Communion of your Congregations? Secondly, from the very law
of Nature; who art thou that condemnest another man's servant? he stands, or
falls to his own master. This is spoken to dissuade them from censuring or
judging; why says the Apostle, he is Gods servant not yours, who bids you
judge him? leave him to his own master, and do not you exercise a rigid
unwarrantable Mastery over him. Thirdly, from the love of God to him, Yea he
shall be established. God that has shined in with some light of knowledge, and
faith, into him, will in his due time (says the Apostle) shine with more; that
though he seems to be now weak, yet he shall be strong; though he be a little
staggering, now for the present, yet he shall be settled, and established; and
this is proved from the two strongest Arguments in the world; to assure to a
true Christian the accomplishing of any promise for the carrying on any work of
grace. First, Gods power. v. 4. He is able to make him stand. Secondly, Gods
love, he will do to his utmost for him, he shall be established. The word is
passive to denote the freeness of Gods act in it.

A fourth Argument is drawn from the joint design that these dissenting
Christians (and that in this very business) carried on with those whose
Spirits were more clear in the thing, viz. The glory of God, Indeed if they
were such base profane wretches, as kept up these ceremonies out of a
superstitious humor, Holy days merely to eat, and drink in, and rise up to
play in, to be days of prophannesse, etc. or if they kept up these merely to
disturb the Church of Christ, or to deny Christ to be come in the flesh, then
it were something; but being the case is so, that they are such persons as
truly aim at the glory of God in this action, and dissent because they are not
yet fully convinced that they are freed from these ceremonies; and think they
should dishonor God in disobeying his command, if they should not; Bear with
them. Yea (may some say) but how should we know this?

First, the Apostle proves it, 1. From the manner of their observation of these
days, and eating these meats. 1. They observed them to the Lord. They ate to
the Lord, giving God thanks: they did not barely observe the Ceremonies, but
with a great deal of holiness, that the shell and the kernel went together.

Secondly, he proves it, from the general scope, and aim of every true
Christian both in his life and death. For none of us lives to himself, etc.
They are some of us (says the Apostle) true believers in whom the grace of God
dwells. Now

None of us lives to himself, and No man dies to himself. For whether we
live we live unto the Lord, and whether we die we die unto the Lord: whether we
live therefore or die we are the Lords. Thus I have brought you to my text,
which is a short Account of a Christians Pilgrimage. The life and death of a
Saint. In it consider

First, The particular of a Christians Life and Death.

Secondly, The Summa totalis of it.

The particular of it is set down, first, Negative; None of us lives to
himself, and no man dies to himself. Secondly, Affirmative; Whether we live
we live unto the Lord, and whether we die we die unto the Lord.

Then there is the Total sum, Whether therefore we live or die we are the
Lords. Or if you please, Here Is the doctrine, No believer lives to himself,
nor dies to himself, but if he lives, he lives to the Lord, and if he dies, he
dies to the Lord. Secondly, Here is an Inference from the Doctrine, a
Consolatory Application: whether therefore we live or die we are the Lords. Or
(as a learned Commentator Pareus ad locum.
well notes) here is a Reason of the Doctrine, why we should in our life live
unto the Lord, and in our death dye unto the Lord: Because in life and death we
are the Lords.

There is no great matter difficult in the words, that which is to be opened
about them, I shall open in the Doctrine. And that I may contract all as short
as may be, I shall sum up both the verses in this one Proposition of Doctrine.

Doct. That all believers, who while they live, live not to themselves, and if
they dye, dye not to themselves, but whiles they live, they live to the Lord,
and when they dye, they dye to the Lord, whether they live, or dye are the
Lords: and because in life or death, they are the Lords, It is their duty not
to live, nor dye to themselves, but to live and dye to the Lord. It is large,
but easy to be remembered, because in the words of the text. For my better
proceeding in the handling of it, and for the helping of your memory, I shall
branch the doctrine into these four particulars which I will handle distinctly,
and apply jointly.

1. That the believer in his life is the Lords. 2. That because of it, he ought
not to live to himself but to the Lord. 3. That when he dies he dies not to
himself but unto God. 4. That in death he also is and shall be the Lords.
First of the first. 1. That the true believer in his life is the Lords. I shall
open it, and show you in what respects, and prove the particulars as I pass
them by, shortly. I shall open it but in three particulars, 1. He is the Lords
by purchase. 2. He is the Lords by Possession. 3. He is the Lords by near
Relation.

First of all, He is the Lords The Lords Purchase.
by purchase, and a dear purchase; he has purchased them with his own blood.
Acts 20. 28. The mother that has had a painful travel says to the child, A
dear child thou have been to me, and Zipporah to Moses, surely a bloody
husband have thou been to me. God may say, Bellevers! Children! you have been
dear Children, bloody children unto me, you have cost me my own heart blood,
a great ransom! They are called the Purchased possession. Ephesians. 1. 14. And a
dear purchase too that cost the owners heart blood. Christians, speak truth,
do you not think you cost Christ more then ye are worth, bodies and scules,
and all? It is true to purpose too that the Apostle says. 1 Cor. 6. 20. For ye
are bought with a price, therefore, etc. a price indeed yet neither silver nor
gold (of that Christ had none,) but what he had he gave you, and gave for you,
even his own life for a ransom for the sins of many; never was there so dear
a bargain, and yet never fewer words spent about one. He bought them of the
Father. Joh. 10. 29. and Joh. 17. Indeed there it is called giving, but he gave
his blood for them: and yet there was an act of grace in the Father giving the
Elect to Christ. It is true, you may say, that they were the Devils Captives.
Ephesians. 2. v. 2, 3. But I answer, that the Devil was but Gods jayler, he keeps
them by nature in a Captivity, but it is for a debt due to the Fathers justice.
Now God gave them to Christ paying such a price. One would wonder to think, he
should meddle with so hard, and unprofitable a bargain, but yet he did, and
with such alacrity that there was scarce too words betwixt his Father and him
about it. The Father writ down in his book, If you will have them that's the
price, you shall go, and do my will (which is taking upon you their nature)
Suffering, Dying, etc. Christ presently subscribed Done: and by such a day it
shall be all paid, Psalm. 40. v. 7. Heb. 10. 8. In the Volume of thy book it is
written of me. Lo! I come to do thy will, O God! There shall no more words be
made of it (says Christ) I will do it: Thus there was a Covenant stroke,
betwixt the Father and the Son for The purchased possession. Thus they are the
Lords by Purchase. Pretium Sanguinis, the price of his own dear heart blood.

They are the Lords Possession: 1 Pet. 5. 3. Ephesians. 2. 22. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 3.
17.
They are his own, he calls them his heritage, his habitation, his peculiar
people, The sheep of his pasture, The sheep of his flock, The temple of God.
His title to them I cleared before, but not altogether. All title you know is
either, 1. By inheritance, or 2. By purchase, or 3. By gift. God has every of
these ways a title to belevers. 1. By purchase. So I have already cleared
Christ's title to believers: I showed you, 1. Of whom he bought this possession.
2. Out of whose hands. 3. What he paid for it. But you know if a man contract
with another for a house or ground, and after such a contract pay the price for
which he contracts with him that has the sale in his power: yet after all this
he must have possession given him, and then it is fully and most properly
called his own. Believers are the Lord Christ's thus; he has not only
contracted for them, and paid his full price, but he has also taken livery,
and seisiu of them. Joh. 10. 29. The father has given them to him: and Joh.
17. Of all that thou have given me I have lost none. And now they are his
inheritance, he has the fee simple of all his Elect ones, and by his 1.
Assuming their flesh has taken livery, and seisin of their natures. 2.
Mystically Uniting himself unto them, he has brought himself and his
furniture for his house, all the graces of his holy spirit, to dwell in them;
nay they are his peculiar Mansion in whom he delights to dwell: you have I
known (says he) above all the Nations of the Earth: Amos 3. 2.
though all the world be mine, and I can pitch my tent any where, and dwell in
my own too, yet you only I have known; you are the Mansion House which I set
apart for my glory; where I will come and keep house my self in person. They
are the Lords possession: that's the second.

3. They are the Lords by near Relation. Near relations are ordinarily by way
of appropriation called ours; wives, and children, and servants; we say of such
a woman, or child, or servant, she is such a man's wife, or it is such a man's
child, or they are such a ones servants: thus are believers to be appropriated
to God. You may say concerning a believer, There goes the child of God. Gal. 3.
7. There goes the heir of Jesus Christ. Romans 8. 17. Children not begotten
according to the flesh, but of the immortal, incorruptible seed of the word. 1
Pet. 1. 23. You may say of them, 2. There goes the Lambs wife, the wife of the
Prince of glory, the Kings daughter. Ephesians. 5. 29, 30, 31, 32. Hosea 2. 18. You
may say of them, 3. There goes one of Gods servants. 1 Cor. 7. 22. Abraham was
styled by Melchisedech, the servant of the most high God. Paul often styles
himself the servant of Jesus Christ. Nay 4. They stand in the relation of
members, to Jesus Christ the head. 1 Cor. 6. 16. This is by reason of the near
mystical unspeakable Union that is betwixt the Lord Jesus Christ and the
soul. Joh. 15. 3. I in you, and you in me. We are flesh of his flesh and bone
of his bone, Ephesians. 5. 29. 30. etc. (...). So then? can you say of your wife, she
is mine? can thou say of thy child, it is mine? can thou say of any servant
that thou keep, he or she is mine? Nay nearer yet: can thou say of thy
right hand, or foot, or any member of thy body, it is mine? So is the believer
Christ's: Christ's purchase, possession, Servant, wife, child, brother, member,
etc. Believers then while they live are the Lords. That's the first branch, and
that is plain. Proceed we now to the second, and that is,

2. Branch. That because of it, it is his duty while he lives not to live to
himself but to the Lord.
In the opening and handling of this, I will do these three things.

1. I will show you, how a man may be said to live to himself, and what that
means. 2. I will show you, how it is the believers duty to live unto God, and
what that means. 3. I will show you, how the consideration of this that a
believer while he lives is the Lords, lays an engagement upon his heart,
while he lives, not to live to himself but to the Lord.
Of all these briefly, and first of the first.

How may a man be said to live to himself, and what does that phrase mean?
A man may be said to live to himself, either in a Civil or in a divine and
Theological sense, in a Civil sense a man may be said to live to himself,
When he is free from all relations, when he trades for himself, and lives upon
his own hand as we say; thus questionless the believer may live to himself.
Or 2. Civilly, a man may be said to live to himself, that is suo commodo, to
his own back and belly merely, that as we say none eats of his meat nor drinks
of his cup, nor is a penny the better for him, thus a believer will hardly live
to himself. Or 3. Civilly a man is said to live to himself, in respect of
Communion, when he is nulli comes, a companion fit for none, either in regard
of the morosity, or sullenness of his temper. But none of these hits the sense
of the text, which (questionless) is not to be understood of a privacy of
civil life, but in a divine sense; and so a man may live to himself two
ways, none of both which are competent to a believer. Not

Formally; not to please himself; not following the corrupt dictates of his
own flesh, as the base profane wretch, to whom the Devil does but say go,
and he goes; or come, and he comes; and his base heart says but do this,
and he does it: this is often called in Scripture living to the flesh, and
living to sin. Thus the believer lives not to himself. Nor

Finally; a man may be said to live to himself, when all the actions of his
life pursue but his own worldly interests of greatness, and wealth, and
honor. The believer in his life drives on Gods interests, trades for glory,
and acts for his Master; himself is but a factor here in a strange country:
whether he eats, or drinks, or sleeps, or trades, or whatever he does, he
does it for the glory of God, whose factor he is. Phil. 1. 21. To me to live is
Christ, and to dye is gain, or (as others read it) [to me both in life and
death, Christ is gain.] Thus I have explaned the first particular, and by
opening of this, I have also given some light to the other, and in part showed
you what it is for a Christian to dye to himself, which I shall further
enlarge my self upon by and by.

The second thing to be opened is what it is for a believer to live to God, and
how a believer may be said to live to the Lord.
I will open it in three or four particulars. 1. A believer may be said to live
to the Lord Ratione Iuris, by way of Right, owning, and acknowledging God to be
his God, as a Son lives to his Father, and a Servant to his Master: wearing
Christ's livery, and acknowledging himself to be Christ's Servant. Proclaming
with David. Psalm. 116. 16. Truly Lord I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and
the Son of thy handmaid: for thou have loosed my bonds. Yea and this he will
do in all places, and companies: if Jesus Christ be named, he is not ashamed
to say (with M. Herbert) My Lord, and Master. He every where acknowledges his
subjection, and duty to God, by his service as his Master, by his homage as to
his Sovereign, by his dutiful fear as to his Father, according to that of
the Prophet. Mal. 1. 6. If I be a father where is my honor, and if a master
where is my fear? He every where honors God as his Father, and fears him as
his Master.

Secondly, The believer lives to God formally. He follows the dictates of his
word, and the motions of his spirit. He is come into the world to do his will,
he knows that for this end he was borne, and readily in the whole motion of
his life says, I delight to do thy will O my God. If God in his word or by his
spirit says to him Go, he goes, Come, he comes, do this, he does it. He
disputes not the rebellion of his own will, nor private interests of his own
spirit, against the will of God once revealed unto him.

Thirdly, The believer lives unto God finally. The whole end of his life, of
all his actions, words, tradings, recreations, is to glorify God, and he does
nothing but he prefaceth this question to it, how may God have glory? what
shall God get by this Action? this is the design he drives, the interest he
pursues, every of his arrows are levelled at this white, and all his actions
ordered to this end, it is his work to glorify God both in his body, and
spirit, according to the Apostles exhortation. 1 Cor. 6. 20.

Lastly, He lives unto God dependently. Indeed this is rather a living upon
God, but yet it is a living unto God too: The life which he now lives is by
faith upon the Son of God. Gal. 2. 20. He cleaves unto God in all the
Conditions, and all the Relations of his life; Thus he lives not to himself
but to the Lord. Yea and Thirdly,

The third branch, It is his duty therefore while he lives not to live to
himself, but to the Lord: because while he lives he is the Lords.
Which is the third thing.

This is plain if you do but consider what I said before in the particular
explanation of the first branch of the Doctrine, viz. How far the believer
while he lives is the Lords.

1. Because he is the Lords purchase. What? shall I buy a servant, and shall he
serve another Master? Shall I buy an house, and shall it rent to another
Landlord?

2. Because he is the Lords possession. See the Apostle pressing this duty from
both these Arguments 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. What? know ye not, that your body is the
temple of holy Ghost which is in you, and which you have of God, and you are
not your own, for ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God, in your
body and your spirit which are Gods. Yea and thirdly,

3. Because we are the Lords in so near Relation. Would you take it well that
your children, or apprentices which you maintain should live to themselves?
And trade for themselves? or others? and not live to you and trade for you?
That your wife should live to another? Either formally or finally, and not to
you, whose she is? And is there not as great an engagment (Christians!) lies
upon you to live to the Lord? you are his Children, his spouses, his servants,
nay nearer yet, his members: There is all reason in the world that you should
not live to your selves, but unto him. And thus I have done with the second
Branch of the Doctrine, viz.

That when the believer lives he lives not to himself but to the Lord, and it
is his duty so to do, because while he lives he is the Lords. I pass to the
third Branch.

The third Branch, That when the believer dies he dies not to himself but unto
the Lord, and it is his duty so to do.
Here for the explanation of this Branch I shall do these two things.

First, I shall show how a man may be said to die to himself, which the
believer does not.

Secondly, I shall show you what it is to die to the Lord, and how a believer
may be said when he dies to die to the Lord.

1. I conceive a man may be said to die to himself, 1. when himself is the
causer, wisher, or desirer of his own death: thus Saul, and Judas dyed to
themselves, and could not stay Gods leisure. The believer is of another spirit.

Or Secondly, when in dying, or desiring to die, he merely aims at his own
end; out of a conceit of the ease and rest he shall be at, because he knows if
he be in the grave, There the wicked cease from troubling, there the weary be
at rest, as Job passionately spoke, c. 3. or to deliver himself from
obloquies, as Jonas, cap. 3. or to save himself from danger, as Saul; or to be
out of the horrors of a guilty conscience, as Judas: these men dyed, or would
have dyed to themselves.

Or thirdly, a man may be said to die to himself, when he does no good by his
death, declares not the glory of God, nor faith in God, but dies like Nabal;
though his spirit be not over-powred with diseases, nor he robbed of his
senses, yet he dies like a block. Now the believer none of these ways dies to
himself. 1. He will not choose his own spear with Saul, nor twist his own
Halter with Judas. He will not only aim at his own ease, in his death, but if
the Lord stops not his mouth by an over-powring disease, nor bereaves him of
his sense and speech, he will be setting out the goodness, and glory of God
with his very utmost breath; as this our precious Sister, that had such a mind
of her journey that she could talk of nothing else.

I pass to the second thing propounded.

Second Branch, To show you, What it is for a Believer to dye to the Lord, and
how the believer when he dies will dye to the Lord.
First, he will dye at the Lords leisure; he will not hasten his death, nor dye
the death of the wicked; his soul is indeed so greedy of glory, that he is
continually sighing after a dissolution, and crying come Lord Jesus, come
quickly; but yet not so hasty, but he leaves God to his liberty, for so poor a
circumstance of time; this was Paul's case, 1 Phil. 23. 24. He had a desire to
be with Christ which was best of all: can you blame him for that? But yet
(says he) it is expedient for you that I should stay; I am content. Like a
dutiful child that being abroad has a desire to see his friends, and is
sometimes wishing, O that the holy days were come, that he might go home, and
it may be he sometimes writes to them for an horse, but yet he is not so mad as
to run home on foot, much less to go contrary to his fathers mind.

Secondly, in dying he will not aim at his own ease, but herein submits
himself to the Lord, and that both for the time of his death, and also for the
kind of it. 1. For the time of his death, See Phil. 23, 24. If Paul might judge
himself, he thinks it would be best presently to dye. But if it be more
expedient for the Churches he should live yet a little while, he is content; he
sometimes sends to his Father, to let him know his longing desire to see him,
but with all lets him know his resignation to his will, and adds, yet Father if
it be your pleasure I should stay a quarter of a year or some few months
longer I will submit my will to your pleasure.

And as for the time of his death, so also for the kind of his death: if his
Father will have him come on foot, or on horseback, so he goes, he cares
not, if he will have him go on his swiftest race nag or on the dullest jade in
the stable; he as willingly will be carted as coached thither. Now says Paul,
I am ready to be offered. 2 Timothy 4. 6.
It is all one to him, to be sent to heaven with a stroke, or linger out many
days with this precious one, that was several years on her journey to heaven,
yet seemed not to be tired with the length of the journey, or the slownesse of
her horse; she knew whose work it was to switch or spurr, and therefore held
her own hands. This is the true temper of a Christian in dying to the Lord, to
be content though he hangs a long time, and that upon a cross, so the life and
death of the Lord Jesus may be made manifest in his flesh, to account it all
one whether he dye of the plague, or a consumption, a fever, or the stone; upon
the rack, or at the stake; whether the sword divides him, or the arrows of the
Lord pierce him, he dies not to himself but to the Lord.

Thirdly, he dies to the Lord, as aiming at the Lords glory in his death, and
thence is submiting himself to Gods will for all circumstances, so also
endeavoring to give glory to the Lord in his death, and bring the Lord glory
by dying. Paul's bonds, and Imprisonment brought glory to Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.
12, 13, 14. And this he may aim at dying several ways. 1. By his quiet and
patient submitting unto God, in the messengers of death, Psalm. 39. 9. David was
dumb and knew not how to complain because it was the Lords doing. Like Ely, It
is the Lord let him do what seems him good. Like Christ, Father (if it be
possible) let this cup pass from me, yet not my will but thy will be done. He
kisseth the stake, and imbraceth the flame. 2. If his death be violent, By
undanted suffering at his death. Thus the blood of the Martyrs paid God a
tribute of glory, by being the seed of the Church. O how glorious preachers
were the Martyrs! That as it was said of Samson, the number of them that he
flew at his death was more than those he slew in his life: So we might say of
them; The number of them that they spiritually quickened in their lives, was
short of them that were quickened by their deaths. Docter Tailor made it a
plain going home, and counted his journey to two styles; whosoever reads the
stories of Eusebius, or the stories of the Martyrs under the ten persecutions,
or of late in those reaking times of Q. Mary (that filled the land with
innocent blood) will find this abundantly instanced. 3. Whether it be a violent
or natural death, they will bring glory to the Lord by speaking something to
the glory of God at their death, some way or other setting out the glory of
God, and his goodness toward them, showed to them in their life or death.
Thus did many of the glorious Martyrs, and an abundant full proof of this was
this our glorious Sister. O how busy was she to tell what the goodness of God
had been to her, to glorify his name, to direct, comfort, quicken! were not
many of you warmed at the heart by her spiritual fire?

Thus the believer dies to the Lord, declaring his faith in God, Now I know my
redeemer lives, and that I shall see him with these eyes. Yet so it may be,
that a believer, through the nature or violence of his disease may be a
wanting to this duty; if the Lord ties his tongue who can help it? but if he
suffers him but to open his lips, his mouth shall show forth his praise. Indeed
sometimes, a believer may dye in the dark in regard of the sensible enjoyments
of Christ's love, but even then though he may complain of his own vileness and
unworthiness, yet it is a thousand to one, but he gives glory to God; he dies
not like Nabal; not as fools dye. I hasten to the last branch of the Doctrine,
which is that

Fourth Branch, Believers in death are the Lords.
Shortly of it.

1. The Lord owns them in Death, Psa. 73. 26. Though my flesh fails, and my
heart fails, yet God is the strength of my heart; and my portion for ever. He
ownes them in dying, he takes notice of their composing themselves to sleep,
and has news brought him to heaven of every Saints sickening and dying, he
hearkeneth and hears their death sighs, and grownes, yea and after death
more then ever; then the soul is returned to God, and imbosomed in him, and
mortality is swallowed up of life, 1 Cor. 5. 6.

2. They are the Lords then by Union; the head, and the members will be then as
much one, yea more one then ever they were, they that were one in Grace, are
made one in glory; as the scattered Sun beams when they are gathered into the
Sun, are more gloriously one with the Sun, then when there was a seeming
division of their unity for the irradiation of the earth, so all the Saints
which are but as distinct beams of the Sun of Righteousness, when they shall
be gathered into Christ, shall yet continue to be one with him, yea and more
gloriously one then ever. The Bride is now made ready for the Lamb, and the
private marriage day is come. The Bride of the Lamb is here but in her
mourning gown, yet Christ (who is a pure essence of infinite love) delights in
her in that dress, and even in that habit will not live from her; when she
dies to the world, she has dressed her head, and then is more lovely in his Eye,
but by that time the day of judgment comes, she will be wholly, and completely
dressed to come out to Dinner, and everlasting banqueting in the chambers of
love, with the King of Glory.

Lastly, When he dies he is the Lords by near Relation; this is an undoubted
consequence of the other, but yet a little more; Death breaks all Relations,
but the Relation that is betwixt God and the believing soul, and its knife is
not sharp enough to cut this asunder; see this but in two instances, 1 Josh. 2.
God says, Moses my servant is dead. Dead; yet my servant: we cannot say, such
a one my servant is dead, or if we do say so, it is but an improper phrase of
speech; for if he be dead he is not my servant; he does me no work, he takes
none of my wages: We can say, such a one, that was my servant is dead, but if
the person be dead, the cord of our Relation is broken. Job speaking of death,
Job. 3. says, There the servant is free from his Master: But God says, Moses
my servant is dead, though he be dead, yet he is my servant. And we may say
concerning any holy man, or woman, concerning this remarkable Saint, such a one
Gods dear Servant is dead: Dead, yet Gods servant; she has changed her room,
and work, yea and her wages too, but not her Master, she is but taken to be his
chambermaid in glory, from being his Kitchin-maid in the world; her work was
before below stairs, now it is above. Take but one instance more, it is, Joh.
11. 11. Christ says, Our friend Lazarus sleeps, he sleeps, yet he is Our
friend. O sweet! we say when such a one dies we have lost a dear friend. But
God loses not his relation by his Saints death, he is our friend then more
than ever, and so are we his. And thus I have gone through the several
branches of the Doctrine.

And now what a sweet doctrine were here for application, if I had any time,
but I must but hint at things, and lay the letters, and leave them to God to
stamp upon your hearts.

I will apply it, or rather show you how you may apply it, by way of
Instruction, Reprehension, Exhortation, and consolation.

First of all by way of Instruction, dust, and ashes. That he will be pleased
to own us in life, and death; to come, and dwell in houses made of clay, nay
not in all the houses of clay neither; some he will not bestow the pains to
make them clean, and tenantable for himself; some great famous built houses,
built of free stoned Nobility and Gentry, learning and honor, adorned with
parts and esteem in the world, he leaves to be an habitation for Owls, and
Ostriches, and comes and dwells in the poor Cottages of his Elect ones. The
poor of this world has God chosen. God loves the house well in which he will
dwell; you only have I known above all the Nations of the Earth, etc. O mercy!
that God should say to one, that it may be has not a rag to cover him with,
nor a place where to lay down his head, Here is the soul in which I have
chose to dwell, to pitch my name there; who are we that Our Lord should come to
us? we have not a room either in head or heart fit for to entertain him. If he
will come he must bring his stool to sit down on, and be welcomed with his own
meat, and yet he will come and be a father, an husband, a friend, and call us
his servants, his children, his spouse, yea his members. Think, O think what
honor it is to be allied to the family of Heaven, yea incorporated in it. It
is a big word amongst men, when they can say, my Cosen of Essex or Norfolk,
etc. to be allied to Earls, Dukes, etc. We think we mightily speak our honor,
when he can speak it; is it not a far greater when we can say, My brother of
heaven, nay my Father, my Lord, my husband, etc? Such honor have all his
Saints.

Secondly, It might instruct us of the happiness of believers both in life,
and death; we are the Lords possession, there is no fear of a bad Landlord.
Are we his purchase? his redeemed ones? no fear of any slavery then, his yoke
is easy, his burden is light, his service a perfect freedom. Is he our
Father, our Master, our Husband, our friend? we have then one that is able to
help us, willing to succor us, ready to pity us; a kind father, a loving
husband, a careful master. The Lord is our Shepherd, what can we want? Surely
nothing that All Sufficiency can help us to. We are the Lords in our life; Nor
is our portion in this life, Whether we live or dye we are the Lords: we are
yet his friends, his servants, Jos. 1. 2. Joh. 11. 11. We are yet his temple in
which he does more manifest his glory than in our tabernacle while it comes to
be dissolved; we are yet his purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 16. Dying loses us
not that friend. O happy, truly happy, and Blessed are they that dye in the
Lord, for they rest from their labors. It was a lesson that John was commanded
to write, do you remember it, It was written for your Instruction, and comfort.
Whether ye live or die, ye are the Lords.

Thirdly, this may Instruct us that there are but a very few that are true
believers, that in death shall be the Lords. No more then those that live to
the Lord, and dye to the Lord. And ah! how few those are? 1. What shall become
of all profane wretches, all drunkards, swearers, adulterers, all those
rabbles of wretches, Rev. 20. v. 8. Ephesians. 5. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 8, 10. that in stead
of living to the Lord, live to the Devil, to their base lusts and corruptions,
and all their study is, how to obey the flesh, in the lusts of it? Ah Lord!
what will become of these poor wretches when they dye, when you shall cry out,
Animula! quo vadis? poor soul whither go thou? It was a dreadful passage
I lately heard to have been the dying breath of such an one, Now goes my prore
soul to pay all its debts. 2. What shall become of all those that live to the
world, and make their gain the End of their life? whose whole life sounds
nothing else, But what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or what shall we
put on? What will you gain (friends) when to gain the world, you shall weep
over your lost poor souls; how will you ransom your selves from the pit? And
so for any other that make any thing below God, the End of their lives. And ah!
where shall we find a man concerning whom, we may pronounce this text, while he
lived, he lived to the Lord, and when he dyed, he dyed to the Lord? And yet
this must be pronounced of all those that when they die shall be the Lords: O
remember your latter end!

4. This may instruct us in the right way, to dye comfortably. He that knows
he is the Lords cannot dye sadly; now would thou find this? while thou
live, live to the Lord: when thou dyest, dye to the Lord. O the sweetness of
perfumed death to the Saint! I remember I have heard of an holy man, that when
he was about to dye, professed to this effect. Now (says he) were all the
honors, pleasures, and contentments of the world on one hand, and death on the
other, I would scorn them, and embrace this. O get your hearts into such a
frame, which cannot be without making the Lord (while you live) the end of your
life and actions.

Fifthly, this may further instruct Of the great difference betwixt the wicked,
and the Godly, in their deaths, and of the Reason of it. The worldling lives to
himself, and dies to himself, perhaps he makes away himself, or dies
murmuringly, and blasphemes God, he cannot give God a good word at the last.
The believer could be content to be present with the Lord, yet he waits Gods
leisure and patiently submits to what death God will have him dye, whether it
be Natural or Violent, sad or joyful, short or tedious, and whatever his
death be, he dies, joyfully. The One is loath to dye and cannot abide to think
of shaking hands with so many Gods as he has here below; the other dies
cheerfully, and in his death gives glory to God. The Reason of this difference
is plain Enough. The Saint, 1. Has lived to God. 2. Desires to dye unto the
Lord. 3. In death as well as in his life aims at the glory of God. 4. Knows
that in death he shall be the Lords. The other, has lived to himself. 2.
Aims at nothing in dying but himself. 3. Knows that if he dies his soul
sinks in hell for ever, can you blame the man for being loath to go into
Everlasting Burnings?

The second use may be Terror

3. This doctrine may be applied by way of Exhortation, And, O that I could
persuade for God this day, some or other to begin a life to him, every one
says, O that I might dye the death of the Righteous, that my latter end might
be like his! but alas! who is there that lives according to his wish? would
thou be the Lords when thou dyest? live not then to thy self but to the Lord,
Live not according to thy own lusts, live not to thy own ends, but live by
Gods law and to Gods glory: who would be the Lords when he dies, he must be so
while he lives; if God dwell with thy soul in life, thy soul shall dwell with
him in death. O, leave trading for your selves, you spend your strength for
nothing, and your money for that which will not profit. What shall it profit
thee to gain all the world, and lose thy own poor soul? Or what will thou
give in Exchange for it? But I pass on (my time being expired, and the whole
doctrine being practical.)

2. Let every believer, look upon this as an Engagement of his soul to God,
that In life and death he is the Lords; And from hence learn, while he lives
to live to the Lord; and when he dies to dye to the Lord. To whom should the
servant live but to the master? the wife, but to the husband? the child, but to
the father? and the Saint, but to his Savior? O quicken up your souls to this
life, from this principle; your engagments to God are high, let your life be
answerable; lay out the talents he has given you, for his advantage; drive on
his Interest, pursue his ends. You are bought with a price. Bloody friends have
you been to Christ, who in this has excelled the love of men, that while you
were yet enemies he dyed for you, that by his death you might be reconciled to
God. Let God never complain concerning you, as he once complained of his
Israelites, Isa. 1. 2. I have nourished children, but not to my self; I have
brought them up but they have rebelled against me. O let your conversation be
such as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ. You live in God, live also unto
God: For none of us lives to himself, etc.

Lastly, it may be applied by way of Consolation, and so I shall apply it more
generally, or more particularly relating to this occasion.

1. Generally. It may administer comfort unto us, concerning our own deaths.
2. Concerning our friends deaths.

1. Concerning our own death. What, art thou afraid to dye Christian? To let
thy soul return to God that gave it?

Consider first, Have thou not lived to God? Have thou been his factor, and art
thou afraid to see him? his child, and art thou afraid of returning to thy
Fathers house? can the faithful Servant fear a return to his Master?

Consider secondly, Has it not been thy desire to glorify God, as he pleases
to be glorified? Thou have finished thy course, run thy race, done thy work,
God has had his desired glory of thee in thy life, and now his will is that
thou should glorify him by dying to him.

3. Remember that in death, thou art the Lords. To dye to me is gain says the
Apostle. While we Phil. 1. 23. 1 Cor. 5. 6.
are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. At home does the Apostle
call it? a strange home! where we have neither father, nor brethren, nor scarce
so much as a friend. By death thou do but return like the sunbeame into the
body of the Sun: Thou art yet the Lords friend.

2. It may comfort us concerning the death of such our friends, as while they
lived, lived to the Lord. Have thou a believing friend dead?

1. Consider that he, or she, is where they would be; it is the desire of every
Saint to glorify God in that manner that he desires to be glorified by them, to
serve him any where, whether in the Kitchen or the Parlour it makes no matter
to them, giving glory to him is that they desire. Gods will is revealed when
thy friend dies that he would have them come, and serve at court. Why weepest
thou? Thy friend has his wish; she desired to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ which is best of all.

Nay,

2. Consider thy friend has not only his wish but his greatest happiness, thy
friend is the Lords, and that in a more special, and glorious manner, now than
ever; Let this stop thy mouth: Thy friend is with the Lord, he has him, he
ownes him: the Sunbeame is but in-bodyed in the Sun, the blood is but run to
the heart. Ah! but we have lost! What have thou lost Christian? 1. Was not thy
friend the Lord's while he lived? the Lords by right, thine only by loan? was
he not the Lords purchase? and shall not the Lord come when he please, and take
possession of it? may he not pull it down, and build it up again, at his
pleasure? shall he not do what he will his own? we use to say, A man may take
his own where ever he finds it; has not God the like liberty? he has found
one of his lambs in thy pasture; it will argue an ill mind in thee not to be
willing he should take it home; what? because he has let thee keep it for
him, will thou deny his right? His Saint can be spared out of heaven no longer.

2. Is he not the Lords possession? and shall not God take his house into his
own hands if he will when the tenants lease is out? God uses not to renew
leases: Once I confess he did it to Hezekiah, but his ordinary custom is, as
leases of Saints lives expire, to take them into his own hands, till he has
got in all his redeemed morgages, and the full day of redeeming the purchased
possession shall come. May thou remove thy house, and shall not God remove
his whither he pleases? The Saints are Gods dwelling place, here he lives in
Cottages of clay, now when the believer dies God pulls down his clay-Cottages,
intending to fetch away the timber and bricks, to build up himself a temple in
the paradise of glory.

3. Nay are they not the Lords by nearer relation than thine? shall not the
father take home his child, because the Schoolmaster shall lose the best
Scholar of his school? shall not the husband take home his wife, because her
friend shall lose a good companion? Has God any thing from thee but his own?
would not thou take it ill, if thy friend should keep thy wife or child, for
his own pleasure, when thou sendst for them after a long absence?

Lastly consider! should not thou thy self, live to, and rejoice in, the
glory of God? Earth is a loser of what was none of its own ever, but heaven is
a gainer, there is one Saint more there, one star more in the firmament of
glory. Will thou weep because thy friend has a Kingdom, and one jewel more
is set in Christ diadem? should not the child rejoice at the increase of his
fathers family? If at the Increase of the family of Grace, then surely at the
Increase of the household of glory. There Is one servant more added to the
Bedchamber: Thy friend lived to the Lord, and died to the Lord, and now in
Death is the Lords, and more the Lords than ever.

I have done with my Doctrine, and my general Application; Let me add a little
in particular relating to this occasion.

You that mourn for this our sister removed, Mourn not, neither weep: while
she lived, she lived not to her self, but to the Lord, when she died, she dyed
not to her self, but to the Lord. In her life she was the Lords, and now in
her death, I question not but she is the Lords.

You know it is not my custom to speak any thing concerning any upon these
occasions, But there are two sorts of persons, concerning whom I think it is
fitting, that if they have lived to the Lord while they lived, and dyed to the
Lord in their death, their examples should be held out like Dorcas her clothes.
1. Eminent persons in the Magistracy. 2. Eminent preachers in the Church.

Of the first sort she was not, Not of the Noble and great persons of the
Earth, but out of a poor family did the Lord choose this elect vessel, to
declare the Riches of the glory of his grace in. But you shall pardon me the
expression, if I say, that while she lived, she was an Eminent preacher, and
give her the character which our Savior gave S. John, she was a burning, and a
shining light; and I am confident, did more good, to poor souls, in the three
years of her sickness, by telling them her experiences, directing, quickening,
exhorting, strengthening, satisfying, them, than God has honored any of us
who have been preachers of his word, to do in much more time. I mean not that
she was a Pulpit-preacher, No, God had taught her to be wise to sobriety, she
preached as Noah, by making the Ark, nay more, as Priscilla and Aquila, by
privately instructing others in the ways of God.

I shall speak but little of her, who while she lived spoke her self so much,
I mean the strength, and grace of God in her self, for I must not exalt her,
whose constant design, and practice, was so much to debase her self, and all
creatures, that the Creator might have the glory of all.

I shall not commend her for her mor all virtues, and natural duties, which is
too usual upon such occasions as these (surely because better things cannot be
spoken.) But I shall set out her example to you, so as to exalt the infinite
grace of God toward her, and to let you see, who they are whom the Lord
delights to honor, and how acceptable it is to him, for young ones to return
to their Father early, and for the poor to receive his gospel. Give me but
leave to repeat my text, and Sermon over her, and I have done.

While she lived, she lived to the Lord, when she dyed, she dyed not to her
self, but to the Lord. It was but a little acquaintance I had of her, not yet
two full years, in which time too, my multitude of occasions were too much
enemies to my happiness, in denying me so many opportunities of seeing her, as I
desired. I shall not speak any thing, from others, but only what I have heard,
and seen will I declare. Her whole time, since I knew her, was a Schooling time
of Affliction (without any cessation) As I remember she wanted some years of
thirty, when she dyed; and for three years and upward before that time, she
was Gods close prisoner; and the greatest part of that time (so bitter was her
cup) was spent in her bed.

I have heard her relating the beginning of her conversion, and for that I
shall referr you to her own account penned (by a faithful See the precedent
Relation.
friend) from her own mouth. Her life was a life of afflictions. 1. Inward,
then outward. Inward, by the temptations of the Devil, terrors of conscience,
and such usual pangs as accompany the first birth: besides that her God was
sometimes afterward behind the Curtain, and when he hid his face she was
troubled; when after much seeking, she had found him whom her soul loved, and
had got inward peace, that she was, as it were rapt into the third heavens,
then lest she should be exalted above measure she had a thorn in the flesh
given to buffet her, God visited her with a long, and tedious affliction, how
she demeaned her self in the beginning of it, what she met with, how she
conquered, you may take from her own mouth in the precedent Relation: I shall
only supply the Chronicle of her days where her own Relation ceased.

We commonly say Affliction is a spending time, it was not a beginning to her
but it was a growing time of grace. The first time I came to visit her (when I
was but a stranger to her and to this City) I remember her first question was,
Sir I beseech you tell me how I may glorify God in my affliction. I told her,
either by patient submitting to his hand, and quieting our selves in his will,
acknowledging his righteousness, etc. Or by Speaking to his glory to others,
etc. For the passive part, it was a lesson she had so well learned, that no
discontent could either be read in her carriage or countenance, nor a repining
word be heard from her lips. And it was no light Affliction, for a young and
Active body in its strength to have Gods fetters laid upon it, and to be kept
so close a prisoner, as she was, so long a time. But her God had subdued her
spirit to the feet of his own will. The latter and Active part she so
practiced, that her chamber was as a room of paradise, none came in there, but
went away Instructed, or Satisfied, or quickened, or some way or other bettred.
The greatest part of her work was Angelical, a speaking well of God, admiring
and exalting his free grace, telling what he had done for her soul; yet she
remembered, that while she was in the body she had a duty to do to others, and
never did any labor more for God with the souls of others than this precious
one. Grace had made her eloquent; her birth, and breeding was mean, but the
Lord had given her the tongue of the excellent. O the abundance of grace that
was powered out into her lips! I appeal to you, did not your hearts burn
within you when you heard her speak, the Excellency of sense, spiritual sense?
I sometimes (as my occasions permitted) went to visit her, and while I thought
to speak, my ears silenced my tongue, and gave her leave to be the preacher,
for the gain of those in the room, and that I my self might learn Righteousness:
who ever heard her, mentioning her affliction? discoursing of any worldly
thing? O that my tongue were so sanctified! she seemed to have lost all sense
of Affliction, and while she was in the body, to have been out of it; she would
often call upon those young ones that were babes of grace and came frequently to
visit her to labor after more communion with God. I remember one thing she
would often Urge, and I beseech you to remember it, viz. The excellency of the
benefit the soul might reap by private prayer. She told you for this what was
her and (if you be not your own foes) may also be your experience. To make my
discourse short, The time of her life grew short, and as she grew nearer the
Earth, so she grew more heavenly in her Hallelujahs, making of it then her
only work to Glorify God, by admiring his grace, and exalting his name. I went
to visit her the day before the Lord took her to himself, I found her bereaved
of most of her senses; but yet God gave her the liberty of speech, which she
ceased not to improve to his glory. Many of her friends were weeping over her,
she was discoursing of the Creators Excellency, and the Creatures vanity, and
that in such language, that one would have thought she had had the tongue of
the Eloquent as well as the Excellent: And so incessant was she in that her
spiritual work, that she would speak even till she had lost her speech, and
pawsing a little (to recover her self) renewed her discourse, to the
admiration of my self, and those others that heard her; she had so far lost
her understanding, that upon such pawses she ordinarily forgot what she had
said, and renewing her discourse, would either beg the help of the standers by,
or go on upon some new, but (as heavenly) discourse; to give thee a taste
thereof, take what I took that day from her own mouth Her words were these:

I tell you (friends) if any Christian sit down short of Christ, he shall
fail; what is your duties, your righteousness, but a menstruous cloth,
loathsome to your selves, abominable to God? Our boasting is excluded, we can
do nothing, what should we stay in any thing that we cannot do? O set up
nothing of your own; Let God have all, your selves are nothing. I will tell you
my friends, my own experience, I have found, the creature is nothing, God is an
Ocean, etc. [Here her speech failed, and pawsing till she had recovered her
self, she was not able to remember what she spoke last, but went on]

O the depth! the height! the length! the breadth! of Gods eternal decrees of
love! Of his love in Christ to poor creatures. Study that Ocean; It may be
some of you have known what that Fountain, that Ocean of love is. Now
whatsoever the soul sets up, or esteems besides that, is but a shadow, a
fancy. Let a man sit never so long by a shadow, when he removes, he cannot
carry it away with him: If we get the substance, that will also carry the
shadow with it; If you get the Lord Jesus Christ, you get both substance and
shadow; whatever you have without him, is but the shadow without the substance;
follow not after shadows, pursue them not: strive after Christ, and you shall
in time see much of God. Sit not still because you see some difficulties in the
pursuance of this; there is scarce any of you but if you knew where to get 5 or
20 shillings, but would rise up early, and work hard to get it. O why are not
Christians covetous? why should not they be ambitious? Aas! the work is small,
why will you sit still. But take heed of resting in your performances; do them,
but rest not in them. Do not think of going to public Ordinances, and duties
enough. Alas! what are public Ordinances and duties, if they be not followed
on by private prayer, and seeking God in secret? O seek him in secret, so you
shall find him, and that shall make you love him more. But when you have done
thus, rest not in it, for I tell you again, if you sit down any where short of
Christ, you lose all, whatsoever you think you enjoy, look higher then your
selves, than your bare performances, etc. And if you look well into them, you
will see nothing in them, but abundance of cause to be ashamed. Nothing short
of Christ (I tell you again) can make you acceptable, or amiable to God. It
has in it the baseness of our corrupted flesh. What if you think a good
thought? (which yet you cannot do of your selves) if you rest in it, it is
naught. Christianity is a work, the natural man knows. Alas! poor creatures
think it is, etc. Here her speech failed, and she again pawsed. It being
Saturday, my private studies called me off, and I saw her no more, she dying
the next day: But by the report of her friends, she continued her work, till
God said, It is enough, and then she quietly surrendered her soul to him that
redeemed it. What passages she had nearer her death I shall omit, being not an
ear-witnesse.

Thus I have now set before you her holy Example, and have showed you, how
while she lived, she lived not to her self, but unto the Lord, and when she
dyed, she dyed not to her self, but to the Lord. And now to what purpose (do
you think) have I done all this? What, merely to commend her? God forbid; But
1. For the glory of God. 2. For your good. 1. For the setting out Gods glory,
in the riches of his free grace, 1. That he would reveal himself ^o such a
Babe, when he conceales himself from the wise and prudent. 2. That passing by
the great men, and rich men of the earth, he would choose this mean one (in
comparison of others) to make known such a fullness of grace in of all kind of
grace, both for her use and comfort, as I have never before in any met with the
like. It is rare to see one that has so much both strength and peace as this
precious one had, to her last hour.

Secondly, I have done it for your good. You have seen a quickening Example,
and heard quickening words, the Lord give to me and you quickened hearts. Learn
hence,

1. You that are young, O slip not your golden Age. God delights much in young
ones, reveals himself much to babes that begin their life to him.

2. You that are mean in the world, learn to walk with God, to keep close to
Christ; you may be richer in the grace of Christ, than the great men your
Rulers.

3. Let all learn to be careful of resting in any thing short of Christ: It
was her counsel, O let her dying words stick fast; she was full of duties,
holy in her constant converse, yet nothing but Christ comforts her.

4. Let all learn from her, though not to rest in duties, yet to perform
them, and that in secret. O be much with God in your closets, she tells you how
sweet it will be.

5. Learn from her Example to be holy, yet humble, her knowledge puffed her
not up; yet I dare say, she had a great deal more of heaven in her, than some
hundreds of those that think they know enough to be Preachers: she was as
heavenly as they, but not so proud and wanton.

6. Learn from her to lay in grace betimes. The Winter may come suddenly, her
snow was fallen early.

7. Learn from her, in affliction to possess your sonles with patience, to
remember it is Gods hand, and be still. Who heard her murmr?

8. Learn from her, to tell others what God has done for your souls. This
she made her work.

9. Learn from her, to reprove, direct, comfort, quicken, strengthen those
that are your brethren. This was her work upon all occasions.

In short, learn from her example,

Not to live to your selves, but to the Lord, and when you dye, not to dye to
your selves, but to the Lord, that both in life and death you may be the Lords.
There came to my hands a sheet written close, containing several promises,
which she by her diligent reading had gathered up to suit her soul in the time
of need, indeed, so many, and so aptly applied, that it would cause admiration
to consider how she could contain them in her memory, or readily find them as
they lie scattered in the Book of God (without the help of a Concordance). But
in regard these sheets have swelled too far already, and in regard the promises
Skippon on the Promises. Leigh on the Promises. The Saints Legacy.
are already sweetly ranked (in several Books printed) I thought good to omit
the inserting of them. Now to the God of grace be Honor and Glory.

FINIS.

