VERA EFFIGIES IOHANNIS COLLINGS S.T.P. ANNO DOM: 1678. AETATIS. 55.

Man's but a shadow, and a Picture is
That shadow's shadow. yet don't judge amiss.
Though here you only on the shadow look
What follows read. The Substance is i'th'book.
R. White ad V^^um: delin et sculp: 167^
portrait of John Collings

SEVERAL DISCOURSES Concerning the Actual Providence OF GOD.

DIVIDED INTO THREE PARTS.

The First, Treating concerning the Notion of it, establishing the Doctrine of
it, opening the principal ACTS of it, Preservation and Government of created
Beings. With the particular Acts, by which it so preserves and governs them.
The Second, Concerning the Specialties of it, the Unsearchable things of it,
and several Observable things in its motions. The Third, concerning the (...),
or hard Chapters of it, in which an attempt is made, to solve several
appearances of difficulty in the motions of Providence, and to vindicate the
Justice, Wisdom, and Holiness of God, with the reasonableness of his dealing in
such Motions.
By JOHN COLLINGES, D.D.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold by Edward Giles
Bookseller in St. Andrews Parish in Norwich, 1678.

To the Right Honorable the Lady Frances Thompson.
MADAM,
I Beseech your Honor to believe me telling you, that I have been these
thirteen years (ever since I had the happiness to know your Ladyship) watching
an opportunity, as to let your Ladyship know the sense I have of the
obligations you have been pleased to lay upon me; so to let the world know the
honor I have for your Ladyship, growing up from my first observations of you,
which was in your Ladyships near approaches to, and in your state of Widowhood.
I then observed, Madam, that your Ladyship (like the child of so Honorable and
pious Parents) had very early entertained just, noble, and most honorable
thoughts of the living God, which had produced in you as early a choice of him
as your God, and of his ways, as your ways, with a zeal beyond the proportion
which could be expected from your years. Having therefore perfected the
following Discourses, I congratulated my self, when I had thought of your
Ladyship as a fit person to entitle to them, and the rather, because your
Ladyship (having not yet seen many years) shall I hope have many days to
observe the motions of Divine Providence, both as to Polities and Persons; and
from thence both to conclude, how true those few Observations are which I have
made, and to give some more eminent Divine, many a subject more of this nature
from your own observation. Madam! in the few years you have yet lived, you have
seen as many, and as quick, and inexpected rotations of Providence; as the like
number of years have at any time as yet produced, or are like to produce; and
yet the wheel seems to run nimbly, and a further multitude of years may add to
your Ladyships wisdom in this thing. I crave leave most humbly to recommend to
your Honor, as the observation of Issues, so the confirmation of Divine
Promises, and Threatenings in the fulfilling of them. I doubt not but your
Ladyship will every day see, that it is that God who cannot lie, who has
commanded his Ministers at all times to say unto the righteous, it shall be
well with them, for they shall eat of the fruit of their doings; and to say, Woe
unto the wicked it shall be ill with them, for the reward of their hands shall
be given them. If Madam! the actual Providence of God at any time seems to
look another way, it is but keeping your patient foot a while at the Promise,
and Providence (like the Be) will come home to the word of Promise or
Threatening, bringing along with it a body laden with honey, to reward the godly
and righteous man, and a sting to smite and pierce those through who have
wrought wickedness, and provoked a jealous God. Our blessed Lord (Madam) tells
us, Joh. 17.3. That it is life eternal for men to know God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent. The promise or predication in the proposition of that Text,
makes it evident that by the knowledge of the Father, and Jesus Christ, is meant
more than the bare comprehension of the nature and things of God in our
understanding (as indeed knowledge and most other terms of sense do ordinarily
signify in Scripture, the Greek complying with its elder sister the Hebrew,
which has a great penury of words) so that to know God and Christ in the true
sense of that text, is not only in our understandings to comprehend what may
be, and is necessary to be known of God; but to adore, love, fear him, believe
in him, to choose him for our God. In short it comprehends all those acts of our
minds which are either just consequents, or may rationally be inferred as
duties from a just understanding and due comprehension of him; but in regard
according to the workings of our reasonable natures those acts will not, indeed
cannot be exerted, without a praevious apprehension of him proportionable to
what he indeed is, and so as to make him an adequate object for our affections,
a just comprehension of God in our understandings is necessary, in order to
those other acts of internal homage, wherein the Creature stands indebted to
his great Creator. So that Solomon, Prove. 19.2. did but conclude rationally,
That the soul should be without knowledge is not good. And the great Apostle of
the Gentiles asked but a reasonable question, Romans 10. How shall they believe on
him of whom they have not heard?

All Knowledge comes into the Soul either by the Exterior senses, or by
reasoning and discourse; or thirdly by Divine impression and revelation. The
two former are the more ordinary; the latter, a rarer and more extraordinary
means of knowledge, in these latter days, since God has spoken to us by his Son.

I speak of Knowledge strictly taken for the comprehension of things in our
understanding, for if we take it in the large sense even now mentioned, neither
sense, nor reason, is a sufficient mean to it.

By sense we can directly comprehend nothing of God, for who has seen him at
any time? he is an Incorporeal, immaterial substance, and comes not under the
cognizance of any sense, nor indeed can we so know any spiritual being; but in
regard the effects both of him who is the Father of Spirits, and of spiritual
beings that are creatures are sensible. Our Senses afford us ofttimes an
auxiliary help, from which our reason draws just conclusions concerning God,
from Principles which it at first it establishes by the help of sense. For
example, That the World is, and Man is, are matters of sense. Now Reason
concludes, Nothing (unless a first being) can be the cause of its own
existence. Hence it gathers there must be a God, a first being, and a first
cause. Again, when Sense has showed us Man a reasonable creature, Reason works
and tells us, He that made this noble Creature must needs be more noble, more
reasonable, more excellent.

What we know then of God must needs be from Reason or Revelation. Reason
brings us in knowledge, by raising Conclusions from Principles. These Principles
are of two sorts, Philosophical, or Scriptural. I call those Philosophical
Principles, which reason as it now resideth in us justifies, and which without
the help of the Word of God are allowed by all; or the most of men, especially
if cultivated by any ingenuous education, being either common natural
principles, or such as are established by studies upon deliberate thoughts,
with the help of sense, and improvement of discourse and ratiocination. Thus
Reason will tell us that there is a God, but one God; That he must be the first
being, the first cause, more excellent in the perfections of his being than any
creature; and an hundred things of a like evidence. Or else it concludes from
revealed Principles, (having first a sufficient evidence, That the holy
Scriptures are the word of God, who cannot speak falsely.) These Principles now
are such propositions as without the surer word of Prophecy we could never
have had any just evidence of: Such now are the Doctrines of the Trinity, The
Incarnation of Christ, The Personal union of the Divine and Humane Nature in
him; and many others.

In the discovery and justification of such Conclusions as Reason gathers
from the first sort of Principles, lies the work of a Philosopher as a
Philosopher. In the discovery and proof of such Propositions as are partly
evidenced from Reason, but more fully from Scripture, lies the work of a
Christian Philosopher.

In the discovery, proving and applying of such Propositions as have their
Evidence partly from Reason, and more fully from holy Writ, or as cannot be at
all concluded, unless building upon Scriptural foundations, but are founded in
Scripture, and may be illustrated imperfectly from reason, and showed not to be
improbable nor unreasonable, lies the work of the Minister of the Gospel, who
is to convey the knowledge of God to his people. And the true reason why some
even of these silver Trumpets (which belong to the Sanctuary) give an uncertain
sound, is because neither the Principles of natural Reason, nor Revelation,
appear to all men in the same light. We say, The best Philosopher is not as yet
born. Our age tells us how generally Principles of Philosophy are exploded (and
it may be some of them justly too) which we when we were boys thought to lie
very near Demonstration; and doubtless in the next age something now admitted,
will be judged as faulty. It has pleased God to subject our understandings to
this vanity. Now we having no way (unless God would from Heaven speak to us) to
know any proposition of Truth, but from the exercise of our Reason concluding,
either from Principles purely natural, or from Propositions of Revelation in
Scripture, every one naturally judging himself obliged to believe, according to
the evidence he has from his understanding, there must and will be different
apprehensions until (which will never be) men have all either the same degrees
of Natural Reason, or Scriptural knowledge; which will be advantaged if there be
any who think that all Propositions are to be weighed by the balance of
Natural Reason, and that the holy Scripture as to the sense of it must come
into that scale, and make but in-weight giving only an auxiliary help to the
Evidence of the most sublime Propositions of truth. Nor is there any help for
this. The Church of Rome (which your Ladyship knows pretends to wondrous
Miracles) has indeed devised a palliating cure for this, setting up an
Infallible cheat to judge of all Controversies, and by fire and faggots, and all
barbarous cruelties, and inhumanities forcing men to acquiesce in the Decisions
of that ridiculous Judge. But in the mean time men's Consciences apprehend
themselves before one who is no Judge in the ease, and the sore festreth and
rotteth to the bone; for the Pope can make none to alter his mind. And a little
reason might tell the Quacks of that College, that if it be not in the power of
a man to believe what he has a mind to believe, it is much less in the power
of a foreign power to compel him to it.

The Protestant cure is certainly more humane and reasonable, yea and more
Apostolical too. They set forth sums of sound Doctrine, to which they only
annex that of the Apostle, Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore (as many as be perfect)
be thus minded, and if any in any thing be otherwise minded God shall reveal
even this unto you. Only Protestants require (as the same Apostle directs) Romans
14. That if any has a particular faith, (different from that of the Church
wherein he lives) he should have it to himself before God. Thus the Knowledge
of God is acquired from his word, reading it, being Catechized out of it,
hearing it opened, and preached, by the comparing of spiritual things with
spiritual; by the use of reason and discourse in the Velitation of Questions
arising from the seeming contradictions in Holy Writ, etc.

But there is also another mean of Divine Knowledge, that is by his exterior
works, by which much of the Knowledge of God is gained, improved, and increased.
These works are either of Creation, or of Providence. Creation was the work of
the first six days, from which God has ceased long since, but the things
created remain, and much of the Knowledge of God is to be gained from thence, by
the help of sense, which shows us the things, and reason which helps us to
conclude, that there being so many noble effects, there must be a first and
more noble cause; there being so many excellent Beings, there must be a first
and most perfect and excellent Being. Nothing created could give an Existence
to it self: Hence the Apostle tells us, That the invisible things of God from
the creation of the world, are clearly seen from the things that are made, even
his eternal power and Godhead, Romans 1.20. So that they are without excuse,
because that when they knew God they glorified him not as God.

For the Book of Scriptures we (blessed be God!) have it in our Vernacular
Tongue, we have means to teach us to read, we have Catechisms, and Confessions
of Faith, containing the Epitome and substance of them, we have the various
labors of holy and learned men, to make us to understand them; scarce any
thing seems to be wanting to this age for the gaining of this excellent
knowledge by this mean but persons giving themselves up to Reading, Hearing,
Meditation, Christian Conferences, and Prayer.

For the Book of Creation methinks it is like a great Bible in some Religious
Gentleman's Hall, that lies always open; we cannot move a step in the world, nor
lift up an eye to Heaven, but our eye is upon one page, or another of it. If
men will not read the Wisdom of God, in the sagacity and wisdom of some
Creatures, nor the power and greatness of God in the greatness and power of
others, and so for other perfections; it is not because they want means, but
because they want an heart to seek after God: as to this there is no want of
any thing, but a wise contemplation of them, and a rational concluding from the
perfections of the effects to the greater excellency and perfection of the
first cause and being. The Book of Creation will learn us much of the nature
and admirable perfections of the Divine Being. The Book of Scripture will learn
us more of it, and instruct us in sublimer Mysteries than Reason could
discover: The Doctrine of the Trinity; the two Natures united in the Person of
the Mediator. They will tell us of Gods Covenants, of Christ's performances of
the Covenant of Redemption, of the Will of God to be done by us, and the Will
of God to be done unto, and upon us, in his Promises and threatenings. The
Apostle sums up all, when he tells us they are able to make the man of God wise
to salvation, thoroughly furnished to every good work.

But there is yet another Book which is less obvious to the eye of sense, than
the Book of Creation is, and to the eye of Reason too, and upon which fewer
Commentaries have been wrote, than upon the Books of holy Scripture, that is
the Book of Actual Providence. A Book in which much of God is written, and from
which much of God may be learned; but it is commonly taken for the Vision of a
book that is sealed, which is given to one who is learned, with a command to
read it, but he says, I cannot, for it is sealed. Some (more brutish than the
Heathens) deny any such Book, dreaming of the old Pagan Fate, or blind Fortune.

Others will allow it in part, but will have much of it spurious, dreaming that
the World is like a Clock, which once set in order and wound up, goes alone
without further use of the Workmans hand. Others will allow Divine Providence a
more universal influence, but yet love not to hear of any Specialties of it.
Some again highly conceited of their own reason, will subject the Providence of
God to their rational Conclusions. Few or none make any observations upon the
motions of Divine Providence; though certainly nothing more conduces to true
Spiritual wisdom. Others stumbling at some difficulties relating to the motions
of Providence, either wholly deny it, or form to themselves strange Ideas of
God, which no way agree to his most holy and perfect essence.

This Madam! has encouraged me to attempt something both to recover the Actual
Providence of God, from the Atheism of this age, and the groundless prejudices
which vain men have taken up against it; and by it to recover for God, that
just Fear, Faith, Love, Patience, and other homage, which both the excellency
of his being, and of his holy working calls for. And certainly, Madam, if
learned men have thought it worth their while (as some have done) to give the
World a rational account of Divine Offices, of the Modes and circumstances of
Ecclestastical constitutions in Rites and Garments, Liturgies and Ceremonies,
etc. It must needs be a noble work, to undertake to give the world a Rational
of Divine Operations. Such especially which seem to be the hardest Chapters in
the book of Providence, and least easy to be understood; and indeed this was
my original design. But while my thoughts were exercised in this, my work grew
upon my hand, considering especially the Atheism of the age in which we live,
together with the circumstances of the Church and people of God in most
European parts of the world, and the particular temptations I have observed
attending many, and those very excellent persons. I was further drawn on by the
pleasantness and usefulness of the subject in all, but especially in evil
times, and the apparent tendency of it to make men fear, and love, hope and
trust in, and with patience to wait upon God. These things, Madam, made me
resolve to open the Doctrine of Providence more fully, though not in its full
compass, and latitude (resolving always to carry along with me the capacity of
those to whom I spoke or wrote.) I was, Madam, the more encouraged in this from
my observation, that amongst the many excellent Books with which this age does
abound, there are fewer of this Argument than any other. Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick
(a great Divine) treats in two or three Sermons about the Specialties of
Providence, and the late eminent Bishop Wilkins has in a short Tract learnedly
and piously discoursed the symmetry and beauty of it. Another in a larger
Discourse called an Introduction into the Doctrine of Providence, has made and
a little enlarged upon several Observations upon the motions of it. I projected
and have at last finished a fuller Discourse than any of these (though possibly
much more imperfect so far as they did discourse this excellent argument) and
resolved to divide my discourse into three parts, which accordingly I have done.

In the first Part, Madam, after two Preliminary Discourses; the first
concerning Gods Predeterminations, (where I had no mind to meddle with any
present Controversies, that was not a popular work,) the second concerning
Creation; Your Ldiship will find me plainly discoursing of the Nature of
Providence, in the notion in which alone I intended to speak to it. There I
have from Scripture and Reason proved, That there is a constant care of God
extended to the whole Creation: That the Creature stands not in its own
strength, nor moves merely from a principle within it self; nor is governed
merely by its fellow creatures in a superior order, much less acts casually,
or under the necessity of any fate; but is under the daily inspection,
government, care and influence of the first cause, its great Creator, who both
preserves and governs it. There I have shortly showed the particular acts by
which God preserves and governs created Beings in their several capacities:
A point, Madam, of inexpressible use, to possess us of a true notion of God, of
our daily dependencies upon him, and (consequently) our duty toward him. David
says he was fearfully and wonderfully made; we are fearfully and wonderfully
preserved.

In the second Part I have discoursed 1. Of the Specialties of Providence, more
especially to the Church, and to every individual soul that loves and fears
him, shortly opening wherein they lie, and showing the reasonableness of it. 2.
Then I more shortly discourse the unsearchable things of it; for Madam, who
dare pretend more than to show a part of his ways? Who can by searching find
out God? Who can find out the Almighty to Perfection? This I have done to check
curiosity, and keep off good people from vain guesses and Prophetical
conclusions without bottom. 3. From that the discourse will lead your Ladyship
to consider the duty of a good Christian, in the observation of the motions of
Providence, and the advantage from it resulting to an observing soul. To help
my Reader in this I have made several observations upon the motions of
Providence. Some of which lie plain enough to every eye, all I think are
justified enough from Scriptural and other instances, only perhaps the
reasonableness and justice, and wisdom of God in them, is not or has not been
so obvious. Others (possibly) have not been so remarked, and are little more
than recommended as probationers for a good man's observation.

There is, Madam, a great variety in the methods of an infinitely wise God by
which he orders the Universe, and particularly that people in the world which
he has set apart for himself, In the same work Gods Providence moves not at
all times in the same method, or by the same means, yet in many things the
motions of Providence have much uniformity if we wistly observe them.

And as from the reading, and observation of the Syntax and construction used
by Authors in several languages, Grammarians have made their observations, from
whence they have formed Rules, few of which are yet without their exceptions:
so from the observation of the motions of Divine Providence in the world; the
reading of the Sacred History, and considering what the great God has been
doing, and is doing in the world; considerate Christians may gain a great
knowledge of God in his ways, and give a very probable conjecture, if not form a
certain judgment, both what God is about to do, and what Israel ought to do.
For (says the Wiseman, Eccles. 1.9, 10.) the thing which has been it is that
which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun. Is there any
thing of which it may be said, see this is new? it has been already of old
time which was before us. The Sinners of the world are but acting over those
lusts of hatred to God, malice, revenge, cruelty, luxury, which their
forefathers perished in acting many years ago. And the Saints in the world are
but making the same defense, fighting the same good fight, finishing the same
course which Abel began in the Old Testament, and was carried on by Elijah,
Zachariah, and all the Prophets, by John Baptist, and the Captain of our
Salvation; and Gods motions of Providence will appear much the same: as to
circumstances of time and place, etc. they may alter, but substantially they
must be so, because of the certainty of the word both of promise, and
threatening. The study of Actual Providence (for which the Historical part of
the Scripture which we count most useless, is of great use) is a noble study,
and the observation of the daily motions of it, is highly conducive to make us
spiritually wise, and to help us to understand the loving kindness of the Lord,
both toward his Church, and individual souls which love and fear him. I have,
Madam, been something large in these observations, but yet how little a portion
of Gods ways have I here displayed? I shall yet think I have done a great work,
if I have but set an example to some other Divines of greater parts, knowledge,
judgment and observation, to carry it on, for doubtless, many more observations
might be made, which would both much increase our knowledge, and direct our
practice.

In the third and last part of my Discourses, Madam, I have endeavored to
expound some difficult Chapters in the book of Providence, and to deliver the
name of that glorious God, whom we serve, from those prejudices, which nothing
but the lusts of men have raised in the world against him, and his righteous
ways. To reconcile the ways of Divine Providence both to those Propositions of
truth, which lie plain in the word, and to those Promises and Threatenings which
are the Indications of his will in that word, both with reference to Saints and
Sinners.

I think, Madam, I discern two great Errors in the world: 1. The Judgment of
Truth. 2. Of the love and hatred of God from motions and issues of Providence.
Hence because God in his Providence has ordered the Production of Men and
Women, giving them life and being, and his Gospel to be preached in their
hearing; so as they are externally called to repent and to believe, men
conclude, There is no election of persons, That Christ has died for all and
every man; That every man has a power to repent, believe, love God, hate sin,
etc. And I wish a modest denial of Divine Truths were the worst: but we are
fallen into a rude and ill mannered age, when every puny has boldness enough
to say, If this be so, then God is an impostor, and mocks and deludes, he is
unjust, cruel. I tremble to recite it; when as the truth is, it is neither so
nor so. Let what will be concluded concerning these Propositions, no such thing
will follow. I have, Madam, endeavored to reconcile these Providence of God
to the truth of these Propositions, which some invidiously charge with such
consequences, and to let these bold men understand that God is equal, his ways
equal, and admirably corresponding with those notions of truth so much distaste
them; only they are ignorant, and do not rightly judge concerning a righteous
God.

The second Error is more common: The judging of the love and hatred of God
from his Providential dispensations to us. Hence are our temptations to call
the proud happy, to bless them whom the Lord has cursed, and because they are
rich and prosper; and as to our selves, to charge God foolishly, as if either
he did not deal justly or kindly with us, because we are tempted or afflicted
more than others, or because we are devoured by wicked men.

I have, Madam, attempted to remove these stumbling blocks out of the ways of
Gods people, and to reconcile both these motions of Providence, and all its
motions in the dispensations both of first and further grace, to his Wisdom,
Goodness, and Holiness, and to our reason; as also to reconcile Gods
Providential permissions of sin, and sinners, his punishment of one sin with
another, to the purity and holiness of God; and to deliver Gods Providential
dispensations of this nature from the usual and ignorant imputation, that this
is to make God the author of sin; what I have done of this nature, I leave to
your Ladyship, and every sober Reader to judge. The whole, Madam, was composed
for popular discourses. Those that dwell in Kings houses may be allowed perhaps
to cloth their Discourses in the soft raiment of fine and delicate words. It
was not so fit for me who was to speak of great things to a plain people, and
whose design was that of S. Paul, not to have the faith of those to whom I
spoke, stand tottering upon the wisdom of men (which varieth much in
individuals) but in the power of God. I am far from thinking these Discourses
perfect in any part of them. I have laid the foundation, God raise up wise and
master builders to superstruct. If I mistake not, the foundation I have laid,
is not upon the sand, and uncertain bottom of humane reason, but upon the
Apostles and Prophets, Christ himself being the chief corner stone.

Madam, I most humbly beg pardon of your Ladyship and noble Husband, for no
further taking notice of him in this Epistle. I had not, when I wrote it,
knowledge enough of him to entitle me to such a presumption; I now so far know
him, as to let me know he will not be disgusted at what is offered to your
Ladyship; and to assure me, he is one who owneth and adoreth Divine Providence;
and if he had no other motives, I pretty well am assured also that its
dispensation toward himself in disposing such a Lady to his bosom, and making
him such a Father in our Israel, by your Ladyship, as he is, and I trust shall
further be, would be sufficient. I most humbly beg, Madam, all the Blessings of
Heaven and Earth upon him, and upon your Ladyship, and all those whom God has
given you, and crave the honor to subscribe my self,

May 1. 1678. Your Honors most humble Servant, JOHN COLLINGES.

Mr. GEORGE HERBERT ON Providence.
O Sacred Providence, who from end to end
Strongly and sweetly movest! shall I write,
And not of thee, through whom my fingers bend
To hold my quill? shall they not do thee right?
Of all the creatures both in sea and land,
Only to man thou have made known thy ways,
And put the pen alone into his hand,
And made him Secretary of thy praise.
Beasts fain would sing; Birds ditty to their notes;
Trees would be turning on their native Lute
To thy renown: but all their hands and throats
Are brought to Man, while they are lame and mute.
Man is the Worlds High Priest: he does present
The Sacrifice for all; while they below
Unto the Service mutter an assent,
Such as Springs use that fall, and Winds that blow.
He that to praise and laud thee does refrain,
Does not refrain unto himself alone,
But robs a thousand who would praise thee fain;
And does commit a world of sin in one.
The Beasts say, Eat me: but, if beasts must teach,
The Tongue is yours to eat, but mine to praise.
The Trees say, Pull me: but the hand you stretch,
Is mine to write, as it is yours to raise.
Wherefore, most Sacred Spirit, I here present
For me and all my fellows, praise to thee:
And just it is that I should pay the rent,
Because the benefit accrues to me.
We all acknowledge both thy power and love
To be exact, transcendent, and divine;
Who do so strongly and so sweetly move,
While all things have their will, yet none but thine.
For either thy Command, or thy Permission
Lay hands on all: they are thy right and left,
The first puts on with speed and expedition;
The other curbs sins stealing pace and theft.
Nothing escapes them both: all must appear,
And be disposed and dressed, and tuned by thee,
Who sweetly temper'st all. If we could hear
Thy skill and art, what music would it be!
Thou art in small things great, not small in any:
Thy even praise can neither rise nor fall.
Thou art in all things one, in each thing many:
For thou art infinite in one, and all.
Tempests are calm to thee, they know thy hand,
And hold it fast, as children do their fathers,
Which cry and follow, Thou have made poor sand
Check the proud sea, even when it swells and gathers.
Thy Cupboard serves the World: the meat is set,
Where all may reach: no beast but knows his feed:
Birds teach us hawking: fishes have their net:
The great prey on the less, they on some weed.
Nothing engendered does prevent his meat;
Flies have their table ^^read, e're they appear.
Some creatures have in winter what to eat;
Others do sleep, and envy not their cheer.
How finely do thou times and seasons spin
And make a twist checkered with night and day!
Which as it lengthens, winds, and winds us in,
As bowls go on, but turning all the way.
Each creature has a wisdom for his good.
The pigeons feed their tender offspring, crying,
When they are callow; but withdraw their food
When they are fledg, that need may teach them flying.
Bees work for man; and yet they never bruise
Their Masters flower, but leave it, having done,
As fair as ever, and as fit to use:
So both the flower does stay, and honey run.
Sheep eat the grass, and dung the ground for more.
Trees after bearing drop their leaves for soil:
Springs vent their streams, and by expense get store:
Clouds cool by heat, and Baths by cooling boil.
Who has the virtue to express the rare
And curious virtues both of Herbs and Stones?
Is there an Herb for that? O that thy care
Would show a root that gives expressions!
And if an Herb has power, what have the Stars!
A Rose, besides his beauty, is a cure.
Doubtless our Plagues and Plenty, Peace and Wars
Are there much surer than our Art is sure.
Thou have hid Metals: man may take them thence;
But at his peril: when he digs the place,
He makes a grave; as if the thing had sense,
And threatened man, that he should fill the space.
Even poisons praise thee. Should a thing be lost?
Should creatures want, for want of heed, their due?
Since where are poisons, antidotes are most;
The help stands close, and keeps the fear in view.
The Sea, which seems to stop the Traveller,
Is by a Ship the speedier passage made.
The Winds, who think they rule the Mariner,
Are ruled by him, and taught to serve his Trade.
And as thy House is full, so I adore
Thy curious art in marshalling thy goods.
The Hills with health abound; the Vales with store;
The South with Marble; North with Furs and Woods.
Hard things are glorious; easy things good cheap.
The common all men have: that which is rare,
Men therefore seek to have, and care to keep.
The healthy Frosts with Summer fruits compare.
Light without wind is glass: warm without weight
Is wool and furs: cool, without closeness, shade:
Speed without pains, a horse: tall without height,
A servile hawk: low without loss, a spade.
All countries have enough to serve their need:
If they seek fine things, thou do make them run
For their offense; and then do turn their speed
To be commerce and trade from sun to sun.
Nothing wears clothes but Man; nothing does need
But he to wear them. Nothing uses fire,
But Man alone, to show his heavenly breed:
And only he has fuel in desire.
When the earth was dry, thou made a sea of wet:
When that lay gathered, thou did broch the mountains
When yet some places could no moisture get,
The winds grew gardeners, and the clouds good fountains.
Rain, do not hurt my flowers; but gently spend
Your honey-drops: press not to smell them here:
When they are ripe, their odor will ascend,
And at your lodging with their thanks appear.
How harsh are thorns to pears! and yet they make
A better hedge, and need less reparation.
How smooth are silks compared with a stake,
Or with a stone! yet make no good foundation.
Sometimes thou do divide thy gifts to man,
Sometimes unite. The Indian nut alone
Is clothing, meat and trencher, drink and cann,
Boat, cable, sail and needle, all in one.
Most herbs that grow in brooks, are hot and dry.
Cold fruits warm kernels help against the wind.
The limons juice and rind cure mutually.
The whey of milk does loose, the milk does bind.
Thy creatures leap not, but express a feast,
Where all the guests sit close, and nothing wants.
Frogs marry fish and flesh; bats, bird and beast;
Sponges, nonsense and sense; mines, the earth and plants.
To show thou art not bound, as if thy lot
Were worse than ours, sometimes thou shiftest hands.
Most things move the under-jaw; the Crocodile not.
Most things sleep lying, the Elephant leans or stands.
But who has praise enough? nay, who has any?
None can express thy works, but he that knows them;
And none can know thy works which are so many,
And so complete, but only he that owes them.
All things that are, though they have several ways,
Yet in their being join with one advice
To honor thee: and so I give thee praise
In all my other hymns, but in this twice.
Each thing that is, although in use and name
It go for one, has many ways in store
To honor thee: and so each hymn thy fame
Extolleth many ways, yet this one more.
A DISCOURSE Concerning ACTUAL PROVIDENCE.
PART. I. Concerning the Nature and principal Acts of Divine Providence to all
created Beings.
SERMON I.
Ephesians. I. 11. Who works all things according to the Counsel of his Will.
THE Relative Particle [who] in the front of the Text, must necessarily relate
to God spoken of verse. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ. Many of these spiritual blessings are enumerated, from that third verse
to my Text. He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world,
predestined us unto the adoption of sons, verse. 5. Made us accepted in him,
verse. 6. And here again, ver. 11. Predestined according to the purpose of
him, who works all things according to the counsel of his will. All this is
written to those at Ephesus, who were faithful in Christ Jesus. Ephesus was a
City in the lower Asia: A City famous for Trade, and as famous for their
Idolatrous Worship of the great Goddess Diana. Paul came thither, Act. 18.19,
20. but tarried not, being to keep the feast at Jerusalem, Acts 19. You find
him returned thither, where he stays two years and three months, as you may
gather from Acts 20. You may in that Chapter find him forced thence by an
uproar of the people; during the time of his abode there, God used him to plant
a Gospel Church. He left the charge of it with Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.3. As I
besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, while I went into Macedonia. We cannot
gather from any thing in this Epistle, that any such corruptions in Doctrine or
manners had crept into this Church, as had done into the Churches of Rome,
Corinth, and Galatia; but the blessed Apostle knew, that although they stood,
they were concerned to take heed lest they fell, and that the common
temptations of those times might influence them; to obviate which he writes
this Epistle unto them. In the Preface contained in the two first verses, he
after his manner saluteth them. In the third verse he begins the matter of his
Epistle, minding them of the wonderful benefits, and acts of Grace, which God
had made them partakers of, in, and through Christ. He instanceth in the
Election of them to eternal life, as the end, and the Predestination of them to
the means in order to that end, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. Thence he proceeds to a
discourse about Redemption, verse. 8, 9, 10. In this Verse he returns again to
the business of Predestination. In whom also (says he) we have received an
inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of him. -- Who
works all things according to the counsel of his will. Where you have two
things affirmed concerning God.

1. That God works all things. As he at first created all things, so he
works all things; some by way of Efficiency, and special influence, others by
way of Permission; or he works all things, whatsoever is not sinful.

2. That he does it according to the counsel of his will.

I am aware, that there are some Divines, who restrain the Universal Particle
all things, to the things before spoken of, or at least to all those things
which God works in a way of Efficiency. The latter is Bellarmine's sense, for
which he quoteth Hierome. I do rather incline to those Interpreters, who think,
all things, are to be interpreted more generally. Nor is there any fear, that
by this interpretation we should make God the Author of sin: for besides that,
after Bellarmine had spit his Venom against Calvin and Beza, Bellar. de amiss.
Gratiae and statu peccati, cap. 15.
he could find out a way himself to entitle God to all things, yet not to sin;
for he tells us right, Peccatum facere est deficere; certainly all actions as
things, or natural motions, must be from him, in whom we live, move, and have
our being; though the irregularity, obliquity, malice and deformity, and
crookedness of actions (in which alone lies the sinfulness of them) is not from
God, but from the corruption and malice of the sinners hearts. Now the very
esse formale of sin (if it be not improper to say so) lies not in the natural
action, but in the obliquity and deviation of the action from the Divine rule;
and this neither Calvin nor Beza, nor any valuable person, ever ascribed unto
God. And therefore the All things of the Text may safely be understood, of all
beings, natural motions and actions, and to entitle God to them, is no more
than to say after the Apostle, In him we live and move, and have our being. Now
the Text does not only say, That God works all things, but that he works
all things according to the counsel of his will, that is, an eternal Decree
made in infinite wisdom. So that two Propositions are plain enough in the Text,
1. That there has been an eternal purpose and counsel of the Divine will
concerning all things. 2. That according to this eternal counsel of the Divine
will the Lord works all things.

I begin with the first of these. Nothing has come to pass, nor ever shall,
but what the will and counsel of God has before determined, that it shall be;
observe that phrase, That it shall be. There are many things have been done,
and are every day done, or doing in the world, which the purity and holiness of
God, will allow him to have no efficiency in; but there is no effect which he
has not willed should be done. Indeed concerning the means, the primary
efficient, or instrumental causes of actions, Gods Will has moved variously.
For all good things, motions, or actions that have any goodness in them,
himself has willed to do 'em, and to concur as a principal efficient cause.
The A postle tells us, that every good and perfect gift comes down from
above, which is not only true of spiritual gifts, habits, and influences, but
of natural actions and motions, such as are purely so, and abstractly
considered from any malice and filthiness, or irregularity cleaving to them;
for the Apostle tells us, In him we live and move. Now whereas all motions
and actions, are either good or evil; as to the first, it is readily granted,
the first mover must be the efficient of motions. God is the fountain and
original of all good. And in this sense that of our Savior is true, There is
none good but God. There is a goodness in natural habits and actions, a
goodness of being considering the motions and actions purely as natural,
without the tincture of a vitiated will, or affections and passions debauched.
There is a further goodness in spiritual habits and actions. All is from God,
and concerning every good action or motion in either sense, there has passed
an eternal purpose or counsel.

The only doubt can be, is concerning evil actions vitiated from the corrupt
and debauched will, and affections and passions of men. As to which it is on
all hands most readily granted, That God is not the author of them as such, nor
willed to effect them; he has neither commanded them, nor approved them, but
he has willed that these should be done, he has willed the permission of
them. And this is so evident, both from Scripture, and from Reason, raising
conclusions from scriptural principles, that it can with no modesty be denied.
I will prove it but from one instance of Scripture, but that so high as nothing
can be higher, and so plainly asserted, as nothing can be plainer. You shall
find it Acts 4.27, Acts 4.27, 28.
28. For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the children of Israel were
gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined
before to be done. There certainly never was, nor is it possible there ever
should be, an higher act of wickedness committed in the world, than the
adjudging to death, and crucifying the Lord Jesus Christ, who was the eternal
Son of God, and the most just and righteous person that ever was in the world.
There was a great Combination, as to this murder, Herod, Pontius Pilate,
Judas, the Jews, the Gentiles: Judas betrayed him, Herod mocked him, Pontius
Pilate condemned him, the Jews accused him, the Jews and Gentiles crucified
him. They all did their highly sinful parts. Now one would think, and may
reasonably conclude, that if there ever had been, or could have been, an action
done in the world, which had slipped the eternal will, and counsel of God, and
come to pass whiles the watchman of Israel had been asleep, or which God never
thought on, it should have been this action. But, says the Apostle, they all
in this act, this horrid act, did no more than what Gods hand and counsel had
before determined to be done. The words are (...), Gods Counsel determined not
to do it, but that it should be done. The word (...) is often used in holy
writ, and usually it is translated predestined, as ver. 5. of this Chapter,
and in my Text; and so also Romans 8.29. Whom he predestined; in 1 Cor. 2.7. it
is translated ordained. It apparently signifies a Predetermination of persons,
or things, and is used with reference to both, and that both as to good and
evil things. I shall only further give you the note of a very great Divine upon
it, that it signifies such a Predetermination of things, as not only
comprehends the end, but the means leading to that end. But in a further
evidence of this, let us use our reason a little, though still exercising it
upon scriptural Principles. My first argument shall be,

First, From Gods certain fore-knowledg of all things. I will open it in three
things:

1. God from all eternity did certainly and infallibly foreknow whatsoever
should come to pass in the world. The holy Scripture is very plentiful in
asserting the perfection of the Divine knowledge, Prove. 5.21. The ways of man
are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all their goings. Prove. 15.3.
His eyes are everywhere beholding the evil and the good. Psalm. 139.3. Thou art
acquainted with all my ways. Jer. 16.17. Mine eyes are upon all thy ways. Heb.
4.13. Neither is there any creature but is manifest in his sight: but all
things are naked and open to that God with whom we have to do. 1 John 3.20. God
is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. Now all things considered
from eternity, were either such things which it was possible might be, but
never were, nor are, nor shall be. God knew these things: He calls the things
that are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. he saw them in suo potenti, as he was
able to have produced them. This Divines call scientiam simplicis
intelligentiae. Or secondly, They are such things as have been, now are, or
shall be. These things also God knew from eternity: Divines say, God knows
these, In suo volenti per scientiam visionis. He from eternity saw them in a
certain futurity, as things which should certainly be: for God does not know
things as we do by succession, one thing to day, another thing to morrow; for
then there must have been a time when God was ignorant of some things, which
were blasphemy to assert: but such is the perfect nature of God, that he must
by the same Act, and at the same time have a perfect knowledge of all things,
that ever were to come to pass in the created world.

2. Supposing now that God from all eternity had such a perfect knowledge of
things, it follows of necessity, That they were certainly to be, and have a
certain existence: for God could not know, and see those things in a future
existence, of whose future existence there was no certainty; which by the way
is a concludent argument against the new device of Molina, Fonseca, Suarez,
Lessius, and some other Jesuits, since embraced by Vorstius, Arminius,
Grevinchovius, and their followers, who have devised a middle kind of
conditional knowledge in God. Thus they say, that God knew that if Peter or
James were in such circumstances they would believe. But this is to say
nothing, for if there were no certainty of Peter's believing from eternity, God
could not certainly know, what was not certainly to be.

3. Now I would gladly be instructed by any who stumbleth at this Counsel and
purpose of God, what but the will of God determining the event, could give a
certainty of being, or existence to any event? If the things that are, might
not have been, then (as I said before) God from eternity could not have had a
certain knowledge of them as things to be: if there were a necessity of their
being, what could make it but the will and purpose of God? For example: God did
from all eternity certainly know, that his blessed Son our Lord and Savior,
should be born of the Virgin Mary, in the time of Augustus Caesar, and here
live some years, and then be crucified; he did certainly know, that Herod
should mock him, Pilate judge and condemn him, the Jews crucify him. Then I say
from all eternity, these things were certainly to be, otherwise God could not
have known them: God indeed did not decree to put that malice into the heart of
Pilate, Herod, or the Jews. But he did decree that such persons should be, and
to suffer them to execute that malice of their hearts, yea and to influence
them to those actions, so far as they were natural actions: without that
influence, neither Herod could have opened his mouth to mock him, nor Pilate to
condemn him; nor could the Jews have lifted up their hands, to have either made
a cross, or driven a nail. That indeed they used this their natural strength,
and power, their tongues and hands thus wickedly, and maliciously, this was
from the Devil, and from their own lusts; but God willed that it should be
done, though he did not will to do it in a way of efficiency. This was that
which gravelled Vorstius (a man of a clear head, and great Learning and Reason,
though corrupt, having not learned to submit his Reason to the Word of God), so
that he confesses it a very great difficulty to fix an immutable cause of the
certain existence of future contingencies: he reckons up all that is said, and
at last reckons this for one opinion, The determination of the Divine will, in
which God beheld all things as certainly decreed, which were to be effected, as
in the first efficient cause effectually decreeing them. He says, That as this
is the most received, Vorstius de Deo, and Attr. Not. ad Disp. 5. p. 260. V.
etiam, 267, 268.
so it is the truest opinion, if it be not extended to all future things, even
to sins, etc. And again he tells us, That whatsoever we fix as the cause either
of Gods fore-knowledg, or the future existence of things, we shall everywhere
find Labyrinthum inexplicabilem, an inexplicable Labyrinth. And indeed it is
not to be determined, How God should know all things from all eternity, if he
had not willed them to be, either by his efficiency or permission. And our
adversaries you see in this point, agree it the best way to fix it there; only
they are afraid, If God willed sin to be, he must needs be the author of it:
That we deny, we say he did not will the infusion of any sinful habit, nor the
doing of any sinful act, only that it should be done; and you heard before, the
Scripture speaks plainly enough in this case, That the Counsel of God had
determined that should be done, which was done against Christ by Herod, Pontius
Pilate, and the Jews.

2. My second proof shall be from the actual Providence of God, extending to
all motions and actions. The Scripture is full of expressions, proving this, In
him we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17. My Father works hitherto, and
I work, John 5.17. My Text says, He works all things. The actual Providence
of God is a certain Servant to the Eternal Will, Purpose, and Counsel of God.
It does but execute the eternal thoughts and decrees. Look as every rational
agent first thinks, deliberateth, and determines with himself what to do,
and then his hands are employed to execute his purposes and deliberations: so
God being the highest rational Agent, does nothing in time, which did not meet
with an eternal thought, nothing but what he had from eternity resolved, and
determined should be done. First, the Counsel of his Will passed upon the thing
that it should be, then his Providence brings it about, though in a different
manner suited to the purity and holiness of God: for God cannot be the author
of sin. The Providence of God therefore, as to actions that are evil, only
permits the filth and obliquity of them, though it further concurreth to the
motion, or action, as it is natural (for so it has a goodness in it). As the
Writing-master guides the childs-hand in the Writing of its Letters, but
guides it not to make blots, or any crooked or irregular strokes; though it is
true of him also, that if he pleased, he could hold the child's hand so steady,
and so far influence it, that it should not make an irregular stroke. The Jews
spit upon our Saviors face, they nailed him to the Cross; if God by his
Providence had not assisted their natural faculties to these actions, so far as
they were natural, merely natural, they could not have spoke or spit, nor moved
an hand to lift up a crown of Thorns to his head, nor to have driven a nail
into his flesh. God did concur to uphold their natural strength to their
natural action: but now, That they spoke bad words, rather than good, to, and
of our blessed Lord; that they used their natural power to spit, (to the use of
which God by his Providence concurred, rather to spit) upon Christ's face than
upon the ground, and their strength rather to drive a nail into Christ's flesh
than into the bare wood, and to work in their honest and lawful occupation;
this was from the lust of their own hearts. Their sin was not in spitting or
speaking, or driving a nail, but in spitting on Christ's face, in speaking evil,
and blasphemously of Christ, in piercing his flesh with their nails: This God
had nothing further to do with, than to permit; for the just punishment of
their former sin, and for the further working out of his own Glory in the
salvation of those for whom Christ dyed. In the mean time the Providence of God
had its place about their sinful actions, though not causing, or any way
effecting them, yet permitting, and not hindering the doing of them, in
assisting to the actions so far as they were natural. And this motion of Divine
Providence, (which is but a servant to the Divine Counsel), does certainly
conclude such a Divine Counsel, according to the nature of the operation of
Providence. And this is enough to establish the Proposition.

This Proposition in the first place shows us the Vanity of those who dream
of an incertainty in the effects of Divine Providence: with reference to us
there is a great incertainty, know not what a day will bring forth; but in it
self there is none, there is nothing but has met with an eternal thought. The
truth is, a certainty of Divine knowledge does necessarily infer a certainty of
events; for God could not have a certain knowledge from eternity of such things,
as in themselves were uncertain, whether they should be or no. Vorstius grants
that God is omniscient; but he expounds it thus, that he does, Omnia scibilia
exactissime scire quo quidem modo ipsa scibilia sunt; Vorstius de Deo, in Not.
ad Disp. 5. p. 268.
That God knows all that could be known, in that manner that they were to be
known: so then it seems there were some things that could not be known by him
who calls the things that are not as if they were. I wonder what these things
should be? he will tell you, Those things which depend upon the liberty of man's
will. So then here is another first cause and mover set up, and God knows
nothing of the effects and motions of that, till they discover themselves in
action. And I beseech you, consider how great a part of the Divine Knowledge
this takes away. God according to this Doctrine could not from eternity
certainly know any thing that depended upon the will of man, so that it leaves
God no certain knowledge, but of things in their own nature necessary, which is
a strange notion of God, yet necessary to be held by all those who are the
Advocates of free will, otherwise than as freedom is opposed to force and
coaction: for if man has a power to believe, or not to believe, God could not
from eternity certainly know that man should believe, because he might not
believe. I cannot understand how this assertion of the necessity of events, in
regard of the Counsel of God concernig them, should (as they say) take away the
Providence of God: for what do they mean by Providence, but Gods continual
inspection of created Beings; his continual influence upon them to preserve and
uphold their beings and faculties, and to govern their actions. Now supposing
that God has determined all Events, why he should not yet inspect all Agents,
and uphold their powers and faculties to those actions, which he has willed to
permit or effect, in order to the production of such effects and ends, and to
govern all their motions and actions in order to that end, I cannot tell. Do
they contend for a liberty for God to alter the series and course in which his
will has set all things? This indeed were reasonable for foolish man, whose
second thoughts use to be best; and whom succession of time teaches knowledge;
but not for God, whose will never moved, but circumstanced with that infinite
wisdom, that required not a second thought, and whose name is I am, and his
will as immutable as his essence. But I hasten to something from this Doctrine,
which shall be more practical.

This notion of the certainty of events from an eternal purpose of God, for the
quiet, stay, comfort and satisfaction of religious souls, under the ungrateful
contingencies of this life; whether caused from the immediate hand of God, or
from the malice and wickedness of men. There is nothing which comes so to
pass, but there first passed upon it the Counsel of the Divine Will: Then, a
working of Divine Providence, either effecting, or permitting it, immediately
influencing the Agent, if it be good; permitting the oblique motions of man's
will to it, and in it, his lusts and passions in their boisterous motions, if
the thing be evil. We are creatures who are full of passions, exceedingly
subject to the exorbitancies, and over-boylings of them. In reference to evil,
that is, things that are not pleasing to our external senses, there are two or
three passions, which give us most, or all of the trouble of our lives. Fear,
that torments us upon the prospect of some great evil probable, or likely to
fall upon us. Grief, that drowneth us upon the overflowing of some Divine
scourge upon our persons, families, or interests in the world. Anger, that
corrodes, and consumes us, because we cannot be revenged upon such as have been
the instruments of any evil to us.

In the operations of all these, our corrupt nature is very prone to
exorbitancy. Now under all accidents, apt to elicite, irritate, or inflame
these passions, and so to disorder, and to spoil the quiet and composure of our
minds, it should mightily stay us, that nothing is casual or contingent to God;
nothing comes to pass in time, but what he has from all eternity determined,
and set in order: man has done, can do no more, than what God has purposed,
nor suffer more than what he has fixed by the eternal counsel of his will.
There are two necessary consequents of this eternal Predestination, and
Predestination of God, which if duly weighed, will wonderfully relieve, and
stay the hearts of Gods People under the troublesome accidents and contingencies
of this life.

1. That although the Will and Counsel of God puts no force upon rational
agents, nor offers any violence to humane will, yet it lays a necessity upon
the event. This is what a Generation in the world will not understand, but
nothing can be plainer to any who have ears to hear, or a mind to understand.
Gods Counsel (as you heard) predetermined the death of Jesus Christ: the
Scripture plainly says, That Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Jews, did no more
than what the Counsel of God had determined to be done, Act. 4.28. I would fain
know now, whether (as to the event) it had been possible that Pontius Pilate
should not have condemned, or the Jews should not have crucified Christ; Who
has resisted his will at any time? Yet certainly none will say, but as to the
action Judas was not forced to betray him, nor Pilate to condemn him; they
acted freely as to their action, although the event was necessary. Gods Counsel
influenced the event, but not their wills to move them to the action. But I
say, the necessity of the event, though it does not justify the Agent, nor
authorize the Act; yet it is of wonderful use to satisfy such, as suffer under
such events; and that upon a double account.

1. As it lets us know, That all our trouble and solicitude, all our fears,
griefs, all our suspicions, jealousies, and condemnings of our selves, for any
omissions, or neglects of means are in vain, and to no purpose. The thing must,
or will be, it must, or would have been; God had determined it, there was an
eternal Counsel had passed upon it. We are very prone upon sad events, to
torture our selves with such reflections as these; If this or that thing had not
been done, if this or that means had not been used, this thing had not been,
such a friend had not dyed, such a mischief had not befallen me. Lord! (says
Martha, John 11.21.) if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed. We are
wonderfully mistaken in these things: It is true, that our knowledge that events
are certain, is no justification of us in the neglect of the use of any means
in order to the obtaining any good we desire, or preventing or removing of any
evil upon us, or imminent over us: and the reason is plain, 1. Because though
the event be certain, yet we are not assured of it: and as to duty, the case is
the same of things which are not, and which appear not to us. 2. Because that
God, who has willed us any good, or the preventing or removing of any evil,
has willed both the one, and the other to be obtained, in the use of such
means, as either in a natural way of working, or upon the evidence of reason,
or direction of Scripture, appear proper for the obtaining it. And 3. It is the
Command of God we should use means. But supposing no means neglected, the
Predetermination of God ought to satisfy us, though we miss of some good,
which we passionately desired, or suffer under the pressure of some evil, which
we passionately desired a deliverance from, and used all means in our power to
be freed of: it should also quiet us as to any fears that are immoderate, and
distracting our minds concerning any evil likely to befall us, or any who relate
to us, when we have it in prospect, and see it hanging over our heads. It may
also be of great use to still our spirits concerning means, less successfully,
and ineffectually used to prevent such evils; yet, as I said before, and for
the reasons I before mentioned, we must take heed of thinking that this
certainty of the event, from the Divine Prescience and Will, gives us any
thing of a supersedeas, as to the use of any proper means, which we are equally
obliged to use, as if the event had been uncertain and casual, and might as
well not have been, as been.

2. But there is more yet in this notion, to satisfy every good Christian; for
if all events (how ungrateful soever to us) are according to the eternal
purpose of God, and the Counsel of the Divine Will, 1. They necessarily must be
good. 2. The products of infinite wisdom. 3. And of infinite love, and goodness
to such, as love and fear God.

1. I say they necessarily must be good. I mean this of such as God has willed
to effect, not such events as God has only willed to permit. But of the first
sort are all evils of punishment. It is not beneath God to be the Author of his
own Judgments: Evils of affliction are only nominally, and nuncupatively evil,
and called so according to the language and apprehension of our sense.

2. They must needs be the products of infinite wisdom. The Psalmist speaking
of the works of God, says, In wisdom has he made them all. It is true of Gods
Counsels, in infinite wisdom God has established them all; so as all events
are fixed in the best order imaginable, for the glorifying of God, which is the
highest end any action can be levelled and directed to. It is the highest end
which God could act for; because he could work for no higher, he has wrought,
and still works for himself: it is the highest end that we can act for, and
that to which as we ought to direct all our actions, so we also ought to submit
all our passions. The sum of all our Prayers is, or should be, Let the Lord be
glorified: If God be glorified, every good man has his highest wish, his
utmost design, and desire. Now if all events were from eternity set in order,
and predetermined by a Counsel of the Divine Will; they must be ordered to the
Glory of God, because they are ordered by and in infinite wisdom, which always
directs the best means, in order to the best end. God could not be deceived
in his contrivement, and proportioning of means, in order to his own ends.
Although therefore we may, and ought to mourn, and be afflicted, for many
things which we see done under the Sun; because they are brought to pass by the
lusts, malice, and wickedness of men; by their sinful corruptions and passions,
by which God is highly dishonored, and it may be we cannot understand what
honor God can have from the event it self; yet we ought at last to recollect
our selves, and get victory over our passions, and to say, Was not the hand of
God in this thing? Was this a slip of the eternal Counsel, or was it a product
of it? Surely nothing slipped the Divine notice; whatever happens, was ordered by
him, who was infinitely wise in Counsel, who could order nothing but in
infinite wisdom, and in subserviency to the great end of his actions, the Glory
of his Name. Every good Christian therefore ought at last to satisfy himself
as to what he sees before him in the world, and to say, Let come what will of
me, and mine, or of a thousand others little concerns, I am frustrated of my
expectations and desires; I thought God might have been more glorified my way,
I see I was mistaken. God cannot be frustrated of his ends, nor be deceived as
to means proper for the compassing of them. This thing came not to pass without
the eternal Counsel of the Divine Will. God is true to his own end; he would
never have decreed to have permitted it, nor have permitted it actually, if he
had not known how to have compassed his Glory by, and from it, when done:
Surely, the wrath of man shall praise him. I cannot see the Wisdom of God in
it, but there is an infinite wisdom in it; and when the Lords work is finished,
I shall then see it, and be able to understand what I now do not. I cannot look
to see the bottom of Divine Wisdom.

3. But this is not all: supposing this, All events and accidents must to those
who love and fear God, be not only the products of infinite wisdom, with
respect to Gods glory, which is the highest end, but with respect also to their
good; and this not only in regard of the Promise, That all things shall work
together for the good of them that love God; but also of his fatherly relation
unto them, All things are theirs, because they are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.
God has said concerning them, that with an everlasting love he has loved
them; and having done so, all his eternal counsels, all the motions of his
Providence, must be ordered to the Demonstration of it; and this every Child of
God shall first or last see. It falls out with us, as with an ignorant
person, which goes into a Limners Shop; he sees there a rude and imperfect
draught of a picture, and thinks that it looks ugly; but he sees not the
Idea of the intended draught in the Limners fancy, and has not patience to
wait, until he has finished his work, which if he had, he would then see it a
very beautiful piece. Thus many of us looking upon Gods Works before they be
finished, we pass an ill judgment upon them. But could we but see the Platform
or Idea of them in the eternal Counsel of the Divine Will, or stay with
patience till the Providence of God had finished his work, we should then
apprehend it beautiful, and very agreeable to the Glory, Wisdom, Mercy, Truth,
and Goodness of that God, which it is produced to demonstrate to the world; and
that we cannot see this before, is our weakness and imperfection. The malice of
men in the persecutions of Gods People, looks upon us with an horrid aspect:
these indeed God does not effect, but he has willed they should be, and has
told us, they must come, yea, and he works too permitting others to bring
them about, and suffering them in the execution of their malice, whom he could
easily hinder: but when these things are over, we often see both infinite
wisdom and goodness too in them. How should the salvation of Sinners have been
purchased, if God had not permitted Judas to have betrayed his Master, Pilate
to have condemned him, and the Jews to have nailed him to the Cross? had it not
been for the persecution of the Jews, how should the Gospel have gone to the
Gentiles? But yet for a close of this discourse, and that we may not mistake
our Duty, we ought not to be so far satisfied upon the Contemplation of this
great truth; but that,

1. We must be piously affected with the sad Providence which God measures
out to his Church and People. What says the Psalmist, If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. The sad rebukes of Gods
Providence ought by us to be laid to heart. Though persecutions and other
punishments be contrivances of infinite wisdom, and products of certain and
infinite love; yet to the present sufferers, they may be punishments of sin,
and marks of Divine displeasure, and therefore ought not to pass over our
heads, without our taking some notice of them, and the causing of some sad
thoughts within us: the crucifying of Christ was the product of infinite wisdom
and goodness to the People of God, but yet a just cause of sadness to the
Disciples of Christ. We must take things as they appear to us, being not able
to see to the end and bottom of Gods designs. That they shall at last issue in
the Glory of God, and the good of his People, is indeed matter of faith, and
will be matter of joy to us, when we see it; but in the mean time it is matter
of sadness to us, to see Gods Vineyard rooted up, his People eaten up like
bread, and wicked men suffered to devour those that are more righteous than
themselves.

2. Again, We have reason to be afflicted both for our own sins, and the sins
of others. Although it be as to the event true, that both our own and others
sins shall issue in Gods Glory; yet it is as true, that God has no need either
of ours or any others lies for his Glory, and that God is both by our sins, and
the sins of others actually dishonored. That they are made to issue in Gods
Glory, is the product of Gods Wisdom, not our oblique and irregular action or
intention, and therefore they ought to be causes of sad reflection to us. But
thus far we may satisfy our selves, 1. That (as I said before) the event was
necessary, and nothing that has come to pass, could, with our utmost care and
diligence, have been otherwise than it is. We may talk after the manner of men,
and reason after the measures of humane probabilities: If such a thing had not
been, another had not followed; but there is nothing issued in time, but was
ordered from all eternity. 2. We ought again in this to be satisfied, That of
whatsoever the Lord has promised, nothing shall fail. We are full of unbelief,
and when we see Gods Providence working (as we judge) directly contrary to what
he has promised, we are presently giving up all for gone and lost; but if
every thing be wrought according to the Counsel of the Divine Will, and the
Holy Scriptures be such part of this will, as he has pleased to reveal to us,
God knows both what he has said, and how he has laid things in his eternal
thoughts, and sooner shall Heaven and Earth pass away, than any word he has
spoke: Prove. 19.21. Isa. 40.8.
The counsel of the Lord shall stand: and the word of our God shall stand for
ever.

3. And lastly, As I have before told you, we may be thus far satisfied, That
whatsoever does, or ever shall come to pass in the world, shall serve Gods
great ends; because it is ordered by the Counsel of the infinitely wise God,
and therefore must necessarily serve his designs. In the end of the world we
shall say, God could not have had so much Glory, but for such a persecution,
such a disorder. Surely the wrath of man shall praise him.

SERMON II.
Heb. XI. 3. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the
Word of God: so that things which are seen, were not made of things which do
appear.
THE last time I showed you, That God has from eternity settled all events by
an eternal purpose, according to the Counsel of his Will; nothing comes to
pass in time, but what was determined before time. I told you my design was to
discourse concerning Gods Acts of Providence, which are acts in time; and
particularly to discourse some things relating to actual Providence, which do
not fall into ordinary discourse, and often give occasion of trouble to the
spirits of Christians: but in order to that, I thought it reasonable, First, to
discourse a little of Gods Settlement of all futurities (things which were to
be fulfilled in their season), by an act of his eternal Counsel. Nor can I yet
come fairly at my intended subject, without speaking to Gods first Act in time
(that was Creation); concerning which we must suppose a Decree of God,
according to that known Rule in Divinity, Decretum Dei, and ejus executio
exquisitissime convenient; nihil est in Dei opere, quod non fuit in decreto,
and nihil fuit in decreto quod non sequitur in opere. That is, the Decree of
God, and the execution of that Decree, most exquisitely agree: God works
nothing but what he first decreed, and he decreed nothing but has had, or
shall have its issue in his working: and when we say God does any thing, we by
it do understand no more than a new effect of his eternal Will. According
therefore to the Counsel of his Will, God first made of nothing, the world, and
all that is therein. And indeed, according to some notion of Providence amongst
Divines, this is a part of it. Now for a foundation of a short Discourse upon
this subject, I have chosen this Text.

The Apostle subjoyneth the words of my Text, to a description of Faith, which
he had given, verse. 1. Where he had told us, That faith is the substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. In the second verse he had
told us, That by this the Elders had obtained a good report. Here he says, By
faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the Word of God, etc. In the
Text you have,

1. A Divine assertion. The worlds were framed by God: things which are seen,
were not made of things which do appear. You have the work of Creation
described in its Causes: Negatively, the world did not make it self, one part
of it did not make another; then Positively, it was framed by God; (...), is
the word used.

2. You have the way described, how we come to comprehend this in our
understanding: By faith. The Proposition of the Text is this:

Prop. That by faith we understand that the worlds were framed by God: and the
things which are seen, were not made by those things which do appear. Here are
two things:

1. The worlds were framed by the Word of God: the things seen, were not made
of those things which do appear.

2. We understand this, Through faith.

In the opening of these I must enquire,

1. What is here meant by the Worlds? (...).

2 What is the meaning of this, That the worlds were made by the Word of God.

3. What is the meaning of this? That the things which are seen, are not made
of those things which do appear.

4. What is here meant by faith, or through faith?

5. How do we understand it by faith, that the worlds were framed by God? After
this, I shall come to the Application.

Quest. 1. What is here meant by the Worlds?

The word here used [(...)] does often signify an age, sometimes (and so
generally in St. John's Gospel, Eternity), but is sometimes in Scripture
translated, World, Matthew. 12.32. The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, (...). So Matthew.
13.32, 39, 40, 49. The harvest is the end of the world, Heb. 1.2. By whom he
made (...), the worlds. The term properly signifies, The duration of the
world; but in Heb. 1.2. and here it must signify the Mass, the things of it.
It carries here its own Interpreter with it in the other part of the Text,
(...), The things which are seen; but neither is that term adequate to it: the
object of Creation is larger than the objects of Sense; Spirits are not seen,
but yet they are created. Let Moses expound it, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God
created the heaven and earth. In short, all the Creatures, whatsoever is not
the Creator, must here fall under the notion of (...), the world, and all that
is therein (excepting him who as the Creator made all, and fills heaven and
earth), the world, and the things thereof: the world, and the persons therein;
heaven and earth, the world of things, and the world of persons: this world was
made, (...).

1. The word in the Greek signifies, to make, to joint, or fit together, to
restore: it signifies, to make, or rather to make up (according to our English
Idiom), to perfect. It is used Matthew. 21.16. Thou have perfected praise: we
translate it perfect, or perfected, Luke 6.40. And be you perfect, 2 Cor.
13.11. 1 These. 3.10. That we might perfect that which is lacking in your faith,
Heb. 10.5. A body have thou prepared [or made me]. So Heb. 13.21. The world was
made, established, made perfect by God: Vt totum quidpiam quod suis omnibus
partibus apt inter se cohaerentibus componitur: The worlds gave not a being to
themselves, they were not eternal, and of an original from themselves, nor made
of any casual concurrence of Atoms, according to the Heathens Philosophy; but
they had their Original, their perfection, their establishment from God.

2. The word signifies to be made perfect, to joint; to be put together. The
world is a beautiful composition, it has not only a Being, but a beautiful
Being, all the parts of it being fitted and joynted together; this is also from
God: it owes not only its Being and Original unto God, but whatsoever it has
of Beauty and Ornaments; that one part of it is fitted to another, the
beautiful composition of it, the subordination of the parts of it one to
another, all this is owing unto God. This is part of the sense of it, 1 Cor.
1.10. That you may be perfectly joined together. Whosoever looks upon the
Creation wistly, must see it consist of a great variety of things; but all
fitted together, so as there is no discord, but a beautiful subordination of
things in that vast composition: so as they serve one another, and
notwithstanding all their different affections and qualities; yet they destroy
not, nor invade each other: this also is from the Lord. The world was not only
by God made, and produced out of a not-being, into a being; but it was fitted,
ordered, joynted together by God.

3. The word signifies also to restore, and bring again into order, what is
disordered; and so it is used sometimes to mend nets: Rem lacer am aliquam
resarcire and collapsam reparare. And this seems to be the primary and most
proper signification of the word. Thus it is translated, restore, Gal. 6.1. If
a brother be fallen, restore such a one. A Metaphor, say some, taken from
Chyrurgions, putting a bone out of order into its place again. The world at
first made, perfected, established, and joynted by God, in the Fall of Adam was
disordered, and put out of joint: God by sending his Son, put the world in
joint again; set its broken bones, created a new heaven, and a new earth. Thus
also the worlds were made, as it were made again, and restored by God. But I
take the two former senses rather to agree to this place; where the Apostle
rather speaks of the first Creation of the world by God, than of the Redemption
of it by Jesus Christ. The world then was made, that is, it had its first
Original, its Order, Ornaments, beautiful composure, from a Divine creating
Power; it did not give a Being, nor a Beauty and Perfection to it self. The
Verb is passive, it had its Original from another, and this other was he whom
we call God. But,

Quest. 2. What is the meaning of this, that the worlds were made by the Word
of God?

None can understand here by the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures, which are
called the Word, that is, the revealed will of God, spoken by holy men, as they
were inspired by God. Nor do I think that the same is meant here by the Word of
God, that is understood, John 1.1. In the beginning was the word: of that word
it is said, That it was with God in the beginning: that it was God; all things
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made: that is
to be understood of Christ. Of him our Apostle says, Heb. 1.2. By whom also he
made the worlds: but besides that, the Gospel of John seems to be the only
Scripture in which the second person in the Trinity is styled the Word; neither
is he there called the Word of God; it is there said, The word was God, and in
the beginning with God, but he is nowhere called the word of God. I choose
therefore rather to interpret it of that word of Power and Command which Moses
Genesis 1. tells us, God used in the making of the world, and the fitting and
joynting of it together. He said, Let there be light, and there was light, etc.
Thus the Worlds were made by the Word of God, so as the term is both exclusive
of any other instrumental cause in the Creation of the world, and expressive of
the true instrumentally efficient cause, which was the mighty, powerful,
commanding virtue of the Word of God. And this is enough for the explication of
this term. But,

Quest. 3. What is the meaning of this, that the things which are seen, are not
made of those things which do appear.

The Vulgar Latin Version reads, Vt ex invisibilibus visibilia fierent, that
visible things should be made of those which are invisible, by a transposition
of (...), as if it were not, (...), but (...); but our Copies are otherwise. If
by the invisible things be meant, those invisible things of God the Apostle
speaks of, Romans 1.20. His eternal power and godhead: So it is true, and the
sense much the same with what went before; but else it is as Beza says,
Perperam, immo false. Some would make the sense of the words this, That the
world was not made of those things which now do appear to us, and are the
objects of our senses; but of invisible principles and elements, which are not
now the objects of our senses. Others thus, That it was made according to an
invisible Platform and Idea (which was Plato's notion). Others say, That by
invisible things, or things which do not appear, is to be meant nothing; that
must be an invisible thing, and the world was not made of any pre-existent
matter; but it was created, that is, produced out of a mere and total not
being, into a being. Which sense, if we allow, the Apostle by it, as to the
Creation of the world, asserteth the Truth of God against the Heathen
Philosophers, who could not by reason comprehend how something (especially such
a something as the world is) should come out of nothing; and therefore grew
very vain in their imaginations, about the pre-existing matter of which the
world should be made. Estius and Calvin also take notice of a much differing
sense, as if (...), signified (...), and it were to be read thus, We by faith
understand that the worlds were made by the Word of God, that they might be the
looking-glasses of those things which do not appear. The thing indeed is true,
for the Apostle tells us, Romans 1.20. That the invisible things of God are
known by the things that are made: But I cannot agree it the sense of this
Text, not only for that (which Beza notes) that it is a very harsh
interpretation to interpret (...), by (...); but because (as Pareus observes)
it seems not to be any thing of the Apostle's design to express the end here,
why the World's were made by God. I do therefore take the Text to be a Divine
assertion of the Creation of the World, against the vain imaginations of the
Heathens; who either dreamed that it was eternal, or made of a casual concourse
of Atoms, or from some Idea's. It was, says the Apostle, made of nothing by
the Word of God, of nothing that does appear. And so I have done with the first
Member of the Proposition, That the worlds were framed by the Word of God: the
things which are seen, were not made of those things which do appear. I proceed
to the second.

Mem. 2. That we understand this by faith. Here I shall speak to two things: 1.
What is here meant by faith? 2. How do we by faith understand this?

Faith in Scripture sometimes signifies the object of faith, the Word of God.
Thus Gal. 1.23. He which persecuted us in times past, now preaches the faith
which he once destroyed. Thus you read of the hearing of faith, Gal. 3.2.
Received you the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith;
that is, of the Word of God, particularly the Gospel? sometimes it signifies
the act of faith, which as it respects the Proposition of the word for its
object, is a firm and steady assent, the agreement of the mind to the truth of
the Proposition; as it respects the person of the Mediator, is a resting,
relying, and recumbency upon him, which is what we call the justifying act of
faith: you may understand the term Faith in either sense. By the word of faith
revealing it, and by our souls acting faith, in agreeing and assenting to the
truth of that word; we understand that the world, heaven and earth, was at
first brought into being, fitted and joynted together by the powerful Word of
God, commanding the production of all those Beings which are in the world, and
that beauty and order in which we see them placed.

But secondly, How does the Apostle say we understand it by faith? May not this
be understood by Reason? if it may, what need Faith in the case? or why, or how
does the Apostle say, by faith we understand this? Wherein does Faith give us a
further knowledge of this, than Reason has given the Philosopher?

To which I answer; Undoubtedly reason has gone a great way, and may go a
great way to make men understand, that the world was made by God. That the
world was eternal, was indeed the opinion of a great Pagan Philosopher; but his
master Plato was of another mind, and he is said to have learned it from
Hesiod: and the most and wisest amongst the Heathens, acknowledged that the
world was at first by a Divine power produced out of a not-being into a being.
Nor indeed would their Reason allow them to judge otherwise; the infinite
motions (the measures of things in the world), their order and succession,
their alterations and corruptions duly considered, forbids reasonable souls,
with any consistency to themselves, to affirm the world to have had an eternal
existence. All motions must be in time, and have had a being; all successions
and corruptions of things plainly speak, that they had a beginning; if we had
no assistance in the proof of it from the word of faith.

2. The same Reason will agree that it gave not a first being to it self,
nothing is the efficient cause of it self: experience tells us, that it is not
in the power of a man to make the least hair of his head white or black, much
less to make an hair. Man is the noblest sublunary Creature, but cannot make
the meanest vegetable; all that his art can do, is but to counterfeit and
dissemble nature; if it be but as to a spire of grass, or to the meanest flower
of the field.

Now if it were not eternal: if it did not make it self: if one part of it did
not make another; it must be made by God. The worlds comprehending Angels and
Men, sensitive and vegetative creatures; these all having had a beginning, and
none of them being able to give being to another: we must in reason find out a
more powerful and excellent first being, that must give being to all the beings
in the world. This first being is that glorious infinite being, whom we call
God. In short, he that further considers the world in its structure and
composition, as one part is knit and united to another: he that considers the
multitude of the creatures, their magnitude; the great and excellent powers,
virtues, and qualities of some of them; the Symmetry of the several parts of
the world, their subordinations each to other; must needs in reason, and by the
force of that conclude, That the worlds were made by God.

So that the Apostle's words must not be understood exclusively; not as if we
could no way but by faith understand this: It may be understood by Reason; and
many that knew nothing of Faith, yet confessed it, and agreed it from the
evidence of their Reason. Yet is not Faith and Reason to be confounded: Reason
concludes from connate, natural principles; Faith from acquired, revealed
principles: neither evidence contradicts each other. We understand it by
reason more darkly, confusedly, imperfectly, faintly; by faith we understand it
more clearly, distinctly, more perfectly, and fixedly. By Reason we understand
a little thereof: by the Revelation of faith we understand it fully. Let me a
little further open this to you in three or four particulars.

1. Reason rather shows us, that the world, then, that the worlds are made by
Gods. It rather evidenceth to us the Creation of sublunary things, which are
subject to our senses, whose natures and accidents we understand; than of those
things which are above the air. Reason will evidence to us, that the men of the
world, the beasts and plants are made by God; but we see the wits of the world
disputing whether there be any spirits or no: Reason lays hold upon the
alterations and corruptions of sensible beings, that have quantity, and
concludes their Original from their corruptibility; but when we come to speak
of those Beings, that have no quantity, but are merely spiritual, and not
subject to those changes and corruptions, Reason is at a loss in a great
measure: here Faith (Revelation which is the object of Faith) must help us.
That teaches us, the worlds were made by God: the world of invisibles, and
things not subjected to sense, as well as the world of sensibles. Reason will
help us to conclude God the Father of all flesh; but not that he is the Father
of all spirits, while it prompteth us to dispute whether there be any such
Beings as Spirits, yea or no. Reason would hardly have agreed such Beings as
Angels, if Revelation had not come in to make it a foundation to stand upon;
but by faith we understand it. Supposing the holy Scriptures to be the Word of
God, it is clear enough there; and we cannot agree to the Scriptures, but we
must agree to it; both that there are such Beings as Spirits (substances
without sensible matter), and that they were also made by God: being some of
those things in the Heavens, of which God was the Creator.

2. Supposing that Reason will tell us, That the worlds were made by God; yet
it will not tell us, That they were made by the Word of God. Reason (as I have
before hinted) will go a great way to persuade, even an Aristotelian, that the
World was not from eternity; but that it was made by a Divine omnipotent Being,
pre-existent to it: insomuch that some of Aristotle's Disciples in other things
here deserted him, and took themselves so much concerned for their masters
Reputation, as to dispute whether he ever meant it, yea or no. And the great
Philosopher himself, though he seems to have been fixed in his notion about
the worlds Eternity in many places: yet in some particular passages of his
writings, particularly in his Book De Generatione, seems to have wavered,
disputing which way God went to work in making of the world. And the fancies of
the great Philosophers ran very wild in this point: some will have it, that he
first made a Chaos, or heap of confused matter; and out of that heap all
particular things: as the Glass-man or Potter makes his Vessels; or the
Brick-maker makes his Brick and Tile: as if it had not been as easy by one
work for God to have made out of nothing, all particular things, as to have
made a Chaos out of nothing, that should in it potentially contain all the
species of particular Beings. Others would have that Heap or Mass, called the
Chaos, to have been eternal, out of which God produced all things: so it should
have been an improper Creation; not ex nihilo materiae, from a nothing of
pre-existent matter; but ex nihilo subjecti capacis, from a nothing of a
subject capable to receive such forms. But that God produced all things out of
a mere nothing, or not-being of matter; and by the word of his power gave a
being, not only to all particular forms of beings, but to all matter, and
particular beings; saying, Let there be light, and there was light: let there
be a firmament, and it was so. This is a thing Reason could never dream of,
never from any connate principles conclude it. This faith tells us, the Word of
God reveals to us: Reason could never discern, never conclude: though it
might conclude the thing, that the worlds were made by God; yet it could not
conclude the modus, or manner of the thing, how God should do it; or that he
did it by the word of his power. This we could not by reason comprehend or
understand.

3. Reason gives us a confused general notion, that the worlds were made by
God: but faith gives us a distinct account of particulars, the order, manner,
and method of them. Reason will tell us, the world could not be eternal, that
it could not give an Original to it self; that it must be produced by a more
noble and excellent being. But now for the circumstances of the Creation, the
order, the time, the manner, that the world was created in six days; that light
was first created, then the celestial bodies, and then the terrestrial, etc.
What was done the first day, what the second, what the third, etc. Reason tells
us not. Reason will tell us, that the first man was Gods Creation, for he could
not be eternal; he could not give being to himself, he must be produced by a
more excellent being: but that the woman should be made of the rib of man, That
man should be made according to the Image of God; That he was made the sixth
day, after the rest of Gods Works, and had a Dominion given him over them: This
Faith learns us, Reason tells us nothing of it.

4. Lastly, Reason creates in the soul, at best, but a faint assent to this
Proposition, That the worlds are made by God, and still leaves the mind under
uncertain fluctuations and doubts about it. By faith we understand, says the
Text; we are not properly said to understand those things, of which we have
only a general, confused, indistinct knowledge, and to which we only give an
uncertain languid assent. The great Philosopher in the world (as you have
heard) has doubted, whether the world were made at all, or had an eternal
existence. Others, whether it had not its Original from a casual concourse of
Atoms: infinitely vain have been unsanctified men's imaginations, as in other
things, so concerning the Original of the world; and optimus Philosophus (we
say) non nascitur. We are disputing still the most confessed conclusions, which
are no more than the structures of Reason. So that indeed we are beholden to
Faith, to the Revelation of the word (which is the object of Faith), and to the
habits of Grace (habits of faith), for the settlement of our minds in
Propositions of truth. It is but an auxiliary advantage as to Divine
Propositions, which Reason gives us; our mind is not set at rest, and settled
by them. A luxuriant wit and fancy makes all the persuasion and confirmation
of them from Reason very uncertain. Faith only brings the Soul to a rest about
them, and gives the soul a clear, distinct, certain notion, and understanding
of them. By Reason we rather think, and opine, than understand, and certainly
know, that the worlds were made by God. But this is enough for the Explication.
I come to the Application of the Doctrine.

This in the first place may help to confirm our Faith concerning the Divine
Being, the Unity of it, Trinity of persons in it: the worlds were made by God:
Then there must be a God, whose being was pre-existent to the world; and this
God must be infinite in Power, and in Wisdom. The producing of things out of a
not-being into a being, required an infinite power: the producing of such a
variety of Beings, many of which were furnished, and adorned with such
excellent perfections and qualities; the kniting and joynting of all together,
and putting them in such an excellent subjection, and subordination each to
other, required an infinite wisdom, a wisdom paramount to any created wisdom;
yea above all the wisdom of the Creatures, had all their wisdoms been united.
This being infinite in Power, and Wisdom, must be God: In the beginning God
created the heavens and the earth, Genesis 1.1. God alone spread out the heavens,
Job 9.8. He made the heavens, and the earth, the sea, and all that therein is.
Yea, thus the Lord proves himself to be God, I am the Lord, and there is none
other; forming the light, and making the darkness, verse. 7. And thus the true
and living God stands distinguished from Idols, Jer. 10.11. The Gods that
have not made the heavens and the earth: even they shall perish from the earth,
and from under these heavens: He has made the earth by his power, he has
established the world by his wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his
discretion. Thus the Apostle argues, Heb. 3.4. Every house is builded by some:
but he that made all things is God; yea, and this God is one. The uniformity of
this great structure, the beauty, and order, and subordination of all things in
it do abundantly prove this by Reason. But Faith yet more confirms it, Mal.
2.10. Have we not all one father? has not one God created us? Indeed (as I
before said,) the structure and fabric of it shows that one will willed it,
one wisdom contrived and directed it, and that one hand framed it. And this one
God is three persons, the Father of whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8.6. The Son,
by whom are all things; for without him was nothing made that is made, Joh.
1.3. By him he made the worlds, Heb. 1.3. The Holy Spirit, that moved at the
first upon the face of the waters, Genesis 1.1. Thou sendest forth thy spirit, and
they were created, Psalm. 104.30. Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has made me, and
the breath of the Almighty has given me life, (...). In the Hebrew, Gods
created. I think it is well said of a grave Author, Constans aliqua and certa
ratio pluralis numeri de Deo usurpati reddi alia nequit quam personarum
pluralitas. There can be no other steady certain reason given, why the Hebrew
word so ordinarily translated God, should be in the plural number, but to
notify to us the plurality of persons in the Divine Being: all three are but
that one God, who made heaven and the earth. The Schoolmen determine right,
that there is an infinite space from nothing to something; and therefore
nothing but the infinite power of an infinite God, could bring any thing out of
a not-being into a being.

From hence we may easily conclude what a God we serve: made heaven and earth,
and consequently one, who is, 1. Infinite in power. 2. Excellent in wisdom. 3.
Admirable in goodness and mercy. 1. Infinite in Power and Greatness. To produce
the least thing, and bring it out of a not-being into being (as I argued
before), speaks an unmeasurable infinite power: What power does it then
require, to produce all the various kinds and species of Creatures, the great
bodies of the Heavens and the Earth; and all those great bodies in them both,
out of a mere nothing, and not-being, into an existence and being? Ex
magnitudine creaturarum Deus magnus intelligitur, etc. From the greatness of
the Creatures, says Augustine, we may understand the greatness of God: What an
infinite and immense God do we serve? What nothings of being, and of power must
we be compared with him? All the nations of the earth are to him as the drop of
a bucket, as the small dust of the balance. 2. Excellent in wisdom. The
contrivance of the fabric and structure of the world speaks this: But what
an abundance of wisdom has the great Creator scattered up and down the
Creation? What a natural sagacity is, not in man only, but in many brute
Creatures? What abundance of moral prudence and discretion is observed, and to
be found in many earthly Princes? Their Ministers of State and Counselors, and
in others of an inferior order? What infinite wisdom appears in joynting the
world, and making the several parts of it to fit, and to serve one another, and
to compound the different qualities of creatures to the service each of other,
and of the Universe? Oh the infinite wisdom of the only wise God! yet how
little do we see of it? 3. Yea, and his infinite goodness also is apparent in
the Creation of all things. Whosoever looks upon the usefulness of the Creatures
to each other; their joint subserviency to their end, and particularly their
usefulness and subserviency to man, who has by the Law of Creation a Dominion
and Rule over all; must cry out, Who is like unto thee, O Lord? who is like
unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, working wonders?

We may from hence observe the vanity of those Philosophers of this world, who
would either make the world, Chaos, or heap of confused matter to have been so:
as also of those, who as to the Creation of the world, will have God at first
to have made such a confused Chaos or Mass, and then out of that to have made
all things. The Potter indeed must have such an heap of Clay, before he can
make his Pots of several sizes and fashions; but if he were to create this
Clay, certainly he would go the furthest way about; for by the same power that
he must first have to give being to his Clay, he might make his several sorts
and sizes of Vessels, and save himself that double labor. I conclude, by Faith
we understand that the worlds were made by the Power, or by the Word of God.
His Power was the efficient cause of it; his Goodness the final cause of its
Creation; his Wisdom the exemplary cause.

4. We may from hence learn, the usefulness, necessity and excellency of faith:
Faith taken for the object of it, Faith taken for the habit and act of it. The
Word of God, the habit of Faith, the exercise of it, they are all useful. We
have great magnifyings of Reason, and indeed Reason is a noble faculty: it is
that to the soul, which the eye is to the body, which light is to the eye; but
Faith is not useless, because Reason is useful; yea Reason must ride but in the
second Chariot: Reason would have taught us little of Spirits, indeed we by
Faith know little of them; but we know so much as God will please to reveal; we
had known much less, if left only to what conclusions we could have raised from
natural principles. Reason would have taught us nothing in particular, how, and
in what order, or in what time the world was made. Nay, 2ly, There is not an
use of Faith only, but a necessity of it. The Creation of the world is an
object of our Faith, and to be received upon the credit of the Word of God; we
must so assent to it, as by our assent to give an homage to Gods Authority in
revealing it: this we cannot do but by Faith. Finally, from this discourse
appears the Excellency of Faith; it makes us to understand, that the worlds
were framed by the Word of God; it puts our mind beyond doubts, and endless
disputes, and uncertain fluctuations; it leaves us not to the endless
inquiries of Philosophy, how these things could be, etc.

Lastly, how every inanimate and brute creature praises God, and how
infinitely all rational creatures are obliged to the service and obedience of
God. 1. How every inanimate and brute creature praises God: The heavens (says
the Psalmist) declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handiwork: Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night declares
knowledge: there is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard:
their line is gone out to the end of the earth, and their words to the end of
the world: In them has he set a tabernacle for the Sun, etc. Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3,
4. There is no Creature but gives a mute praise to God, they show the Lords
Glory, and praise him; as the picture finely drawn does praise the Limner, or
the building praises the Mason or Carpenter; as any great effect praises its
efficient cause. And this is a thing we ought to attend, and observe in our
Contemplation and use of the Creatures; we should view God in them: see how God
is glorified in their brave and useful structure and composition; Oh how sweet
a Contemplation would this be, if we could view the Glory, Power, Wisdom,
infinite Goodness of the Creator in them all! But secondly, How particularly is
man concerned, to praise, love, and serve God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth!
to man he has alone given Reason to make conclusions; to man has he given the
word of Faith; for man he has made all these things, and given him a Dominion
over the work of his hands. Now who planteth a vineyard (says the Apostle), 1
Cor. 9.7. and eats not of the fruit thereof? The world is a great Vineyard,
God has planted it, he has let it out to the Sons of men as his husbandmen;
Should he not eat of the fruit thereof? The inanimate Creatures, they declare
the glory of God: the Heavens declare his Glory, the Earth shows his
handiwork, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, carry the high Praises and Glory of
God to the utmost ends of the Earth. Do not you that are Fathers think your
Sons obliged to serve, and to honor you? Yet you were but partial causes of
their being; God did much more than you to their production. Does not the
Master think his servant is obliged to serve, and to honor him, because he
has made him, he has raised him up to some capacity of living in the world,
to some dignity? The Potter thinks that he may command the Pots which he has
made, and shall not man be the servant of the most high God, who made him, and
who made the world for him?

1. In Reason he ought to be so, he owes his being, his well-being, all that
he has, all the accommodations of his life unto God.

2. God expects it from him. Nulla necessitate coactus, (says Holy
Augustine) nulla sua cujusdam utilitatis indigentia permotus, sed sola bonitate
ac liberrima voluntate fecit Deus quicquid fecit. God was not compelled to make
the world, he needed it not, he made it merely of his own goodness, and for the
use of man. Can any one think that God does not expect homage and service from
man? And from hence three things must follow,

1. That the presumptuous sinner must necessarily be the most unnatural
creature; he serves not the end of his Creation. The grass was made for the
food of the beast, that serves its end, it grows, is cut down, etc. The beasts
serve their end, they were made for the use of man, for his food, his covering;
they dye daily, are clipped, shorn, flayed, and all for man, only the sinner
serves not his end. He was made for the Honor and Glory of God, he does
nothing less; yea his whole life is a dishonouring God, an abusing of his holy
name and things.

2. That this sinner is the most ungrateful creature in the world: he acts from
his will and choice, with the use of Reason. Now doing so, considering that not
only he is born in the Lords house, and is his Creation; but all the Creatures
upon which he lives, by the use of which his life is made sweet to him, are the
Lords, his Wheat, his Oil, his Wool, Silk, Flax, etc. This speaks him the
most ungrateful creature in the whole Creation.

3. Nay lastly, It speaks him the most self-condemned creature. If he would but
ask his own conscience, whose image and superscription he bears, it would
certainly reply unto him, God's: then certainly that of our Savior would
follow, Render therefore unto God, the things that are Gods; and in not doing
so, he cannot but be condemned by his own Conscience, whenever he will give it
liberty to speak freely to him.

SERMON III.
Psalm. XXXVI. 6. -- O Lord! thou preservest man and beast.
I Am now come to the Theme which I at first intended, viz. a discourse
concerning Divine Providence; to which my two former were, indeed, but
preliminary and introductory discourses. I shall not speak to Divine Providence
in that latitude in which sometimes Divines take it, as it comprehends the
Prescience of God; but shall restrain my discourse to what Divines call Actual
Providence: by which I understand the workings of God referring to the world as
created. We have already showed, 1. That there was an eternal purpose of God,
according to the counsel of his will, concerning all things. 2. That in pursuit
of this, he first made the worlds, all creatures both in heaven and earth. Now
the question is, Whether God, when he had made the worlds, left them to their
own order and government, either subjecting them to a mathematical fate, or
leaving them to their own inclinations, no further caring for them: or Whether
he does not exercise a daily care concerning them, in the preservation of their
beings, qualities, and faculties; and directing and governing their motions and
actions: we affirm the latter, viz. That as all things were made at first, per
essentiam creatricem, by the creating power of the Divine Being, producing them
out of a Not-being into a Being; so they are kept in Being and Order, per
ejusdem potentiam conservatricem, by the same power, preserving, upholding and
governing of them. This is a very large Theme, should I undertake it in the
full extent and compass of it; but I shall reduce whatsoever I shall say
concerning it to these Heads.

1. I shall speak something concerning the Nature and Principal acts of
Providence, as more generally respecting creatures. I shall therefore first
prove the thing, That there is such an act of God; and then discourse of the
two main acts of it.

2. In regard the motions of Providence are not all equal, I shall discourse
something concerning the specialties of it.

3. I shall shortly discourse of the depths, and unsearchable things of it.

4. Something I shall also speak (more largely) of our duty to observe it: and
some more special observable things in the motions of it.

5. Lastly, I shall speak something fully concerning the (...), or hard
Chapters of it. For what St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.16, says concerning Paul's
Epistles, the same may be applied to the workings of Divine Providence. There
are in them some things hard to be understood, which they who are unlearned,
and unstable, wrest, as they do other things, to their own destruction. The
profane and carnal hearts of men wrest them to their ruin: the jealous and
suspicious Christian to his own disquiet. My work will then be, to answer some
hard questions, solve some Phaenomena's, expound some hard Chapters; so as to
reconcile the motions of Providence to the eternal purpose, the faithful
promises, and the unchangeable loving kindness of God to his church and people.
This shall be the method of my discourse. First, Let me open the term, and then
establish the thing, That there is a providence. The word, Providence, is
derived from the Latin; and indeed strictly according to the Notation of the
word, signifies no more than a foresight of a thing that is to come; in which
notion Tully describes it.

This it may be gave some Divines advantage to extend the Notion of it to the
Divine Prescience. Per quam futurum aliquid videtur, antequam eveniat, Cicero
de Invent. (...).
But this Notation is too short to express the Notion of Providence as an act
of God, and indeed the Notation of it, both in the Hebrew and Greek, signifies
more than this. In the first a curious subtle search and care; in the second
more than a bare sight; such a one as is conjoined with care and minding the
thing seen.

Indeed we do not find the Noun Providence attributed to God in Scripture: we
find Tertullus, the Roman Orator, telling the Governor, That by his Providence
many worthy things had been done for the Jewish Nation, Act. 24.2. But I do not
remember the term Providence of God, applied to God any-where. But we are not
disputing for a word: the thing we find up and down. Can God provide flesh for
his people, Psalm. 78. v. 20. God having provided better things for us, (...),
Heb. 11.20. Job 38.41, Who provideth for the Raven his food, when his young
ones cry unto God. Our Savior, Matt. 6. argues from this act of God toward
the Birds and the Lillies, to dissuade his Disciples from a too eager
solicitude for the things of this life. There again is the thing plain enough,
though not the word Providence.

I hinted to you before, that some Divines use the term sometimes in a far
larger notion than I am speaking to it, as comprehensive of something of the
Divine Decrees, relating to all but rational beings: hence their distinction
betwixt the Decree of Predestination, and the Decree of Providence. The latter
they make the purpose of God to create the world, and to preserve and govern it
being created; and thus they make Creation a branch of Providence, (it was
indeed a working according to the Counsel of the Divine Will). But I meddle not
with the Decree, but shall limit my discourse to the work of Providence, which
I told you was Actual Providence.

In short, the term, Providence, in the Notion wherein I shall speak to it,
signifies, The daily influence of the Divine Being upon the whole Creation,
preserving and upholding the several Beings and faculties of all the creatures,
permitting, directing and governing their several motions and actions to the
great end of his own glory, and other ends of their creation subordinated to
this end. So I understand by it the work of God, which (as our Lord says) he
hitherto works, and his son works, contradistinct to the work of creation.
Creation was his work in the beginning of time: this his work in the process of
time, beginning when Creation ceased. That was the work of six days; this his
work ever since: That gave the creature its Being; this upholdeth and
continues that Being: both the works of an Almighty power, of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. For the works of the Trinity, with reference to the creature, are
not divided: what is the work of the Father, is also the work of the Son, and
the work of the Holy Ghost. So that when we assert a Divine Providence,
extensive to the whole Creation, this is that which we mean.

That as the blessed Trinity did at first by an Almighty power, bring the
worlds, both Heaven and Earth, and all creatures therein, out of a Not-being,
into a Being; so he does still, wisely and powerfully influence the whole
creation, preserving their Beings, and several faculties of all his creatures;
and so far directs, permits, and governs their actions, that they shall
answer the ends, for which he created, and so qualified them, especially the
great end of his glory. For (says Solomon) he made all things for himself; and
for him, as well as of him, are all things (says the Apostle). The Schoolmen
say, that Gods Being, is esse fixum, a fixed and unalterable Being, in which
there can be no variableness, no shadow of change: his name is, I AM, he is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever. But the creatures Being, is esse fluxum,
a mutable Being; we see changes and varieties every day, in their Beings, in
their Motions: the whole creation is but one great Sea, in a continual flux and
reflux. Now, as God by his Decree of Providence from eternity, determined these
successions, varieties and motions; so like a great King, mighty in Counsel,
and wonderful in working, he upholdeth them to them, and he governs them in
their effects. So that, as the former Doctrine of creation excluded the Pagan
conceits, either of the worlds eternity, or casual composition of it, and gave
God the glory of that his first and great work of creation: so this is opposed
to the Atheistical conceits of those, who would have the created world, to be
either a principle to it self, of its standing or preservation in the order it
is; or as a great Machine or Engine moving from some great wheels that move all
the rest, (which is said to be the Peripatetick Doctrine, and much suits our
Judicial Astrologers), or moving from any other first principle than the will,
command, or influence of God. This is a great point, giving God the glory of
His, and his Sons hitherto working.

We live in a generation when Atheism abounds, otherwise it were needless to
establish so great a principle. Aristotle thought he deserved to be answered
with a Gallows that denied it. Suffer me a little to confirm your faith in it,
by arguing it, 1. From the Creation. 2. From the Nature of the Divine Being. 3.
From the effects which are our daily objects of sense in the World. 4. From the
more sure word of Prophecy.

1. That the worlds were first made by God, I before showed you: Our eyes are
continually exercised in the view of a vast Theater (and it is but a little of
it that we behold). The Heavens (that are visible to us) are replenished with
great and vast bodies, the Sun, Moon, and Stars; in the Heavens are great
Clouds, containing vast quantities of water: The Earth is full of multitudes of
species, infinite individuals of all sorts; all endued with a variety of
contrary faculties, and qualities; so are the wide Seas. The Earth hangs in the
midst of the air. These things have lasted some thousands of years. The
inanimate creatures still keep their Stations. The Sun is not wearied, nor worn
out in its course, though it runs it with a strange swiftness every day. The
Moon is where, and as it was; the fixed Stars keep their abodes, and the
wandering Stars, yet go not out of their road. The Earth drops not down under
us, nor does the Sea invade the Earth; not a species of creatures is lost, from
the first Creation. Individuals indeed perish, but as one generation goes,
another comes: the species in competent numbers is preserved. The creatures
move and work in a subordination to the good each of others; the production and
being of no creature, antedates the being or production of another upon which
it lives. Those that renew their lives with the year, have their table spread
before they appear. The silkworms egg quickens not, but in proportion to the
budding of the Mulberry. Each creature knows its season, when to fly from
colder Countries, in which it could not endure the winter, into what is warmer.
Creatures have a care provided for them, while they are not able to provide for
themselves; which then, as naturally leaves them, as it before wrought for
them: The Be and Ant provide for the winter: in short, a thousand such
instincts and inclinations might be insisted on. Countries that have most
poisons, have most antidotes; few Countries have sufficiency for themselves,
but must be beholden to their neighbors. Take any one body, but especially
that of Man (who is a little world in himself); study but your selves, and
consider how many Vessels, how many limbs and instruments must daily be kept
clean and entire: How many humors, joints, and members, must be kept in order
to keep you alive, and in any degree of health and capacity to the operations
of humane life. I would now fain know whence all this is: Will any ascribe all
this to a fate, or order at first set? Suppose any would say so, he must needs
conceive an omnipotent Divine Being, at first setting the joints of the world
in such an order; and surely it were as easy for him to suppose the same being
upholding and preserving them in order; yea, and in acknowledging the former,
he must be forced to acknowledge the latter. We see a skilful workman making a
Clock or Watch, consisting of many wheels, and little instruments, that shall
have and keep their several motions 24, 48, hours; suppose it were two or three
months, suppose it were so many years; yet we see at last it must not only be
wound up, but by daily motion the wheels, and other parts (though made of
hardest metals) decay: How is it, that in so many thousand years the Sun,
Moon, and Stars are not worn, nor abated in their light? That by the daily
motions of man's body, his instruments of motion are not sooner worn out? (his
bones are not of Brass, nor his sinews of Iron); if they were, less than
seventy years would wear them out. Will any say things are not under a fate,
but are left to move at their pleasure? We know there are multitudes of natural
Agents, that move not upon election or counsel, but naturally and necessarily;
how come these influenced? For those that do move from Counsel, and have a Will
to guide them: Let but any consider what a confusion would presently be by the
wayward actions of Children and Servants in his own house, if they had nothing
but their own wills to guide and govern them: What an heap of confusions every
City or Town would make, if all inhabitants were left to their own wills and
government; and he will easily conceive what a place of ataxy, mischief and
disorder the world would be, if God did not daily work and rule in the midst
thereof. The infinite variety, with the different qualities of created Beings,
yet all conspiring together for the good and order of the whole; the order we
see amongst them; their subserviencies and subordinations each to other; they
all speak that there is a God, that by his Providence rules the world. Whosoever
lifts up his eyes to the Heavens, and considers the constant unwearied
motions of those great celestial bodies, with the evenness of them; so as they
are reducible to a science of all other most certain, liable to little more
exceptions, than an extraordinary command to the Sun to stand still in Gibeon,
and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon, or to go backward some few degrees, as in
Hezekiah's time; or considers the vast bodies of water sometime in the
Heavens, coming upon us, not as water from a pail, but through a water-pot;
must needs conclude a Superior hand, directing and guiding the motions, and
holding the thin Cloud that it is not rent; while the rain makes its orderly
passage by drops through the thin and subtle parts of it. Whosoever stands by the
Seaside, and observes that vast body of water, driven by fierce winds
sometimes, and constantly by its natural motion invading the Earth, as if it
would presently swallow it up; and observes it after the ceasing of the wind,
or a six hours progressive motion, gradually retreating, and leaving it out of
fear, yea, and further leaving a water-mark for the following flow, unless at
some certain times, before and after the full of the Moon, must needs
acknowledge a Supreme Being, setting bounds unto it, which it has no reason to
prescribe to it self; nor is it subject to the Command of the greatest
Potentate on Earth. Finally, he that stands upon the Earth, and considers its
annual productions; the variety of Creatures, of all orders in it, their
Sympathies, and Antipathies; their Successions, the varieties of their Beings,
Motions, and Qualities; and yet their mutual subserviencies to one another, and
subjection to each other; must be no less than a most absurd and brutish
Atheist, if he will not acknowledge, that no less than the daily and mighty
influence of an Almighty God could compound their living together upon the same
soil, in any harmonious agreement each with other. That every thing should know
its seasons, and keep its bounds, and be in subjection to man, weaker than many
of them; and not transgress its order or end (but when armed by God as a part
of his Host to revenge his quarrels upon sinners), must be from a knowledge
which God gives them, and a Law he daily puts upon them; but as the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 107.23. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do business in
great waters: these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep: For
he commands, and raises the stormy winds, which lift up the waves thereof:
they mount up to the heavens, they go down to the depths: their soul is melted,
because of trouble: the breaking of a wave would swallow them up. Who is he
that maintains the continuity of the parts of the water that the waves break
not, nor the water divides under the mighty weight that is upon it? who but
the mighty God could do it? In short, he seems to have taken a very cursory,
slight, and overly view of the Works of Creation, that does not see a plain
necessity of a Divine Providence, to uphold the various Beings within the
compass of it, and their various Qualities; to compound the disagreements of
their natures, into an harmony proportioned to the preservation of the
Universe. Whosoever is wise, and has observed these things, he must understand
both the Power and Wisdom of God in all these things, and consequently the
loving kindness of the Lord. I shall shut up this with that Pious foot of the
Psalmists Song of Providence, Psalm. 107. O that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness, for his wonderful works to the children of men!

2. If we consider the Nature of God, we shall find that he who acknowledges a
Divine Being, and denies a providential care of all created Beings, has but
set up an idol in his heart, and rather owneth a God with his tongue, than in
any truth and sincerity. For what do we mean by that term God, but an immense
Being filling all places, a first cause of all things; Almighty in power, of
infinite activity, wisdom, and goodness? We can hardly so much as fancy such a
Being, but by the same conception, we must establish a Divine Providence.

1. If we allow not God to be the first Cause, we must grant a former cause of
things; and this were to deny God, while we pretend to own him. It is as much
nonsense to assert one before the first, as one higher than the highest. But
how is God the first cause, if he has no influence upon second causes, nor
they any dependence upon him? If they say that second causes have a dependence
on him, and he an influence on them; they establish what we contend for, viz. a
Divine Providence.

2. If we allow God to be an immense and infinite being, filling all places: we
must either allow him to fill all places as an oculate active being, or as a
senseless inanimate being. A bulk of lead or stone fills a place, but takes no
notice of any thing in it: A man fills a place which circumscribeth him, but
sees and observes all things. It were an high blasphemy against God to
affirm, that he fills all places, only as a Log, or a bulk of Lead fills a
particular place: if he fills all places as an animate being, that has eyes
and ears, he must needs see and hear, and observe all things in all places
which his Being fills. Whosoever grants this, does in a great measure own and
acknowledge a Divine Providence.

3. But this Doctrine is fully confirmed to us, if we will but recognize God a
being of infinite mercy and goodness. God is not like the Ostrich, of which Job
says, 39.14. She leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust:
and forgets that the foot may crush them, or the wild beast may break them:
she is hardened against her young ones. It is our great vanity, that laboring
under a difficulty to conceive of any being above our own pitiful perfection
and capacity, we fancy to our selves strange Idea's of God. We can hardly
apprehend an immense being that should fill all places: if we could, we should
easily conclude a Divine Omniscience. If we can fancy any thing of that, yet we
are ready to conceive of him according to the lazy imperfections of our
natures; and think of God, as of some great and mighty Prince, that has either
through inactivity, or for greater state, mewed up himself in his Court, and
gives up himself, instead of his business of Government, to divertisements of
pleasure, leaving the care of Government upon his Counselors, or some
principal Ministers of State. Hence the mistake of the old Philosophers, of
Gods Providence extending not to all, but to some particular Beings, observed
to have a great influence upon sublunary Beings. And our Judicial Astrologers
seem to inherit, though not their wisdom in all other natural things; yet their
error in this: Astra regunt homines, sed regit astra Deus (is their Song). But
alas! this is but to set up an Idol in our hearts. And indeed, if we could
conceive any earthly Prince to be present in every place, we could hardly
imagine him so neglective of his Government. What Prince will not rule all
motions and actions which he sees and hears, to what he apprehends the
wisest and best ends for his own honor? So that if we could suppose an earthly
Prince in all places, where he has Children, Servants, or Subjects, and to
have his senses open, to see and hear them, he would certainly contribute his
best help to preserve and govern them. Especially if he be a person of ordinary
humanity, and goodness, and has a sufficiency of Power and Wisdom. Do not we
see how naturally the parent, to his finite capacity, cares for, preserves,
and governs the Child? How the Master of a Family cannot neglect a care for,
and government of his Family, till he has debauched himself to a beast? Nay,
do not the birds of the air, and beasts of the field naturally care for their
young seed, and govern them? Whence had they their natural propensions and
inclinations to this goodness toward those, to whom they have stood in any
order of causation? Was it not from the great Creator, who thus disposed them?
If it be a piece of goodness in the creature so to care for, preserve and
govern its fellow creature; certainly we must allow it to be so in God. What
goodness of this nature there is in the creature, flows from him, as the
stream from the fountain: And is certainly much more in him, he having lost
nothing by the Communication of the Creatures shares to them. So that whosoever
will acknowledge a Being that is infinitely good, must also acknowledge that
Being infinitely provident for the Creatures that derive from him: and every
creature thus deriving, God who wants neither Power nor Activity, must as
naturally care for them all, as a Father or Mother cares for every Child, and
a bird for every young one. And it is nothing but some men's Atheistical
conceptions, and others more imperfect notions of God, not considering the
Divine Being in the extent of his Immensity, Activity, Power, and Goodness,
which makes any so much as in the least to hesitate, as to the Doctrine of
Divine Providence.

3. Let us once more turn our eyes to the strange effects and events which we
see in the world: of which we see great variety, and many of them which appear
to us of great moment and consequence. Now supposing that there were not a
Divine Providence directing and governing them, and being the first cause to
them, they must either be the products of so many Machines or Engines, moving
necessarily; or of the imperate acts of some creatures endued with wisdom and
counsel. We shall find the effects in the world such as are impossible to be
products of any such nature.

1. Were they the products of the first, Man might have a previous knowledge of,
and not at any time be surprised by them.

2. Were they merely the products of the second, God himself could hardly be
conceived, to have a previous certain knowledge of them, so as by his Prophets
to give the world a warning.

1. I say first, Were the effects we see in the world necessary, depending upon
a certain fate, and moving in a certain order; What then hinders, but man
might have a certain previous knowledge of them things which work necessarily,
work certainly, and evenly? Thus indeed the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all
natural agents move: Every Almanackmaker therefore will tell you how many hours
the Sun will shine in a day, six, twelve months hence; when the Eclipses shall
be of either Luminary, and to what degrees they shall be obscured. But can they
also tell us when the next great Plague, the next Innundation, or Fire we shall
hear of shall be? or when, and where shall be the next great mutation in an
Empire, or a Kingdom? We see men (sometimes) infinitely surprised in the
product of second causes, so contrary to their expectation, and to what
appeared to us would have been their probable effect. If things had moved by a
Law of Fate, the world is now so old, that the course of its motions would have
been matter of science and demonstration to us; but alas there is nothing less.
Who can tell what to morrow will bring forth? not only as to his own particular
concerns, but the far greater, and more general concerns and interests of
mankind, and the Church of God in particular.

2. How then are they produced? Is it from the will of man? I ask whether from
the wills of men working necessarily, as the first and only principle of them;
or working freely, and at perfect liberty; the first surely none will assert
that considers what he says. If from the wills of men working freely, then
they might also work and move otherwise than they do. Then I say it is hard to
conceive, how God himself should have a certain knowledge of things, previous to
the event or effect; for there was no certainty of such an event or effect. But
that God has such a certain previous fore-knowledg, is evident from all the
Prophecies, where by his Prophets, he foretold things that were to come to pass
many hundreds of years after; and that with all their circumstances. The great
effects of created Beings must have some cause, I mean some first cause: If
this were Nature, or Fate, i. e. a necessary law imposed upon them; their
motions would be even, uniform, subjected to our art and fore-knowledg, which
they are not. If the first cause of them be the wills of men, working upon
choice, there could then have been no certainty of them before they had
existed; for they might as well not have been, as have been. If any say, but
though the wills of men move freely, yet he who calls the things that are
not, as if they were; he knew which way things should be, and how the wills of
men would move. This we most freely grant, but we also say, That he knew them,
because he willed either to effect, or to permit them; and that supposing this
Decree of Providence, there must also be a working of it, upholding created
Beings, conducting their effects, and many times overruling them: and this is
that which we call Providence.

4. In a further evidence of this, I might call in a plentiful Testimony, from
the most learned and wise amongst the Heathens. But I shall not much trouble my
self or you with that discourse; but refer those that desire to be satisfied
herein, to the excellent discourse of Du-Plessis Lord of Morney, in his Book of
the Trueness of Christian Religion, Chap. 13. where he shows Providence a
bundantly owned by Plato, Plotinus, Hierocles, Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, and
others. I shall therefore only add one passage of Seneca (not I think
particularly by him mentioned); it is in his Book of Natural Questions, Chap.
45. where he calls God, The keeper and governor of the whole world:
Custodem, rectoremque universi, animum and spiritum, mundani hujus operis
Dominum and artificem, cui nomen omne convenit. Vis illum fatum vocare? non
errabis. Hic est, ex quo suspensa sunt omnia, causa causarum. Vis illum
Providentiam dicere? recte dices. Est enim cujus consilio huic mundo
providetur, ut inconcussus eat, and actus suos explicet, Seneca Not. Qu. l. 2.
cap. 45.
a Mind, a Spirit, the Lord, and Artificer [or Creator] of all the world, he to
whom every name agrees. Will you call him Fate? you will not be out. For he it
is on whom all things depend. Will you call him Providence? you will say right;
for by his Counsel the world is provided, and taken care for that it remains
steady, and performs its operations.

Salvian upon this Argument tells us, that the Heathens acknowledged God to be
in the world, as the Master of a great Ship is in that, abiding always in it,
and stirring up and down: Whence he cries out, Quid potuerunt de affectu, and
diligentia Dei religiosius sentire? Salvian, l. 1.
What could they more religiously judge and speak of God, than to compare him to
the Governor of a Ship, who is never in the Ship idle, but continually at work
either in one kind or another? The Pythagoreans compared God to the Soul in the
body, filling each part, and actuating each part of the body. The Platonists
call him the moderator of all things. The Heathen Poets speak as well and
fully. Virgil tells us, God is continually moving throughout all the Earth,
Tractusque maris, coelumque profundum, and the Waters and the Heavens. In
short, none but some of the most sensual and brutish Epicureans, ever so much
as called this in question.

5. But hitherto I have been arguing this point with you as men, to convince
you of it if you were Heathens, and had no knowledge of the Holy Scripture. When
I consider you in that notion, I must say to you, as the Apostle speaks in
another case, We have a more sure word of prophecy. As we by faith understand
that the worlds were at first made by God: so by faith also we plentifully
understand, that the created worlds are upheld, preserved, protected, and
governed by God. I shall hereafter more distinctly prove this in my following
discourse, when I shall come to speak of the distinct and particular acts and
objects of this Divine Providence. I shall only here make use of a few, instead
of very many Scriptures which might be produced, Heb. 1.3. (...). Upholding all
things by the word of his power. He at first made all things by the word of his
Power, and he upholdeth all things by the word of his Power. My Text says, He
preserves both man and beast. Our Lord tells us, that he cloatheth the grass
of the field, and feeds the Ravens, Matthew. 6. The Psalmist tells us, that his
kingdom rules over all. And again, Matthew. 10.29, 30. Are not two sparrows sold
for a farthing? yet not one of them falls to the ground without the will of
your heavenly father. Acts 17.28. In him we live, move, and have our being.
Prove. 15.13. The eyes of the Lord are in all places, beholding the evil and the
good. John 5.17. My father works hitherto, and I work. In short, the places
of Scripture confirming this Doctrine of Divine Providence, are very many; and
will most of them fall under some part or other of my ensuing discourse,
referring to the particular objects and acts of Divine Providence. And I
therefore shall not in this place further enlarge upon them, but come next to
consider the extent, or particular objects of Divine Providence. I proceed
therefore to a second Question.

Quest. 2. What are the objects of Divine Providence? or how far does the
Divine care extend?

Though the Epicureans of old would acknowledge no Providence, and many of the
Stoics asserting a Fate, destroyed it; yet the wiser Peripateticks would grant
it, though but a limited one, extended to some particular Beings and things;
and too many amongst those who are called Christians, seem to inherit something
of their spirit. I remember that when Pharaoh saw Egypt almost destroyed, he
calls for Moses and Aaron, and bids them go and serve the Lord: but adds, Exodus
10.8, But who are they that shall go? When Moses replied, We will go with our
young, and with our old, with our sons, and with our daughters, with our
flocks, and with our herds will we go. He replyeth verse. 10. Let the Lord so
deal with me, as I let you go and your little ones. Thus many deal with God.
When they consider the vast bodies of the Creatures, the great varieties of
their beings, and qualities, their motions, etc. they are forced to acknowledge
a Divine Providence; That the world could not stand, nor the parts of it hold
together, unless a Superior hand ruled, upheld, and governed them: They
therefore will acknowledge a Providence, as to the great bodies of the Heavens,
etc. But say they, How far will you extend it? When they hear us assert it as
to all things, the sound of the little ones in nature, troubles them, yea, and
as to the wills of men, they are wonderfully disturbed. We must therefore
enquire what the Scripture says, which certainly cannot err, as to the bounds
and extent of Gods Providential care. The Scripture tells us, Heb. 4.13. That
all things are naked, and open before him with whom we have to do: That the
eyes of the Lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good, Prove.
15.3. My Text says, He preserves both man and beast. The Apostle to the
Hebrews says, He upholdeth all things by the word of his power. But to speak
more distinctly; we extend the Divine Providence, 1. To all Beings. 2. To all
motions and actions of Beings. 3. To all omissions, suspensions, or cessations
of action. 4. To all events of things.

1. First, I say, to all Beings. Beings are usually distinguished into such as
have no life, or such as have life. Or if you please we may make use of that
plain division of Beings into, 1. Such as have no more than a mere Being,
neither life, nor sense, nor reason. Such are the Heavens, the Earth, the
Waters. Or, 2. Such as have Being, and life, but no sense. Such are herbs and
plants. Or, 3. Such as have Being, and life, and sense. Such are Beasts, Birds,
Fishes, Insects, etc. Or Lastly, Such as have not only Being, life, sense, but
Reason also. Such are Angels and Men. I shall show you that Divine Providence
extends to all these.

1. To such things as have mere Beings. As to the Heavens, Extol God (says the
Psalmist), Psalm. 68.4.33, Who rides upon the Heavens. Gods riding upon the
Heaven signifies his influence upon them, and his Rule and Governance over
them. Our Savior tells us, That he makes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to
fall upon the just and unjust; yea, and God makes it a thing proper to him to
give rain: and the Scripture tells you of his giving it, and withholding it
at his pleasure, as in the days of Elijah. Job 9.7, God is said to be he who
commands the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up the stars. For the Earth,
he is said to hang it upon nothing; and certainly so great a weight would not
hold there long, if it were not held up.

2. For those things which have not a mere Being, but life also: they are the
herbs, and plants, and flowers. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle,
Psalm. 104.24. Psalm. 147.8, He makes the grass to grow on the mountains: He
cloatheth the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into
the Oven.

3. For those Beings which have life and sense. He feeds the fowls of the
air, Matt. 6.18. Not a sparrow falls to the ground without him: he called for
the flies and locusts, etc. against Pharaoh.

4. For the most perfect Beings, viz. such as have not only Being, life, sense,
but Reason also; These are either Angels or Men. Providence reaches to both of
these; it reaches to the good Angels: he commands all his Angels to worship
Christ; he makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flaming fire, Heb.
1.6, 7. and ministering Spirits for the good of his Elect. How frequently do you
read in Scripture of Gods government of his Angels, in sending them upon his
messages? For the Devils: the Old Testament tells you of his employing them
against Ahab; of his commissionating them against Job. And the New Testament
plentifully declares their subjection to the Son of God. For Men; the Scripture
speaks abundantly. My Text tells you, He preserves man and beast. In short,
there is hardly a leaf in Scripture but abundantly confirms this piece of
Divine Providence in one particular or other.

Secondly, I say, the Providence of God extends not only to all Beings, but
to all the Motions and Actions of Beings: upholding them to their motions,
governing all their actions. The grass grows not, the sparrow falls not,
the Lilly grows not, without our Father: he has made the Ordinances for the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, for the day and night. It is he that thundereth out
of Heaven, 1 Samuel 7.10. 2 Samuel 22.14. The Scripture everywhere asserteth the
influence of God upon the natural motions of all creatures; nor is it to be
excluded from the voluntary Actions, whether good or bad. As for good actions,
he moves to them, he assisteth in them. As to bad actions, he upholdeth as to
the natural action, but has nothing to do with the malice and wickedness of
it, but to govern it, when showed, to his own wise ends. The Scriptures are
infinite which might be produced in the proof of this. What can be plainer than
that of our Savior speaking of good actions, Joh. 15.3, Without me you can do
nothing: that of the Apostle, Phil. 4.13, I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me; and again, He gives to will and to do. For bad actions,
He suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16. And the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 76.10, Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; and the
remainder of wrath thou shall restrain.

Thirdly, The Providence of God extends to all omissions, cessations, or
suspensions of actions; yea, and to all irregularities of natural motions or
actions. It was from God that the fire did not naturally act to consume the
three children; nor the Lions to devour Daniel though in their Den; that the
Sun stood still in the Valley of Ajalon; that it went backward, as appeared by
the shadow upon the Dial of Ahaz: and so as to actions depending upon the will
of man, Genesis 20.6, God says to Abimelech, that he suffered him not to touch
Sarah; Jacob tells his Wife, Genesis 31.7, that God suffered not Laban to hurt
him. Multitudes of Scriptures might be produced in this case.

4. Lastly, The Providence of God extends to all events. Events are reducible
to two heads; they are either such as are good and grateful to us, or such as
are evil and afflictive. The hand of Providence is in both. There is no good
event but is from God; he is the fountain of good, the author of every good and
perfect gift: evil events are from him, Is there any evil in the City (says
God by Amos), and I have not done it? Afflictions spring not out of the dust
(says Job). But the holy Scripture is so full of proof of this, as I need not
give particular instances; especially considering that it has been recognized
by the children of God in Scripture, and is so by every one of us, so often as
we either praise God for any receipt of good, or deliverance from evil; or pray
unto him for the collation of any good thing, or prevention or removal of any
evil. Thus now I have confirmed the Doctrine of Divine Providence, and also
showed you the extent of it. I should now come to discourse of the particular
acts of it; but first let me make some application of this general discourse of
Providence, so far as I have carried it on.

In the first place, observe from hence, how unreasonably and Atheistically any
deny the Providence of God, and that in the extent of it: Atheistically, for it
is all one to deny a God, as to deny the Providence of God. If there be a God,
there must be an infinite Being filling all places: infinitely active, all eye,
all ear, all understanding, doing all that from his most perfect Essence, which
we do by the help of our senses, or any of our faculties. Now that God should
fill all places, see, hear, understand all things, motions, actions, events,
and not rule, and govern all to the wise ends of his own glory, having a power
so to do, is to fancy that of God, which cannot be presumed of a man like our
selves. Those therefore that deny Providence, must have deceived their souls
with some false idea's, and conceptions of God, and set up an idol in their
hearts, instead of the true and living God; Either a finite and limited Being,
not filling Heaven and Earth: or a dead, lazy, dull, careless inactive Being.
All which is indeed to blaspheme, to deny God instead of acknowledging him. 2.
As it is Atheistical, so it is most irrational. I have formerly discoursed
that, and therefore shall refer you to it. To fancy that the world could be
preserved or governed in that order in which we see it, without an infinite God
giving conduct to it, ordering it, and ruling it to his pleasure, is to fancy
that may be done casually in so vast a place as the whole world, which we see
cannot be in a little City or Family; than which nothing is more unreasonable.
3. Nor thirdly is any thing more contrary to the Scripture, for there is no one
proposition of truth, that has a more plentiful evidence of Scripture, than
this Doctrine of Providence has. I beseech you therefore to take heed of
suffering any such suggestion, any such thought, or imagination, to possess
your hearts: look upon it as a very great piece of Atheism to deny, or to
dispute it: besides that, as I shall show you by and by; There is no Doctrine
of greater use to settle and compose our Spirits under all the varieties of the
world, nor to keep us in a more holy, quiet, patient temper, and in a
dependency upon God under all accidents which occur to us, than this Doctrine
of Providence. Let this therefore be the first use and application of this
excellent Doctrine, to settle your hearts in this point, so consequential to a
just, and due notion, and a right apprehension of him who is the living and
true God.

In the second place, Beings, Motions, Actions, Events, etc. But take heed of
two things; 1. Of thinking that the Providence of God necessitates all motions,
and actions of voluntary Agents. Or, 2. That it gives any supersedeas to our
own endeavors, with reference to Events. Some Agents indeed act necessarily,
all but rational Agents do so; they have no reason, and consequently, no
counsel, deliberation or election. But reasonable creatures, such as men and
women are, have a Will, and act from it as from their principle: these the
Providence of God influenceth, but does not compel or necessitate. The
Providence of God influenceth a man to good actions, suggesting them to him,
moving him and inclining him unto them, but not enforcing him. As to evil
actions; the influence of Divine Providence is otherwise. God does not suggest,
not move, not incline the heart to them. It upholdeth the creature to the mere
natural action. 2. It suffers the sinner to vent the malice and wickedness of
his heart in the action. 3. It governs the action when done, to the wise end
of Gods glory. The influence of Providence neither necessitateth the child of
God to do good, nor the sinner to do that which is evil. This is one thing you
must warily understand.

Secondly, Take heed of thinking that the influence of Providence as to all
events, supersedeth any thing of lawful endeavors, in order, either to the
obtaining a good, or preventing a bad event or issue. The influence of Gods
Providence does by no means justify man's improvidence. There is a great deal
of reason for this, if we duly weigh it.

1. Providence is not our rule. We are to walk by the Precept, and to depend
upon Providence. So that whatsoever the word of God makes our duty to be done,
or used as a mean in order to the obtaining of any event, remains still our
duty, without respect to the influence which Providence has upon events.

2. Again, The Providence of God does ordinarily bring about events by our
endeavors as means. It is an extraordinary working of Providence, when it
brings about an event without humane means; it ordinarily brings them about
in, and by the use of means: hence it is that we cannot regularly depend upon
Divine Providence, without the use of proper means. So far is the influence of
Providence from superseding the use of means. Thus the Providence of God
neither destroys nature, nor discourageth industry.

In the third place, for the comfort and relief of the spirits of Gods people
under any of the afflictions of this life. The wheels of the world sometimes
run very cross, not only to the expectations of Gods people, but to their
sensible interests: I say, to their sensible and appearing interests, for
contrary to what is their true and real interest they cannot run. All things
shall work together for the good of them that love God. All things must be
theirs, for their good, profit and advantage. But Gods dispensations to them in
this life are sometimes very afflictive, very ungrateful to their sense. Now
what a relief is this to a child of God to be assured of this, to be rooted and
confirmed in this, That there is a Divine Providence extending it self to all
the motions and actions of creatures; To all the suspensions, omissions, and
cessations of creatures action. Hence follow diverse things, which may be of
great relief to us under our disquietudes.

1. That the omissions, suspensions, cessations of actions in means; yea, their
workings contrary to our expectation, are things ordered by Divine Providence.
It is wonderful how great an affliction this thing sometimes gives persons of
more thoughtful and reflexive tempers. We lose a friend, and fancy, if such or
such means had been used, or if such or such a thing had not been done, our
husband, child, wife, had not died: you know what Martha said to our Savior,
Joh. 11, Lord, if thou had been there, my brother had not died. But now
suppose this, that if such or such a thing had not been done, in a natural
course thy friend had lived: (for that is all thou can say), yet was not the
hand of God in it? had the Providence of God, think thou, no influence upon
the omission of such a means as was omitted, or the use of such things as thou
conceivest to have been pernicious? Does not a sparrow fall to the ground, and
is thy friend (think thou) fallen to the ground, without thy Father? thy
Father ordering the omission of such a mean as might have preserved his life,
or the use of such things as hastened their dissolution. God often hides from
us what shall be the proximate cause of our end, and so as to our friends. It
is true, if we have knowingly, and wilfully omitted or neglected probable
means, we have cause of some reflection; but yet even in that case, the
providence of God reaching to all events is some relief to us. In this sense it
is no blasphemy to say, God often deceives the Physician, and the sollicitous
friend; that is, suffers them to err under false apprehension. There is not
an omission but Providence has influenced, not a suspension, or cessation of
an usual action in a natural agent, nor a contrary operation of it, but the
Providence of God has influenced it. We, our friends, are of more worth than
many sparrows, and fall not to the ground but by the will of our heavenly
Eather; so as we do but torment and disquiet our selves in vain.

Secondly, If the Providence of God influenceth all events, and that too, by
effecting them, if not sinful; They must, as to the people of God, be good, and
for good, and the products both of infinite wisdom, and of infinite goodness.
It is our unhappiness, that we judge of events to us in this world by sense, and
not according to faith. This makes us call many things evil; indeed there is
nothing can happen to a good man truly evil: for the hand of his Father must be
in it. Providence must have the ordering of it, and never did the hand of a
good Father, knowingly mix a potion of poison to his child, and with his own
hand give it him to drink. We do not ask evil of God; and he that hears our
prayers, will not, when we ask him bread, give us a stone, nor when we ask him
a fish, give us a Scorpion. If we that are evil, know how to give good things
to those that ask them of us: much more does our heavenly Father, know how to
give good things to his children, asking them of him. In this we may be secure:
If the Providence of God influenceth all the events of the world, he so
regulates them, that although they may prove sensible, joyless, and afflictive
evils; yet they shall never prove real evils to those that fear God, but in the
issue appear the products, as of infinite wisdom, so also of infinite goodness.
Thus far this Doctrine of Divine Providence is a great fountain of consolation
to the people of God.

But lastly, Let us enquire what duty we may conclude from hence, and that is
very much. I shall instance in some few particulars.

1. Is there a Divine Providence? and does this influence all beings, motions,
actions, events, etc? Let us learn then the duty of faith, to commit all our
ways unto God, to trust in him, and depend upon him. It is a duty we are often
in Scripture called to, and that with respect to our persons, and with respect
to our affairs and ways, 1 Pet. 4.19, Wherefore let them that suffer according
to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls unto him, in well-doing
as unto a faithful Creator. Our Savior presses it in opposition to two things.

1. In opposition to the fear of man, Matt. 10.28, 29, 30, And fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Are not two sparrows
sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your
Father? But the very hairs of your head are numbered. Fear you not therefore,
for you are of more value than many sparrows.

2. Again, He presses it in opposition to too great solicitude, Matthew. 6.25.
Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or
what you shall drink, nor yet for your body, what you shall put on. This he
presses from Gods Providence, for the Lillies, the Birds, etc. verse. 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31.

2. With respect to our affairs, and the events of things in the world, so far
as they concern us. 1. Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares
for you. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, for he shall sustain you.
Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and do good. Verse. 5. Commit thy way unto the
Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Prove. 16.3. Commit thy
works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established. Man troubles
himself in vain, both with care and fear; the Child of God especially. We
cannot let God alone to rule and govern the world. But surely, if there be a
God in the world, an immense and infinite Being that fills all places, and
infinitely active, seeing and hearing all things; and this God is not idle, but
influenceth all beings, all motions and actions of beings, all suspensions,
omissions, and cessations of action in the creature, all events; and if he has
any Children, people, or servants in the world, whom he loves, delights in,
cares for; these people may trust him, and commit themselves and their ways to
him, and it is their duty so to do. Who may trust God? who may commit their
ways unto him, if these should not? Let me therefore say with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 115.9, 10, 11. O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: O house of Aaron, trust
in the Lord: you that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord. Be not over-solicitous,
be not sinfully afraid as to any events. There is a God that rules in the
earth, that overseeth the world. But this trusting in God must be,

1. In doing good: Trust in the Lord, and do good, Psalm. 37.3. Our souls must
be committed to the Lord in well-doing, 1 Pet. 4.19. There is no trusting in
the Lord, without walking in his way. The unholy walking man has no ground to
trust God for any good: he has no promise to bottom his trust upon. We must
trust God in an holy walking.

2. We must, notwithstanding the Providence of God, trust God in the use of
proper means. The reason for this is, because the Precept commands the use of
lawful means. Trusting of God is indeed exclusive of the use of unlawful means,
but it always includes the use of means that are proper and lawful. To refuse
proper and lawful means, and talk of trusting God, is to tempt him not to trust
him.

3. It includes also the use of Religious means: such as the waiting upon God
in the use of his Ordinances. The word Sacraments, and Prayer: For these things
(says God) I will be enquired of by the house of Israel. Prayer is a general
means instituted by God for the obtaining of any mercy. But I say, supposing
these three things: That a Child of God keeps in the Lords way, and has used
all proper means for an event which he has desired, and sought the Lord for by
Prayer; This Doctrine of Divine Providence shows him the highest reason
imaginable, for his committing both his person, and his ways unto the Lord,
without any anxious solicitude, or distracting, fears: Because he is the Lord
who cares for us, therefore we should cast our care on him.

2. A second thing which I shall press upon you as your duty, and consequent to
this Doctrine of Providence, is a pious security in all conditions, and with
respect to all events. There is a sinful security which all good men ought to
avoid, and to take heed of. Security is the freedom of the mind from care, as
to this or that thing. Now this is sinful two ways.

1. When the ground of it is some carnal confidence, a relying on some arm of
flesh. Cursed be he (says the Prophet) that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm. Thus the Jews were often secure upon the view of their great allies
and confederates, Assyria and Egypt. In like manner people may be secure upon
the account of their relations and interests, or the power and favor of men.
We are commanded to cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; and the
Psalmist tells us, It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in
Princes.

2. When there is a pretended confidence in God, but not conjoined with an holy
walking, nor with a due use of means, Natural, Moral, or Religious; take heed
of such a security as this is. That which I call a pious security, is the fruit
of a confidence in God. When the minds of men upon the view of a Divine
Providence, are quiet, and free from distractions, and overmuch solicitude as
to the events of things, whether relating to the Church, or to their own
particulars. This I say is every good Christians duty: and if there be such a
Divine Providence, as I have been discoursing of to you, it is the most
reasonable thing in the world. God is the highest rational Agent, and must work
for some ends, and those the best; the great end of his Glory, the subordinate
end is the good of his People. Now if he has in his working an influence on
all beings, all motions and actions, all omissions, suspensions, and cessations
of such motions, all events, etc. Certainly that man or woman that loves and
fears God, and keeps his way, and has used all proper means, natural,
moral, or religious, in order to the obtaining of what he apprehends for Gods
Honor, the good of his Church, or his own particular good, he has all
imaginable reason to sit down quiet, and be secure. Affairs in the world are
upon the wheels, but those wheels are full of eyes: God sees all things, and
his hand is in and upon all things, and has his own ends in his eyes, and a
power to turn all things, and to make them to serve his ends. We may in the
darkest day cry out, Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise him, and
the remainder of wrath he shall restrain. A good Christian may sit down, having
done his duty, and leave the world to wag as it will. Let that great Ship
wallow as it will, there is one that sits at the Stern, that will guide it,
and all its motions, it shall at last come into the true Port. Hence a Child of
God has reason enough in all things to give thanks, and at all times to
rejoice in the Lord, and again to rejoice. What then mean the disquietments,
anxieties, and sollicitudes of our thoughts? Are they not tacit denials, or
suspensions of the workings of Divine Providence? Are they not Indications of
the weakness of our Faith? Certainly if we had Faith in the Doctrine of Divine
Providence, if it were but as a grain of mustard seed; we should only attend
our duty, and when we had done that, should speak to our soul, if yet in a
tumult, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? why art thou disquieted within me?
Trust still in God, for I shall praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. This is a second piece of duty.

3. A third duty which this Doctrine of Divine Providence will evidence but
reasonable for us, is, A patient waiting for God under all the displeasing
varieties of this life. A duty which in Scripture you will find often called
for by God, and his Holy Servants, who have spoke in his Name, Psalm. 27.14.
Psalm. 37.7, 34. Psalm. 6^.5. Prove. 20.22. Hos. 12.6. and as often resolved upon
by the Holy Servants of God, Job. 14.14. Psalm. 25.21. Psalm. 52.9. and in many
other places: And there are many excellent promises that are made to it, Psalm.
37.9. Prove. 20.22. Isa. 49.23. It is exclusive of all murmuring, repining, and
discontentedness at any of Gods dealings; of all use of irregular means to help
our selves: it is an habit of grace, which in the midst of the most adverse and
afflictive Providence, teaches us to stand still, and to see the salvation of
God. It is a great piece of a Christians duty, keeping a Christian in his
station, and in the paths of holiness, under the most cross and thwarting
Providence, in the most dark and gloomy days, and the greatest confusions we
see in the world. The failure of this is like the starting of the Ballast in a
Ship in a storm: every Ship of burden, that goes to Sea, has a Ballast of
stones, or sand, or some weighty thing, which keeps it even upon the waters; if
in a storm this Ballast starts, so as it is thrown on one side, and gives not a
just poise to the Ship, there is a great danger of a wrack, the Ship presently
lies all on one side. Faith now is this Ballast, active patience, or waiting
for God in a storm of Providence, is that which keeps the soul poised; if
this Ballast starts, there is great danger of the souls being overwhelmed. Now
this Doctrine of Providence, and the extent of it to all motions, actions, to
all suspensions, omissions, and cessations of actions, to all events, and
future contingencies, shows us the duty and reasonableness of this patient
waiting. Is there a storm, a whirlwind, an hurricane of political motions in
the world? It lets us know that God is in that storm, God is in that whirlwind,
that hurricane is not without the Lord, and God is not out of it. If the
Enemies of the People of God could raise a storm without the Lord, or when they
have raised it shut God out of the Governance of it, it were something; but
they can do none of this: we can have no confidence in them, in the goodness of
their natures, or their designs; but we may be confident of God, and wait for
him. I compared Providence before, to a man of business, that seldom keeps a
road; but ever and anon turns out this way, and that way, as his variety of
business leads him; those that will bear such a man company home, must ever and
anon wait for him, while he turns out of his road. Let this Doctrine of
Providence have this kind influence upon your souls, to make you to wait upon
God, whiles he hides himself from the house of Jacob, and to look for him. It
is good to wait upon God; for none yet that ever waited upon him, returned
ashamed; it is your duty to wait upon God, he is a great Sovereign, he has
required this homage from your souls. It is reasonable you should wait on him;
for you may be sure he is in every storm, in every hurricane, seeing it,
working by it, governing of it.

4. This Doctrine of a Divine Providence, shows the reasonableness of a
passive patience, or submission to, and contentation with our lot and portion
in the world, under the most afflictive and adverse issues. Nothing comes to
pass without the Will of God, not a sparrow (as cheap, and inconsiderable a
bird as it is) falls to the ground without our heavenly Father. It is true,
while we are in the world, we are in the midst of briars and thorns; subjected
to a thousand accidents, which are afflictive to us, afflictions in our bodies,
troubles in our spirits, crosses in our relations, and in our affairs in the
world; and no affliction is joyous, but grievous. It is the great effect of
Faith to make us glory in tribulations. But certainly, although this Doctrine
of Providence does not show us a sufficient ground to glory in tribulations,
which is an exercise of grace most proper in such Tribulations, as we suffer
for the name of Christ; as the Apostles went away rejoicing, that they were
thought worthy to suffer any thing for the name of Christ. But surely the
consideration of this Doctrine of Gods Influence upon all events, all motions,
all actions, etc. of his Creatures, shows us a great reason why we should be
submissive and patient, possessing our souls with patience under the most
afflictive contingencies of this life. I remember Rabshakeh would not have the
men of Jerusalem think that he was come out without God against that place. Is
affliction come upon thee? Are crosses in thy estate, in thy relations, come
upon thee? Think not that any of them are come upon thee without God; the hand
of God is in this sickness, in this pain, in this depriving of thee of thy near
relations; in this poverty that has overtaken thee like an armed man. None of
these things are come upon thee without God, 1. Willing them. 2. Nor without
God influencing them, ordering the causes of them: now if we do but consider
the wisdom and infinite goodness of this God; if we do but look upon him, as
our Father, how cogently does the Apostle speak, Heb. 12.10, 11. Furthermore,
we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the father of our
spirits, and live? For they verily for a few days, chastened us after their own
pleasure: but he for our profit, that we might be made partakers of his
holiness. How many arguments are there in two verses to persuade us to this
submissive patience? The main argument is from our reverent subjection to the
Fathers of our flesh. Hence the Apostle concludes, that we ought much rather to
be subject to the Father of our Spirits. 1. They were but the Fathers of our
flesh: he the Father of our spirits. 2. They chastened us after their own
pleasure, but he for our profit. But I say here is argument enough, God is in
the affliction, It is the Lord (said that good man) let him do what seems to
him good. Nothing can seem good to God to bring upon his people, but what truly
and really is for their good; he cannot but give good things, dispense and deal
out good things unto his people: submit your selves therefore unto God, under
his severest Dispensations. Remember he is in the storm and whirlwind.

5. This Doctrine of Providence may convince you of the reasonableness of your
duty of Prayer. 1. Daily Prayer. 2. More extraordinary, and solemn Prayer. I
say first daily Prayer. Every day is pregnant with new designs. The world is a
place full of a variety of Beings, and those are in daily motion and action:
hence we are subject to infinite accidents, and as our Savior says, Who can
tell what a day may bring forth! This speaks our subjection to ungrateful
changes and mutations. Now certainly the same reason that teaches us, if at
any time we have any business of concernment to us (that may (if it goes for
us) be much for our advantage, if against us, much to our prejudice) to be
dispatched in Parliament, or any Court of Judicature; to apply our selves to
those persons, to whom in those cases we may have access, to entreat them to be
our friends, and to lend us their assistance, should also direct us to be as
constant and diligent in our Applications unto God by Prayer. We have great
concerns in the world every day, the concerns of our lives, our health, our
success and prosperity in our affairs, the concerns of all our friends and
relations, above all, the concerns of our immortal souls. The good prosperity
and welfare, or the evil and mischief of them, all does very much depend upon
the motions and actions of other beings, as well as our own, upon the
omissions, cessations, and suspensions of their actions, upon the events, etc.
Now you have heard that the great God of Heaven and Earth fills the world,
influenceth all beings, motions, actions, cessations, suspensions, or omissions
of action, all events; he is ever present, seeing, and considering the matters
of the world; Will not now Reason evince it to be our duty, to be much in
Prayer alone, with our Families, morning and evening, to be crying to God,
Prosper thou the works of our hands upon us? Restraint of Prayer from God,
argues Atheism in our hearts, either that with the fool in the Psalm, we say in
our hearts, There is no God: or else that we say, Tush God, sees us not, the
Almighty does not regard us.

2. But it lets us see the more especial reasonableness of more solemn and
earnest Prayer, upon more especial Emergencies. I told you that every day is
big of events, and who can tell what any day may, or will bring forth? But
there are some more especial times, when we have more high and eminent concerns
upon some special undertakings, or when some eminent danger threateneth us. In
reason here, our sense of a Divine Providence influencing all events, all
Beings, all motions and actions, of Beings, and all omissions, cessations, or
suspensions of such actions, does more particularly oblige us, upon the
emergency of such affairs, to be more earnest and importunate with God. It is
the precept of Solomon, Acknowledge him in all thy ways, and he shall direct thy
steps. And accordingly has been the practice of the people of God; as you see
it in the whole story of holy Writ, and is the practice of the people of God
still. Now this Doctrine of Divine Providence justifies this practice of the
children of God, as a very reasonable practice; and evinceth as daily Prayer,
so this more set and solemn prayer to be the reasonable practice of all those
that have any knowledge of God, or any desire to maintain fellowship and
communion with him.

6. Lastly, As it evinceth the duty and reasonableness, both of daily, and of
solemn and extraordinary prayer: so it evinceth also the duty, both of daily,
and more solemn and extraordinary praises. We have not a good thing happens
unto us, but there is an hand of God in it: it may be some created Being has
been the instrument to bring it to our hand; but the action or motion of that
created Being has been influenced by God. The event or issue has been
ordered, governed and directed by God; the hand of God is in every days health
and protection, in every nights sleep and preservation. But this is obvious
enough to every Christian, of how mean a capacity soever. I shall therefore add
no more to this part of my discourse. I have, you see, hitherto proceeded no
farther than to prove, That there is a Providence. 2. And to show to you the
exceeding great latitude of its objects.

SERMON V, VI.
Heb. I. 3. Psalm. XXXVI. 6. -- Upholding all things by the word of his power.
-- O Lord! thou preservest man and beast.

I Have hitherto showed you no more, Than that there is a Divine Providence
extensive to all things, influencing all Beings, all motions, and actions of
Beings, etc. I am now come to discourse concerning the acts of God, by which he
exercises this Providential care. Divines do usually reduce all to two Heads.
1. Preservation. 2. Government. Preservation respects the creatures Beings;
and that in esse tali, in such a kind of Being as he at first created them.
Government properly respects the motions or actions of these Beings, or the
omissions, suspensions, or cessations of such actions or motions, and the
events of the things. The Proposition I shall a little enlarge my self upon, is
this,

Prop. That as the worlds were at first made by the power and word of God, so
they are by the same power and word preserved and upheld.

The Heathens had some notion of this, as appears by their fiction of Atlas,
bearing up the world upon his Shoulders. God is the true and only Atlas: the
Apostle says, He upholdeth all things by the word of his Power. The Psalmist
says, That he preserves both man and beast. You have a recognition of this,
in that solemn prayer of the Levites, Neh. 10.6, Thou, even thou, art Lord
alone, thou have made the Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all their host;
the earth, and all things that are therein; the sea, and all that is therein,
and thou preservest them all. Job gives God the glory of this, Job 7.20, I have
sinned, and what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of man! But although
the upholding, and preservation of the world, the influence of God upon the
world, in order to its standing and conservation, be matter of clear and
undoubted Revelation, and demonstrable by reason, and confessed even by the
wiser amongst the Heathens themselves; yet every one possibly does not
sufficiently understand the method and order of Gods sustentation, and
preservation of the world: Nor dare I promise you fully to open it to you, and
make you to understand it, for how little a portion of his ways do we know? But
something I will speak in particular. I hope it may be of further use to you,
not only to expound Gods works, but to make you understand how wonderfully we
are preserved, and what a necessity there is of the Divine hand to uphold our
souls in life, and us in any state of well-being. Only let me first premise two
or three things.

1. That there is a more common and general preservation of all beings, and a
more special preservation of some.

2. That there is a preservation common both to man and beast, and a
preservation more peculiar to man; and yet more special to the people of God,
those amongst the sons of men, whom God has set apart for himself.

3. That there is a preserving Providence, respecting the body and outward man:
and a preserving Providence, respecting the inward man.

4. That as to man he is considerable in a threefold capacity. 1. In his
personal capacity, as a reasonable creature, endued with all the powers and
faculties of vegetive and sensitive creatures: and further, with several
powers, and faculties suited to his reasonable nature. 2. In his Political
capacity, as he makes up a member of a Kingdom, or civil society. 3. In his
Ecclesiastical capacity, as in society with others he makes up that body of
people which is called the church of God. God preserves him in all these
capacities; of which (when I come to it) I shall speak more particularly, and
distinctly.

I shall lay down several conclusions. The first of which shall be more general
and extensive to such creatures as have merely being, and no life. The other
will concern living creatures, and amongst them men, as the nobler and more
excellent of them.

1. Concl. God by the word of his power upholdeth the Beings, order, and
courses of all his creatures; so as not only their natural inclinations, and
qualities, and affections, by which they are mutually serviceable to each
other, and to the upholding of the universe, do not fail, abate, or decay, but
so, that their power and opposite qualities work not to the ruin and
destruction of the whole. This now to him who will give his thoughts leave to
stand upon it, will appear a great and wonderful work of God, and no less than
a wonderful miracle of Divine Providence. When God gave a being to the world,
and to all the things therein, he endued them all with several qualities,
according to his infinite wisdom; he set them in an excellent order, so as they
might be mutually subservient one to another, and all of them to the whole: he
did not only make the world, but he fitted and jointed it together, so that one
part of it corresponded with the other. 2. He endued them with several
qualities, by which they are mutually serviceable each to other. 3. He set the
several creatures in their orders and stations, so as they might be best
serviceable. Now, I say, the Providence of God works in the preserving of
them. 1. By upholding these qualities, and keeping them in this order, that
they do not dislocate and fall out of joint, but abide both in their station,
and in their full vigor and virtue.

2. By keeping them that the qualities in them, which are opposite one to
another, and would naturally incline them to a dislocation and falling out of
order, yet have no such operation, nor produce any such effect; but even
inanimate Beings, move and work orderly according to the Creators intention,
though they do nothing out of any counsel, choice, or deliberation. Let me but
illustrate this a little, in the four great Inanimate Bodies of the World; the
Heavens, the Air, the Earth, and the mighty Waters. All exceeding great, and
vast bodies, yet without life, sense, or reason; so as their motions cannot be
from reason and counsel of their own. The order in which God set these things
in the day of Creation was this, The Heavens he placed uppermost, the Air in
the midst betwixt them and the Earth. Then he placed the Earth; and the Seas in
the midst, contiguous one to another. In the Heavens he placed Waters, the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, all great bodies. Now all these bodies have several
qualities; Gravity, or weight, levity, heat, cold, moisture, etc. Who knows
not that active qualities in creatures are subject to spend, waste, and decay?
To instance but in that one body of the Sun, whose great qualities are light
and heat: We see candles, and torches, and fires give light and heat; but they
spend themselves, their light goes out, their heat wastes, and spends it self
in a short time. How is it that it is not so with the Sun, and the Stars, but
from the power of God that upholds these qualities, that they neither waste nor
abate from their continual motion? The candle is fed from the tallow, and wax;
the torch, and taper from pitch, wax, rozin, and other combustible matter; when
that fails, it expireth. Whence is the Sun, Moon, and Stars fed? but from the
immediate upholding power and hand of God? Again, these great bodies are not
indeed so gross, and heavy, as mere sublunary and terrene bodies are; but yet,
they must not be denied something of weight, especially the Waters in the
Heavens. We know weight and heaviness is of the nature of Water; yea, of that
Water which falls from Heaven: how come the Clouds which are a thin body, to
contain and restrain it, and keep it as in bottles? how come those vast bodies
of Water to be contained in the thin body of the Clouds, and to diffuse
themselves so gradually upon the Earth?

2. Let us look upon the Air, from the agitation of which proceed the great and
boisterous stormy winds. The Air is cold, and moist, only heated and warmed
from the Sun: how comes it to pass, that it is not in that continual agitation,
which we see it in sometimes? sometimes we hardly discern it moved at all,
sometimes more violently, and that sometimes from one quarter, sometimes from
another; is this a natural, a mere natural motion? then it is necessary, and
would be uniform: so we see it is not. Who can give a reason sufficient to
satisfy an inquisitive Philosopher, of the heat and cold in the Air in several
Countries, nay, in our own Country? or a sufficient reason of drought and
moisture in the Air? whence is it think you, that it is not always dry, nor
always moist; not always stormy, nor always calm, none of which would suit the
conservation of the world, but from Gods upholding those qualities in those
bodies which influence it, and by which these things are caused? so that unless
when the ordinary Providence of God is not withheld from the creatures, in some
particular places, for the chastisement of the wickedness of them that dwell
therein. The Air keeps its motion, and courses: the winds their courses, for
the preservation of our bodies, and the advantage of humane affairs. God, I
say, by a daily providence upholds these Beings to those motions, and measures
of motion, which he at first set for them, in order to keeping the World in
joint. The Air putrifieth not, nor grows infectious; the Winds sometimes
blow, sometimes are still, etc. The Psalmist gives God the great glory of his
Providence, in this particular, very plentifully. He raises the stormy winds,
Psalm 107. v. 25. He walks upon the wings of the wind, Psalm 104.3. He
brings the winds out of his treasures, Psalm 133.7. He causes his winds to
blow, Psalm 147.18. The stormy winds fulfill his word, Psalm 148.8. The Heathens
had such a sense of the Necessity of a Divine Providence to rule this Creature,
that they devised a God on purpose (whom they called Aeolus) whom they feigned
to have a care and dominion over them: and the Poet says, That if he did not,
they would confound Heaven, and Earth.

3. From the Air let us come to the Earth, a great and vast body. Job says, It
hangs upon nothing, Job 26.7, upon nothing but the Almighty power of divine
Providence. It hangs in the midst of the Air, and that upon nothing God did
hang it there, in the day of Creation: the Seas are contiguous to it, both of
them make but one Globe, or round body of a great weight. We see it is of the
nature of weighty Bodies to incline and press downward. Suppose God did at
first hang it there, What is it keeps it there? We should conclude it a great
Miracle, not to be effected by other than a divine Power, to see but a great
stone, or Canon-bullet hang in the air; how would a whole City come out, and be
astonished at so great a sight? especially, if it should hang there a month, or
a year, or any considerable proportion of time. But who sufficiently
contemplateth this great sight? Who thinks on the immense weight of the Earth,
and the Seas, hanging in the midst of the thin body of the air? Let the
Atheists of this generation come near, and see this great sight! If there be no
God, or if this God exercises no Providence in the upholding and governing
created Beings: How comes the Earth to hang upon nothing? or how does it abide
one day in that station? Let any of them in an open field climb up, and hang up
a Cannon-bullet so if they can. I know the Philosophers tell us, it is in its
Center, and every thing naturally rests there. The Poet tells us, That
Ponderibus librata suis. But this is all but an idle and an impertinent
muffling us with unintelligible terms: for what do they mean by the center of
things, the center of the Heavens, or the center of the Earth, or of the
Waters, unless they understand the place which God ordained for them, or
wherein God fixed them in Creation? in that they abide, and we say, there
Providence keeps them. Let them try if the art of all the men in the World
can so poise a great weight in the air, that it shall not fall, but abide
hanging there any considerable time.

4. Lastly, let us view the great body of the Waters, in continual flux and
reflux; whether they be placed higher than the Earth, is a little question: But
suppose they be not, certain it is, that the winds often raise them much higher
than the Earth: they are of a fluid Nature, of a great weight, in continual
motion; whence is it that they do not drown the World, or at least a great part
of it? It is a matter of demonstration, that in many places, they rise higher
every side than the Earth next adjacent to them: How comes it, that the Sands
check them, that in many places, they bring their bridle in their mouth, an
huge quantity of small stones or sands, which make a bank on every side to
protect the adjacent Earth against their rage? certainly no reason can be
given, but what the holy servants of God have long since given. Job 26.10, He
has compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to an end.
And Jer. 5.22, He has placed the sand for a bound to the sea, by a perpetual
decree, that it cannot pass. Now suppose such a Decree, these inanimate
Creatures obey it not out of election and choice, but being natural Agents,
they work and move necessarily according to the affections and inclinations,
which God has created them with. So as the water being fluid, and heavy, would
from a necessity of natural working, overflow and drown the Earth, did not God
by his Providence continually work, establishing his Decree, and seeing to the
execution of it; and to that end governing these inanimate Creatures, contrary
to their natural inclinations, that the World may be kept in order, knitted and
jointed together; and the qualities and affections of one creature may not work
to the ruin and prejudice of another, and so to the ruin and destruction of the
whole. And thus I have opened to you my first Conclusion, showing you the
Method and order of Gods working in the preservation of his creatures: in their
beings, stations, and orders; and in upholding the useful qualities of them,
that they do not waste or decay; and the restraining and governing of their
opposite qualities, that they shall not work according to their natural
tendencies and inclinations to destroy the World, or spoil the beauty,
comeliness, and order of it. Nor do they transgress, but upon Gods withdrawing
this Providence, this ordinary Providence. Whence come inundations of Waters,
infections in the Air, strange motions of Celestial bodies in some places, as
the just, and wise God at any time, will please to make use of any part of the
hosts of his Creatures, to execute his Vengeance; either upon particular
Persons, Countries, or places. But thus much shall serve to have been spoken
for the illustration of the first Conclusion. The others will respect such
creatures, as have life and sense. I proceed to a second.

Concl. 2. God preserves his creatures which have life; or life, and sense; or
life, sense, and reason; by a daily providing for them food, and nourishment,
and directing them to their proper food, and an ordinary avoiding of what is
noxious, and destructive to their bodies. Of living Creatures there are three
orders: 1. Such as have nothing but being and life; such are Plants, and Herbs.
2. Such as have not only being, and life, but also Sense. Such are Birds in the
Air; Beasts, and creeping things in the Earth; Fishes in the Sea; Insects, and
other creatures, that live on the Earth, and in the Air, which the Birds, and
Fowls also do. 3. Such as have not only being, and life, and sense, but also
Reason. These are (upon the Earth) only Men, and these only have Bodies. All
these creatures having life, and that in a bodily substance: and so being in
continual motion, are of mutable perishing, and decaying beings; and the lapses
and decays of their Natures must be daily repaired by nourishment; to the
taking of which, they are naturally inclined, by the passions of Hunger and
Thirst: and by this Nourishment all know that all sorts of creatures are
preserved, and without this they cannot live. Now as to this, the Providence of
God is eminently seen in three things instanced in, in this second Conclusion.

1. God provideth it for them. All Vegetables; Trees, herbs, plants, are
nourished by heat and moisture. The moisture is either the natural fatness of
the Earth, or the adventitious dew of Heaven, or falling of water from thence,
either in a more fluid form, which we call Rain; or congealed, as Snow, and
Hail. The heat is from the Sun. There is a natural moisture in the Earth; it is
also in part watered from the Springs and fountains of water into it, from the
contiguity of the waters to it; but we see in a time of drought how all these
fail. The Earth is parched, and dry; God renews its moisture by showers from
Heaven; by Rain, and Snow, and Dew, etc. Moisture alone will feed sew plants,
if any. They must have heat, as well as moisture; Some, and the most must have
the beams of the Sun, all must have the heat of it diffused through the Air.
Now who is he, who in the Heavens has set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which as a
Bridegroom comes out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run his
Race? Is it not Gods? Psalm 19.4, 5. Our Savior tells us, Matthew. 5, He makes
his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall upon the just, and upon the unjust. The
Heathens lay under so much conviction of this, that their Poets feigned a
Chariot of the Sun, which none but their God Phoebus could drive, without
burning the World. For the Rain, how plentifully does the Scripture give unto
God the Prerogative of it. Has the rain a father; or Who begot the drops of
dew? Job 38.28, He causes it to rain upon the earth, 26. He gives rain, Jer.
5.24. He makes lightnings with rain, Jer. 10.3; Yea, and none but he can do
it, Jer. 14.22. Are there any amongst the vanities of the Gentiles that can
cause rain? or can the Heavens give showers? Art not thou he, O Lord our God?
therefore will we wait upon thee, for thou have made all these things. Thus the
Lord provideth food for vegetables. The sensitive Creatures are the Birds, and
Fowls of the air, the beasts, and creeping things of the Earth; the Fishes of
the Sea: These live partly upon herbs, and plants, and the seed, grain, and
fruit of them; partly upon each other, the greater devouring the lesser. God in
providing a nourishment for herbs, and plants, provides a nourishment for the
most of them; as also by upholding the procreating virtue of some creatures, he
provideth food for others. Man lives upon the creatures of inferior order to
him; partly upon vegetables, herbs, roots, the fruits of plants; partly upon
sensitive creatures. God has given him a commission to Kill, and Eat. God
provideth food for Man, by upholding the budding, germinative, seed-bearing
qualities of plants, and the growing virtues of them, and by upholding the
procreative virtue of birds, beasts, fishes, etc. without which those species
would fail from the Earth, and Man who lives upon them, would perish also,

2. Secondly, The workings of Divine Providence are seen in directing them to
their proper food. Whence is it that each creature knows its proper food, and
is inclined by its appetite to that only? Let me, as to these two things, show
you how plentifully the Scripture speaks. God takes the glory of this, Job
38, Will thou hunt the prey for the Lion? or fill the appetite for the young
Lion? V. 39, Who provideth for the Raven his food? when his young ones cry unto
God, when they wander for want of meat? Our Savior tells us, Matt. 6.26.
That it is God, who feeds the young Ravens. The Psalmist gives God the glory
of this, Psalm 104.27, These wait all upon thee, that thou may give them
their meat in due season: That which thou give them they gather, thou openest
their hand, they are filled with good. These all wait upon thee: Who are these?
the wild asses. V. 11, He sends the springs into the valleys, which run
amongst the hills: they give drink to every beast of the field, the wild asses
quench their thirst. V. 14, He causes the grass to grow for the Cattle, and
herbs for the service of man, that he may bring forth food out of the Earth,
and wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine,
and bread which strengthens man's heart. V. 21, The young Lions roar after
their prey, and seek their meat from God. V. 30, Thou renewest the face of the
Earth. God at first said, Let the earth bring forth grass, Genesis 1.11. He
sends the grass of the field, Deuteronomy. 11.15; He causes it to grow for the
cattle, and herb for the service of man. He multiplyeth the beasts of the
field, the birds, and fowls of the air. He leaves us not without witness, but
gives fruitful times, and seasons, filling the hearts of men with food, and
gladness.

3. From whence is it, but from the influence of God, upon his Creatures, that
Creatures universally, and ordinarily avoid the eating of such things as would
be noxious to them, and many creatures, if they be distempered, are directed to
such things as will cure them? But this is enough to have spoken to the second
Conclusion.

3 Concl. Thirdly, God preserves living Creatures, by upholding those
faculties in all living creatures, upon the operations of which their lives are
preserved, their species are propagated, and they are to propagate their
species, and to perform those actions which are proper to their several Beings,
and natures.

To uphold the Creation, as to those things in it which have life, there are
diverse faculties necessary which must be upheld: here are four sorts mentioned
in the Conclusion. Let me speak a little to each of them. It will be of
excellent use to convince you of the necessity of a Divine influence, or
Providence upon you every moment. 1. The first sort are those: By which the
Beings, the lives, and beings of Creatures are preserved, and increased to
their due proportion. These are those which belong to those principal
faculties, which the Philosophers calls Facultatem altricem, and auctricem: (I
will put them together) and instance in diverse particulars. We are craving,
changeable creatures, subject to wastes and decays in our beings; and we must
have a Nutritive faculty, or we could not live: The action of this faculty is
called Nutrition, or Nourishing. Now our nourishing depends upon our food, the
change of our food in our stomachs by the natural heat of our stomachs; and
this depends upon several powers, which God has created in all sensitive
creatures; in the upholding of which, the daily Providence of God is
wonderfully experienced, although possibly, not so wistly observed, and
considered by us as it ought to be. Let me a little awaken you to a due
consideration of it, by instancing in several Particulars.

1. In the first place, We have a power, a natural power to crave and desire
food. Without an appetite the creature desires no food, can take none, though
it be set before him; but instead of it, the very sight of it makes him sick:
he loatheth and abhors it, and calls to have it taken away out of his
sight, as we see in daily experience. Now I would know by what this faculty is
upheld, but by the concourse and daily operation of Providence? I do not intend
to divert here into a Philosophical discourse, concerning the causes of a decay
of our appetite. It is sufficient to tell you, that the causes may be various,
and the variety of the causes, which may produce such an effect, is sufficient
evidence, that nothing but the upholding power of Divine Providence can hinder
it. It is God that must give us our daily food, and it is God that must give us
a stomach, or appetite to it; and the causes are so many which may abate and
destroy our appetite, that did not God daily watch over us, and influence us,
as to this very thing, it were an hard thing to conceive, how it should keep
preserved a few days, much less as it is with many, to very many years.

2. But suppose us to have an appetite (to say nothing of our power to take,
and chew, and swallow our food); We see by a daily experience, if we have not a
power to digest it; if the natural heat of our stomachs be from any cause
abated, so as it will not change our food, and this continues upon us for any
time, and no remedy can be apportioned to it, the creature dies, whether it be
man or beast. If the nap of the stomach be but worn off, our bodies soon appear
thredbare; we pine away, and presently sink into our graves: by which we learn,
that a natural faculty, power, or ability to digest our food, is necessary to
the preservation of our beings. As I said before of the Appetite, so I shall
say again of this. I intend no discourse of the variety of causes, from which
such a thing may proceed, but the possibility of such a thing, and that as an
effect of various causes, evinceth a necessity of a daily influence of God upon
us, to uphold this faculty in its vigor and efficacy, which ministers to our
nutrition.

3. But thirdly, suppose our food taken into our bodies, concocted, and
digested in our stomachs that it may nourish the whole body; it must be by
several vessels and channels distributed to the several parts of the body. So
as there must be supposed a freedom from obstructions in those passages, and an
attractive virtue and faculty in the several parts. If these passages be any
way stopped, or the attractive virtue abated, the parts are not nourished, but
decay and wither, the creatures being destroyed. Of such obstructions we have
daily examples: and indeed, whosoever considers the various passages in our
bodies, through which that part of our food, which proves for nourishment
passes, and the variety of obstructions to which we are subject, must needs
again acknowledge, that our Souls must be kept in life, our bodies in health,
merely by a Divine Power.

4. Again, What we take into our bodies for our proper food, being in part,
found either not proper for us, or in too great a proportion; when the stomach
has done its office, there is a separation made, that not proper for us, or in
a superfluous proportion for that end, must be voided and cast out; and a
natural faculty to do it, must be supposed, which if it cease but for a
while, or the freedom of the passages, by which it passes be obstructed, the
life of the creature quickly determines. Now, whosoever considers the variety of
powers, and faculties in a living body, which must be all upheld, and the
variety of causes, from which they may be encumbered, yea and quite destroyed;
will be forced to acknowledge the incessant influence of Divine Providence, in
upholding, and preserving both the being and well-being of every creature that
has a sensitive life.

2. But yet here is not all: For in order to our nourishing, not only those
faculties in the body nourished, which I have mentioned, must be upheld; But
also the faculties, and virtues in the bodies nourishing, by which they are
made nourishing to us. In all nourishing, there must be a body giving the
nourishment, as well as a body receiving it: each of these must have its
faculties upheld, or there will be no nutrition, and consequently no
preservation of life. Philosophy tells us, that the nourishment of living
bodies must be, 1. Something that has a capacity to be turned into the
substance of our bodies, else how can it nourish? Hence it is, that a man
cannot feed, or be nourished, by stones, or dirt: there is not in these things
a capacity to be turned into humane flesh. 2. It must have something of
contrariety in it to the body nourished, otherwise the stomach would make no
alteration of it. And 3. It must have in it something of similitude, else it
would never incorporate with us, and join it self to our flesh, or mix it self
with our blood. All our food must have some qualities in it, that must be
accommodate to our nourishment; and these qualities, or faculties must be
upheld in it, and upheld too in some due proportion. Hence we see, that food
when corrupted and putrified, and so has lost these faculties and virtues, and
they be extinguished, it instead of nourishing us, breeds diseases, and
destroys us. Now God preserves the life and being of his creatures, by a
daily concurrence of his Providence, as well by upholding the nourishing
virtues and qualities of their food, as those natural faculties, by which they
crave, concoct, and digest, or attract their nourishment; or expel, and throw
out that part of it which is not proper for the nourishment of their bodies.
But this is enough to have spoken as to that first principal Faculty, by which
the life, and being of all sensitive living creatures are preserved.

2. A second principal Faculty by which the life of creatures is preserved, is
that of Respiration or breathing, which is the motion of the breasts and lungs
by which they draw in air, and again puff it out, thus continually cooling the
heat of the heart, which would else soon determine the life of the creature. A
Faculty so necessary, that we daily see with what difficulty the creature
lives, when it is any way encumbered; daily experience we have of this in
persons sick of Consumptions, or Asthma's, etc. When any living creature is
once wholly deprived of this, it presently dies. This God gives and
maintains: He gives to all Life, and Breath, and all things, Acts 17.25. He
also takes it away; Thou take away their breath, and they die (says the
Psalmist), Psalm 104.29. God is said to be the God, who spreads forth the
Earth, and that which comes out of it; he that gives breath unto the people,
and spirit to them that walk thereon, Isa. 42.5. Now God preserves both man
and beast, by upholding this power or faculty in them, by which they draw in,
and puff out the air: yea, and his daily Providence appears also in the
preserving of the air which they suck in, ordinarily, from such affections and
qualities as would destroy life in his creatures: I say, ordinarily, to except
those special remissions of Divine Providence in this case, by which God
sometimes punishes persons and places by a noxious and infected air, as the
procreative causes of more Epidemical sicknesses and distempers. And this
shows us, how reasonable a thing it is, That all that has breath should
praise the Lord, according to the Psalmists exhortation, Psalm 150.

3. A third principal Faculty, necessary to the upholding of the life and being
of creatures, is that by which they sleep, and take their alternate rest: Quod
caret alterna requie durabile non est. Experience tells us, that we can live
very little while without sleep; we must therefore have a power to sleep. There
is no living creature that is always asleep, or always awake; we must have a
power to sleep, and a power to awake again, or we cannot live. Some sleep more,
some less, all must sleep sometime. Sleep is a cessation of the common sense
and the exterior senses from action. The Eye sees not, the Ear hears not,
etc. Now this is caused (say the Philosophers) from the ascending up of vapors
out of the stomach, which stop the passage of the animal spirits from the
brain; which vapors when they are spent, and the passages are clear again, man
waketh, and the senses return to their exercise. Be the cause what it will,
certain it is, it is necessary in order to the holding of our souls in life: we
must have a power both to sleep and to wake, and this power must be preserved;
and by the upholding and preserving of this power and faculty, both men and
beasts are upheld, preserved, and kept alive. Now I say, this is Gods work; he
that made the deep sleep at first to fall upon Adam in the day in which he was
created, Genesis 2.21; makes ordinary sleep to fall upon all living creatures. He
gives sleep to his Beloved, Psalm 127. v 2. It is a piece of his promise,
Prove. 3.24, Thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet. David
complained, that God held his eyes waking, Psalm 77.4. And thus I have showed
you, how God preserves both man and beast, by upholding and preserving those
powers and faculties in their Bodies, by which they are kept in life, and their
Being is preserved.

2. But both men and beasts are very small when they first come into the World.
Their Beings afterward increase; and this must be by a natural power, which God
the great Creator has created in them at first, and made every creature to be
brought forth with, without which it could not grow beyond its proportion in
the first day of its production into the World. This is that which the
Philosopher calls Facultatem Auctricem; the power by which the living creature
grows and increases to a just perfection and measure. I say, a just measure,
for no creature grows always. The God of Nature has set a just measure to
every Being: This Power also must be upheld, or the World would be full of none
but Children, and very small beasts. The Psalmist says, Psalm 104.14, He
causes the grass to grow for the cattle; and by a parity of Reason, he must
also cause the cattle to grow for the grass. Christ has taught us, that we
cannot add one cubit to our stature: It is true, man and beast grows to both
their just dimensions by a natural faculty; man's growth stops at thirty years,
or under, by a natural Law. But God at first created in them this Natural
faculty; and God by a daily concourse of his Providence upholdeth, enliveneth,
and assisteth this natural faculty, and by this particular act of his
Providence he does preserve and uphold both man and beast, as in their Beings,
so in their just dimensions and proportions in which we see them supplying and
adorning the World.

3. But thirdly, Supposing all living creatures preserved and upheld in their
several lives and beings by Gods upholding and preserving those several powers
and faculties in the object of their nourishment, by which they are made fit
nourishment for their bodies: and those several faculties in their bodies,
which are the subjects to be nourished, by virtue of which they desire their
due food, concoct, digest it, etc. and to uphold the just proportions of
creatures in the World, by preserving and upholding in them that faculty by
which they dilate themselves, grow, and increase to the law of Magnitude which
the great Creator has set for them: yet if they had not all a several power to
propagate their species or kind, the World, or at least the living creatures in
the World, would quickly cease; the days of man's life are three or fourscore
years, the days of most other creatures much less. God has therefore created
all living things with a power to propagate their species, some one way, some
another: of all he has, he says in the day they were created, Let them
increase and multiply: and has created several powers and virtues in them, by
which, as all species, so most individuals does so. To some individuals of most
kind he denies this, or at least concurreth not by his Providence to the
effects of it. Some Men and Women are barren; so are some beasts: generally not
so: and this is another act of Divine Providence, by which he preserves both
man and beast, and eminently attributed to God. The Rabbis tell us of three
Keys which God keeps: the Key of the Clouds, of the Womb, of the Grave. None
can give Rain but God; none can open the Graves but God; none can open the Womb
but God. Psalm 113.9, He makes the barren womb to keep house. Psalm 127.3,
Children are the heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward.
It is as true of other creatures as of man; He turns a fruitful land into
barrenness, Psalm 107.34. It was Gods Promise, Exodus 23.26, There shall nothing
cast her young, nor be barren in thy land. Deuteronomy. 7.14, There shall neither male
nor female be barren amongst you, nor amongst your cattle. The flocks of the
field and of the air, the herds of Cattle, the multitudes of Fish in the
waters, the numberless Families of the Earth, they are all preserved by the
daily concurrence of Divine Providence, in the upholding of that natural power
and virtue with which he has created them, by which they propagate their
species: by the propagation of which, and the multiplication, and the
succession of individuals in it, Man, and beast, the whole living World is
preserved.

4. There is yet a fourth sort of Powers and Faculties, which I called those
faculties, abilities, or powers, which are necessary to every living being, for
the performance of its several operations according to the specific nature of
it. God also preserves man and beast, by upholding, and preserving these to
their several operations. The Herb has only a vegetative soul, by virtue of
which it grows, buds, blossoms, produces its seed, etc. The beasts have a
sensitive soul, which works a little further: Man has a reasonable soul,
comprehensive of all the powers and virtues of the former, and extending
further; he sees, hears, perceives things by his outward and inward senses.
By his Understanding he gains the notion of things, judges of them: he
wills, and chooses by his will, etc. Now his power to all these, and other
operations proper to his nature, must be preserved and upheld, or he can do
none of these things. These powers are not indeed all necessary to our being,
and the keeping of our souls in life; but the upholding of them is necessary to
our perfection, and the actions that are proper to the stations wherein we are,
and the capacities in which we stand: God has not only created in the Soul a
power to see, hear, taste, etc. and created the Eye to be the Organ to the
visive Faculty, and the Ear to be the Organ to the hearing faculty, and the
pallat to be the Organ for the faculty of discerning tastes: but he concurreth
with his Providence both to uphold the faculty in the soul, and to keep the
several Organs in tune and order, that by and through them as means, those
faculties might be exercised; and as the upholding both the faculties and
Organs, or instruments, the bodily members, by which they are exercised in
their due state, is the cause why we hear, see, taste, etc. so Gods withholding
that concurrence, as to some individual persons, is the reason why some are
deaf, blind, etc. For though there be second causes of these infirmities,
decays and weaknesses in humane bodies, yet all these are under the governance
of the first cause, either set on work by God, or permitted in their motions by
God; and this is as true also of the Locomotive faculty, the power in man or
beasts to move from one place to another for their food and dispatch of
business: for though it be the Soul that moves, yet it is by virtue of a power
which God created in it to command the motion of the feet, for the moving of
the whole body: and man moves no longer, than this inward power or faculty is
upheld by God; and his feet which are the Organs or instruments of motion, are
kept in order free from dislocation, or ruptures of joints or bones, or the
encumbrances of troublesome humors; the keeping of which freedom depends
upon the influence of the Divine Power; and thus, requiritur continuus tam
verbi conservatricis, quam creatricis influxus, to preserve man and beast,
there is required as well a continual influence of the upholding-word, as the
influence of the creating-word to give both man and beast a first being. So as
Raymundus de Sabunde says truly, Ut radiorum esse a Sole, umbra a corpore: ita
omnes creaturae, a divina pendent conservatione.
All creatures depend upon the Divine Power for their preservation, as the
beams of the Sun for their being depend upon the Sun, and the shadow upon the
body. I shall add no more to my Discourse concerning this third Act of
Providence, by which God preserves both man and beast.

4. A fourth Act by which God preserves both man and beast, is Gods
discovering to his creatures the virtue of other creatures, with which he has
created them, for the amending, repairing, and recovering of the decays and
disorders to which their frail natures are subjected, and concurrence in the
use and application of them: upholding the virtues in them in order to that
end, and blessing the application of them. For the delivery of his creatures
from diseases and accidents to which they are subjected, Mesua the great
Arabian Doctor, is said to have cried out, Solus Sanat languores Deus.
That God alone does heal sicknesses and diseases. God made man healthy, in the
day wherein he was created, and most think he should have continued so, if by
his fall he had not disordered the crasis or temperament of his bodily humors,
corrupted the air, brought a curse upon the Earth, which has ever since
brought forth as well briars and thorns to prick and offend his flesh, as herbs
and fruits to increase and nourish it. Man is subject to a variety of diseases
in all parts of his body, from the predominance of humors, the ill affections
of the air, of his food, etc. The Heathens had some notion of this: Their
Elegant Poet cries out, Audax Japete Genus
Ignem fraud mala Gentibus intulit
Post ignem aetheria domo
Subductum macies, and nova febrium,
Terris in cubuit cohors, etc.
That was their Fiction; That one Prometheus stole fire from Heaven, which
Jupiter had hid up, and distributed it amongst men; whence he says came
sickness, and a whole troop of agues, and fevers, and death. Faith makes a
better discovery: it tells us man fell from the state wherein he was created,
lost the Image of God, brake Covenant with him, and so became subject to
sicknesses, unto death, etc. Yea, so subject are we, that if every one that
falls sick should die, men especially would fail from the Earth; but to prevent
this, as God in the day when he made Heaven and Earth, created diverse qualities
in his creatures, by which they have a sanative or healing virtue for various
Diseases: so his Providence is daily working, and daily seen in this thing, in
two particulars:

1. In discovering to some of his creatures these hidden virtues. The Physician
indeed studies, and makes experiments; and upon the exercise of his reason, and
the demonstrations he makes, directs the Apothecary to compound Medicines; but
his God instructs him to this discretion; and we may reasonably so conclude,
when we find the Prophet, Isaiah, chapter 27. v. 29, affirming it concerning the
discretion of the Thresher, not threshing the fitches, nor turning the
Cart-wheel upon the Cummin; and this is a work of daily Providence; as every
day produces new Methods of the Physisitians practice, new Medicines and
Compositions, etc.

2. Secondly, In upholding the Virtues of those herbs, roots, etc. that are
made use of, in order to our healing, so as they have their effects in removing
our distempers, and healing us. The strength of the body must be upheld, and
the faculties by which it is enabled to take in, and apply, and retain the
Medicine: and the virtues, faculties and powers also of the drugs, herbs,
plants, seeds, etc. must be upheld also: both of them are by the mighty
powerful concourse and power of God: hence the Scripture attributes our
healing unto God; I am the Lord that heals you, Exodus 15.26. And the Psalmist
says, He heals all our diseases: I wound, and I heal, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Hence Asa
is rightly blamed for trusting in Physicians more than in God. Physicians are
Gods Ordinance, they are to be used, but not to be trusted in. God must
discover the healing-Medicine to them: God must uphold the healing-vertue in
the Medicine when used by them, and the faculties also in their Patients, by
which they must be enabled to take, use, and apply the Medicines they
administer And thus now have I showed you, how God by the ordinary workings of
his Providenee, every day works in the preserving man and beast, considered
as Individuals.

5. But as in the production of things into being, notwithstanding the ordinary
rule and law of Nature generally observed, there are some Anomalies or
deviations; so in the preservings of the creature, in the workings of Divine
Providence, God who will not be tracked in any of his ways, makes some
Anomalies, turns out of his ordinary road in some special cases. Ordinarily he
works by means natural, and to the Eye of Reason probable means: sometimes he
will do his work without means, or without such apparent probable means, or, by
what our Reason shall judge, quite contrary to the end: He will walk sometimes
in a natural course, sometimes contrary to it; These we call Miraculous Acts of
Divine Providence. The Bodies of some of his people shall be sometimes upheld a
long time without nourishment, without natural Rest, without sensible
breathing; healed without proper applications of Physic. Many instances of
which we have in the story of the Evangelists, and of the Acts of the Apostles:
but these are ertraordinary and special; and my business is not to discourse
those workings of Providence which are unaccountable to us.

6. Lastly, There is a special providence of God in preserving man, that is yet
further considerable by us. We have hitherto only considered the preservation
of men as Individuals, man considered as a single person by himself. I must
further consider him as a political creature, involved in Society, and show you
the workings of Divine Providence in preserving Bodies-Politick, and the
Societies of men: and then (3dly, as a spiritual creature, capable of the Grace
of God, and being made partaker of it. Nisi vegitaret Deus, cum ego dormio nisi
me defenderet and custodiret cum ego sim securus fieret ut omni momento more
etc. Luther.
I shall conclude this Discourse so far as I have already carried it on, with
that saying of Luther: If God watched not when I sleep, if God did not defend
and keep me when I am void of care, I should die every moment, and every moment
be losing either an hand, or an Eye, or an Ear, or a Foot. I shall further at
this time only apply what part of this Discourse concerning
preserving-Providence you have already heard.

the Lord our God. The Lord who preserves both man and beast! How great, how
glorious must the God whom we serve, be, if what you have heard be true? But to
open this a little in a few Particulars:

1. It may satisfy you in that great truth of Gods Immensity. The Schoolmen
say, God fills the Heavens and the Earth, and infinitum ultra Spatium, an
infinite space beyond. The Scripture, Jer. 23.24, says. Do not I the Lord fill
Heaven and Earth? It must needs be so. The Heavens and the Earth are creatures,
and they are all full of living creatures. So are the great and wide Seas: all
these creatures must breathe, be nourished, rest, grow, and increase, multiply
their species, be renewed daily; they have all their several and various
motions and operations: for these, they have powers, and faculties; all these
(as you have heard) are upheld by God by the daily concourse and influence of
his Divine Providence; he must heal their diseases, restore their lapses and
decays. How could all this be, if he were not every where filling it with his
Essence, Presence, and Power?

2. Secondly, From hence you may conclude, The Activity of the Divine Essence.
You must not think that the great God is in any place, as a stone which indeed
fills the place, but moves not, acts nothing; He is in the World, (say the
Heathen Philosophers) as a Master of a ship, is in a ship, as a Moderator; as
the Soul is in the Body, which is in every part of the Body, enlivening and
actuating every part. God is totus actus, all Act. He works (says our
Savior); hitherto my Father works: Take heed of making an Idol of God in
your secret thoughts and apprehensions of Him. Our fear of God, our love, our
homage to him, will all be proportioned to our apprehensions of him; it is
therefore of great importance for Christians to have right notions and
apprehensions of God, otherwise they will never glorify him as God; and needs
must his Being be an active working Being, if (as my Text says) he preserves
man and beast. They in all places have need of the Activity of God every hour,
every moment.

3. Thirdly, This may teach you to apprehend the great God, as the Psalmist
does describe him, Psalm 113.5, 6, Who is like unto the Lord our God, who
dwells on high: who humbles himself to behold the things that are in the
Heavens, and in the Earth? This beholding is not an idle view, and beholding of
them neither, as follows there, ver. 7. He raises up the poor out of the
dust; and lifts the needy out of the dunghill. God is not in the world as a
King is in his Kingdom only. A King is a body, that must occupy, and take up
but one space; there he is, and influenceth his dominions by his Laws, Edicts,
and the ministry of inferior Magistrates. But this great Lord is in all
places, Quis disposuit membra culicis, and pulicis, ut habeant ordinem suum,
and vitam suam? quis disposuit ista? quis fecit ista? Aug.
has his hand in and upon every natural action. It is Augustines meditation:
Who (says he) has disposed, and set in order, the members of the flea, and of
the gnat, who has given them life? Consider but any little beast, what you
will, who has made them? upon Psalm. 147. The usual prejudice against this
Doctrine in our thoughts is, that it seems to be an employment too low for the
great God, to uphold the faculties of the meaner and more dishonorable part of
his creatures: but Ambrose answers it well. If it were not beneath the honor
of God to make them, it is not beneath his honor to uphold and preserve them;
in the mean time how does God humble himself in these his acts of Providence?
Who is like unto our God, who humbles himself thus to behold, and look upon;
to care for, and look to the meanest of his creatures?

4. But this Doctrine shows us God admirable in nothing more than in his
patience and long-suffering. Has any of us an appetite to our meat and drink,
a power to digest and concoct it, it is the Lord that gives it: have we a power
to move our tongue to speak, our feet to walk, our body to any natural actions?
all this is from the Lord, who is wonderful in working. Oh how patient is God
with the drunkard, with the liar, the profane swearer, with all sorts of
sinners, who use their bodies, or the several members and parts of them, to the
profaning, abusing, blaspheming of his holy name; or in doing, or in order to
the doing of any actions in the violation and contempt of his holy and
righteous Laws. Why do they go on despising the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
them to repentance? but after the hardness and impenitency of their hearts
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation
of the righteous judgment of God. Who will render unto every man according to
his deeds, Romans 2.3, 4, 5. Yea, and the Lord is not slack, as some men count
slackness, but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. But the day of the Lord will
come as a thief in the night, 2 Pet. 3.10. Thus far this Doctrine may instruct
you concerning God.

Secondly, instruct us a little concerning our selves. I remember the Psalmist,
Psalm. 139, 14. cries out, I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Certainly every
one of us may see reason to cry out, O Lord! I am fearfully and wonderfully
preserved; the truth is, none of us think upon it as we ought to do. If a man
would sit down, and think how many bones are in the body of a man, a
dislocation of any of which would make his life, without speedy help, very
uncomfortable to him; how many nerves, arteries, muscles; how many parts,
humors, etc. What offices they have, how many passages are in his body, how
many ways they may be stopped, what faculties and powers are in these, how
these are upheld to their due operations; and in them, how many things are
noxious to, and at enmity with man; he would think the life, the health of
every day almost a miracle, and cry out, O Lord, I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully preserved: we live by a miracle almost every hour.
Study this, it will much contribute to your being in the fear of the Lord all
the day-long. And that is the last use that I shall make of this discourse, so
far as I have carried it on.

Learn here what an Argument this point affords.

1. For the defaming of all sin, and disobedience to the divine will.

2. For the promoving of piety, indeed in all the parts of it.

First. How should this defame sin to every ingenuous soul, and that two ways.
1. As it shows it to be a most audacious daring of a just and holy God. I
remember a passage God uses to his ancient people the Jews, Hos. 2.9, She did
not know that I gave her her corn, wine and oil, which she prepared for Baal;
therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine
in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax given to cover her
nakedness; and I will discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers. Does
the man who uses his tongue to lying, cursing, swearing, blaspheming,
reviling, know that it is God that upholdeth that faculty by which he speaks?
Does the glutton and the drunkard know that it is God that gives him an
appetite, a power of concoction, and digestion, attraction, etc. Does the
sinner know, that it is God who gives him air to suck in, and a power to suck
it in? does he know that it is God who has given him that hand, and a power to
move that hand, which from the malice of his heart he stretches out to work
iniquity? Oh! what a daring of an holy and righteous God must all sinning with
our bodily members be! Methinks the bold and daring sinner should think with
himself these two things. 1. That he who gave him these natural powers, can
also at pleasure take them away. 2. That he can do it with the greatest ease
imaginable. It is but the withdrawing of this hand of Providence from us, our
natural powers fail; our faculties are all lost. When a man is using his tongue
to lie to his neighbor, to curse him, to swear profanely, and to blaspheme
God; methinks he should thus think with himself, How easily can God stop my
breath, withdraw that hand from my tongue which upholds my faculty to speak.
Methinks he should remember the instance of Ananias, and Saphira, and Zechariah
the father of John the Baptist, but for a few words of unbelief. When a man is
stretching out his hand to work any iniquity, methinks he should remember how
easily God could do by him, as by Jeroboam, When he stretched out his hand to
lay hold of the Prophet, and his hand presently withered. If any of you lent
your hand to one that were blind, or lame, and he should spit in your face,
revile you, etc. would not you think it a strange daring of you? Oh! what a
daring of an holy, just, and powerful God it is for a man wilfully and
presumptuously to use a member of his body, or a power, or faculty of his Soul,
knowingly, and presumptuously to sin against God? Thus this Doctrine may serve
to defame sin to every ingenuous soul, as it necessarily must be an impudent
daring of a just and holy God.

2. But it defameth it further, As it speaks it an act of the highest
ingratitude imaginable. Ingratitude sounds ill, very ill in the ears of
humane nature; so ill, that an Heathen could say of it, Call a man an
ungrateful man, and you call him all that is naught: it is a very great vice.
Every sinner must say, If God had not been so good to me, I had not been so
evil against him. The Drunkard must say, If God had not assisted me to my
natural action in drinking, I could not have dishonored him by that excess.
The like must every sinner say, the liar, the swearer, the adulterer. God has
nothing to do with the obliquity of their action; but to the action so far
forth as natural, his Providence assisteth, upholding the natural faculties to
their natural Operations. And do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people?
Is this your thankfulness to God for Gods assistance of you in the use of your
faculties, for the necessary uses of your life? I gave thee cloth, says God,
to cover thy nakedness, thou make it to serve thy pride; my creatures to
silence thy natural passions of hunger, and thirst, and thou usest it to serve
thy Luxury. I gave thee a tongue to interpret thy mind to thy neighbor, and to
praise me, and I assist thee in the natural use of it: thou usest it to swear,
curse, to blaspheme my great and sacred name. I gave thee an hand, and assist
thee in the use of it, that thou may get bread, and do the works of thy
calling in order thereunto: thou usest it to smite with the fist of wickedness,
to persecute and oppress my people. Thus the sinner turns the gifts of God
into weapons with which he fights against him. I remember a quite contrary
resolution in holy David, Psalm. 116, I will (says he) take the cup, of
salvation, and praise the Lord. I know, that Poculum salutis is capable of
other interpretations, which are also given according to the various fancies of
Interpreters. But why may not we interpret it thus? I will take that very mercy
which, thou have showed me, and use it, and improve it for thy honor and
glory. Certainly thus we ought to do as Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. did by her child
Samuel, which she had begged and received of God. She takes her child, and at
the return of the year carries him up to Jerusalem, and says, For this child
I prayed, and the Lord heard me; has given me my Petition which I asked of
him: Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord; as long as he lives he shall
be lent unto the Lord. But of this more under the next head; to which I now
come, to show you how far what you have heard may be useful. 2. To promove
piety, and that both in the internal and external acts of it, in the more
immediate acts of homage, which we are to pay to God, and in all the duties of
an holy and pious conversation before men, in obedience to the will of God. It
is not hard to understand upon this hypothesis, that God does thus concur in
the assistance of all our natural faculties, in order to the preserving of us,
how reasonable it is, that we should be in the fear of the Lord all the day
long; That we should live in an exercise of faith, trust and dependency upon
him; That we should love the Lord at all times. And for acts of more external
immediate homage, prayer and praise, etc. How reasonable a thing is prayer
morning and evening; do thou not remember it is God that must concur to give
thee sleep in the night, a power to breath, to move, to work, to eat, to drink,
etc. and give me leave to tell you, if you do not think the sleep of the night,
or a strength to labor in the day, an appetite to thy meat, a power to digest
it, a liberty and power to breath, mercies worth the asking; it is because thou
have not wanted them much: will you not every day have need of the use of your
senses, your hands, your tongue, your feet, your ears, etc? do not you think
them mercies worth the asking? Go to the lame, and the blind, and the deaf, and
those that lie on sick-beds, and enquire of them; they will better instruct you
in the value of these things. Do not you know what to pray for so often? this
Doctrine will show you in part; pray that God would preserve your life and
being, uphold your powers and faculties, etc. And Praise is as reasonable as
Prayer; you are every day fearfully and wonderfully preserved. By whose power
is it, as Peter and James said to the people when they had cured the lame man?
Not by our power, but by the power of Jesus of Nazareth does this man walk. So
give me leave to tell you, it is not by your own power, nor by the mere virtue
of your own faculties, with which you are born, that you sleep, walk,
discourse, work, but by the mighty power of God concurring and assisting those
faculties. Particularly, you may hence conclude the reasonableness of that
Religious custom, (which some have bruitishly cast off) begging a blessing upon
your meat at meals, and giving thanks after receipt of it.

Lastly, Certainly this Meditation well digested, cannot but highly promove all
manner of practical holiness. For what is holiness, but the obedience of the
members of our bodies and powers, and faculties of our Souls to the Will of
God, the exercise of them all according to the Divine Rule, and the end for
which he gave them to us; and what can be more persuasive to this, than for us
to hear, that as God has given these powers, so God upholdeth them in
exercise; in him we live, by him every member we have moves, and we are all
kept in being: may I not therefore with the Apostle conclude, Romans 12.1, I
beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your
bodies as a living sacrifice, holy acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service. It is reasonable that he who has given you the Sacrifice,
should smell the sweet savor of it. He has provided the sacrifice for you; He
has provided it for that end, to be a sacrifice for him; it is therefore but a
reasonable Service. It is reasonable that he who planteth a Vineyard, who
dresseth, keeps, and preserves it every day, should have some of the fruit
thereof. Which of you planteth a Vineyard, and Orchard, etc. and eats not of
the fruit thereof? But I shall add no more to this first part of my Discourse,
concerning Gods preserving Providence.

SERMON VII.
Psalm. XXXVI. 6. -- O Lord! thou preservest man and beast.
I AM discoursing concerning the first mentioned great Act of Providence, in
the Preservation both of man and beast, Upholding all things by the word of his
power. I showed you in my last Discourse, by what particular acts, God
preserves individuals of all kinds. But Man, is to be considered yet in two
notions further: Man is (...), a sociable, a political creature; and so as one
of a multitude, formed into political bodies, called by the names of Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, etc. He is further to be considered, as a spiritual creature;
capable of Divine Grace, and diverse spiritual Habits, things which accompany
salvation, and make him fit for the Kingdom of God, and preparing him for that
blessed Eternity, which is the end of our hopes. These also must be upheld, and
maintained by the power of Providence; We are (says the Apostle) kept by the
power of God through faith to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. My last Discourse showed
you no more than the particular workings of Divine Providence, in preserving
and upholding the natural world. Let me now show you the workings of it, in
preserving and upholding the Political, and Spiritual World. I begin with the
former, and so the preserving Providence of God works several ways. 1. In
disposing the minds of all people unto Government. There are indeed some
Anomalies here, some sons of Belial in all places, that will endure no yoke,
but generally it is not so. And the minds of men are disposed to order and
Government; without Government Polities could not stand, the World would
quickly be in confusion; there can be no order without Governors, and
governed. Governors must be spirited for the exercise of Government, and the
Governed must be spirited for obedience. Both these are from the Lord, who is
wonderful in working. Every one is not fit to govern; he has not parts for it,
he has not a spirit for it. Some are like Issachar, fit for nothing but to
couch under the burden. Others like Judah, who have hands fit to be upon the
necks of their Enemies, and their fathers children shall bow down before them.

1. God by his Providence influenceth some for the exercise of Government,
either from the womb, or from the time they are called to that exercise, as it
is said of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.9, when Samuel had anointed him to be King over
Israel, God gave him another heart. Every man has not a spirit of Government;
there is much goes to the making up of that spirit. It was prophesied of
Christ, Isa. 9.6, That the Government should be upon his shoulders. And Isa.
11.2, The Spirit shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom, and understanding,
the spirit of counsel, and might, the spirit of knowledge, and fear of the Lord.
A spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord is necessary to a religious
Government. A spirit of understanding and wisdom; a spirit of counsel, and
might, is necessary for a good civil Government. Joshua the Son of Nun, was
full of the spirit of wisdom, Deuteronomy. 34 9. Every man in a Kingdom, or a City, or
Commonwealth, has not knowledge, and understanding, nor wisdom, and counsel,
nor might, and courage fit for Government: God gives it only to some persons,
whom he designeth to rule over men. And herein is the Providence of God
mightily seen, and that both in Hereditary Kingdoms and States, and in those
also which are Elective: 1. In such as are hereditary: ordinarily the sons of
Princes are not like other men, though under equal circumstances of Education.
When Gideon asked Zeba and Zalmunna, Judge. 8.18, What manner of men they were
that they killed? They answered him thus, As thou art, so were they; each one
resembled the children of a King: There is something that ordinarily appears in
the faces of Princes, more of Majesty than in other men, which shows another
spirit. I know that this is not universal; there have been Princes in the World
of mean parts, courage, etc. which ordinarily happens when God has a quarrel
with a people, Eccl. 10.16, 17, Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a child,
and thy Princes eat in the morning: Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is
the son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for
drunkenness. 2. It is much seen in Elective governments. God by his Providence
directs, and disposes the Electors to the choice of such persons as he has
prepared with such a spirit; or (except in cases where God has a design by
unworthy Governors to chastise a sinful people) when they are chosen, he
gives unto them such a spirit, and by his extraordinary Providence corrects
the errors of those that choose them to that employment. This is a wonderful
working of Divine Providence. We often see persons in Government, showing quite
another spirit and temper than they before appeared to us to have. Nor is the
Providence of God less seen in disposing the spirits of the Governed; That
thousands, yea millions of people should consent to a subjection to one chief
Ruler (as in a Monarchy) or to the Government of a few (as in Commonwealths),
and be willing to be ruled and governed by him, or them: yet this we ordinarily
see. It is the Lords doing, and it should be mavelous in our eyes: and it
would be so, if we would but be so considerate as to think of the variety of
men's humors, fancies and passions. Sometimes indeed God in judgment against a
people, suffers a perverse spirit to mingle it self with the governed; there
are rebellions, and mutinies, yet those for the most part are originated in
oppression and violence. But supposing no errors in Governors, that yet
multitudes of people should be so willingly subject (and yet few of them for
conscience sake) must needs come from the Lords influence, who is wonderful in
the working for the preserving of the Politic Societies of men, which without
a Political order or Government could not stand.

2. Secondly, God preserves men in their Political Societies, by directing
them to make, and to agree in Laws proper for their Government; as to this he
upholdeth the reason of Legislators. Laws are the rules of Government. 1. God
has given unto men a Divine Law for a Copy; the Book of this, the King of
Israel was always to have before him, and he was to read in it all the days of
his life, Deuteronomy. 17.19. Jos. 1.8. The Divine Law concerns some generals; but
there must be many particular Laws, respecting the complexions of several
Kingdoms and bodies of people: In the making of which the Providence of God,
and his influence is wonderfully seen, upholding the reason of the Lawmakers to
the making of such Laws as are necessary and expedient, and proper for the
government of such a people. It is true, as the Hebrew Doctors were wont to
say, That the Spirit of God did not always touch the hearts of the Prophets; so
neither does the Spirit of God always touch and direct the hearts of
Legislators. God suffers sometimes the wisdom of the wise to fail them:
impious and wicked Laws, foolish and insignificant Laws may sometimes be made,
to which it were blasphemy to entitle God in any efficient causation. God will
by these instances let us see men are but men; but yet there is such an
ordinary influence of Divine Providence, that although some Kingdoms and
Commonwealths in a Superfoetation of Laws may have some wicked and impious,
others foolish and insignificant; yet they are not deficient in such as are
necessary to maintain Justice, and preserve civil order and peace. Now although
we must by no means entitle God to the wicked effects of men (which he only
permits), nor to the follies and impertinencies of men: yet he is justly to be
entitled to the wise and prudent effects of his creatures; for good useful and
necessary Laws they are from the Lord, who is wise in counsel, from whom comes
every good and perfect gift. If the Plowman be instructed by God with
discretion, and taught, and the Thresher be instructed, as to the discretion he
uses, by the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in
working (which the Prophet asserteth, Isa. 28.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.) Then
certainly the hearts of those who are instructed to the making of Rules for the
Government of the great bodies of his people, are instructed also from the
Lord, who is great in Wisdom, and wonderful in Counsel. And herein is the
mighty Power and Wisdom of God seen, in the preservation of Political Societies.

3. A third thing wherein the Providence of God is seen in the preserving of
these Societies, is, In the ordinary silencing of those passions in men, which
disorder and disturb all Government. We justly look upon it as a merciful piece
of Divine Providence, to conceal from some beasts of great use in our lives
their own strength, which if known to them, would make them our masters. The
multitude in any Polity is as an unruly beast, and all Governments are
preserved by their ignorance of their own strength, and the bridle of Divine
Providence, by which God keeps them in and silenceth their passions, which if
let loose, would quickly turn all into a tumult and confusion. The Individuals
of all Societies are full of boisterous and brutish passions; so as a
considerate man when he looks upon such a City as this, or any other great
Political Body, and considers how many persons are in it of unruly tempers
and passions, who either know not the rules of natural Justice and Equity; or
if they know any thing of them, their lusts and passions will not suffer them
to live in any just observance of them; will see reason to wonder how people of
such heterogeneous tempers and different passions, should ever live together a
year, or a month, in peace and any degrees of order: nor is there any thing
which holds them together but the wonderful influence of Divine Providence,
silencing their passions, and restraining those lusts in men, which otherwise
would set any Kingdom, City or Nation on a fire, and bring it quickly to an
heap of rubbish and confusion. It was said of old, that in the degenerate state
of man, Homo homini lupus, one man is a Wolf to another, and nothing but the
Divine Hand keeps them from biting and devouring each other; the Lord by his
Providence holds them in as the Horse and the Mule with bit and bridle. When
God thinks fit for the punishment of persons or Nations but a little to let
loose the Reins, we see what brutish passions do discover themselves in men;
what envy, malice, revenge, oppression, and other lusts and vices directly
tending to destroy Societies. So as we are only preserved because these
disorders are but fits of distemper, not abiding diseases in the bodies of
people; and the reason why they are no more is from Gods restraining influence
upon unruly turbulent spirits: He that rules the raging of the Sea, and
stilleth the waves thereof when they arise, rules also the passions of men,
keeps them generally still, and stilleth them if at any time they rise to any
exorbitant height: it is the same power that does them both: Psalm 65.7, Thou
stillest the noise of the Sea, the noise of its waves, and the tumults of the
people. It is God that says, Be still, O ye inhabitants of the Islands: Whence
is it but from this, that there are so few murders, rapes, etc. no more thefts
and acts of Violence? We see the fear of punishment will not restrain them, as
soon as God but takes off his restraint from them; and the consideration how
unreasonable multitudes appear in their fits of disorder, is enough to convince
men, that the general tie of people have not reason enough to be a law unto
themselves, but are merely governed and overruled by the influence of Gods
restraint upon them, for the preservation of his people in their political
Societies.

4. A fourth thing wherein the power of Divine Providence is eminently seen in
the preservation of Men, in their Political Societies, is in discovering the
secret devices, and conspiracies of men, tending to the disturbance and
dissolution of Government in the places where they live: I still understand
this in ordinary causes. When God has a design to punish a Senacherib, he
suffers the plottings of his own sons to take effect against him. God sometimes
punishes Rulers: sometimes he punishes People by such sufferances, but
ordinarily he does not. You have an hundred Treasons discovered, for one that
takes effect. Here I might enlarge strangely, how God brings to light those
hidden works of darkness, wherein the welfare of States and Kingdoms are
concerned. Solomon therefore gives good counsel, Eccles. 10.20, Curse not the
King in thy thoughts, nor the rich (that is, the Ruler I conceive) in thy
Bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter; that is, it shall be discovered strangely and
swiftly. What eminent instances of Divine Providence of this nature we had in
our own Nation, especially in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and the beginning
of King James his reign.

1. Sometimes God sets their own Consciences on work, and they shall betray
and discover themselves; before they fall to their work, God smites one of
their Consciences, and they come and discover their Accomplices and confess their
own errors: how often have we had this in our own story? 2. Sometimes their
Countenances shall betray them, while they are just ready to strike the fatal
stroke. 3. Sometimes a terror shall seize them, and their Daggers shall drop
out of their hands. 4. Sometimes their own Letters shall destroy them (of which
we had an eminent instance in the Powder Treason, hatched by Papists in this
Nation); sometimes the powder shall not take fire: another time it shall miss
the mark. The Monsters are sometimes brought to the birth, and the parents of
them want a strength to bring forth. How often was Queen Elizabeth in this
Nation so preserved to fulfill the word of the Lord? Job 5.12, He disappointeth
the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.

5. A fifth thing I shall instance in, is Gods defeatings of the counsels of
Ahitophels. All men are not alike in wisdom and counsel: God fitteth some more
eminently, who are to have stations in the public Government and Councils of a
Nation. Amongst these, some are men of integrity and sincerity, men of public
spirits and designs, who use all their wits, parts and abilities, for the
general good and prosperity of people. Others are men of more private spirits,
driving selfish designs; and these ofttimes are men of great craft and
subtilty, whose counsels yet, should they take effect, would ruin the body
politic, which they pretend to serve, whiles they serve but their own bellies,
or families, or the lusts of some others in order to that end. Here now the
Providence of God is often seen, in defeating their counsels, and that various
ways: Sometimes by making them unacceptable, as was in the case of Ahitophel:
his counsels ordinarily, were taken and followed as Oracles; but God makes the
counsel of Hushai, though (as appears by the story, a friend at first
suspected by Absalom) to be more accepted. Sometime God does it by some more
extraordinary ways, as in the case of Haman, who had both given counsel, and
obtained a decree against the Jews. The King shall not sleep, but spend his
waking times, reading the book of the Chronicles; there he shall fall upon the
place where a record is of the good service Mordecai had done. The King shall
mistake Haman's Courtship to the Queen, while he is making suit to the Queen
for his life, for an attempt to force her: Thus Haman shall be defeated in his
designs, and it shall be his own lot to be hanged upon the Gallows which he had
prepared for Mordecay: nor are these the only instances. There is no Kingdom,
no Age, in which observing persons will not observe some instance or other of
this nature, for the preservation of the Political societies of men.

Sixthly, The power of divine Providence in preserving Political societies, is
eminently seen in ballancing and diverting opposite powers. It is wonderful to
observe how God ballanceth one Nation against another; sometimes by natural
situation, sometimes by voluntary associations. We in England are an instance
of the former. All the Kingdoms about us are larger and more mighty than we
are; France, Spain, etc. far more populous. God has balanced us with them by
our situation. We are an Island, we are powerful in Shipping, they cannot
march an army by land against us: that keeps us at some proportion with them,
and from being a prey to them, often gaping for us. Others God has situated
in Countries full of Rocks, and Mountains, and Waters; by which natural
Fortifications they are balanced with the far greater fleshly power of their
Enemies. Thus God preserved his people in Epirus from the overflowing flood of
the Turkish Power: In Holland, from the attempts of the Spaniard 40 years
together, a Nation far more great and mighty than they. Thus he has preserved
his Church, his little flock in the Valleys of Piedmont and Lucerne. As Solomon
says, because the Conies are a feeble people, they have their habitation in
the Rocks: So where God has had a little people, a feeble people, his
Providence has for their habitation allowed them the natural defenses of
mountains, and the inaccessible paths of Rocks. Others he ballanceth with the
far greater power of their adversaries, by voluntary confederacies and
consociations: were they singly to be encountered, they would quickly be
swallowed up; but they join in league with others, and so make a proportion to
their Potent Adversaries. Some he ballanceth by giving them a more
extraordinary strength, spirit, courage; that one will chase ten, and ten an
hundred, and an hundred a thousand, and a thousand shall put ten thousand of
their Enemies in flight. Some are stronger in Landforces, but weak as to
Naval-forces; others strong in Naval-forces, but weaker in Landforces: till
the period of a Nation comes (for Nations have their periods) he ballanceth all
Political Societies one way or other, according to the variety of his infinite
wisdom. 2. Another way is by Diversion; you have many instances of this in
Scripture. How often has God thus preserved us in Europe, from the overflowing
flood of the Turks, by stirring up the Persians to invade him, by suffering
rebellions amongst those that are his own Subjects. But I shall contract this
discourse, much will fall into my following discourse of Governing Providence.

7. The last thing which I shall instance in, wherein the Providence of God is
seen in the preserving of men in their Political Societies, is, in giving unto
men wisdom, and disposing of them to several Arts, Trades, Mysteries, and
Occupations, by which they become mutually serviceable one to another, and
contribute to the upholding the societies in which they live. Here are two
things, in both which, the Providence of God is eminent to every eye which
wistly observes it. There is nothing more evident than that there is a variety
of Arts, Mysteries, Trades, and Occupations useful for man, by some of which he
is supplied with things necessary for food and raiment; by others of them, with
things for delight and ornament: both the one and the other, if not necessary
for individuals, yet are necessary for preserving a Polity consisting of
multitudes.

Now, 1. The wisdom, by which men work in these several Arts, Mysteries, and
Occupations, and by which men follow these several Trades, is from the Lord.
The Prophet Isaiah tells us, the discretion of the Plowman, and of the
Thresher is from him. God called by name Bezaliel, the Son of Uri, and he was
filled with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in
knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship: and to devise curious works, to
work in gold, in silver, and in brass: And in cutting of stones, to set them,
and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work, Exodus 35.31, 32,
33, 34. and it is said, that God filled him and Aholiab with wisdom of heart to
work all manner of work of the engraver, and of the cunning workman; and of the
embroiderer, in blue, purple, and in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the
weaver, even of them that do any work, and devise any cunning work, v. 35.

2. The Providence of God in this thing is eminently discerned, in disposing
men to these several employments. So that as in the natural body, there are
several members, and every member is inclined, and naturally disposed to its
particular office; by which the several uses and necessities of the
body-natural are supplied. So in bodies politic, as there is a great variety
of members, so the several members of it are, by the wise Providence of God,
disposed and inclined to the learning and practice of several Arts and
Sciences, Trades and Occupations; by which, the uses of the whole are supplied,
as well as the several individuals in the Society enabled to get themselves a
subsistence, yet in the service of the public: This is a great piece of Divine
Providence. One man is disposed to husbandry; unless some were so disposed,
however slavish and dirty the employment be, the Nation could not be fed:
others to the making of Clothes, and Stuffs, and Linnens; if none were so
disposed, though the whole might be fed, they could not be clothed. One works
in iron and brass for more necessary uses; another in gold and silver for
Ornaments, and more fine and delicate uses. One man is disposed to study
Physic, Law, Divinity, and cannot endure hard labor: another is of a more
slavish and servile disposition, no ways disposed to learning and studies: All
this is from the Lord, and by this working of his Providence, the uses of all
are supplied, and so Political Societies are by this means preserved. We have
now considered man, 1. In his single and individual capacity: And. 2. In his
Social and Political capacity; and shown you several acts of Divine Providence,
by which God, in either, preserves him. But we have yet a third capacity to
consider him in, that is, his spiritual capacity, as a creature possessed of
the grace of God, the Grace of Justification, and the Grace of Sanctification.
As to this he is in a peculiar sense Gods creature, often, by Saint John, said
to be born of God: and as to this likewise he is preserved by God, 1 Pet. 1.5,
You are kept by the power of God, through faith to salvation. Indeed, a
discourse upon this properly belongs to the specialties of Providence, of
which, I may possibly hereafter speak distinctly; but not knowing whether I
shall reach to that, something (though more shortly and generally) I shall
speak to it here. Grace in the Soul of a man, or woman, is a noble creature,
and one of those things that are upheld by the mighty power of God. Now that
which I have to do is to consider, How the Providence of God works in
upholding this noble creature in those individual souls, into which he has
breathed this breath of spiritual life. Let me show you this in a few
particulars.

1. God preserves man in his spiritual life and capacity, by a daily repeating
to him his gracious acts, in the pardon of sin, and reckoning of Christ's
righteousness to him. It has been a Question betwixt Arminians, Papists, and
Calvinists, Whether there can be an intercision of the state of Justification?
Whether a soul once justified can again be not justified? We say No. The gifts
and callings of God are without repentance; whom he loves he loves to the
end: Well, but how can this be? for who lives and sins not? The righteous
falls seven times in a day. If Justification be not repeated, how can a soul
be justified? We say, Though the state abide, yet Gods gracious acts are
repeated. Sin is not pardoned before it is committed; but when committed, it is
pardoned by a repetition of an act of Grace. Justification speaks a state; this
is not repeated: but remission of sin, is an act of Grace frequently repeated;
and the imputing of Christ's righteousness is an act often repeated. We are not
daily created or born, as to our natural life, but we are daily preserved: so
God puts the believer once into a state of Justification, that abides and
fails not; but we should fall from it every day, did not God continue us in
it, by the repetition of these gracious acts. We need a continual pardoning, a
continual imputation of the righteousness of Christ, to preserve our spiritual
life, as we need continual acts of Providence to preserve and to uphold our
souls in their natural life. Thus every day it is God that justifies.

2. God preserves his Church and particular souls, as to their spiritual life,
by a daily infusion of those habits of grace, which are necessary in those
souls that are ordained unto life, as the principles of those operations by
which they must attain this life, and by increasing these habits in them. In a
word, by perfecting, 1. The number of his Saints. 2. By perfecting their
graces. The first respects the collective body of his Church, and is called
in Scripture, an adding to the Church such as shall be saved; a working of
faith in all them that are ordained unto eternal salvation: without this the
Church of God must perish, and fail from the earth in a short time. Gods people
are mortal, even as others. Now God so orders it in his Providence, that
there is a succession. One generation of believers passes, another comes; and
thus God has a seed kept alive in the Earth. 2. God also does it as to
individuals, by a daily infusion of gracious habits, further strengthening and
quickening them to their spiritual operations, Phil. 4.13, I can do all things
(says the Apostle) through Christ that strengthens me: believers, Ephesians. 3.16,
are strengthened with might by his Spirit. God upholdeth his own seed in the
soul, and blows up the sparks which himself has kindled.

3. Gods Providence in the preservation of men in their spiritual capacity, is
seen, in the upholding and maintaining his word and ordinances, upon which the
souls of his people live. As the body lives by bread, as to its natural
capacity; so the soul lives by the word of God, as to its spiritual capacity.
By these things men live (says Hezekiah). I know some interpret that passage
concerning afflictions: but others concerning the promises. Now the Providence
of God has been, and is eminently seen, in maintaining of his word; the
written word, the word preached; in taking care that his people have had a
succession of Ministers. Before the Books of Moses were written, God provided
for the souls of his people by a word not written: since, by a written word,
and that most eminently, since the whole Scripture was written, since which
time Prophecy; and unwritten Revelations are much ceased, not further to be
expected. God may yet reveal himself to some particular servants of his: but we
are not to expect such Revelations, nor are they the object of faith. Now
herein has the stupendous Providence of God been eminently seen; that when so
many thousand books wrote since the Scriptures were written, are lost, and
there is no memorial almost of them; and the Scriptures have had more enemies
than any of them, more that have endeavored to corrupt them, and to destroy
them; yet God has preserved this storehouse of spiritual food, and kept it
from corruption by the extraordinary care of the Jewish Church; the multiplying
of translations, guiding and governing of those who have been employed in them:
Nor has the Providence of God been less seen in maintaining Ministers and
Teachers of his word. In the Jewish Church, when the ordinary officers failed,
and were corrupted, God from time to time raised them up Prophets, who were his
extraordinary Ambassadors to teach his people. In Christ's time, he calls
Fishermen to the Apostleship: and in all succeeding Ages, though there have
been sometimes more, sometimes fewer able, and faithful Ministers; yet God has
so ordered, that there never have wanted some, and a competent number to break
the bread of life, and to feed his people with wisdom, and with spiritual
understanding. No sort of men have been more maligned, hated, persecuted, yet
God has upheld the order, and taken care for the souls of his people, that
they have continually had faithful stewards of the mysteries of God.

4. The Providence of God is admirable in preserving man in his spiritual
capacity, in the daily influence of his spirit attending his word, and
sanctifying his institutions. The word is in it self but a dead letter; the
Preaching of the word is far from a mean adequate to so great an effect as is
the conversion and edification of souls: God is therefore pleased to join his
quickening spirit to the word, where he pleases, blessing and sanctifying it.
I am not of their judgment, who think that there is such a constant concurrence
and influence of the Spirit with the preaching of the Gospel, that if men will
do what in them lies, they may repent, believe, etc. I know no Scripture which
will justify that notion; but certain it is, that the holy Spirit does
ordinarily join it self with the preaching of the word, like the wind blowing
where it pleases, and none knows the motion of it, convincing men of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment.

5. Lastly, The Providence of God preserves men in their spiritual capacities,
by supplying them with strength and succor against their spiritual enemies;
their own flesh, the world, the Devil; all which with a variety of temptations
strike at our spiritual welfare. But this is much of kin to what I said before.
I shall add no more to this discourse concerning Gods Act of Providence, as in
the preservation of beasts, so of men, and that in their single natural
capacities; In their Social and Political capacities, and finally in their
Spiritual capacities. I shall only add some few words of application.

This in the first place may inform us, How great that God must necessarily be
whom we serve; he is the Creator of the ends of the Earth, of the Heavens, of
the Seas, of all things, and it is he who preserves both man and beast: he
preserves all men in their single and natural capacities; this I opened
before. He preserves all men in their Political capacities, all his people in
their Spiritual capacities. It is an ordinary observation in the Kingdoms and
Empires of the world, that when they have grown to a great bigness, they have
perished with their own bulk and weight. No Monarch has been found sufficient
to preserve them by his wisdom and Counsels. And I remember the Historian
speaks of it to the great honor, and as a wonderful thing, in one of the first
Roman Kings, that he put the Roman Kingdom (it was no more then) into such an
order, that it was governed as if it had been but one Family. But how much does
it speak the Glory and Majesty, the Immensity and Omnipresence, the Efficiency
and Activity of God, who at the same time is working over all the Earth, in all
the Empires and Kingdoms, in all the Cities and Towns in it, defeating
Ahitophels, discovering Plots and Conspiracies, ruling the spirits of unruly
men; so as the whole Universe is kept in order: and the thousands and ten
thousands of men in it, that know not the yoke of Reason and Religion, are yet
bridled by his Providence, and kept in some just order and decorum, and made,
in stead of running one upon another, and destroying one another, mutually to
be subservient one to another? I say, how great? how wise? how infinite? how
glorious in power must this God be?

Secondly, Observe how much mercy passes over our heads, which we do take
little or no notice of: We are fearfully and wonderfully preserved, and that in
every capacity. I showed you it before as to our natural capacity, few think of
that; what a strange working of Providence there must be to keep our souls in
life but one day: It is as much remarkable in our Political capacity. I
remember, when Christ sent out his Disciples to Preach, he told them, That he
sent them out as lambs amongst wolves. It is true indeed, not only of
Gospel-Preachers, but of all sober and virtuous men, that would live in the
world but according to the Laws of Reason and Moral virtue. They are in the
world as lambs amongst wolves: Let but any one consider how many lewd,
unrighteous, debauched men are in all places, such whose only rule is their
lusts: how full the world is of men that make no conscience of murders, rapes,
thefts, oppression, and other enormities, and then stand and wonder at the
Providence of God, that in any part of the world there is any thing of order
and decorum observed, that men have any thing which they can call their own,
that the lives of Princes or sober people are secured. What can it be
attributed to, but the mighty power of Divine Providence, that we have no more
murders, rapes, thefts, etc. we see laws, punishments will not restrain all,
nor the same men at all times; how, or whence is it, that they restrain any, or
at any time? I will conclude this with what the Psalmist so often makes the
foot in that his admirable song of Providence, Psalm. 107, Oh! that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness, for his wonderful works to the children of
men! Oh that Princes would praise the Lord for his goodness! It is by him that
they reign, that they have a days liberty to decree justice; by him that the
Counsels of Ahitophel are defeated, the conspiracies of ungodly men are
discovered; that the spirits of unruly and unreasonable men are subdued under
them: by him that they have wisdom to make Laws, and liberty to execute them:
that men in their dominions are disposed into their several orders, ranks and
stations, so as mutually to serve one another, and to uphold the whole. Oh that
Subjects would praise the Lord for his goodness! that they have wise
Magistrates, good Laws, that their lives are not Sacrificed to murderers, that
their houses are not fired, that their Wives and Virgins are not ravished, that
they are disposed to Trades and Occupations: that they have wisdom for them, a
spirit to them. Let every Citizen, every Subject, see and acknowledge the hand
of the Lord in these things, and bless his holy name.

But lastly, Let the Redeemed of the Lord, particularly, see and acknowledge the
Providence of God, in the preserving of them in their spiritual capacities.
Were it not for the preserving Providence of God, our spiritual life would be
extinguished every moment: God preserves it by repeating his Gracious Acts in
the remission of our sins, in the imputation of Christ's righteousness. Our
habits of grace would weaken: we a^^ preserved and kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation. It is a great mercy, and deserves a great
acknowledgment, that we have our lives preserved, our estates preserved, our
wives and daughters preserved. But oh! how much greater is it, that we have our
state of Justification maintained? Our principles of Spiritual Operations, our
habits of Grace, our power to repent, believe, love God, preserved; that the
influences of Grace are continued, that we have the Word and Ordinances
preserved. Let the redeemed of the Lord say, his mercy endures for ever; let
them adore preserving-Providence: let them consider what a subtle adversary
they have, Who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.
What abundance of lusts and corruptions they have in their own hearts; what a
law in their members, warring against the law of their minds; and they will
say, that the seed of God, which is in them, is wonderfully preserved. But thus
much may serve to have spoken of the first great act of Providence, which I
called Preservation. My next work is to speak concerning Government.

SERMON VIII.
Psalm. CIII. 19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his
Kingdom rules over all
I AM (as you know) discoursing concerning the Principal Acts of Actual
Providence, which I told you were two: 1. Preservation, 2. Government. All
things were at first created by a Divine word of Power: all things are
preserved by a Divine Power; He upholdeth all things by the word of his Power
(says the Apostle). This I have done with: but Gods actual Providence does not
extend only to the upholding and the preserving of all his creatures, but he
governs them also. Preservation respects their several beings and
capacities: Government respects their motions and actions. For a Discourse
upon this I have made choice of this Text, and choosing it with that design
only, I do not take my self so much concerned to enquire into its relation to
what went before, or follows. I shall only consider it in it self: and so it
gives you an account,

1. Of the Royal Seat of the Divine residence, or place where God more
gloriously manifests that Presence, which yet fills Heaven and Earth. He has
(says the Psalmist) his throne prepared in the heavens. 2. The vastness of his
Imperial royal influence and dominion; His Kingdom (says the Text) rules over
all. I shall not meddle with the first part: it is the second only which I have
to do with. The Proposition shortly is this:

Prop. That he whose Throne is in Heaven, governs the whole Creation.

The Scripture speaks plentifully to this point of Gods Universal dominion, 1 Chronicles. 16.31, Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice; and let men say
amongst the Heathen, The Lord reigns. Psalm 96.10, Say amongst the heathen
the Lord reigns. Psalm 93.1, The Lord reigns, he is clothed with Majesty,
etc. Psalm 97.1, The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice. Psalm 99.1, The Lord
reigns, let the people tremble. An Heathen Prince acknowledges it, Dan. 4.3,
34. But not to multiply Texts, Reason will evince it; every Superior being
has a kind of natural right to rule over those that are inferior to it: and
God being the Supreme Being, and the Creator of all other beings too, has a
natural right to extend a Kingdom and Dominion over all; and that not only as
he is Superior to them, and greater than they are, but also as he is the
efficient cause of all, the Creator of all things. But to speak more
particularly: we will enquire, 1. What Government is; 2. What are the Objects
of this universal Government and Dominion, which the Proposition ascribes unto
God; 3. What are those special acts, by which God exercises this Dominion and
Government.

Government implies three things: 1. The fixing of some ends. 2. A power
invested in some one or more persons, upon others, ordering and directing them
in order to that end. 3. The exercise of this Power. The end of Government
amongst men, is usually the peace, quiet and settlement of a place: Gods End is
his own glory; He has made all things for himself, and he does all things for
himself, for the fulfilling of his own Counsels and Will, in order to the
glorifying of his holy Name. The Apostle says, Of him, and for him are all
things.

2. Secondly, Government implies a power invested in one or more persons in
order to an end. Now that God has such a power none can deny and acknowledge
him to be God; Once have I spoken, yea twice have I heard it (says the
Psalmist) that power belongs unto God. He who confesses God to be almighty,
and able to do whatsoever he pleases, must own him to have a power sufficient
for an Universal Government. If we take Power for Authority, i. e. a Right to
exercise a power over such and such objects, that also God has by the very law
of Nature; Has not the potter a power over the clay? and is not the creature
the clay, and God the potter?

3. But thirdly, Government implies yet something more, viz. an actual
exercise of this power; and indeed this is the main: Actual Government is the
exercise of a power, wherewith a person or persons, are invested over some
persons, or things in order to some wise ends. But let me come to the second
Question, viz.

Quest. What are the particular Objects of this Divine providential Government?
The Text says, His Kingdom rules over all. I think that term all is to be
expounded by three general heads: 1. The beings and existences of his
creatures. 2. The motions and actions of his creatures. 3. The omissions and
obliquities of his creatures: all these (as I shall show you) fall under the
government of Providence.

1. The Beings and existences of his creatures, the production and cessation of
them; the giving of them Being belongs to Creation, the ordering and directing
their beings under their circumstances belongs to Providence: so does the
issue and determination of their beings with their circumstances; Psalm 68.20,
Unto God belong the issues from death. Providence holds the key of the Womb,
and the key of the Grave; he it is that kills, and makes alive. From that it
is that one generation passes, another comes; and this holds to all
creatures: There is not a sparrow which falls to the ground without the will
of our heavenly Father, as our Savior tells us.

2. A second object of this Providential Government, is all the motions and
actions of his creatures: all their operations according to their several forms
and natures of being. There are some motions and actions of reasonable
creatures: I mean, some of their moral actions influenced from their wills,
upon which God has no efficient influence; such are men's sins and obliquities,
but there are none but he orders and governs, when done and brought into
effect; even with the vilest actions of men God has thus much to do. 1. To
uphold their natural powers and faculties while they do them. 2. To order and
govern them, when done, to his own wise ends, so as they shall issue in the
glory of his holy and blessed Name: and that brings me to the Third.

3. A third Object of the government of Providence, is the Omissions, Errors
and oblique actions of his creature. Every creature moves not according to a
Divine Rule, man only varieth; the stormy winds fulfill his word; the Sun, Moon,
Stars, all obey his Law; man only rebels, and is guilty of thousands of
obliquities and Omissions. Now these also are under the government of
Providence, some corrupt inclinations and lustings he restrains; Others he
suffers to break out into action, then makes the wrath of man to praise him.
But this is enough to have spoken to the second Question, the third follows:

3d Quest. By what particular acts does Providence show it self in the
Government of the World?

1. To this I shall answer in several particulars: 1. By causing the production
and existences of his creatures, or making them to cease as it pleases him; He
causes the barren wombs, and again makes the barren to bring forth Seven.
Hence you shall find the multiplication of Abraham's seed to the number of the
grains of the dust of the Earth, or sands upon the-Sea-shore, is made the
matter of a Divine Promise. The Beings of his creatures are both the objects of
his Government, and his Vtensils or Instruments in Governing; for he governs
a great part of the inferior creatures by the Superior influenced with Reason
and Wisdom for that end. God blessed man, Genesis 1. saying, Have dominion over
the fish of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and every moving creature that
moves upon the Earth. Now the Lord in order to this Government, multiplieth or
diminishes them: whence is it, but from this Providence of God, that the wild
Beasts are not multiplied to the destruction of man? that we are not so full of
Lions, Bears, Tigers, Wolves, Foxes and other hurtful creatures, as we are of
sheep and Neat-cattel, though many of them often bring forth young in greater
plenty than those useful unto man? Thus also God orders the reasonable World:
should men live as in the first age of the World, to five, six, seven hundred
years; should all children born live to an old age, there would be no room on
the Earth, there would not be food enough for them: God therefore in order to
the Government of the Universe, as well as for the punishment of the multitude
of sins committted in the Earth, limiteth the number of Individuals, and
diminishes them; and this not only in an ordinary course of nature, shortening
the periods of their life, but by some extraordinary dispensations: such as
those of War, Pestilence, and other fatal and Epidemical diseases, by which he
not only serves the great end of his glory in punishing the sins of men, but
also reduces the World to a governable body, and to such a pass, that one sort
of his creatures is sufficient for the service of another, so as the whole is
preserved. But this is but the first thing.

2. God governs the World (Secondly) by maintaining the laws and ordinances
of Nature. As there are positive Laws, written Laws in the Word of God, which
God has ordained for the government of reasonable creatures: so there are Laws
and Ordinances of Nature, by which creatures not endued with reason move, and
work in order to the preservation of the whole, by the mutual service each of
other. Thus Jer. 31.35, you read of the Ordinances of the Moon and Stars, and
of Gods covenant of the day, and of the night, that they should be in their
season, Jer. 33.20. Such an Ordinance you have, Genesis 8.22. While the Earth
remains, seed-time, and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter,
and day and night shall not cease. By virtue of these Ordinances it is that the
Sun every day rises, and sets upon one part of the world, causing day and
night; rejoicing as a Bridegroom to run its course (as the Psalmist speaks),
that at sometimes of the year it is nearer, another it is further off this, or
that part of the Earth. These Laws and Ordinances of Nature are nothing else
than the affections, and inclinations of several creatures to their several
motions and actions. Now these affections and inclinations were put into them
in the day of their Creation, but the Providence of God maintains these Laws:
and hence it is, that seed-time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter,
do not cease. By this it is, that the proud waters ordinarily exceed not the
bounds of the sands which God has set to limit them: The winds do not always
blow from the same quarter, nor at the same rate. The Earth brings forth its
variety of fruits: there are thousands of things, of which we can give no other
account than that they cause such effects, they make such motions by an
Ordinance of Nature, by a Law which God imprinted upon them in the day of their
Creation; and God preserves them by his Providence, which daily works in
upholding these Laws, and regulating the creature that it moves not, nor
acts contrary to this Law.

3. A third thing wherein the Government of Providence is seen, is in the
miraculous suspension of these natural Laws and Ordinances, according to the
good pleasure of God. Indeed this is a specialty of Providence, and more proper
to be handled under that head: I shall therefore only touch it here. It is a
thing which God seldom or never does, but for some more than ordinary
declaration of Judgment, or Mercy. Thus he suspended the law of day and night,
to plague the Egyptians with three days continued darkness. He suspended again
the law of Nature for the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, that the Israelites
might pass over it in safety. By an Ordinance and law of Nature the fire
burns, the hungry Lions devour men; God suspendeth both these Laws in the
case of the three Children, and of Daniel: by an Ordinance of Nature, the Sun
keeps its course, and is in a continual progressive motion; God suspendeth
its motion in Joshuah's case, alters it, and makes it to come back in the
case of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.10: by the Ordinance of Nature, the Earth brings
forth her fruit, so does the womb ordinarily; God suspends this Law in
Judgment; the Earth is made as Iron, the Heaven as Brass: men commit whoredom,
yet do not increase; they eat, and have not enough, Hos. 4.10. This both
demonstrates the governance of Divine Providence, and also shows how God
exercises it. This is a third Particular.

4. A fourth Particular, wherein God shows his Dominion over all, and
exercises his Government over the whole Creation, is his influencing all
creatures to their natural actions, either in a more ordinary, or extraordinary
manner. Every living creature has its natural motions, and actions, and powers
and faculties in order to them, which are the principles of those operations;
and in the upholding of those powers to those natural motions and actions, God
exerteth and puts forth his preserving power of Providence: but his
extraordinary influencing of them to some motions and actions, which are not in
a natural course and order, does more eminently show the Governing power of
Divine Providence. That Locusts and Caterpillars should feed upon grass and
green herbs, this is but their natural motion and action according to their
nature and the kind of their being; but that they should come in troops, and
rather feed upon one place than upon another, till they had devoured all the
grass and green herbs in Egypt, this was extraordinary: Psalm 105.24, He spoke;
and the Caterpillars came; and did eat up all the herbs in their land, and
devoured all the fruit of their ground. And again, Psalm 74.46, He gave their
increase to the Caterpiller. The same may be said for the Flies, Lice, Frogs,
and other creatures used as a plague upon Pharaoh: but indeed this is rather a
specialty of Providence, than belonging to the ordinary Government of it;
though very demonstrative of the governing power of Providence.

5. A fifth act, by which the Providence of God exercises its governing power
and influence, is, His daily raising up and influencing Governors for the
Households and Societies of men, and giving checks to them upon their
miscarriages, and mal-administrations. The governing Providence of God,
exerteth it self either more immediately, or mediately. Other creatures God
ordinarily governs by men: many of them, I mean, influencing man with Reason
and Discretion, by which he rules, orders, and governs them, though many
of them be much more mighty and powerful than he: the mouth of the horse and
mule which have no understanding, by the Providence of God so influencing man,
are held with the bit and bridle, lest they come near unto us, Psalm 32.9. The
Whale is smitten with a spear, wild bulls and boars are hunted down, etc. The
Ox is tamed and brought to serve our uses, who are much less in strength than
he is. Men also are governed by men; the weaker by those that are more wise and
powerful: but whence have the Governors their wit and power, their wisdom and
understanding, prompting them to make Laws acceptable to the greater part of
Subjects, so as conspiracies are of the lesser number, and subdue^ ^o the
greater and keeps them in order? Is it not from the Lord, great in wisdom, and
wonderful in counsel? Psalm 75.7, God is the Judge, he pulls down one, and
sets up another, and by him Kings reign. God rules the World by
Magistrates: which if well considered, would aw men to that duty of honor and
obedience which they owe to those that are their Superiors; and may make us to
understand how we ought to be subject for conscience sake, and for Gods sake in
things commanded, which we cannot say are contrary to the Divine Law, nor so
appear to us, and have any manifest appearance of good for the government and
peace of the whole. As on the other side, it calls to Kings to be wise, and the
Judges of the Earth to be instructed to serve the Lord with fear, and to
rejoice before him in their great capacities with trembling: Psalm. 2.10, 11,
they are but the Lords Viceroys; and as Jehosaphat told his Judges, they judge
not for themselves, but for the Lord; for him whose Throne is prepared in the
Heavens, and whose Kingdom is over all. They ought therefore (according to the
command to the Kings of Israel) to have the book of the law before them, and to
be reading therein all the days of their life; and where that does not give
them particular direction to have the honor and glory of God yet in their Eye,
to measure all their laws and actions according to that Rule; to remember God
is the Judge, and has only exalted and dignified them to rule the World, or
this or that part of the World by them: still the Government is the Lords.

6. A sixth particular act by which God providentially governs the World, is,
By influencing the souls of some in it to such actions as more immediately tend
to his honor and glory. God has an honor and glory from the natural
complexion, and constitution, and motions of inanimate Beings. Psalm. 148.6, 8.
Thus the Heavens, and in them the Sun, Moon, Stars; from them the snow, rain,
hail, meteors, the lightning and thunder, the cold and heat, the vapors and
stormy winds bring glory to God: stormy winds fulfilling his word, says the
Psalmist. The heavens declare the glory of God, the Earth shows his
handiwork, Psalm 19.1. God has made in the Heavens a tabernacle for the Sun,
a course for the Moon and Stars: the very complexions of them, their natural
and necessary motions bring God abundance of glory. Now this arises from a
necessary causation, they cannot but do it. The same may be said of brute
creatures, though animate, not acting upon Election: The Whale in the Sea; the
Lion and Tiger amongst the beasts; the Eagle and others amongst the birds; the
Be, the Silkworm, and others amongst Insects: several sorts of creeping
things glorify God, but it is necessarily. Man only amongst earthly creatures
glorifieth God voluntarily from a principle within himself, and upon choice.
Take mankind in the general, it is a noble piece of Gods Creation, and
necessarily glorifieth God. Man is fearfully and wonderfully made, his body is
an admirable structure, but the great glory which God has is from his
spiritual actions. Man is not a mute Preacher of Gods glory, as the Heavens and
the Earth, the Sun, Moon and Stars are, or brute creatures are. He has a Soul,
and understanding, will, affections; from these God expects a great homage and
glory. But now take man in his depraved estate, and he does nothing less; No
creatures, but the evil Angels so much dishonor God, and so cross him in the
great end of his governing the World, which is his glory. Now it pleases God
to influence some of the children of men, to such actions as do truly and
immediately tend to his glory, ex intention agentis, from the intention, will
and design of the agents; and also ex fine operis, from the end and issue of
the action: such are acts of repentance, faith, and all manner of holiness. The
glory of God in these actions, is first in the intention of the agent, and also
in the issue of the work. Joshua exhorts Achan to confess his sin, and give
glory to God: The Apostle says, Romans 4, That Abraham was strong in the faith,
giving glory to God. And our Savior tells his Disciples, Joh. 15.8, Herein is
my father glorified, if you bring forth much fruit, the fruit of Holiness. Now
so depraved is the heart of man, that he neither could nor would do any of
them, if not influenced and overpowered by God; Without me (says Christ) you
can do nothing. God therefore, as to actions of this nature, does influence the
heart of man, making him willing and able; so that as to the event the actions
are necessary, but as to the manner of working they do them freely, willingly
and cheerfully: and this is another piece of Governing Providence, by which he
rules and governs the motions and actions of men to his praise.

7. A seventh act, by which God governs the motions and actions of rational
creatures. 1. His permission and overruling their oblique intentions and
actions. 1. He permits the doing of them. 2. He overruleth and orders
them, when done, to his own ends. Concerning Gods permission of sin, I may have
hereafter a more proper and particular opportunity to speak. His overruling and
ordering of them, when done, to his own wise ends, is what I shall speak to,
and but shortly in this place. It is the great art and wisdom of a civil or
military Governor, amongst men, to make use of the several humors and
passions of those under his Command, to make them serve the great ends which he
has proposed to himself in his Government. The great and infinite power and
wisdom of God in the Government of the world, is in this wonderfully
perspicuous; making use of the several lusts, passions, and humors of men to
his own praise and glory; for God governs man so, as he puts no force upon
his will: If he does any thing that is good, acceptable, and well-pleasing unto
God, he does it willingly and freely. The power of God indeed is seen in making
some souls willing; he gives to will, (says the Apostle), not in overruling
him, to do the action whether he will or no: Man acting thus freely, many men
do that which is evil from the sinful inclination of their own hearts, not
corrected by the power of Divine Grace. God permits men's sins, Act. 14.16, Who
in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways; but the actions
being done, his power is seen in overruling the oblique action, beyond, or
quite contrary unto the intention of the agent, to the glory of his holy and
great name: this is that which the Psalmist says, Psalm. 56.10, Surely the
wrath of man shall praise him, and the remainder of wrath he shall restrain.
You have an eminent Text to prove this, Isa. 10.5, 6, 7, O Assyria, the rod of
mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will send him
against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give
him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down
like mire in the streets. Howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart
think so, but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off nations not a few.
The business was this: Israel (that is, the ten tribes) had grievously provoked
God; God was determined to punish them, they were an hypocritical Nation: There
must be an instrument to bring divine wrath upon them. Assyria shall be the
instrument, therefore called, the rod of Gods anger, and the staff of his
indignation. Possibly the inward cause moving the Assyrian, was his own lust,
the enlargement of his Territories; some revenge of himself, the robbing of
their treasures: he meant not so, his heart never did think so merely to serve
God, in the execution of his wrath; but herein was the governing and overruling
Providence of God seen, that he so ruled the lust, ambition, and revenge of the
King of Assyria, that he accomplished his pleasure upon mount Zion. And indeed
thus God does, as to all the sinful actions of men, God will have his glory
from them, but it is by the overruling power of his Providence: the sinner
means not so, neither is it in his heart to think so. The persecutor says, I
will satisfy my lust, or I will supply my self with moneys for the
satisfaction of my lust, that is his end: in the mean time God by his
Providence overruleth his malicious actions, so as he chasteneth his people for
their sins, and ripeneth the sinner for destruction. God in this does with
sinners, as the wise Faulconer does with the Hawk: The Hawk is a bird of prey,
a ravenous bird, that flies at the Pheasant or Partridg for it self, to
satisfy its rapacious quality; but the Faulconer, by his art, tameth the Hawk,
and makes use of its ravenous quality to serve his own table: and this is a
wonderful piece of Divine Providence in governing of the world; Most of the
motions and actions of men in it are diametrically opposite to Gods glorious
end, yet they are all made to serve the manifestation of Gods glory, and to
bring about his great designs in the world. But this is enough to have spoken
Doctrinally, to this point of the Governing-Providence of God. I cannot at this
time compass all, which I would speak of for the Application of this point.

Only let me mind you again from hence, how great the God of Heaven must
necessarily be, and that, not only in respect of the immensity of his Being, as
he fills Heaven and Earth; but in respect of his activity and power: he is
called the King of Kings, the ruler of Princes. The Persians thought themselves
great Princes that ruled one hundred and twenty seven Provinces. The Turk
glories in the greatness of his Empire; so does the Spaniard, upon whose
dominions, they say, the Sun never sits. But alas! what are all these to the
Lords Kingdom, who rules over all, and that after another manner than any
Earthly Prince, who exercises a dominion over his Subjects and Vassals? how
justly therefore is greatness ascribed unto God? and who is there that can be
compared with him, or like unto him? The Unity of the Divine Being also may be
concluded from hence, for if he rules over all, then all is subject unto him;
and there cannot be another God imagined, but must be in subjection unto him.
Indeed such a subjection, or subordination, the Heathens fancied amongst their
idols. Jupiter was their supreme idol, others were subject unto him; but he is
no God that can truckle under another, and be in subjection unto any Being. And
this greatness of God calls to all men to fear before him, and do reverence
unto him: who shall not fear before that God, whose throne is prepared in the
heaven, and whose Kingdom rules over all? and for a free and voluntary
subjection to him, for he rules over all, not as a Tyrant and Oppressor, whose
title lies in his Sword, but as one who is a native Prince, and has a rightful
title, not to obey whom is the highest Rebellion, which Samuel compares to the
sin of witchcraft. But I must leave the distinct and full application of this
Doctrine for a further discourse.

SERMON IX.
Psalm. CIII. 19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his
Kingdom rules over all.
I Am at this time to make Application of what you have heard, concerning the
Governing-Providence of God. I shall do it under three Heads, showing you how
it may be useful for Instruction, for Consolation, and for Exhortation.

In the first place, you may conclude from hence, casual or necessary; what to
determine concerning Chance, and Fortune, or Fate. As to the first I shall only
lay down this Conclusion.

Concl. That although many things, as to our eyes, and apprehensions of them,
may appear casual, yet there is nothing so with reference unto God, the first
universal cause. It is truly said by Augustine, that chance and fortune are but
terms of humane ignorance; as we say of the old Philosophers occult qualities,
they are but the refuges of ignorance: so the same may be said of chance and
fortune. He described chance well, that called it inopinatum rei eventum, an
event of a thing which man thought not of; it is not inordinatus eventus, but
inopinatus: there is no event of any thing that is a slip of Providence, not
ordered and disposed by him, whose Kingdom rules over all. Beings and
existences, motions and actions, yea, errors and obliquities; nothing comes
to pass in the world, but was foreseen, foreordained, fore-ordered, and that
in infinite wisdom: but many things come to pass which we did not think of,
could not foresee whose causes are hidden from us: these things, we say, come
by chance and fortune: A word indeed not very fit for a Christians mouth. I
remember Augustine, more than once, repents that he had defiled his tongue with
it. The Heathens ignorant of the true God, and of his influence on all things,
devised such a blind God as Fortune; and assigned it a place amongst their
other Idols: Te facimus fortuna Deum. But Christians must own no such blind
cause of things: they believe there is a God, whose throne is prepared in the
Heavens, and whose Kingdom rules over all; and therefore can leave no place
for chance or fortune. You read of a case, Deuteronomy. 19.5, which one would think,
if any thing in the world were casual and fortuitous, that were so. A man goes
into the Wood, with his neighbor, to hew wood; and his hand fetches a stroke
with the ax to cut down a tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and
lights upon his neighbor that he dye. What can be imagined more casual and
fortuitous than this, for the head of an Hatchet to fly off from the helve, and
to kill a man at work with him who had the Hatchet? such were the cases also
mentioned, Numb. 35.22, 23. Casting a thing upon a man without laying of wait;
or with any stone, wherewith a man may dye, seeing him not, nor seeking his
harm: yet in these cases, Exodus 21.13, God is said to deliver the person slain
into his hand, who involuntarily and unwarily has been the cause of his death.
There are many things, which indeed to us are casual, nothing is so to God; he
has ordered all, he rules and governs all actions. Ahimaaz and Cushi knew
not of each others journey; or at least he that ran first knew nothing of the
others journey: they both met at the Court of David to carry tidings of
Absaloms death: but Joab had ordered the running of both. Ahimaaz casually met
Cushi there; but though it was casual to him, it was not so to Joab who sent
him: I say, nothing is in it self casual, or with respect unto God casual; with
respect to us many things are so, that is, we do not know the causes of them;
but God orders and directs all; his Kingdom, his Rule and Government
extends to it; his hand is in it, either permitting, or effecting it.

Secondly, You may from hence conclude how things are necessary. Arminians make
a great deal of stir about this, and charge those, whom they call Calvinists,
as maintaining a fatal necessity of all things. Let us examine the word Fate a
little, we shall find a three or fourfold use of it; there is two or three
sorts of Fate, which we shall condemn as freely as any of them: but in a fourth
sense we shall find the word honest enough, and to destroy it, will ask better
arguments than any they have yet favored the world with.

1. There is a Stoical fate. The Stoics were a sort of ancient Philosophers;
you read of their name in Scripture, Act. 17.18. They fancied an eternal
necessity of things, Cui and Deum licet nolentem subesse fingebant nexum in
rebus ipsis; to which, they conceived God himself, though against his will, was
subjected: according to this they fancied all things came to pass by an equal
necessity, and that the wills of men were forced by it. This is a fate to be
abominated by all those that own God, and him as the first cause of all things.

2. There is a Mathematical fate. This was a necessity of things depending upon
the motions and influences of the stars: these men indeed make God to be the
ruler of the Stars, but the Stars to be the Rulers of men's motions and actions,
according to that verse in credit amongst them, Astra regunt homines, sed regit
astra Deus; as if God did not exercise a daily Dominion and Power over the
Creation, but had made the celestial bodies, which being created, and set in
their order, move other things by a fatal necessity. Of both these, Augustine
says, Si cor tuum non esset fatuum, non crederes fatum: if thou had not a
foolish heart, thou would not credit such a thing as fate.

3. There is thirdly, a Physical or Natural fate, by which we understand that
necessity which God has established in natural causes; according to which,
they cannot but produce such and such effects, supposing them not hindered by
the supreme cause: thus the fire burns necessarily, and we say, all natural
causes move necessarily, and produce their effects, unless suspended, hindered,
or restrained by some superior cause: this is called in Scripture Gods
Covenant with day and night, heat and cold, summer and winter. Such a necessity
all must acknowledge, in the operation of all natural agents; the power and
pleasures of God only being reserved to countermand their operations, which
when he does, we call it a miraculous work of God: thus, day and night, cold
and heat, seed-time and harvest, summer and winter are under a fate, they
necessarily follow one another; but as God was the first cause of this
necessity by the Covenant he established, so their event is in the power of God
to hinder, or suspend, or alter as he pleases.

4. But then, Lastly, There is a Theological or Christian fate, which is
nothing but a necessity of event imposed upon things by the most holy, wise,
eternal, free purpose, and counsel of God, executed by his Providence. It is
true, the name of fate sounds ill, because of the Stoical and Mathematical
vanities about it; but if we take it for, Quod Deus in animo suo fatus est,
apud se statuit, ac decrevit: what God has said within himself, purposed and
decreed, it is innocent enough. Now whosoever denies a fate (if they will call it
so), in this sense, does not so well, as he should do, understand the Divine
Nature, or the Scriptures. We neither deny (says Augustine), an order of
causes, which the will of God has set; neither do we call it fate: In the mean
time they are very ignorant, that cannot see the difference betwixt this
necessity of events, and the Stoical fate.

1. The Stoics subjected God himself to fate: this necessity depends upon
the will of God as the cause of it. 2. They made their fate pre-existent to
God. 3. They asserted a fate that took away all the liberty of man's will. Now
this is no consequent (says Augustine) that if God has set a certain order of
all causes, Non est autem consequens, ut si Deo certus est omnium causarum
ordo, nihil sit in nostrae voluntatis arbitrio. Aug. l. 5. De Civ. dei.
then nothing is in the power of our wills. The upshot of all is this. We say
there are a thousand things happen in respect of us casually, and fortuitously,
that is, we know not the causes of them, and manner of their operations, yet
there is nothing so in respect of God. And though all things happen
necessarily, as to the event, with respect to the decree of God, which has set
all things in an order; and in respect of the universal power, and influence of
his Governing Providence; yet for such things as are done by us, they are not
necessarily brought forth, but freely: our will is not forced, but acts as a
free agent. But I shall add no more to the first Branch of Instruction.

2. Branch. What you have heard, may help to confirm your Faith as to the
glorious nature of God, and that in four or five Particulars:

1. As to his Omniscience or knowledge of all things; He must needs know all
things who governs all things; He governs all the beings and existences of
his creatures, all their motions and actions, all their errors, obliquities
and Omissions, as I have showed you, which he could not do if they were not all
naked in his sight: all things must needs be open and naked in his sight with
whom we have to do. The Doctrine of Gods Omniscience is evident from the work
of Creation? He that made the Eye, shall he not see? He that made the Ear,
shall he not hear? and it is evident from the work of Providence, if his
Kingdom rules over all.

2. Secondly, It as much confirms us in the Doctrine of Gods Omnipotence. If
his Kingdom rules over all: 1. He must have a power to Rule and govern all. 2.
He must be in a capacity to exercise this power, and there must be no power
able to resist him; So that you may see the Reasonableness of those titles
given to God in Scripture, viz. The Lord God Omnipotent. The Almighty God. The
King of Kings. The Lord of Lords. The Lord of all the Hosts of Heaven and
Earth. If there were any thing too hard for God; if he could be resisted, he
could not rule over all.

3. Thirdly, It may confirm you in the Activity of the Divine Essence. The
Schoolmen say, That God is Totus Actus, wholly an Act, always moving, working,
operating; so it must be if he has such a Rule, as I have been describing to
you. He must fill all places, not as a mere inactive moles, and bulk of a thing
fills a place: but so as at the same time he is in all places at work,
seeing, observing, governing, effecting, and directing, or restraining, and
overruling. We have no Similitude to express it by, but comes much short.
That of the Soul in man comes nearest it which is in all parts of the body,
animating, actuating, and governing of it.

4. It confirms us in our belief of the Infinite wisdom of God. He is called,
The only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17, and Jude v. 25. This Doctrine concludes it. We
see it requires a great deal of wisdom to govern a Family, and keep it (if it
consists of many members) in order; but much more to govern the greater bodies
of people, in Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, Empires, etc. Such a variety there is of
motions, humors, passions and tempers of people: Who is able to conceive what
Wisdom it requires to govern all beings in the World, all motions and actions
of all creatures in the World, and to keep them in any order or decorum at all?
In fine, Next to the work of Creation, there is nothing like the work of
Providence well-studied to give a man the true notion of God, and let us know
what manner of Essence, the Divine Essence necessarily must be. Thus much by
way of Instruction.

Secondly, for the unspeakable consolation of the people of God. Psalm 97.1,
The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice; let the multitude of Isles be glad
thereof. It is matter of rejoicing to all the World that the Lord reigns; and
there is none so vile and wicked, but experienceth much (though many consider
it not) of the good effects of this universal Dominion which God exercises.
The Devils cannot do what they please in it; the wills and passions of men
cannot have their swing. There is an Almighty One that holds the reins upon the
brutish affections and passions of men; the ill effects of which the greatest
Atheists and contemners of God which live in the World, would quickly
experience: but to the people of God, as being the lesser number, the most
hated and maligned part of the World, and the far weaker as to natural strength
and power; besides the restraint their Souls are under from putting out what
natural power and strength they have beyond the Divine Law, does most eminently
demonstrate to them the good effects of the Lords Reign, and the necessity of
it. Isa. 52.7, How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of
good, that publishes salvation; that says unto Zion, thy God reigns? It is
good news to all the World, that God reigns; but particularly to Sion, to the
Church and the people of God: to the whole visible Church it is good tidings,
but particularly to the invisible part that is militant here on Earth, and the
individual members thereof.

1. This Doctrine first is of great use to comfort them against, and under all
their disturbances for things which happen to the Church in general, or
themselves in particular. A ship at Sea were but in an ill case if it were not
for him that sat at the Helm: a skilful Pilot there orders her well enough,
so as the winds serve his design; so it is with the Church tossed with winds
and waves, she is only safe in the Lords government of all the affairs of the
World. Luther (I remember) says thus of himself; I (says he) have often
attempted to prescribe God ways and methods in the government of his Church,
and other affairs. I have said, Ah Domine, hoc velim ita fieri, hoc ordine, hoc
eventu. I would have this thing thus done, in this order, with this event. But,
says he, God did quite contrary to what I asked of him. Then (says he) I
thought with my self what I would have had, was not contrary to the glory of
God, but would have been of great use for the sanctifying of his Name. In
short, it was a brave design, well advised, but undoubtedly God laughed at at
this wisdom of men: and said, Go to now, I know you are a learned man, and a
wise man; But it was never my manner to allow Saint Peter, or Saint Martin or
any other, to instruct, teach, govern, or lead me. Non sum Deus passivus, sed
activus; I am not a passive, but an active God. That great man and Melancthon
were two famous Instruments in the Reformation of Germany, but of different
tempers: Melancthon was a man of a more mild and gentle Spirit, and
melancholic timorous temper. Luther was of a more fierce and bold temper.
Melancthon would often write very troubled Letters to Luther about the state of
the Church affairs. Luther would constantly make use of this argument, from the
Governing-Providence of God to support Melancthon. Melancthon (says he), Let
God alone to govern the World; The Lord reigns. It pleases God so to order
it in his Providence, that the face of affairs relating to the Church, often
looks very sadly, and there is nothing which gives the spirits of the people
of God a greater disturbance. Now all these disturbances are caused from our
Not-attending to this Principle; which yet every good Christian professes to
receive, and to believe. Were we but rooted and grounded in the faith of this
one Principle, That the Kingdom of God rules over all, and that he exercises
a special care and Government relating to his Church, and rules the World with
a special regard to the good of his little flock, we could neither be
immoderately disturbed for the concern of the glory of God, nor yet for the
Church of God. 1 Chronicles. 16.31, Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth
rejoice, and let men say amongst the Nations, the Lord reigns; let the Sea
roar, and the fullness thereof, let the fields rejoice, and all that is therein,
Then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of the Lord, because
he comes to judge the Earth. Say therefore unto Zion, Thy God reigns. Let
Papists rage, and Atheists scoff and threaten, and do what they can; Let all
their Favorites take counsel together and join hand in hand: when they have
done all they can, they will find, that the Lord reigns. And this is enough
to say unto Sion, or to any of her sons and daughters. Two things are
sufficient in the most troublesome and tumultuous times to still, support, and
comfort the spirits of Gods people.

1. That the Lord reigns; and has an unquestionable superintendence upon all
the Beings of his creatures, all their motions and all their actions: He is
higher in power than the highest of them.

2. That this God is our God. The Psalmist hinteth both in that excellent 46
Psalm, v. 10, Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted amongst the
Heathen, I will be exalted in the Earth: The Lord of Hosts is with us: The God
of Jacob is our refuge. Let not therefore those that fear the Lord trouble
themselves about the motions of the World, and commotions in it, about the
ragings of lewd men against the interest of Christ. Let them not trouble
themselves further than is their duty, viz. to be sensible of the rebukes of
Divine Providence; The Lord reigns, He that sits in the heavens laugheth.
The Lord shall have them in derision, and shall (one day) speak unto them in
his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure; and let the World know, that
yet he has set his King upon his holy hill of Sion. I remember a passage of
Luther, Si nos ruamus, ruet Christus, unus Christus scilicet, magnus ille
regnator mundi, etc. If we perish (says he) Christ must fall too; Christ, that
great Governor of the World.

2. If we did consider this as we might, or ought, we should also see as little
reason to be disturbed, as to the concerns of our own Souls: with the fear of
two things as to their own Souls ordinarily the people of God are troubled: 1.
The prevailings of their own lusts and corruptions. 2. The prevailings of
Satan's temptations. This Doctrine of Divine Providence excellently serves to
still our unquiet spirits, as to either of these troubles. If the Lords Kingdom
be over all, both these fears must be vain and causeless: for supposing the
faithfulness of the Promises; Sin shall not have dominion over your mortal
bodies: God shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly: He will with the
temptation give an happy issue. If the Lords Kingdom be over all, neither shall
corruption prevail, nor Satan by temptations prevail to destroy the work of God
in our Soul, or to prevent us or hinder us as to the Kingdom, which God has
prepared for us: for as he that has promised is faithful, or cannot repent, or
lie; so he is powerful, and has a dominion over all beings, persons, things,
etc. My father (says Christ) is greater than all; none can pluck you out of my
fathers hand.

3. Lastly, It affords us a relief against the sad prospect we have almost
continually before our eyes, of the malicious actions of wicked and ungodly
men. There is, and always was, a generation in the World, which sleep not
unless they do mischief; they are continually devising mischievous devices
against the little flock of Christ: Their counsels, designs, works, have a
plain and apparent tendency to the ruin of the whole interest of God in the
World, if possibly not to leave Christ a Name in the Earth, nor Religion, pure
and undefiled Religion, a footing in any place: he that runs may read this day,
that the malice of some is against no form in Religion, but the life, and
power, and practice of Holiness. The Devil their Master has given them a
command like that of Benhadads, Fight neither against small nor great: Neither
against Conformists, nor Non-conformists, but against the life and practice of
Religion only. Who sees not, that although a man has a further latitude than
others of his brethren, as to matters of Conformity: yet if he lives an holy
life, if he presses Holiness in his Pulpit, and practices it in his
Conversation, he makes himself a prey to the common Enemies, both of Gospel,
Faith and conversation? But trouble not your selves, Christians, The Lord
reigns; the Frogs out of the bottomless pit, may through Gods permission get
out, and croak a while, but to the pit they must return again. A sad time it
was, when the Enemy said to the Soul of the man according to Gods own heart,
Flee as a bird to the mountains: when the wicked bent their bows, and made
their arrows ready upon the string, that they might privily shoot at the
upright in heart, Psalm 11.2. When the foundations were destroyed, and the
godly knew not what to do, what comfort at such a time? Observe the same
Psalmist, v. 4, The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lords throne is in heaven:
his eyes behold, his ey-lids try the children of men. I shall conclude this
branch of Application with that Psalm 99. v. 1, The Lord reigns, let the
people tremble; he sits between the Cherubims, let the Earth be moved: the
Lord is great in Zion, and he is high above all people; Let them praise the
Lords great and terrible Name, for it is holy.

Lastly, if the Lord reigns? I will tell you in five or six particulars, and
so shut up this Discourse concerning the main and principal acts of Divine
Providence.

1. An exercise of Faith seems a very reasonable piece of duty to be concluded
from these premises. By Faith here, I understand not an assent to the
Proposition of the word, nor yet a resting upon the person of the Mediator
(which is the justifying-act of faith); but committing of our selves unto God,
and casting our care upon him in all estates and conditions: a thing often
called for in Scripture: Cast thy burden on the Lord, Psalm. 55.22. Casting all
your care upon him, for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. Commit thy way unto the
Lord, Psalm. 37.5. So Job 5.8. Prove. 16.3. Sometimes it is called a Trusting in
God, Psalm 4.5, and 7.1. Pro. 28.25. and 29.5. Isa. 57.13, etc. Power and Love
are the things that support and justify one in trusting and putting confidence
in another. This Doctrine concerning the general Providence of God in governing
all, justifies him as to his Power, to be the true and sole Object of our
confidence. We can trust in none else, but may be controuled. The greatest
Princes of the Earth are but men under the authority of one, who is higher than
they; and a man's trust in them, oft-times is but like the Jews trusting in
Egypt, which the Prophet compares to a leaning to a bruised reed, and upon a
broken staff, which are not able to bear the weight of a man's body; but if he
leans upon them, they will run into his hand. If God be against us, man
cannot protect from him, nor deliver out of his hand: therefore (says the
Psalmist, Psalm 118.8, 9.), It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
confidence in man: It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in
Princes: but he, whose Kingdom is over all, must needs be a proper Object of
our confidence; and as our confidence in God is warranted from general
Providence, as to the power of God; so as to his love, it is secured from
special Providence: but of that I hope to speak distinctly, only a word here,
lest any should say, But although the Kingdom of God be over all; so that upon
the account of his Power, I may trust in him; yet how does it appear his Power
shall be put forth for me? I shall but offer four Meditations to you.

1. That the glory of God is the great end that he aims at in all his
actions: He made all things for himself: he preserves, he governs the World
for himself.

2. That whereas God has a twofold glory from his Creation, Passive, and
Active: One wherein the creature does nothing from an inward principle; thus
the Heavens declare the glory of God, and every creature speaks of his glory:
The other wherein the creature is Active, acting out of intention and design,
and from the principle of its own will: This latter is that which is most
pleasing to God and acceptable.

3. That God is capable of receiving no further glory from his creatures, than
what flows from the predication of his praise, and the doing of his Will.

4. Lastly, That from hence it must needs follow, That God is more glorified by
his Church, and by his Saints, than by all the Creation besides. God is mutely
and passively glorified by other creatures: but in his Temple men speak of his
glory. The children of men, and amongst them, only those who are born of God,
do voluntarily and out of choice bring glory to God. God (if I may so speak)
wrests his glory from others, as from Pharaoh, etc. God indeed in some sense
may be said to be actively and voluntarily glorified by all Professors; but
only by that little flock whom he has chosen to himself, with a full
intention, voluntarily and sincerely. They are the favorites of him, whose
Kingdom is over all. Supposing then God to have a Dominion and Government over
all, and to be continually in the exercise of it, surely, if Haman could say,
Whom should the King delight to honor but me? They may with much better right
and advantage say, For whom should the great King of kings, and Lord of lords,
exercise a Rule and a Dominion? For whose advantage should the Lord govern the
World, if not for those who most freely, cheerfully, voluntarily serve the
greatest end and design which he has in the World, viz. his own glory; and can
sincerely sum up all the desires of their Souls, in that one Petition, Let the
Lord be glorified? surely, therefore the children of God have all obligations
imaginable upon them under all vicissitudes of Providence, to trust in God, and
to commit their ways unto the Lord. But this is but the first Duty.

2. A Second Duty which this Doctrine of Providence calls to us for, and
shows us the reasonableness of, is Prayer. We have reason in our distresses
to seek unto God by Prayer, because the Lord reigns; and it is an
encouragement to us to seek him, because he reigns: Whither should we go but
unto him who has power to help, save and deliver? Prayer therefore has in all
times of distress been the Refuge of Gods people. It was a sad time with David,
Psalm 109.4, The mouth of the wicked, and of the deceitful (says he, v. 2, 3.)
are opened against me; they have spoken against me with a lying tongue. They
compass me about also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a
cause; for my love they are my adversaries, but I give my self unto Prayer, v.
4. Luther, when he was in any strait, was wont to say, I will go and tell my
God of it. Prayer has been the constant mean which the people of God have used
for rescue out of any troubles. You see it is upon a good foundation, viz. The
Dominion which God has over all, and his daily exercise of it.

3. It calls to you for praise and thanksgiving; Prayer solliciteth for a
mercy when we want it: Praise acknowledges the gift when received, and gives
unto God the glory of it. Nor can it, without robbery, be paid at any other
than Gods Altar. Is there any good done by thee? Let God have the glory of
that; thou have done it by virtue of a power or gift which is given to thee
from above; yea, and it is from his Governing-Power of Providence, ruling,
directing, and influencing thy heart to it: His Kingdom is over our hearts, our
hands, our tongues, inclining them to every good thought, word, action; without
him we can do nothing. Does any good come unto thee? Let God also have the
glory of that. The earthly Prince looks that you should acknowledge your
peace, your trade to his Government; but he is but the instrument of God in
bringing these things. It is the Kingdom of the Lord that rules over all; he
gives thee power to get riches, (says Moses): I am sure the people of God have
more special reason to acknowledge God in all their peace and prosperity. They
are men of peace, their hands are against none; but the world hates them, they
are as sheep amongst wolves; if they have any months or years of peace, they
are beholden to the power and ruling of God for it. Is any evil kept from you?
It is God that does it, he that rules the raging of the Sea, he stilleth the
tumults of the people; he has the hearts of Kings in his hand, and turns
them as the Waters of the South. It is because the Mountain of the Lord is full
of Chariots and Horses, that they are not swallowed up by their Enemies every
moment. O see, and praise the Lord for the Governance of his Providence!

4. This Doctrine calls to you for patience in adversity. The people of God
are subjected to trials of adversity; yea, ^o fiery trials, as well as other
men, yea, in greater degrees than others: hence the Apostle calls to them, to
let patience have its perfect work. Patience is nothing else but a quiet
submission to the will of God under any adverse dispensation of his Providence,
in obedience to his command; and because it is his will, and he lays it upon
us, we have need of patience, and the exercise of it is our duty; and this
Doctrine will show you that it is but a reasonable duty. Let me show it you in
two or three particulars.

1. As it shows you, that all your afflictions (be they of what sort and kind
they will) are from the Lord, Job 5.6, Afflictions comes not out of the dust;
nor does trouble spring out of the ground. Is there (says God by the Prophet)
any evil in the City and I have not done it? Affliction comes not by chance or
fate, it comes from God, and is the wise issue of his Providence in the
Government of the World: we have therefore no reason to fret and vex our selves
against instruments. They are but instruments. Perhaps (said David of Shimei,)
God has bidden him curse. They possibly do ill, and at last will know it; but
God is righteous in their unrighteousness. I held my peace (says David), I
knew it was thy doing. It is the Lord, (says that good man) let him do what
seems him good.

2. As it assures us, that all things shall work together for good to them
that love God. If God rules and governs the world, he certainly does it for
himself, and for his own glory: which glory of his being the highest design of
his people, all things must necessarily tend to their good, to that which they
above all things desire and seek after. This God, who rules the World, is his
peoples father, and does whatever he does as a father for the good and
advantage of his children.

3. Lastly, It is a good Argument of patience, As it lets them know, that
their afflictions are ordered and governed by God. The Afflictions,
Oppressions, Persecutions of the people of God are not things excepted out of
the Dominion of God. It was, you know, the Centurions faith, That diseases were
to Christ, as his servants were to him: He said to one go, and he went; to
another come, and he came; and to another do this, and he did it. So God
speaks to diseases; and not to diseases only, but to all sorts of
afflictions: Isa. 27.8, In measure when it shoots forth thou will debate with
it. God first causes, then rules, and governs all our troubles, afflictions
and trials.

Fifthly, This Doctrine calls to all the people of God for love to him. This
is the Psalmists Exhortation, and upon this very Argument, Psalm. 31.23, O Love
you the Lord all you his Saints: for he preserves his Saints, and plentifully
rewards the proud doer. All the earth is bound to love the Lord for the
exercise of his Governing-power. If the Lord did not reign, the worst of men
would quickly find the ill effects of it; they need no worse enemies than their
own brethren and companions in wickedness, did the Lord lay the reins upon the
necks of their lusts, and suffer them, as they would, to devour one another.
For as we see the ravenous Birds, Fishes, and Beasts, do not only prey upon
other, but their own species: so, were it not for the Restraining-Providence of
God in governing the world, the wicked of it would see their brethren in
iniquity, not only preying upon the Saints and people of God, but also upon
those like unto themselves, if lesser than themselves. But, I say, above all
the people of God, as being the least flock, are more especially bound to love
the Lord for the Government of his Providence; but this will more eminently
appear, when I come to discourse concerning the Specialties of his Providence
with reference to them.

6. Lastly, This Doctrine calls unto all for a willing subjection and
obedience unto God: This is that which we call holiness. There are two
Arguments arising out of the former discourse, which ought to have a force here.

1. Let us do what we will, God will be our Governor. Let Assyria mean, or not
mean so, he shall be the Lords Servant, and execute his pleasure, and no more.
Pharaoh may huff a little, and ask, Who is the Lord, that he should serve or
obey him: but God will at last be glorified on Pharaoh, and make him know his
Kingdom is over all. God will disappoint the devices of the crafty, so as their
hands shall not find their enterprises. God will at last be glorified, and make
all the wrath of man, at last, to praise him.

2. None shall be rewarded by God, or be his favorites, but only such as yield
him, free, willing, and cheerful obedience. Let us do what we can, we cannot
resist his will; but unless our obedience be free, voluntary, and cheerful, it
shall never be rewarded by a just and righteous God. There is nothing more
ordinary in the Prophets, than to read the denunciation of Gods judgments
against Assyria and Babylon; which were yet Gods servants in executing
vengeance upon the hypocritical and rebellious Jews. Let this therefore mind us
to be obedient to to the will of God, freely, and willingly, and sincerely,
that so we may hear that joyful voice, Well done, thou good and faithful
Servant. -- Enter thou into thy masters joy.

A DISCOURSE Concerning ACTUAL PROVIDENCE.
PART. II. Concerning the Specialties of Providence.
1 Cor. IX. 9. Does God take care for Oxen?
I Have been for some time discoursing concerning Providence, that is, Actual
Providence, which is nothing else but Gods taking care for his creatures, made
(as you heard) by the word of his power. I have discoursed this care of God
more generally, opening to you those two more general Acts of God, by which
this care is expressed. 1. In preserving of them. 2. In the rule and governance
of them. I have showed you the workings of Divine Providence, in the preserving
of his creatures in general, in their Beings, and use of their several
faculties with which he created them; of man in particular, considered singly,
as an individual, or in his Political capacity; or, 3. In his Spiritual
capacity, as the subject of Divine Grace. I have also discoursed generally,
concerning the Government of Divine Providence; and by what particular acts God
exercises this Government, and declares his Dominion over all the Creatures
which he has made; but besides the general care of God concerning all his
Creatures, there is also a special Providence. For the beginning of a discourse
concerning that, I have made choice of this Text: Does God take care for Oxen?
(says the Apostle). Non est vox dubitantis (says Pareus), It is not the
language of one that doubts. The Apostle knew well enough that our Savior
had said, That God cloatheth the Lillies, the grass of the field; and that a
sparrow (though two of them are sold for a farthing) falls not to the ground
without the will of our heavenly father. The words therefore only signify an
inequal care, viz. That God takes a greater and more special care for some of
his Creatures than he does for others, and so it lays a foundation for this
Proposition.

Prop. That God exercises a special Providence for, and concerning some of his
creatures. He takes a general care concerning them all: but a more special
care concerning some of them. That is the Proposition which I shall handle in
this method.

1. I shall show you that there is such a special Providence, i.e. though the
Lord takes a general care of all his Creatures, according to their natures;
yet he takes a more particular and special care concerning some more than
others.

2. I will enquire, Which of his Creatures they are, as to which he exercises
a special Providence; and concerning which he takes such a more especial care?

3. We will enquire by what acts God exerteth, puts forth, and declares
this his especial care.

4. Lastly, I will make some Application of the whole.

1. That God does exercise a more particular care in the Preservation and
Government of some of his Creatures than he does of others, will appear,

1. By express Scriptures which assert it.

2. By promises made to some, in which others are not concerned.

3. By experience and matter of fact.

1. By express Scriptures: thus Deuteronomy. 11.12, Canaan is called a Land which the
Lord cares for: so Matthew. 6.30, If God so cloth the grass of the field, which
to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven; Shall he not much more cloth
you, O you of little faith? Matt. 10.31. Fear you not therefore, you are of
more value than many sparrows, ver. 29. Christ had let them know, that the
Providence of God extended to the sparrows; two of them were sold for a
farthing, but not one of them fell to the ground without God: but (says he)
you are better than many sparrows, God will more regard you, and take more care
of you, 1 Timothy 4.10, He is the Savior of all men, but especially of them who
believe. Psalm. 33. v. 13, He beholds all the sons of men: but Verse 18, The
eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: upon them that hope in his mercy,
to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive from famine: so this
Text, Does God (says the Apostle) take care for Oxen? or does he say it
altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt. It is true, there are degrees
and differences as to this special Providence, as I shall show you hereafter: I
am only, as yet, evincing the thing in general.

2. All the promises of God made to some men, not to others, are a proof of
this; for what is a promise but the Revelation of Gods Will, to bestow some
good things in the way of his Providence? so as, if there be any special
promises, there must be a special Providence. Now there is none so meanly
versed in the holy Scripture, that he is not aware of a multitude of promises
in them, made to the people of God; promises that concern this life, and that
also which is to come: the 91 Psalm is made up of such promises.

3. Lastly, The experience of all times proves it, that some have been
preserved, upheld, directed and governed by a Providence, in a more special
manner than others have been: So that none can modestly deny or doubt a special
Providence. The next Question is,

Quest. 2. Who are the objects of it?

It is generally answered by Divines, that reasonable creatures are the objects
only of special Providence. These are only Angels and Men: for the Specialty of
Divine Providence, so far as they relate to Angels, as we know little of it, so
neither does the knowledge of it much concern us: of that therefore I shall say
nothing, being not desirous to intrude into those things which man has not
seen. It is certain, that by the special Providence of God they are more
eminently upheld, confirmed in their state of integrity, governed in their
motions and actions by God, and that in a more eminent manner than other
inferior creatures: but I intend no discourse of that.

2. The second object of special Providence is Man. 1. Mankind considered in
the general. All men and women are under more special acts of Providence, as to
Preservation and Government, than the grass, or the beasts, the inanimate
creatures, or the brute creatures: but neither shall I make this the subject of
my discourse. The Psalmist speaks of man in the general, Psalm. 8.5, Thou have
made him a little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and
honor. Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have
put all things under his foot. All sheep and oxen; yea, and the beasts of the
field.

2. But Secondly, The Church of God, and more especially, those that are the
invisible part of it, that glory not in appearance only, but in reality, and
have not only a name to live, but live indeed, are the more eminent objects of
special Providence. I say first,

1. The whole visible Church, by which, I mean, the whole body of people, whom
God, by the Preaching of the Gospel, has called out to an external profession,
and visible owning of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Church of the Jews of old, (
Amos 3.2.); the whole body of that Nation circumcised, and visibly owning and
serving the true God, were under more special Providence than all the world
besides. The Christian Church is so. Canaan of old was the land which God cared
for, and he has a Canaan now; his whole Church which he does care for, and for
whom he exercises a more special Providence, both in the preservation and
Government of them.

2. But yet the invisible part of the visible Church, that is, that number of
Professors, whose Profession is not only visible to men, ( Psalm. 33.18), but
their faith, their sincerity, their true holiness is seen by God, who love and
fear the great God in truth and holiness; these are the most special objects of
special Providence. Only one thing let me more add, in an answer to this
Question; that neither all mankind, not members of the Church, nor all
Churches, nor all Saints are under the same, or equal influences of Providence;
and therefore Divines have distinguished special Providence into those which
are more extraordinary or ordinary: the former are more miraculous, or little
differing from miracles: the latter are more equal and ordinary, and so will be
the more the subject of our discourse. All men are not restrained as Abimelech
was. All Churches are not preserved in a red Sea, a wilderness; have not Manna
rained from heaven to feed them, nor Waters brought out of a rock to satisfy
their thirst, as the Jewish Church had. All Saints are not taken up to Heaven
in a fiery Chariot as Elijah, nor preserved in the Lions Den as Daniel, or in
the fire as the three children. But there is, 1. A special Providence attends
every visible Church of Christ. 2. And every one who is a true believer, and
puts his trust in the Lord. I come more particularly to show you, by what more
particular acts the Providence of God discovers Gods special care, for his
Church, and for particular Souls.

Quest. 3. By what more particular acts does the Providence of God discover
Gods special care for the visible Church, and for particular believing souls.

1. As to the Church of God.

1. He preserves it so as it shall never perish. You know the promise: The
gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Matt. 16.18. God preserves the
individual Being of every particular man, He holds our souls in life, but yet
his being shall fail: there will come a time when he shall not be. Our Prophets
are gone, our fathers where are they? God preserves the Beings of Polities,
the Kingdoms and Empires of the World; but these also have their periods: where
are the great Empires of the Medes and Persians, the Grecians, the Romans, etc?
He so preserves his Church, that it shall never fail; this is a Specialty of
Providence. Men shall dye, Kingdoms shall dye, Empires shall come to nothing:
the Church shall not dye. This woman may flee into the Wilderness from the red
dragon, (as in Rev. 12. Where she has a place prepared of God; but there she
shall be fed 1260 days: the earth shall help the woman, Rev. 12.16. Christ will
be with them to the end of the world: God so preservetth, no creatures, no
Polities, no Societies of men whatsoever.

2. A second specialty of Providence relating to the Church, seems to be a
special Ministry of Angels, Heb. 2.14, Are they not all ministering spirits,
sent forth to minister for them who are heirs of salvation? Who are those that
are heirs of salvation, but the Church of God? Acts 2.47, And the Lord added to
the Church daily such as should be saved. 1 Cor. 11.10, The woman ought to have
power over her head (or a covering over head) because of the Angels. There have
been many Divines, who have thought that in the Government of Providence, some
particular Angels have the charge of particular Kingdoms, and Provinces, and
Churches. You read, Dan. 10.12, The Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood
me twenty one days: but lo, Michael one of the chief Princes came to help me:
and ver. 21, There is none that holds with me in these things, but Michael
your Prince. There are some also that interpret thus; The Angels of the Asian
Churches mentioned in the Revelation (but most interpret them of the Pastors
over them): but certain it is, the Angels (whether one more specially or no)
have a special Ministry toward the Church of Christ. Psalm 91.11, He shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. I shall not
enlarge upon this: for though this seems to be plainly enough in Scripture
revealed, yet the particulars of their Ministration are not so clearly
revealed, as we can assert much distincty concerning them. Dan. 12.1, At that
time (says the Prophet) shall Michael stand up, the great Prince, which
stands for the children of thy people. The Angels stand up for the Church;
that is a Specialty of Providence.

3. Thirdly, All Gods extraordinary acts in the Government of his Creatures
have been for his Church. It was in revenge of their oppressions, that God
sends ten plagues one after another upon Pharaoh: it is for them he suspendeth
the Laws of Nature, for them the waters of the Red Sea, then the waters of
Jordan divide: for them it was that the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon
in the Valley of Ajalon, in the time of Joshuah; That the earth opened, Numb.
16, and swallowed up Corah, Dathan and Abiram: It is for his Church that
natural Beings have acted beyond their ordinary capacities: Hailstones are
made so big, as falling down upon their Enemies-heads, they killed more than
his peoples swords. At the sound of Rams-horns, the walls of Jericho fall down.
It is for this people that the clouds rain down bread, and the Rock gusheth out
water. There was no people, that God so assayed to take from the midst of
another Nation by temptations, by signs and wonders, and by war, and by a
mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, Deuteronomy. 4.34: and
although God has not been so seen in miraculous operations for his
Gospel Church: yet how often has one chased ten, ten an hundred, an hundred a
thousand, and a thousand put ten thousand to flight? There have been no such
instances in the World of the Providence of God, working for the salvation and
deliverance of Heathens, as of that body of his people, which are his Church:
or of Gods workings in a miraculous manner for the preservation of others, as
of that his little flock.

4. But 4thly, It is a great specialty of Providence, that unto this people are
committed the Oracles of God; they are the only people which have the ordinary
means of salvation. This is that Much advantage every way (as the Apostle
speaks) which the Jews had, Romans 4.2: beeause unto them were committed the
Oracles of God. It has been a question, Whether God gives unto all sufficient
means for salvation. Some affirm it, others with better reason deny it; at
length some of the Patrons for it, are forced to yield, That none but the
Church has sufficient means. In Judah is God known: in the Church Christ is
preached; the glad tidings of salvation are published; the Heathens have only
the light of Nature, a light sufficient (if not walked up to) to make them
inexcusable, but by no means sufficient to direct men to Heaven: it shows men
nothing of Christ, and there is no other Name under Heaven but the Name of
Jesus by which we can be saved, neither is there salvation in any other. Christ
is only ordinarily preached in the Church of God. This is a great Privilege, a
great Specialty of Providence toward the Church of God.

But yet, There is a more special Providence attends the members of the
invisible Church, particular Saints, and that is plain from the Promises of God
in Scripture. There are indeed many Promises which concern the whole visible
Church; but the most of the Promises are made unto Godliness: the Apostle tells
us, 1 Timothy 4.8, that has great promises both of this life, and a life to come:
and as the great variety of Promises evinceth a special providence in the
preservation and government of them; so also Gods Dispensations upon those
Promises do abundantly evince it: but let me open it in a few particulars.

1. It is for them that God ordinarily goes out of the common road of his
Providence for their preservation: Thus Daniel is preserved in the Lions Den;
The three Children in the fiery Furnace; Moses in a little ark of Bul-rushes;
Noah, when the whole World was swallowed up in a Deluge of waters: they are
those that dwell in the secret place of the most High, that shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty; these he delivers from the snare of the Fowler,
and from the noisome Pestilence; and to whom all the Promises are made, Psalm
91. I do not say, but others may sometimes meet with strange and miraculous
preservations, but the instances of them are rarer. The Promises are not made
to them, they can expect no such thing, and usually it is for the sake of such
as fear God: indeed these Providence are not the portion of all the children
of God. God will have us know that these are not the good things which he has
prepared for them that love him: though the power and goodness of God shall be
thus declared for some of them, yet it shall not be so for all, that we may not
think them the Believers portion; but things which God adds unto them, who
are the heirs of salvation, and seek first the Kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof.

2. These are those, whom God gives special warnings to of evils to come, and
whom he prompts to hide themselves. What says God? shall I hide from Abraham,
the thing I intend to do to Sodom? Noah being warned of God, prepared an Ark
(says the Apostle); you know what a warning Lot had of the destruction of
Sodom. They tell us of a Voice which the godly Jews heard a little before the
fatal destruction of Jerusalem, Ite Pellam, Go away to Pella. It is true, those
extraordinary warnings are much now ceased; but the Providence vf God yet
continues. God told David, that the men of Keilah would deliver him up. God
gives warning still by secret impressions upon the spirits of his people, by
causing them more steadily than others to believe the threatenings of his Word,
and to give credit to his Ministers speaking from him. These secrets of the
Lord, are mostly with them that fear him, while simple wicked men will believe
nothing, take no warning at any thing; but pass on, and are punished.

3. For these it is, that he commands inanimate creatures to move for their
service; The stones of the field shall be at peace with them: the Sun, the Moon
shall serve them, the stars shall fight against Sisera in their order. The dust
shall fly in the face of their Enemies: The winds shall serve them; -- tibi
militat ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti,
says the Poet of that eminent Christian Emperor. But I have touched a little
upon this under the first Head.

4. For these (fourthly it is) that God commands the sensitive creatures that
they shall not hurt them, that they shall serve them: the Lions shall not hurt
Daniel; it is to them the Promise is made. Psalm 91.13, Thou shall tread upon
the Lion, and the Adder, and the Dragon shall thou trample under thy feet. It
is a famous story of that Protestant in the Parisian massacre, that was saved
by a Spider, that had woven a web before the entrance of a hole, in which he
hid himself from the murderers that sought his life; which made them conclude,
that he was not there.

5. For these it is, that he bridleth the rage of wicked and ungodly men: The
Providence of God (if I may say so) has its hardest task with wicked men.
These alone have an enmity to Gods people: there is, and ever will be an
implacable Enmity between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the Serpent.
God holds them in as we hold in an unruly Horse with bit and bridle, and
oftentimes of Enemies they are made friends. Gallio stands up, and pleads for
them. Cyrus becomes Gods servant for the deliverance of the Jews.
Nebuchadnezzar shall be a friend to Daniel; Darius to Nehemiah. Paul shall meet
with Friends in the Court of Nero.

6. For these it is, that he over-ruleth the most malicious actions of men:
Surely (says the Psalmist) the wrath of man shall praise thee; and the
remainder of wrath thou shall restrain: Hamans malice shall issue in the
exaltation of Mordecai, and the further establishment of the Jews. Joseph's
brethren shall sell him into Egypt, intending him nothing but evil; the issue
of it shall be the exaltation of Joseph, and the keeping much people alive.
But, as I said before concerning these matters which relate to this life,
though the people of God can only claim a right in these Promises, and be those
to whom they generally are fulfilled, not to others: yet you must not be
mistaken to think, that all the people of God shall have them made good to
them. God as to these Dispensations, dealing out (as in other things of outward
Providence) according to his own good pleasure; regulated by his infinite
Wisdom, working for the glory of his holy Name, and for the good of his people.

7thly, There is a special Providence of God extended toward all those that
truly fear and love God. In the giving to them the things that accompany
salvation, and preserving and upholding in them those habits of grace; by the
operations of which, they are made fit for the inheritance of the Saints in
light. Grace is the only creature of God, which God preserves that it shall
not die; but yet it is preserved alive by the power of God. Natural habits may
perish; Moral habits may be extinguished; Gracious habits are the seed of God,
which do not die: he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him to stand,
Romans 14.4. Now this is a piece of Providence common to all the Saints, and
special and peculiar to them.

8thly, The special Providence of God to his people, is eminently seen in this,
That all things work together for their good: You know the Text, Romans 8.28, And
we know that all things work together for the good of them that love God, who
are called according to his purpose. There is another Text much of the same
import, possibly of a larger extent, 1 Cor. 3.21, All-things are yours: whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come: all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. The former Text chiefly respects sufferings: the sufferings and
afflictions of Gods people are for their good. The latter respects
Ordinances, but both of them have the universal particle All: All things are
yours; All things work together for good: and whether either of those Texts
respect sins or no (which indeed are hardly to be counted into the number of
things) I will not say; yet most certain it is, that by the over-rulings of
Divine Providence, even the sins of Gods people work together for their good.
What fear (says the Apostle), What sorrow? what jealousy, what revenge do
they work? How low do they make the child of God in his own Eyes? How do they
contribute to a poor, broken and contrite spirit in him? What care and
watchfulness do they produce in him for the time to come? It is the misery of a
wicked man, all things work together for his hurt: if he has Riches, Honor,
worldly enjoyments, or crosses, trials, afflictions, all things are against
him. God gives the Israelites, rebelling and murmuring, Quales in his wrath,
and a King in his wrath; and God gives others Riches, honors, wives, children,
all in his wrath; all things are against them: but now if a man be a child of
God, all things are his; all things are for him, for his good and advantage.

Ninthly, (which indeed should have been mentioned first), God gives his good
Angels charge concerning them: The good Angels have not only a Ministry to the
Church, which I touched before, but they have a Ministry as to every individual
Believer. It is a Promise made, Psalm 91.11, to every one: who, ver. 1.
dwells in the secret of the most High; He shall give his Angels charge over
thee to keep thee in all thy ways: they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest
thou dash thy foot against a stone, ver. 12. Heb. 1.14, Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation? and therefore they are called Their Angels. Matthew. 18.10, Take heed
that you despise not one of these little ones: for I say unto you that in
Heaven, their Angels always behold the face of my father which is in Heaven. It
has been the opinion of some, and those very eminent Divines, That every child
of God has his particular Angel, usually called his Tutelar Angel, or
Angel-guardian. They have builded this Notion upon those probable Texts, Acts
12.23: where the Christians met, told the Maid concerning Peter, It is his
Angel. Genesis 48.16, where Jacob prays, That the Angel who had redeemed him from
all evil would bless the lads, Joseph's children: and Matthew. 18.10. I shall not
meddle with that nice Question; those who desire to read what is to be read for
it, or what may be said, may find it in Mr. Dingles judicious Discourse of the
Deputation of Angels: certain it is, that the Angels have a special Ministry
with reference to the heirs of salvation: certain it is, that they shall bear
them up in their hands (as the Psalmist says) that they shall not dash their
feet against a stone: that they shall keep them in all their ways. What power
they have to make impressions upon their minds, I cannot determine; but
probable it is, that as evil angels have a power to tempt and solicit to evil:
so the good Angels do often move, and solicit (by way of secret impressions)
the souls of the Saints to that which is good. Certain it is, this is a
Specialty of Divine Providence with reference to the Saints; therefore our
Savior calls them, their Angels. The Angels pulled Lot out of Sodom, Genesis
19.16: they appeared to Jacob in his journey to Padan aram, Genesis 28.12: they
met him again at Mahanaim, Genesis 32.1, 2. The Psalmist tells us, Psalm 34.7,
They encamp about him that fears the Lord. An Angel attends Elias, moves him
to eat, 1 Kings 19.7; appeared for Elisha, 2 Kings 6.17. In short, much is
spoken in Scripture concerning the Ministry of Angels, for the good of the
people of God; though much also of their Ministration be, doubtless, unknown to
us: Scriptura piis tantum Angelorum custodiam, and ministerium tribuit, impiis
non item (says a grave Author). But I shall add no more to the Explicatory
part of this Discourse, having touched most of the Specialties of Divine
Providence; with reference both to the Church, and to particular believing
Souls. If any thing be further needful for the proof of this: what need we do
any more, than take a view of the Church of God in the several periods of it,
and of the number of sincere and pious Souls in any age of the World? The
Church of God from the beginning has been either Jewish, or Christian. For the
Jewish Church he that runs may read it in the whole story of the Old
Testament; Moses makes a large recapitulation, Deuteronomy. 1. chapter 2. chapter 3, and chapter
4; and the very bent of his Discourse is to show the eminent special
Providence of God for them, above all other people and Nations upon the Earth.
In short, the whole story of the Jewish Church after Moses his time, until
Christ's coming, is all but an eminent proof of this Doctrine. After Christ's
coming and ascension, the Christian Church was formed, encompassed with Enemies
on all hands; the Jews on one hand, the Heathens on the other. The Jews power
indeed was not much: they were at first under the power of the Romans, and in a
few years utterly destroyed by them; but the Heathens overspread the World.
The Roman Empire was then in its glory; They were full of Philosophers and
learned men, to whom the Gospel appeared no better than foolishness; They were
established and rooted in Idolatry, and very jealous of their Religion. The
Christian Church began with twelve men, most of them Fishermen: one indeed (a
learned man) Paul was afterward added to them: What think you, must there not
a great deal of special Providence be showed to preserve this little flock?
these few men sent out to, plant the Gospel over all the World; that they
should go, and in despite both of Jews and Gentiles, spread the Gospel over
all the World. It is true, there were great persecutions, great havoc made by
the Enemies of the Church amongst them for three hundred years; but this still
evidenceth the more special Providence of God, watching over them, working with
them; that though they did what they could to blow out this light, and had all
the power in the World on their side; yet neither the Philosophers, and Orators
of the World, with their Philosophy and Rhetoric, could argue and persuade the
World from this New Doctrine; nor all the force and rage they could use, could
fright the World from it, nor root it out of the World; neither destroy all the
Ministers, nor root out all the professors, but a number should be left in all
places: and after three hundred years, an Emperor should arise that should
establish the Christian Religion, and make it obtain in all places. It is true,
after this the Christian Church degenerated, admitted foul Heresies, Idolatry
and Superstition; and it became with the Christian Church, as it was with the
Jewish Church in the days of Elijah, Prophets were hid in caves; Elija
complained he was left alone; yet God had his seven thousand in Israel that had
not bowed the knee to Baal: nor kissed him with their lips. Antichristianism
had so prevailed in the Christian Church; that the sincere and true Professors
were few. A few in the valleys of Piedmont; A few in Germany, who stuck to the
truth: did it not argue a great and special Providence of God to watch over
these few, keeping them, that they were not swallowed up by their numerous
adversaries? Luther began the Reformation in Germany, and began it almost
alone: One poor man against all the power of Rome: God preserved him alive,
prospered his works in his hands. Indeed this Doctrine of special Providence
needs no other proof, than what might be afforded it from the story of that
great man; who considering what he did, and with what an undaunted spirit and
courage he did it, lived almost every day by a Miracle, and yet went down to
the grave in peace in a good old age, like a shock of corn in its season (as
Job speaks). For particular instances of the special Providence of God
toward particular Saints; the time would fail me to tell you the particular
stories of Abraham. Jacob, Joseph, Daniel, David: and there is hardly any child
of God living, but will find it in the records of his own life, that has been
preserved more than other men. There is no truth more wrote with a Sunbeam,
than this great truth of Special Providence is.

Now if any man ask me the reason of it, it is enough to say, So it pleased
God. God is free in these, as in other of his dispensations: but yet let me
show you the reasonableness of these more particular and special Providence.

1. It has been an old Observation, That Gods Providence is most eminently
exercised about the noblest of his Creatures, Angels, and Men: but I know not
how to make this Notion out. The Angels are more noble creatures than men,
spiritual substances, of vaster capacities; according to this observation they
should be the more the objects of special Providence: but I say, I doubt this.
I am sure there was one great act of special Providence, in which the Angels
were not concerned: Christ did not take upon him the nature of Angels, but the
seed of Abraham.

2. But Secondly, Of the whole Creation Angels and Men are those creatures,
whom in Creation he was pleased most to fit, and capacitate for the great ends
of his glory, for an active, designed, glorifying of his holy name. Let me open
this a little.

1. The great end of all the actions of God, is his own glory. The wise man
tells us, That the Lord made all things for himself, Prove. 16.4. Indeed, if we
wisely consider the thing, it must be so; every rational agent works for some
end, and his reasonable nature constrains him to work for the best end. God
is the highest reasonable agent; and as he can do nothing in vain, but for some
end, so he cannot but act for a good end, and for the best end. Now this could
be no other than himself, his own honor and glory: so that as the Apostle
says of Gods swearing, because he could swear by no greater, he swear by
himself: so we must say of Gods working; because he could work for no better,
no higher end than his own glory, therefore he wrought for himself: whatsoever
he did he did for his own honor and glory. Now (as I have said before),

2. If we diligently consider it, God cannot be otherwise glorified by his
Creatures, than by their praedication and publication of his honor and glory.
The essential glory of God is neither capable of augmentation, nor of
diminution; no creature can add any thing unto that. Now look,

Thirdly, As a man may be honored mutely, or more livelily; so may God. For
example. A Limner draws a curious piece, which is exposed to view; he gets a
great deal of honor, credit and repute by it: the Picture is a dead mute
thing, and has no voice to praise its maker by, nor any understanding or will
to praise him from any intention, and design, and choice; yet it honors him:
the Workmanship and Art of it gives the Limner a repute to all that view it. We
will now suppose this Limner to have two Sons, both excellently bred up in Arts
and Sciences, etc. but the one a rude debaucht fellow, rebellious to his
father, yet a man of parts; and as he shows his breeding and education upon
any subject, he honors his Father. But the other Son is dutiful, loves his
Parent, makes it his business to commend him to all: you will say, That this
Limner, though he receives some honor from his mute and dead Picture, and
some honor from his rude and rebellious Son, yet the dutiful Son is he who
brings most honor and repute to the Father. This is the case betwixt God and
his Creatures; God has made the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Earth, the Seas;
the Whales, the Lions, and Elephants, the Eagles, the little Silkworms: all
these are pieces of the Divine Workmanship, all give honor and glory to God;
but it is done mutely and passively. The vile and wicked men of the world, that
are rebels against God, yet give a glory to God. The structure of their bodies,
the endowments of their minds, honor God, who made them, and gave them those
excellent features, qualities and endowments. God uses them (some of their
vile and malicious actions) to bring about his wise and glorious ends; but God
does but, as it were, extort his glory from them: But now, the people of God,
out of choice, and design, and by a voluntary act and constant study give
honor and glory to him. Obedience is better than sacrifice; doing of his will
is more acceptable to him than burnt-offerings. The glory God has in Heaven
from Angels, and the Souls of just men made perfect, is from their voluntary
praising of him, and doing of his will: therefore we pray, Thy will be done in
Earth, as it is in Heaven. Now I pray observe,

Fourthly, Angels and men are the only creatures capable of an active,
voluntary, designed, glorifying of God: The Heavens, and in them the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars glorify God, but they know it not; they are inanimate
creatures, not capable of knowledge. The brute creatures act not from any
principle of reason, they have no rational nature; and though God has glory
from them, yet it is not from any principle within them: so that Angels and Men
being rational Beings, have a further capacity to serve the Lords great end in
bringing glory to God, than all the Inanimate Creatures; yea, than all the
vegetative or sensitive Creatures in the World.

Fifthly, Amongst men, The whole Church of God in the general, is that body of
people, where there is any voluntary glorifying of God: Psalm. 29.9, In his
temple does every one speak of his glory. The whole visible Church brings an
active glory to God: it is the Pillar upon which his Proclamations of truth and
grace are hung forth to the view of the World: Psalm. 76.1, His name is great in
Israel. In the Church, whether in truth or in sincerity, all men glorify God
by a professed subjection to his Ordinances, and an outward owning of him.

Sixthly, But Lastly, God is most eminently glorified by his Saints.

1. They do it most heartily, steadily, and fully. What hypocrites do they do
in a mere show and outward appearance. As they glory in appearance, so they
glorify God but in appearance, from the teeth outward, as we say; there is
nothing of heart, design, and choice in it: they indeed glorify God, but we
may say of their honoring and glorifying of God, as the Prophet said, Isa.
10.7, of Assyria's serving God, Howbeit he means not so, neither does his
heart think so; but it is the godly man's choice, design, study, and he does it
more steadily: the hypocrite is in and out; he glorifieth God one hour, by
confessing his sins, putting up prayers to him, reading his word, singing his
praise, and spits in the face of God the next hour, by swearing, and cursing,
and blaspheming, by drunkenness and disobedience; and the godly man glorifieth
God most fully: the hypocrites action is but the action of his outward man; he
does not glorify God as the godly man does in body, and mind, and spirit.

2. Godly men glorify God sincerely: so do no hypocrites, no formal
professors. All hypocrites aim at themselves, they do what they do, (as our
Savior said of the Pharisees), (...), to be seen of men: the godly man drives
no such designs, nor has a squint-eye in his actions, which appear to be
directed to the glory of God: the glory of God is the first, the main of his
design.

3. Lastly, The godly man is he alone whom the Lord has set apart for himself;
whom he intends to take up into Heaven to pursue the great end of his glory
to all eternity.

Now the glory of God, being the great end to which he directs all the
general and particular acts, both of his preserving, and of his
Governing-Providence; it from hence appears exceeding reasonable, that
Providence should work both in preserving and in governing the world by these
different degrees, and with these Specialties which I have showed you. God is
more glorified by men, than either by inanimate creatures, or by any vegetative
or sensitive creatures. More by that body of men called his Church, than by
Heathens amongst whom his name is not known. More yet by godly men, whom he
has set apart for himself, and who steadily, designedly, heartily, sincerely
set themselves to pursue the great design of his glory, than by any hypocrites
and formal professors: therefore it is but reasonable, they should in their
degrees be cared for, preserved and governed by God in a more special and
eminent manner. But I shall add no more to the Doctrinal part of this
discourse. The Application still remains for the subject of further discourse.

SERMON XI.
1 Cor IX. 9. Does God take care for Oxen?
I Am come now to the Application of my former Discourse. You have heard that
God does not only exercise some general acts of Providence in the preservation
and government of all his creatures, but some special acts of Providence, in
the preservation and government of some creatures in a more particular and
eminent manner. Though God does take a care for Oxen, yet he does not take such
a care for Oxen as he does for Angels, for men, and amongst the children of
men, particularly for the members of his Church, and amongst them for such as
are not so only in an external visible profession, but in truth and sincerity;
they are under the highest Specialties and care of Divine Providence. The
Doctrine of Gods Special Providence concerning Angels, and mankind in the
general, and the Polities and Societies of men, I much passed over. The former
being much a secret to us, and not much concerning us: and my Discourse being
not amongst Heathens, but to a Congregation, which universally is within the
pale of the visible Church. I therefore most enlarged upon the Specialties of
Divine Providence (as you know) with reference to the Church of God, and those
in it who truly fear God; accordingly I shall suit my Application.

In the first place, instruct all that hear me this day in the Reason, That God
has this day a Church in the world: and also confirm them, that
notwithstanding all the appearances of hostility against it, yet God will have
a Church to the end of the world. Whosoever considers the Church of God this day,
especially the Reformed Church, and looks back upon it, even from the
commencement of its Reformation, cannot but fancy it, as Noah's Ark in the midst
of raging waters, every moment threatening to swallow it up; like Moses his ark
of Bulrushes, ready to be washed away at the return of every tide; like the
Burning bush which Moses saw all on fire, yet not consumed. You shall find the
Reason why it is not so in the 46 Psalm (a Psalm which Luther was wont often to
call for in his troublesome time); God is our refuge and strength, a present
help in trouble, Ver. 5, God is in the midst of her: The Lord of Hosts is with
her; the God of Jacob is our refuge: he breaks the bow, he cutteth the spear
in sunder; he burns the chariots in the fire. Papists call for Miracles, as a
Note of the true Church; see here a Miracle: Was it not a Miracle that Luther,
a poor Friar, renouncing his former Superstition, and bidding an open defiance
to the Pope and the whole power of Rome, in such a time when all the World was
admiring, or fearing the Beast, and so boldly and freely opposing himself to
them, as he did, and falling upon them in a point of profit, should not only go
through all his bold attempts, and die in peace; but also draw unto him so many
learned men, and prevail so far amongst the people, as that in very many, if
not in most parts of Germany, the Doctrine of the Gospel should prevail, the
Mass and Popish worship should be abolished, and the Truth contrary to the
Doctrine of Rome should be received? Was there not a special Providence (think
you) watched over them? Next to the preservation of the Apostles, and the
succeeding of them to the first plantation of the Gospel in the World, there
has not been a more eminent and conspicuous work of special and miraculous
Providence than in Gods preserving and succeeding the works of Reformation; by
which the Doctrine of Christ, and Worship instituted by him, was restored in a
great measure to that Primitive integrity and purity, which the great Lord of
the Gospel first instituted. And a due meditation of this Doctrine of special
Providence, may also secure the hearts of the people of God against their
fears, for the prevailing of the Churches enemies against it. Their fears can
arise but from the prospect of the multitude, and rage of the Churches enemies:
and their judgment is but a judgment of probability, made from the more common
and ordinary workings of Providence: but this judgment proceeds upon a false
Hypothesis, viz. That Gods way of Providence as to his Church, is but an
ordinary road, and such as he keeps toward other men. Now this is false; God
in his workings for his Church, keeps not the beaten road of his Providence.
Zion has a special Providence, watching over it: The eyes of the Lord are upon
it from one end of the year to the other. Canaan is the Land that God cares
for; God is known in the places of his Church for a refuge; For lo the Kings
were assembled, they passed by together; they saw it, and so they marvelled,
they were troubled and hasted away: Fear took hold upon them there, and pain as
on a woman in travel. Psalm 48.3, 4, 5, 6, God will establish it for ever. Ver.
8, Watch about Sion (says the Psalmist) and go round about her; tell the
towers thereof: mark you well her bulwarks, consider her palaces, that you may
tell it to the generations following: for this God is our God for ever, and
ever: he will be our guide until death. We have lived to see as bold and
impudent attaques made upon the Church, as to that part of it that has been
studious of the stricter and severer practice of Holiness, as possibly later
ages have known. If Christians could have been swagger'd and hectored out of
the practice of Holiness, or jeered and drolled out of it; or threatened and
frighted, or cudgel'd out of it, there have been arguments enough of this
nature used: but how little have they done? how few are less in love with the
good, and holy ways of God than before? Having therefore so many great and
precious Promises for the preservation of the Church, and God exercising a
special care for it, and keeping it under a special tutelage; Let us not fear,
but believe that God (as the Psalmist says) will establish it for ever. Let us
therefore look off creature-appearances and humane-probabilities. The Church is
a burning-bush, and has been so from the very first plantation of it: but we
see it is not consumed, because God is in the midst of it. Remember this, That
the Church lives not upon an ordinary, common, general Providence, but upon a
special peculiar Providence; watching over it, and caring for it.

In the next place, this may serve to show you your duty: the special
Providence that attend your lives. There is an observation of the more general
Providence of God in upholding and governing the World; which is our duty, and
a very sweet and advantageous piece of duty; (but this I shall hereafter
further press upon you). That which I would speak a few words to here, is the
observation of the special Providence of God relating to you. What the Psalmist
says of the observations of Providence more generally, Psalm 107, the last
verse; Whosoever observes these things is wise, and he shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord, is eminently true. Here it speaks, 1. A Spiritual
wisdom. 2. It will be of great use to make us understand the loving kindness of
the Lord. Observe the special Providence of God toward his Church; his Church
in former ages, his Church in our present age: you will by those observations
be able to make up a judgment what man is like to do against it; and what God
is like yet to do for that body of people that come under that Notion: nay, you
will be able to go a great way in making up a Judgment, who they are that make
up the true Church of God; even those upon whom the Eye of God is most, and for
whom his Arm is most stretched out; not in this or that particular act, but in
a continued series and course of strange preservations. There is, and indeed
always has been a great dispute in the World, which is the true Church of God.
The Jews arrogated the honor to themselves; and indeed there was a time when
none could claim with them: but the Apostle amply declares their rejection,
and the Gentiles ingraffing. But though it be certain now, that the Church of
God is made up of those that were Gentiles; yet as several Sects and parties
have risen up amongst them, so they have had an ambition still to arrogate this
Name to themselves. The Arians would be the only Church; since that, the
Papists: the Protestants think they have the best claim, and great disputes
there are for this Honorable Title. I will not say this will determine the
cause, but it will go a great way. That body of people professing Christ,
against whom the gates of Hell cannot prevail, Matthew. 16.18. In the midst of
which God appears to be by a more special powerful Protection, keeping it that
it shall not fall. Psalm 46.5, That people which the Lord keeps and waters
every moment, lest any should hurt it, keeping it night and day, Isa. 27.3.
That people round about whom the Lord is as the mountains are round about
Jerusalem. Psalm 125, v. 2, Who can say, as Psalm 124, If it had not been the
Lord who was on our side: If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side:
when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up quick, when their
wrath was kindled against us: Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the proud
waters had gone over our souls. I say, that people amongst those that lay claim
to the honorable Title of the Church of God, seem to have the best claim; for
it is the Church for which God exercises a special Providence: I will not say,
This alone will prove any party the true Christian Church; but wherever we
see a people professing faith in Jesus Christ, holding the Doctrine of the
Gospel; crying, To the Law and to the Testimony for the trial of her Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline, and God watching over this people, strangely
preserving, multiplying and increasing them; using the ministry of his Word
amongst them, to convert and build up Souls, delivering them in a constant
series and succession of Providence from their Enemies, far more and more
mighty than they are, we may join our selves to them: The anointed of the Lord,
the Church of the true and living God is doubtless before us. Though these
special Providence will not make an argument alone, yet they are a far better
argument than the Popish pedigree they pretend to in a succession from St.
Peter, or Antiquity, or their pretended Unity, or Miracles, indeed rather to be
called lying wonders. I know no promises of these things to the Church to the
end of the World; but I know many promises for special Providence attending
them. And certainly, that Body of Christian people called Protestants: I mean,
that people in all the parts of the World, that are now called by that name
(for the name bears date but from the German Reformation): but I say, that
Body of people united in their Doctrine and Worship, can lay the fairest claim
to this of any others. No people has been more strangely preserved than they:
witness those in the valleys of Piedmont and Lucerne, and Bohemia; none more
strangely preserved, nor whose number has been more strangely increased, nor
their Doctrines more strangely prevailed. A Christian by observing which way
special Providence has most moved, may get much wisdom, and much help himself
in making a judgment which is the true Church. 2. Yea, and he may also much
help himself in judging of those in the World, who are the true Saints and
people of God; who they are that dwell in the secret of the most High, as the
Psalmist speaks; for they generally abide under the more particular shadow of
the Almighty. It is true, there are some rare instances of persons that walk
close with God, whom yet God follows with a series of severe Providence;
such an instance was Job, and such particular instances we see in our time, to
let us know, that outward prosperity is not the Saints portion: God has
provided some better things for his people. But take now any considerable
number of people in any City or Place, that (so far as we can judge) walk more
close with God, and in a more strict observation of his law than others do; and
oppose these to a like number of persons in that place, that give a liberty to
their lusts, and walk by no such rule: and observe number for number, who are
most under the special Providence of God, preserving them from dangers and in
dangers; who are most blessed with special Providence, as to length of life,
health, etc. you will remember, that I told you, we must abate for particular
instances of Gods own people, whom he picks out, to make examples of says and
patience, and to be his witnesses unto the world in a time of trial. Who
observes not how strangely God preserves and blesses some people that fear
him, and walk closely with him? and I do believe the observation will justify
it self, concerning any considerable number of such persons compared with a
like number of others. So that although none can conclude himself, or herself,
a child of God, from some particular special Providence, no not from a series
and course of them; yet where men and women walk close with God, Gods special
Providence attending them, will much evidence, even to others, that they are
not hypocritical in their professions.

2. But secondly, The observation of Gods special Providence toward our
persons, our families, our Church, will much make us to understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. The love of our friend to us is not seen so much
in some acts of his goodness, which others experience as much as we, as in some
special things, which he does for us, and does not, or will not do for others.
The observation therefore of special Providence helps much to affect our hearts
with the love of God. God in trying our love to him says to us, What do you do
more than others? and as our love to God is so tried, so Gods love to us is so
evidenced: this is that which has always set the hearts of the people of God
admiring God. This was that which set the Psalmist upon admiring Gods goodness
to mankind, Psalm. 8.4, What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of
man that thou should remember him? If you read on, you will see, that which
affected the Psalmist, was Gods special Providence to man, making him little
lower than the Angels, clothing him with glory and honor, putting all things
under his feet, etc. This made David understand the loving kindness of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 7.18, Who am I, O Lord, and what is my house that thou have
brought me hitherto? and this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord. God
aggravates our sins from the special Providence he has blessed us with; as in
the case of David, 2 Samuel 12. and Saul. Moses argues the Israelites to duty
from Gods special Providence to them, in the four first Chapters of
Deuteronomy: nothing makes us so much as them to understand the loving kindness
of the Lord. Oh therefore observe, consider what God has done, and what he
daily does for you more than others; preserving your lives, your health,
blessing you in your relations, and estates, and trades, prospering and
succeeding you in your undertakings; above all, what he has done for your
souls more than for the souls of others, plucking you as brands out of the
fire, snatching you (as the Angels did Lot) out of Sodom.

3. Lastly, This observation of special Providence, will more eminently engage
and quicken you to duty. God expects it from you, as you may see by Moses his
discourse to the Israelites in the four or five first Chapters of Deuteronomy;
and you will find your hearts more enlarged in duty from the sense, and
apprehension of them. But of this more under the next branch of Application.

Secondly, special Providence calls upon all mankind in general; that part of
them which make up the Church of God more especially; and yet more
particularly, those that fear the Lord, for more special homage and duty to
God: those gradations, you know, I observed in special Providence. The objects,
the general objects of it, I told you, were Angels and Men. I baulked the
discourse of Gods special Providence in the preservation and Government of the
good Angels; as that the particulars of which we know little of: so neither are
they those to whom we are to preach, neither do those blessed Spirits need any
of our exhortations: they spontaneously, perpetually, and without ceasing give
honor and glory to God, and do his will; and this in a degree proportioned to
that special Providence, by which they are both preserved and governed. We are
bid to pray, that we might be able on earth to do the will of God, as it is
done in heaven: it is to men, to the sons and daughters of men, that I am to
speak.

1. Let all the sons and daughters of men then praise God, and glorify him in
a degree proportioned to that special Providence which God exercises toward
them in general. You will say, what is that? I answer in the general, It is
more than that which God exercises toward any degree of creatures that is
beneath them. There are three orders of creatures beneath man. 1. Such as have
only Being, no life, as the Earth, the Waters, etc. 2. Such as have Being and
life, but no sense, as berbs and plants. 3. Such as have Being, and life, and
sense, but no reason, as beasts, birds, fishes, creeping things; of all these
God takes a care, as I have before showed you: but does God take care for
Oxen? (says the Apostle in my Text), God exercises a more particular special
Providence for all the children of men than for any of these. Then certainly
every man is obliged to honor and glorify God more than these do. There is
none of these but glorifieth God in its kind: The Heavens declare his glory;
The little Be and Silkworm glorifieth God as they are his workmanship, and
endued with excellent qualities which speak the infinite wisdom of God: every
spire of grass glorifies God as it shows it self to the world, and
challenges all the art of men to make such a thing. Nay, these inanimate and
brute creatures use all the faculties and qualities with which they were
created, to the end for which God endued them with them. Alas! the best of men
come much short, none lives and sins not. None lives who uses not some of
the faculties which God has given him for his honor and glory, to his
disservice and dishonor. Wherein then can man live up to the special
Providence, that watches over, preserves, and governs him? I answer, In the
voluntary directions of his words, thoughts, and actions to the glory of God.
This no creature but man can do; they have no reasonable souls, they act merely
ex necessitate naturae, according to the necessity of nature imposed upon them
by the Law of creation: God indeed has an honor from every man, as he is
created in the image of God, and is a noble and glorious creature. One man may
more speak the praises of God than another, as he is endued with a greater wit
or wisdom, has more dexterity, sagacity, more excellent parts than another;
but while the poor creatures heart is not right-set, and bent, and directed to
the glory of God; wherein does he more than an Element, or a brute Beast? that
man only in this excels a Stone, or a brute Beast, that with purpose of
heart, out of choice, and designedly honors God: and quotus quisque est, how
rare is the man in the world that sets his heart to bring God glory by his
manlike actions. God has indeed an accidental glory by most men's actions; but
it is rather to be said, that God is glorified by them, than that they glorify
God: Now what a sad reflection this is for a wicked man to think, that his
horse more glorifies God than he does. There Is no man lives, but partaketh
more of a special Providence than any other creature, not of his order:
certainly God expects from all of you, some service proportionable to this
particular Providence. Say to your selves sometimes, What do I more for God
than the flower of my Garden? the grass in my field, the beast in my stall? and
see if the answer of your souls, to such a Question, will not reflect a shame
upon you. O study your special Providence, and live up to them: remember, that
where God has given much he expects much. But rest not here, do not only study
the special Providence which you are under, as men, and which are common to
all men with your selves, or to the most of men with your selves; but observe,
and study also the particular Providence that have followed you, for which God
expects a return. It may be you have more wit, more wisdom than others, you
have a greater dexterity in business: God has better provided for you, given
you a better estate, more comforts in your relations, etc. Oh live up to these
Specialties of Providence: you will expect it from those to whom you have at
any time done any good: you are mistaken if you think that God does not expect
it from you.

2. This more especially calls to you, who are the members of the visible
Church, for a more special consecration and dedication of your selves unto God.
You have heard that the Church is an eminent object of special Providence many
ways; many special Promises are made to it, and that is the body of people of
the world whom God cares for: see then what a particular obligation lies upon
all professors, all members of the visible Church, to give God honor and
glory. You are the only people in the world, to whom the Oracles of God are
committed; you are the pillar of truth; you are those who do alone enjoy the
Ordinances of God: you are the people in the midst of whom God dwells, upon
whom the eye of God is from one end of the year to the other. Certainly there
lies an high obligation upon you to honor God more than others. God has done
infinitely more for you than for Heathens. Now what a shame it is that an
Heathen should out-doe you in any thing; yet give me leave to tell you, that
while you only do some actions that are materially good, not formally and
truly, many Heathens have done as much as you. An Heathen may do, and many of
them have done, and that with some good intention, actions materially good,
that is, such things as God commanded. Many of them have been eminent instances
of moral virtue, Justice, charity, temperance, liberality, etc. many of them
have professed to love virtue for the sake of virtue. Wherein can you excel
them? but by doing actions which are formally good, designing Gods glory,
acting in obedience to Gods will, regulating your selves as to the manner by
Gods word: you have the word, the Gospel of God, oh how reasonable it is that
our conversation should be as becomes the Gospel of Christ! The Heathen else
that lives up to his light of nature out-does us, and it will (as our Savior
tells us) be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the day of Judgment than for
us.

3. But Lastly, Let the Saints of God see what an obligation, to all manner of
duty and holiness, lies upon their souls: they are the most special objects of
special Providence. God takes more care for all men, than for Oxen, or for the
grass of the field; he exercises a more special Providence for that body of
people which make up his visible Church, than for all the earth besides: but
yet what is that special Providence which God exercises for mere formal
professors, or for any other men in the world, in comparison of what they have
experienced! Any thing of more special distinguishing Grace, is a great
Specialty of Providence, and that in the best and highest sort of good things,
viz. those which concern the salvation of the Soul. Oh, what does God expect?
what does God require from you? what should you do more than others? More
particularly, This Doctrine of special Providence calls to you,

1. For more extraordinary degrees of Love. 2. For more special acts of Faith.
1. For more eminent degrees of Love, Psalm. 31.23, O Love you the Lord, all you
his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful, and plentifully rewards the
proud doer. Reason argues thus with us, that the reciprocations of our love
ought to bear proportion to love received. If (says our Savior) you love them
that love you, what reward have you? the law of nature commands us to love,
and by actions of kindness and duty to express our love to them who have
expressed their kindness to us: and the same reason requires the reciprocations
of love to be proportionable. God therefore declaring especial love to you, you
are bounden in a special duty to him. Let our Saviors question be often in
your thoughts, What do you do more than others? If you for whom God has sent
his Son to dye, and into whose hearts he has sent his Spirit, the Spirit of
Adoption, Supplication, Consolation, and whom the Lord has from the womb
watched over and preserved by a more special peculiar Providence, bearing you
as upon Eagles Wings, and gathering you as an Hen gathers her Chickens under
her Wings; I say, If you do no more for God than others do, not under such
influences, nor such Providence; you must certainly act beneath, and short of
your duty. This depends upon what I told you before, of the reasonableness of
the reciprocations of love in some commensurate proportions.

2. It calls to them who fear God, for special exercises of faith; you have
reason more to trust and depend upon God than others, because God has declared
a more special care and Providence for you. The ground of all faith is the word
and promise of God. Now special promises call for a more special and peculiar
faith. What though another man cannot trust God contrary to a sensible or
reasonable appearance; yet you have reason to do it, because God has declared
more his care for you, and the workings of his Providence for your preservation
and deliverance than for others: God has promised to save, defend and deliver
you, not after the workings of his ordinary Providence. You may therefore say
with David, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? He is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Psalm 27.1.3, Though an Host
should encamp against me, my heart should not fear: though war should rise
against me, in this I will be confident. But thus much shall serve to have
discoursed concerning the Specialties of Divine Providence.

SERMONS, XII, XIII.
Rom XI. 33. O the depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!
I Have finished my Discourse concerning the principal Acts of Divine
Providence, both generally and specially. I have discoursed concerning Gods
general Acts in preserving and governing all his creatures, and concerning
God's more special preserving and governing of some creatures. I am now come to
discourse concerning the Methods of it, concerning which we must cry out with
this great Apostle; O the depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? My Text is the
conclusion of an exceeding deep discourse, which the Apostle had made
concerning the Rejection of the Jews: which he proves to be neither Total, nor
final. In the ten first verses he proves that it is not Total. V. 2, God did
not cast off his people, whom he did foreknow. V. 5, There is a remnant
according to Election. As it was in Elias's time: he thought, and complained
that he was left alone, and they sought his life also: but he was mistaken, God
at that time had seven thousand in Israel, that had not bowed the knee to Baal.
V. 7, He says, The Election had obtained, though some, though the most of them
were rejected: yet the Elect amongst them were not rejected; and this he
proves to have been but according to what was prophesied. V. 11, He proves
that this Rejection should not be final: There should be a fullness of them, V.
12. Receiving of them, V. 15. They should be again grafted in, V. 23, 24. It is
but (V. 25.) till the fullness of the Gentiles should come, and then all ^srael
should be saved. This Discourse is mixed with several arguments to prove the
assertion, and with several reflections upon the Gentiles, whose present state
was better than theirs: showing them their duty negatively and positively: not
to be high-minded, but humble; To fear, etc. Now look as a man wading in deep
waters, when he finds the water go over his head, and trip up his heels; he
cries out, O I shall be drowned, and endeavors to get back again. So does the
blessed Apostle; he had been wading into the great deeps of Gods counsels and
ways: but he finds that such knowledge (as David says) was too wonderful for
him. In my Text, he does refer pedem, draw his foot backward. I will go back,
says he, I will wade no further: O the depth! There are some truths, and ways
of God which are unsearchable. We may discourse a little, and more generally of
them: but we shall never be able to find the bottom of them. It is wisdom for
us in time to retreat, and cry, O the depth! But what depth is this? The
blessed Apostle tells you of the wisdom and knowledge of God; in man knowledge
and wisdom, are two differing habits; a man may be a knowing man, yet not a
wise man. Knowledge apprehends things, Wisdom directs the practice to the best
ends of humane life. Knowledge is a speculative habit, Wisdom; a practical
habit. In God also (though he be but one simple act), we may conceive a
difference betwixt Wisdom, and Knowledge; but in this Text, possibly it is but
(...), one thing expressed by two terms: he is speaking of the wisdom, the
unsearchable wisdom of God in some particular acts of his Providence; How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out. Here are two
terms, Judgments, and Ways: Both again here signify, 1. the same thing.
Judgments in Scripture, sometimes signify the ways and statutes of God;
because of the Justice and righteousness that is in them. By Justice, God
measures his own Words, and Laws. 2. Sometimes the Term signifies corrections
and chastisements; because God measures out all these likewise in Justice, and
in them acts as a righteous Judge: But here doubtless, Judgments and ways
signify the same thing. All Gods ways are Judgments, ways of Justice and
Equity, and Righteousness. The term ways, is also used in more senses than one:
Sometimes it signifies the way of Duty, wherein we ought to walk toward God,
or the course of men's actions; so you read of the way of the wicked, the way of
sinners: here it is applied to God, and signifies, The course and series of his
actions toward his creatures; so it signifies here. Of these Judgments, and
ways of God, of this wisdom and knowledge of God, it is said, They are
unsearchable, they are past finding out. Unsearchable, that is, such as we can
by no means search out, by no means come to the bottom of. The only Proposition
I shall insist upon from these words, is this:

Prop. The ways of Gods counsels and Providence, are unsearchable and not to be
found out.

In the handling of this Proposition,

1. I will endeavor to prove it to you that it is so.

2. I will show you how far it is our duty to behold, and to search into them:
and to show you also wherein they are unsearchable, and not to be found out.
Then I shall make some application. Let us first see how this is established
from Scripture: Eccles. 8.17, Then I beheld all the works of God, that a man
cannot find out his work that is done under the Sun: yea, though a man labor
to seek it out, yet he shall not find it: yea, though a wiseman thinks to
know it, yet he shall not find it. A Text which must be understood of Gods
works of Providence. The Wiseman says, a man cannot find them out, yea though
a man labor to seek it, yet he shall not find it: He that spoke this was
Solomon, a man to whom God had given Wisdom above all that had been before him,
and said that there should be none after him, who should be like unto him. He
tells us ver. 16, That as he was endued with Wisdom, enriched with this Talent,
so he had not laid it up in a Napkin, but had made it his business to improve
it: I have (says he) applied my heart to wisdom, and to see the business which
is done on the earth. V. 17, you have the conclusion, That the ways of God were
not to be found out; yea though a wise man think to know it, yet he shall not
find it out. Psalm 36.6, His righteousness is like a great mountain, his
judgments are a great deep: Not a deep only, but a great deep. The Sea is
called a great deep; there is no sounding the bottom of it in many places: For
(says the Apostle) what man knows the things of a man but the spirit of a
man that is within him: even so no man knows the things of God, but the
spirit of God; and it must be so if we consider the infiniteness of the Divine
Light, Wisdom and Understanding; His understanding is infinite, Psalm 147.5.
Now it is said of the works of God, In wisdom has he made them all: There is
the infinite wisdom of God in the works and contrivances of his Providence. The
Apostle tells us, he dwells in that light to which none can approach, 1 Timothy 6.16: and so he walks in that light which none can see, and fully
comprehend: There is no searching out of his understanding, Isa. 40.28. The way
of the Lord is like the way of an Eagle in the air; of a Serpent upon a Rock,
not to be seen, not to be tracked, Incomprehensibilis Dei sapientia inter
angustias humanae rationis coarctari non potest. It is the saying of a grave
Author, Gods unsearchable incomprehensible wisdom cannot be cooped up within
the straits of humane Reason: but the Doctrine is experimentally, and de facto,
evident enough.

In the second place, here may arise a Question; How far our duty extends, as
to the ways of Divine Providence? for certainly we have a duty, a great duty
incumbent upon us to Divine Providence. I remember it is the saying of Cicero,
Si vera est sententia quorundam philosophorum, qui omnino nullam rerum
humanarum procurationem docent habere Deos; Quae potest esse pietas? Quae
Religio? Quae sanctitas? Cicero de Not. Deorum: If the opinion of some
Philosophers, who deny that the Gods exercise any providence (or take any care
of humane affairs) be true; What piety can there be? What Religion? What
Holiness. A sentence which will let us know that there were some amongst the
Heathens that were less Atheists, than some amongst those who are called
Christians. Now the case is the same, supposing this Divine Procuration or
Providence, if we may not, or do not at all take notice of it. Let me therefore
discourse a little concerning the duty of man with reference to the Providence
of God; and then I shall show you the boundaries of it, and wherein it is
unsearchable. I shall open the first in three or four particulars:

1. It is doubtless the duty of Gods people, To see and behold the works of the
Lord: indeed we cannot but see them, they are before our eyes every day. But my
meaning is, to behold the things that are done in the earth, as the works of
the Lord. There are too many that do see, and not see; they see pluckings up,
and plantings of Nations and Families, but they see nothing of God in these
effects. They say not this is the Lords doing, and therefore it is not
mavelous in their eyes: They see Pestilences, sweeping away Cities and
Families; fires laying populous Cities waste: Enemies breaking in upon
Countries, and strangely overrunning them, the hand of God sweeping away whole
Families, but they see nothing of God in them: they consider these as terrible
things, as misfortunes, to which the state of Humane affairs is subjected;
their Eyes are upon the visible wheels that turn these things, but they see not
the wheel within the wheel: the Psalmist calls to us, to come and behold the
works of the Lord, what desolations he has wrought in the earth. Men see
desolations wrought in the Earth, but they see them not as the work of the
Lord, as desolations wrought by him. This is what the Psalmist complained of,
and for which he prays against them, Psalm 28.4, 5, Give them according to
the works of their hands, etc. Because they regard not the work of the Lord,
nor regard the operations of his hands: he shall destroy them, and not build
them up. This is a sign of an Atheistical heart, to see great changes, and not
to see God in them: the Heathens had more of Religion than this came to. I
remember the Poet in his description of the ruin of Troy, brings in Venus
taking Aeneas of his metal in the last defense of his Country, and from taking
Revenge on Helena the cause of it, by showing him the gods at every corner and
post of the City, helping the Grecians to fire it, and to over-turn the walls
of it. It is very sad that amongst Christians, there should be any that in the
great changes which God works in Nations, Cities, Families, cannot see the
great and living God at work, and using creatures but as instruments in his
hand: but this is but a seeing and beholding the works of Providence, highly
useful for the production of pious affections, and such acts of duty as God
requires; We have a further Duty than this incumbent upon us.

2. It is not only our Duty to see and behold; but wistly to consider and
observe these things. Psalm 107.43, Whosoever is wise will observe these things,
and he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord, (a Text which in this
discourse I shall make a further use of.) Observation implies the application
of our minds, unto the passages of Divine Providence which are before our eyes:
as we must not be careless and forgetful hearers of the word of God, so we must
not be careless and forgetful observers of the works of God. It is said Genesis
37.11, that Jacob observed the saying, Joseph's saying in the repetition of his
Dream, relating to eminent providential workings. So it is said, Luke 2.19,
That when upon the birth of our Savior, the Angels had spoke to the Shepherds,
and the Shepherds had published the glad tidings which they had brought to the
City, That all who heard it wondered at those things which were spoken by the
Shepherds: Mary kept all these sayings, and pondered them in her heart. To see
a thing, is one thing, to make our minds to stand upon it, to consider it, and
to ponder upon it, is another thing. This is also our Duty, as to meditate on
the Lords words, so to meditate on the Lords works: twice the Psalmist has it,
I will meditate on all thy works, Psalm 143.5, I muse on the works of thy
hands. So Psalm 77. v. 12, I will meditate also on all thy works, and talk of
thy doings. It is our great fault, that we suffer the impression of Gods works
to go off our hearts too soon. We hear of great changes; we see great
desolations, God works in Kingdoms, Cities, and Families: at first they make a
little impression upon us, we startle at them; but by the next day they are as
a tale that is told, the sound is out of our ears, the impression is off our
minds: this is now, not to observe the works of the Lord, not, as we ought, to
consider the operation of his hands.

3. It is thirdly our Duty, modestly and humbly to search out the causes of
Providence toward our selves especially. We are commanded to hear the Rod,
and who has appointed it. Thus did Joseph's brethren, Genesis 42.21: when they
were in prison they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our
Brother, when we saw the anguish of his soul; when he sought to us, and we
would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon us. Job prays, Job 10.2,
Show me wherefore thou contendest with me: this is but a searching, and trying
our ways, an excellent help, and necessary medium in order to a true
repentance. Indeed it is our great error, that we are very prone to search out
the causes of severe Providence upon others. The Barbarians seeing a Viper
cleave to Paul's hand, conclude him a Murderer; but we are very slow and
backward, to enquire into the meritorious causes of Gods severe Dispensations
to our selves: Yet as to others, as it is our Duty to observe the Providence
of God to them, so we may modestly and humbly search out the causes of them.
Thus did Jeremiah, venia praefata, having first recognized God, in the Justice
and righteousness of his proceedings: Jer. 12.1, Righteous art thou, O Lord, in
thy Judgments, when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee of thy
Judgments: why does the way of the wicked prosper, etc? So the Prophet
Habbakuk, chapter 1.13, Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously,
and hold thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous than he? But as to this searching into the causes of Divine
Providence, I put in those two words, modestly, and humbly. Indeed, God is so
plain and open in his Judgments sometimes, that the provocation is wrote, and
that in capital Letters in the front of the punishment. Thus it was in the case
of the Sodomites, the Egyptians, the Benjamites; Saul's bloody house, Haman, the
final destruction of the Jews, etc: and thus it is still very often. The
Drunkard dies in his drunkenness; but it is not always so. The Judgments of the
Lord are a great deep. This enquiry therefore into causes must be modest and
humble: we must no more caecutire in revelatis, as to the works of God, than as
to the word of God: if we see a blood-thirsty and deceitful man, not living out
half his days, a Dart striking through the liver of the Adulterer; these are
open things. And when we see profane vile wretches, devouring those that are
more righteous than they: when we see God plaguing men according to his own
heart, chastening them every moment, not giving them time to swallow their
spittle: These are secrets of Divine Providence, of which we must be careful
that we pass no ungrounded censure, yea, and we must search humbly too. Our
judgment in these cafes will amount to no more, than a judgment of probability:
we cannot pretend to an infallibility, we are not of Gods counsel, and his ways
are great deeps.

4. Lastly, We ought so far to search into, and to enquire into the workings of
Divine Providence, as may any way conduce to make us better, by more adoring
and revereing God; more avoiding of sin, more quickening up the habits and
exercises of grace: but to take heed of such an enquiry as will be of no use to
us, unless to make us Atheists, or too curious searchers into the unsearchable
things of God, or uncharitable consurers of our brethren. The reafon of this
is, because Duty is the End of all our beholding, considering and observing the
Lords works, or any way enquiring and searching into them. This is the main
thing which God has said to us, Obey my voice. Now so far as an enquiring into
the Lords ways and works of Providence, will help us to obey the Lords voice,
so far doubtless it is our Duty. The voice of the Lord is in Scripture
everywhere to us; to fear before him, to love him, to trust in him, to take
heed of sinning against him. Now so far as the searching into the causes of
Divine Providence, may conduce to quicken us up to these Exercises, so far is
it undoubtedly our duty, and a very commendable practice; but where it only
tends to make us Atheists, by seeing nothing of the hand of God in them, but
confirming a fancy in us, that we have found out the reason of all in a
necessary connection, or working of natural causes, or only serves us for an
advantage or ground for us unwarrantably and uncharitably to judge and censure
our brethren, so far it is undoubtedly sinful. Where the searching of the
causes of Divine Providence to us, or others may contribute; and so far forth,
as it may conduce to quicken us up to repentance for them, to a faith in, and a
dependence upon God, to make us either more thankful, or any way more holy; so
far forth it is our advantageous duty. Thus Jona's reflection upon the storm he
met with at Sea, when he was fleeing from God, Jonah 1.10, 11: and Joseph's
brethrens reflection upon the imprisonment they met with in Egypt, were both
good and pious, tending to bring them to a sense of their several sins against
God. David's observation of Providence helped him in the exercise of his Faith;
1 Samuel 17.34, 35. Manoahs observation, that God had accepted a sacrifice,
confirmed his faith, that he would not destroy them. Oft-times the observing
of, and searching into the ways of Divine Providence, hugely exciteth praise
and thankfulness, Psalm 107.8.15, 21, 31, etc. Thus far now it is our duty, to
behold, observe, search into the ways of Divine Providence; they are not called
unsearchable, to deter us from beholding, seeing and considering them, so far
as it may help in the performance of any piece of that duty which we owe unto
God. God hangs out his great works of Providence to the world that men may
behold them, look upon them, and that not superficially, but wistly and
considerately. Well, but how are they then unsearchable? why does the Apostle
pronounce them past finding out? That brings me to the last thing promised you
in the Explication of the Proposition: I shall open it to you in several
particulars.

1. They are unsearchable and past finding out, as to the latitude and full
compass of them. Job, chapter 26, had been largely discoursing of the great works
of Divine Providence, his stretching out the North upon the empty places, and
hanging the Earth upon nothing. Ver. 7, His binding up the waters in the thick
clouds, and the clouds not being rent under them, ver. 8, etc. But then
concludes ver. 14, Lo these are part of his ways, but how little a portion is
heard of him? but the thunder of his power, who can understand? some read it,
These are but the borders, some corners of Gods ways. David tells us, Psalm
111.2, The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein. It is our duty to seek out the works of the Lord, and every
good man has a pleasure therein, and will be modestly seeking out Gods works;
ay, but though they will be seeking, yet we shall be no more in this World than
seekers: Job 16.7, Who can find out the Almighty to perfection, says God? Much
of God is seen, much of God may be found out; but the perfection of Gods works,
as well as of his Divine Being, is an unsearchable thing. There are thousands
of things in the workings of Divine Providence which we cannot find out:
infinite motions in the upholdings of it, in the government of it, of which we
know nothing; something we can by the helps of Scripture and Reason, discourse,
how Providence upholds the great varieties of Beings in the World, the Methods
of God in governing the World; but who can find out the Almighty to perfection?
Who can discourse the thunder of his power? There is a terra incognita, or
rather a coelum incognitum in the Divine workings. What Job said, we may apply
here; A thing was brought unto me, and my ear received a little thereof. Many
things concerning Gods workings are brought to our senses, and our senses
receive, yea our reason receives a little, and but a little thereof: as to
them we may say as the Apostle says in another case, Where is the Scribe?
where is the Wise man? where is the disputer of this World? We by study can
dive a little into Gods ways; but we must come out of our deepest studies,
crying out with our Apostle, O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
This knowledge is, as Job says, chapter 11.7, 8, As high as heaven, what can thou
do? deeper than hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof is longer than
the Earth, and broader than the Sea.

2. A second thing unsearchable, and past finding out in these ways of God, is
the tendency of them, while we see them come to an issue. Had one of us been a
companion with Joseph, and seen him thrown into a pit, then sold into Egypt;
after this thrown into a prison, upon the accusation of his Mistress, we could
never have judged this a Method in order to his riding in the second Chariot,
and being the second man in Egypt; but we see at last it was so. Had we been in
the Court of Persia, or Babylon, and have seen Haman's Exaltation and his power
with the King, obtaining a Decree from him for the destruction of all the Jews,
we should never have seen the tendency of this to the ruin of Haman, the
exaltation of Mordecai, etc. Had we seen Daniel thrown into the Lion's Den, we
could never have read the tendency of this to his greater exaltation and fuller
preferment, and conquest over his Enemies; and yet so it was. The tendencies of
Divine Providence are sometimes by us boldly determined; sometimes guessed at:
but how unsearchable are the ways of God in them? How strangely are we every
day mistaken in what we judged the design, and tendency of many motions of
Providence, proving in the issue quite contrary to what we expected.

3. A third unsearchable thing in Divine Providence, is the track of it.
Necessary causes (and such Natural causes are) have a certain track, you may
follow the prints of their feet: Moral and voluntary causes have not such a
certain track, moving not like Machines, but as influenced from the will of
man; but yet there is something of ordinary certainty in them. Reason in all
men, and in men of several ages is much a kin; whence that certainty does
arise, as well as from the finiteness of men's wisdom and understanding. But
here God is unsearchable: he does not always do the same things, the same ways;
sometimes by humane means, sometimes without means, sometimes by improbable
means: sometimes adding by a preternatural power to natural causes: sometimes
by suspending their acts; sometimes by overruling their motions and workings,
all in infinite variety: so as his ways are like the ways of a Ship in the sea,
an Eagle in the air, a Serpent upon a Rock; you can track them in none of their
ways. By Faith we know that God will deliver his people; but how, and by what
means, or when, we know not. Sometimes prosperity shall slay the fool,
sometimes he shall perish by adversity; sometimes the Sinner shall be cut off
in the middle of his days, sometimes he shall live to an extreme old age: men
keep a path and a track in their motions, but God keeps none. Naaman did ill,
when he came to the God of Israel to be healed of his Leprosy, to be
prescribing to him so much as in his thoughts, thinking that the Prophet must
needs come down, and stroke the sore, etc. Gods way or method of Providence, in
bringing about the effects of his counsels and purposes, is unsearchable.

4. A fourth thing which in the motions of Divine Providence is unsearchable,
is the indications of it. Solomon tells us, that the righteous and the wise,
and their works are in the hand of the Lord, Eccles. 9.1, 2. Unto all men there
is one event, both to the righteous and to the wicked: No man can know either
love or hatred, by all that is before him in this life. Esau is rejected, yet
he has the mountains of Edom given him for his portion, and the seed of Jacob
must not dispossess him. Jacob is beloved, yet must he fly to Padan Aram,
endure the extremities of weather to feed his Uncles flocks, etc. and when he
comes away, he must once and again run the hazard of his life. No man can
expound the Providence of God unto any to make them indications of Gods love
or hatred. Israel is the people beloved of the Lord, yet they must serve an
hard servitude in Egypt; then forty years together, by traveling through a
desolate and howling Wilderness. Dives is rich, clothed with purple, and
fares deliciously every day; yet when he dies goes to Hell. Lazarus is a
poor beggar at his gates, clothed with rags, abounding with sores, yet when he
dies is by Angels carried to Abraham's bosom. Abraham, and Lot, and David, and
Joseph of Arimathea, all rich men, yet very good, and heirs of the Kingdom of
God: Others very poor, yet every-whit as poor spiritually, and miserable as to
their spiritual estate, as they are in respect to their outward condition.
Grateful Providence speak the appearing love of God to us, and oblige us to
thankfulness, but they do not speak special distinguishing love. Adverse
Providence appear as the frowns of God upon us, yet may be but the chastenings
of an indulgent father, who chasteneth whom he loves, and scourges every
child whom he receives. Hell begins with some in this life; their life is but
a life of misery, and leads into that misery which shall never have an end:
sometimes men in the enjoyments of this life are lifted up to Heaven, but it is
-- ut lapsu graviore ruant, that their fall may be the greater into the pit
prepared for them. The Indications of Divine Providence are altogether
unsearchable. No man can know love or hatred by any thing which is before him
in this life.

5. A fifth unsearchable thing in Divine Providence, is the causes of them.
There is infinite wisdom and reason in all the dispensations of Providence. In
wisdom has the Lord done, and made whatsoever he has done: but this wisdom of
God, as to all his works of Providence, is not always evident to us. It is one
of those things, which Divines say, we shall more perfectly understand at the
day of Judgment, and in another life, than we yet do, how wisely the infinite
wise God has managed the Government of the World. We are oft-times startled,
and troubled, and amazed to see the works of God in the World, and at loss to
compound them with the declarations of his love to his people, and the great
number of promises made to them. What Christ said to Peter, We may apply here,
what God is doing we do not know here, but we shall know hereafter. We cannot
tell the reason of a thousand dispensations of God to his Church and people
here, but we shall know them hereafter. Sometimes we know much of them in this
life, but what we do not know in this life we shall know in the day, when all
hidden things shall be made manifest, and all the works as well as all the
Saints of God shall praise him.

6. Lastly, The windings of Providence are unsearchable. It is with the
Providence of God, as it is with a man of business that is riding to London;
that is his utmost journey, but he does not like a Post keep his road, but
rides out this way and that way, to speak with this and that man, as his
business leads him. The Providence of God drives at the securing of his
Church, the destruction of his Enemies, the promoving of Gods glory, etc. But
it carries on many designs together, possibly the chastising of his people for
their sins, the suffering of the Amorites to make up their measure: so it winds
in its motions, and the reason of the variety of its windings and turnings we
do not understand. But this is much co incident with what I told you before
concerning the tracks of Divine Providence, that they are past finding out. I
come therefore now to the Application. I shall there only show you the
usefulness of this point. 1. To check curiosity. 2. To direct you in spiritual
duty.

In the first place, curiosity which so much infecteth humane nature, and to
which the wiser part of men are mostly too subject. It was the complaint, long
since, of an acute Author, Iste labor vexat homines ut plus Deum laborent
intelligere, quam diligere -- malumus vestigando laborare quam amando reperire,
malumus inquirere, quam invenire and perfrui. -- This is a labor which vexes
men; they take more pains to understand, than to love God. We had rather tire
our selves by searching than by loving find God. We had rather enquire than
find and enjoy. Curiosity is a great piece of the vanity of the mind of man: it
was Eves temptation to eat of the true knowledge of good and evil, that she
might be like God knowing it. It is a lust inclining a man to employ his
outward senses and his understanding, to an inordinate gaining of some knowledge
which God has hidden from him. Knowledge is good; it is the light of the soul.
Solomon tells us, That it is not good that the soul should be without it. But
there is a knowledge that is too wonderful for us. Secret things belong unto
God. Our Savior told us, that there is a day and hour of which none can have
any knowledge, no not the Angels. It is not for you, (says our Savior) to know
the times and seasons, which the father has put in his own power, Acts 1.7.
The knowledge of truth is good, but it may be accidentally evil.

1. If the End be naught: If a man desires to know only that he may be able to
cavil and dispute, or, that he may be thought wiser than others. Solomon says,
It is not good for a man to eat much honey: so for a man to seek his own glory,
is not glory.

2. If we will use unlawful means to gain it; such are now going to witches and
wizards, Astrologers, Star-gazers, cunning men, as Ahaziah sent to Baalzebub
the god of Ekron, to know whether he should recover of that disease; and Saul
went to the witch of Endor to raise up Samuel, the Devil in the likeness of
Samuel, to tell him the fate of the approaching Battle. A practice too frequent
amongst simple people in these days, and places where we live.

3. When men have an itch to know what God has concealed from them. It was an
excellent advice of St. Augustine, That men should neither be too curious to
pry into secret things, nor be blind as to what God had revealed. To do the
first, is to be unwarrantably curious; the latter is damnable unthankfulness.
Vain man would be wise, and so becomes indeed more foolish in his
imaginations. Plutarch well compares men infected with this itch, to those
that should not be content to behold the Sun in the firmament, but must make a
Ladder to climb up to see it in its Throne; we shall find the best of men had
something of this disease. Moses says, Lord, show me thy Glory. Philip says,
Show us the Father. The Disciples say, Will thou not this time restore the
Kingdom to Israel? And again, Lord, When shall these things be? Now as this
Curiosity in us shows it self in other things, so it wonderfully busieth it
self as to the ways of Providence, to find out all the ways of God, and track
him in his most secret paths; to understand the reasons of Gods dealings, the
tendencies and indications of them. But oh! the depth of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past sinding
out! Let me offer you two or three Meditations to give check to this lust.

1. It is an unprofitable labor. It is a labor; much study is a weariness to
the flesh: and it is an unprofitable labor, by searching thou can not find
out what thou searchest for: Should a wise man utter vain knowledge (says
Eliphaz), Job 15.2? Should a wise man seek after knowledge in vain, and fill his
belly with the east wind? The boy in Plutarch carrying a covered dish, answered
him well, that would know what was in it, by telling him, It was therefore
covered that he might not know what was in it. God has also his covered
dishes, man will be enquiring what is in them; but he ought to know that God
has therefore covered them, that he might not know, and therefore it is but a
vain thing for him to enquire and ask. Should a Christian, an understanding
Christian, busy himself in searching out that which he cannot find out, when
he has wearied himself in a long and vain enquiry? as soon may you track an
Eagle in the air, or a Ship on the Sea, as God in the ways and methods of his
Providence: such knowledge, when you have done what you can, will prove too
wonderful for you. No wise man will labor in vain, and spend his time, and his
wit, and parts to find out that, which he is assured he shall never find out by
enquiry.

2. You shall observe our blessed Lord continually checking such enquirers: one
while putting them off, and directing them to more profitable employment for
their thoughts; as when they asked him, If there were few that should be saved,
he bids them strive to enter in at the strait gate, Luk 13.21, 22. When they
asked him, Matthew. 24.3. When shall these things be? He replyeth, Take heed that
no man deceive you: sometimes he chideth them, Acts 1.4, 5. It is not for you
to know the times and seasons. When Peter asked, John 21.21. And what shall
this man do? Christ answers, If I will, that he tarry until I come, What is
that to thee? Follow thou me.

3. Lastly, It commonly produces error in our imaginations, vain thoughts,
bold determinations of the Councels of God, groundless prophecies, erroneous
apprehensions both of God, and of his ways. What strange effects have men's
curious enquiries about the time for the calling of the Jews, the ruin of
Antichrist, the day of Judgment produced in the world? What have men at last
found out about them, that a wise man can set his foot upon? Verily they have
labored for the wind, and filled their belly with the east wind, and run
themselves into a temptation to believe nothing of Scripture, because their
mis-apprehensions about those dark portions of them, have failed them. There
are some things, of which we may say, Bona coecitas est non videre, and quae
scire non licet pie ignorance; It is a good blindness not to see them, but to
be piously ignorant of what we cannot lawfully know. Let us labor to know God,
and the Will of God so far as he has revealed it. But for a knowledge of God in
all his ways, for a perfect knowledge of him, it is too high, it is too
wonderful for us: let us more study to love him, than to know him. By our
understanding and comprehension of God, we draw God to us. By Love we pour our
selves into the bosom of God. Knowledge and Wisdom, let us have never such
degrees of it, if love to God be not as the soul to give it life, signify
nothing; and indeed Love is the end of all knowledge, and knowledge without Love
is very unprofitable and insignificant. If (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.) I
knew all mysteries: yet if I have not love, I am but as a founding-brass, and
as a tinkling-cymbal.

2. But in the second place. This discourse concerning the unsearchable things
of Divine Providence, may serve to direct us as to much spiritual duty. I will
show you this in four or five particulars:

1. The first is that of the Apostle, Romans 12.3. (...), to be wise to sobriety.
We translate it, Not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think,
but to think soberly. It may as well be translated, Not to be wise above what
we ought to be wise, but to be wise soberly. The Apostle, Col. 2.18. makes an
intruding into things which we have not seen, but a sign of ones being puffed up
with a fleshly mind. Augustine says, when a thing is obscure, Et aperte divina
Scriptura non subvenit, temere aliquid definire humana conjectura praesumit,
Aug. And the Scripture does not plainly help, humane Wisdom does but presume,
rashly to define any thing about it. It Is an excellent thing for a Christian to
know his measures, not to reach at further degrees of knowledge, about the
secret things of God, than it has pleased God in his Word to communicate unto
us: that is the true boundary of spiritual knowledge. But I shall not enlarge
upon this. This is now opposite to that curiosity, which I largely reflected
upon under the first head of Application.

2. This in the second place calls to us for a deep adoration, and veneration
of God. This is one reason why the Lord has made his judgments so
unsearchable, his ways past finding out. An holy, and humble admiration of God,
is one piece of that homage, which our souls owe to God: He is to be admired of
all them that believe, 2 These. 1.10. All admiration is the daughter of some
ignorance, we seldom, or very little admire what we fully and perfectly
understand. The unsearchableness of God in his ways, makes him the true and
proper object of our admiration, and admiration gives God the honor of his
unsearchableness. Take heed of denying, or disputing what the Scriptures reveal
of God, because you cannot comprehend and fathom it. Where you cannot
comprehend him, there it is your duty to adore, and to admire him.

3. This Proposition calls aloud to all, To take heed of making the motions
and issues of Providence, the rule and guide of their actions. We are to follow
the rule of the word, not the windings of Providence. I told you before, that
Providence is like a man of business, that carries a great many designs in his
head at once, and seldom keeps his road: he that will bear such a man company
to London, or any other place, which is the ultimate end of his journey, may go
a great deal out of his way, and where he has nothing to do, and be a great
while longer than he need, before he comes there; neither must the
opportunities which Providence offers be always taken, nor conclusions be
made from the successes or frowns of it.

4. Learn hence to take heed of raising either too sweet, or too bitter
conclusions for, or against your selves, from the Providence of God. The
indications, reasons, tendencies of Providence are all unsearchable things.
Love or hatred cannot be concluded from what is before you in this life.
Providence carries many to hell by a gale of prosperity; and others into
heaven by a whirlwind of adversity; the way to heaven is by much tribulation:
some are scourged into heaven, others go leaping and dancing into the lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone.

5. Lastly, Though it be our duty to be wise unto sobriety, and not to search
curiously into what God hides from us, though we cannot make either the
motions or issues of Providence, the rule of our duty or action, because in our
appearance, it sometimes points one way, when the rule of the word directs
us another; yet it is our duty to observe the motions and passages of Divine
Providence, to behold, observe, ponder them, and to lay them up in our hearts.
Now what observation of Providence is our duty; or what observable things there
are in the workings and motions of Divine Providence, must be the subject of a
far larger discourse.

SERMON XIV.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Who so is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
Whosoever wistly casts his eyes upon this Psalm, will find it from first to last
a Song of Providence, intermixed with frequent exhortations or wishes, That men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the
children of men. My Text is the conclusion of this excellent Song, Whosoever is
wise, observes these things. The Prophet Hosea has much such a conclusion of
his Prophecy, Hos. 14.6. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things;
prudent, and he shall know them? The Proposition of the Text is plainly this:

Prop. It is an argument of spiritual wisdom in men to observe the motions of
Divine Providence: and those that do it shall understand the loving kindness of
the Lord. The Proposition you see has two Branches.

1. That it is an argument of spiritual wisdom, to observe the motions of
Divine Providence.

2. That he who does observe them, shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord.

The work commended to us, is the observation of Providence. The honor and
reward of the work is expressed in two things: 1. It speaks a man wise,
truly, spiritually wise. 2. He shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord. The word which we translate [observeth] is, (...), a word that signifies
to keep, and to observe: it is often used in Scripture to signify a keeping
safely, and translated by the LXX by (...). He shall keep me in the way wherein
I shall walk: and he that keeps Israel, neither slumbereth nor sleeps,
Psalm. 121.4. And he shall give his angels charge over thee, and they shall keep
thee, Psalm. 91.11. In all those Texts the same word is used, sometimes it is
used to signify such a keeping of Gods Commandments, as shows it self in
practice, as in Deuteronomy. 6.17. and chap. 8.2. sometimes a keeping of them in our
mind, as in that Text, Genesis 37.10. Jacob kept the saying, the LXX interpret it
(...). Pagnine says of it, Curam, sollicitudinem and diligentiam denotat, ne
quid emittatur, elabatur aut excutiatur. It denotes care, solicitude and
diligence, that nothing slip out, or be let go, or shaken out. In short, I
conceive this duty of observing the works of the Lord, his great and various
works of Providence, may be dispatched in three things:

1. In a considerate beholding and looking upon them: Works of Providence, pass
before our eyes every day, but the truth is, for the most part, we see, and do
not see them, that is, we do not considerately, and deliberately fix our eyes
upon them, and see them as the Lords works; we see them as events in the world,
but consider not the operation of Gods hands in them. This is no observing of
them. Observing them argues a fixing of the eye of the mind, as well as the
body upon them, without which, a transient view of them, is of very little
significancy and import unto men.

2. In a diligent reposing them in our minds: this is that which we call a
remembering of them. The Lord does his great work to be had in remembrance. This
is a consequent of the other, we remember little of those things we only
cursorily view as they come before us: but when we six our eyes upon them, and
apply our minds to the knowledge of them, then we remember them.

3. In a continued and repeated view of them, and reflection upon them. That man
that suffers not the great and daily workings of Divine Providence to pass by
his eyes, as a tale passes through his ears, which he heedeth not, nor
applies his mind unto, but fixes his eye and mind upon them, lodges them in
his memory, frequently reflecteth upon them, repeateth and re-considereth them
in his thoughts; that is a wise man, and he shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord: And that brings me to the second Question in the
Explication of the Proposition.

Quest. 2. How is he wise? how is it an argument of wisdom? and does he appear
to be a wise man, who observes these workings of Providence?

Wisdom is sometimes taken in a larger sense, so a knowing understanding man is
a wise man; sometimes in a stricter sense, as it signifies a practical habit,
directing the life and conversation; sometimes as comprehending both, and so I
shall take it in the Proposition. He is a wise man, he will have more knowledge
and understanding than another man, and will know better how to order and
direct himself in the several parts of his Conversation:

1. He will be a more knowing and understanding man. We use to say, Experience
is the mistress of fools: Experience makes a fool wise, and indeed without it
notions give little wisdom; we speak in the commendation of the ablest persons,
in any art or profession, such a one is an experienced man; and the more
experienced any one is in his art, or course, the better you account him in it.
Nothing is so well learned by rule and precept, as by example and president.
Hence it is a common maxim of these times, That the study of books
accomplisheth none so much, as the study of men does. Knowledge is much
increased by experimental observation. By this, Much of the knowledge of God
will be let into the soul. We cannot see God as he is, in his own light we must
behold him, in his word, and in his works. From the Word of God we get a great
knowledge of God, what he is as to his Divine Being, and in his glorious
Attributes; but the knowledge which we have of God from his Word, is both
confirmed in us, and increased by his works of Providence; and our observation
of them, as well as of his great work of Creation. And that,

1. As they establish the Proposition of the word, and confirm our faith in it.
Psalm. 48.8. As we have heard, so haeve we seen in the city of our God, God will
establish it for ever. Demonstration confirms us in our notions. The Church had
before learned it, that God would establish his Church; but now they were
confirmed in it, when they had seen it in the Works of Providence, what they
had before heard from the mouth of Gods Prophets and Messengers: indeed a
notion is but a probationer in our souls, until we come to have it established
by Faith and Demonstration.

2. An observation of Providence does also increase knowledge, as it expounds to
us the word of God, and gives us a more certain, clear, and distinct knowledge
of the revelations of it. We do not know how to expound some words of God, but
as we are taught the meaning of them by his Providential Dispensations in the
fulfilling of it. Gods dispensations in the world, both toward his Church, and
the enemies and persecutors, help us to understand both his promises and his
threatenings.

2. He who observes the motions of Divine Providence, will also know better
how to order and direct his life. I told you, that Wisdom strictly taken, is a
practical habit directing this: He that thus observes, will best know how to
order his Conversation. But will some say, Is not this to make Providence our
rule? I answer, It is one thing to make the Providence of God an argument to
justify our actions, which the word condemns: Another thing to take
occasions from Providence for the performance of our duty. Providence alone is
no rule of our actions; but the word, which is the rule of our actions, is more
sealed and confirmed to us by Providence. Though Providence give no rule, yet
they wonderfully confirm and establish a rule; when what we have read and heard
in the word, we see in the dealings of God, it gives a new life, and makes a
new impression of the rule upon our hearts. God has said, Blood-thirsty and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days: and honor thy father and thy
mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God give thee.
Now when we see God cutting off cruel and bloody men in the strength of their
years, or cutting off a stubborn and rebellious Child in his youth; it
wonderfully confirms the word to us, and helps us to guide our
Conversation, so as we may not tread in their steps, and be partakers of their
Judgments.

2. Again, Though Providence be no rule as to particular actions, yet it is a
great help to us, as to the three great principles of all our spiritual
actions: which are Faith, Fear, Love. It is true, the Proposition of the word
is the object of our Faith; when a soul gives assent to the Proposition of the
word, because of the Authority of God, who has revealed it: and this is the
reason why wicked men, though they have the Scriptures as well as others, yet
walk not in the light of them, because they believe them not, they assent not
to the Propositions of Truth that are revealed in them; but either say in their
heart, That it is but the fancy and invention of men, or else flatter
themselves with the hopes of impunity, saying with those in Deuteronomy, That
they shall have peace, although they walk according to the imaginations of
their own hearts. But now when a man observes the Providence of God
exemplifying, and verifying the Word of God; it much helps his faith in the
word, especially as to those in whose heart God has wrought a previous habit
of Faith. It is true, in this case the Providence of God will do little alone:
we have the words of Christ, They have Moses and the Prophets: if they will not
believe, they will not believe if one should rise from the dead: But where a
soul is first taught of God to give a credit to his word, if his faith be weak
and languid, the exemplifying of the thing revealed in the Word of God, by the
issues of Providence, tends much to the confirmation of the souls faith and
assent; and therefore it is laid to the charge of the Israelites, as a great
aggravation of their sins, That they believed not for all his wondrous works.
And this was the great aggravation of the sin of the Pharisees and the Jews,
that lived in the time, when our Savior was upon the Earth; that although the
Providence of God had declared Christ to be the Son of God, by his doing such
works, as no man ever did, and by such evident signs and tokens, as never
before were declared as to any man, yet they believed him not to be the Son of
God.

2. As Faith is one great principle of all our spiritual actions, so Fear is
another. Now the observing of Divine Providence much conduces to this: It is
particularly remark't by the Holy Ghost, upon the sudden death of Ananias and
Saphira, That a great fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as heard
of those things: And in the Law of Moses you shall find God commanding
exemplary Justice to be done upon some remarkable offenders for this very end,
That all Israel might hear and fear. It is particularly said, Jonah 1.16. When
Jonah had told them the cause of the storm, and they had thrown him overboard;
Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered sacrifices, and made
vows. Severe Providence without the word make men startle, and put them into a
passion of fear; but when they follow a word of threatening, and they do but see
God doing what in his word he has said he will do: this must needs have a
great power and influence upon the heart, especially upon the hearts of such as
before had an habit of Divine Fear wrought in them, though it were smothered
with the ashes of too much carnal security.

3. Love to God is a third principle of spiritual action: an habit wrought in
the soul of every Child of God, but not at all times so lively, and quick, and
working as it ought to be. Now the observation of Gods good and gracious
Providence, serves hugely to excite it, and to blow up the Coals of it in the
soul, Psalm. 37.23. O love you the Lord all his Saints! for the Lord preserves
the faithful, and plentifully rewards the proud doer. But this will be
further enlarged upon in my discourse upon the second branch of the
Proposition, which I now come to discourse upon.

Mem. 2. Whosoever observes the Providence of God, he shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

I take the word understand here to signify three things: 1. Knowledge. 2. A
more clear and distinct knowledge. 3. A more demonstrative and experimental
knowledge.

1. He shall know the loving kindness of the Lord; understand it with reference
to the Church and People of God: for Gods Providence is like the Cloud, which
conducted the Israelites out of Egypt, and through the Red Sea; it has a
light-side, which has an aspect upon Gods Israel, and it has a black and
dark-side toward his enemies. Now he who observes Divine Providence, will
know this, That all the ways of the Lord are mercy, and truth to those that
fear God, Psalm. 25.10. A slight and transient view of Divine Providence, will
not bring a man to the knowledge of this; but a wist view and observation of
Divine Providence in the course and series of it will do it. The word of God
speaks much of the Love and Favor of God to his People. Providence to the
strict and constant observer of it, will confirm all these words: God himself
(speaking after the manner of men to Abraham) speaks as if he had not known his
love and obedience to him, till he had made an experiment of it, and saw that
he would not have withheld from him his Son, even his only Son. We know nothing
of the loving kindness of God, before we see it experimented, and brought into
demonstration, in comparison with what we know upon such an evidence: and this
we gain by our considerate observation of the motions of Divine Providence.

2. He who observes the motions of Providence, shall have a more distinct
knowledge of the loving kindness of God. He shall not only know that God is good
to Israel, and to all that are of a clean heart; but he shall also see
something of the Methods of God in the exercise of his loving kindness. When we
speak of the Love and Favor of God to his People, we are prone to understand
by it, nothing but pleasing Providence, grateful to our senses: now the
loving kindness of God is not only seen in pleasing dispensations, but in
adverse Providence also; Whom he loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every
child whom he receives: All things are yours (says the Apostle). This
knowledge must be gained by observation. Sense looks upon cross dispensations of
Providence, and it may be Reason judging of them from present appearances, and
effects, cries out, All these things are against me: Here is nothing of
promised loving kindness in all this. Is his mercy clean gone? does his promise
fail for evermore? But whosoever observes Divine Providence, will in these things
also understand the loving kindness of the Lord, and know that it is the method
of Divine Providence, to deal out the loving kindness of God to the Souls of
his People, through crosses and trials, and afflictions, in a way, which at
present they do not understand and know, but shall know hereafter. No
affliction (says the Apostle) is joyous at present, but grievous; but it
brings forth afterward, the peaceable fruit of righteousness, to them that
are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11.

3. Understanding (thirdly) may signify experience; and indeed, there is no
such understanding as experience gives. Every Child of God that observes
Divine Providence, shall find it (let the wind of it blow which way it will)
giving him an experiment and demonstration of the Love of God to his Soul. But
thus much shall serve to have spoken to the Explication of this Proposition in
both branches. I come to the proof of it, to show you how it appears, That he
who observes the motions of Divine Providence, and he alone shall understand
the loving kindness of the Lord. It will appear to you if you but consider,

1. That however things go in the course of Providence; yet it is most certain
that they are mercy, and truth to them who fear God. For this we have a certain
word: Psalm 25.10, All the paths of the Lord are mercy, and truth unto such as
keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies. And again, Psalm 73.1, Truly God is
good to Israel. In my former Discourse, I showed you three Objects of special
Providence: 1. Rational creatures are a more special object of Providence, than
either inanimate or brute creatures. 2. Amongst rational Creatures, those men
and women in the World which make up the Church, are more peculiar, and special
objects of Providence, than all others in the World. 3. Amongst them such as
fear and love God in sincerity, are yet the more peculiar objects of Divine
Providence; and which God has a most peculiar regard unto, which makes a
cogent argument to prove, That supposing the glory of God to be the great end
of all his providential Dispensations; that the Providence of God must most
eminently work for the good of these as being such, who most eminently serve
the great end of his Glory. So as he who observes the motions of it, must
needs by them understand the loving kindness of the Lord toward them.

Secondly, The mercy and truth of Gods ways toward them that fear him, are not
to be read in the surface of present Providence. The dark side of the cloud,
is sometimes toward the Israel of God; and at such a time it must be by Faith,
that we understand that the ways, all the ways of the Lord, are mercy and truth
toward his own people. Who could read the loving kindness of the Lord toward
Israel, while they were in Egypt, serving at the Brick-kilns, and under their
great oppression there? but he who observed the Providence of God, thus working
to make them willing to go out, and take possession of the promised Land, he
might understand this. It is not every motion of Providence, but the issues of
it, that demonstrate all the ways of the Lord to be mercy and truth; and this
evinceth to us, that an observation of the motions of Divine Providence, yea,
and a wist, and diligent, and continuing, observation of them also, is
necessary to make us understand the loving kindness of the Lord. I come now to
the Application of what you have heard upon this Argument.

This in the first place shows us one great reason of that ignorance which is
in men, both concerning God, and concernng their own duty. Men know little of
God, and little, how to govern their actions according to any degree of
Christian prudence. As ignorance of, and unbelief in, the Word of God is one
great cause; so their not observing the motions of Divine Providence, which
have been in the World, is another no small cause of it. Men are much ignorant
of God; indeed there is but little of the knowledge of God in the World,
especially that knowledge, which floateth not only in the brain, but influenceth
the heart and affections; and men know little how to govern their actions by
any spiritual wisdom, but live directly contrary to what they own, and pretend
to as their highest end. And we understand as little of the loving kindness of
the Lord; I say, one great cause of this is men's not observing the workings and
motions of Providence. They pass before their eyes every day, but they observe
them not: Non tantum oculis intueri, sed animum ad hanc considerationem ita
exuscitare, ut meliores inde evadamus; To observe, signifies not only with our
eyes to behold it; but so to stir up our minds to the consideration of a thing,
that we may grow the better by it, (says a grave Author). Now in this Notion
of it, how few are they that observe these things? they see stupendous
Providence, sometimes, in the destruction of the Churches Enemies for the
salvation of his people: it may be at first they (as all new things do) affect
men with a little passion, according to the nature of them; but they are like a
flash of lightning, which though at present it startles us, yet the impression
is presently off our spirits: and I say, this is one great reason why we are so
ignorant of God, so unskilful in the government of our lives to his ends, and
that we understand so little of his loving kindness.

Hence it is, that we cannot understand how much good God does his Church, and
people by afflictions and trials. They are the sensible frowns of Providence
which blind our eyes, that we cannot see the loving kindness of God in all his
ways. We think sometimes we see God driving his Chariot in a direct road to his
great ends, the glory of his holy Name, and the good and protection of such as
fear him, here we think we can easily discern Gods Wisdom, and as easily
understand his loving kindness: But now when the Lord drives his Chariot out of
our sight, and exercises his Church, or the particular souls of his people
with long and tedious Afflictions, here we are at a loss, and can neither read
the wisdom nor loving kindness of God. But what is the reason of this, but only
our superficial view of Gods Providence without a wist, and diligent
observation of them. If we would but bend our minds, to observe what a wholesome
influence Afflictions and adverse Providence have ordinarily both upon whole
Churches, and upon particular Christians, we should even in them easily
understand the loving kindness of the Lord. The Husbandman can easily
understand that he could as ill want the frosts and snows of Winter, as the
warmth, heat and sunshine of the Summer. Gideon taught the men of Succoth with
briars and thorns: and God ordinarily does so teach his people. Blessed is he
(says the Psalmist), whom thou chastenest and teach out of thy Law. David
tells us, Psalm 119.61, that before he was afflicted, he went astray; but since
that he had learned to keep the statutes of the Lord. It was an old saying, The
blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church. The Church is bettered, and the
Soul is bettered by adverse Providence. That Text, Isa. 27.9, is very
remarkable: By this [that is, by this severe affliction, by this captivity]
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged: and all the fruit shall be to take away
sin, when the Lord shall make the stones of the altar as chalk stones that
crumble in pieces, the groves, and the images shall not stand up. As an hard
Winter keeps under, and kills the weeds: so the winter of Affliction much
helps to the purging out of corruptions, both out of the Church, and also out
of the particular Soul. Augustine (as I remember) somewhere lamenteth, That a
Fever had done more with him to subdue, and mortify a lust than before the
love of God could do with him. Now I say, our not observing this, which is
matter of no difficult observation to him that wistly eyeth Divine Providence,
is one great reason, that men do not understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

Another reason of men's not understanding it, is their making of a judgment of
Gods works before they are perfect. If any of us should go into a Limners shop,
and see his first draught of a lovely picture; we should discern little
loveliness in it, which yet we should easily discern if we would but stay until
he had finished his work, and laid on his life-colours. It is the same case
with us as to works of Divine Providence; we look on them while the Lords work
is yet upon the wheel, we see nothing in it that resembles God the great
workman: we see in it nothing of the Divine Wisdom, possibly nothing of the
divine goodness and loving kindness; but could we have patience till the Lords
work came off the wheel, we should easily see it in quite another
representation: we often see in Gods works of Providence nothing but confusion,
and blood, and trouble, and multiplied troubles, and disturbances to those who
most fear him, and desire to walk most closely with him: But in the evening of
that day (says the Prophet, Zech. 14.6,) it shall be light. The day neither
light nor dark, but in the Evening it shall be light. Gods peoples days
sometimes are plainly darkness, thick darkness: but would we have patience to
the evening of them, we should see light. The Evening is the close and making
up of the day. When God comes to close up his days work, did we but observe
Divine Providence, we should easily understand that it would be light. Sorrow
may be for a night, but joy shall be in the morning. So as I say again, This is
one great reason, why at all times we cannot understand the loving kindness of
the Lord to his Church and his people, because we do not observe the motions of
Divine Providence, but take only a slight and superficial view of them.

I shall conclude this Discourse with an Exhortation to the duty of the Text,
The observation of the motions of Divine Providence. non caecutire in
revelatis, not to be blind as to those things which God has revealed. This
also is your duty as well as the other: by the former you acquit your selves
from an unwarrantable curiosity, by this from a wretched unthankfulness. The
Providence of God is daily working, in order to the fulfilling of Gods great
end, the glorifying of his great and holy Name, the establishing of his people,
etc.

1. Do not rest in a mere view of what is done in the World, but fix your eyes
upon it. Lay up the things in your heart, let your thoughts dwell upon them,
the remarkable passages of them especially. You see and hear of Wars, and
rumors of Wars, inundations, fires, changes, and over-turning in Nations; of
powers and Dominions: you at present understand not the tendencies and
indications of them, you cannot make up a judgment of them, and prophecy what
will and shall be from them; but yet observe them, lay up these things in your
minds, yea, and let them not pass out of your minds: as we are to hear for the
time to come, so we are to behold and observe the motions of Providence with a
respect unto a time to come too. Do not think, you can expound every Providence
presently; the vision oft-times is for an appointed time, and is to be
expounded by time; in the mean time, only to be diligently marked and observed,
taken notice of as a great work of God, the meaning of which we shall
understand hereafter. Divines say, That the meaning of many Providence, and
our clear understanding of them, is one of those things wherein our knowledge
shall be bettered and perfected in the day of Judgment; and till that time,
when the hidden things of God, as well as of men shall be made manifest, we
must be content to know but in part.

2. Do not secondly observe mere single acts of Divine Providence, but let your
Eye follow it in its motions. God sometimes has his works a long time upon the
wheel, especially those relating to his Church. I will give you two famous
instances: 1. The establishing of his ancient Church of the Jews in Canaan. The
promise was out for it, Genesis 12, to Abraham; it was more than five hundred
years, before this work was off the wheel of Providence: four hundred years
before they went out of Egypt, where they were in bondage; forty years they
traveled in the wilderness, then during all the time of the Judges: yea, and
in Saul's time too, they were but in a very unquiet condition. In David and
Solomon's time, they came to a settled estate in the promised Land. There was a
Promise given out unto Christ, for having the ends of the earth for his
possession: David mentions it; Isaiah prophesies much of it. After this
Christ comes, was crucified, etc. And it was three hundred years after this,
before these Promises had any considerable accomplishment. Indeed as to
particular persons, their beings are of shorter duration, and the Providence of
God brings about the promises to them, in much shorter periods, or they could
see nothing of Gods loving-kindnesses in the issues, or contextures of them:
but take heed there of resting your Eye upon the observations of some single
acts of providence relating to them; those who should thus have observed the
motions of Providence with reference to Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, David, Daniel,
Job, would have seen little of that loving kindness of the Lord to them, which
yet is evident enough to all that keep their Eye upon their story, to the
winding up of their bottoms. Now to this observation of Providence, you have
two great Arguments in the Text: 1. It is an Indication of spiritual Wisdom. A
wise man looks not only at present things, but at things past, and yet to
come. Now Wisdom is a lovely thing; It is justified of her children (says our
Savior). Every man desires the reputation of a wise man, and studiously
avoideth the reproach of a fool. Two things speak a fool: 1. To observe and
mind nothing. Or 2dly, Merely to take notice of things present, and gather
conclusions from them. 2. Thus you shall understand the loving kindness of God.
Then you will see that all the paths of God toward his Church, are mercy and
truth. Truth, not a word failing of the promise; and mercy, working for the
good of them that love God: yea thus, you that fear the Lord shall understand
the loving kindness, and truth of God to your particular souls. A thing, the
evidence of which is, and ought to be of more value to you than the whole
World. I will conclude my Discourse by giving you three Cautions to direct your
observation.

1. Observe the Providence of God, when it seems to move contrary to his
Word; but never determine the Indication of it without the Word. Indeed, the
Providence of God never moves contrary to the Word, it is always a servant to
some Declaration of the will of God, in some promise, or threatening, but it
often seems to us to move contrary: which made the Psalmist cry out, Does the
promise fail for evermore? The reason of this (...), that deceives us, is our
imperfect knowledge, or understanding of the Word of God, and non-acquaintance
with the Counsels of God, and contrivances of his Wisdom, and the variety of
those designs which he carries on at the same time. God designs to bring the
Jews into Canaan; but a-long with this to carry on the destruction of the
Egyptians, the Amorites (whose sins in Abraham's time were not come to the
full): the destruction of the rebellious and disobedient amongst the
Israelites. Now in order to this, the Egyptians must ripen themselves for their
ruin, by their oppression of Israel: The Amalekites, and Amorites, and the
other Nations by their falling upon them at their coming out of Egypt, and in
their journey. Now upon these accounts, the Providence of God often seemed to
move quite contrary to the word of Promise. The people of Israel at the
Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, looked very unlike a people that should have a
quiet possession of Canaan: Therefore I say, Providence is to be observed in
its Motions, which seem contrary to the Word; but the Indications of it are
only to be determined from the Word. God has appointed wicked men to
slaughter; notwithstanding this we see most vile and wicked men, thriving,
prospering, growing great in the World, and trampling the righteous servants of
God under their foot. Observe this, but take heed of determining the Indication
of this but from the Word, which says, There is no peace to them: keep
therefore thine Eye upon their Tabernacles, and thou shall see the Lords Sun go
off it, and the Threatening verified.

2. Compare present Providence with those that are past. As those who will
understand the letter of Scripture, must compare Text with Text: so those who
will be wise by understanding the motions of Providence, must compare
Providence of a present age, with Providence of former ages. Thou art
offended possibly at the Providence of God toward wicked men: they thrive and
prosper, they grow mighty and increase, and do what they list. Or at the
Providence of God toward those, who (if thou can judge) are such as walk
closest with God, and are most severe worshippers and servants of him: they are
hated, maligned, exposed to all manner of injuries, which may make their lives
bitter to them. Thou cryest out here, O the depth! I cannot understand the ways
of God, I cannot see his loving kindness toward his people. Compare now
(Christian!) Gods dealing in thy age with his dealings both with wicked men,
and with his sincere servants in former ages, and see if they be not much alike
with what they were: In Jobs time, and David's time, and Jeremiah's time. Yet it
is not hard for thee to understand how the servants of God in those times found
the loving kindness of God, and experienced that all the ways of the Lord were
mercy and truth: believe that the Hand of the Lord is not weakened, nor his Arm
shortened, nor his Truth failed.

3. Lastly, If you would by observing the Providence of God understand his
loving kindness, and gain a spiritual wisdom, Let your eye affect your heart. I
hinted to you before, that Mollerus tells us, such an observation of
Providence is here intended, unde ad pietatem exuscitemur, ut inde meliores
evadamus, as will quicken us unto piety, and help to make us better. There are
many careless observers of Providence, that indeed see Events rather than
Providence; they see much that comes to pass in the World, but consider
nothing of God in them: they see great fires laying populous Cities wast, and
possibly see a villain putting the first coal to them, or a careless person
accidentally occasioning them; but they do not see God, throwing such a wretch
off his hand of restraint, nor blowing the coals that turn the Cities into
ashes, by his winds, which men could not cause. Others are curious observers of
Providence: these are wonderfully busily employed in searching out the natural
causes of such thunders, lightnings, inundations, devouring pestilences, etc.
They do by the book of Providence, as Augustine complained of himself, that in
his unregenerate state he did by the book of Scripture; he rather brought to it
discutiendi acumen, than discendi pietatem. So men bring to the great Works of
God rather an acute Eye, and wit to find out the immediate causes, and reasons
natural or political, than a trembling, humble heart, that they might learn by
them more to acknowledge, love, fear, adore, and revere the great and mighty God
whose works these are: let not yours be such an observation; but let your Eye
beholding God in his providential Dispensations, affect your hearts with that
adoration, and veneration, that love and fear of the great and mighty God,
which such works of God do call to you for.

But for the further hopes and consolation of the people of God in their states
of affliction, I intend to commend to you some principal Observations upon the
motions of Divine Providence; which shall be the work (if God pleases) of some
succeeding Exercises.

SERMON XV.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am discoursing concerning Divine Actual Providence, as the Object of good
men's observation. I showed you in my last Discourse, That the observation of
the motions of it, is both an Indication of spiritual Wisdom, and an excellent
step toward it; and that by it duly made, men and women shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Now to advantage you a little in this Observation,
I shall give you an account of some observable things in the motions of
Providence, which possibly you may parallel in the present or future dealings
of God, both with his Church, and with particular Souls. I shall lay down my
first Observation thus:

1. Observe. The Actual Providence of God, in bringing about that word to which
it is a certain servant, does rarely move in a direct line, but sometimes
obliquely, sometimes to our appearance quite contrary: but at last it
fulfilleth the word, and is all the while faithfully executing the Eternal
Counsel.

There are three things in this Observation, each of which I will open in a few
words, and then endeavor to justify the observation by particular instances:
after which, I shall give you some reasonable account of it, and then make some
short Application.

First (I say), The Providence of God, is a certain servant to the word: the
word either of Promise, or of Threatening; for Providence serves to the
execution of them both: As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of our
God, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 48.8: the Promise is but providentia occultata,
and Providence is but promissio explicata, the Promise fully explained and
opened: and this is no more than you shall find recognized by the holy Servants
of God, both in all their thanksgivings for mercies they had received, and in
all their humiliations upon any judgments, which the Lord had brought on them,
as also in all the Narrative parts of Scripture, declaring any great motions of
Providence: how often do you meet with it in the Gospel, such or such a thing
was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet, etc.
Dan. 2.12, He has confirmed his word which he has spoken against our Judges,
etc. which way soever Providence works; whether in a way of sensible good, or
sensible evil, against any persons, people, or places, it is pursuant to, and
in fulfilling of some word of God.

But (secondly), I say, it moves not always, yea it moves seldom in a direct
line, in order to the fulfilling of that word to which it is a Servant; and
here I shall take notice of three things observable.

1. Ordinarily at first it seems to move directly toward the end which we
have in our eye: this you will better understand by and by, when I come to give
you instances in the proof of it.

2. Sometimes it moves obliquely, seeming to be driving another design.

3. Sometimes to our appearance directly contrary.

But thirdly, I say at last it comes home to the Promise: and so lets us see,
that all the while it has been but a faithful servant to the Counsel of God.
But I shall make you understand this better by the instances, by which I shall
in the next place endeavor to justify and establish the Observation, to which
I now come, and shall particularize in four or five instances:

The first instance I shall give of it, shall be that great work of Divine
Providence, in bringing the posterity of Abraham into a quiet possession of the
Land of Canaan. The Promise went out from God, Genesis 12.2, I will make of thee a
great Nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and unto thy seed
will I give this Land. This Promise was given out to Abraham, when the World
was little more than two thousand years old: It was above two hundred years
after this that Jacob with his Family (not exceeding seventy persons) went down
into Egypt: How slowly did the Providence of God move as to that part of the
promise, which concerned the multiplication of Abraham's seed. After the giving
out of the Promise, Abraham first flees into Egypt for the Famine: Genesis 13.12,
You have him again returned into Canaan, Genesis 13.18. He is told, that
notwithstanding this Promise, his seed should be servants in a Land that was
not theirs. Ver. 16, But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again.
Abraham dies, seized of this good Land: Isaac succeeds him, and dies there
too. Jacob first is forced to flee to Padan-aram: returning from thence, he is
compelled by the Famine to go down into Egypt; where after his and Joseph's
death, the posterity of Abraham, for the multiplication of which the promise
was out so many years before, was attempted to be diminished, and destroyed by
all acts imaginable. The Midwives are practiced with to stifle their Infants in
the birth: when that will not do, others must be employed to throw the Males
into the River; the Parents are afflicted with the highest degree of
oppression. At length, the Providence of God begins to turn toward the Promise.
The Israelites are allowed to come away: but they had gone but a little way,
but they see the Red Sea before them, the Philistines behind them: one would
have thought that now they had been far enough from any prospect of Canaan.
Providence by a miraculous operation brings them over this Mountain of
difficulty: but whither do they come? into a long and howling Wilderness: one
while they are assaulted with Famine, want of Bread, then of Meat, another
time with drought; then again assaulted with Enemies, set upon with fiery
flying Serpents; at last they come within prospect of the desired Land: But on
the sudden for their murmuring, are turned back to forty years wandering. When
they get over Jordan, they meet with seven Nations more strong and mighty than
they, who must all be subdued before they could have possession of Canaan: at
last, the Providence of God comes home to the Promise; Joshuah their Captain
having first conquered the Land, divides it amongst them: yet after this they
were far from a quiet possession of it; all the time of the Judges, or indeed
till Saul, or David's time. What staange circulations, and windings of Divine
Providence were here in the accomplishment of the Promises? how little to an
humane Eye the Providence of God seemed to mind the promise of multiplying
Abraham's seed for above two hundred years? Abraham had but one Son of the
promise; and that when he was very old and past hopes of children. Isaac had
but one neither that was an heir of the Promise, that was Jacob: Jacob had
indeed twelve, and these in the remaining space of that time were multiplied
but to seventy (besides Joseph in Egypt), how quite contrary to the Promise did
Providence seem to move all the while that the Israelites were in Egypt? yea
and after too, how often would one have judged that the people guessed right?
when in their impatience they complained, that God had brought them out of
Egypt to destroy them in the Wilderness; yet at last Gods work was done,
Providence faithfully served the Promise, and gave a Being to the Word of the
Lord given out, Genesis 12.

2. Let the second instance be that of Joseph. Joseph had a promise, Genesis 37; I
know it was a dream, but it was the revelation of Gods will to him in that
dream; That there should come a time, when all his Fathers house should bow to
him: all their sheaves should bow down to his. Now observe how Providence
moves in bringing this Word of the Lord to pass. Joseph is hated of his
brethren, hardly escapes with his life; at length is sold into Egypt, and into
Potiphars house; here now he was brought to Court, but no sooner does he grow
into Reputation, that there was any appearance of his rising to any degree of
Dignity, that might look toward a fulfilling of the promise; but he is accused
by his Mistress, thrown into prison, like enough to lose his life; but after
this Providence turns again, raises him to a great degree of Dignity; makes
him the second man in Egypt, and what God had told him in his dream, was all
fulfilled: his Father and his Brethren, all come and bow down to him.

3. A third instance shall be that of David, the promise of the Kingdom, was
given out to David in the day, when Samuel by order from God anointed him, 1 Samuel 16. In the 17th Chap. The Providence of God so orders it, that Saul
having made a Proclamation, That if any man would encounter Goliath, the
Champion of the Philistines who defied the Armies of Israel, he should have his
Daughter to Wife. David coming to the Army, accepts his Challenge, fights,
and slays him, and obtains Saul's daughter. Jonathan Saul's Son, takes a
great kindness to him, the people admire him: Here now the Providence of God,
at first setting out, moves as if David should presently have come to the
Kingdom: but after this Saul falls out with David, uses all arts to take away
his life, pursues him with an Army from place to place: David had a pitiful
company with him, is forced to flee to Gath, there to dissemble himself mad;
would any one have thought that had seen David among the Philstines, scrambling
on the walls, that he should ever have been King over Israel and Judah? At
length Saul, and Jonathan (the next heir) are slain in Battle; then Ishbosheth
is set up: but yet after all these oblique and seemingly contradictory motions
of Providence, it comes home to the promise. David is settled in the Throne of
Israel and Judah.

4. Let a fourth instance be that of the Gospel Church: God had promised, that
he would set his King upon the holy hill of Zion. Psalm 2.6. v. 8, That he
would give him the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for his possession: and promises of this nature are everywhere multiplied
by the Prophets ( Isaiah especially). Our Lord, when he ascended up into
Heaven, gave out a Commission to his Disciples in order to this effect: Go
preach and baptize all Nations, etc. Now at the first, the Providence of God
seemed to move as if the thing should presently have been done. You read Acts
2, That the Spirit of God descended: and there were then at Jerusalem (says
the Text) devout men of every Nation under Heaven: Parthians, Medes, Elamites,
Mesopotamians, Jews, Cappadocians, men of Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Pamphilia,
Egypt, Lybians, Cyrenians, Romans, Cretes, Arabians, and heard the Apostles in
their own language, speaking of the great works of God. Here were now Preachers
made for all the World: would not one have thought that surely at this time,
all the ends of the Earth should have been given unto Christ? Peter at one
Sermon converts two thousand: soon after there were five thousand added to the
Church. But all on the sudden the Providence of God turns, the Gospel grows
out of repute, and the Apostles that preached it too, both with Jews and
Gentiles. James is put to death, Peter hardly escapes. The Church (the only
Gospel church God had at that time) at Jerusalem was scattered and broken: the
Apostle complains, That they were made as the filth of the world, and as the
off scouring of all things. The Jews persecute them, the Gentiles in all places
rise up against the Preachers of the Gospel: bonds, stripes, and imprisonments,
waited for the Apostles in all places where they came: Paul says he thought,
that God had set them forth as men appointed unto death; spectacles to the
World, Angels and men. Few of the great Ministers of the Gospel died their
natural death; the Christians were a sect everywhere spoken against; all
courses almost imaginable taken to root them out of all places for three
hundred years together. But at length, the Providence of God comes in a great
measure to work up to the direct fulfilling of the many promises of this
nature. Constantine an Emperor of a great part of the World, arises and
commands, and encourages the preaching of the Gospel. And thus it came to be
spread, and accepted in most known parts of the World. Indeed, there is hardly
any instance can be given of any great work of Providence, respecting Churches,
Nations, or particular persons, as to which this Observation will not justify
it self.

5. For another instance may we not bring in, if not all, yet very many of your
particular Souls, who fear the Lord. You also upon believing receive the
promises: The promises are made of old, but we receive them: we come to have a
title to them, in the day when God opens our eyes, and opens our hearts to a
receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ, turning our hearts from dead lusts and sins
to serve the living God. In that day, I say, we have a first right to all the
Promises, whether respecting joy, and peace or spiritual strength and
assistances. Now very-often at the first of our conversion, the Providence of
God moves directly toward them: the Soul finds a great life to Duty, a great
zeal against sin, great joy and peace in believing, glimpses of the glory of
God. But after this very ordinarily follow very dark hours, and the Soul like
Jonah cries out of the belly of Hell. The Soul that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his Servant, yet walks in the dark, and sees no light,
cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and has a thousand fair
and foul days in its journey to Heaven. I know particular cases must here be
excepted: but I speak of the ordinary Methods of Divine Providence, with Souls
whom God brings to glory.

6. I will conclude this Discourse with the instance of the great work of
Providence in the Reformation of his Church in this latter age; whether you
look upon it in Germany, France, or England. In Germany it began with Luther
(an eminent Servant of of God, though like Elias of like passions and
infirmities with other men): how strangely did the Providence of God in the
beginning work toward the accomplishment of it? That Luther, who was a poor
Monk, should be preserved to plant the Doctrine of the Gospel, and should
diffuse it so far as he did, and be preserved to do it against all the rage
both of the Pope, and Emperor 28, or 29 years, was a great favor of
Providence to the infantile Reformation: but afterward, how the Providence of
God gave check to it is sufficiently known, yet it kept its ground and gained.
For England we know from our story, That King Hen. 8, laid the first stone; we
also know how Providence at first favored the work, during all the reign of
Edward the sixth; but in Queen Mary's time, for five years together it seemed
to move directly cross; the Popish Superstitions were restored in all parts of
the Nation, Multitudes burnt for the profession of the Gospel, others fled into
foreign parts to secure their lives. But the Providence of God returned again
to its work in the time of Queen Elizabeth. But I have spoken enough to
justify the Observation.

Let me in the next place endeavor to give you a reasonable account of these
transverse motions of Providence: not that I dare presume to give you the
reasons why God moves thus, or thus; for who has been his Counselor at any
time? but so far forth, as to show you that these motions of Providence are
approvable to our Reason, so as we may judge the Lords ways but proportioned to
his wise and great designs.

1. In the first place, certainly one reasonable account to be given of these
motions, must be the variety of designs which the Providence of God ordinarily
carries on together. I have hinted this to you before; suffer me here to
enlarge a little upon it again. I then compared Providence to a man of great
business, and dealings in the World; who though London, or some other great
place, be in his Eye as the end of his Journey where his business lies, which
he does chiefly design the dispatch of; yet has also other business here, and
there, at this Town and that Town; and therefore seldom or never keeps a road
long. Providence is Gods great Minister of State, upon the hand of which all
the effects of his Counsels and Eternal purposes lie, and it never drives a
single design. The Promise was gone out, for the seed of Abraham to inherit
Canaan: Providence is to bring this about, but this cannot be done till the
Nations be dispossessed, and in order thereunto the iniquities of the Amorites
must be full, Genesis 15.16: and God gives Abraham this very reason, why his seed
should not possess Canaan until the fourth Generation. God had designed to get
himself glory upon Pharaoh; in order to this he must first oppress, then pursue
Israel to the Red Sea. The Providence of God never carries on a single design,
but in the fulfilling some eminent Counsel of God, referring to a person or a
Nation, effects an hundred other pieces of Divine Counsel; although it may be
to us not so remarkable, as that which our Eye is so much upon, and which we
are so impatient for. The Providence of God will bring David to the Kingdom;
but in order to it, it must also execute Divine Vengeance upon Saul, etc.

Secondly, The seemingly oblique, and contradictory motions of Divine
Providence, do often (though we at first discern it not) bear the notion, and
have the nature of proper means in order to the great End. If Joseph had not
been sold into Egypt, if there he had not been thrown into a prison, how should
he have been of use to save much people, and particularly his Father, and his
Brethren alive? It was in prison that he had the opportunity to interpret first
the Butlers dream, who recommended him to the King, and brought him before him
to interpret his also, which you know was his rise to his great capacity. It
was the Israelites affliction and oppression in the Land of Egypt, which made
them willing to leave the fleshpots, and Onions, and Garlic, there to go
toward Canaan. We use to say, The furthest way about, is the nearest way home.
That man makes it so, that does a great deal of business in one journey (riding
only now and then a little out of the way) which he must else have dispatched
by new journeys: but it is never truer, than in the motions of Providence; what
seems to us in Gods working, the furthest way about, in order to the saving
of a Soul, or the preserving of his Church and making it to grow and flourish,
is indeed the nearest way to it. They say, the beating of a Walnut-tree, is the
way to make it fruitful: the treading on the Palm Tree, the way to make it more
flourish. We see in daily experience the treading down, and trampling a piece
of ground, makes it the better in the Spring for grass or corn; and much
spares other stercorations. It is as trite an observation, That the blood of
the Martyrs has always proved the seed of the Church. David before he was
afflicted, went astray. And this many times we can say, when a day of Evil is
over, though we could not so easily read it in the hour of his afflictive
Dispensations either to the Church, or to particular persons.

3. A third account of it, may be Gods design to exercise the faith and
patience of his people. God has determined the impenitent sinner to
destruction, and his people to salvation; but both of them must come to their
Eternity by means. The Sinner by the pursuit of his lusts, and a continuance in
them; the child of God, by the exercise of his graces. Amongst other habits of
grace, faith and patience, are not the least. The exercise of these is when
sense fails, and the Providence of God moves out of our sight, in a time of
adversity when it seems to move at a great distance from the Promise, if not
directly contrary to it. Blessed are they who have not seen, and have yet
believed (says our Savior). God gave Abraham a Promise, nay diverse promises:
two more eminent, the one of a Child; the other, of a numerous seed, and their
inheriting the land of Canaan. Now if the Providence of God, had presently
moved in a direct line toward the fulfilling of these Promises, where had been
a room for Abraham's faith, so much celebrated in Scripture? the Apostle says,
Romans 4.18, That he against hope believed in hope, -- and ver. 19, Being not
weak in faith, he considered not his own body being now dead, when he was about
a hundred years old, nor yet the deadness of Sarahs womb. Ver. 20, He staggered
not at the Promise through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to
God; and being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was also able to
perform: and therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness. The Providence
of God delayeth the time, suffers Abraham first, and his Wife to live to an
age, that they both were past any reasonable hope of children, then it gives
him a child: why does Providence move thus slowly, and obliquely? how else
should Abraham's faith have been tried? how should it have been tried whether he
would stagger at the Promise through unbelief? Another branch of that Promise
was, That the child which God should give him of Sarah his Wife should be his
heir, Genesis 15.4. This [that is, this Eliezer of Damascus of whom thou speak,
ver 2.] shall not be thine heir: but he that shall come forth of thine own
bowels, shall be thine heir. Chap. 22. God by his Providence tempts Abraham;
He bids him go, and with his own hands sacrifice this his son, his only son;
what an oblique, yea contrary motion of Providence does this seem to be, to the
promise of Isaac his being the heir? In Isaac shall thy seed be called, says
the Promise. How shall that be, when Isaac (who as yet had no seed) must be
sacrificed? But how else shall Abraham's faith and obedience be tried, which
stands upon Record. Heb. 11.17, By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered
up Isaac; and he that had received the Promise, offered up his only begotten
son, of whom it was said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called; accounting that
God was able to raise him up from the ^ead; from which he also received him in
a figure. Abraham had a promise of Canaan for his seed: Providence went a great
way about before it sensibly came home to this Promise; if it had not, how had
Abraham's faith had its exercise mentioned? Heb. 11.8. By faith Abraham when he
was called to go out into a place, which he should afterward receive, obeyed;
and he went out, not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land
of promise, as in a strange Country, etc. God gave him no inheritance in it
(says St. Stephen, Acts 7.5,) no not so much as to set his foot on: yet he
promised, that he would give it to him for his possession, and to his seed
after him, when as yet he had no children.

Fourthly, What if we should say, That God does this, that he might be the more
admired in the works of his Providence when they came to an issue, and have the
more of the praises and thanksgivings of his people. We are never so deeply
affected either with with the good, or evil that be tideth us, as when we are
surprised with it, and it comes upon us, fearing or looking for the contrary.
Evils unthought-of are more heavy, and more dejecting and afflictive: Good
things not looked for, are more affecting, and raise up holy affections more to
the high praises of God. Now, when the Providence of God has moved obliquely,
and to our appearance quite contrary (as we judged) unto the Promise, when it
comes home unto it, to give it a being and issue, it comes upon us as it were
upon the sudden, and contrary to the expectation of our sense and reason; and
so wonderfully affects our hearts, and enforces from us great and high
acknowledgments of the Omnipotency, and power of God, of his mercy and
goodness, of his truth and veracity. It is the common infirmity of our Natures,
that we more know our mercies by wanting them, than by enjoying them. If the
Providence of God moved in a right line to bring promised good to them who love
and fear God, he would neither have so much of the prayers and cries of his
people, during the want of their desired good, nor yet so much praise upon the
bestowing of it. You shall observe, That God is not so much praised for mercies
of common Providence, which we receive every day (how valuable soever, as our
sleep in the night, our appetite to our meat, etc.) As for such Dispensations
as are more rare and extraordinary: the reason is, because we look for the
former; they are common with us, and we expect them, Providence more ke^peth a
road as to them, than as to others. But it is time I should come to the
Application of this Observation.

In the first place, bespeak us aforehand, that no such oblique, and seemingly
contrary motions of Providence may be any prejudice to our faith in the
Promise. W^nder not if you still see the Providence of God keeping the same
Methods, that it has always in all the great things which it has brought to
pass in the World. Particularly, as to Gods great works relating to his Church;
God has used to begin a work in one age, which it may be he has not finished,
or will not finish till that age be out. Thus you have heard, that it was in
the first plantation of the Gospel, begun in the Apostles time. Thus it has
been in the Reformation of the Church when corrupted; there is nothing more
ordinary than this. If therefore you see any-where foundations of Reformation
laid, and then the Providence of God seems to desert its work, and the
foundations laid seem to be plucking up again, and all things to run in the old
Channels, trouble not your selves at it; this is but an ordinary Method of
Divine Providence.

But let us secondly from hence collect what is our duty with reference to such
times, With reference unto God. 2. With reference to the Promise. 3. With
reference unto Providence.

1. Quest. What is our duty relating more immediately unto God, under the
posing and astonishing Dispensations of his Providence,

In the first place, we doubtless ought to take heed of charging God foolishly.
I borrow the expression from Job, Chap. 1, In all this Job sinned not, nor
charged God foolishly. To charge God foolishly upon the account of his
Providence, is by occasion of them to utter vain and foolish things that are
not fit to be spoken of the Majesty of God; as if he failed either in his truth
or mercy, or goodness to his people. It is an exellent precept of the Apostle
in this case, though given in another: 1 Cor. 4.5, Judge nothing before the
time. There is a time when God will give us leave to judge of his ways, whether
they be not both mercy and truth to them that fear him. Only Judge not before
the time, before God has finished his work, and brought off what he has upon
the wheel. Now it is this hasty Judgment, which is the cause of all our
murmuring and repining, of all our hasty sayings, like the Psalmist in his
passion, Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no more? Is
his mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for evermore? Has God
forgotten to be gracious, has he in anger shut up his tender mercies, Selah?
Psalm 77.7, 8, 9. If this be the usual method of Providence in the
accomplishment of Promises, to move obliquely and contrary (as to humane
appearance) and yet at last most certainly to bring the Promise to effect; we
have no reason under the oblique, or seemingly contrary motions of Providence,
to charge God, as if he failed in his truth, or failed in his mercy; he is only
fetching a compass in order to the verifying and justification of both. For us
so much as to suspect, or to think the contrary, is to charge God foolishly,
not observing, nor understanding the ordinary methods and courses of Divine
Providence in accomplishing of his greatest Promises.

2. It is our duty to admire God in those providential Dispensations, which we
do not understand. Man vainly studieth to find out God in his unsearchable
Counsels and motions of Providence; Vain man would be wise. Now the ways of God
(as I have showed you) are in many things past finding out. Where we can fee
God in his ways of mercy, there is an opportunity for our love and
thankfulness: where we cannot see him, there is an opportutunity for our fear
and admiration; stand upon this bottom, That all the ways of God are mercy and
truth to them that fear him: Let nothing shake you from this foundation, nor
move you from this Rock: where this is not matter of demonstration to your
sense and reason, let it yet be matter of admiration to you. Be admiring at the
wisdom of God, that can out of a Chaos bring order, out of darkness bring
light. But secondly,

2d Quest. What (at such a time) is our duty with reference to the Promise?

1. I answer to stand fast by it. I would have every good Christian think at
such a time as Providence (to his appearance) moves obliquely, and contrary to
the Promise, to think that he hears it speak unto him; as Christ sometimes
spoke to his Disciples, Matthew 5, Think you that I am come to destroy the law
and the Prophets? I am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them. I say, I
would have you think you hear the Providence of God thus speaking to you, under
its darkest Dispensations. Think you that I am about to destroy the Promise, or
by my motions to make it of no effect? No, I am come not to destroy a tittle of
a promise: Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not a tittle of the promise
shall fail: I am not by these motions destroying the promise; whatever your
sense may dictate to you, or whatsoever your reason may prompt to you, I am but
fulfilling the promise. Therefore I say at such a time, look to your hearts
that they abide by the promise: Let it be the case of the Church in which we
live, or the case of any particular Soul, still keep to the Word, the promise
to the Church is sure; the promise to the particular Soul is sure: Providence
is not moved out of its way, it is only got a little out of thy sight; if thou
can but wait for it, it will come into thy road again, and go with thy
expectation most certainly to the fulfilling of the Promise. Take that one
word, Eccles. 8.12, 13, Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days
be prolonged; yet surely it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear
before him: But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days, which are as a shadow, because he fears not before God. Consonant
to which is that, Isa. 3.10, 11, Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with
them, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings: Woe unto the wicked, it
shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him. Now
these words both of Promise, and of Threatening, are sure words; yet such as to
which the Providence of God makes our faith stagger, more than as to any other.
It often goes out of what we take to be its road, in order to the
accomplishment of these words: we see wicked men prospering, growing great in
power, honor, riches: yet their ways are such as he that runs may read,
that the fear of God is not before their eyes. Well, be it so, yet let not your
hearts fail as to the promise, keep close to it: you will see Providence return
to what you call its Road again. If a Sinner do evil an hundred times, if he
lives an hundred years; yet the Word of the Lord shall be justified upon him.
So if a child of God be chastened an hundred times; if Religion, and
Reformation, and the interest of God in the World be brought under the hatches
an hundred times: yet Magna est Veritas, and praevalebit, Truth shall prevail
at last, and Gods people shall have the day at last. Consider, O Christian,
thou can not give God a greater honor, than to believe when thou do not
seee: This is a faith like Abraham's, who believed in hope, above hope, or
contrary to hope, Romans 4: who believed when he had nothing else to trust to,
but that God was able to raise up, and save from the dead. Say in the
prosperity of Sinners, I will have nothing to do with them: For I know it shall
be ill with them; though they thrive, and prosper some months, and years, yet I
know the reward of their hands shall be given them. In the adversity and
afflicted estate of Gods people, say, with those will I cast in my lot, for I
know it shall be well with them. Take heed that the Providence of God draw you
not from the Promise.

Lastly, (will some say), What is our duty with reference to Providence at such
a time? I will open this in four or five particulars, with which I will shut up
my Discourse upon this Observation:

1. Search, and see whether some miscarriages of thy own, has not carried
Providence out of thy sight, and turned it out of its right line. I told you
before that Providence is never out of its way: it is always moving upon Gods
Errand, but it is often out of our sight, and our sins are the cause of that
its motion. You know under what a multitude of Promises the Jews were, as the
seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; as the posterity of David, etc. Promises for
great measures of outward prosperity; notwithstanding which they were carried
captives into Babylon, and there endured an hard bondage of seventy years.
Isaiah tells them the Reason, Your iniquities have separated betwixt God and
you: and your sins have made him to hide his face from you. What do the godly
amongst the Jews under this Dispensation? Lam. 3.39, 40, Let us (say they)
search and try our ways, and return again to the Lord: this is undoubtedly the
duty of the Church, the duty of every particular Soul. When thou see God
turned out of his way, as thou think, and not doing by thee as thou did
expect, search and see, whether thy miscarriages have not caused that
withdrawing, or turning aside. It is true, Gods punishments of his people are
not always for sin: he may sometimes do it to try their faith, their patience,
their adherence to him; but this is a secret to us.

Two things are certain in this case: 1. That God does most ordinarily punish
them for their sins. 2. That he never punishes them, but they have sinned
enough to warrant it an act of justice, and to give them cause of suspicion,
and of Soul-humiliation: so as a searching and trying of their ways in the day
of divine chastenings, can never be improper, or out of season.

2. Look to your faith in the Promise. It is the Promise is the object of
Faith, and Providence no further than it relates to the Promise. A time of
dark Providence is usually a time of great temptations: It is so oftentimes on
Gods part, that is, God designs his peoples trial. It is so often from Satan,
who takes the advantage of those hours to suggest to the Soul. It is so as to
the World; they pierced David's heart in such an hour as with a sword, when in
it they said unto him, Where is thy God become? Psalm 42. It is so in it self,
considering that we are but flesh, and how ready the language of that is,
Surely I have cleansed my hands in vain, I have washed mine hands in innocence
for nothing: Or that of Saul, This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for
him any longer? Therefore, I say, Look to your Anchor-hold in such a day. Thus
does David, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? why art thou disquieted within
me? trust thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God, Psalm 42. So does the Church, Micab 7.8, Rejoice not
over me, O mine Enemy; when I fall, I shall rise; when I sit in darkness, the
Lord shall be a light unto me. The Heathen Poets have a story, that Ulysses in
his sailing home, being to pass the Sirens, who were wont to allure Mariners
with their melodious tunes toward them, while their ships were dashed in
pieces upon Rocks, to avoid the temptation, caused himself to be tied to the
Mast of his Ship. I would have every Christians heart tied to the Promise as to
his Mast, that he might be out of the danger of all temptations from Providence.

Thirdly, (which indeed is a consequent of this), Resolve to wait upon God
under all the hidings of his face. I called this a consequent of the other: for
he that believes, makes not haste (says the Prophet). This was the Churches
resolution, Isa. 8.17, I will wait upon him, that hides his face from the
house of Jacob. Temptations in an evil day can have no advantage, but upon our
Souls precipitancy. The Soul that is resolved to wait upon God, has much
defeated all Tempters, and is out of all their Gunshot. I remember the speech
of the three Children to the King of Babylon, We are not (say they) careful to
answer thee in this matter, The God whom we serve is able to deliver us out of
thy hand: however, we will not fall down before the image which thou have set
up. If he will not presently deliver us, we are resolved to wait on him.

Fourthly, To waiting, must be added Prayer: I will look unto him, for he will
hear me. Prayer is the Catholic remedy, both for the aversion of any
Judgments, and for the obtaining of any mercy.

Fifthly, To all this add but that of the Psalmist, Psalm 37.34, Wait upon the
Lord, and keep his way, and thou shall inherit the promise made to it; He shall
exalt thee to inherit the land: and when the wicked are cut off, thou shall see
it. But I shall proceed no further in this Discourse.

SERMON XVI.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
HAVING showed you it to be the duty of Gods people to observe the motions of
Divine Providence (which are the things spoken of in this Text) and showed you
what a great indication of spiritual Wisdom such an observation is, and how
great a mean, to make us to understand the loving kindness of the Lord; I came
in my last Exercise to commend unto you some remarkable Observations concerning
them. I finished my Discourse at that time upon my first Observation, without
any further preface I shall now proceed to a second, which you may take thus:

Observe. 2. The Providence of God, in the fulfilling of the words, both of
promise, and of threatening, does ordinarily fulfill the first, when the people
of God are at the lowest: and the latter, when his Enemies are at the highest.
I shall handle this in the same method as I did the other, speaking to it
shortly, 1. By way of Explication. 2. Confirming the Observation, and giving
you the reasons of it: and lastly, making some Application of it. For
Explication,

1. I must desire you still to observe what I before told you, and now repeat,
That the Providence of God in all its motions is but a Servant of the Word, it
fulfilleth the will of God: That it is the spring from which all its motions do
proceed, both the secret, and revealed will. The will of God is but one; but
part of it is revealed, part concealed. So much of it as is necessary, in order
to our Salvation, is revealed, whether respecting our rule of life; or
respecting what shall happen to us, or others, to Nations, and Kingdoms, and
Churches in this life; or to particular Souls in, or after this life. Now what
God has thus revealed, Providence brings to issue; and here is the ground both
of our prayers, and praises.

2. For the Promises: I say, you shall observe, It is the ordinary method of
Divine Providence, to bring them to an accomplishment, upon the Church and
people of God, when they are at the lowest in all humane appearance; in the
lowest state of dejection, in the lowest degree of affliction; when they are
lowest as to their outward state, lowest as to their hopes.

3. I added thirdly, That it ordinarily gives a being, and fulfilling to the
threatening, when Gods Enemies are at the highest. The people of God are those
to whom the promises are made: they are the heirs of them; they are those to
whom are given the great and precious promises: wicked men are they, to whom
the threatenings belong; they are the children of wrath, the heirs of the
Curses: the work of Providence in reference to them (those of them that will
not be reformed) is to bring all the Curses, that are written in the book of
God, upon them. But I say you shall observe, That the time in which the
Providence of God fulfilleth these words of Threatening upon them, is when they
are at the highest; in the highest hopes of the contrary, on the highest
mountains of prosperity.

Let me endeavor to justify this Observation by some instances, and those
concerning bodies of people, or individuals. You know the people of the Jews
were the only people under Heaven until Christ's ascension, that God owned as
his people: Individuals there were that were not Jews, as Job and others; but
(I say) for a body of people there were no other. Gal. 3.16, To Abraham, and
his seed were the Promises made, Romans 9.4, Who are Israelites: to whom
appertained the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of
the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises. The Promises made to
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob. David, etc. The Promises of inheriting Canaan, coming
out of Babylon, destroying their Enemies, etc. Now these promises being given
out, it was the work of Divine Providence to give them a verification, and to
fulfill them. Observe what times the Providence of God does it in: It brings
the children of Israel out of Egypt, and into Canaan, not while Jacob, or
Joseph were alive. Joseph was a great man, and could have given a probable
conduct to that great work. The Israelites while he lived were in a very
flourishing condition, multiplying exceedingly, and being in a very prosperous
state every way. But this is not a time when the Providence of God will
accomplish the Promise; Joseph must die, and another King rise up that knew not
Joseph. The children of Israel are diminished, their little ones slain, their
whole body oppressed with hard labor, and brought to as low a pass as you can
well imagine a people to be not wholly blotted out. This is the time that
Providence will accomplish the promise for their coming out of Egypt. They pass
the Red Sea in a very formidable body, like enough to make their way through
the Wilderness, and a variety of Enemies into the promised Land. But before the
Providence of God brings them in, they must be broken, in a great measure
destroyed; all dead unless Caleb, and Joshuah, who came out of Egypt, and their
body wholly a new generation; then they shall pass over Jordan. Read over all
the story of Judges, and observe; God seldom delivered them from their
oppressors, until they were brought as low as could be. After that time, when
the men of Jabish Gilead were ready to take the basest terms, then God sends
Saul to their rescue; when there was not a sword, nor a spear found in all
Israel, but in the hand of Saul and Jonathan, then will God deliver them from
the Philistines. They shall be delivered out of the captivity of Babylon, but
not till they had been worn out there seventy years: when one would have
thought scarce any should have been left to have returned, and those that were
so linked with alliances to the Babilonians, so fixed in another Country, as
few of them should ever have been persuaded to have come out, and have gone to
build a new a desolate City. The promise of Christ (their great King) shall be
made good to them: but when? when the Scepter is departed from Judah, and the
Lawgiver from his feet. When the Jews are made tributaries to the Romans; for
particular persons the cases are very many: Abraham shall have the Child of the
promise, when he is an hundred years old. Joseph shall be exalted out of a
dungeon. Isaac shall be rescued, when the knife is at his throat. David shall
have the Kingdom, when he is brought to the lowest Ebb; and that is the time
when Job shall be restored to a prosperous state, and his latter end shall be
greater than his beginning. The three Children, and Daniel shall be delivered
and exalted, but not till the former be actually thrown into the fiery Furnace,
and Daniel into the Lions Den. Peter shall be delivered out of prison, but not
till the very night before his execution was designed. Paul shall be delivered
when he despaired of life, and had the sentence of death in himself, 2 Cor.
1.9. In short, you shall observe this the constant course and method of Divine
Providence.

Secondly, The observation is as true on the other hand: when Pharaoh with his
Host was in their highest ruff; and he says, I will pursue, I will overtake
them, I will satisfy my lust on them, then shall he be drowned in the Red Sea;
when the sins of the Amorites are at the full, then, and not before, will
Providence destroy and root them out. When Sisera is in his greatest height,
then will God by Woman bring him down. When Sennacherib is at his height, then
shall he perish. The like instances might be given of Belshazzar, Haman; in
short, of all the Enemies of God, and his people, of whom we have any
Scriptural record. I remember when Gideon had his great Army: God said, they
were too many for him to conquer by, and reduces them to three hundred, then
makes them victorious. The people of God, though under some misery, and
oppressions may be too many, or in too good a condition for him to deliver
them, and the Enemies may be too low, or in too pitiful a condition for the
Lord of Hosts to encounter them. He will then deal with Pharaoh, Sennacherib,
Haman, Belshazzar, Herod, when they are at the highest, and think themselves
out of the reach of divine Power and Justice. When all the World almost is
turned Arian he will begin to root out Arianism: When all are made slaves to
the Pope, and he can with his Bulls fright the greatest Prince; that is the
time Providence will choose to begin Reformation. Let us a little enquire into
the Wisdom of God in this method of working.

God in all his great workings, both of Judgment and Mercy, in all his great
motions of Providence, is pursuing one and the same great end, viz. the glory
of his great and holy Name; he can work for no higher, he will work for no
lower, or lesser end: The deliverance and good of his people is subordinate to
this, so is the ruin and destruction of their Enemies; so that this must be the
reason of this method of Providence, Because, thus God is most glorified, by
delivering his people when they are at the lowest; by destroying his Enemies
when they are at the highest, God is most glorified. My further Work must be to
demonstrate this, God is thus most glorified: 1. By a Declaration of himself in
his glorious Attributes. 2. By Eliciting pious actions from his Creatures.


1. By a Declaration of himself: that men may know that he is God, and he
alone; and the work is his, and his alone. There is, as I have told you, a mute
Glory, which arises unto God from his own works: as the Psalmist says, The
heavens declare the glory of God. As all Gods works of Creation, so all his
works of Providence, declare the glory of God; and he does them to be had in
remembrance, that he might by them be glorified, and get himself a great Name
in the Earth. God is diverse ways eminently magnified, and made known to the
World by this method of Providence in its workings: diverse Attributes of his
are remarkably by it published to the World. I will instance in some: His
power, his wisdom, his justice and righteousness, and his goodness, and mercy.

1. The power of God is thus more magnified. Power is a great Attribute of God:
Once have I spoken (says the Psalmist), yea twice have I heard it, that power
belongs unto God. Hence he is so often called The great God. Now the power of
God, is never so eminent in the view of the World, as when he raises up his
people out of the dunghill, and pulls down the Sinners in the height and
pride of their glory. When God falls upon a Nebuchadnezzar, crying out, Who
is that God who shall deliver you out of my hands? Dan. 3.15. Upon a
Sennacharib, saying, Who are they amongst the gods of the Nations that have
delivered their people out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver you out of
my hand? Isa. 36.20. Upon a Pharaoh, saying, Who is the Lord that I should obey
him? Exodus 5.2. Then does the Lord make the greatness of his might and power
known: God lets them then see, that wherein they thought, spoke, and acted
proudly, he can be above them. Power is never so magnified, as when an opposite
power is greatest, when men most think they are out of Gunshot. I remember the
story of Gideon (which I hinted before); you have it, Judge. 7.2. The people
(says God) are too many for me, lest Israel vaunt himself against me, and say,
my own hand has saved me. Ver. 3, They were reduced to twenty two thousand:
Ver. 4, God says, They are yet too many for me. In short, they must be brought
to three hundred, and by them God will work; here now Gods Arm was made bare:
when there is a plenty of means, and probabilities, and God works by and in
the use of them, it is still God's arm that brings Salvation; but it is as it
were a cloathed-arm, and the arm, the power, and strength of God is hidden and
concealed: but when God works contrary to humane probabilities, and without
such means, there the arm of the Lord is made bare. The Egyptians, the
Philistines, the vilest Enemies cry out; God fights against them, or, This is
the Lords work.

Secondly, As the Power, so the Wisdom of God is seen in these methods and
operations of Providence. Indeed, sometimes God so works, that the Power of
God appears uppermost, and is most conspicuous in the destruction of the
Enemies, and in the salvation of the Lords people: as in the case of
Sennacherib's Army, destroyed by an Angel; of Pharaoh, destroyed by the return
of the waters, etc. But oft-times there is a wonderful wisdom of God in ordering
contingencies, and seeming casual things, to his own ends in these cases: as in
the case of Joseph and Haman, the reflection of the Sun upon the waters, which
caused the Moabites mistake and confusion. But the wisdom of God is further
seen in this, That a mercy seldom comes; but though we could see nothing of
Wisdom relating to it before it came, yet when it is come to pass, there is no
understanding Christian but is forced to say, It could never have come in a
more seasonable time: the wisdom of which, we could see nothing of in the
prospect, is evident upon the event. It would have been a great question,
whether the Israelites would have been so willing to have come out of Egypt
under the conduct of Joseph, when they were pinched with no oppressions, as
they were under Moses and Aaron, when they had been serving in the Brick-kilns,
and their lives so many years together had been made bitter to them, through
the hard bondage which they had so long endured.

Thirdly, The Lord does thus more eminently magnify his justice and
righteousness. Justice lies in the distribution of rewards and punishments:
the first we call Remunerative; the second Vindicative Justice: Both are much
magnified by this method of Providence. Persons in the greatest heighths of
prosperity, or depths of (...), are ordinarily the most remarkable objects of
the worlds eyes, and more regarded than those that are in a more middle-state.
When God lifts up a Joseph out of the dungeon, and a Daniel out of the Lions
den, and advances a Mordecai, for whom a gallows was set up, and the three
Children are taken out of a fiery Furnace; He proclaims to all the World, and
they are forced to confess it, that verily there is a reward for the righteous:
and so on the other side, when a Pharaoh, a Sennecharib, an Haman, a
Nebuchadnezzar are pulled down in the midst of all their pride and jollity,
from their very pinacles of honor; the Justice and Righteousness of God in
punishing proud and imperious Sinners, is proclaimed, and made more evident to
all the World. Lastly,

4. The Lords goodness is thus more magnified and taken notice of. Common and
ordinary Dispensations of gracious Providence, are little remarked by us: what
mercy do we receive every night, every day from God, yet how little notice do
we take of it? how little is our heart affected with it? but now when we are
brought to the pits-brink, to a very low estate, and then are plucked from it;
when we are in a very low estate, and then delivered; Gods goodness is both
more proclaimed to the World, and more conspicuous unto us. But this will in
part fall in under the second head: for I told you, that God is glorified by
this method of his Providence, not only as his glorious Attributes (diverse of
them) are by it more exalted; but also as the pious and religious Acts of his
people, are more by this method of Providence elicited. I have often hinted to
you, that God has a twofold glory from his Creatures, and the works of his
hands: The first is a mere passive glory; Thus the heavens declare the glory of
God; the Heavens show forth the greatness, glory, and power of God. The second
is Active; wherein the creature does some actions, from which a glory does
result unto God. Now by this Method of Providence, God is not only glorified in
the first sense, as this kind of working speaks more of his Power, Wisdom,
Justice, Goodness, etc. but in the second also.

^. Thus God sometimes forces an acknowledgment of his Power, even from the
worst of men. Julian himself shall confess that Christ is too hard for him,
throwing up his Dagger to Heaven, and crying, Vicisti Galilaee. The Egyptians
shall cry out, Exodus 14.25, Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord
fights for the Israelites against the Egyptians. Nebuchadnezzar shall make a
Decree, Dan. 3.29, That every Nation, People and Language, which speak any
thing against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in
pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no other God
that can deliver after this sort. Dan. 6.25, Darius shall write to all people;
Nations and Languages that dwell upon the Earth, and make a Decree, That in
every Dominion of his Kingdom, men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel;
for he is the living God, and steadfast for ever, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be even to the end: he
delivers, and he rescueth, and he works signs and wonders in the Heavens,
and in the Earth, who has delivered Daniel from the power of the Lions. The
King of Babylon that set up the Golden-image, and so rigorously commanded all
should bow down to it, or be thrown into the fiery Furnace, heated seven times
hotter than ordinary, Dan. 3.26, shall bless the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, who has sent his Angel and delivered his servants that trusted in
him; and have changed the Kings word, and yielded their bodies, that they might
not serve or worship any god but their own God. What a wonderful glory here had
God given him from a wicked Pagan Prince? he confesses his Command wicked; he
blesses God that put into these three hearts (...) to disobey it, and make him
change his word; he acknowledges God the true God, and that he delivers them
that trust in him. All this accreweth from Gods delivering these three men when
they were at the lowest, when all gave them over for dead men.

But secondly, How much more glory has God from his own people upon any such
deliverance? Surprizals affect us most. An unthought-of evil most startleth and
dejecteth us: An unthought-of good most elevates, and affects us. Good things
lessen in our opinion and estimate, by a long expectation; They are greatest
and most affect us, when we are past hopes of them. Sudden and unlooked for
good, raises our hearts to great admiration, great praise, and thanksgiving.
Now, he that offers praise (says God) glorifieth me. The more God is
admired, the more his goodness is predicated and proclaimed; the more men upon
any occasion speak of his honor, and power, and greatness, the more glory God
has from them.

Thirdly, God is more honored by this method of Providence, not only as the
suddenness of it does more affect and elevate his peoples hearts; but also as
by it his people are more prepared for the receiving of mercy. The Psalmist
says, He prepares the heart, and then causes his ear to hear: their heart is
prepared by their exercise of grace; as of other grace, so especially faith and
patience; they become more low in their own eyes, they learn more to trust and
depend upon God, and to wait upon him in the way of his Judgments, as the
Prophet speaks. Now all exercise of grace brings glory to God, all of it is
the fruit of his Spirit, it is obedience to his Will; it carries with it a
recognition of the power, wisdom, goodness and Sovereignty of God. The longer
God deferreth a mercy, the more time his people have to search and try their
ways, to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, to exercise their
faith, their patience, etc. the more he has of his peoples prayers, etc.

Fourthly, I may yet add one thing more: he has by this means, the glory of
his Justice, both from his own people, and from wicked men. By suffering his
own people to be brought very low, he proclaims to the World, that he will
not suffer the best of them to go unpunished; but as to them he will approve
himself a God of purer eyes than to behold any iniquity: and by letting Sinners
run on to the height, before he pulls them down, their wickedness also
becomes so exorbitant and conspicuous to the World, that the neutral part of
the World, shall both acknowledge the righteousness of God, in bringing them
down to an utter destruction, and delivering of his oppressed people out of
their hands. But this is enough to have spoken in justification of the
Observation, and giving you some reasonable account of it.

This (in the first place) may let us see, how little means is considerable in
the great effects of Divine Providence. Humane means are by us to be used when
Providence affords them: but God ordinarily does his works either without them,
or when there is but little of them to use: Not by might, nor by power; but by
my Spirit says the Lord. The stone was cut out of the mountain without hands,
which smote the image on his feet: which were part of iron and clay, and brake
them in pieces, Dan. 2.34: and indeed, if this Observation is true, if God
ordinarily delivers his people when they are at the lowest, and brings down his
Enemies when they are at the highest, humane means must have but a little share
in Gods works: when men are at lowest, there is least visible means to lift
them up; and when God's Enemies are at highest, there is least appearance of
humane visible means to pull them down. Now this, as you have heard, is the
time when God ordinarily works, and therefore our eyes should be off the arm of
flesh: What is a Mountain before Gods Zorobabel? How little of humane means did
God use in bringing his people out of Egypt and Babylon? There is never greater
improbability of any great work of Providence, than in the greatest probability
of humane means. Gideon's twenty two thousand were too many for God. Let us
then learn how to look upon, how to use means: Look upon them as signifying
nothing without Gods efficacy: use them as not trusting in them, or to them.
Raise up no great hopes upon great probabilities in respect of them. The people
of God are never more deceived, than in their judgments upon such appearances.
Many times the thing appears too probable to humane eyes, for God to suffer it
at that time to come to issue; he should have little honor, little glory from
the effect; if he should give it, men would say that God had saved them by
their own bow, and sword, and staff. God will have it otherwise: When he
turns again the captivity of Sion, his people shall be like them that dream,
Psalm 126.1. He will so destroy his Enemies, that they shall cry out, Let us
flee, for God fights for the Israelites against the Egyptians, Exodus 14.25.
He will so bring to pass all his great works, both of Judgment and mercy, that
they shall sing that Song, Psalm 115. v. 1, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us;
but unto thy Name be given the glory.

Hence learn in the second place, That the Sinner can never be secure: nay is
then least secure, when he judges himself most secure. Gods people value
themselves upon the Promises: but wicked men value themselves upon Providence,
and judge of their security from their prosperity, successes and interests. They
never crow, but when they have made their nests in the Cedars, and fixed their
habitations on some strong Mountain, which they think shall never be moved.
They are never less secure, they are never nearer to ruin than now: For when
they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as
upon a woman in travel, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5.3. When Babylon
was given to pleasures, and dwelled carelessly, and said, she should be as a
Lady for ever; she was, and there was none besides her: she should never sit as
a widow, nor know the loss of children: then it was that God tells her, that
both these things should come upon her in one day: both the loss of children,
and widowhood, Isa. 47.7. Dan. 4.30. When Nebuchadnezzar was in his Ruff,
walking in the Palace of the Kingdom of Babylon, and saying, Is not this great
Babylon that I have built? for the house of my Kingdom, by the might of my
power, and for the honor of my Majesty. Even then while the word was in the
Kings mouth (says the Text, ver. 31) there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O
King Nebuchadnezzar! to thee be it spoken, the Kingdom is departed from thee. A
Sinner can be secure in no estate, at no time: If God has lifted him up he
has reason to fear his ruin is near: If God be pulling him down, he has
reason to fear that he is sinking into Hell. God delights to grapple with a
prospering, fortified, interested Sinner; and to let him then when he speaks
most proudly, know, that wherein he speaks proudly, he will be above him. Let
not therefore any Sinner trust to his prosperity.

Thirdly, high, and prosperous estate of Gods Enemies; and with reference to
God in the low and mean estate of his Church and people. It is one of the great
temptations which attend us in this life, to see the wicked prospering, and
flourishing like a green baytree. It troubled the most eminent Servants of God
we read of in Scripture, Job, David, Jeremiah, Habbakuk: We had need therefore
learn our duty in such an hour. You will say, What is it? I answer, 1. Not to
envy them, 2. Not to fret, and repine against God, 3. Not to take part with
them.

1. Not to envy them: It is what the Psalmist calls to us for, Psalm 37.1, --
Neither be thou envious at the workers of iniquity: And the Wiseman, Prove.
3.31, Envy not the Oppressor. Prove. 23.17, Let not thy heart envy Sinners. You
have an usual saying, It is better to be envied, than pitied: the meaning is,
to be in a state of prosperity, which usually is the Object of Envy, than in a
state of adversity, which is usually the Object of pity: It is not so here, It
is better to be a child of God, though an Object of pity, than a Sinner, though
an Object of Envy. Prosperity slays the fool, nor is he ever so near ruin, as
when he is at the highest. There is a story of a custom they had in Persia, to
gratify a condemned Malefactor, for an hour before his Execution, with
whatsoever he should desire; which of us should have envied such a poor wretch
for that hours pleasure? Sinners are never so near ruin as when they are at the
highest: O then envy them not in their heighths!

2. Much less fret, and repine against God, for allowing them such a
pre-eminence over thee, as to their outward estate. God has his wise and just
ends in it, both in suffering them to grow high, and thee to continue in a low
and afflicted state; by the former, he ripeneth them for Judgment: by the
latter, he prepares you for Mercy. Fret not because of evildoers (says the
Psalmist, Psalm 37. ver. 1.) We cannot dive into the bottom of Gods Counsels;
but if this observation of the motions of Providence be true, we may see cause
enough, not to fret our selves, nor to murmur and repine at God; we have no
reason to repine at God, when we see his Providence working toward our
deliverance, and toward the downfall of his and our Enemies. Thus it is
according to this Observation; when we are brought most low, and the Enemies of
God are suffered to mount most high.

3. Certainly (if this be true) the flourishing state of sinners should be no
temptation to us, so much as to desire to take part with them. Solomon joins
them together, Prove. 3.31, Envy not thou the Oppressor, neither choose any of
his ways: My son (says Solomon) If sinners entice thee, consent not thou unto
them; though they say, we shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our
houses with spoil. The words of Sinners are nothing so enticing, as their
prosperous state; for riches, and honor, and rule, and pleasures, not many can
resist the temptation of them: but certainly, if the heighths of these to
sinners be prognostics of their ruin; if we could consider their pride, their
riches, honors, plenty, dominion, as things which set them nearer unto ruin,
they would be no temptations: desire not to rise, and thrive and grow great,
and domineer with wicked men, lest thou also fall with them.

2. But in the last place, let us from hence conclude the duty of a child of
God in his lowest state, or in the lowest state of the Church and people of
God. I will open it in few particulars, and so conclude.

First, To glory in Tribulation. The Apostle makes this one of the fruits of
justifying faith, Romans 5. St. James would have the rich Christian rejoice in
that he is made low, Ja. 1.10. A depth of misery in the people of God, always
makes way for mercy; and the redemption, and salvation of the people of God is
never nearer, than when in humane appearance it seems to be furthest off.
Indeed, this must be the rejoicing of faith, for the eye of sense at such a
time is quite put out. Besides the circulation of Divine Providence, which is
evident to those who look wistly upon the motions of Providence in the World;
there is a great deal more to give the people of God at such a time cause of
rejoicing: they are more prepared for mercy, their Enemies are more prepared
for vengeance; it is then a fit season for God to work for his glory, etc.

Secondly, This should learn the people of God patience under all their
sufferings, pressures, and oppressions. Patience is a grace, of which we may
say as Solomon of a Friend, or a Brother: It is made for adversity. There are
many arguments to persuade Patience, that is, a quiet, calm submission to God
under frowns of Providence; but nothing more effectual to our hasty and
impatient frail natures, than to hear, that the burden of God upon our
shoulders shall not lie there long: when we can hope that Nubecula est and
transibit, it is but a storm, and it will over. What said our Savior to his
Disciples, Could not you watch with me one hour? The prospect of the shortness
of an Evil, does very much alleviate it, and relieve our spirits under the
burden of it. That miserable Emperor had no other relief under his most cruel
torments, than Hoc non est Eternitas; this is not Eternity. Now what an
argument is this for a Christians patience, and fortitude, for him to think
when his case is worst, when his burden most pincheth him, then his
deliverance is nearest, even at the door. They say in a dark morning, the
darkness is always thickest just before break of day. In the Mount of the Lord
it shall be seen. I am sure it is always darkest just before break of day with
the Church and the people of God. As the pains of a Woman in travel increase,
so the hour of her delivery more hasteneth; and there is no worse sign of a
long travail to her, than little and lingering pains. The Women at such a time
will sometimes say to those that enquire after the Woman in pangs, We want more
pain. Truly it is so oft-times with the Church of God: They want more pain,
more pressures and oppressions, they are not brought low enough for a mercy. O
let us be patient then under the greatest trials: Great trials never last long.
You know what the Martyr said, We have a bad Dinner, but we shall have a better
Breakfast.

Thirdly, This calls aloud to the people of God at such a time for the
exercise of faith. Indeed, this is the proper time for faith to work. As too
much light blinds the Eye instead of helping it, so does sense blind the Eye of
Faith: Sense follows Providence; but Faith stands by the Promise, and
exercises it self upon that. When the Providence of God is most out of our
sight, then is the time to lay the fastest hold upon the Promise. As there are
degrees of darkness in nights, some are much more dark than others; so there
are degrees of darkness in the Churches nights: sometimes there is a darkness
in it which may be felt, when Providence is so far from giving a light to us
like that of the Sun, that it does not give us the light of a Candle. Here now
Christians stand concerned to show, that they do not live by the light of
Providence, but by faith in the word of God; which still is the same, and
abides for ever. If two be walking together, they had never more need to take
heed that they lose not one another company, than in a dark and blustering
night, when the darkness keeps them that they cannot see one another: and the
wind hinders that they cannot hear the sound each of others feet. The
Believer and the Promise are Relates, companions each to other: there is never
more danger of their being parted each from other, than in a night of dark and
blustering Providence. Now a Christian stands concerned, to be often applying
his Soul to the Promise: often calling upon his Soul as David, in Psalm 42,
Trust thou in God, for I shall yet praise him. Nor is there any thing more
conducive to make a Christian at such a time hang upon the Promise, than to
hear that it is the usual method of Divine Providence; then to remember Gods
people, when they are in the lowest condition.

Fourthly, As this calls to the people of God for faith in the Promise, so it
calls to them for hope: Faith and Hope are so near of kin, that they are often
put one for another. Indeed, Hope is nothing else but Faith looking out at the
windows of the soul, in expectation of the coming of the thing believed. There
is an hope that works upon the encouragements of sense, when the mercy hoped
for is seen coming in a way of probable means: but there is an Hope that
proceeds merely upon the Evidence of Faith, when the Soul hops for some
good thing, but sees no encouragement from any sensible thing: the former is
but a natural affection working upon an absent probable good; This latter is a
supernatural habit, and an exercise of grace. The Apostle calls it an hoping
against hope; or a believing in hope against hope. This is that which I am
calling to you for: This is that which keeps the heart alive in the deadest
time. We use to say, If it were not for hope (under evils) the heart would
break. Faith is the acquiescence of the Soul in the World: Hope is the motion
of the Soul consequent to this acquiescence. Faith says, the thing is sure;
Hope sees it coming, and relieveth the Soul with that. Hope is the Souls
watchman. The Soul cries out, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of
the night? Hope says, The morning is coming. Now this Observation advantageth
Hope; It assures you, that God is coming at Midnight. When you see these things
come to pass (says our Savior, Luke 21.28.) lift up your heads, for the day
of your redemption draws nigh. It has reference to all that went before,
where our Savior had been telling them of the great Evils that were to precede
his coming. Now, says our Savior, when you see things at this miserable,
despicable pass; then lift up your heads.

Fifthly, This Notion calls to the people of God for fervent, and constant
prayer for the Church, and people of God, when they are at the lowest ebb.
Never give over the case of the Church and people of God for desperate, it is
never less so than when it most appears to you to be so. I remember it is
particularly remarked concerning Daniel, in the 9th Chapter of his Prophecy,
That when he understood by books that the time was come for the fulfilling of
the Jewish captivity, then he made that excellent Prayer, which you have upon
record in that Chapter, with a great deal of fervor and zeal for the people, of
which you will find it full. Daniels certain knowledge, that that was the time
for their deliverance, did not supersede his duty of Prayer, but more
abundantly quicken him to it. In such a state of the Church and people of God,
as I have been describing to you, a Christian has two great arguments to
persuade him to a more constant, diligent, and fervent application of himself
to the throne of Grace. 1. The Churches misery and low condition, calling to
him for pity, and what help he can give it. 2. The knowledge he has, or may
have, that it is now about the time, when God uses to arise and help.

Lastly, This Observation calls upon all that fear the Lord, especially at
such a time when they, or the Church of God is lowest, to watch unto holiness;
to wait upon the Lord and keep his way, and to be wary of sin. To deter all
that fear God from sinning, especially at such a time, I might mind you of that
precept of God to the Jews: When the Host goes forth to battle, then take heed
of every wicked thing. But I shall conclude with that known story of the
Israelites: You know they had an old Promise made four hundred years before,
that they should inherit the land of Canaan: they had served in Egypt many
years, they were now come over the Red Sea, and had encountered, and overcome
the long and many difficulties of the Wilderness: they were brought within a
prospect of the promised Land, nothing wanted, but a taking possession: they
murmur against God, retard their entrance forty years, until all that
generation was destroyed, except Caleb and Joshuah. I shall conclude, Has the
Church been a long time under great pressures, things still as to its interest
growing worse and worse, that they seem to be brought to as low a pass as they
can be? Now begins her hope to dawn, according to that Method of Providence
which I have observed to you: Only now, let the people of God look to
themselves, that by some defection they do not set back their own mercies. You
may take the Exhortation in the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.6, Now these
things happened unto them for our ensamples, to the end that we should not lust
after evil things, as they lusted: neither be ye Idolaters as were some of
them, etc.

But I shall add no more to this Second Observation.

SERMON XVII.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Have both showed you the duty of the people of God, to make Observations
upon the motions of Divine Providence; and the advantage accrewing to them that
perform it. 1. It is an indication of spiritual Wisdom. 2. Those that do it
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. My work at present is to give
you some observations upon the motions of Actual Providence, which is the work
of God in the World, fulfilling his purpose; and fulfilling his Word, both of
Promise, and of Threatening. Two of those Observations I have given you,
discoursed upon them, and made some futable Applications. I proceed to a third.

3d Observe. Providence ordinarily does its greatest works, in the day of man's
smallest things.

It is truly observed, that the greatness of Divine Power and Wisdom is most
seen in the Creation, and Preservation of the least creatures. As a Workman is
most magnified, that can bring most art into the least room: and it is as true,
that the greatness of Divine Providence, delights to show it self in the day
of man's smallest things. This Observation has some cognation with the former:
but there is more in it, as you will see by the Sequel of my Discourse. Man's
smallest things may be understood to signify, 1. Smallest means. 2. Smallest
hopes. 3. Smallest works or actions.

1. Smallest means: Though God be not tied to humane means, but sometimes he
works without them: Though they have no efficacy, but what they derive from
him, and he commands them to exert and put forth; yet he often makes use of
means. But this you shall observe, and it shall be justified to you by and by,
that God seldom does great things by great means: but when God does great work,
though he make use of means, yet it is but little small means: and the day of
smallest means, is usually the day of Gods work.

2. In the day of smallest hopes: and indeed this almost naturally follows
upon the other; for humane hopes do usually ebb, or flow according to the
proportion of humane means that are in our Eye: so that if God does his
greatest works in the day of smallest means, he does them likewise in the day
of our smallest hopes; which rise higher, or fall lower (usually) according to
the prospect which we have of probable means.

3. Lastly, In the day of smallest works or actions: when man is most busy,
God seems to be most idle, most asleep when we seem to be most awake. When God
turns again the captivity of Sion, they are as those that dream: they never see
so much the Salvation of God, as when they stand still. I do not say, when men
will do least; but when they do, when they can do least, then usually God does
his greatest works of Providence.

I shall justify this Observation by a great variety of instances:

Let the first be that great work of Providence, in bringing the children of
Israel out of Egypt. It is true, they were no inconsiderable body, or number of
people: they were at their coming out six hundred thousand souls, but scattered
over all the Land of Egypt, a small number in comparison of the Egyptians:
diminished by all arts, by many years hard labor, in no Military order,
nothing of the power of the Lord was in their hand: they were so very slaves,
that they murmured against Moses and Aaron, for but going in to Pharaoh to ask
for a deliverance for them: means of deliverance for them there appeared none
to an humane Eye. Indeed, being so great a body of people, God might have made
use of their Swords to have fought their way out of Egypt: he could easily have
commanded them into a Military rank and file, but he uses none of them; only
sends Moses and Aaron upon his Errand, to command Pharaoh to let his people
go, that they might serve him. The same might be said of their deliverance out
of the captivity of Babylon: there was no means, they had no hopes from any
appearance of humane probabilities, (those that believed amongst them doubtless
had an hope from the Promise); there was none of them stirred that we read of.
Cyrus proclaims their liberty. The walls of the strong City of Jericho fall
down before the Israelites, upon the blowing of Rams-horns, and the peoples
compassing it at a distance about seven days, Josh. 6. Canaan is given into the
hands of the Israelites: they were indeed a considerable Army, but the seven
Nations, through which they made their way into that possession, were more
strong and mighty than they, as Moses tells them, Deuteronomy. 7. Gideon delivers
them, oppressed by the Midianites, with a party (rather than an Army) of three
hundred men. Sampson with the jaw bone of an ass stays a thousand
Philistines. David with a sling and a stone, shall kill Goliath, when none durst
encounter him; and the hearts of the people were killed with his daily defiance
of them. Indeed, God has seldom done any great things in the World by great
means: when the Philistines came out in an Army of thirty thousand, of which we
read in 1 Samuel 13, and but of three thousand Israelites that could be got
together: and they also frighted, so as ver. 6, They hid themselves in caves,
thickets, rocks, and in high places, and in pits: those that kept together
(except Saul and Jonathan) had neither sword, nor spear amongst them, ver. 19,
20. Jonathan and his Armor-bearer go up alone and smite them: set all the Host
on trembling, and the multitude melts away, chap. 14. v. 16. The color of
the Water deceives the Moabites to their ruin, when Jehoram, Jehosaphat, and
the King of Edom were almost all famined for want of water, 2 Kings 3.20, 21.
When Jehosaphat knows not what to do, 2 Chronicles. 26.22, God tells them, ver. 17,
They need not fight, only stand still and see the salvation of God: they did
but stand still, and sing, and praise; their Enemies destroy one another: Look
upon Gods great work of Providence, in the conversion of the World to the
obedience of the Gospel; How does God do this? Not by might, nor by power, but
by his Spirit. Christ sends out a few poor Fishermen: these shall go and
persuade the world to throw out their Idols, and to receive the new Doctrine of
the Gospel, which to their wisdom appeared foolishness. The World was full of
very learned Philosophers: God could have converted, instructed, and sent out
them, but he chooses to do this great work by small things: Choosing (as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.) the foolish things of the world, to confound
the wise: the weak things of the world, to confound those that were mighty: the
base things of the world, and things which are despised, to bring to naught the
things that are. Next to this was the great Work of God in the Reformation,
begun in Germany by Luther; it was a day of very small things, the whole world
was Popish, and had given their power to the Roman beast: the remainders of the
Church were in the valleys of Piedmont and Lucerne, and in Bohemia, a small
despised remnant. Now God begins to work, and by what means? Luther, a poor
despised Friar, he begins and preaches against indulgences: the whole world
almost were against him, he has to do with, the Emperor, the Pope, all the
Popish Doctors; yet by these small things the Providence of God brings to pass
this his great work. It was a day of small things with us, when we were
delivered from the Spanish-Armado in the year 1588, from the intended
Powder Treason. In short, I say we shall find, that the Providence of God has
done the greatest works, that it has brought to pass in the world, in the day
of man's smallest things; when there have been the smallest appearances of
humane means, when the People of God have had the smallest hopes, and when they
have been least in action. God has in his Providence seldom done any great
things by great humane means.

Now the reason of this is the same, as of my former observation, Because thus
he gets himself most glory. The Glory of God is the great end of all his
actions, he works for himself, for the Honor and Glory of his own great
Name. Now God has more Honor and Glory by these accomplishments, than if he
should bring them to pass by greater and more probable means. The Apostle gives
this very reason, 1 Cor. 1.29. Why God chose weak things to confound those that
are mighty, etc. That no flesh should glory in his presence.

1. His power is thus more magnified: He thus appears to be a great God, a
mighty God, though it be true, that the Power of God is equally exerted, when
he works by great means, as by small: (had we spiritual eyes, or did we look
upon means as we ought to do, as deriving all their efficacy from God), yet de
facto, it is not so to us; and therefore you shall in Scripture observe God
often declaring, that he would work this, or that in this, or that manner, that
his People might not say, that they had done this by their own might or power.
The lesser appearance there is of second Causes, the more the efficiency of the
first Cause is evident; so God gets himself a great deal of Glory, by
working in the day of man's smallest things.

2. (As I also told you under the former head) God gets himself more Glory
by the praises of his people: he is more admired in his workings, more praised
and adored for his workings. The Enemies are also hereby enforced to confess
the works of the Lord, and to acknowledge the greatness of his Power. But having
enlarged upon these things under the former observation, I shall add no more
here, but come to the Application.

Use 1. The first Use I shall make of this point, shall be what the Prophet
Zechariah has made before me, Zech. 4.10. Who has despised the day of small
things? The Prophet propounds it by way of Interrogation, but it contains a
Precept in the bowels of it: Learn not to despise the day of small things; it
is usually Gods day. It may be a day of small things as to the Church, the
state of it may be very sad, the case of it very low; little humane means or
probabilities may appear of the amendment of its state; all things may seem to
make against the interest of God and Religion. Now I say, let no man despise
this day of small things: It may be a day of small things with the particular
soul, the case of it may be very sad, it may be full of dejections, full of
despondencies, hurried with temptations; it may have hope, and but a little
hope, light shining in upon it at a poor crevice: let none now despise this day
of small things. Two things I would press upon you. 1. Not to despise this day.
2. To perform what is your positive duty with reference to such a day.

1. I say first, Despise not such a day. Persons or things may be despised two
ways: 1. Directly. 2. Interpretatively. Take heed of despising it directly.
Take heed of despising it interpretatively. We despise a person or thing
directly, when in our hearts we contemn him or it, and have a low and poor
estimate of him or it, and express it by any outward sign, as words, gestures,
etc. Thus the Enemies of the Jews scorned the Jews, employed in re-building the
City and Temple; when they said, What will these feeble Jews do? if a fox go
up, he will break down what they have builded. It was (it seems) a day of small
things with the Jews, their Enemies despised them, and mocked at them. Thus
Sennacherib despised Hezekiah, when he offered his Commissioners two hundred
horses, if his master could set riders on them: Take heed of this despising.
Thus the Popish party in Germany despised the day of small things in the
beginning of the Reformation by Luther; when they bid him go into his Cell, and
pray, Lord have mercy upon me. The issue in all three cases showed, that they
had no reason, as to any of them, to have despised the day of small things:
Providence usually brings forth its greatest works in such a day. But besides
this despising,

2. There is an interpretative despising of such a day. Take heed of this also:
thus we may despise things,

1. When we do not give that due regard to them which we ought. Thus our
Savior tells you, A man cannot serve two masters, but he will cleave to the
one, and despise the other; that is, not give that due regard which he ought to
give to the other. He that neglects what ought not to be neglected, does
interpretatively despise; when we have not that due value for a thing we ought
to have, we despise it. Thus Esau despised his birthright, (says the
Apostle): we no where read that he spoke contemptuously of it; but he did not
duly value it, he sold it for a contemptible price, a mess of pottage.

2. When because of the smallness of means, our hearts fail in the use of the
means we have; or, as to the promise: this is a despising of the day of small
things. Now I say, take heed of despising such a day any of these ways; it is
usually Gods day. Let your rule be this:

If a work, or issue of a work, be for Gods Glory; if it be the matter of a
Divine Promise, though there may be but a small appearance of means for the
accomplishment of it; take heed of despising it, either directly, or
interpretatively. Who has despised such a day? (says the Prophet),
intimating, that none ought to despise it, none has any just reason to despise
it.

2. But secondly, Do what is your duty in such a day: you will say, What is
that? I will open it in three things: 1. Use the means you have. 2. Exercise a
faith in God, beyond the probable effect of those means. 3. Make up in prayer,
what you will want in action, through a want of means. Of each of these a word
or two.

1. Use those means and grounds of hope which you have. If David has but a
sling and a stone to go out against Goliath with, yet he will use them. Means
that have a natural virtue in them, or a divine institution, have Gods stamp
upon them, and must be used, leaving the event and success unto God: we must
neither idolize means, by attributing the divine Efficiency to them; nor yet
tempt God by a neglect of them, when God affords us them. You shall observe God
sometimes commanding the use of means, which had no rational tendency to the
production of the effect: as what influence could the Israelites blowing with
Rams-horns, and the Army encompassing the City seven days, have upon the walls
of Jericho; yet the Israelites were bound to use them, because they had the
stamp of a divine Institution upon them. It is much the same case, when they
have a natural virtue, or a rational tendency; there is a divine stamp too,
though of a different nature: what means are proper must be used, how mean
soever they appear in our eyes. What proportion was there betwixt Jonathan and
his Armor-bearer, and the whole Garrison of the Philistines, between Jeroboams
Army, and Abijahs? This but four hundred, the other eight hundred thousand;
between the Army of Asia, and that of the Ethiopians and Lubims, 2 Chronicles. 14.
God often works, yea, he ordinarily works by small means, and Providence
brings forth its great work in the day of man's small things. If we be sure that
we are in Gods way, and about his work, let the means be what they will, if
lawful, and rational, it is our duty to use them; God must be honored in his
own Institutions, and sought in his own way: though the means be small, and our
humane hopes small; yet if we expect Gods blessing, this mercy must be sought
in the use of those means which the Providence of God lays before us.

2. But secondly, The duty of a Christian will lie much in the exercise of his
Faith in God, beyond the probability of the means. This is the great duty of a
Christian, and the very end which God aims at in cutting us short of means
many times. I think we may say, Vbi media deficiunt ibi fides incipit; where
means begin to fail, there faith begins to work: Where we are out of sight, as
to means, there is a room for faith; For it is (says the Apostle) the evidence
of things not seen: By faith, here I mean, a trusting and relying upon God, as
a God able and faithful. But to open this a little more clearly to you: I will
show you, 1. In what cases we may warrantably exercise a faith in God beyond
the virtue, and probability of means. 2. What means we may use for the help of
our faith in this case. 3. What encouragements we may take to our selves in
such a case to set our faith on work.

1 Quest. In what cases may a Christian exercise faith in God for the
accomplishment, beyond the virtue, efficacy and probability of humane means, to
be used in order to it?

1. To this I answer, The object of faith must be a Promise. It is ridiculous
to talk of an exercise of faith in God, for an accomplishment, for which we
have no word to warrant us in the expectation of it: But now, a Promise may be
either particular, or General; of old many had: particular persons, and the
Nation of the Jews had particular promises made to them by God immediately, or
mediately by his Prophets; we have no such, God has left us unto his written
Word. There are many general promises, which shall be made good still to
particular Churches and persons: Hence is our difficulty to conclude what it is
we may exercise a faith in God, for bringing to pass. To direct you a little,

1. Where you have a particular promise, the case is plain. Some such there
are, as for the destruction of Antichrist, etc.

2. In the want of a special particular Promise, a general promise is a
sufficient object for our faith. General promises made to the Church and people
of God, are applicable to particular Churches, and particular Saints.

3. Every Precept does imply a Promise: God has certainly promised a blessing
upon the doing of that which he has commanded us to do; no man serves God for
nothing.

4 Whatsoever issue certainly conduces to the glory of God, is under a
Promise: God has resolved to glorify himself, and he orders all his actions
in order to that end.

The substance of all this amounts to thus much: We may exercise a faith in
God, and trust in him for accomplishing by his Providence whatsoever in his
Word, he has either more particularly, or generally promised: or whatsoever he
has commanded us to act in tendency unto, or whatsoever does certainly tend to
the glorifying of his great and holy Name. Now if any thing of this nature be
upon the wheel, although we see the present visible means in order to the
accomplishment of it be small, and in all appearance disproportioned to the
greatness of the event; yet a Christian using what lawful means the Providence
of God lays before him, may warrantably trust in God for the exerting a further
power for the accomplishment of it, than is in the means which at present are
apportioned to it. But this is now an hard thing to us. Let me therefore
secondly, direct you what you should do in a day of small things, for the
advantaging of your faith in this noble Exercise. I shall offer but two things
in the Case:

1. Keep your Eye as much off the means, and as much upon God as you can. We
have so much of sense and reason in us, that we are very prone from one or
other of them to take all our measures about future events. If we would keep
our hearts steady in a time of such exigencies as these, we must shut the Eyes
both of our sense and reason. Faith credits a Proposition, neither upon the
demonstrations of the one of these, nor the conclusions of the other; but the
mere authority of God. Men count it wisdom when they are upon precipices, never
to look downward, but upward; if they look downward, their weak heads are apt
to be giddy. Christians in such stresses of Providence as these are, have
nothing else to do: if they look downward, their sense, their reason, says,
how can these things be? If God would make windows in heaven (says that
Nobleman) these things could not be. Our poring upon means in the day of our
small things hinders the exercise of our faith in God. If the foundations be
destroyed (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 11.3,) what can the righteous do? Means
are the foundations of our natural hopes: now if these be destroyed, if there
be little or nothing of these, what can we do? Wicked men are indeed at their
wits-ends, they despond and despair; but says the Psalmist, v. 4, The Lord is
in his holy temple; the Lords throne is in heaven, his eyes see, his eyelids
try the children of men God is still where he was, and has the same power, the
same knowledge of things, the same rule and dominion. Twice in Scripture Abraham
is propounded to us as a noble Example; and a father of the faithful in this
thing, Romans 4. God had promised him a Son, a Son of his Wife Sarah; he grew to
be an hundred years old, his Wife many years past child bearing; here was no
means: yet Abraham believes for a Child, and he was not weak in the faith
(says the Apostle), Romans 4.18, 19, 20. How does he behave himself? The Apostle
tells you, That he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an
hundred years old, nor yet the deadness of Sarahs womb; he staggered not at the
Promise, but was strong in faith giving glory to God; being fully persuaded
that what he had promised, he was able to perform. Abraham, that he might keep
up his heart, fixed on the promise; he considered not the nothingness or
improbability of the means; he considered nothing but the power, and
faithfulness of God. God had said it, there was a promise for it, a promise
from him who could not lie: then he considers, that he who had promised was
able also to perform: an honest faithful man may sail in his promise, because
he may not be able to perform; but as God was faithful, so he was also able; he
keeps his Eye off means, fixed upon God. So again, Heb. 11.17, 18, 19, By faith
Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac, and he that had received the
promise offered up his only begotten son; of whom it was said, that in Isaac
shall thy seed be called, accounting that God was able to raise him up even
from the dead. Abraham had a promise, that in Isaac his seed should be called.
God calls Abraham with his own hand to slay Isaac, he could not but have such
thoughts as these: Lord, if Isaac be gone, where is thy promise? what becomes
of thy word? how shall my seed be called in him? how shall I be the father of
the Jewish Nation, if Isaac be he, in whom my seed must be called, and he be
dead before he has a child? He had nothing to relieve him under these thoughts
but this, That God was able to raise him from the dead: hither he flies, and
keeps up his faith in the Promise, by turning his eye off from the means, and
merely considering the power and faithfulness of God. You shall find Asa doing
thus, 2 Chronicles. 14.9, 10, 11: Asa had but an Army of five hundred thousand:
Zerah the Ethiopian, comes out against him with an Army of a million, and
three hundred Chariots, there was double the number he had: If he had looked
upon the means, he must have desponded; how should five hundred thousand deal
with ten hundred thousand? but he looks off the means, and fixes his Eye upon
God. Ver. 11, He cries unto the Lord, and says, Lord, it is nothing with thee
to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O Lord
our God, for we rest on thee; and in thy Name we go against this multitude: O
Lord, thou art our God, let not man prevail against thee.

Secondly, In such a day consider the experiences of Gods people: consider what
they did, and how they sped. What they did, that you heard in the instance both
of Abraham, and Asa. They shut the Eyes of their sense and natural reason; they
took off their Eyes from all consideration of means, and eyed only the
certainty of the Promise; the faithfulness of God, and the power of God. So did
Abraham, so did Asa. Then 2. Consider how they sped: Abraham had a Son at the
set-time; Abraham had his Son reprieved, when the knife was at his throat, and
his seed was called in Isaac. The Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and
before Juda, etc. says the Text, 2 Chronicles. 14.12, 13, 14. Now it is a great
encouragement to us in the exercises of our faith, to consider the experiences
of other of the Servants of God in their exercises of Faith. Our fathers
trusted in thee (says David, Psalm 22); they trusted, and were delivered. The
strength of this lies in the stedfastness and unchangeableness of God: he is
the same, his name is I am. David as to Goliath, raised up his faith upon his
former experiences in slaying the Lion and the Bear, 1 Samuel 17, and upon the
experience of others, Psalm 22: nothing is more conducive, to help and relieve
a Christian, weak as to his faith, in the day either of small things, as to the
Church of God, in which he is considered as a member; or in the day of small
things as to his own personal concerns. God chooses the day of small things to
be seen in: it is the day which Providence chooses to show it self great in.
And you may thus advantage your faith in God in such a day. Now for your
further encouragement in this exercise of faith in God, beyond the visibility
or apparent probability of means, I shall offer these things to your
consideration.

1. That it is Gods ordinary time and method of working. This is that which I
discoursed to you in justification of the Observation, and proved it to you
from a plenty of instances, and therefore shall not enlarge here.

2. That God never works with so much advantage to his own glory, as in such
a time when he fulfilleth his Word in the day of man's small things. We never
need doubt Gods pursuing of the great ends of his glory; He does all things for
himself, his glory is the end of all his great works. Now I say, God never
works more for the advantage of his glory than in such exigents: then is his
power, and the greatness thereof most eminently made known: Then shall his
people more see, and confess the Arm of the Lord.

3. Consider (thirdly) this is the proper work of faith. It is true, we ought
to exercise Faith in the use of means, let them be never so great, never so
probable for the accomplishment of the the End: but the proper place for faith,
is, where means are weak, or wanting, to put the Soul in hope against hope. It
is the evidence of things not seen: as patience is an habit of grace given the
Soul for a day of adversity, so faith is made for an hour of sensible darkness.

4. Lastly, Nothing so pleases and engages God, as such an exercise of faith.
Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.11, uses it as an argument with God: Help us, O Lord, for we
rest on thee, and in thy Name we go against this great multitude. The next
Verse says, God smote the Ethiopians, 2 Chronicles. 13.18. You will find that
Jeroboam's Army was full double to the number of Abijah's: and could not have
been conquered without some extraordinary influence of God upon Abijah's side.
Now would you know what engaged the Lord of Hosts. ver. 18, Thus the children
of Israel were brought under at that time; and the men of Judah prevailed,
because they relied upon the Lord God of their fathers. See the contrary, 2 Chronicles. 16.7; Hanani the Seer comes to Asa, and tells him, Because thou have
relied on the King of Syria, and not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore the
Host of the King of Syria is escaped out of thy hands. Thus I have showed you a
second thing, in which I conceive the duty of a Christian lies in the day of
small things, viz. The exercise of a faith in God, beyond the virtue and
probability of the means.

3. A third piece of his duty is, To beware of the use of sinful means in order
to the accomplishment of what he desires. It is a great vanity to which
through our misapprehension of means we are very subject: if we want lawful
means, to make use of unlawful, thinking to add to the day of small things this
way. Abraham failed in this, going in to Hagar: so did Asa, in the instance
beforementioned, though he acted otherwise, when the Ethiopians and Lubims were
against him. Indeed, nothing is more contrary to faith than this; it speaks a
plain distrust in God: nothing is more improper and needless, supposing the
truth of this Observation.

4. The last thing to be done in such a case, is Prayer to God, to supply by
his arm what is wanting in humane means. To this Asa, and Abijah, and all the
servants of God in such distresses have had recourse. God will be found in a
way of Prayer.

SERMON XVIII.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am pointing you to some observable things in the motions of Divine
Providence, though the way of God in it be in many things unsearchable, and
past finding out. Three Observations I have already made, justified them by
plenty of instances, and endeavored to give you some reasonable account of
them, and suited some Application to them. I proceed now to a fourth, which you
may take thus:

Observe. 4. The Providence of God as to its works, relating to his Church and
people, rarely as to circumstances answers the expectations, and confidences
of the best of Gods people. I will open it in two things:

1. God never fails the grounded expectations of his people, as to any thing
which he has promised. Psa. 9.18, The expectation of the poor shall not
perish. Their expectation is upon God, and their Souls wait for God, Psalm
62.5, and their expectation and confidence in him shall not fail; They that
trust in him shall not be ashamed. It is made the portion of a wicked man,
Prove. 11.7. Prove. 10.18, that his expectation shall perish; but the hope of the
righteous shall be gladness. The Wiseman says, His expectation shall not be
cut off, Prove. 23.18; The reason is plain, The expectation of good men is an
expectation of faith, and the object of faith is the word of God; and heaven
and earth shall pass away, before one tittle of Gods word, be it of promise, or
precept, shall fail: Many promises as to the Jews, and as to Gospel-Churches
are fulfilled; some are yet to be fulfilled: Antichrist is yet to be destroyed;
The Jews (doubtless) are to be called in a more plentiful manner than they have
yet been. There are many Scriptures that seem to assure a more united,
peaceable, glorious state of the Church. Now these Promises, are matter of Gods
peoples expectations; and as to the things promised, the expectations of the
poor people of God shall not perish for ever: the things shall certainly be
accomplished. If their hopes, and expectations, and confidences might fail; the
word of God, the truth of God might fail: but this cannot be.

2. But secondly, as to circumstances you shall observe, God rarely answers
the confidences and expectations of the best of men, unless they be part of the
Promise. By circumstances, I understand whatsoever is not essential to the
thing promised. Particularly, 1. Time, when a thing is done. 2. Place, where a
thing is to be done. 3. Particular persons, by whom, as Instruments, God will
do his work. 4. Particular means, or actions, by which the things should be
brought to pass. These and such like I call Circumstances, as to which Gods
Providence often fails, not only the earnest desires and expectations, but the
highest persuasions and confidences of men; yea even of such as fear him.

1. As to persons. Who, if he had not exactly considered the Promise, subjoined
to what God had said, they should four hundred years be servants to the
Egyptians, (and it was not like Joseph should indeed live so long); but I say,
if he had not considered that, but only received a notion of the delivery of
Israel out of Egypt, would not have thought Joseph should have been the man who
should have given conduct to that motion? Who would have expected it from
Moses, a poor Hebrew child, exposed to the next tide in a thin Ark of
Bulrushes? yet by Moses, Providence did the work. When Moses had done that
work, and given them forty years conduct in the Wilderness, and was grown an
experienced Commander; who would not have thought, and expected that he should
have led them over Jordan, and given them possession of the promised Land? But
Moses must die, and his servant Joshua must do it. In the captivity of Babylon,
the believing Jews doubtless had great expectation of a deliverance, according
to the Promises so often repeated by the Prophet: and unquestionably they had
their expectations upon this, and that person, probable to have done it; but
who could have dreamed that Cyrus should be the man? The Army of Israel under
Saul, might reasonably have expected that some or other of the great Soldiers,
which were at that time doubtless in the Army of the Israelites, should have
encountered Goliath; Who could have thought of a Shepherd's coming and doing of
it, with a sling and a stone? There is a Promise under the New Testament for
the bringing down of Antichrist, the ruin of Babylon: how often have men's
expectations been upon this, or that, or the other Prince to have done it? and
to what strange confidences have some, even good people grown? that this, or
that person should be the man, should pull Antichrist out of his Seat: we see
hither to God has failed all their expectations; the person appears not that
shall do that great work; and when he shall appear, it is likely that it shall
be one never talked of, never thought of.

Secondly, As to Time: We have a strange curiosity to know the times and
seasons, which is not for us to know, but are reserved only to God. Tell us
(say the Disciples) when shall these things be, and what shall be the sign of
thy coming, and of the end of the World, Matthew. 24.3? Acts 1.6, Will thou at
this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? There are three great Promises, or
four, concerning the Churches of God, the fulfilling of which we yet expect, 1.
That for the destruction of Antichrist, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8. 2. For the full
conversion of the Jews, Romans 11.26, (to speak nothing of many other Texts which
look that way). 3. Christ's second coming, of which you know the Scripture
speaks plentifully. 4. A more calm, and flourishing, and peaceable state of
the Church; which many Scriptures also seem to look toward: whether for a
thousand years precisely, under the conduct of Christ's coming personally, or
no, has, you know, been much disputed: but the generality of the most
inquisitive Divines into the will of God, do think there shall be a more
peaceable and calm state of the Church of God. Now it is strange to observe the
curiosity of many in searching out the precise time when these things, or some
of them, should begin, or be. Some have fixed this year; some another. How many
agreed in the year 1666, is known to those any thing acquainted with books: we
see the Providence of God has hitherto failed all men's conjectures; and still
it holds, that of these days and hours knows no man; the best Prophets have
proved but vain guessers.

I might give you a-like instances as to Places and Means: but you will
generally observe it, That the Providence of God rarely, as to circumstances,
suteth any of our fancies. And the same thing we shall observe as to particular
cases of Christians, who are ready to think, that if ever, by such an
instrument at such a time, or by such a means, they must, or shall obtain their
desired mercy. They obtain it probably, but by quite other means, and at other
times, and by other instruments than they fancied, and such perhaps as they
never thought of; the thing is plain, and evidenced from a daily experience:
let us a little enquire into the Reason of it. Has God a pleasure in
frustrating the expectations of his people? or exposing them to the worlds
censures, as persons pretending to more acquaintance than they indeed have with
the Counsels of God? Surely no: But God by this method of his Provdience does
two things: 1. He punishes the rashness and vanity of his peoples spirits. 2.
He more consulteth the glory of his own name.

1. He by this means chastises the vanity and rashness of his people: there is
a great deal of vanity in peoples spirits in this particular. Let me show you
the great evil of this in some few particulars.

1. There is in it an unwarrantable curiosity. Job tells us, chap. 11.12, That
vain man would be wise, though he be like a wild asses colt. We have a great
itch after knowledge of things, which God has hidden from us. Now this is a
great Error, and you shall observe it continually checked by our Savior, when
any thing of it discovered it self even in his best Disciples: when they said
to him, Will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? He says unto
them, It is not for you to know the times and seasons, Acts 1.6, 7. When Peter
says to him, John 21.21, 22, Lord, what shall this man do? Mark our Saviors
answer; If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou
me. When the Disciples asked him, Matthew. 24.3, Tell us, when shall these things
be, and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?
Jesus answers and says unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you. God of
old had an Ark into which none might look. There are secrets of his Will, which
are as yet the Ark of God: we would fain be looking into this Ark, there is our
vanity. God chastens us in it with disappointments, that we may learn, not to
pry into Gods secrets; things which we cannot see, because God has hidden
them; the things are sure, the vision is certain, and there is an appointed
time, but that appointed time is not published.

2. There is as to these things an ungrounded confidence, which God also
chastises by these disappointments: There is nothing more worthy of a
Christian, than a believing God upon his word, and a relying upon him for the
fulfilling of it. There is nothing more idle, nothing more unworthy of him,
than to be confident, where he has no word to set his foot upon. Now such a
confidence as this, is the confidence of people as to circumstances. It is
true, as to the Jews deliverance out of Egypt, and out of Babylon, the promise
did not only extend to the thing, but to the time: the four hundred years for
the first were named, and the 70 years for the latter; yea, and the particular
person Cyrus, by whom God would deliver them. But it is not so as to the
promises which we live in expectation of the fulfilling of, as to the Church:
God has nowhere revealed the year for the ruin of Antichrist, nor for the
calling of the Jews; nor when the halcion-days of the Church shall begin, or
when Christ shall come to the last judgment. If people will expect any of these
things shall begin, or be at such a time, in such a year, by such persons,
their Confidences are without ground or bottom, their pretended faith but a
rude and bold presumption, a rush growing up without any mire, and a flag
growing up without water; and it is but reasonable, that God should chastise
these vain Confidences.

3. There is in these things a sinful limitation of God. It is laid to the
charge of the Israelites, That they limited the Holy One of Israel, Psalm.
78.41. When men tie up God to their circumstances in the fulfilling of his
promises, or his threatenings, they limit God. Now this is a great sin, God is a
free and a powerful Agent, he works by means, or without means; sometimes by
means that seem probable, sometimes by such as have no appearance of
probability to produce the effect: he can work how, and when, and by whom he
pleases: he that fixes God to his circumstances, secretly says, It must be
thus, or no way; by this means, and by no other, now or never. What ground else
is there for the expectation or confidence, if God has no where revealed his
Will as to particular circumstances, only as to the accomplishment of the thing
in general? God will have us know we are not to limit him.

4. Such expectations and confidences are usually but introductions to a
greater unbelief. God has promised the things in the plain letter of
Scripture: the Vision is sure; vain man would be wise, and search out when
these things shall be, and where accomplished, and by what instruments and
means; at length he fixes his eye upon some instruments at work in the world,
or some means which he fancieth probable to bring these words into a Being.
Upon these he raises up to himself high expectations, and grows very
confident, that in such a year the thing will be; and such a person shall be
Gods Instrument, and by such means he will effect it: It proves no such thing.
What a temptation this often proves to men, to believe nothing of the thing;
but because they have deceived themselves in expectations and confidences, for
which they have no ground, to think also that God has deceived them, and there
shall no such thing at all be as he has promised?

5. And lastly, These expectations and confidences prove oftentimes very great
temptations to the use of unlawful means, in order to the bringing about of
what we would have, and know God will bring to pass; and do but fancy that he
will do it at such, or such a time, or by such and such instruments. The story
of the Anabaptists in Germany is a dreadful story to this purpose; There is a
world of evil in these vain confidences and expectations, and consequent to
them, which God sometimes punishes in a more smart and severe manner, as he
did to those Rusticks, that so much disturbed the Civil peace in Germany; but
generally punishes by disappointments, to bring us to a regular trust and
confidence in him, where we have a plain and sure word to fix our foot upon.

Thus I have showed you the reasonableness of these cross motions of Divine
Providence, in point of Divine Justice; that God might punish peoples sinnings
in them, and caution others against the like guilt.

2. Let me (in the second place) show you the reasonableness of it in order to
the glory of God; which I have often told you is the great end which God aims
at in all his great Works, whether of Creation, or of Providence.

1. The work is more eminently seen to be the Lords, although he in effecting
it, makes use of instruments and humane means. God does not always, yea, he
does not ordinarily work miraculously, but makes use of rational means, and
works in, with, and by them. Now if God in these workings should make use of
means, and instruments, and circumstances, which our fancies prescribe unto
him; we should be apt to overlook the mighty Power and Efficiency of God in the
means; for the more we have a prospect of an event in the second Causes before
it comes, the less we see of the first Cause in it. But when we see our selves
disappointed in all our expectations, as to time, persons, means,
circumstances, and the thing brought about by persons we thought not of, at a
time we looked not for it, by means not at all in our eyes as probable to
effect it; the more is the hand and power of God seen in the effect, while we
cry out, This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

2. Again, God has more Glory from the Prayers, Humiliations, and Praises of
his people. By these things God is glorified, as his Will is done, as his Power
is recognized. Disappointments produce more extraordinary Prayers and
Humiliations: when we meet with them, we see the folly of our rashness,
ungrounded confidences; and see reason to lie low before the Lord, with more
fervent Prayers to God, to take his work into his own hand, and having
manifested to us our follies, now to declare his own wisdom, that having broken
our arms of flesh, he would now make bare his own holy arm; and the fulfilling
of his word at last by means and circumstances not known to us, produce
praises, adorings, and admirings of his infinite wisdom, and further
confidences in God for the time to come; when we see arms of flesh broken, and
find our bruised reeds and broken staffs but running into our hands, and
wounding us, instead of helping us. I have done with the Doctrinal part of this
Observation, I come now to the Application of it.

Use 1. The first Use may be, Not to wonder at disappointments of this nature,
and to take heed they be no temptations to us. Here are you see two branches:
1. Not to wonder at them. There is nothing more ordinary; it is not often that
a Church, or body of people, or a particular soul, or person, obtains any
great mercy or deliverance in the way they looked for it, or at that moment of
time they expected it in. God delights to surprise his peoples hearts with joy
and gladness: we are sick, and we are ready to think such a person, and by such
a means, must heal us: the cure comes quite another way. Naaman thought the
Prophet would have come, and laid his hand upon his leprous body: the Prophet
bids him go and wash in the waters of Jordan. We are in terrors, in troubles of
mind, etc. and we are ready to think, such, or such a Minister must speak to
us, and then we shall be relieved; he comes, and applies what help he can; we
are yet disquieted, and find no relief at all; the mercy comes at last quite
another way: Mercy comes to Gods People, as Judgment (ordinarily) comes upon
sinners, in a way, and upon a day they looked not for it: when with Agag they
say, Surely the bitterness of death is past: I say, so mercies ordinarily come
to Gods People, in an unlooked-for time, in a way, and by persons they looked
not for it by.

2. Let not such disappointments be temptations to you: Let them not be
temptations to make you distrust the promises, or to use any unlawful and
indirect means to obtain your desires. It is not God that has deceived you:
you have but deceived your selves: God has made you certain promises of the
things; you will limit him to do it by such a time, by such means, by such
persons and instruments: The promises express no such things, but have left God
to his liberty. You have no reason to distrust Gods word, because you have
disappointed your selves.

Use 2. Let us make this use of the Observation, To embrace the promises, and
to depend upon God for the fulfilling of them, without limiting him as to
circumstances. Let us do this as to those great promises which are behind to be
fulfilled: as to the destruction of Antichrist, the calling of the Jews, the
second coming of Christ, the more happy and calm state of the Church, etc. The
Scripture seems clear as to the things, that they shall be; but it is far from
being clear, that it shall be in such a year, or by such a mean or instrument;
there is nothing particular of this nature for a good Christian to set the foot
of his faith upon. I have showed you, there is a great vanity of Christians in
these things. I know Christians have a very great curiosity to search dark
Prophecies, to find out the particular circumstances for these things: I cannot
commend their diligence; it is much like the hard labor and study of those
that have been studying the Philosophers stone; a great deal of money, and much
more precious time has been spent about it, nothing yet effected; no more has
there been in these things: men have wearied themselves in vain, and their
study has been but labor and travel. 2. Again, As to promises that concern
our particular souls, for comfort, for a victory over temptations, etc. they
are many, they are exceeding sweet; but they are general, not to this or that
individual person, but to such as love and fear the Lord, to persons under such
or such qualifications; they are exceeding sweet, but they are not made with
circumstances. God will have his people trust him, he will have them wait for
him. Take heed either of saying, These things shall never be: this is to give
the lie to the God of Truth. God says thou shall live: thou say, I shall
dye, I shall fall by the hand of this temptation: and take heed of saying, If
it ever be, it must be by such a time, by such a Minister, it would have been
by such a Minister, etc. This is to limit the Holy One of Israel; thou know
not the ways of God, it is a knowledge too high, too deep for thee: Providence
usually brings home, both the promises to the Saints, and the threatenings to
the Sinners, in a way quite different from what they looked for, or it may be
expected it in.

I have spoken enough already to take Christians off this; but yet because it
is a great point, a thing wherein we are prone to slip, and wherein our
slipping is more than ordinarily dangerous: let me spend a little time further
to argue you out of this vanity, and to direct your Souls in the expectation of
the fulfilling of Divine Promises.

1. Consider how much the strength of your souls is spent, and how vainly, in
the expectations of your own fancies. As the expectation of that for substance,
which God never promised, is but the expectation of our own fancy: so neither
is the expectation of what God has promised under such circumstances as are no
part of the promse. Now the strength of our Souls runs much out in such
expectations: Let a man but fancy, that in such a year Babylon shall fall, The
Jews shall be called; The thousand years shall begin, That by such a time the
Church in distress, or his Soul in distress, shall be delivered: It is strange
to observe, how the Soul will spend it self upon such a Notion; the thoughts of
men run upon it, their wits are bent to interpret dark Scriptures into their
own fancies: it presently becomes the main article of their faith, and the
great argument of their hope, and the whole subject of their discourses; and at
last (possibly) they are enforced to acknowledge, that they had a lie in their
right hand. The Prophet uses the expressions upon an higher argument; but yet
they are applicable here: Why spend you your strength for that which is not
bread, and your labor for that which will not profit? There is nothing that is
bread for a Soul, but the Word of God; it has pitied my Soul many times to
observe many (otherwise I hope serious persons), how they have spent themselves
in such Enquiries and expectations as these.

Consider (secondly) how the faith of your souls is often endangered and shaken
by your disappointments in these things. I do but name this again; for I before
enlarged upon it. How ready are we to dis-believe the Promise wholly, because
it comes not in the circumstances that we fancied it would come! The Apostle
was aware of this great Evil; and therefore when some had been prophesying in
the Church of the Thessalonians, of a sudden coming of Christ to Judgment, he
writes to that Church, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2, Now we beseech you brethren, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that
you be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter as from us; as if the day of Christ were at hand. Let no man
deceive you by any means. The Apostle saw that this hasty and ungrounded
expectation of Christ's coming, under such circumstances as he had now here
revealed, did not only tend to the troubling of Christians when they saw
themselves disappointed, but also to the shaking of their faith, as to the
thing it self: and therefore beseeches them, by the coming of our Lord Jesus,
and by their gathering together unto him: what can be the meaning of that, but
this? If ever you expect the joyful coming of Christ, and would keep your faith
steady as to it; if ever you would be with us gathered unto him, concern not
your selves in those who would limit the Promises to the circumstances of their
own fancying: Let them pretend Revelations of the Spirit, or wrest the word of
God; yet faith the Apostle, let them not deceive you. You have an eminent
instance of this shaking of Christians faith, so consequential to this limiting
of God to circumstances, Luke 22.31. There was a Promise of redeeming Israel:
Christ had been crucified, and three days were passed, and they had heard
nothing tending to their expectation: say they, We trusted it had been he which
should have redeemed Israel: and besides all this, to day is the third day
since these things were done. Their faith began to shake as to the main
Promise, because Providence in the accomplishment of them, did not fit it with
the circumstances which they had fancied.

Thirdly, Consider, it much hinders that duty of waiting upon God, which the
Scripture so often presses upon us. I need not mention particular Scriptures:
there is hardly any one duty more pressed upon Christians in Scripture, than
this patient waiting upon, and for God. Now how does that Soul wait upon God,
that limits God to his circumstances of time, place, means, persons? he indeed
waits upon those circumstances a while; but when he is disappointed as to
them, he knows not how to wait upon God any longer. The Soul which truly
waits on God, leaves circumstances unto him. You will say unto me in the
next place, What then is the duty of a Christian with respect to the Promises,
whether concerning the Church, or his own soul in particular? I answer, to
receive and embrace them, and be persuaded of the truth of them, and leave unto
God the way, time, manner, and circumstances for fulfilling of them, which he
has not revealed: going on in the way of our plain duty, till God shall please
to give a being to his Word. You shall see your duty, Heb. 11.13, These all
died in the faith, not having received the promises; but having seen them afar
off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they
were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. What promises were these? The
promises of Canaan, of the Messiah. Abraham saw Christ's day, and rejoiced
(says our Savior); They received these promises in their ears, God revealed
his will for these things; they saw them afar off, as things like to come to
pass many years after; they were persuaded of them, of the truth of them, that
God would give them a being: they embraced them with thankful believing hearts,
and lived so, as that they confessed themselves strangers and pilgrims of the
Earth; in a constant course of self-denial, and fulfilling the will of God, and
in a crucifixion to the World: they never stood troubling themselves to search
out the particular time, and circumstances, when, and which way God would do
these things: but kept in the faith of the Promise; leaving circumstances unto
God: Let us go and do likewise. I shall conclude this discourse with a Text of
our Saviors, Luke 17.20, 21, And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when
the Kingdom of God should come? He answered and said, the Kingdom of God comes
not with observation: Neither shall they say, Lo here, or Lo there, for behold
the Kingdom of God is within you. Let me a little open these words to you: The
Kingdom of God, that is, the great things which concern the Kingdom of God;
these are not brought to pass, and come not with Observation, (...), that is the
Original phrase, we translate with Observation. There are diverse
interpretations given of that Text: Not with a superstitious observation of
days, months, and years; so some make the sense, according to that of the
Apostle to the Galatians, You observe days, and months, and years: I am afraid
of you, etc. And Romans 14, 17, The kingdom of God is not in meat, and drink, but
righteousness and peace. Some understand it of external Observations of meat
and drink, such as God had commanded to the Jews: but the most, and most
valuable Interpreters agree in one of these two senses: which indeed well
considered, both make but one.

1. So as it may or can be observed. Thus Brugensis, Piscator, and Beza, who
indeed translates it, Ita ut observari possit; so as it can be observed.
Theophylact understands it of the time; so as the time cannot be fixed, nor the
place neither. It follows, Neither shall they say, Lo here is Christ, or lo
there.

2. Not with a worldly Pomp, Splendour or Ceremony. Thus Stella, Chemnitius,
Erasmus, Piscator, etc. This is the same indeed with the other: and therefore
they generally add, ut observari possit, we do not use to observe the coming of
a Kingdom, but by observing some Pomp, Splendour, etc. preliminary to it. Now
(says Christ) the Kingdom of God comes not so as it can be observed, it
steals upon men and surprizeth them: it comes not by observation. Christ
indeed has given us general signs of his second coming, and of the end of the
World, etc. But he has also added, Of that day and hour knows no man. I
suppose the same thing is to be said as to the Promises for calling the Jews:
for the expected peace, and tranquillity of the Church of God, when the usual
years shall begin, etc. Believe the thing, pray, wait, that is all which we
have to do in the case.

SERMON XIX.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am yet proceeding in recommending to you some further Observations I have
made upon the motions of Actual Providence, in the execution of the eternal
Counsels and Purposes of God; and fulfilling his Word, whether of Promise or
Threatening. Four I have done with: A Fifth I shall now offer and discourse a
little upon it.

5th Observe. The Actual Providence of God, in the production of its great
works, relating to his Church, or the particular members of it, does ordinarily
suit or fit the circumstances of the world, or the circumstrances of particular
persons, to the work he intends to produce.

I say Ordinarily. Every Rule must have some Exception: especially such Rules,
as upon observation we fix concerning the methods of Divine Providence. The
infinitely wise God treads not always in the same steps; I say, in his great
works relating either to the Church, or to such particular persons as are
members of it: These two, I before told you were the great Objects of Special
Providence. As Canaan of old was the Land which God cared for, upon which his
Eye was, from the beginning of the year to the end of it: so his Church still
is, and to the end of the World will be the object of his more special care;
and with reference to which, Providence produces its most remarkable works:
Hence you shall observe throughout all the Scripture, though mention be made of
such other Sons as the Patriarchs had, and other Nations and Princes
contemporary with those of the Jews, are named; yet very little of their story
is recorded, and that only subservient to the story that was to keep a Record
of Gods dealings with his own people. This makes me restrain the Observation to
the Church and Members of it; and that which I recommend to your remark is,
Gods ordinary fitting the circumstances of the adjacent world (which lies round
about the Church, as the mountains about Jerusalem, or the Nations of old
about Canaan) to what he is producing in his Church; and the particular
circumstances of persons, to the work God has to produce, more eminent with
relation unto them.

1. I will show you this, with reference to the productions of Providence,
relating to the collective body of his people, which we call the Church.

2. With reference to particular persons, that have relation to this body, in
matters of an outward concern.

3. With reference unto the souls of his people, in matters of a more inward
and spiritual concern.

1. With reference to the great products of Providence relating to the body of
his people, called the Church.

1. The Jews (you know, under the Old Testament) were the only people that
could lay claim to this great Name, To whom God was nigh, in the midst of whom
he dwelt, whom he so often delivered, and for whom he so signally engaged.
Great works of Providence we read of relating to them: their deliverance out of
Egypt, and conduct through the wilderness; their bringing out of Babylon after
their seventy years Captivity, and re-building their Temple and City. The
sending of the Messiah. When the Providence of God sets about these works, let
us observe how God fitted circumstances to these great products, making every
thing beautiful in his time (as Solomon says in Eccles. 3.11.) In the bringing
of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, God did two things: 1. He brought out
the Jews out of a Nation where they had been bred, and lived some hundreds of
years: His Providence now fitteth circumstances to this; it suffers the King
of Egypt most miserably to oppress them, so as they were weary of their lives.
It is hardly else conceivable, that they would willingly have quitted their
possessions, and their Native-Countrey, to obtain a land promised 400 years
before; and that not without overcoming the difficulties of an houling
wilderness, and many years fighting. The Providence of God also destroys
Egypt by Ten successive plagues, else the King and his Servants would never
have let so many 100000 persons go out of their Dominions. Circumstances were
fitted by God to the design of his Providence: they must be grievously
oppressed, that they may be made willing to go; and Pharaohs People and Nation
must be destroyed, that he may suffer them to get into a body for a march, and
furnish them with a viaticum for their journey. Pharaoh and his Army must be
destroyed; alas, the Israelites are in no circumstances fit to fight them: the
Sea shall divide it self, they shall see the Israelites go through safely as on
dry ground: this shall allure them to follow them, then the waters shall return
and swallow them up.

2. God brings this people out of Babylon: he had promised, that after 70 years
they should come out; Cyrus, he conquers Babylon just at that time, and it was
his interest to let them go, as much as it was the interest of the Kings of
Babylon to keep them there: He thus endeared the Jews to him, and thus
transplanted a Colony; yea, and secured Jerusalem to his obedience, which was
before under the Command of the Babylonians, who were his Enemies.

3. The sending of the Messiah was a great product of Divine Providence: he was
to introduce a new way of worship, to preach (what to them in their corrupted
state) was a new Doctrine: had the Jews been in their height, this would by no
means have been endured by them: See how God fitteth the worlds circumstances,
to this great product of Providence: The scepter is departed from Judah, and
the lawgiver from his feet: the Jews are become Tributaries to the Romans, and
under their power; so they were not so brisk as they would have been: There is
a general peace over all the world, so as the Romans were not so jealous of
making parties and factions: people were more at leisure to listen to the
Gospel, and Prince of peace. Now comes the Lord Jesus Christ. If we should
carry the business a little further, What great work has God ever done since,
in which we may not see a remarkable fitting of the worlds circumstances to the
production of it? I will instance but in one or two things, referring to the
Protestant-Reformation.

Our reformation you know was began in the time of Henry the Eight; How did God
fit our circumstances to it? King Henry shall fall out with the Pope, because
he will not allow his divorce, and so shall break with him, and set up a purer
course of Religion; it was hardly to have been imagined, how England should
have been freed from Popery at another time, by the advantage of the chief
Magistrates assistance.

There was a strange concurrence of Divine Providence in the reformation which
was begun in Germany. Luther was raised up, a man of a most invincible spirit
and courage: Printing was found out a-few years before in that very Country,
in 1440; by which means, Luther's, and others books were presently diffused
throughout all Europe, [ V. Sculteti annals, l. 1. c. 1.] The knowledge of Arts
and Learning, were just restored to the world, after the long darkness and
ignorance in which Popery had muffled the world. Many secret favorers of
Religion were admitted to great places in the Popish-Church, who either out of
favor to the reformed Religion, or out of love to their learning, showed great
kindness to the first Reformers: several great Princes of Germany were also
prepared; some possibly out of conscience, others out of principles of honor,
favoring and protecting Luther. In short, the Providence of God has hardly at
any time produced any great work, in the change of the State of the Church, or
of any Kingdom; but his fitting of the circumstances of the world to it, have
been strangely obvious and remarkable to every observing eye.

2. Let us, secondly, take a view of the Providence of God working as to
particular persons, with reference to things of a more outward concern: take it
in the instances of Joseph, of David, of Haman, of the three Children, and
Daniel. David was to be brought to be King over Israel and Judah; from a
Shepherds boy, to be a great Prince; he shall first kill Goliath; he shall be
sent for to Court, to drive away Saul's evil spirit with his Harp; he shall
marry, the Kings Daughter, and grow great with Jonathan. Joseph is to become a
great man in Egypt; he shall first be recommended to Pharaoh, grow great with
him, a famine shall come, he shall save much people alive; and thus be in great
honor, and in a capacity to serve his Fathers family. The Providence of God
designs to preserve the Jews, to advance Mordecai, to ruin Haman. An Hebrew
Lady, by a strange Providence shall come to be Queen, and one that shall be
Mordecai's Niece. Haman shall be found upon the bed with Esther, and mistaken
in his Complement to her, as if he had a design to force her, etc. Infinite are
the instances which might be brought.

3. Let us consider the motions of Providence with reference to the souls of
people, as to their best and most spiritual concerns. If God has much people
in Macedonia, St. Paul shall be called thither: he orders Ministers to
places, or particular persons to a Ministry proper for the work, in a strange
way many a time, when he has a design to do good to particular souls. But here
let me recommend one observation to you; When he designeth the trial of a Child
of his, with inward troubles and temptations, he usually fits it with an
unhealthy body, suited to such impressions; and when he designeth the restoring
of quiet and peace to the spirit, he ordinarily fits it with an healthy body:
Not that all the trouble and disquietudes of the spirit flows from the
indisposition of the body; the contrary is evident enough to any who diligently
observe Christians at such times, and may know many others under the same
kinds, and possibly greater degrees of bodily distempers, whose minds are not
so disturbed, who have no such temptations, etc. But seldom it is, but such
inward troubles are circumstanced with bodily disturbances; and so on the
contrary, it is rare to find a peaceful, quiet, rejoicing spirit; but it is
suited also with a freedom from bodily distempers, especially such as have an
influence upon the head, and affect that. But I shall enlarge no further upon
what is so evident to any who observes any thing of the motions of Divine
Providence.

Reas. Now the Reason of this is evident; Because, though the Providence of God
sometimes produces things miraculously; yet it ordinarily produces them by
the way of means: some means, although possibly not adequate, and fully
proportioned to the production. The Providence of God is a servant to his
Glory: that is the end for which it works, for which it always works, and can
work for no other end: but it does not always work for the glorifying of God in
the same Attribute: sometimes it glorifieth his Power, sometimes his Wisdom,
sometimes his Goodness and Mercy, etc. It glorified Gods Power in the
destruction of Pharaoh; he was ruined by the immediate supernatural hand of
God; but ordinarily the Providence of God works by means, and the Wisdom of
God is most eminently seen, in contriving, and ordering, and disposing means
unthought-of; and yet ordinarily the Power of God is also glorified, the means
being such as are very unlikely, or improbable to produce such an effect. Now
this being granted, that the most ordinary way of Gods working is by means,
little or much; there must be an ordering and preparation of them: and this is
the reason of Gods fitting adjacent circumstances to his work which he
produces; those circumstances, being the ordinary means, which God thinks fit
to make use of, to work in, with, and by. And here the great Power and Wisdom
of God is seen, in ordering the affairs of the world, so as they shall suit his
great designs and purposes, that men see reason to cry out, O the depth of the
wisdom and of the Counsel of God! So that, look as God did not bring man into
the World, till he had fitted the World for his use and Government; nor does
bring any creature (by his continued Creation) into the World, before its table
is prepared: the Fly, the Silkworm, etc. does not prevent its meat; so
neither does Gods work prevent the means, by which he designeth the
accomplishment of it. Thus every thing is brought forth in its time, and every
work of God is thus made glorious.

Secondly, God by this means, puts a wonderful beauty upon his works of
Providence. The beauty of any creature, you know, does not only lie in the
color of it, and the loveliness of that; but in the Symmetry and proportion of
all its parts. Hence our Eye judges sometimes a person that is of a good
complexion, to have little or nothing of beauty; but a good mixture of color,
with a good symmetry and proportion of parts, must concur to a perfect beauty.
Gods work is perfect, and his ways are Judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.4, and he is
excellent in working, Jer. 32.19. The glory of the Lord is much concerned, not
only in the goodness of his works; but in the perfection and beauty of it. Now
it adds much to the beauty of a work, when it is brought forth in a fit season,
and is as an apple of gold in a picture of silver. The unlook'd-for concurrence
of all circumstances to the production of any great work of God, makes it
appear very admirable in our Eyes.

Thirdly, God does by this means wonderfully glorify, both his Power and his
Wisdom, in the Eyes of the men of the World. 1. His power: when men see the
whole Creation sequacious to his Will and Counsel; that as soon as he begins,
and sets out in any work, there is a fudden change in the creature, and all of
them follow him in his paths. As the power of a great Prince is herein
magnified, all his Subjects possibly are secure and at quiet, and peace, and
think nothing of the Prince's counsels: But no sooner does he set up his
Standard, or cause his Drums to be beat up, but presently all his Subjects are
in arms, and ready to follow him, upon what designs he pleases to lead them.
This speaks now the great power and influence, this Prince has upon his
Subjects. So now, to observe the World as it were all at quiet, and minding no
such thing, and God then beginning some great work, and as it were setting up
his Standard; and it is no sooner up, but all men flock to it, as if it had
been a design laid amongst them. To make it plain by an instance; The whole
World almost was in a dead sleep of Popish-ignorance and superstition, and in
all humane appearance, none thought or dreamed of any Reformation: God no
sooner proclaims his design of Reformation, and uses Luther to set up his
standard at Wittenberg 1516; it was but by a pitiful Monk: but as if this had
been a design of a long contrivance in the World, and laid in the several parts
of Germany, Duke Frederick the Saxon-Elector, falls in with him; Franciscus
Picus Mirandula, at Rome persuades a Reformation, Marquess Caracciolus, and
Bernhardenus Bonifacius, Marquess of Oria turn Confessors at Naples: Zuinglius
stands up for Reformation in Switzerland; Myconius, at Thuring (I think all in
a year) and then other parts in Germany, till the Reformation had overspread
the greatest part of Germany. What a wonderful Specimen was this of the power
of God upon men, upon the hearts of men in the World? yea, and thus the Wisdom
of God is wonderfully magnified: for by this means all the World comes to be
convinced, that God could not have begun, or done his work in a fitter time.
Indeed, God could have done it with equal advantage at any time, having at all
times the hearts of Princes, and of all men in his hand: but those that do not
so wistly consider the influence of God upon men's hearts in the cause, and only
view humane circumstances, when they see God bringing forth his work, at a time
when the World is prepared and fitted for it, must adore the wisdom of God in
it.

Fourthly, God does by this means check the haste and precipitancy, and
rashness of our spirits, and show us our own folly. We are very prone to
prescribe to God, and to limit the holy One: Will thou at this time restore the
kingdom to Israel (say the Disciples)? Now when we see God disappointing our
hopes and expectations, and bringing forth his work in his own time; when the
worlds circumstances fit it, and all things concur to it; then we understand
our own folly and rashness, and that our spirits are too hasty; then we see,
that if the work of God had been brought forth in our time, it had not been
half so easily effected, nor half so beautiful. Methinks here we are like some
foolish, ignorant children, that view the Carpenter at work about some goodly
frame of an house: the Carpenter you know, does his work by degrees; first he
fitteth one piece, and lays it by him, then another, and so a third: The
child vieweth this, and not understanding the contrivance, he is every day
crying to his father to set it up; Father, when do you set up the house? shall
it not go up this day? to morrow, etc The child thinks that there is nothing to
do, but to set up this piece, or that piece: but his wiser Father, knows that
he must have every piece fitted and prepared, the joints and the tenons ready
to couple one piece to another; or it would be to no purpose to begin to set up
the building, before it were framed, and one part coupled to the other: The
child at last, when he sees his Father set it up all, and the parts fitted one
to another, then it begins to see its self a fool, and to understand that its
Father was wiser than it; against another time it learneth wit, to let the
Father alone to his own wisdom, time, and contrivance. The Father might have
lost his pains, and spoiled some pieces of good timber, and done nothing else,
in sooner harkening to the child's importunity. It may be the child in its
haste, hoists up a piece of timber, but it falls down upon him, and bruiseth
him, etc. It is much the same case with us: we look for a Reformation, we
believe God will sit as a Refiner upon Zion; we cannot let God alone to his own
time, till he has fitted the world's circumstances to his design; but it may
be we are hastening of God, not only by modest prayers, submitted to his will
(which is our duty), but by murmurings and repinings at God: It may be we, like
the hasty child, are hoisting up some pieces of timber, encouraging some or
other to begin it irregularly; and by that means get nothing but a knock, or a
bruise, and lose such Instruments as might have been useful. But at last, we
see God bring forth his work, the world is (as to its circumstances) fitted to
it: then we see our folly. David was anointed to the Kingdom of Israel and
Judah; after this, he is called to Court, he is made the Kings son-in-law: If
any one upon this should have made a party for David, to have rent the Kingdom
from Saul (a defensive party he indeed had to protect him from Saul's rage, but
no more), he had undoubtedly but made himself a prey. But David waits year
after year, till God had fitted the circumstances of that Kingdom to his
design: till Saul and Jonathan were gone, and the peoples hearts were
inamoured, and set upon David, and the Captain of the Army was turned also to
him; and when these circumstances concurred, then he brings forth his great
work, and sets his Servant David peaceably upon the Throne promised unto
him. Thus far I have enlarged upon the Explicatory part of this Observation: I
now come to the Application of it.

Use 1. In the first place, Let us learn from hence, to adore the wisdom of
God, in his great productions of Providence. There is much, very much of God to
be seen, in his great products of Providence: but he is to be seen in them, in
nothing more than this, his adopting and fitting the world to his designs. With
how much blood must David have come to the Kingdom, the children of Israel been
brought out of Egypt and Babylon, had it not been for this? Oh, the infinite,
unsearchable wisdom of God! his footsteps are not known, his ways are past a
creature's finding out. Wisdom in action is then much seen, when the action is
not attempted, but at such a time as it takes effect. The wisdom of the Smith
teaches him to strike, when the Metal is hot and malleable. The wise General
opens not his trenches, till all is ready to make the Sally, or assault: nor
springs the Mine, till it be carried right under the wall. Herein is the
infinite wisdom of God seen, that he attempt^ not a great work, until he has
accommodated circumstances to it.

Use 2. Secondly, Observe from hence; That the miscarrying of a good design,
must be the product of man's improvidence; not of Gods directive Providence.
There are many instances might be given of men's miscarrying in a good design,
that is, in the attempt of things which God will certainly bring to pass. How
many have perished, in their undertakings of works of Reformation, their works
miscarried? The Providence of God, is not indeed excluded out of these events:
it permitted those persons so to act, it governed their action: But it was
their own ungrounded zeal and sinful passions, and undue precipitancy that
caused their miscarriage. God's effective Providence never miscarrieth in its
designs; for it always, either produces a thing by an almighty-Power,
miraculously; or else so fitteth the worlds circumstances aforehand, that if
it be to be done mediately, it is certainly produced. It is only man's haste and
mis-guided zeal, that makes any good work abortive. By a good work here, I
understand, whatsoever is made the Object of a Divine Promise; and (by the way)
this may teach us, not to let go our hold on the Promise, upon any such
disaster. If the work be of God, if it be any thing which God has promised, it
shall be effected, though it may miscarry in a first, or second undertaking;
either because the Providence of God is driving another design, viz. in the
accomplishment of it, first to punish some undertakers in it for their sins,
which was the case of the Israelites against Benjamin, and against Ai; or for
their precipitancy, and rash setting upon it out of Gods time; or their
ill-managery of it: yet let not your faith fail in the Promise, for the work
shall revive in Gods time, when he has fitted the Worlds circumstances a
little better to it; it shall go on. But thirdly,

Use 3. Let me call upon you to Observe this in Gods providential
Dispensations, both toward the Church, and toward your own Souls in
particular: Whosoever is wise, observes these things (says the Text), and he
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. This is a very observable
thing, it will make us spiritually wise, it will make us to understand much of
the Lords loving kindness, in the products of his Providence. 1. I say first,
it will give us spiritual wisdom, and in a great measure make us to understand
Gods time for the production of his great works; and very much guide us, as to
our duty in the use of means: what, and of what nature is seasonable, and
proper for us to make use of. For Example, There is a great expectation of the
Conversion of the Jews; whether the whole Body of them shall be converted, or
no, and whether they shall return to Jerusalem, and again build, and inhabit,
that once holy City, I cannot say: But the Scripture seems to incline very
much, That there shall be a far greater conversion of them, and calling of them
in, than yet has been. But to look for this suddenly, or to fix it upon any
certain year, must needs be a very great, an idle and groundless vanity: we
must first see the Worlds circumstances much better fitted to it, than we yet
do; whilst either the lives, or blasphemies of the Jews are such, as it is not
reasonable that Christian Princes should endure them in their Territories; or
the spirits of Christians are such, as they will not so endure them, or such
Idolatries and Superstitions are amongst Christians, as are abomination to that
people: the circumstances of the World do not seem fitted to the production of
such a great and noble work. If we should live to see the bitterness of the
Jews against Christ abated, and the bitterness of Christians Spirits against
them more generally allayed; The lives, and worship of Christians more reformed
from such superstitions as they abominate, and the lives of the Jews more
reduced to rules of Christians; we might then hope for something of this
nature, and judge Gods time at hand. To give another instance: Protestants do
believe, or at least did (till of late some have began to doubt it) That the
Pope of Rome was the great Antichrist: That wicked one, of whom the Apostle
prophesied, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, that should be revealed, whom God would consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and with the brightness of his coming: He it is, ver.
4, who opposes, and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he as God sits in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. The mystery of his iniquity began to work, even in the
Apostle's time, though there was none of many years after owned the name of
Pope; or arrogant title of Universal Bishop, or Vicar of Christ, etc. But the
Apostle, ver. 6, tells us, there was something which then hindered his being
revealed, and would let, until he should be taken away. The Roman Empire
hindered, nor is that hinderance yet taken away. It Is true, there is but a
stump of that Empire remaining in Germany, Spain, France, England, many other
great boughs are lop'd off it; but most of them kept their Antichristian
favor, though they changed their temporal Lords, and set up for, and by
themselves, as to temporal subjection and dominion. You see and hear how
fierce, the French, the Spaniards, the Portugals, etc. the house of Austria,
are for the Romish Religion. It Is true, England has broke that yoke off its
neck; so has Holland: the Gospel has got a great foot in Germany, France,
Denmark, Poland, Sweden, Hungary; but yet the Devil has a large Chapel in
most of those places. It is the National Religion of France, Spain, Portugal,
Italy, the Imperial Proper-territories. God is fitting the circumstances of the
World, much to his promised Work; of destroying this Antichrist with the spirit
of his mouth, with the brightness of his coming. England is fallen off, Holland
is fallen off, a great part of Switzerland, many Cities and Territories in
Germany, Sweden, and Denmark; great numbers in France. God is by degrees doing
his work, and a great deal is done within the space of a hundred and fifty
years last past (for it is no longer since Luther began to shake his Throne):
but yet the circumstances of the World do not look, as if it were like to be a
work we should see in our age; nor it may be our childrens children. Methinks
the Scripture looks, as if that man of sin should die a natural death, not a
violent one. I mean, that that Religion should be loathed out of the World, not
fought out of it; God will consume it with the Spirit of his mouth, and with
the brightness of his coming: Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit
(says the Lord). I tell you but my judgment, that before the fall of
Antichrist, you must yet see a greater falling off from Popery, by the Princes
of other Nations and their people. The Worlds circumstances do not yet seem
fitted to that great Work: God may work Miracles in the case, but I know no
ground we have to expect them. I am very confident that Antichrist is in his
wane, much past his full, declining every day; and therefore the fears of some,
that that ridiculous Religion should again overspread England, or Holland, or
any other reformed Church, do not much afflict me: I take that for granted,
that Babylon is falling; but when we shall hear that joyful sound, Babylon is
fallen, Babylon is fallen, that I cannot tell you: but in the general I think,
we must first see the World otherwise circumstanced than it is.

2. By this observation of the motions of Providence, you shall also understand
much of Gods set time, as to showing mercy to your own particular soul: viz.
when your bodily, or spiritual circumstances are fitted for the desired mercy.

1. I say first, when your bodily circumstances are fitted to it. There is
nothing more evident, than the dependence of our minds upon our bodies, and the
influence that some bodily distempers (especially) have upon our souls and
minds: now although it be true, that God can work miraculously, and by light
can break through a darkness, be it never so thick, and ravish a Soul with
unspeakable joy and peace, though at that time it be yoked to a dark, cloudy,
melancholic, disturbed body: yet God uses not to work Miracles ordinarily,
but to move in a more ordinary course of Providence, by the use and application
of means that are proper: so that as it is seldom, but God uses the disorders
and disturbances of the body, to influence and afflict the mind, and to be (at
least an adjuvant) cause, when he will trouble a Soul: so he usually restores
health, and a better constitution of body, when he intends to restore peace and
quiet, and a composure of spirit; I say, ordinarily he does so. And hence again
in the next place,

3. We by giving attendance to this Observation, may learn our duty in
reference to the use of Means, so as to use what is proper to its season: for
there is great wisdom to be used in apportioning means. For Example: as to the
bringing down of Antichrist, if Gods time be not come, the means are not,
girding our swords upon our thighs, etc. (I question whether that will ever be
a Mean proper to be used in that case); but endeavoring by all means possible,
to loath the World of Popish superstitions and ceremonies, and all the idolatry
of that Synagogue, and of all the cheats they put upon the World, and alienate
the hearts of people from them. So for calling the Jews: the means to be used
is not inciting them to get into a body, and heading them, etc. but to convince
them of their errors, to endeavor the sweetning of their spirits, the
enlightening their minds with the knowledge of the truth of the Gospel; and
reconciling them to the Christian Religion, and showing them the Examples of an
holy life and conversation. So in case of particular Souls, where the
discomposure of the mind, is originated in, or further advantaged by bodily
distempers (which is a thing very frequently happening); I do not take it to be
the duty of a Christian, merely to pray and hear, but also to use natural means
proper for the abating of these distempers: yet not this, without Prayer and
use of Ordinances, both for the blessing of God upon such means, and for the
further influences of his supernatural grace; for God fitteth the circumstances
of the person that is to receive the mercy, to the desired mercy, when he
intends the bestowing of it; as well as the circumstances of the World, to
the mercy which in his set-time he intends for his Church: so, as I say, this
observing of this method of Providence duly attended to, adds spiritual
Wisdom to a Christian, as in discerning of Gods time for mercy; so also in
directing him to his duty, as to proper means to be used by him in the way of
his duty, in order to the obtaining of the mercy; teaching him to know, what
Israel ought to do: what a good Christian ought to do under the circumstances,
under which God has brought him.

2. By an attendance to this working of Providence, you shall understand much
of the loving kindness of the Lord; very much of the goodness and love of God
to Nations and Churches, is seen in this his fitting of the worlds
circumstances to his designs, before he produces them; as his designs are
effected without tumult and bloodshed, which otherwise through men's opposition
to it, would not be avoided. With how much bloodshed (in all humane
probability) must the Children of Israel have first came out of Egypt, then out
of Babylon, had not God fitted the circumstances of the world, to those designs
of his Providence? Who could have imagined, either the first Plantation of
Gospel-Doctrine and Churches, or the after-reformation of it, when Popery had
everywhere obscured it, had not God by an infinitely-wise Providence, first
fitted the circumstances of the world to his own works? To give you an
instance, so late, that it is in most of your memories. The Restoration of our
present Sovereign, was a great work of Providence; had not God fitted the
circumstances of the three Nations for such a work, with how much tumult,
confusion, and bloodshed must it have been effected? It were easy to make the
same observation of particular Providence, relateing to our selves; we shall
find that God brings forth his works in their seasons, and his season is always
such as the Wit and Wisdom of Man, had it been to choose, could not have chosen
a fitter: He makes every thing beautiful in his time (says Solomon). Indeed
this is all the beauty of Providence (almost) which we discern: Beauty in
persons lies much in symmetry, or proportion of parts, and mixture of colors:
There is a Beauty of Providence, that lies in the symmetry and proportion of it
to the revealed Will and Promises of God: but the further beauty of Providence
lies in the seasonableness of it, and the fittedness of Gods work to the
circumstances of the world, or of our persons at that time, when he produces
it. And herein we understand much of the loving kindness of God. But I shall
add no more to this Observation.

SERMON XX.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am going on in making some special Observations concerning the motions of
Divine Providence: Five I have already made and discoursed, I proceed now to a
sixth.

Observe. 6. It usually subordinateth the civil affairs of the world, to the
Religious concerns of his Church.

1. The world was of old divided into the circumcision, and the uncircumcision,
that is, Jews and Gentiles: The Jews which were the circumcision, made the
visible Church, until Christ's ascension, or at least until he came in the
flesh. Since it has been divided into Jews, Christians, and Heathens; I speak
not merely of the name Christians, (that I know was first given the Disciples
of Christ at Antioch): but I understand under that notion, such as own Jesus
Christ, and the Doctrine of his Gospel: these make up the New Testament Church,
the Gospel Church: the whole number of them makes up the Church Catholic
visible. Those of them in this or that Nation, make up the visible Church in
such a Nation. Indeed a particular Organical-Church can consist of no more than
so many, as have either explicitly or implicitly agreed to walk together under
the charge and inspection of such or such Officers.

2. But there is a world amongst Christians, as well as amongst Heathens; all
Hypocrites, and seeming Professors, who are carnal, and savor nothing but
earthly things, make up this world: which is opposed to the invisible Church,
which is restrained to the number of true and real Saints, who glory not in
appearance, but in truth and reality. Now this Church of God, is that which God
has set his love upon above all other people in the world.

1. The first and great objects of his love, are those whom he has chosen in
Christ before the foundation of the world, and for whom in time Christ dyed,
and whom God has effectually called, and translated out of darkness into
marvelous light. These are those whom God has set a part for himself, Psalm.
4.3. A chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, to show forth the praises of him, who has called them out of darkness,
into mavelous light.

2. Next to these is the whole body of the visible Church. To the body of the
Jews appertained the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving
of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises, Romans 9.4, 5. And, as the
Scripture mentions diverse privileges which were peculiar to the Jews, and
are to the Church; as to have the Oracles of God, the Word and Sacraments; so
doubtless there are many promises which relate to the whole body of the Church,
which argue Gods peculiar kindness to that body of people. Whether it be,
because God has more honor from them, than from Pagans, or for the sake of
his invisible Church which is amongst them, I shall not undertake to determine,
certain it is that the thing is so. Now the Observation which I make, is but a
further evidence of this love, that God by his Providence disposes and
governs the affairs of the world, in a just subordination to the good of his
Church; and to those wise ends, which with reference to that he is bringing
about: and this is true, both in reference to the Pagan world, and the
Christian world; according to the design which God has, by which he does
design to do good to his whole Church; so he disposes and governs the
affairs of the Pagan world. And according to the design God has, by which he
designs to bring about good to the sincere Servants of God in any place; so he
disposes, orders and governs the affairs of ungodly men, amongst whom they
live.

This will appear by a twofold Observation, which you shall make:

1. Concerning the variety of the same people's spirits.

2. Concerning the variety of their actions.

1. As to the variety of the same people's spirits, with reference to the
Church of God, and those especially in it, that walk more fully and close with
God. It is matter of astonishment to those who do not wistly consider the wheel
within the wheel, or the spirit of the living God within the wheels, upon which
all the great actions of the world do turn: the world is sometimes all in an
uproar against those they nickname Puritans, that is, such as exercise
themselves to keep a good conscience, both toward God, and toward men, (for
that is the true description of such a person); and if profane and carnal men
hate some that are otherwise in their Conversation, it is but their mistake,
for they think them so; holiness and strict walking, is the thing they hate,
revile, and malign: If you were of the world (says our Savior) the world
would love its own; but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hates you, John 15.19. sometimes again
the scene is quite altered, that of the Prophet Zechariah is fulfilled: Zech.
8.23.
Ten men take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with
you, for we have heard that the Lord is with you: men stand amazed at this. The
People of God are the same, walk in the same method of Conversation: but the
hand of God is in the thing. Sometimes God designeth in his external Providence
to smile upon his people, and give them some breathing-time, a few
halcion-days; then they shall find favor in the eyes of the great men of the
Earth, and of their lesser neighbors: another time he designeth to scourge and
chasten his people, then every ones spirit shall be up, and their tongues let
loose against them. Thus it was with the Israelites, Gods ancient people, Exodus
11.7. But against any of the children of Israel, shall not a dog move his
tongue. The Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 105.23, 24. That Israel came into Egypt,
and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham, and he increased his people greatly,
and made them stronger than their enemies, Verse. 25. He turned their hearts to
hate his people, to deal subtly with his servants.

2. The great variety of actions in the world, does also demonstrate this. In
the 12th of the Revelations you have, as Divines think, showed unto John the
state of the Gospel Church, there represented under the notion of a woman
clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her feet, traveling, and in pain.
The Devil and his instruments, the Enemies of the Church, set out under the
notion of a great Red Dragon, Verse. 3. Having seven heads, and ten horns, and
seven crowns: This Dragon was cast unto the earth, and there ver. 13. He
persecuted the woman, who had the wings of an Eagle given her, by which she
fled into the wilderness, where she was nourished for a time, and times, and
half a time, from the face of the serpent, verse. 15. The serpent cast out of
his mouth water, as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be
carried away off the flood. Now verse. 16. it is said, That the earth helped the
woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood, which the
Dragon cast out of his mouth. Very good Interpreters, by the Earth there
understand, V. Paraeum ad loc.
Homines terrenos, per quos, saepe aliud agentes, Deus Ecclesiam suam
mirabiliter protexit; The men of the Earth, by whom (though they intend no such
thing) God often wonderfully protecteth his Church. God sometimes designeth to
scourge and chasten his people for their sins, then all the world is in arms
against them; sometimes again, he designeth to increase his Church, and give
them further ground to enlarge their Territories, and increase their borders:
he then accordingly disposes the spirits of the men of the world: and the
truth is, the various complexion of those Nations in the world, that are
Enemies to the Gospel of Christ, and of those persons, that are certain Enemies
to the power and practice of Godliness, is a thing, of which an account can
hardly be given by him, that does not consider this; That God has a people in
the world, that are dear unto him, and with whom in the wisdom of his
Providence he deals diversely, sometimes exalting, and lifting them up;
another time humbling them, and keeping them low, and with relation to these he
governs the hearts and actions of Princes, and great men, and of the lower sort
of men also; subordinating the affairs of the world to his designs, with
reference to these people. God has a design to multiply the seed of Jacob,
according to his promise; though there be a famine in Canaan, it shall not
destroy them; his Providence directs one of that family to be sold into
Egypt, to become a great man there, to save much people alive, to give them
rest, and a time to multiply there peaceably, Exodus 1.7. And the children of
Israel were fruitful, and multiplied, and increased abundantly, and waxed
exceeding mighty, and the land was filled with them, Exodus 1.7. But there was
another part of the promise to be fulfilled, they were to come out of Egypt,
and to inherit the promised land of Canaan. God accordingly orders the
actions of the Kings of Egypt; they shall grow jealous of them, and set
themselves to destroy them: He turned their hearts to hate his people (says
the Psalmist) and to deal subtly with his servants. David is anointed to be
King over Israel and Judah, and to the Kingdom he must come, the Philistines
shall protect him; he shall flee to them for sanctuary against Saul, and they
shall afford it him. On the contrary God has a design to chasten the
Israelites, and David their King; the Philistines shall be their constant
Enemies, seeking all advantages against them. There is nothing more remarkable
in Divine Providence than this is: Who sees, and is not astonished, sometimes
to observe the strange difference in the complexion and inclinations of the
wicked world, to Gods little remnant in it? The ebbing and flowing of the Tide
(of which none that I know has as yet given the world a satisfactory account)
is not so unaccountable a thing as this is. If we do not admit of the
hypothesis of this Observation; Will not any one be amazed to consider how the
Gospel should at first have gotten any footing in the world, but for this? What
a strange thing it was, that John the Baptist, the harbinger of our blessed
Lord, should be suffered to come preaching in the wilderness; and so plainly to
point out the coming of the Messiah, that Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the
Region round about Jordan, should go out to him, confess their sins, and be
baptized of him: that immediately upon this Christ should come, and meet with
that acceptance he did, though indeed it was true, that the generality of his
own received him not. That first the seventy, and then the twelve should go out
to Preach the Gospel, and Paul alone should carry it from Jerusalem to
Illyricum; and the great persecutions should not arise, till the Gospel had got
such a footing, that it was not to be rooted out; but they rather tended to the
furtherance, than to the hinderance of it. I say these were all strange things
to him, that considers not how God, to this great end, subordinated the
affairs of the world. The Jews were then tributary to the Romans, and so in no
capacity to show themselves such hinderers of this, as probably they otherwise
would have been: The Romans were a great while more careless in the matters of
Religion; while the Gospel continued in Judea, it made little noise in the
world, and was looked upon but as a division amongst the Jews in matters of
Religion: in which the great masters of the world concerned not themselves so
much; and when the Apostles first carried the Gospel amongst the Heathens, it
was at first little taken notice of, while the Christians grew very numerous;
so as ten persecutions, succeeding one another, could not root them out; and
the same thing you shall constantly observe in any great works of Providence
relating to the Church. It could not have been thought, that Germany and France
should have so easily fallen in with the carrying on of the Reformation, if the
Providence of God had not first fitted the world for it, by the complexion of
Princes, the diversity of their interests, by suffering the ignorance and
sottishness of the Popish-Clergy, together with their covetousness, ambition
and debauchery, to grow to that height, that they grew an abomination to all
men.

And as it is in the Political and Ecclesiastical body, so it is as to the
particular persons of Christians; the Providence of God (ordinarily) disposes
the body, according to the work which he has to do upon the soul. But that is
more foreign to my observation, therefore I shall not enlarge upon it. Besides
that I spoke something to it under the former observation, which has some
cognation with this, this only differing from it in this, showing you, that the
Providence of God does not make the Church lacquey to the world, but he makes
the world lacquey to the Church; and subordinateth the business of the world to
his own great designs, relating to the Church. Now if you ask me the reason of
this, it doubtless lies,

Reas. In the peculiar favor of God, to that people in the world, which bear
the name of his Church. You have an expression, Psalm. 87.2. The Lord loves the
gates of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Sion was the place, at the
foot of which the Temple was built, where all the worship which God had in the
world performed according to his will was performed: The tabernacle in Shiloh
was forsaken, Psalm. 78.60. God has a particular kindness for any place, for
any persons, amongst whom his true worship is, and where he has placed to
himself a Tabernacle; though God had a kindness for the whole seed of Jacob,
yet he loved the gates of Sion above all the dwellings of Jacob, because that
was the place where his worship was regularly performed. It holds still under
the New Testament, and will hold to the end of the world; wheresoever God has
a Church, or people, he has a particular kindness for that people: they are in
Scripture called the house of God. God is said to dwell, and walk amongst them;
and God has yet a more particular favor to those that are the invisible part
of the visible Church; I mean such as truly belong unto God, that worship him
in spirit, and in truth; that fear the Lord, and hope in his mercies, as the
Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 33.18. All the world is nothing to God, in
comparison of this little flock, to whom it is his will to give a Kingdom: He
has given them his Christ, and shall he not with him give them all things?
This were easily to be proved to you from a variety of Scripture, and arguments
drawn from thence. Now supposing this, it is no wonder if he subordinateth his
works in the world, to his designs here: This is that Canaan which the Lord
cares for, and upon which his eyes are from one end of the year to another,
Deuteronomy. 11. His heritage, the dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12.7. His peculiar
treasure, his sister, his spouse, the redeemed and ransomed of the Lord, his
portion; in short, there is a multitude of expressions, by which God has
shown that his Church, the whole body of people owning and professing him; and
especially those of them, that worship him in spirit and truth, and walk up to
the rule of his word, are dearer to him than all the world besides. He calls
them his bride, Rev. 21.9. His beloved, Psalm. 108.6. His building, 1 Cor. 3.9.
His City, Heb. 12.22. His chosen generation, 1 Pet. 2.9. His family, Ephesians. 3.15.
His husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. His Kingdom, the lot of his inheritance. Now
considering this, it is no wonder at all, that the Providence of God should
manage all the affairs of the world, in subordination to his designs, for the
good of this body. All the relation of God to others, is but that of a Creator;
and they are no better than the synagogues of Satan, as to the Divine Worship
that is in them: and the throne of Satan, with respect to the homage of their
Conversation: They are called children of wrath, of disobedience, of the curse,
strangers, and forreiners. If God sometimes gives up his people into the hands
of wicked men, it is either, 1. For his peoples good, to purge away their
dross, and take away their tinn (as the Prophet expresses it), or for to ripen
sinners for their destruction, that they may by it fill up the measure of their
iniquities. Methinks you have a full proof of this Observation, in the 105
Psalm: the Psalmist in that Psalm, is calling the Church of the Jews to give
thanks unto the Lord, to sing unto him, to talk of all his wondrous works. Then
follows a recapitulation of those great things which God had done for them;
amongst which, this is reckoned, that he subordinated his motions of Providence
amongst the men, and the nations of the world, to his gracious designs for
them; Verse. 14. He suffered no man to do them wrong; yea he reproved Kings for
their sake; saying, Touch not mine anointed, do my prophets no harm; and so he
goes on, almost quite through that Psalm. Now I say, the reason of all this
was, his love set upon this people. As most of us have some particular persons,
that our heart is most set upon; some particular interest and design that we
drive on: now whoever those persons be, or whatever that design be, we make all
the rest of our actions to be subordinate to that. So the great God having set
up his glory as his great interest and design, and set apart him and them that
are godly for himself; it is no wonder at all if he rules all the world, and
governs all the affairs of it, in subordination to this great interest, and
the good of this people. I now come to the Application of this Observation.

Use 1. In the first place (as I said before upon the other Observation, so I
say here): From hence a wise and observing Christian, may in a great measure
know, what weather it is like to be in the Climate of the Church: How it is
like to fare with them that are the People of God. They are, and always were
the far lesser part of the world; and their quiet and tranquillity (to look
with a rational eye) does much depend upon the complexion of the men of the
world, and their inclinations: if God intends a calm and tranquillity to the
Church, he usually so orders the world, that the earth helps the woman, the
men of the world, either out of good nature, or (which indeed mostly is the
business) out of interest, show them kindness. Hence you shall observe, that
when God intends the tranquillity and prosperity of the Church, his
Providence (ordinarily) brings one of these things to pass.

1. He sometimes raises up some eminent servant of his, to do great services
for the men of the world: this you see in the case of Joseph, God had designed
the Jews a prospering, multiplying time in the land of Egypt: he raises up
Joseph, makes him a Privy-Counsellor to Pharaoh, yea the second man in Egypt;
and this by endowing him with a power to interpret Pharaohs dream, so he came
to be a great man, and was a protection to the Church of God for many years in
Egypt. So when they were in the Captivity of Babylon, we do not read, that
besides their Captivity, and their want of their worship at Jerusalem, their
condition was very sad; but in the peace of that Country, they had peace, yet
they were amongst Heathens and Idolaters: but the Providence of God raised up
Daniel and the three Children, and by giving them great Wisdom, and some
miraculous deliverances of them, he brought them into a great credit; and
Daniel was made first President over 120 Provinces. God designed afterward the
Jews peaceable building of the Temple, and enjoyment of their own land; his
Providence brings Esther (one of them) to be Queen, makes use of Mordecay to
discover a great treason, and by this means brings these two eminent friends to
his Church, into great reputation. The like might be paralleled all along in
story, and may be every day observed: but the Scripture-instances are enough.

2. Sometimes the Providence of God makes the Earth to help the woman, by
making his people the balance to the clashing interests of the men of the
world: and this is a very ordinary method of Divine Providence. The men of the
world are not always friends one with another; if they were (in humane
probability) the Church would quickly be swallowed up. But their lusts will not
suffer them always to agree, and then the Providence of God (ordinarily) makes
his Church the balance: and so they obtain peace and protection, either by a
neutrality, not engaging on either side, or by strengthening the weaker party
against the stronger, where the case is such, that they can do it with
consistency to their duty to God, and religious principles. David with his
little company, upon this account doubtless, was protected by the King of the
Philistines a while.

3. Sometimes the Providence of God raises up his people to such a
considerableness, as to the commerce and trade of a Nation; that they cannot be
rooted out, without cutting the sinews of a nation, and breaking the strength
of it. The Prince (who Solomon says is served by the field) is concerned as to
his revenue; the poor are highly concerned as to their employment and
livelihood; it may be many of the maddest of their Enemies are concerned; for
there is a strange twisting of all men's interests in the trade and commerce of
a Nation. This is another way by which the Providence of God helps and makes
the earthy part of the world to help the Woman his Church.

4. Sometimes the Providence of God suffers the maddest Enemies of his people,
to run out to such strange extravagancies of oppression, and injustice, of
folly, and superstition in worship, of looseness and debauchery in morals; that
the soberer part of men, though no great friends to the practice and power of
godliness, yet is not able to bear them, but choose rather to take the part of
them with whom they agree better in matters of civil justice, and sobriety, and
temperance, though not at all better in matters of true Religion and Godliness.
This was the very case in the beginning of Reformation, both in Germany, and
other places: The Providence of God having designed a better time for the true
worshippers of him, had so ordered it in his great Wisdom, that the Church men
of the Popish party, had made themselves a just abomination to all sober
persons; the generality of their watchmen were such as they were in Israel and
Judah, just before their ruin described, Isa. 56.10. His watchmen are blind,
they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, that cannot bark, sleeping,
loving to slumber; yea they are greedy dogs, that can never have enough; and
shepherds that cannot understand, they all look to their own way, every one
for his gain, from his quarter: Come you, say they, I will fetch wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant. Just such a Clergy they had in Germany, and in England, and
other parts too before the reformation. Some learned men they had, but they
(for the most part) spent their studies and pains about trifles in Divinity,
subtle school-niceties and distinctions, signifying nothing to men's salvation:
the generality of them were drunken sots, and debauched persons, dumb dogs that
could not bark; neither pray, nor preach, nor say any thing (almost) beyond
what they had in their mass-books; but thought to have carried all before them,
with the forms of a few latin Prayers, their Albes and Stoles, and Levitical
habits, etc. yea and they were greedy dogs too, never thinking they had enough.
This was that ruined them, their selling men pardons for a sum of money, every
one looking for his tithes and oblations, but none regarding peoples souls. And
by the way, observe this, A generally debauched, ignorant, sottish, cruel
Clergy, is a certain sign, either of an approaching ruin to that nation, or to
that party, by a reformation of the nation. To the Jews it was a prognostic of
an approaching ruin: All you beasts of the field come to devour, yea all you
beasts of the forest (says the Prophet), his watchmen are blinded, etc. Upon
the reformation from Popery, it was a prognostic of reformation, and indeed so
it is ordinarily, where there is not like people, like priests. But God keeps
up in any considerable number of people, an abomination and hatred of those
Priests, and their courses; but where they fall in with them, applaud,
patronize them, and these are the men they are for, The interpretation be to
those that hate that people.

So that I say, from hence observing Christians may make a great judgment, how
it is likely to go with the Church: you must lay down this for a principle,
That no wicked men have any hearty love and affection for those that are the
people of God. There is an Enmity which God has put betwixt the seed of the
woman, and the seed of the serpent, and nothing but grace will wear it out;
besides, they see themselves shamed, and condemned every day by their contrary
conversation. It is only the interest of the men of the world, that gives them
any breathing-time, and makes the earth to help the woman. So that if at any
time you can but make up a judgment, from what quarter the the wind blows for
the men of the worlds interest, you may go a great way to determine, how at
such a time it is like to fare with the Church and People of God: for God
ordinarily subordinates his government of the world, to his designs with
reference to his Church. If there happens to be such a juncture of affairs,
that the People of God are few in any place, like a gleaning of grapes after a
vintage, or an Olive-berry or two upon the top-boughs; there is little good to
be hoped for, unless God by his Providence makes some particular persons
amongst them highly serviceable, or instrumental in the state where they live;
either discovering some plots or treasons (which was the case in Mordecai's
time), or brings some of them to some great favor, which was the cause of the
Israelites first in Egypt, then in Babylon, and Esther afterward upon their
return from Babylon; or else God by his Providence secureth his little flock,
by suffering some intestine factions to rise amongst the men of the world, or
stirring up other enemies against that part of the world, that they have
something else to do, and cannot attend the execution of their malice upon the
servants of God: or blesses a particular state with a good-natured Prince,
that is not inclined to rigor and severity, but naturally abhors the blood
and ruin of people: though usually, if the latter be the case, it is but an
uncertain time with the Church; for good natures are ordinarily with ease
inclined this way or that, according to the mutability of prevailing Counsels.

But now if the People of God in any nation be a considerable number, and you
see the Providence of God has raised them up, to be men of interest many of
them, either with respect to their Wisdom, or Estates, or Employments; though
their Enemies be many and boisterous, yet there is no great fear (unless of
particular persons suffering): God seems to have subordinated the world to
their peace. For though some few imprudent men, that are rash and malicious,
and some hot-spur'd Churchmen, who understand little of politics, may in such
a juncture be for nothing but fire and faggot: yet God, who in his Providence
has ordered civil affairs so, that it should be the interest of the men of the
world to give them liberty and peace, will seldom suffer those whom he has
betrusted with the government of the affairs of the world (unless he designeth
to bring a period to the state) so far to overlook their interests, as to
gratify the lusts of malicious and rash men.

Again, If you see in any place, God suffering men calling themselves
Ministers, to degenerate into such sots in their Conversation, or to run into
such heighths of superstitious vanities and fooleries, as all men condemn and
see the vanity of; or to be so insufficient for any part of their work, that
they can do nothing of it, but are contemptible unto all, and make the offering
of God to be abhorred: This is another juncture of affairs, when you may either
fear the ruin of the place, or hope for a reformation, or more quiet abode for
Gods People in it. And (by the way) my enlargement upon this Observation, may
mind the People of God of the Policy, as well as Piety of a threefold duty.

1. The first is, All just homage and serviceableness unto such rulers as God
has set over the places wherein their lot is cast: I say just homage, for it
is better to obey God than Man; and we cannot obey Man, where Obedience to him
is disobedience to God. But the more any of our consciences toward God
straitens us, as to some points of Obedience, the more we should be serviceable
in what we may. If it at any time falls in our way to secure their lives, by
discovering dangerous plots and conspiracies; Mordecay by such a service, made
himself the Protector of all the people of the Jews. If we be called to it, and
can assist them with our arms, with our wisdom, counsel, with our service and
industry; remember what great instruments for the good of Gods People, Joseph,
Daniel, the three Children, Nehemiah, etc. were made.

2. Observe here also the Policy, as well as Piety of the practice of all moral
virtue: Justice to all, charity and liberality to the poor, temperance,
sobriety, all manner of loveliness in Conversation; there must be something
more than these things to commend you to God: but these are the things that
must commend you to the world. Moral virtue has a great cognation with humane
Nature: though men's lusts and passions sometimes run them out to acts of
injustice, and oppression, and debauchery; yet no body would willingly himself
be oppressed, or dealt unjustly with, or have his own wife and daughters
debauched. It is very rare but the highest and maddest Enemies of the People of
God are malicious and debauched persons; few of them persons of moral virtue
and honesty: make but your selves great Examples of these things, and you will
certainly at one time or other be too hard for your adversaries; the world so
loatheth their injustice, cruelty, oppression, hard-heartedness, their
drunkenness, and uncleanness, their lying, cheating, and defrauding, that it
will vomit them out.

3. It lets you also see the Policy, as well as Piety, of keeping close to God
in the matters of his worship. The sottishness and superstition of Priests
signifies good, not hurt to you, unless you approve of their savings and
doings: But when the prophets prophecy falsely, and the priests bear rule by
their means, and the people love to have it so: what will you do in the end
thereof? Jer. 5.32. If the ministry in any nation be sottish in their lives,
corrupt in their Doctrines, superstitious in their Worship, dumb dogs, that can
neither pray nor preach, let not the people love to have it so, and comply with
them, and own them. God will not long suffer his flock to be rent in pieces
with such wolves, nor be at the will of such idol-shepherds. But I have
enlarged far enough upon this first branch of Application, I shall be shorter
in the other.

2. Observe from hence both the felicity and duty of the people of God. 1.
Their felicity and dignity.

Their dignity. I remember the Psalmist admiring the mercy of God toward man,
and expressing his Dignity, Psalm. 8.6, 7. Thou made him to have dominion over
the work of thy hands, thou have put all things under his feet: all sheep, and
oxen, yea and the beasts of the field, the fouls of the air, and the fish of
the sea, and whatsoever passes through the seas. This is a great dignity of
man, that God has subordinated all the works of Creation, all the orders of
Creatures beneath him, unto him. But what a dignity is this to which God has
advanced his Church, that all the affairs of the world should be (as it were)
put under their feet? that they should not only have a dominion over the works
of the Lords hands in Creation, as sheep, and neat cattle, and fouls, and
fishes, but also all the Lords works of Providence: that the Kingdoms of the
Earth, and the great affairs of states should be ruled with reference to the
good of this little flock. What a felicity it is to be within this hedge, to be
a member of this body of people; I mean a true member of the Church of God? I
know the whole visible Church (as I have before showed you) is under a special
Providence: But it is not to be thought that God should do much for Hypocrites
and Formalists: What advantages they have from the Providence of God, they have
for the sake of those better servants of God, with whom they are joined in an
external communion. And certainly in the last place, this obliges all within
the Church of God, to a more special duty. Does God subordinate all his great
actions and motions in the world, to his gracious designs and counsels relating
to that body of people of which we are a part? Surely then it were but
reasonable for us to subordinate all our little actions in the world, to the
honor and glory of God: Gods glorifying of himself is his great design, he
aims at no other end, and it ought also to be our highest design. He has
chosen a certain people out of the world, and marked them out for himself, as
the people in whom, and by whom he will be more especially glorified: This
people is called his Church. God subordinateth all his great actions in the
world to his gracious designs upon, and for these; certainly in reason, Whether
we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we should (according to the Apostles
Precept) do all to the glory of God. His people are those whom he has created,
whom he has formed for himself; all the world is nothing to God in comparison
of them, they are the dearly beloved of his Soul. What love, reverence,
obedience is but reasonable on our parts toward this great God? What
ingratitude must it argue on our part, to prefer any thing in design or action
to the Honor and Glory of this God? We can never live enough unto, nor do
enough for that God, who has done, and does do so much for us. This
Observation might be many other ways improved, but I shall add no more.

SERMON XXI.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Proceed yet in making some Observations upon the motions of Divine
Providence. A seventh Observation I shall make, is this:

Observe. 7. It ordinarily enforces wicked men, who mean nothing less, yet to
do the Lords work.

It is the great art of a Politician to serve himself of every humor: A good
Penman will write almost with any Pen, and a good workman will work with any
tool; and the great and wise God herein shows the greatness of his Wisdom,
that he also works with any tools, and does his business by any instruments.
The Stars shall fight in their courses, against Sizera; the Sun, and the Moon,
against the Canaanites; the Frogs, the Lice, and the Flies against Pharaoh; the
Earth against Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. Now in this there shines forth a great
deal of Divine Power; thus God shows himself to the world, to be the Lord of
hosts, to have all the hosts of Heaven and Earth at his command. So that as a
great General, who has several Regiments under his Command, at his pleasure,
he sometimes commands out one, sometimes another, as it pleases him upon a
particular service: so does our great and mighty God; and as that great
Commander, showing his vast Army to his friend, is reported to have said, there
is not one of these, but if I bid him throw himself down a Precipice, or into a
River, he will do it: so there is not any company of inanimate, or brute
Creatures, not one Company in the whole Army of the Lord of Hosts; but like the
Centurion's servants, if he says unto them, Go, they go; if Do this, they do
it. But though much of the Wisdom and Power of God be seen in this, yet it is
more eminently seen in the use he makes of wicked men, to accomplish his
designs, which is a thing very usual in the motions of Divine Providence. As
that Politician does most show his Wisdom, that makes his Enemies serve him;
so God in this does commend to us his infinite Wisdom, to make use of the Sons
of men, that have a perfect hatred and enmity to God, and all his holy designs,
that they shall serve him, and accomplish his designs. Now this Observation
justifies it self by a great variety of instances. You have one in holy Writ
very plain, Isa. 10.5, 6, 7. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff
in their hand is mine indignation: I will send him against an hypocritical
nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take
the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them like mire of the streets:
Howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart think so. Assyria you see was
the Rod of Gods anger: Gods indignation was his staff: Thou could do nothing
against me, says Christ to Pilate, if it were not given thee from above. He
went upon Gods errand, when he went against Gods People the Jews; they had
proved an hypocritical people, and God had determined to make the people, that
had been the dearly beloved of his soul, the people of his wrath: God gave him
his charge to spoil, to take the prey, to tread down the people. O but how
should God persuade the Assyrian to serve him? The Assyrians were Enemies to
the true God; the Text tells you, Howbeit he means not so: neither is it in
his heart to think so. He thought of nothing less than serving of Gods design,
that which he thought of was plunder and spoil, and prey for his Soldiers, as
the Apostle says of himself, 2 Cor. 12.16. Being crafty, I took you by guile;
so we may say of God, being wise, infinitely wise, he took the Assyrian by
guile; or rather by his infinite wisdom. This is that which the Psalmist says
Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: The wrath of man shall
praise God: How can that be! James tells us, That the wrath of man works not
the righteousness of God: Well, but for all that it shall praise God; God will
make use of their wrath and malice, to bring forth his great designs. Who would
ever have thought, that Pharaoh the King of Egypt should have been a great
instrument to have brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt? Yet he was
rather a greater instrument in it than Moses was: Moses did no more than lead
out of Egypt a willing people, and solicit Pharaoh to give his consent:
Pharaoh was Gods instrument to make them willing; he meant nothing less, he saw
the people grew great and mighty, Come on (says he) let us deal wisely (that
is, subtly) with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass when there
falls out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and
so get themselves out of our land: here was all he aimed at in his oppressing
them, to bring them low, and keep them still under his subjection. Observe how
God made use of this. The Children of Israel were now seated and settled, and
multiplied in a fertile Country, and had it not been for the King of Egypt's
oppressing them, would never have been willing to have left the fleshpots, and
onions, and garlic of Egypt: but for this dealing of Pharaoh with them, making
them to serve with rigor, slaying their male-children, etc. This quite tired
them, and made them willing to go out of Egypt toward Canaan. But let me a
little show you what a variety of lusts in wicked men's hearts, God has from
time to time made use of, to accomplish the great designs of his Providence,
with reference to his people: and indeed it is hard to say, what lust in
sinners hearts God has not made use of (at one time or other), and made it to
serve the holy and wise designs of his Providence.

1. The lusts of the eye and flesh, are of all other the most unmanlike brutish
passions; yet the Providence of God has sometimes taken advantage of these for
the glory of God. You all know what a strange influence Esther's being advanced
to be Queen of Persia, had upon Gods design for the building of the second
Temple in Ezra's time; she was the great instrument to save the whole Church of
the Jews (the only Church God had upon the Earth at that time) from utter ruin.
God made use of the lust of Ahasuerus to bring this about; he takes a Teach to
Vasthi, for refusing to come to him, to be shown to his Princes, and turns her
away, and then must look for the greatest beauty could be found: Esther proves
to be she. What a strange instance of this had we of this in King Henry the
Eighth of that name in this Nation? Those who know any thing of the story of
those times, know, that it was no abhorrence of the Idolatry and Superstition
of the Popish-Religion, that set him upon the work of Reformation. After some
beginnings of it, the six Articles came out: Papists were burnt on one side of
Smithfield, Protestants on the other: but the King was weary of his Wife, and
had a mind to another. His wife indeed was one whom Protestant-Divines judged
he could not keep (having been his brothers wife) without a continual living in
incest; the Pope (who thinks he can dispense with any thing) he thinks or
decrees she was his wife, and would give no dispensation for a divorce; the
Popish-Universities, and Divines (who never fail to be on their holy Fathers
side) all oppose the King in his desire of change: This angers the King, and
was the first motive to his business of Reformation, and casting off the Pope's
Supremacy. Nor is this any reproach at all to the Lords work of Reformation
amongst us; there is nothing more ordinary, than for God to make the wrath of
man to praise him, and make use of the lusts of men, to bring about his own
designs.

2. Ambition is another lust, which fireth the heart of wicked men, especially
great men. It is an excessive desire of Honor and Dominion. Poor wretches,
born to, and brought up in little circumstances, and low stations in the world,
are ordinarily not so much infected with this; it is the great man's lust. God
makes an eminent use of this. See it in the case of Jehu, a proud ambitious
man, that had in him a great lust, and desire of rule and honor; God had a
quarrel against the house of Ahab, by his Providence he orders Jehu to the
Kingdom, makes use of him to destroy Joram, the Son of Ahab, and Ahaziah, the
King of Judah the Son-in law of Ahab, and Jezebel, Ahab's wife, whom God had
threatened for the blood of Naboth, and his whole Family, until none remained, 2
Kings 8. verse. 23, 24, 25. chap. 9. verse. 9, 10, 24, 27, 35, chap. 10. verse. 7,
11, 17. And thus he delivered his seven thousand in Israel, that had not bowed
knee to Baal, from the idolatry, cruelty, and oppression of a vile and wicked
Prince. Jehu indeed in all this, pretended a great zeal for God, and did
destroy Baal from Israel, 2 King. 10.28; but yet ver. 9. Howbeit from the sins
of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from
after them; to wit, the golden calves that were in Bethel, and that were in
Dan. Verse. 31. But Jehu took no heed to walk in the way of the Lord God of
Israel, with all his heart, for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, who
made Israel to sin. Hence it was, that though the Lord tells him, 2 King.
10.30. That he had done well in executing that which was right in the eyes of
God, and had done according to all that was in Gods heart, as to the house of
Ahab; and therefore promised him a reward for it, viz. that for it, his
children of the fourth generation, should sit on the throne of Israel; yet God
by the Prophet Hosea told them, Hos. 1.4. Yet a little while, and I will avenge
the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu: The business was no more than
this. Jehu was an ambitious Prince, that loved honor and dominion, the
Providence of God makes use of this lust of his, to bring about his holy and
righteous designs upon that wicked family of Ahab, and for the delivery of his
people from their oppressions. This was the case of Haman, a proud ambitious
Courtier in the Court of Persia; he had a mind to be great, this made him
malice Mordecay, he would not bow his knee to him; this made him propose such
great things to be done, to the man whom the King should please to show favor
and honor to; the Text tells you he said, To whom will the King delight to do
honor, more than to my self? Est. 6.6.
God makes use of his ambition to bring Mordecay into honor, and to save the
whole people of the Jews: and thus it ordinarily falls out in lesser spheres;
the humble disposition of Gods People inclining them to give honor, to whom
honor belongs, and not to deny civil respects to the worst of men, does
often commend them to those that are ambitious of honor and respect, and
makes them their friends; God making use of his Enemies ambition for their
sake, which by the way commends to all that fear God, that Precept of the
Apostle, Romans 13.7. Render therefore to every one their dues, tribute to whom
tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

3. Another lust of men, which you shall find Gods Providence has made great
use of, is curiosity. A curiosity to know secrets: What shall come to pass in
aftertimes? or a curiosity to delight in rare workmanship of any sort, etc?
This is a great vanity of the heart of man; but the Providence of God has made
great use of it. Of the first sort, there are in holy Writ the instances of
Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar; both of them dreamed dreams, wherein God revealed
to them things that were to come to pass in the world. Then God inspireth
Joseph, a great friend to his people, and Daniel with wisdom to interpret these
dreams to them: this brought them both into high and great favor with those
mighty Princes, in subjection to whom the Jews at those times were. This indeed
is not an ordinary work of Providence, but what God has done. The second is
more ordinary, men have a curiosity to see, and have fine pieces of work done,
to hear rare music, to see fine mathematical operations. Indeed some of these
things are very useful, but a curiosity in many of them, is but vanity; Solomon
after a long experience, so concludes it: but the wise God often makes a most
remarkable use of this lust in men's hearts. David's skill at his harp brought
him to Court. And many sober persons skill, dexterity, and activity in arts and
sciences, has made them very acceptable to those that have had the power of
the world in their hands, and put them into great capacities to serve the
interest of God in the world: where God has both showed his Wisdom, in making
use of men's lust of curiosity for his own glory; and also in making his own
common and ordinary gifts so serviceable also.

4. A fourth lust, which you shall observe God to make an ordinary use of, is
that of covetousness. The People of God many times buy their peace and
tranquillity; sometimes they obtain it by their usefulness in trade and
traffic, and the detriment the public revenue would have by rooting them out:
sometimes they make themselves friends with their industrious hands, sometimes
with their liberal hand: This was but our Saviors counsel, Luke 16.9. Make to
your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness. It is particularly said
of Joseph, when he was a servant to Potiphar, Genesis 39.2, 3. That the Lord was
with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man. -- And his master saw that the Lord
was with him, and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand:
and Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him, and he made him
overseer over all his house, and all that he had he put into his hand. This was
Gods first step to bring Joseph into a great capacity, that he might be able to
protect his people.

5. I will instance but in one lust more, that is, the malice, hatred, and
cruelty of wicked men, Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrah of man shall praise thee.
Now this seems a strange thing, but there is nothing more ordinary than this.
The malice and cruelty of Pharaoh, contributed much to the Children of Isreal's
coming out of Egypt: had they not been so cruelly dealt with, they would never
have been so willing to have removed: it is no better than madness, not to be
justified by Religion, nor yet by Reason, for private persons to rise up in
arms against their rulers: but Solomon tells us, Oppressian makes wise men mad,
and God sometimes makes use of the madness, both of his Enemies, and of his own
People, to bring about his own designs. Far be it from me, either to encourage,
or to justify such actions; my business is only to show you how far God makes
use of men's lusts. But the most ordinary and regular way, which God makes use
of in this case, is by making the soberer part of the Princes and Rulers of a
Nation, sensible of the greatness of their peoples sufferings, and the
unreasonableness of the rage and madness of their adversaries; and giving them
bowels of compassion to their brethren, though it may be they be not of their
minds. I remember I have somewhere read it in one of the French Historians,
that a great Peer of that Nation (though a Papist) in the midst of that woeful
havoc, the fury of the Romish Priests were making, stood up in Counsel, and
said, He had no patience to see Frenchmen so used. And this is very ordinary,
the men of the world are not all of a complexion: some of them are men of
Honor and Virtue, men of Justice, Charity and Mercy, persons almost persuaded
to be Christians, not far from the Kingdom of God; in short, men of moral
virtue, abhorring sottishness and cruelty: others of them are men of blood, and
violence, and cruelty. These latter are they that make the great havoc in the
Church of God, breathing out (like Saul, Act. 9.) threatenings and slaughters
against the Disciples of the Lord; and commonly like Saul, they have letters
from the highpriests, to Damascus, to the synagogues. It is much, but it is
observable from the very beginning of story -- that the greatest cruelty and
rage which the People of God, that have desired to walk more strictly and
holily with him have met with, has been from the corrupt Priests and Ministry.
It was thus upon the first general corruption of the Priesthood in Israel: that
was you know upon the revolt of the ten Tribes in Jeroboam's time: for though
before that there were personal corruptions, as that of Hophni and Phinehas,
yet (generally) they kept to the Law of God; but in Jeroboam's time, the body
of the Priests was corrupt; for the Scripture said, That Jeroboam made of the
meanest people priests of the high places, whosoever would, he consecrated him,
and he became one of the priests of the high places, 1 King. 13.33. It was not
to be thought that so great a body of that people should all be corrupted, many
there were that kept close to the instituted worship of God at Jerusalem, and
would go thither: though abundance of the people, as Hosea says, Willingly
walked after the Commandment, Hos. 5.11. The Commandment of Jeroboam, the son
of Nebat, the Commandment of which you read, 1 King. 12.28, 29, etc. yet many
would not. Now as to these, the Prophet Hosea tells us, Hos. 5.1. The Priests
were a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor, and the revolters were
profound to make slaughter. So it was in our Saviors time, the Priests, and
Scribes, and Pharisees, were the cruel Enemies of Christ, and his Disciples, as
you read in the Gospels, and the story of the Acts of the Apostles. And so it
always has been, and still is in the Church of Rome, their Priests and
Jesuits are the bloody men, the cruel men against those that cannot comply
with them. But now there are a great many others, that are persons of better
nature and temper, that hate sensuality, and cruelty, and injustice, and
oppression. Now God often makes use of the immoralities of the Enemies of the
People of God, to bring about his designs for their liberty and deliverance:
men of honor and virtue, abhor the sensuality and beastliness of the great
Enemies of the Church; and although themselves (possibly) be not of the minds
of the People of God, yet they abhor injustice, and oppression, and cruelty,
and sensuality; and this makes them favor the poor servants of God, as men
that have done nothing worthy of such deaths, or bonds, or to be so
unreasonably dealt with: and thus God makes the wrath and rage of bloody men
to praise him.

I might go on, and show you how God makes use of the wars and fightings, the
envy, emulation and strife, which often arise amongst the men of the world,
(and James 3.1. Whence come all these, but from the lusts that war in our
members?) to gain his people liberty and protection. But I have spoken enough
to justify this Observation: but it may be some will say to me, Why does God
do this? Could not God do his work by other instruments? And were it not more
suitable to the Holiness of God, to bring about his designs by better
instruments? To which the answer were good enough to say, Who art thou that
disputest with God? It is enough for us, that thus it pleases him, and that
this is consistent enough, both with his Holiness and Wisdom. It is not
inconsistent with his holiness, to mean, and to turn that for good, which men
mean, and intend for evil, (as in Joseph's case, Genesis 50.20.) for God does not
put this malice into their hearts, he only suffers them to walk in their own
ways, and then governs their lusts to his own praise and glory. But I shall
show you, that this is a very reasonable motion and working of Divine
Providence, which will appear to you by the following Considerations:

1. That God by this shows his infinite wisdom and power, by how much there
is the less aptitude and disposition in a cause, to bring forth an effect; by
so much must the power and wisdom of the efficient cause be made more glorious.
Now there is nothing in nature less disposed to the Glory of God, nor that has
so much antipathy to the Glory of God, as sin and lust. What cannot that God
do, that can make men's lusts to praise him? Lust (of its own nature) opposes
God, nothing is so contrary to his designs; for God to make this now to serve
his designs, and to bring about his Counsels; this must glorify God, as an
Almighty God, that can do whatsoever he pleases, and by what means soever he
pleases; yea, and by this means God makes his Wisdom admirable. When he
takes the wise in their own craftiness, Come (says Pharaoh) let us deal
wisely with them: God makes Pharaoh's wisdom to destroy his people, a great
means to deliver his people. What an infinitely-wise God did he by this declare
himself? Turning Pharaoh's wisdom into folly, and making it to operate directly
contrary to his deliberations.

2. A second Consideration is this, That it is but reasonable that God should
make some use of the worst of men. The worst of men are the Lords creatures, he
has made them, he does much for them, they live upon his hand of Providence;
it is reasonable they should do him some service: now, intentionally, and
designedly, a wicked man will do God no service at all; his heart is quite
another way, his life is a pursuit of one lust or other; if God did not get
glory on him besides his intention, he could have no service at all from him.
There is no reason that lewd and wicked men, covetous, ambitious men, bloody
and cruel men should live in the world for nothing; and be maintained from Gods
basket for nothing, without doing him any service; they will not serve God, as
reasonable creatures should do, offering up their bodies as a living acceptable
sacrifice to God, which the Apostle, Romans 12.1, determines our reasonable
service: The Apostle therefore to the Thessalonians, calls wicked men
unreasonable. They shall therefore serve God, as brute creatures, as the beasts
of the field serve him; not knowing what they do, as a mere machine, and engine
serves us by the force of our hand; nay in a worse degree quite contrary to
their own counsels, intentions, and designs. God could have no service from
wicked men, if he did not get himself a glory from their lusts, as he got
himself glory upon Pharaoh.

3. There is something in Gods Counsels to be produced in the world, that is
fit for no other hands, than the hands of sinners, and is hard to be effected
any way, but from their lusts. These are the acts of his Punitive Justice upon
his People. God is compelled by his Justice, sometimes to kindle a fire in
Sion, and to set up a furnace in Jerusalem, to melt, and to try his people, in
order to the purging out of their dross, and taking away their tin. Now as it
is lust which kindles all fires, so (ordinarily) it is the lust of Gods
Enemies, of wicked men, which blows up this fire. Sometimes indeed Ephraim is
against Mamasses, and Manasses against Ephraim; but (ordinarily) it is the
Assyrian, or Egyptian, or Babylonian, that must destroy Israel. Men do not use
to set sheep to hunt, and tear sheep; but to make use of dogs for that work.

4. This is a reasonable motion of Providence, to encourage the people of God,
never to despair, but continually to hope in the Lords mercy. That which
usually discourageth our hope in God, for any good as to his Church, is the
height of the rage of Enemies, the sad and forlorn state of things, the
appearance of never an instrument like to do any service for God, or for his
People. But none of all this is a sufficient ground for discouragement, if God
can make use of the worst of men, and make the lusts of people serviceable to
his own wise counsels, and bringing about his purposes. I might also have
added, that these motions of Providence are reasonable to show wicked men their
folly, and how vainly they set themselves against the counsels and purposes of
God; who ordinarily takes them by guile, and overthrows them in their own
craftiness. But I have enlarged enough upon the doctrinal part of this
Observation, I now come to the Application of it.

Use 1. In the first place let us here admire the infinite power, and the
wisdom of God, and learn at all times to trust in his word. What cannot that
God do? What will not the wisdom of that God extend to, who can make the
highest and proudest Enemies, which his glory has, to serve the designs and
counsels of his glory? The work of Creation, is not so much a work of infinite
power and wisdom, as this work of Providence. In Creation, God only produces
being out of not being: here God brings out his glory from that which has an
unmeasurable contrariety to his glory: nothing is so desperately opposite to
the glory of God, as the sordid lusts of man's heart: no creature is so opposite
to the honor and glory of God, as a resolved malicious sinner is. Now for God
to make such a wretch to serve him, nay, to make such a wretch in the hottest
pursuit of his lusts to serve him; and by the satisfaction of his lusts, to
serve the great design of his glory: O what an Almighty Power, what an infinite
wisdom must this speak in God!

And this I say should recommend God to us, as a God that may at any time,
under any face of things, be trusted. We cannot see a worser face of things,
than when wickedness is at the height, men in the height of rage and malice
against the People of God: when all kind of filthiness and sensuality abounds
in a place; when the vilest men are exalted, and the wicked walk on every side:
they are put together, Psalm. 12.8. But under such dispensations, Christians,
trouble not your selves as to Gods care of his Church: indeed it is, and ought
to be an afflicting dispensation. 1. For the glory of God. Under such a face of
things, the holy Name of God is blasphemed, the honor of God is at present
laid in the dust. 2. Such a time must needs be a time of great suffering to the
holy and innocent servants of God. Many particular servants of God, must be
made great sufferers under such a Providence: But yet encourage your self in
God; he that can bring light out of darkness, can, and will bring good out of
such an evil as this is. The Providence of God does ordinarily compel even the
worst of men to do his work; howbeit that they mean not so: one way or other
they shall do the Lords work; if no other way, yet by making their own folly
manifest to all men: God often brings wicked men upon the stage, to make them
more abominable. There are many in the world, men of sobriety and virtue, would
not have believed there had been such horrible injustice, and oppression, such
horrible, and insatiable avarice, such merciless cruelty in the hearts of many
sinners, if they did not see them play their parts upon a stage in the world.
In the mean time know that you trust in a God, that knows how to make use of
men's malice, and to make the maddest and desperatest sinner serve his purposes.

Use 2. In the second place, what a foundation does this notion lay, for an
Exhortation to all, to break off their sins by true repentance, and to give
unto God a voluntary chosen service.

1. To break off their sins by a true repentance. I remember our Lords words to
Saul, out of Heaven, Saul, Saul, (says he) why persecutest thou me? it is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks. Suppose a person, whose heart the Devil
has filled with all malice, that if he could, he would pluck God out of
Heaven, and root out the Name of God from the Earth: yet methinks this should
discourage him in his fullest career and madness; to think, that he that
sits in the Heavens, laugheth him to scorn; and when he has done all he
can, he shall but have effected the Lords counsels, and done the Lords work,
although he meant not so. Let therefore the sinners of the Earth be instructed,
and learn wisdom: they cannot do what they list, and many times, wherein they
think, and talk proudly, God shows himself above them, and they do Gods work
quite besides, and contrary to their own intentions. There is no encountering
with a God, who can make the wrath of man to praise him, and restrain the
remainder of it when he pleases. 2. If this be so, certainly it is wisdom in
men, designedly and intentionally to serve God: otherwise they lose their
reward, at least their spiritual and eternal reward. We find God with temporal
rewards, sometimes rewarding men, that do some things at his command, though
their hearts in the action be not right with God: so Jehu was rewarded, his
Sons inherited the Throne to the 4th generation; but God at last visited the
blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu. But no man has a spiritual reward,
inward joy. and peace of conscience; nor shall have an eternal reward, but that
man, who with purpose of heart serves the Lord.

SERMON XXII.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Proceed yet in making some Observations concerning the motions of
Providence, in the preservation and government of the world. An eighth
Observation, which I shall make, and a little enlarge upon, is this:

Observe. 8. That the Providence of God is wonderfully seen in bringing to light
hidden counsels of darkness, and punishing of sins, which tend to the
disturbance of civil societies. Indeed there are not many sins but have an ill
influence upon humane society; and the reason is, because there is no law in
the world so fitted to the prosperous beings of Societies, as the law of the
Lord is: but yet there are some which tend to a more eminent disturbance and
confusion in them. Such are now plottings and treasons against Princes, whom
God has made the heads of these Societies; Seditions, and raising up mutinies,
murders, etc. These make great gaps and disorders in political bodies, and you
shall observe the Providence of God bearing an eminent testimony against them,
Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no^ not in thy thought, and curse not the
rich in thy bedchamber; for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that
which has wings shall tell the matter: it shall be discovered, it shall be
suddenly discovered, and by ways, that one would never think of. Two things you
shall observe in the workings of Divine Providence as to this thing.

1. That it is very rarely, that the Providence of God suffers any such
designs to come to any effect and issue.

2. That if at any time he does for the punishment of flagitious rulers suffer
them to come to issue, he very rarely suffers the actors in them to go down
to their graves in peace. This abundantly justifies it self in the story of
Scripture, and in all other story.

It Is very rarely, that the Providence of God suffers conspiracies to take
effect. Of an hundred plots, that you read of in story, to take away the lives
of Princes, and make disturbances in political affairs, it is very rare to read
of any that take effect, Job 5.12. either the Lord makes their own hearts to
fail them, or weakneth their hands, that they cannot find their enterprise; or
put's it into the hearts of some of the conspirators to reveal the matter, or
causes some strange impression and jealousies in those whose lives are aimed
at: some way or other the Providence of God works, to crush the cockatrices
egg, before it hatcheth into a serpent. Our Queen Elizabeth was a famous
instance of the special Providence of God in this kind, over such, as God
makes rulers over others. What a strange discovery had we of the
Powder Treason in this Nation? But this is but the first thing which I
commended to you under this Observation.

2. Sometimes the Providence of God, for his wise ends, does suffer such
conspiracies to come to issue; either for the personal sins of such rulers, or
for the sins of the people, over whom God has set them; but when he does, he
rarely suffers the actors in them to go down to their graves in peace. You
read 2 Samuel 4. that Baanah and Recab, two servants of Ishboseth, conspired
against him, and slew him, ver. 9. David causes them both to be slain. Baasha,
1 King. 16.27, conspireth against Nadab, and slays him; (indeed the Scripture
does not express the particular kind of his death) but he threatened him by Jehu
the Prophet, 1 King. 16.3, 4. and tells us, ver. 7. That the wrath of the Lord
came against him for all the evil that he did -- in being like to the house of
Jeroboam, and because he killed him, that is, he killed Nadab, the Son of
Jeroboam.

And against Elah his Son, Zimri killed him, ver. 20. Had Zimri peace that slew
his master? no, he killed himself; when he had reigned but seven days, ver. 28,
after him Ahab (a most wicked man) dyed in war, his Son Jehoram was slain by
Jehu, and Jehu executed both the Lord's counsel and command in what he did; so
the Lord spared him, and three or four after him of his generation, to fulfill
his promise to Jehu. After this, 2 King. 15, Shallum conspireth against
Zechariah, and slays him, but reigns only one month; and Menahem requiteth
his bloodshed, and slays him: Joash was slain for the blood of the Sons of
Jehojada, 2 King. 24.23. Amaziah his Son succeeds him, 2 Chronicles. 25.1. and
ver. 3. He slays his servants that had slain the King his father. And as this
notion is justified everywhere in sacred story, so civil story also makes it
good: Solomon says, He that breaks an hedge, a serpent shall bite him:
Government is the hedge of a Nation, and rulers are the stakes in that hedge,
that keep it together; and it is very rare, but the Providence of God orders
it so, that a serpent biteth him, who breaks this hedge, which the Providence
of God has set up about a Nation, or People. Princes and Rulers, are (in a
great measure) privileged persons, and have great prerogatives from Divine
Providence. And this motion of Divine Providence seems very reasonable. 1. If
we consider the relation that they have unto God. 2. Or their usefulness unto
men. I say, first, if we consider their relation unto God, which I shall open
to you in three things: ^: They are the Ordinance of God. 2: They are Gods
Creatures. 3. They are Gods Vicegerents.

1. Rulers are Gods Ordinance. This is the reason which the Apostle gives
Christians, for subjection to governors, Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God: the powers that
be, are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God. God is a God of order, and not of confusion, as well in
States, as in Churches: and for the conservation of this order, he has been
pleased to ordain Government, a subordination and subjection of some unto
others: and a man cannot rise up against this, but he must rise up in
opposition to a Divine Ordinance. In 1 Pet. 2.13, Rulers are called the
Ordinance of man, or as it is in the Greek, an humane creature: but that must
not be understood of Government in it self, (that is the Ordinance of God). I
am aware that that is a Text, that is much made use of to prove Christians duty
of Obedience to humane Laws and Sanctions. But this seems not to be the
sense: For, 1. We cannot submit thus to every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake. Men may command us things which are contrary to the Will and Command of
God, and in such cases our Allegiance is first due unto the great God. 2.
Again, The distribution that follows, seems not to favor this sense --
whether to the King as supreme, or unto rulers sent by him. Let the form of
Government, under which you live, be what it will, let the persons entrusted
with the execution of this Government, be what they will, their qualities are
not so much to be regarded, as the office which they bear. 3. Thus both the
Syriack version, and some of the ancients interpret it: the Syriack version
interprets it -- Be you subject to all the Sons of men. 4. But lastly, The word
(...), which is there used, is always applied to persons, not to such
constitutions, as laws are. Besides, there are that think, that the Apostle
uses a dialect, then in use: there is nothing more ordinary in Latin Authors,
than those phrases of creare consulem, creare dictatorem, etc. it is a phrase a
little in use amongst us, to express the conferring of some particular honors.
But I digress too far, certain it is, that as Government in the abstract, so
particular governors in the concrete, are the Ordinance of God, and so have a
more eminent relation unto God: All men are the creatures of God, they are the
works of his hands, rulers are the Ordinance of God.

2. Rulers are Gods creatures, and that not in a large sense, (so every thing
else is) but in a more eminent way; as Rulers in that capacity, to which God
has called them, they are Gods creatures; Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice: by me Princes rule, and nobles, even all the Judges of
the earth. It must not be understood only by my sufferance and permission, nor
by me in an ordinary course of Providence, as all things are by God; but by me
in a way of special Providence and designation: for (as the Psalmist says),
Psalm. 75.6, 7. Promotion comes not from the east, nor from the west, nor from
the south: but God is the judge, he pulls down one, and he sets up another.
And this must be said of the worst of Rulers: they came not up into that place
of government, without the Lord. Saul was a Prince bad enough, God foretold by
Samuel what he would be; yet you know what a special hand God had in the
setting of him up. And God sets up good or bad Rulers over a people,
according to his designs to bless and prosper, or to chastise and punish them.
Rulers, as rulers, be they good or bad, gentile, or froward, are God's
creatures in an eminent way. Now as a Prince thinks himself obliged in honor
to maintain his creatures, whom he has set up in any place, for any end; so
God will maintain Princes, as they are his creatures, raised up for his special
designs.

3. Nay further yet, Rulers are Gods vicegerents, Psalm. 82.6. I have said you
are Gods; and in this sense it is true which the Apostle says, There are Gods
many, and Lords many. Every Prince is but a Viceroy to the King of Kings, a
Deputy-Lieutenant to the great Lord of Heaven and Earth. This creates a very
near relation betwixt God and them, and highly engages the Providente of God
for them. Every Prince takes a special care of persons, which he sends
abroad for Ambassadors, and which represent his person and authority. Plots and
conspiracies against Princes, are much against God himself. God gives this
reason for his severe Law against murder, Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man. The Image
of God in man, lay much in his Knowledge, Wisdom, Righteousness, dominion over
other creatures. If God sends a people, a Prince, in whom nothing of the
Image of God can be seen in the three former things, Knowledge, or Wisdom, or
Righteousness: yet he has given unto all Rulers a dominion over his creatures,
and that not only over brute and inanimate creatures, (every man has such a
dominion, and is a great Prince) but over rational creatures: and herein much
of the Image of God, who is the King of kings, and Lord of lords, and ruler of
Princes, is to be seen. Now I say considering this great relation of Rulers to
God, it is but reasonable that God should watch over them with a special eye of
Providence, maintaining his own Ordinance, his own Creatures, his own
Vicegerents in the Earth.

2 But secondly, The reasonableness of it will appear, if you consider the
usefulness of Rulers unto men. Upon the former account I have showed you how
God consulteth his own glory. I shall now show you how God in these motions of
Providence consulteth our good. It is usually said, and I think very truly,
Better Tyranny than Anarchy; better a very ill oppressive government, then no
government: He that would pluck up the government of any place, would but pluck
up the bridge, which in a short time, himself will have occasion to go over: so
that God in his special Providence toward, and for Rulers, shows a special
kindness to humane society. What do laws signify without Executors of them?
Now this is the office of Rulers, to execute the Laws, and if some of them be
partial in the execution of them, and spare some transgressors; yet there is
none of them, but in many things do execute justice, and keep up something of
the face of order of humane society. But I have hitherto only instanced in one
sort of sins, eminently disturbing humane societies, treasons, seditions,
conspiracies, etc. I come now to a second.

2. Oppression is another sin of this nature, and this must be the sin of
Superiors, and men that are in power over others. I may join with it tyranny
and cruelty, they are of a great cognation one to another: Oppression is one of
the crying sins of a Nation, and the Providence of God is eminently seen in
giving testimony against it: this was that sin for which God so plagued
Pharaoh, Exodus 3.7. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the
needy, now will I arise (says the Lord), and the vengeance of God is so
certain against oppressors, that the wise man calls to us, Prove. 3.31. Envy
thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways. Does he flourish? does he
grow rich and great? Envy him not, choose none of his ways. It is very seldom
that God lets eminent oppressors escape. If they be amongst inferior
Rulers, God stirs up their superiors against them at one time or other: If
chief rulers be oppressors, God has other ways to punish them, either
immediately by his own hand, as he did Pharaoh; or suffering people to throw
off the reins of Government, which was the case of Abijam, though he did but
threaten oppression, 1 King. 12.11. All men are not wise, the most of people
are overruled by their own lusts and passions, and not governed by reason: but
even for wise men Solomon tells us, Eccles. 7.7. That oppression will make them
mad, put them out of the government of their reason. It is indeed madness, and
nothing but madness for private persons to rise up against a government; but we
see it sometimes done, and usually oppression, eminent, and general oppression
gives the occasion, and is the proximate cause of it; but one way or other God
(ordinarily) revengeth oppression by signal Providence; and therefore the wise
man says, Eccles. 5.8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and the
violent perverting of judgment and justice in a people, marvel not at the
matter: for he that is higher than the highest regards, and there is higher
than they. Now the reason of the special and remarkable Providence of God in
this case, may be conceived to be, 1. Gods great love to Justice and Judgment.
2. His great kindness to Political Societies. God is a just and righteous God,
and loves justice: Justice is an essential Attribute of God, he could not be
God, if he could be unjust: he gives to every one their due, and he cannot but
give every one their due; and the righteous God loves righteousness, and
hates iniquity. Now oppression is nothing else but a violent perverting of
Justice and Judgment, by him that has power on his side. Solomon says, Prove.
14.31. He that oppresses the poor, reproacheth his maker: he reproacheth his
Maker, because it is God that has made his brother poor, and put him under his
feet. Again, he reproacheth his Maker, because God hates and abhors all
oppression and injustice; he pretends to rule in the place of God, but he
reproacheth his Maker: God deals so by none, his law directs the quite
contrary. Again, he reproacheth his Maker, because God has taken the poor, the
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow into his special protection; and has
given many particular laws about them, and given the world a particular charge
concerning them.

2. As God is a God of Justice, and loves that; so he has also a great
kindness for humane societies, and for brotherly love. God has in Creation
disposed man to society, he is not like the wild Ass, that loves to be alone
in the wilderness; he has also disposed them to trades and employments,
serving one another; so as though a beast, or a bird could live without one
another, yet men can live in no degree of felicity (outward felicity) without
company; nor can society be well maintained without justice and brotherly love;
injustice, violence, and oppression break all humane society. There is nothing
that breaks humane society, more than oppression does; when the greater devour
the lesser, and the richer swallow up those that are more poor, that they might
be left alone in the Earth. There Is nothing more opposite to brotherly love,
the ligament of humane society, than oppression is; and therefore the special
Providence of God in the punishment of it, and delivering the oppressed from
the bondage of it, is not to be judged a strange thing, but exceeding consonant
to the nature of God.

3. A third sin which makes gaps in humane societies, is murder, a private,
willful taking away the life of another; I say private, for if it be done by
the hand of Justice, it is no murder: I add wilful to distinguish it from
casual homicide, when one is the cause of the death of another, not in the
least intending him death, or any harm tendent to it. It was one of Gods
Precepts to Noah, Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed, for in the image of God made he him. Afterward it was one of his Ten
Commandments, given to his people on Mount Sinai, Thou shall do no murder. And
although in the case of casual homicide, he appointed Cities of refuge, to
which the manslayer might fly, and be free from the avenger of blood; yet for
the wilful murderer, Numb. 35.31. he says -- you shall take no satisfaction
for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death; but he shall surely be
put to death: and verse 33. So shall you not pollute the land wherein you are:
for blood, it defiles the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood
that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. And accordingly the
Providence of God has (generally) ordered the government of the several parts
of the world, that unless it has been in a very debauched nation, scarce any
place has been found where the Rulers have not been zealous, even from the
light of nature, against wilful murderers; and the Providence of God is in
nothing more eminently seen, than in the discovery of such transgression, and
bringing them to justice. It is a common observation, therefore I shall need
the less to insist upon the Justification of it. Sometimes God makes use of the
fear and passion, and shy-looks of the guilty conscience of the murderer, to
discover himself: sometimes the birds of the air shall pursue him (as I
remember I have somewhere read of a famous story of murderers, pursued by
Crows and Ravens), sometimes a Dog shall do it; sometimes a Spirit shall do it:
in short, the stories are very many, and strange, of the Providence of God in
discovering of murder: Murders make great gaps and disorders in humane
societies.

4. Adultery is another sin, which makes great confusion in humane society;
though not like those beforementioned, but in a more secret way; yet great
disorder it begets. By Gods old Law, the adulterer was to be put to death; it
was an extraordinary act, and one of those we call heroic acts, not to be
defended, but by an immediate impetus, by a command from God, that of Phinehas,
I mean, taking a javelin, and at once running through Zimri and Cosbi: God
justified it, and promised Phinehas a reward for it. The vengeance of God upon
those that have given up themselves to this sin, is eminent; he has prepared a
dart to strike through their livers, which he uses in no other case, a
peculiar defiling, tormenting disease: The persons that are guilty, are often
sent to hell in the act, by the jealousy of Husbands; and by the Laws of most
Nations, such manslayers are justified. It is a sin indeed, that does not make
that havoc in humane society, which some of those beforementioned do; and
therefore the Providence of God is not so remarkably seen in preventing it, and
discovering preparations to it; but it is eminently seen in the punishment of
it, both as to punishments in this life, and in his threatenings, as to
depriving them of a life to come.

5. I will instance in one more, and that is, Rebellion and disobedience to the
lawful commands of parents. It is the fifth of of the Ten Commandments, Honor
thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord
thy God gives thee. Upon which account the Apostle calls it, the first
commandment with promise. Indeed this sin is the root of most disorder that is
in political society. The rebellious child seldom proves a dutiful wife, or
good husband, nor good servant, nor good subject, unless grace first makes a
change in their hearts, and brings them from under the government of their
passions; the Providence of God is therefore eminently to be seen in the
punishment of such children. By the Law of God, the Son that obeyed not his
father, was to be stoned to death. Read Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20. He that curses
his father or mother, shall dye the death, Exodus 21.17. Levit. 20.9. Mal. 15.4.
Mar. 7.20. And if you observe the Providence of God, it strangely pursues
rebellious children with vengeance, they seldom prosper.

6. I will instance but in one sin more, That is persecution, or eminent
disturbance of others, for their conscience toward God. This is a sin which
does not only disturb humane society, but the best of humane societies, the
society of the Church: it disturbeth humane society, ingageth husband against
wife, and children against parents, and brother against brother; it spoileth
that commerce and traffic, by which political societies are maintained and
upheld. As to that, it cannot be without a great connection and twisting of men's
interests of diverse persuasions, one with another; so as the interrupting the
free course of one, is the interruption of another: and while persons are
rifled in their houses, haled to prisons, there must needs be an interruption
in their commerce. But this sin has this further aggravation, That it makes
disturbance in the best societies; the Assemblies of Gods People for his
worship, are the best of humane societies, God is in the midst of them, more
present with them, than with any societies in the world besides them. Those
that rudely break in upon such Assemblies, break in upon the great God of
Heaven and Earth, who has said, Wheresoever two or three are gathered together
in my name, I will be in the midst amongst them; and may justly expect some
such extraordinary judgment, as the Sodomites met with, when they would have
broken open Lots house, to have pulled the Angels out; but God does not always
work miraculously, but seldom fails (even in this life) to set his mark upon
this sort of sinners. It is an observation that I have formerly made to you.
You shall in story read of persecutions, which sometimes have lasted long, very
long, but seldom of a persecutor that has lasted long: he is an odious,
abominable wretch, whom vengeance will neither suffer to live, nor often to dye
after the ordinary death of men. He that will but read over the story of the
ten Primitive persecutions, will see this abundantly confirmed: or if any
thinks those stories too old, let him read what became of Gardener and Bonner,
those two bloody wretches in Queen Mary's days, and of diverse others that were
their instruments, and willingly followed their Commandments; and possibly he
may confirm himself in this Observation, by later examples than those also. But
I have instanced in those sins, which do most eminently disturb humane
societies, and spoken enough to the doctrinal part of this Observation. I shall
reduce all I shall say by way of Application to two heads: 1. Showing you what
advantage this observation gives me, to call upon all men, but especially
those in higher orbs, to praise the Lord. 2. To persuade all men to take heed,
as of all sin, so especially of such sins as these are, against which the wrath
of God is so eminently revealed.

Use 1. In the first place, let then all men that live upon the Earth praise
the Lord; but especially such as are superiors and rulers over others, and more
especially such as are his Church. The Psalmist, Psalm. 135.1. calls to all,
saying, Praise the Lord, praise ye the name of the Lord, and ver. 19, 20, 21.
He calls in particular, Bless the Lord, O house of Israel: Bless the Lord, O
house of Aaron: Bless the Lord, O house of Levi; you that fear the Lord, bless
the Lord: Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, which dwells at Jerusalem. 1.
This observation calls to all the sons and daughters of men to bless the
Lord. We are all sociable creatures, and much of the comfort of our lives lies
in our societies and fellowships one with another, either in our
family-societies, or in our civil-societies, or in our Church-societies. We
should think it a life worse than death, to be condemned to live like a wild
Ass alone in the wilderness. Now there are some lusts of men, that would spoil
us of all this comfort. God peculiarly sets himself against them, and makes
these the marks for his arrows of vengeance. The Jews said of the Centurion, He
has loved our nation, and has built us a synagogue. We may say of our good
God, he has loved mankind, for he has taken care to preserve order in humane
societies, and severely to chasten the invaders upon the rights of others. What
an engagement does this lay upon all men to praise the Lord? Certainly sirs,
there is a great deal of praise, and glory, and homage due to God from all men,
as they are concerned in their several societies. There is a great deal of
glory due to God from families, for his testimony against those lusts of men,
(such as are murderers and adulterers) which in a short time would spoil all
the comfort of those societies. Certainly every family is bound to worship God,
and to walk with God. But particularly,

1. Let Rulers praise the Lord. Let all the Princes of the Earth give homage to
him that ought to be served; they are more especial marks for furious and
ambitious men's lusts. Gods Providence (as you have heard) is eminently seen in
preventing their dangers, in revenging their harms. 2 Samuel 23.3, 4, 5.
Surely then (as David says) those that rule over men should be just, ruling
them in the fear of the Lord: their light should be like the light of the
morning without clouds. God has not only set them up as lights upon an hill,
but he has made his special Providence to be a lanthorn about them; that it is
rarely, that the wind of sedition and treason prevails to blow them out, and
then it is (ordinarily) for some eminent Provocation of God. But I am not
speaking to persons in that capacity. You that are parents, praise the Lord:
Gods special Providence you see reaches you, and in a great measure secureth
you from that great heart-ach of rebellious and disobedient children. I know
you will say, How then comes this to be the great affliction of many good
parents? To which I answer: 1. There is many a good parent may have been but
like good old Ely, too indulgent and cockering to their children; ordinarily
God keeps up the authority of parents over their children, until themselves
have prostituted it; and in the rebellion and disobedience of their children,
they may read their own sin, and see as much cause to be humbled for that, as
any thing else, as David in the case of Adonijah, 1 King. 1.5, 6. And herein
the goodness of God toward parents will be seen, that if he does not (upon
their endeavors) secure to them the duty of their children; yet he will not
fail to revenge their quarrels against them.

2. Let the poor and weak of the earth praise the Lord: he has declared
himself the father of the fatherless, and the judge of the widows, a refuge for
the oppressed, Psalm. 68.5. Exodus 22.5. Psalm. 10.11. How are all the widows, and
fatherless children, all the poor and oppressed people of the world bound to
praise, and to serve this God, who has taken upon himself the special
patronage and protection of them? This indeed would be the best use we could
possibly make of this Observation, relating to the special Providence of God,
if it might lay a special obligation upon all those, who are thus especially
concerned, to magnify God as their great patron and defender. And how can they
praise God more effectually, than in doing those particular duties which
concern them all in their respective relations? or with reference to those
peculiar circumstances of Providence, under which they are acted. I shall add
but one branch of Application more, and indeed it is not a new Use, for it is a
part of our praise and homage which we owe unto God upon this Reflection, viz.

Use 2. To all, to take heed of those sins, which God in his word declares
himself more eminently to abhor, and in the execution of Providence, does most
severely punish. All sin is in it self a filthy and abominable thing, and the
just object of every good man's hatred: for should not we hate what God hates?
and what has of all things the greatest opposition to God? yes, we ought to
hate it with a perfect hatred. But such is the naughtiness of our heart, that
we are not so led to an hatred and abhorrence of sin, from the intrinsecal
evil, and obliquity of it, as from the dangerous and pernicious consequence of
it. Death, eternal death is the wages of every sin; but this being only matter
of faith to bold sinners, (none having ever come from the dead to give them an
account of those flames) the punishments of sin in this life, are those things
which most deter carnal sensual men. But if men will look no further, nor
believe any more; yet let this lay some law upon us, and make us afraid of
those sins which I have instanced in, being such, whose judgment the Providence
of God seldom lets sleep so long, as to another life. Let this mind us not
to meddle with them that are given to change, that curse Kings and Rulers in
their bed-chambers, and are of turbulent and unquiet spirits, always plotting,
and contriving seditions, and treasons, and disturbances to civil governors:
it is very rarely, that God suffers their designs to come to issue, or their
persons to come to the grave in peace. 2. What a law should it lay upon the
rich and great men of the earth, to take heed of violent perverting justice and
judgment, of turning away the causes of the widows, and the fatherless in
judgment: To consider, that he who is the highest, does consider the matter;
and there is one higher than the highest of them, who abuse their power to
trample the poor under foot. If men be not turned Atheists, and have banished
all the fear of God from their eyes and hearts; it must a little give them law,
and lay them under some restraints, as to those horrible sins, of murder,
persecution, defiling their neighbors wives, etc. To consider that these are
some of the sins, which go ordinarily beforehand to judgment, and which God
usually revengeth by some special remarkable Providence in this life. But it
is time to finish this discourse. Let us beg Gods blessing upon it.

SERMON XXIII.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am in a discourse about the observable things of Divine Providence. When do
you think, shall I have finished it? Day unto day utters speech, night unto
night declares knowledge. When I have said all that I can, I must conclude with
Job, Lo these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion of him do we
understand? However, it is wonderfully sweet to know the least of God. If a
learned man could think it worth his while to write a book of the admiranda
Nili, the admirable and observable things of the famous River of Nile; What a
book might be written, and how much worth a pen-mans hand would it be, to write
a book, and call it, Admiranda, or Observanda Providentiae Divinae, the
admirable and observable things of Divine Providence? But leaving Prefaces, I
proceed to a ninth Observation, which is this:

Observe. 9. The Providence of God often repayeth both good and evil, and
especially charity and cruelty in this life in its own kind, 1 Cor. 3.8. 2 Cor.
5.10. That God will reward every man according to his works, is most certain,
and is a piece of Divine Justice; he cannot condemn the innocent, nor clear the
guilty, there will be a now when God will visit for all sin: and though sinners
do evil an hundred years, yet the day of vengeance will come. And to let us
know the certainty of it, oftentimes the Prophets of God in the denouncing of
judgments yet a far off, cried out, It is come, It is come; and gave the
alarm, as if the enemy had already entered the gates. But God does not
recompense all sinners in this life: Judgment comes afterward. But for those
whom God does chastise in this life, he does not punish them all the same way;
some are punished with temporal judgments, and those some of them of one sort,
some of another: others he punishes with spiritual judgments, blindness of
mind, hardness of heart. And it is the same case for rewards of grace, some
have little reward for all their service for God, until they come in Heaven;
others are rewarded in this life, but in different manners. The Observation
which I am making, concerns charity and mercy, and the vices opposite to it,
such as are, cruelty, hardheartedness to those in want and misery. In these
cases I observe Gods Providence often retaliates. I say, 1. The Providence of
God does often recompense other sins in this manner, but especially sins
against charity and brotherly love. God many times repayeth other sins in their
kind: our Savior by this argument dissuades from rash censuring, and
censorious judging of others, Matthew. 7.1, 2. For with what judgment you judge,
you shall be judged: and with what measure you mete, it shall be meted to you
again. (A text which if well thought upon, should deter Christians from the too
common practice of censuring and judging one another) especially in doubtful
things, where they are not of a mind; as if sincerity and uprightness were the
Prerogative of a party in Religion, or annexed to some particular forms. You
know God threatened David for his adultery with Bathsheba, That he would take
his wives before his eyes, and give them to his neighbor, and he should lie
with his wives in the sight of the Sun, 2 Samuel 12.11. and it was fulfilled by
the permission (though not by the instigation) of Divine Providence, in 2 Samuel
16.22. Spoiling and plundering of others, taking away their goods without a
just warrant from God, is another sin we find thus threatened, Isa. 33.1. Woe to
thee that spoilest, and thou were not spoiled; those that thou so rifledst,
never did thee any wrong; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not
treacherously with thee: when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled,
and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal
treacherously with thee. But that indeed refers to the more special
observation, as to sins opposite to that Charity we should exercise to our
brethren, to which I now come. I say it is very observable, that God punishes
sins against charity, and rewards deeds, and acts of charity in their kind,
secundum legem Talionis, ordinarily giving the Authors of both like for like. I
will first show it you in the motions of Providence, as to the execution of
Vindicative Justice, in the punishment of sins against Charity. Against which
men may sin, either by omissions, hardening their hearts from their brother in
distress, not relieving him when it is in their power, according to their
ability; or by commissions: murders, oppressions, cruelty, are all sins against
Charity. 1. For omissions. It is a dreadful text, Prove. 21.13. He that stops
his ear against the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, and shall not
be heard. A text worth deliberating upon by those who find their hearts so shut
up in cafes of Charity: not that we are bound to hear the cry of all that are
poor. There are some poor, that the greatest act of Charity we can show them,
is not to relieve them, that they may learn not to be idle, and wander up and
down begging, refusing to work. The poor we are concerned in, are Gods poor; I
hope we favor none that are lazy, idle, or lewd, and by that means bring
themselves to, and continue themselves at a morsel of bread: far be it from me,
or any Minister of Jesus Christ, to plead for such. You from us hear the cries
of the Lords poor, take heed of stopping your ears at their cry, remember
Solomon's word, Gods word by Solomon: He that does so, he also shall cry, and
not be heard: you may also come into such a condition, or you may have a child
may come to it through age, through Gods hand upon him. You remember the story
of Naomi, she went out full, she returned empty; the story of Job, and others
in Scripture. I could tell you the stories of Belisarius, of diverse persons of
far greater estates (some of them), than any that hear me this day, yet brought
to live upon the baskets of others: who knows what you or yours may come to? Do
you think the great fire at London 1666, that at Northampton but the last year;
That at a Town in this County two or three years ago, at Cottenham in
Cambridg-shire the other day, has not given many instances of this nature?
(for God of late has very remarkably contended with England, as by such a
plague, as our forefathers never knew; so by a multitude of such devouring
fires, for number and greatness not to be paralleled). God make us to
understand his Rod, and how many ways he is as a moth unto England, secretly,
and gradually, and almost irreparably devouring and destroying us. This makes
our days full of the cry of the poor: God grant we be not also full of such as
stop their ears at the cry of the poor, either giving nothing, or in no
proportion to relieve them. I wish we could consider and remember that Text,
and think what may be our portion, and do as we would be done by, and remember,
God often punishes this uncharitableness in its kind. Men of hardhearts in
prosperity, (ordinarily) meet with hard-hearts in their adversity; with what
measure they mete to others, it is meted unto them again. The Apostle, Gal.
6.1. persuades the restoring of a brother fallen in the spirit of meekness,
and uses this Topic, Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. And to
the Hebrews he speaks, To remember them that are bound, as bound with them:
and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves in the body, Heb. 13.2.
There Is much in those words, Lest thou also be tempted, and those, as being
your selves in the body. In cases of true charity, Christians, as they should
consider other things, so they should consider, that they themselves are in the
body; they may lose their estates, their health, their limbs; they are not in
Heaven yet, they are in the world, and they are in the body; they are not
merely spirits invulnerable, impenetrable: Men should think my house may be
fired, and all I have lost in an hour or two: I may lose my eyes, my limbs, as
this poor creature has, I am in the body. So in those words there is a great
Emphasis, Lest thou also be tempted: Tempted, sometimes signifies as much as
afflicted, (though indeed in that Text it seems to signify solicited to sin,
and overcome). God (says the Apostle) for thy rigid dealing with thy brother,
overborn with a temptation to sin, may suffer the Devil to give thee a foil;
would thou in such a case be roughly dealt with thy self? With what measure
men mete to others, God measures to them again. Let me say to you, take heed
of omitting your duty in a charitable act, lest thou also come to be so
afflicted, as to need others charity; and when thou art so, God should repay
thee in thy own kind, so straiten men's hearts toward thee, that from persons,
from whom thou might have expected pounds, thou have not so many pence:
think with thy self how such a thing would please you? Let me here give you two
rules, which I think your Reasons will all concur with.

1. It is a foolish thing for any person (in circumstances of mortality) so to
govern himself in his conversation, as if he were not subject to the common
accidents of that state. The Apostle says of Elijah, That he was a man subject
to like passions with other men: The Apostle speaks of humane weaknesses,
sinful infirmities; and God considers that, and gives us allowances for it:
and therefore though Job had many ill fits of impatience, when the hand of God
was heavy upon him; yet God says, Behold the patience of Job. We are all of us
also subject to the same sufferings, and the Apostle from this Topic,
comfort his Corinthians in those first (and furious) times of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but what is common to men. Now
I say there is nothing more foolish, than for any of us in our conversation to
govern our selves, as if we were not so, but out of the gun shot of the
chastising Providence of God. Our bodies are subject to death, to sicknesses,
to old age, and impotencies; our estates are exposed to the fire, to the thief,
to the merciless soldier, to the oppressor. Now for a man in his conversation
to govern himself so, as if he were never to dye; as if he were never to be
sick; as if it were not possible that a fire should devour his pleasant things,
that he or his should not be brought to straits, is no better than folly and
madness.

2. It is as foolish a thing for a man to promise himself, that in case of such
accidents, others should be kinder to him, than he has been to others in the
same circumstances. We cannot so much as fancy such a thing, without supposing
them better-natured, or more gracious, either of which is at best a reproach to
our selves. And this is but reasonable for us to think, although we consider
not the influence of God in the case, who has told us, That he who stops
his ear against the cry of the poor, he also shall cry, and not be heard; and
has the hearts of all men in his hand, and can easily shut them up (in
judgment) against the cries of those who have sinfully stopped their ears
against the cries of those who have cried to them in their distress. Hence it
follows, that it is but reasonable for us in these cases thus to conclude. I
have now a fair estate, but it is subject to decay, a fire may consume it in a
moment, soldiers may devour it, either in my or my childrens days: I have now
an healthy body, sound and perfect limbs, I may grow sickly, lose my limbs, my
senses, and be brought into the condition of a receiver, who am now a giver.
Why should I think that any should consider me, or mine in such circumstances,
more than I consider others? Let me therefore do unto others, as I would have
others do unto me: I have no reason to look, that it should be meted to me
again, better measure then I measure unto others. But I have dwelt too long
upon this first, showing you how the Providence of God does often retaliate
hard heartedness, by suffering the hearts of others to harden against men in
straits, who have stopped their ears against the cries of others to them in
distress.

2. But there are other kinds of uncharitableness, which God does ordinarily
repay in their kind. Those are acts, bearing the highest opposition to charity,
tending to the utter ruin and destruction of their brethren: such as murders,
cruelties, and barbarous and inhumane usage of others. We shall find in the old
Law, that God in diverse cases established a law of Retaliation. If any mischief
followed such a striking a woman with child, as caused a miscarriage, God
ordained they should give eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe, Exodus 21.23, 24,
25. and in the case of a false witness there was such a law, Deuteronomy. 19.16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21. which you may read at your leisure. It was Gods will, that a
witness who had testified falsely against any man, (if he were once found a
false witness) should suffer the very same thing that the other should have
suffered. So that throughout all the Jewish period, the Providence of God did
(ordinarily) execute this Justice by the hands of Magistrates. But you must not
mistake to think this rule of God was without exceptions; for oftentimes
exceptions were made with respect to the quality of the persons, and this by
the Law of God, Exodus 21.16. He that cursed his father or mother, was to dye
the death: that now was more than like for like: and ver. 26. If a master had
struck a servant, and put out his eye, the masters punishment was only to
manumit his servant, not to pay eye for eye: the reason was the disparity of
persons. I might observe to you, that the Providence of God directed other
Magistrates, then those he set up amongst his own people, to enact laws, to
render like for like: in many cases especially, where offenses were eminently
against mercy and charity, (though with the like respect to persons and other
circumstances) which is enough (by the way) to evidence the justice of such
laws in many cases. But further, the Providence of God, in this retaliating
sins of this nature, is eminent in those whom he took to punish with his own
hand. In the case of Pharaoh, he cruelly caused the maleinfants of the Jewish
children to be drowned; God causes him, and his host to be swallowed up in the
red Sea. In the case of Adonibezek, Judge. 1.6. The Israelites took him, and cut
off his thumbs, and great toes. You never read that the Israelites served any
Enemy so, either before or after that time; and doubtless what they did, was by
an extraordinary instinct from God. Ver. 7. Adonibezek acknowledges the hand
of God in it, Threescore and ten Kings (says he) having their thumbs and great
toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table; as I have done, so God has
requited me, 1 Samuel 15.33. When Samuel comes to slay Agag by Gods Commandment,
observe what he says, As thy sword has made many women childless: so this day
thy mother shall be made childless as to thee, and he cut him in pieces before
the Lord. And this is that which God has said, Rev. 13.10. He that leads
into captivity, shall go into captivity: he that kills with the sword, shall
be killed with the sword: and in Rev. 18.6. speaking of mystical Babylon (by
which our Forefathers have understood Rome, though late Authors have otherwise
endeavored to interpret it), and the fall of it, says God, Reward her even as
she has rewarded you, and double unto her double, according to her works; in
the cup which she has filled, fill her double. You see still those whom God
has thus punished from time to time, have ordinarily been great offenders
against mercy and charity, great actors of cruelty; the wickedness of these
men, God has ordinarily retaliated, and paid them in their own kind. I have
hitherto justified the first part of my observation, that God very ordinarily
does repay eminent sinners against charity in their own kind; what has been
wanting, there is hardly any observing Christian but will be able to make up in
his daily observation; it is very seldom but God gives cruel and bloody, and
mischievous men blood to drink, and cruelty to digest; if he gives it not to
them, he ordinarily does it to their children, as he did to Saul, and to Ahab,
and to Jehu. Saul's children were hanged by David at Gods command, for his
bloody house; Ahab's seventy Sons were slain for his bloodshed and cruelty. And
God repaid the blood which Jehu shed in Jesreel, (though in it he executed Gods
counsel) unto his children, as the Prophet says expressly. God gave Manasses
his children ( Josiah only excepted) blood to drink, to requite him for his
filling of Jerusalem with innocent blood.

2. Let me now justify the Observation as to the second part of it. Gods
retaliation of charity: Charity is a word of a very vast extent, and
comprehends under it all acts of kindness done unto our brethren, standing in
need of our help. It is a saying I have met with somewhere, A man seldom
himself experienceth in himself, that misery which he has truly felt in
others. Many great and exceeding precious promises are made to it, as if it
were all Godliness; what the Apostle says of Godliness, is applicable unto it.
It has promises both of this life, and that which is to come. Blessed are the
merciful (says our Savior, Mat 5.7.) for they shall receive mercy: He that
gives to the poor shall not want, Prove. 28.22. I have been young (says David)
and now am old; yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging
their bread: he is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is blessed. It were
a great work to reckon up all the promises of this nature, made to mercy and
charity, so many that the hardhearted, the niggardly-handed person, must
necessarily be either an Atheist, or a notorious Unbeliever, either not
believing there is any such God, as the Scriptures speak, or such Scriptures as
are the word of God; or not daring to trust God upon his word; either of them
has a soul in state bad enough. But my work is to show you how the Providence
of God justifies this word. I told you before how David observed it in the
whole course of his life, he never saw such a man forsaken, nor his posterity
beggars. What an experience was that? he was a good man, a wise and observing
man, much acquainted with the world; he had seen more than most of us, he lived
to be an old man; he does not say he had rarely seen, no, that was too little.
I have been young, says he, and now am old, I never saw the righteous
forsaken. If you would know what righteous man he means, he tells you, One
that is ever merciful and lends. I think in this case we may as to the
motions of Providence distinguish (as St. Paul does in another case between a
righteous man, and a good man, Romans 5.) The Providence of God does sometimes so
order it, that we see religious men, (though it is a hard task, I would not
willingly be employed in it, to reconcile an hardness of heart in this kind to
Religion); yet so it is, that we find sometimes persons, that in other things
we cannot say, but they are devout, religious men, and just men, and (were it
not for that of St. John, how dwells the love of God in him? after a very
imperfect manner certainly; his brother can scarce tell how) for that of St.
James: He that keeps the whole law, and (in the constant track and course of
his life) offends but in one point, is guilty of all. One would think they had
love for God, and were righteous men: yet when you come to them for an act of
charity, oh it grateth them, a sixpence comes at two or three pulls, and with
many a grudg and excuse. You may possibly see such a man decay (God distributes
his estate, because he would not), and such a man's seed you may see begging
bread: But for a good man, one that disperseth abroad, and gives to the poor,
Prove. 3.9, 10. David never saw such a man's seed begging their bread: and it is
no wonder, thousands of men grow poor by lending; but he that gives to the
poor, lends to the Lord (says Solomon): never any man lost by that lending.
The great God never yet failed, never yet was unfaithful. I could fill your
ears with stories. I will only give you one or two. It is reported in the life
of that famous Junius, Minister in France and Holland, he died but in the year
1602; he met with the Lot of many godly Divines in all ages, as well as ours,
and came to be pinched with want, and resolved for the supply of his
necessities, every each day to dig in the Town-ditch. But see the Providence of
God, there lived near a Tailor, a young man, whose Mother had in France lived
near to this Junius's mothers house, and being very poor, Junius's mother had
often relieved her. Her son remembers this kindness, and though but a poor
man, inviteth Junius to his house, and provideth meat and lodging for him for
seven months. I could tell you many, and strange stories of Gods repaying
Charity in its kind, of little pieces of silver given in this kind, repaid with
an hundred fold, even in this life. But this is an observation which justifies
it self in the experience of every one of you. I shall rather show you the
reasonableness of this motion of Divine Providence, which will be evident to
you. I will open it to you in five particulars:

1. God does this to evidence his general love to mankind, and special care of
Providence for the needy, the poor, and the fatherless, the stranger, and the
widow. Justice and Charity are the two pillars of the world, all humane society
is dependent upon them: Justice, because as I told you before from Solomon,
oppression makes the wiseman mad, men's spirits will never be calm under a
course of oppression; hence Tyrants must have constant standing-armies to
secure their lusts. The Turkish Empire is little but injustice and oppression,
it could not stand but for his Janissaries. Charity is another pillar of the
Earth, the reason is, because as our Savior told us, The poor we shall have
always with us. Now God shows his great love to societies of men in eminent
upholding of both these. And besides, the Scripture speaks God to have taken
the special patronage of the poor, and needy, the stranger, and widow, and
fatherless. God does this by raising them up friends, and it is a great means
to raise them friends, to encourage them by sensible rewards, and that of the
same kind.

2. It is necessary, that (as our Savior often says) all righteousness should
be fulfilled. The promises might have a being given them. I told you before,
that the promises made to mercy and charitableness are very many; now some of
these promises are made for a term within this life: He shall not lack (says
Solomon:) that must be a promise respecting reward in this life: and so for the
threatenings against cruelty and hard-heartedness toward them in misery, or
that exercise any barbarous dealings toward their brother; so that it is
necessary God should in this life retaliate such wickedness.

3. It is necessary for the terror of such sorts of sinners. God himself gives
this as one of his ends in establishing the law of Retaliation in the case of
false witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And those which remain, shall
hear and fear, and from henceforth commit no such evil more amongst you. The
most of men hearing that Adonibezek, who cut off so many Princes thumbs and
great toes, came to be served in the same kind himself, are afraid of such kind
of Inhumanity.

4. Again, It is necessary for the conviction of unbelievers. There are many
sins, against which there are dreadful Revelations of Divine Wrath in holy
Writ, and the Providence of God gives them a being every day: but yet sinners
will not believe when they see the vengeance that comes upon them, that God
designs to punish them for their unmercifulness and cruelty to their brethren;
no, all things fall alike to all men, and those that judge otherwise, are with
them in no better repute, than as bold priers into the secrets of God, and
judges of his Counsels. God therefore will please sometimes to write their sin
in their plague. It shall be wrote over the Gallows fifty cubits high, upon
which Haman was hanged: this was the Gallows which he prepared for Mordecay.
The accusers of the three Children shall be thrown into the same fiery furnace,
which they had caused to be heated for the three children; and Daniel's
accusers into the same den of Lions, in which they would have had him perished:
He that leads into captivity, shall be led into captivity: and he that
kills with the sword, shall be killed with the sword. When men see this, if
they will believe any thing, they will believe this.

5. Lastly, It is also reasonable, for the more perfect demonstration of Gods
favor to these exercises of grace and virtue. Our Savior faith, All men have
not faith. The most of men live, either merely by sense, or by reason. The
promises of a reward of Heaven, are matters of faith A true believer, only from
these, understands Gods favor to merciful men; his faith being the evidence of
things not seen, indeed, evidenceth to him Gods love sufficiently. Inward
rewards of grace, are like the newname given unto the People of God, only known
to them that have them. The most of men are acted by sense, and convinced by
that mostly, (for in this cafe Reason will do little). God is therefore pleased
to reward such persons to great degrees in this life, and that in the same kind
too, that all the Earth may know what he will do for such persons. But I come
to the Application, which I shall dispatch in two branches, making it a
foundation.

Use 1. First, for Admonition to all that hear me, to take heed of these sins.
I would have you brethren take heed of all sin, for the wages of every sin is
(without repentance) eternal death; but especially take heed of sins eminently
against charity. Take heed of stopping your ears against the cry of the poor:
God will be even with you; you, or yours shall cry, and not be heard. It is a
woeful folly for a man so to govern himself in his Conversation, as if he were
not subject to changes; it speaks the man that does it, to be void of
understanding; and it is a most unreasonable madness for a man to expect that
from another, which himself would not do to another. Abraham checks Dives in
the parable, for thinking that Lazarus should go to fetch him a cup of cold
water, when as he in his lifetime would not afford him a cup of drink: take
heed of cruelty, of false-witnessing, of any eminent act of uncharitableness.
Remember, he that shows no mercy, when he comes to need it, shall have
judgment without mercy for his portion. Take heed of persecuting good people
for their conscience sake toward God; it may be you may take the advantage of
a furious time, and plunder them a little, or get them imprisoned or oppressed,
directly contrary to what is law and justice, or directly contrary to the
highest law, which is the Law of God: but if you do, it is ten to one, but as
your hands sent many to bed, without bread for themselves and their children to
eat, to sleep, without a bed to lie upon, to work, without a tool to work with;
so God will find hands, shall requite it into your bosom: Or if you should
contribute to make the wives of your brethren widows, and their children,
fatherless, and vagabonds, in a good sense to seek bread out of desolate
places; God ere long will stand over your houses, and say, Let these men's
children be fatherless, and their wives widows: let their children be continual
vagabonds in the earth, and beg, and let them seek their bread out of their
desolate places: Let the extortioners catch all they have, and let the
strangers spoil their labor: let there be none to extend mercy unto them,
neither let there be any to favor their fatherless children: Let the iniquity
of their fathers be remembered with the Lord. It was the curse, Psalm. 109.9. And
for what cause? they were adversaries without a cause to David, while he gave
himself unto prayer, ver. 4. They rewarded him evil for good, and hatred for
his love. Oh! my heart aches to think what judgments many in these days have
laid up for themselves, and their wives and children: they have showed no
mercy, they, or some of theirs will find judgment without mercy: God hates
cruelty, and the sons of violence his foul abhors.

Use 2. This observation calls aloud to you for the exercises of charity and
mercy. They are virtues, or graces, the exercises of which, God will not only
certainly reward; but he makes haste to their reward, he ordinarily lets not
their reward sleep. As it is said of some sinners, Their damnation sleeps
not: so as to some exercise of grace and virtue, it is such a sweet savor in
the nostrils of God, that their recompense shall not sleep till the
resurrection. Let me not hear a mouth opened amongst my brethren, nor see a
purse-string tied against an act of charity and mercy, it grateth upon my ears.
Sirs, give me leave to tell you, that God never came more on borrowing, than he
does in this age. Troops of Robbers have robbed God: they have robbed his
Servants, and God accounts what is done to them, as done to himself. Anon it
may be, before these are gone, another comes, and tells you, that such a Town
is burnt down to the ground, many hundred. Families undone, God sends to you
for some help for them. Anon another comes to tell you, God has sent to borrow
a little of you for such a poor servant of his, who has not spent his estate
in Luxury, but God has blasted him. Possibly God sends another to you, to lend
him a little for another, that is under the Physicians hand, or under the
Surgeons hand, and has spent all his or her estate. O lend it: He that gives
to the poor, lends to the Lord, and he will repay. Say not (as many of you do)
when such come to borrow of you, as you have no mind to lend any too, Truly I
have no money, I can spare from my necessary occasions: When the truth is, thou
have no money thou art willing to lend such a person God sends on borrowing to
thee. He that has given thee all that thou have, has sent to thee, to lend
him a few shillings, a few pence, he has sent us his Ministers upon his
errand, or some poor servant of his; but he has sent us with a ticket under
his hand, which thou know, thou ownest his written word, his holy
Scriptures: Say not thou have no money, if it be true indeed, it is a good
excuse; or none that thou can spare from thy necessary occasions; if that be
true too, it is a good excuse: but take heed it be true (remember the case of
Ananias and Saphira). What mean the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of
the oxen? What mean thy garments of silk, thy costly laces, thy feasting, thy
faring deliciously every day? I do not blame these things, where there are
estates to bear them out; soft raiment may be worn in Princes houses: but then,
say not thou have no money, no money for to buy a cap to keep thy brother from
the cold, and yet money to buy a costly periwig? no money to help thy brother
to buy so much bread, as to keep him from starving? and yet have thou money to
furnish thy table with varieties and dainties? have thou no money to help a
poor Christian to buy clothes to cover his nakedness? and yet have thou money
to lavish out to cloth thy self and family with silks and fine linen? have
thou no money to lend to thy Lord, to relieve one of his prisoners? to buy them
a bed to lie on, to recover them a seat to sit down upon? and yet can thou
find enough to buy thy self a cupboard of plate, or the most costly
housholdstuff? O take heed that God judges not, that thou have no heart, thou
can not trust that God thou so much talkest of, and art no more than a
prating Christian. But, my brethren, remember, that acts of mercy and charity,
are such as God ordinarily retaliateth in this life; it is seldom that God
puts men to trust him to another world for rewards in these things. It is a
time to speak, and I must speak in this case. It is reported of holy Mr.
Bradford, that in an hard time he sold his Chains, Rings, and Jewels to relieve
those in want. It is reported of Basil, that in a famine once he sold all the
lands and goods he had to relieve the poor. I shall add no more, but conclude
my discourse as that of our Savior; He that has ears to hear, let him hear.
He that believes what he has heard this day, and searching the Scripture,
finds it true, let him be up and doing accordingly. But if any man believes
not the word of God, nor us his servants, but has a mind to make an
experiment, whether Solomon had any warrant from God to tell the world, That he
that stops his ear to the cry of the poor, he also shall cry, and not be
heard; Let him at his peril try, whether Solomon or he was the wiser man: I
know I have spoke to many obedient ears, if there be any other, I so far my
self am assured of what I have said, That in these things, Let them do what
they please, I and my house shall desire both to obey and fear the Lord.

SERMON XXIV.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am still communicating to you, some Observations which I have made,
concerning the motions of Divine Providence, not only for your instruction, but
to quicken you also to make Observations your selves upon the motion of it,
that you may increase in spiritual Wisdom. I proceed to a Tenth Observation.

Observe. 10. That the Providence of God is eminently seen in the preservation
and protection of his faithful Ministers; and such, both amongst them, and
other orders of men, who keeping themselves within the latitude of their duty,
have been great adventurers for God in their generations.

1. The Providence of God preserves both man and beast; it is God that
upholdeth our souls in life, and there is no man but in him lives, moves, and
has his being.

2. Nor is there any man that lives any considerable time in the world, and
keeps any ordinary record of his life; but will see reason, as to say (with
David) O Lord! I am fearfully and wonderfully made; so also, Lord, I have been
fearfully and wonderfully preserved. But yet (as I have showed you) there are
specialties of Divine Providence: some persons that the Lord seems to carry
upon eagles wings, and to preserve in a more eminent and special manner;
sometimes in a way of miraculous Providence, sometimes in a way of
extraordinary Providence, in a way beyond other men. Now I have long since
hinted you three sorts of men, whom God thus preserves.

1. Such as are Gods Vicegerents, Magistrates, and Rulers of others. This I
have abundantly showed you, when I showed you how eminently the Providence of
God is seen, both in discovering, and bringing to light; and also in punishing
such sins, as tend to the eminent disturbance of humane Societies.

2. Such as God uses for the Ministers of his Word. 3. Such as make the
boldest adventures for God, and in his service, keeping themselves within the
latitude of their duty. I am to justify now this Observation to you. I will
open it, and prove it, then show you the reasonableness of Divine Providence in
these extraordinary motions. And lastly, I shall make some Applications. First,
let me open it to you.

1. It is to be understood of godly, faithful, and painful Ministers, and
mostly of such, of whom God has made, or does make, or intend to make an
eminent use in his Church. As there are no persons more justly a hatred in the
house of God, abominable to all men of any sobriety, then lewd, or lazy
Ministers; so there is nothing of any special Providence promised to them, and
it is more than I have observed, if God, as to their issues in the concerns of
this world, has not left them to a common share with others; and if there has
been any difference made by his Providence, it has been to their disadvantage;
they are more vile than others, and dishonor God more than others; and God
often makes them and their families to smart more than others. It is that which
God has said in the case, Them that honor me, I will honor: and they that
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. We have had a great deal of
enquiry in the times wherein we live, into the causes of the contempt of the
Clergy, Lev. 10.2, 3, 4; one has guest this thing, another that; for my own
part, I have been young, and am growing old, I never yet knew a painful able
preacher, living an holy and exemplary life, be his persuasion what it would,
under a greater contempt than other men: there are some Sons of Belial will
contemn all that are not as much Atheists as themselves. If Ministers will
regard nothing but striking their flesh-hook with three teeth into the Lords
pot, to feed themselves; if they will heap up parsonage upon parsonage, till
there be no room left in the Earth; and grasp more souls than they can manage,
putting out some to pitiful nurses, where they are starved, and affording the
other but dry beasts; if they will make themselves vile, like Hophni and
Phineas; it is no wonder if they be contemned by men of any sobriety. The
Psalmist, Psalm. 15.4. makes it the mark of one that shall dwell in Gods holy
hill, in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them that fear
the Lord; for others, God secureth their honor eminently.

2. Nor is it to be extended to every godly Minister, and at all times. The
best of Ministers have their personal sin, for which God may punish them by the
common fate of others; God eminently showed himself for Moses and Aaron in the
case of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: he made the Earth to open its mouth, and to
swallow up their opposers; but when they had provoked the Lord at the waters of
Meribah, they took their common fate with the rest of the Israelites, and dyed
in the wilderness, when they had had no more than a prospect of the promised
land. Several instances might be given of eminent Prophets of old, and
Ministers of the Gospel, that have perished in common judgments: more
especially when it has pleased God to pick out some of them for Martyrs, and
to make them witnesses with their blood, to seal the Truths they have preached.
And indeed this special Providence of God has been most remarkable, in times,
when God has been beginning some great work, which was the case of the
Apostles in the first Plantation of the Gospel; and of those eminent servants
of God, which since that time he has made use of in the reformation of the
Church, or upholding the interest of pure and true Religion in a time of great
Apostasy and defection.

3. The special Providence of God has not been seen uniformly in those cases,
but several ways.

1. Sometimes in providing food for them, and theirs, whereas otherwise they
must have starved, or at least been so employed, as they could not have
attended the work of God upon their hands.

2. Sometimes in keeping them from such dangers, which have been very near to
them, plucking them as brands out of the fire.

3. Sometimes in the delivering of them out of their Enemies hands, rescuing
them from the Lion, when they have been in his paws: sometimes one way,
sometimes another, accordingly as it has pleased the infinite wisdom of God to
work for them.

1. The Providence of God has been eminently seen in the providing of
necessaries for his Ministers. I need not tell you what special Laws God made
in the case of his Ministry among the Jews; his Priests and Levites were
particularly taken care of: but this being the settled maintenance for those
that were employed about the Tabernacle, and the Temple, when the Priests were
generally corrupted, and God to uphold a faithful Ministry amongst his people,
raised up some extraordinary Prophets, that should faithfully reveal his will
unto people, they had little or no advantage, but the Lord never failed to
provide for them. He provideth a Shunamite, 2 King. 4.10, that provideth a
little chamber, a bed, a table, a stool, and a candle-stick for Elisha. And
another widow for Elijah, that had faith enough to believe, that in the time of
famine her little meal should not fail from her barrel, nor her oil from her
cruse: He commanded the Ravens to feed the same Prophet by the brook Chereth, 1
King. 17.14. and 4.6. When the brook was dried up, then the Lord commanded the
widow to sustain him, verse. 9. The whole time of the Kingdom of Israel, from
the time that Jeroboam revolted, until they were carried away captive, was a
sad time to faithful Ministers; for all such stood for the instituted worship
of God, in opposition to that at Dan and Bethel; but of all that time, the time
of Ahabs reign was the most perilous time: but then God had provided an
Obadiah, who took an hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed
them with bread and water, 1 King. 18.5. Under the Gospel, God also declared
his will for the maintenance of his Ministers. That tithes under the Gospel are
due, jure divino, to the Minister, I dare not say; but that a certain and
honorable maintenance is due to them, the Apostle puts beyond all dispute, 1
Cor. 9. And if the government of a nation settleth it by way of tithes, there
is no question to be made of the lawfulness, either of giving or taking them:
but as the best establishments are subject to men's corruptions; so is this.

The story of Merline, a French Minister, is a known story; being forced
several days to save his life, by hiding himself in a haymow, God sends an Hen
every day, that laid an egg by him, upon which he lived. The story of Junius I
told you, relieved by a Tailor, when he was put to work in the Town-ditch for a
livelihood: God raised up a rich Matron to provide for Origin and his family.
But what need we look back so far for instances, of which all Ecclesiastical
story is full; when we have such a plentiful testimony at home. There is no
order of men, that God in all ages of the Church has so strangely and
(miraculously almost) provided for, as to the necessaries of life, as for such
who have been faithful and painful laborers in the work of his Gospel; they
have not been forsaken, their seed have in no scandalous manner begged their
bread: but this is but one particular.

2. A second head of instances, which I shall give you to prove this specialty
of Divine Providence, shall be the preventing Providence of God, warning them
some way or other, of evil that has been toward them, so as they have been
able timely to prevent or escape it. Elijah was you know an eminent Prophet of
the Lords, and his life was often in danger; but God hid him one while at the
brook Cherith, 1 King. 17, after he had delivered that unpleasing Prophecy to
Ahab; another time, at Beersheba, after he had made such an havoc amongst the
Priests of Baal, Chap. 18, 19. God gave him warning of his dangers, and
prevented Jezebel's designs. A boy overhears Paul's Enemies conspiring his
death, and reveals it, and he is sent away: at another time he is let down in
a basket. Infinite instances might be given you out of other story. Athanasius
amongst the ancients, and Luther amongst more modern Divines, were eminent
instances of this nature. God indeed (as I told you before) does not make all
his Ministers in times of dangers, such instances of special Providence, but
only such as he has designed to make great and eminent use of.

3. I might also give you as large a proof of this special Providence of God,
for the Ministers of his Gospel, in his deliverance of them out of trouble,
when they have been within the paws of the Lion, and ready to be devoured. And
this not always in the same method, nor by the same way and means; sometimes
miraculously, as in the case of Elisha, and Elijah, more than once, striking
their Enemies with blindness, causing fire to come down from Heaven, and to
destroy their Enemies. In the case of Daniel, stopping the mouths of the Lions.
In the case of Peter, the very night before that Herod was fully intended to
have murdered him. In later story we have infinite instances of Gods strange
deliverance of faithful Ministers (whom it afterward appeared, God designed to
make eminent use of) out of their Enemies hands. I remember in the History of
the persecution of the Church of Bohemia, we read of an Edict made by
Ferdinand, to apprehend all the Protestant-Ministers; upon which many fled into
Moravia, and hid themselves; three were taken and kept prisoners in a deep
dungeon at Prague: but God by his Providence wrought the escape of one of them,
whom he made use of to plant, not less than twenty Protestant-Churches
afterward in Poland. But there would be no end, if I should begin to recite to
you all we find in his story of this nature; there can be none so meanly
acquainted with Scripture or History, but may confirm himself in this
observation. But I added, That the Providence of God has been also eminently
seen in the preservation of those, who have been great adventurers in the cause
of God, within the latitude of their duty. A man may adventure in the cause of
God, and miscarry in his adventure, and that in two cases: 1. When he
adventures without a call from God. 2. When he governs not himself in his
adventure, by the reasonable rules of prudence. Peter made an adventure, when
he drew out the sword, and cut off the highest Priest's servants ear: But our
Savior bid him put up the sword into its sheath again; for he that draws the
sword (being a private person) shall perish by the sword. Peter had no call to
use the sword in the case: The Magistrate has a call to use the sword in the
execution of just laws. The Minister has a call to use another sword, the
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. Every Christian has a call to
serve and obey Magistrates, in what is just and lawful, and to perform those
duties, which in his private capacity he owes unto God; to worship God in his
family, and to meet often together in the congregation of Gods People, to hear
the word, to partake of the Ordinances of God, etc. Now there are times when a
godly Magistrate cannot do his duty in punishing of sin, without the adventure
of his reputation in a wicked world; the adventure of his estate, his life:
when the Minister of the Gospel cannot do his duty, nor the people theirs,
without the like adventures: but you shall observe this very ordinary in the
Providence of God, he strangely watches over, and protecteth such as have a
spirit to make boldest adventures, and as strangely rewards such. You see it
in the whole story of Scripture, Moses and Aaron were called to go in to
Pharaoh, and to demand the dismission of the Israelites; God suffers not
Pharaoh, nor any of his Courtiers (notwithstanding their threats) to do them
any hurt. Caleb and Joshuah adventure to bring up a good report of the land of
Canaan, God protecteth them from the mutiny of the people, and they are the
only two are suffered to go over into the promised land, Numb. 14.6, 7, 10, 24.
Elijah, the three children, and Daniel were great adventurers in the case of
God: so was Esther in her going in to the King, to speak for the Jews: so were
the Apostles in the first Plantation of the Gospel. The Providence of God
strangely watched over them, and delivered them, as you read in the story of
their Acts. A man cannot be too bold, if he keeps within the latitude of his
duty. Indeed we read of some whom God strangely watched over, in the doing of
some actions, that we cannot evince to have been their duty, as that of
Phinehas, Numb. 25.7, 8. in killing the Moabitish-woman, and the Israelite in
the act of adultery. That of Elijah's killing Baals Priests, 1 King. 18; yet
God protected them, and rewarded them; there are many things said in the
defense of Phinehas and Elijah, to reduce their actions to the ordinary rule of
Justice. It is certain, that by the Laws of God, the adulterers ought to have
dyed, so also the false Prophets; but for the persons that executed the
vengeance of God upon them, all that we can say, is this: Their call was
doubtless clear to themselves, their actions were most certainly approved by
God: he protects them upon the doing of them, he rewards them for doing of
them; but non fue^unt ordinaria, sed facta quaedam extra usum, and ordinem
communem; they were not ordinary actions, but depended upon a special call of
God. By virtue of such a call too, it doubtless was, that Moses slew the
Egyptian, for which St. Stephen justifies him, Acts 7. But a man cannot be too
bold for God, if he keeps within the latitude of his certain duty.

2. Provided secondly, He keeps to reasonable rules of prudence: our rule
obliges us to be wise as serpents. But I will not enlarge upon this Theme; for
the truth is, the Providence of God strangely watches over bold adventurers in
his cause and service, who have acted under such circumstances, as are hardly
reconcilable to what our reason calls Prudence; yet certainly, that will not
warrant a rash and imprudent managery of a good cause. I need not give you more
instances than I have done, to justify this Observation in sacred History.
Moses and Aaron, Caleb and Joshuah, Elijah and Elisha, Esther, Daniel, the
three Children, all the Apostles afford a plentiful proof of this Observation;
and in other stories the instances are without number. Luthers whole life was
an instance of this, the Archers shot sorely at him, he ventured as high as any
in opposition to them; yet his bow abode in his strength, Luther dyed in his
bed in peace.

Nor does this seem an unreasonable motion of Divine Providence, if we either
consider how far the honor of God is concerned in the upholding and
maintaining his Ambassadors, and rewarding his servants; or the faithfulness of
God in justifying his promises, or the further use that God will make of men in
the accomplishment of his designs in the world.

1. Let us but consider the relation wherein the Ministers of Christ stand to
him, they are his Missionaries, be has sent them; as the father has sent him,
so he has sent them; nay, they are no ordinary servants, they are the Lords
Ambassadors, they come in Christ's name, and as in Christ's stead they entreat
men to be reconciled unto God. It is beneath the honor of a Prince to suffer
an Ambassador to starve, or any way to perish for want of that protection which
he is able to afford him; indeed, if any run before they are sent, or instead
of Gods work to their own, Gods honor is not concerned in them, unless to
chastise their presumption, and to take vengeance upon them, as in such a case,
no Prince would think himself further concerned: but supposing Ministers of the
Gospel to be sent by him, and to be ready faithfully to deliver their masters
messages (and this we must suppose and believe, or disown the Scriptures, which
expressly assert this), God is highly concerned in point of honor (having power
in his hand, and the command of all the hearts of men) to provide for his
faithful Ministers, and they shall not want.

2. God (secondly) is not only concerned in honor, as a great King and God
above all; but as a God of truth and faithfulness, that can sooner suffer
Heaven and Earth to pass away, then a word to fail of what he has spoken: he
has made many promises to his faithful servants in the Ministry, and to those
that he has employed in hazardous employments for him; he of old promised to
satiate the souls of his priests with fatness, Jer. 31.14. He of old appointed
no inheritance to the sons of Levi, amongst their brethren, because he was
their inheritance, as he had promised them, Deuteronomy. 10.9. he has told them he
will cloth them with salvation, Psalm. 132.16. he told Jeremiah and Ezekiel he
would be with them to deliver them, Jer. 1.7, 8, 18, 19. Ezekiel. 2.6. He has
told Gospel Ministers, he will be with them to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.
he has bidden them take no thought what they should eat, drink, or put on,
when he sent out the twelve, Matthew. 10.9, 10. he bid them to provide, neither
gold, nor silver, nor brass in their purses, nor scrip for their journey, nor
two coats, nor shoes, for the workman is worthy of his meat. Now after all
this, if God should suffer his Ministers to want bread to sustain their lives,
or their families, what would men say of the faithfulness of God?

3. Lastly, Let us but consider God, as having many designs yet to accomplish,
a great deal of work yet to be done in the world, to be done by the hands of
men, who can imagine God should not eminently protect, and provide for those
that are, and have been faithful? who would work for that Master, that will not
find them bread? What subject would be free to go as an Ambassador for that
Prince, that would never protect him in the faithful discharge of his trust, or
reward him proportionably to his affronts or losses? Now God knows that we are
flesh, and much led by our sense and reason, and must not be encouraged to our
duty only by rewards, which are the objects of our faith; but by sensible
rewards, at least to such a proportion as is necessary to uphold us to our
work. It is therefore not to be wondered at, that God should in a way of special
Providence, eminently take care of the Ministers of his Gospel: he has called
them, and sent them to his work, he has by that call taken them off from that
pursuit of the world, by which others procure themselves a livelihood; he has
told them they should live upon his Altar; he has told us, 1 Cor. 9.7. That no
man goes to a warfare at his own charge, none planteth a vineyard, and eats
not the fruit thereof, nor feeds a flock, and eats not the milk thereof: he
sees them out of obedience and conscience to him, refusing the bread they
might have: men will not provide for them, he will; Ravens shall bring them
meat every day, but they shall be fed. This is but a reasonable motion of
Divine Providence. I shall make a short Application of this discourse.

Use 1. This in the first place lets you see the fountain of that bounty, which
the many painful and faithful servants of Christ have experienced in all times,
and even in the days wherein we live. It has pleased God in all times to raise
up friends to his faithful Ministers. I remember when Abigail came to meet
David, coming against her husband, and had stopped his journey, David says unto
her, 1 Samuel 25.32. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee to meet
me this day: and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, etc. First, he
blesses God, then he blesses her; the faithful servants of God, yea the
Churches of God, who by this means enjoy any thing of the labors of their
shepherds, have reason to bless those whom God has made his instruments to
support those upon whom others had no pity. Yea verily, and what our Savior
said of the woman that spent her box of Ointment upon him, I think I may apply
here, Wherever the Gospel is preached, what they have done shall be told for a
memorial of them. If a cup of cold-water for a thirsty Prophet shall obtain a
Prophets reward, the greater kindnesses of many shall certainly be rewarded;
they have but put a little money into the bank which God keeps in Heaven. But
we have more reason to look upward to him, who has the hearts of all men in
his hand, and opens them as he pleases. God has in it showed his special
Providence for his faithful Ministers; let us therefore say, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, who has stirred them up. It was the grace of God bestowed
upon the Churches in Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3.
which taught them in a great trial of affliction, and deep poverty, to abound
in riches of liberality, and willingly of themselves to give to their power,
yea and above their power. Let it be written to posterity, for a memorial of
the people in England, that for so many years together, in the midst of a
devouring pestilence, many consuming fires, expensive wars, and a deadness of
trade, they have refreshed the bowels of so many hundreds (if not thousands) of
Gods messengers; but let God have all the glory, who has given the heart,
though their hands distributed the money.

Use 2. In the second place, Let me cry out, O house of Aaron, trust in the
Lord: O house of Levi, trust in the Lord: Trust in the Lord, and do good (says
David) so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be fed, Psalm.
37.3. Let us be faithful to our masters service, and do the work which he has
given us to do, and verily we shall be fed. I cannot say God will provide
Coaches, and delicate things for us; but necessaries we shall not want. Herein
let us exercise our selves to keep a conscience void of offense, both toward
God, and toward men; and as to other things, we may trust a Providebit Deus,
God will provide for us and ours. The experience of these times, if wistly
attended to, certainly is enough to keep any from being tempted through fear of
want, to debauch their consciences, by doing any thing which is apparently
sinful, or but so judged and suspected by them. We see some fed with great
provisions, faring deliciously every day, whiles others (like Daniel and his
partners) have been fed with little more than pulse and water; and at the end
of some years it appears, they look fairer, as to worldly circumstances, than
those who have had far better commons.

Use 3. Lastly, This observation commends confidence and courage to all in
the Lords work, in opposition to fear and cowardice. I would not be mistaken,
be sure in the first place you be in Gods work, that which by his word
appears to be the duty of one in thy circumstances: nothing but the
conscience of having been surprised in the way of our duty, will bear us up
under sufferings; be therefore in that point well satisfied: having done that,
observe those rules of Prudence which reason directs thee in such cases: this
done, fear nothing. Remember the Providence of God most eminently watches over
the boldest adventurers in the way of their duty. They are the words of our
blessed Lord, Mar. 8.35. Whosoever will save his life, shall lose it: but
whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, and the Gospel, shall save it. They
observe in war, that the soldier that turns his back, and flies, is in much
more danger, than he who stands to it; and that nothing makes a conqueror, so
much as resolution, and bold adventuring: it is so in our spiritual fight with
the world; be then of good courage in it, and quit your selves like men;
remember God is with you, and if so, there is more with you, than can be against
you. God indeed in our combats with the world, does not always keep us
shot-free, and bring us off without a scratch; but those whom he does bring
off, are ordinarily those who are most valiant and adventurous: however, it is
better to fall valiantly, than cowardly; and our Lord has told us, That if a
man will save his life, he shall lose it; if he has such a mind to sleep in a
whole skin, that he will neglect his duty, and do that which his heart
condemns him for doing, he shall lose what he hoped to save by it, be it
life, reputation, estate, etc. It speaks great unbelief, and distrust in God,
to be cowards in plain and certain duties. Be prudent, but take heed of
forbearing necessary duty out of prudence, or being faint in the performance of
it. That can be no prudence: If a man faints in the day of adversity, Solomon
says, that his strength is but small, his faith is but small, and his
observation of Gods Providence in such cases has been very small too. But I
shall add no more upon this Argument.

SERMON XXV.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Have done with the Tenth thing in the motions of Divine Providence, which I
commended to your observation. I proceed now to another.

Observe. 11. The Providence of God makes a very frequent and remarkable use of
the sins of people, though it be always spotless in making such use of men's
sins. That the Providence of God in bringing about the eternal purposes and
counsels of God, does very ordinarily make use of peoples sins, I have in a
great measure already proved to you under my seventh Observation, where I
showed you how God accomplished his purposes upon Mount Zion, by persons that
meant not so, and overruled the several lusts of sinners hearts to his own
praise, making the wrath of men to praise him. But yet I shall take it again in
my way, and the rather, because I will show you more especially what use God
makes of the sins of his own people. Then I shall give you a reasonable account
of this great work of God. And thirdly, I shall endeavor to show you, that it
is a spotless use which God makes, and open it to you, how it may be so, and
our reason may conceive of it well enough. And lastly, I shall make some
Application.

That it is so, is so obvious to those that are meanliest exercised in the
Scriptures, that it can hardly be overlooked by any considerate person.

One of the most glorious products of Actual Providence, was the Revelation of
the Covenant of Grace and Redemption: I say the Revelation of it; for the
paction, or making of that Covenant, I take that to be eternal, and antecedent
to the Creation: but as I take it, those who would distinctly understand the
Covenant of Grace, must distinguish betwixt the Paction, the Exhibition, and
the Revelation of it, and the Application of it to individual souls. The
Paction was an act of Counsel, an eternal act, a transaction between the Father
and the Son; the Son as the head of the elect, standing as a surety for
believers, and undertaking something for himself on their behalf; that in the
fullness of time, he would come into the world, assume our natures, and in that
nature dye, and give satisfaction to Divine Justice for the sins of the elect:
(which some call the Covenant of Redemption) also undertaking for them, that
they in his strength, and through the assistance of his spirit, should do
whatsoever his Father should require personally of them, in order to their
obtaining salvation through him. But now the Exhibition and Revelation of this
eternal contrivement to the world, that was the work of Actual Providence, done
in time subsequent to the Creation, and done gradually, as to the more full and
perfect Revelation of it, according to the good pleasure and infinite wisdom of
God. The first Revelation of it was to Adam, after he had fallen, Genesis 3.15.
And I will put enmity betwixt thee [that is the serpent] and the woman, and
betwixt thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thine head, and thou shall
bruise its heel. Now for this, God made use of the first sin that was committed
in the world, the fall of Adam: had not Adam fallen, there had been no need of
the Revelation of a Covenant of Grace; he, and his posterity had been saved
upon the Covenant of Works, he had perfectly done the Will of God, and lived,
Romans 9.11, 12. The Apostle tells us, that before Esau or Jacob were born,
before they had done good or evil, God loved Jacob, and hated Esau; and it was
foretold, That the elder should serve the younger; Genesis 25.3.
for the law of God and Nature, had made the younger a servant to the elder.
First, Esau sells his birthright for a mess of pottage; then Jacob by the
counsel of Rebeccah comes, and tells his Father a lie, and obtains the
blessing of the firstborn: both sinful acts; the first on Esau's part, the
second on Jacob's; but Gods Providence makes use of both, to bring about his
counsels. There was a promise made to Abraham, that God would multiply his
seed, and that they should inherit the land of Canaan: Pharaoh strongly sets
himself against it, uses all arts to destroy the seed of Jacob; the King
commands the midwives to kill all the male children, Exodus 1. they save them
alive, the King questioneth them for it, Exodus 1.17, 19. they tell a lie to
excuse themselves; God makes use of their lie for the accomplishment of his
counsels, and the fulfilling of his promise unto Abraham. Who can excuse Rahab
in the lie she told to the Kings messengers, sent to apprehend the spies? It is
true, the Apostle says, she did it by faith, and God rewarded her, as he did
the Egyptian midwives: Rahab did it by faith, believing what at that time she
did not see, that God would give that land to the Israelites, and God rewarded
her good intention in the general, not her particular sinful act: but yet the
Providence of God made a great use of her lie, for the design he had in hand.
Who can excuse David in many particular actions which he did? Which yet God
made use of in order to the bringing about his counsels and promise concerning
David, in settling him upon the Throne of Israel and Judah: The setting up of
Solomon upon the Throne of his Father David, was an eminent product of Actual
Providence; but Bathsheba you know was his mother, and David in order to the
having her for his wife, murdered Vriah her husband, yet she was the mother of
Solomon. No man can excuse Jeroboam in his revolt from the house of David, he
did what he did from a very turbulent and ill spirit, and in a very irregular
and rebellious manner: but God yet made use of what he had done to fulfill his
own counsels, and the threatening he had denounced against Solomon. In short,
innumerable instances of this nature might be given, and it is an easy thing
to observe God doing the same thing every day. I will instance but in three
great products of Actual Providence more, which the Scripture makes mention
of; and three greater have not been, nor can be. 1. The incarnation of our
blessed Lord. In the genealogy of Christ recorded by Matthew, chap. 1. ver. 3.
you read, Judas begat Pharez, and Zarah of Thamar. You have the story Genesis
38.29. Pharez was an incestuous child, which Judah had by his own
Daughter-in-law: he was one of Christ's Progenitors; so was Bathsheba, who came
with much sin to be David's wife; yet God made use, you see, both of the sin of
Judas, and the sin of David, for the bringing forth his son into the world.
Next to his Incarnation, let us consider the sacrifice of Christ for the
expectation of our sins, the noblest and greatest act of Providence which was
ever brought forth in the world, it was produced by wicked hands. Judas,
Pilate, Herod, the Jews, all have their hand in it. The Devil put the malice
into the heart of Judas; but God had his end in the action, and accomplished
the great design of his glory. The sending of the Gospel amongst the Gentiles,
was a great product of Providence in the fulfilling of the Lords counsels, and
many promises: but it was the fall of the Jews, that proved the riches of the
world, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 11.11, 12. They did not stumble that they
might fall: but through their fall salvation came unto the Gentiles, for to
provoke them to jealousy. The Apostles upon their going out to preach to the
Gentiles, gives this account of it, Forasmuch as you have judged your selves
unworthy of eternal life, (that was, by not receiving the Gospel) we turn unto
the Gentiles. What shall I need say more? there is no soul brought to Heaven,
but is an eminent instance of this: If they had not sinned, they would have no
need of any pardon or justification from the guilt of sin, no need of a Savior
or Mediator: God suffers the souls of his People to be concluded under the
guilt of sin, that he might have mercy upon them. It is also an ordinary
observation of Divines, That God often suffers people to fall into some gross
and scandalous sins, that he might take that advantage to awaken them to
repentance, and make use of their falls to a rising again to a new life: and
this is often seen in those that have lived civilly, and might be prone to
trust to their own Moral Righteousness. But I shall enlarge no further in the
Justification of so obvious an Observation. It follows, that I should show you
the reasonableness of this motion of Divine Providence.

1. The truth is (in the first place), it is hard to conceive, how otherwise
some of Gods greatest works of Providence could have been produced. What would
the Revelation of a Covenant of Grace have signified to the world, if the
Covenant of Works had not first been violated by the first man's transgression?
How could else any man imagine, that the salvation of the world should have
been accomplished by the death of Christ, if God had not made use of the wicked
action of those who took him, and by wicked hands crucified him? The Apostle
assures us, that in all they did against our Lord, they did but execute what
the counsel of the Lord had predetermined should be done: If sin did not
abound, how should grace much more abound? Romans 5. In the pardon of sins, the
justification of a guilty soul; the Scripture tells us, That all are concluded
under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe. What should we say to the great work of Providence, in trying his
Saints by afflictions and persecutions, from the hands of violent men? God
makes use of the sins of Persecutors, to perfect his Saints by the exercises
of their faith and patience; it could not be, without the sins of those who
persecute others for righteousness sake.

2. Again, God by this gets himself a great deal of glory. I have spoke
something to this under the seventh Observation: but let me here add a little.

1. He gets himself the glory of his power. There is a fancy has possessed the
Philosophers of the world, That metals of a baser nature, may by art be turned
into nobler metals, brass, etc. into gold; and they will tell you, that some
such thing has been done; and abundance of time and money has been spent, by
the vain and covetous Philosophers of the world to little purpose, to find out
this Philosophers stone (as they call it): but supposing such a thing possible;
yet there must be some similar quality to help, or they will not pretend to any
such thing; no Philosopher ever yet pretended by all his Chemistry, to fetch
gold out of a dunghill. But now in sin, there is nothing of a similar quality to
the glory of God; there is nothing so opposite to the glory of God, as the sins
of men and women: For God to fetch water out of a rock, argued great power; to
raise up Abraham children from the stones of the field, it must speak great
power: but yet not so much, as for God to fetch his own glory out of peoples
sins. There is in sin an infinite opposition to the glory of God: nothing so
diametrically opposite to God's honor and glory, as sin is. Sampson put forth
a riddle, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness. But what is this riddle to that which I am speaking of? for the
glory of God to come forth out of the dunghill, the woeful dunghill of the worst
of men's actions? for God to work out his own righteousness out of the vilest
actions of men? O it speaks an infinite Power in God! it is a greater work to
fetch light out of darkness. I will (says God) get me glory upon Pharaoh: For
God to get himself glory out of Pharaoh's hard heart, was more than to get his
people water out of an hard rock.

2. God by it gets himself the glory of his infinite wisdom. I told you in my
former discourse, that he is accounted the best Politician, that can make the
best use of all humors, and serve his own designs, even of his utter Enemies:
this is the top of a Politicians wisdom: How great then must the Wisdom of God
appear in this? nothing has such an enmity to God and his glory, as sin has.
Job speaks it to the great glory and honor of God, Job 5.13. He takes the
wise in their own craftiness, and the counsels of the crafty are carried head
long. It speaks the wisdom of a man, that he can make use of the capacious
quality of a bird, or a beast, to catch a prey for him: thus the faulconer
makes use of the hawk, the huntsman of the dog, the fisherman of a fowl, to
catch birds, or beasts, or fish for him. This I say speaks the wisdom of a
man above other creatures; O how it speaks the admirable Wisdom of God, that
he can make use of the worst belchings of lusts in men's hearts, the most vile
and rebellious actions of men, and out of them fetch his own glory.

3. But in the last place, God above all does by this magnify the riches and
freeness of his grace. This is that wherein the Lord delights to have glory; he
predestined, adopted us, etc. to the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians.
1.6. If God had taken man out of a state of innocence into Heaven, we should
never have admired free grace so much as now; it marvellously affects the heart
of a child of God, to see God make use of his falls of his sin and corruption,
and manifold rebellions, to make his free grace exceeding glorious. We should
never so much admire free grace and mercy, if we were not so great
transgressors: This is it which makes grace precious in our eyes, when we cry
out of the belly of hell, and he hears us.

Thus far I have showed you, that God makes a very ordinary use, and a very
remarkable use of peoples sins. But I also added, that it was a spotless use;
and thus it must be, if God makes it; For he that is of purer eyes, than that
he can behold iniquity, must be of a purer will, than to will iniquity, and of
purer hands than to work iniquity. But the difficulty lies here. It is plain
from this discourse, that God uses peoples sins as a medium to his glory; he
having willed the end, must needs have willed the means: for though a thing may
be fortuitous to man, yet nothing is fortuitous, or casual to God. A man now in
order to the accomplishment of some design of his, may make use of some things
which fall in, and he never foresaw, nor forethought, nor designed as a means
in order to his accomplishment, but it were blasphemy to suppose any such thing
of God.

A great question there is amongst Divines, what influence God has upon the
sinful actions of men. It falls not so fully in my way at present, as to
engage me in any full discourse upon it. Certain it is, that the holy God
puts malice into the heart of no man, nor does at all incite him to any
sinful actions. This were indeed to make God the Author of sin: he commands it
not (that is impossible), he approves it not, he inclines not the will of man
unto it: But as certain it is,

1. That he assisteth the faculties and members of a man to those natural
actions, which his own lust and malice makes sinful. He assisted the tongues
of Ananias and Saphira to speak, but it was their own lust and malice, which
inclined them rather to speak that which was false, than the truth. In him we
live, move, and have our being.

2. As certain it is, That he permits and suffers men to execute their
lusts, otherwise they could not execute them, he could most certainly hinder
them: Forty years he suffered the Jews manners in the wilderness, Acts 13.18.
He suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16. Now for this
sufferance, I think it is well expressed by an eminent Divine of our own; Gods
permission of sin (says he) lies in the suspension of his own efficiency, and
the removal of the impediments. Pelagians dream, that God gave unto man a
perfect freedom of will, and so did, as it were, Dormitare in operibus suis,
sleep while his Enemies sowed the tares of sin; but no such thing must be
imagined of God. Nor does God only remove those impediments, by which the
sinner might be hindered in his acts of sin; he is properly said to be hindered
in an action, who cannot do what he has a mind to do: now God does something
more in his permission of men's sins, than not hinder their commission of it; he
suspendeth that efficiency, by which they were restrained, or which should
incline them to do otherwise.

3. He wills that the sin should be, though he does not will to effect it.
Indeed for God to will the effecting or committing of sin, is not consistent
with the purity and holiness of God: God's permission of sin, and willing it in
the effect, does ponere effectum non causam, it does assert the effect, not the
cause; his willing it in this sense, does by no means imply his procuring it,
inciting to it, or approbation of it. It is not procurans volitio; and here
Divines say rightly, Deus absque jactura, and sanctitatis offendiculo, velle
potest peccata; vult rem effici, non effectum dare. He wills the thing should
be done, but he does not will the doing of it. Who shall dare to say that God
did not will that Judas should betray Christ, and Pilate condemn him, and that
the Jews should crucify him? When the Apostle says, That they did but
according to whatsoever Gods hand and counsel had determined before to be done,
Act. 4.28. And that he was delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledg of God, Act. 2.23. If God did not will that most vile action
should be done, how did his hand and counsel determine it? How was he delivered
by the counsel of God, which the Scripture expressly affirms? And this is all
that I know, that Mr. Calvin, or any that tread in his steps have said, which
many now adays have so clamoured against, as if he made God the Author of sin,
and willed acts of sin. Mr. Calvin, and all sober Divines will grant them, that
it is inconsistent with the holy nature of God, to infuse malice into the
hearts of any, or to incite any to any malicious and sinful action, or to
assist them in the sinfulness and obliquity of their action: but those who have
read Pareus's disputes with the Jesuits at Swalbach, will easily understand,
what Divines these men read, and with whose heifers they plow, and out of whose
quivers they draw their arrows of bitter words. To whom the best answer, is
that of the Archangel to the Devil, The Lord rebuke them.

4. Then lastly, God governs the wicked actions of men, when they are done to
his own praise and glory, and makes an eminent use of them; but yet a spotless
use. Take Pharaoh in his hardening of his heart, against the Will of God
revealed to him for the dismission of the Israelites. God had purposed that
Pharaoh's heart should harden, he tells Moses so long before it came to issue:
God removed what might have hindered the hardening of his heart, he would
believe from time to time, that God had done his worst, and he should keep
them, let the mighty God do what he could: he suspended his own efficiency, he
could have softened Pharaohs heart, if he had pleased; he assisted him to his
natural actions, he could never else have spoken the words he did, nor made
ready a Chariot. When the action was done, he governed it to his own praise and
glory, he said, I will get me glory upon Pharaoh; and he did get himself glory
upon him, and made Pharaoh's wrath to praise him. But I will add no more to the
Explication, or proof of this Observation.

Use 1. This now in the first place may convince us of the infinite power,
wisdom, and goodness of God. Omnipotency is usually thought to be most
discovered in Creation, the production of things out of a mere not-being, into
a being, where there is no pre-existent matter for God to work upon: but here
seems yet to be a greater demonstration of Divine Power, for God to make the
wrath of man to praise him, to bring forth the great designs of his glory out
of men's sins. It shows us also the infinite wisdom of God. The natural
sagacity of the be is seen in sucking honey out of poisonous herbs and
flowers, a thing of the sweetest taste out of flowers, and herbs of bitterest
taste, and in doing it, it by its chemistry commends the wisdom of its Maker,
who has given it this natural skill. The acquired art and skill of the
Apothecary and Chemist, who make the desperatest poisons, which have the
greatest contrariety to humane nature, to serve for medicines, to heal men's
diseases, commends the wisdom of God; for their God has taught them this
discretion. But oh the wisdom of God! to make our lusts, our wrath, our sins to
praise him! there must be something of the nature of honey in the herb or
plant, or the be could get none out of it; there must be something in the
poisonous drug or plant, that is consonant to the nature of man, or all the art
of the Chemist and Apothecary could never make it serve for man's cure or
healing. But there is nothing in the nature of sin, but is quite opposite to
the glory of God; yet God makes sin to praise him. O the height and depth of
Divine Wisdom, yea and of Divine Goodness too! As there is nothing more
opposite than sin to Gods glory, so there is nothing more pernicious and
destructive to us: God makes our sins to serve us, to excite habits of grace,
repentance, faith, fear, watchfulness, etc.

Use 2. In the second place, Learn from hence, how impossible it is, that a
sinner, by his rebellions against God, should do any hurt but to his own soul.
And this is enough to convince the most malicious sinner, of the exceeding
vanity of sin. If Julian will in his rage throw his dagger up against Heaven,
it shall not touch a star, but return only upon his own head. If the Princes of
Babylon will heat a furnace seven times hotter than ordinary, and open a Lions
den to destroy the Jewish servants of God; the furnace shall only burn up, and
the Lions devour themselves. Indeed in regard of the sinsuness of the best of
men, and Gods design sometimes to melt, and to try his people, the rage of
sinful men does sometimes reach them; but this is certain, it never reaches
Heaven, nor any of its counsels and designs, unless by the cry of it for
vengeance against the sinners. God will have his glory from the vilest persons,
and their vilest actions; and although Assyria means not so, yet he shall but
accomplish Gods pleasure. In 2 King. 6. you read a story of the King of Syria,
his sending a party of Soldiers to take the Prophet, ver. 15. The Prophet, ver.
18, prays, that they might be smitten with blindness; they were so, and then
the Prophet leads them into Samaria, into the midst of their Enemies. God
deals thus with outrageous sinners. Their design is to dishonor God, and to do
God as much despite as they can: God smites them with blindness, and instead
of accomplishing of their ungodly designs, he gets glory upon them: He
disappointeth the devices of the crafty; so as their hands cannot find their
enterprise, Job 5.12.

Use 3. Let me caution all, that they take heed, that they do not abuse this
notion, to give themselves a liberty to sin. Do not think this a sufficient
warrant for you to do any sinful action, because God knows how to make your
sins serviceable to his glory. This was an old corrupt conclusion, which the
Apostle foresaw, men would falsely draw from these premises, Romans 3.7. If the
truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his glory, why then am I
judged as a sinner? and not rather, as we are slanderously reported, and as
some affirm that we say, Let us do evil, that good may come upon it. So when
the Apostle, Romans 5. had said, That as sin had abounded, so grace should much
more abound; some concluded, that it was then best to continue in sin, that
grace might abound. Whom the Apostle answers, as you will find, Romans 6.1, 2,
etc. But that none may think, that from hence he is licensed or encouraged to
sin, I beseech you to consider,

1. That God does not move, or incite any to any sinful action, nor command,
nor approve any such thing. God in fetching of his own glory out of men's sins,
does but (if I may so speak with reverence unto God) make the best of our bad
markets. In the Epistle of John to Gaius, ver. 11, says he, Beloved, follow
not that which is evil, but that which is good: he that does good, is of God;
but he that does evil, has not seen God, 1 John 3.8. He that commits sin,
is of the devil: now for this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the devil. Sin is called the work of the flesh; the
flesh, that is the mother of sin, and the Devil, he is the father of sin; the
Devil ingendreth sin upon our flesh. So much of sin as is in any man, so much
there is in him of the flesh, so much of the Devil; so much he is a servant to
Satan, and to the flesh.

2. Consider, it is no thanks to the sinner, that God has any glory from his
sin; he is not active in the glorifying of God, his activity is all spent in
the dishonor of God: he is not voluntary in it. Sin does not of its own nature
glorify God, there is nothing so contrary to the glory of God as our sin is.
The sinner does not, cannot intend the glory of God by his sinful act. The
sinner in this case, is only a passive instrument of Gods glory; God fetches
out his glory, forces his glory from men's sins. God is not at all beho^den to
the sinner for any glory he gets from his sinful act. The glory which God
has from men's sins, is as to the sinner, merely by accident, and besides his
intention; as much as it was besides his intention, to let out an imposthume,
and cure his Enemy, who ran his sword into him, with an intention to let out
his lifeblood.

3. Consider, that God needs not our lie for his glory. Every sin is a lie,
and God out of our lies fetches out his glory; but he needs them not, and
therefore it is madness to say, I will sin that God may be glorified. God can
better bring forth his glory another way, he would be much more glorified by
thy keeping his Commandments, and doing of his Will. God indeed needs not our
duties and best actions; but he much less needs our lusts and corruptions.

4. Consider, That though God in the wisdom of his Providence, makes use of
men's sins, to fetch out his glory from them, yet he usually takes vengeance
upon the sinner. It is the practice of the Politicians of the world, to make
use of the treasons of others, but seldom to reward the Traitors. It cannot be
said of God, that he ever loves or approves of the treason of sin, but he ever
punishes the Traitor without a true repentance.

5. Lastly, When God makes use of the sins of people for his own glory, and for
their good and salvation also (as in the case of those which belong to his
Election of grace), it is never done without a great deal of grief and sorrow
of heart to the sinner: they are saved as through fire: great sinnings must
have great humiliation. He indeed sometimes makes use of his peoples sins, to
make them more humble, more watchful: but the sinner first suffers a great
deal of loss in the peace of his Spirit; he goes to heaven ordinarily with
broken bones, and a bleeding heart. So that you see that Gods getting himself
glory from his peoples sin, gives no man a ground of presumption, to go on in a
course of sin against God.

Use 4. In the last place, Let this observation mind us, in this case to be
workers together with God. Have we sinned, and come short of the glory of God?
Let us do our endeavor to make our sins to turn to the furtherance of the
glory of God. Let us endeavor to make the best of our own bad markets. What is
done, we cannot re-call; let us endeavor, if possible, to make an advantage of
our former miscarriages. You will say, How should that be?

Answ. 1. Let the sense of your sins hasten your pace to the Lord Jesus Christ.
God has a great deal of glory from our believing in him whom he has sent. The
soul that accepts of the Lord Jesus Christ as his Savior, gives unto God
the glory of his Power, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, Truth; it gives him the
glory of the exceeding riches of his free grace.

2. Make use of your sins to increase your Confession, your Repentance and
Humiliation. Confession gives glory to God: my Son, says Joshua, Confess, and
give glory to God. Let your former sins give you the further advantage for
sorrowing after a godly sort, that will bring forth carefulness, indignation,
fear, vehement desires, zeal, revenge, as it did in the Church of Corinth, 2
Cor. 7.11.

3. Let the remembrance of them cause you to walk softly all the days of your
life. This is that which God requires of all, to walk humbly with their God.
The remembrance of your sins may be of notable use to you for this, to keep
down that pride which is naturally in all our hearts; that swelling in an
opinion of our selves, of our own duties and performances; that uncharitable
judging, and censuring, and triumphing over others, when we see them fallen in
the day of temptations.

4. Lastly, Let the consideration of how many sins God has forgiven you, make
you love much. Thus the woman, Luke 7.37, 47 made an improvement, even of her
former sins; her much that was forgiven, engaged her to love that God much, who
had forgiven her so much. This improvement St. Paul made, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. I am
(says he) the least of all the Apostles, and not meet to be called an Apostle,
because I persecuted the Church of God. But by the grace of God, I am that I
am, and his grace which was bestowed on me, was not in vain: but I labored
more abundantly than they all. O this will be an excellent improvement, even of
your sins, if your former unholiness shall now help to make you more holy, your
former unrighteousness shall help to make you more righteous for the time to
come; your reflections upon how much you have done against God, and his Saints,
shall now engage you to do more for God, and the cause and people of God. A
good husband and house-wife, will lose nothing, but make some advantage of
every rag, every bit of wood, etc. I would have you be like them, you have been
formerly great sinners, and done much to the dishonor of God: your consciences
can show you a great dunghill of sin, which you made in your state of vanity:
God has changed your state, changed your hearts: let not that dunghill be lost,
look upon it often, to help to raise up your hearts in the praises and
admiration of Gods free grace, and the engaging your hearts more for God in
your contrary duties for the time to come. But so ^uch shall serve for this
Observation also.

SERMON XXVI.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am still going on, instructing you to that spiritual Wisdom, which the Text
tells you may be gained by, and is declared in the Observation of the motions
of Actual Providence. I am now proceeding to a Twelfth Observation of this
nature, which I shall give you thus:

Observe. 12. The Providence of God in the distribution of the good things of
this life, does in a great measure move circularly, though mostly to the
seeming advantage of ungodly men. In my enlargments upon this notion, I shall
keep much to the same method which I observed in the former. 1. Opening it unto
you. 2. Justifying the observation by instances. 3. Showing you the
reasonableness of this motion of Divine Providence. And lastly, Making some
suitable Application.

1. My observation (as you see) concerns the motions of Actual Providence, as
to its distribution of the portions of this life. The Pagan Philosophers
distributed all the good things they had any knowledge of into three sorts. The
good things of the body, amongst which they reckoned, long-life, health,
strength, beauty, etc. The good things of the mind the rich endowments of it,
such as knowledge, invention, judgment, wit, memory, and moral virtue, etc. and
the good things of fortune, such as birth, ingenuous education, honors,
riches. All these have a goodness in them, which lies in their suitableness to
the use of humane life or society. The blind Heathen, not seeing the
fountainhead of these beautiful streams, ascribed them to fortune: But they
are all in the hand of Providence, that gives to one a longer, to another a
shorter life; to one greater, to another lesser measures of health and
strength, etc. to one more judgment, wit, etc. than to another. But I chiefly
understand my Observation of the good things, which the Heathen called, Bona
fortunae, the good things of fortune, such as honors, riches, etc. These also
are the Lords; he it is, says Moses, That gives us power to get wealth. And
the Holy Ghost by another penman tells us, That promotion comes neither
from the east, nor from the west: but God pulls down one, and sets up
another. Promotion does mostly depend upon the favor of the great men of the
Earth, and you shall observe the Scripture everywhere makes God the Author of
the favor and grace, which persons have found in the eyes of the Princes of
the world.

2. Now I observe in the first place, That the wheel of Providence, in making
this distribution, does for the most part move circularly. My meaning is, that
good and evil of this nature, has (as all humane things) its turns and
vicissitudes, sometimes to good men, sometimes to bad men. The Heathen had some
prospect of this, though what we call Providence, they ascribed to fortune, to
whom they gave a wheel, to signify the rotation of all these sublunary
contentments, in which you know the same spokes are not always up nor down; but
sometimes these spokes are uppermost, by and by they are at the ground; and
those that but now were below, are up in their place. And this is most
perspicuous in bodies of people, which are made up of those two sorts of men,
that divide the world, godly and ungodly. There is a time when the vilest are
exalted, and the wicked walk on every side. This is their hour, and the power
of darkness, as our Savior says, Luke 22.53. And there is a time again, When
ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall take
hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we
have heard that God is with you, Zech. 8.23. There was a time when the seed of
Jacob prospered in Egypt, Joseph was advanced, and he was a protection to them.
A while after the wheel turns, and there arose a King that knew not Joseph, and
then the Israelitish spoke in the wheel of Providence, was at the ground: but
in a little while up it gets again. The Children of Israel go out of Egypt with
colors flying, and drums beating, and Pharaoh and his Host were drowned in the
red Sea. This was now their hour. But soon after the wheels turn again, and
they are almost devoured in the wilderness: But as soon as they were on the
other side of Jordan, they were again in a prosperous state. Soon after they
were oppressed, first by one Pagan Adversary, and then by another; but in
David's and Solomon's time, it was again an halcion-time with them. And when they
were in Canaan, that party of them, after Solomon's time, which adhered to God,
had their vicissitudes; as they had good or bad Princes, so it fared with them.
In the seventy years of the Babilonish Captivity, they had a very sad time; but
when that was out, they had again a kind hour: and in the very time of the
Babilonish Captivity, they doubtless had great vicissitudes; and the case was
much different with them, when the three Children were thrown into the fiery
furnace, from what it was, when they were advanced to great honors: or when
Daniel was thrown into the den of Lions, from what it was, when he was made the
first president. When they were come again into their own land, it was not
above fifty years before Ahasuerosh disturbeth their settlement, Ezra 4.6.
After a few years more, they perfect the building, both of the Temple and City.
Soon after they were oppressed, first by the Grecians, (when it was a very sad
time with them) then by the Romans, under whom they enjoyed more liberty, till
after the crucifying of Christ, soon after which, God said to them, Lo ammi,
you are not my people. The like observation might be made of the Christian
Church-Catholick, and the several parts of it; God will not always chide, nor
keep his anger for ever, Psalm. 103.9. The needy shall not always be forgotten,
Psalm. 9.18. he has said, He will not contend for ever, neither will he be
always wroth. The same observation might be made of particular persons and
parties fearing God. Jacob had his time of hard service, and his time of
liberty. Joseph one while is a prisoner, another time the second man in the
Kingdom. David had a time, when he was hunted like a partridg on the mountains,
and his time when he ruled happily and peaceably over all Israel and Judah.

2. The second part of my Observation was, that as to these good things, the
Actual Proridence of God, ordinarily moves to the seeming advantage of wicked
men: I say, seeming advantage upon a double account: 1. For first, Wicked men
have no real advantage from any good things they have, their morsels are all
dipped in wrath; and they turn to their real loss and disadvantage, as they draw
out their lusts, and aggravate their eternal condemnation. 2. I much question
whether they have that seeming advantage, which they appear to have. If we
consider the disproportion in the numbers of such as fear the Lord, and such as
fear him not; I believe we shall find God, as to the things of this life, do as
much for his people, as for wicked men. It is true, we see more wicked men than
good men in places of honor and power; we see more of them, than of these
prosper in the world, and grow great and rich: but therefore what disproportion
is there betwixt the number of the one, and of the other? But however, certain
it is, that the servants of God have many of them found this a rock of offense
to them, and have stumbled upon this temptation; so did Job, chap. 21. David,
Psalm. 73. Jeremiah, Jer. 12.1. Habbakuk, etc. And this appearance has been a
temptation to others, to deny, or at least to dispute the Providence of God. I
shall therefore give you a more particular account of this, when I come to open
the (...), or hard Chapters of Divine Providence. In the mean time, I take
notice of it, only as matter for our observation, and supposing that it is so,
I shall hereafter show you, that it is but a reasonable motion of Providence.
But truly upon a stricter observation, I believe we shall find Divine
Providence, as to these things, more circular in its motions, and equal in its
distributions, than we usually judge it; being deceived, by not wistly observing
the disproportion of each party in its numbers; and that of Solomon, Eccles.
9.1, 2. will hold, that the love or hatred of God, is not to be judged from
what does in this life happen unto men.

3. But thirdly, (which I should have added to the observation, and crave your
leave yet to add it) in the dispensations of special grace, and those good
things which are truly spiritual, the Providence of God is inaccountable: here
the way of Providence, is like the way of an Eagle in the air, a Ship upon the
S^^, or a serpent upon a rock, it cannot be tracked. It is true, our Savior
says, (...), the poor receive the Gospel; so I should rather translate it, as
in the passive voice, then as our translation does, as if it were the middle
voice. The poor preach the Gospel; and the Apostle tells us, That God has
chosen the poor of this world to be rich in grace, and heirs of the kingdom.
And again, you know your calling brethren, not many rich, not many wise not
many noble, etc. yet the Providence of God does deal out special grace to the
rich, as well as to the poor. Abraham, and Lot, and Isaac, and Job, and David,
and Solomon, Joseph, and Daniel, and Joseph of Arimathea, were all rich men;
though as the number of the poor, far exceeds the number of them who are
possessors of great Estates; so the number of holy persons of mean estates,
bears the like disproportion to the number of such persons, that are great, and
abound in this worlds goods; neither does the Providence of God deal out these
riches of special grace, as if they were inheritances. Was not Jacob and Esau
brethren? yet the Lord loved Jacob, and hated Esau. You often in Scripture read
of good men, that had very bad children; and of bad men, that had very good
children: Jeroboam was a wicked man, one that made Israel to sin, yet in Abijam
his son, there was some good thing found toward the Lord. Abijam the King of
Judah, was a man that walked in all the sins of his Fathers, 1 King. 15.2. Yet
ver. 11. Asa his son did that which was right in the sight of the Lord.
Jehoshaphat, the son of Asa, was a very good man; but Jehoram his son walked in
all the ways of the Kings of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 21.5. so did Ahaziah his son.
Jonathan was a good man, 2 Chronicles. 27; but Ahaz his son walked in the ways of
the Kings of Israel, and made images for Baalim; yet the son of Ahaz, Hezekiah,
was an excellent man. Manasses his son was a very wicked man the greatest part
of his life: indeed, 2 Chronicles. 33.13, 14, 15, being carried into Babylon, and
bound in fetters, he besought the Lord, and the Lord was entreated of him; and
then the Scripture tells us, That he knew the Lord was God, and he began
something of reformation, ver. 15. Ammon his son was a very wicked Prince, but
Josiah his son an excellent man; but we read no good of any one of his sons.
Thus as to the dispensations of saving-grace, we see the Providence of God is
not to be tracked, sometimes given to the son of a good father; at another time
denied to the seed of those in Covenant with God, and given out to the children
of most vile and wicked parents: and this is no more than we yet see every day
in the dealings of God. But it is time that I should show you the
reasonableness of these motions of Divine Providence. 1. Why the Providence of
God moves in such a circular motion, in the distribution of the good things of
this life. It will appear reasonable to you,

1. If you consider both Gods general relation to all his creatures, and also
his special kindness, and the demonstration of it to his people, together with
his faithfulness to his promises. 1. I say, his general relation to all his
creatures: they are his creatures, he their Creator; they by Creation his
children, and he their father. It is true, they are undutiful children, and do
not answer the law of their Creation; God may say to them, If I be your father,
where is my honor? But yet children they are, God intends them not the
inheritance, and therefore God does by them, as Abraham by the children he had
by Keturah, Genesis 25.5. To whom he gave portions, and sent them away. A father
has many children, some elder, some younger, some more dutiful, whom he loves
with a more peculiar love; but he has something of a fatherly affection for
them all, he gives them all portions, more or less. Some have their portion in
this life, as David speaks, Psalm. 17. Son remember, says Abraham to Dives,
thou had thy good things in this life: thy good things. So Lazarus had a
right to a child's portion. Joseph sent all his brethren a mess, though to
Benjamin he sent seventimes as much as to the rest. 2. But besides this, some
wicked men have another relation to God, as servants in some special service,
none of them are universally Gods servants; but in some special service, many
wicked men are Gods servants. And no man shall serve God for nothing. This was
Jehu's case, which procured him the Crown for four generations, for the service
he did God against the house of Ahab. Then if we consider, 1. Gods special
kindness to his people, declared so often in Scripture, and the reasonableness
that God should make some demonstration of it, that all the world may know that
God will honor those that honor him; and how impossible it is, that the men
of the world should take notice of this, and be convinced of it merely from
spiritual rewards, of which they have no certain cognizance, or from eternal
rewards; you will see it but reasonable, that God in his Providence should
dispose, even of the goods of this life, unto his own people, though not to
all, yet to many of them, and that they should have their turns in these
distributions of Providence, and not be always, or all of them poor and needy,
or vile, and contemptible in the eyes of the world. Especially seeing that, as
the Apostle says, Godliness has the promise as well of this life, as of that
which is to come: And our Lord has commanded us to seek the kingdom of heaven,
and the righteousness thereof, upon the encouragement of a gracious promise,
that the things of this life shall be added to them. Further, if there should
be no circulation of Providence in these distributions, how should those
Scriptures be fulfilled? wherein God has told us, Psalm. 30.5. That the rod of
the wicked shall not always rest upon the lot of the righteous; that he will
take care that the spirits should not fail before him, nor the souls that he
has made: that his anger endures but for a moment; that sorrow comes for a
night, but joy shall come in the morning, etc. And those many other promises
for the good things of this life, which are made to the People of God in
Scripture, though they are not to be interpreted into an extent of that
latitude, as if they should be the constant portion of the Church and People of
God, or of every child of God. Yet how should they be made good, if there were
not some circulation of Providence in the distribution of the good things of
this life; if it should not go sometimes well, as well as sometimes ill with
the Church and People of God.

2. The reasonableness of this motion of Divine Providence will appear to you,
from Gods love and zeal to Justice. Justice lies in giving to every one their
due; God must be just, and his Justice must be declared to the world, that all
may know, that the God of Heaven is a righteous God. Now this Justice of God
requires such a circulation of Providence, as I have commended to your
observation. If you will but consider, that as the whole life of wicked men is
a life of rebellion and disobedience: So God never had a Church in the world,
nor any particular Saint, but had their corruptions, and were guilty of many
miscarriages, which subjected them to the vindicative Justice of God. Now for
the People of God (if I may so speak with holy Reverence) God has tied up his
own hands, he cannot punish them with eternal punishments, he has accepted a
price, a satisfaction for them; so as now, There is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus: But he has a controversy, even with Judah; and he
must punish Jacob according to his ways, and according to his doings he must
recompense him, Hos. 12.3. This can be no otherwise, than by denying of them
some good things in this life, either such spiritual enjoyments, as the denial
of is yet consistent with their enjoyment of the eternal inheritance, or those
things which concern the outward man. And as to wicked men, although their
greater punishment is reserved unto another life; yet it is necessary for the
vindication of Divine Justice before the world, that they should in this life
also have their portion of affliction and misery: for as to spiritual
judgments, they are but secret plagues, which the world takes no notice of,
nor does it understand the bitterness and terribleness of them: and as to
eternal punishments, they, as well as the eternal rewards of the righteous, are
matters of faith, and as not evidenced to the sense of the living part of the
world; so neither to be made so demonstrable to their reason, as to enable the
men of the world, from them alone, to conclude the Justice of God in
recompencing sinners according to their ways. So that upon this supposition,
that the God of Heaven is a righteous God, that will recompense every one
according to his ways, and that in the eyes of the world he will declare his
Righteousness: There must be in this life, both a reward, and a punishment for
the People of God, and a recompense for the wicked according to their ways; and
consequently such a rotation and circulation of Actual Providence, in the
distribution of the good things of this life, as I have been discoursing to
you. And this now gives you a reasonable account of this motion.

If you further require of me to give you a reasonable account, of the seeming
inequality of the hand of Divine Providence, in these distributions, why it
seems to give most advantage to evil men.

1. In the first place it is sufficient to repeat to you, what I before told
you, that it is but a seeming advantage. The good things of this life are not
in themselves good or evil, but as they are used and improved. Indeed they are
such as of themselves have a tendency to make men better; but they make men
better or worse, according to the hearts they meet with. Many a man's honors
and riches prove his ruin here; but they prove to many more (through the
corruption of their hearts) the occasion of the eternal ruin of their souls, as
they give them more opportunities to exercise the lusts and corruptions of
their hearts. As they are sensible portions, so it is but reasonable, that the
worst of men should have their portions of them; and through the predominancy
of lust and corruption in their hearts, they prove no advantages to them; but
such things as fat them up to the day of slaughter, and further prepare them
for the Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God against them.

2. But, secondly, for riches and honors. The Providence of God does
ordinarily dispense them out to men, according to their endeavors, and
oft-times rather suffers men to get them, then gives them to them. Gods
efficiency is indeed sometimes discernable in giving men estates and honors,
giving them favor in the sight of Princes, raising them up great friends: but
the most of men that come to great wealth and honors, arrive at them, by being
only suffered by God to walk and prosper in their own ways. And indeed this is
one reason, why the way to these great things in the world, is more open to the
Sinners, than to the Saints of the Earth. Our Savior calls riches, the
Mammon of unrighteousness; and although it possibly was too large to say, omnis
Dives; yet it had been true enough to have said, Plerunque Dives est vel
iniquus vel iniqui haeres, great estates are at first gotten (usually) by ill
means, and are seize, hardly fit for those who think themselves tied up
to the rule of the Gospel; being either got by undue sparing, or unjust
dealing. And the same might be said of honors. Indeed it is not always so,
sometimes God throw's an estate into a man's lap, that is careless of it, and
heapeth honors upon some that seek not after it: and this may be one reason,
why in these distributions the Providence of God in the distribution of these
things, moves more to the appearing advantage of wicked men, who can use any
arts and means to make themselves rich and great; than of those who live by a
stricter rule, and must refuse gold offered them upon sinful terms, and honors
tendered them as a price for a prostituted conscience.

3. Experience teaches us, That affliction and poverty, and a mean condition
in the world, and a scant measure of the good things thereof, are most adequate
to the exercises of grace, and the enjoyment of communion with God. Israel
follows God in the wilderness, in the land of droughts, and apostatizeth in
the land of Canaan. When Jeshurun waxes fat, she kicketh up the heel, like a
fatted beast in the pasture, that while it was lean, was tame enough: and
therefore Agur prays as much against excessive riches, as poverty. Now Gods
whole design upon the Saints, is by his dispensations to them in this life, to
fit them for the inheritance of the Saints in light; and what he gives them,
shall be no more, than will accompany salvation, and fit them for it.

As to the third thing in my observation, who can give an account of the thing
that is inaccountable? The reason of it lies in this: That God will have mercy,
upon whom he will have mercy: and whom he will, he hardens. God will proclaim
to the world, that his Grace is Grace, that is, free, not to be conveyed as an
inheritance from the father to the child: not depending upon the merits of
parents, nor annexed to any secular circumstances, nor any thing, which in this
world makes one man to differ from another. But this is enough to give you
some rational account of these motions of Divine Providence. I come now to the
practical Application of what you have heard.

Use 1. And in the first place this Observation will confirm us, That the love
of God to men's immortal souls, is not to be determined from his dispensations
of the good things of this life. In Gods special love, there is a certainty, in
these things there is a great incertainty. These the Providence of God
disposes in some kind of Circulation; sometimes godly men have them, sometimes
wicked men, sometimes the Church of God, sometimes the Enemies of God. The
Providence of God (as you have heard) in these things moves most to the
advantage of the vilest men. But leaving this more general branch of
Application, I shall apply it more particularly.

1 To the sinners of the world that prosper. The rod of God is not upon their
backs, they are not plagued like other men: Gods Sun shines upon their
Tabernacles: their Bull gendreth, and fails not; their-Cows calve, and cast
not their calves; they send forth their little ones like a flock, they take
their Harps, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ (as Job speaks) riches,
and power, and honor, are all with them. Three things I would take the
advantage of this Observation to caution them against.

1. That they would not promise themselves a perpetuity in this state. As the
child of God may say of his adversity and afflictions, these things are not
Eternity; so the sinner may say of his prosperity. There is a circulation in
the motions of Providence in its distribution of these things: The same spokes
of the wheel are not always uppermost; you are now spokes in the upper part,
the wheel will turn, and you will be lower; most sinners have their day, but it
is but a day. Day and night, summer and winter, light and darkness follow one
another in humane conditions, as well as in time: some have a summers-day,
others a shorter winter-day, but none has more than their hour or day. It was
Babilon's error to say, That she sat like a Lady, and should never see
widowhood, or loss of children. God tells her both these should come upon her
in one day. It is the weakness of humane nature to look upon any thing here as
permanent. Are you therefore in a state of prosperity? Is it your hour? think
not you shall never be moved. David, Psalm. 30. said in the day when his
mountain stood strong, That he should never be moved. God did but hide his
face, and he was troubled. You may possibly meet with particular persons, that
are exceptions to this general rule, but hardly any body of people.

2. Let what you have heard admonish you not to glory and triumph in your
prosperous state; if you will rejoice, let it be with trembling. The
observation affords two reasons why the prosperous sinner should not
excessively rejoice. 1. Because there is a circulation in these motions of
Providence. This was that which quieted David's spirit, disturbed at the
prosperous state of ungodly men, Psalm. 73.18. Surely thou have set them in
slippery places, thou castedst them down into destruction. 2 I have told you
that the Providence of God in these dispensations seems to incline most to
favor the worst of men. David, Psalm. 17.13, 14. prays to be delivered from
wicked men, who have their portion in this life, and whose belly God filled
with his hidden treasure. It has been an ordinary thing for good men to
suspect the love of God to them, when they have met with no changes. Luther was
afraid God intended to put him off with the good things of this life. But,
says he, I protested that I would not be so satisfied.

3. Lastly, This speaks aloud to sinners on the pinacles of the world, not to
harden their hearts. Sin gives a man a base spirit, you shall ordinarily
observe, that the worst of men are most proud and haughty in their prosperity,
and the most cowardly and low in their spirits, when an hour of adversity
comes. How ordinarily do we see it? If vile and abject men get a little power
on their side, there is no living by them, their insolences, oppressions and
cruelties are so intolerable; but let them be a little under hatches, there is
none will crouch so basely. But, O you fools, when will you be wise? O that in
their days of health, they would but think they may be sick, when they are
rich, that they may be poor; that when they are the head, they would consider
they may be the tail. Prosperity then would not harden them: but it is true,
which the Holy Ghost tells us, That prosperity slays the fool. It seldom does
a child of God good. Before I was afflicted (says holy David) I went astray;
but it ordinarily slays the fool. I shall advantage this with this further
observation. As it is usually observed, that men who have had a long and
non-interrupted health, seldom escape the first acute sickness they meet with.
So it is very rare, that God enters into judgment with a sinner, that has
enjoyed a long prosperity, but he utterly consumes him; you cannot but observe
in reading the Prophets, that as they denounced the Judgments of God against
his own People; so they also denounced them against the Enemies of God, and
with this remarkable difference. They seldom threaten judgment to them, but it
was utter ruin; God would make a full end of them. But says God, as to his own
people, Thou shall not go utterly unpunished. I will make a full end of the
Nations, that have carried thee away captive, but I will not make a full end of
thee, Jer. 30.11, etc.

But secondly, Let me turn my self to them that fear the Lord, and improve my
observation as to them in three or four words.

1. Fret not then at the prosperous state of wicked men. It is the great
argument of the 37 Psalm: where it is pressed from a great variety of
arguments. Remember that the motions of Providence are circular. There are two
sorts of things that use mightily to affect us. 1. Strange and unusual things.
2 Things which appear to us against reason. It is no strange thing, Job 12.6.
Job complained that the tabernacles of robbers prospered, and they that
provoked God were secure, the men into whose hands God brings abundantly.
Disturb not your selves then if you see men of prodigious wickedness great in
power, and honor, and riches, and flourishing ('it is but what has always been)
and trampling under foot the people of the Lord. It is no new thing that
happens to you. A second sort of things we usually startle at, are those
things which seem to us unreasonable; we cannot reconcile them to our thoughts,
and such a thing is this prosperity of sinners: but this fancy speaks only,
1. The weakness of our faith. 2. And the shallowness of our reason. If we had
faith but as a grain of mustard seed, that we could believe a life to come, and
the joys of an eternal state, in which these men shall have no portion; we
should not think these things of that value, but that God might reasonably give
them to wicked men. We are like ordinary people, that never were out of the
Town where they live, or the Nation wherein they were born, that take that
Town, or that Nation to be all the world, and think there is no place better
than that which they see and live in. Did we believe that there is a more
enduring substance? an house in the Heavens not made with hands, an inheritance
that is immortal, incorruptible, that fades not away, to none of which the
ungodly man has any right at all, we should never trouble our selves, that the
Sun shines a little upon the Tabernacles of ungodly men: we should think it
but reasonable, that God should allow something of the good things of this life
to vile and profligate livers. Remember how the Father of the prodigal quieted
the Son that had been always with him, troubled that his brother, who had
devoured his living with Harlots, had the fatted calf killed for him, Luke
15.31. Son, remember thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. The
People of God, have God always with them, and are admitted to a daily communion
with God; all the grace, all the glory of God is theirs. Think this reward
enough for the cleansing of thy heart, and the washing of thy hands; and seeing
the swearers and blasphemers, and even the worst men of the world, are Gods
Creatures, and some of them (though they mean not so), yet do God service
sometimes; do not judge it unreasonable that God should give them a portion in
this life. But I forbear knowing, that it will fall in my way hereafter, when I
shall come to open the hard Chapters of Divine Providence, to speak more fully
to the reasonableness of this motion of Divine Providence.

2. This calls unto the People of God, if at any time they be in a prosperous
state to look for an hour of adversity. The Circulations of Divine Providence
admonish Gods People of this; no man reasonably says in the morning, that the
Sun shall set no more in his Horizon, nor in the Summer, that he shall never
feel the cold, or see the storms of another Winter; he considers the Ordinances
of nature, and the Circulation of these natural motions. It is as unreasonable
to promise our selves stated and uninterrupted felicity in this life, to say
(as David) In our prosperity I shall never be moved. Be rather thinking what
you shall do, if God should bring you into such a condition.

3. Nor do you despond in adversity. Say to the Enemies of Church and Gospel,
as the Church in Micah, Mic. 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; when I
fall, I shall rise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.
It is as unreasonable for any to conclude at midnight, that there shall never
be a morning, as in the morning to fancy there shall never be a midnight more:
you have not it may be in this life those full measures of the good things
thereof, which others have; But, says David, Psalm. 17. when I awake, I shall
be satisfied with thy likeness. Some interpret it of an awaking at the
resurrection, that is sure enough. Some of an awaking out of his afflicted
state; God in this life is not always smiting, not always grieving the children
of men. The rod of the wicked shall not always lie upon the back of the
righteous. Do not build too much upon these hopes, remember that God has
better things for his people, than riches and honors, and earthly power.
Heaven is their portion, but yet even as to this life, do not cast away your
hope.

4. But lastly, Be patient under all the frowns of Divine Providence. This is
the method of Providence, the sinner must have his hour, and that hour to the
People of God will be the very power of darkness. The beasts that are nearest
the slaughter, usually have the fattest pastures; God has far better things
reserved for them that love him, and even in this life: He will not leave you
comfortless, he will come unto you; if not to the rescue of your bodies, yet to
the relief, support, and satisfaction of your souls. Wherefore comfort your
selves with these words.

SERMON XXVII.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
WE take notice in the world, that Wisdom is not so much the daughter of study,
as of experience. It is a practical habit, directing the ordering of men's
conversations to their best advantage: which is not so well acquired from our
poring on books, and making conclusions from connate principles, or maxims of
others, as from the observation of what we see in the world. Hence we observe
what Job said, Job 12.12. with the Ancients is wisdom. Elihu said, Job 32.7.
Days shall speak, and multitude of years shall teach wisdom. There must indeed
be supposed a foundation in nature, and that is a good faculty of judgment, and
a foundation in art; for wisdom dwells with knowledge, but neither nature, nor
art and study will make a morally wise man. Observation contributes more than
either: and this is the reason that wisdom is with the Ancients, and that
multitude of years teaches it. The reason of this is, the inequal distribution
of reason to reasonable creatures, and the prevalence of passion above it in
the most of men; from this it is, that we can better conclude what is like to
be done in the world, from what has been done, than from any rational
principles, which will tell us what one would think reasonable men should do.
Spiritual Wisdom likewise is much gained by observation: this is that which we
call experience, by which we understand not always what our selves have felt,
but what we have seen with our eyes, what we have remarked in Gods dealings.
And the reason of this, is our imperfect understanding of what God has
revealed in his word, which lets us see, that we stand in need both of the
Spirit, and of the Providence of God to be our interpreters; and the oneness
and immutability of God gives us a far better advantage to gain wisdom from the
issues of his Providence, then the variable passions of men will allow us to
gain from what we see in their actings, whose methods oft-times vastly differ
one from another; so as the policies of one age, have no cognation with those
of another. The reason also of which is, because there is a wheel within these
wheels (though the fools and blind men of the world see it not) governing these
sensible wheels, to the designs of his eternal counsels. Hence it is, that he
who is wise, will observe; and he who would be wise, must observe the motions
of Divine Providence; which though it has many secret and unsearchable
motions, yet also has many certain and uniform motions, which will fall under
the science and understanding of the soul, that gives up it self to the study
and observation of them. I have already offered to you twelve Observations upon
the motions of Providence, I yet proceed, and shall at present offer you some
further things chiefly relating to the motions of Divine Providence, in the
executing of Divine Justice and Judgment, and that as well in the rewarding of
the righteous, as in the punishment of the sinner; Two great works of Divine
Providence, about which indeed it is mostly taken up: it goes to and fro the
world, doing this work every day; let us see how far we can track it, or make
any judgment from the prints of its feet, where, or what we are like to meet
with from it: meet it we must at every turn of our lives; our business is to
make up a judgment, what we are like to meet with from it, whether it be like
to say unto us, Have thou met me, O my friend! or as Ahab to Elijah, Have thou
met me, O mine enemy! The next Observation I shall commend to you, is this:

Observe. 13. The reward of the righteous man, and also of the sinner, is always
certain and constant, though not always sensible and uniform? This must be
true. Shall not the judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.25. It is in the
nature of God to do justly, far sooner shall a good tree bring forth corrupt
fruit, than a righteous God do an unrighteous act. It is written in the Will
and Promises of God, and in the threatenings which declare the Will of God
against sinners. Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with them, for
they shall eat the fruit of their doings: Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill
with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him, Isa. 3.9, 10. Though
a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged: yet surely it
shall be well with them that fear God, that fear before him: But it shall not
be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, Eccles. 8.12. But
it may be better for your edification, that I should open the Observation in
the branches of it. The subject of my discourse you see is the vindicative and
remunerative Justice of God, considered as in the hand of Actual Providence, I
say of both.

1. That it is certain, both the one and the other is certain; for the sinner
that swears and drinks, and wallows in his beastly lusts, that lies and cheats,
and oppresses, and breaks Sabbaths, that murthereth, and commits adultery,
and lives in the violation of the Commandments of God, his Judgment is certain,
his damnation sleeps not; the Providence of God shall most certainly meet
him, as a Bear robbed of her whelps, to tear him in pieces, and there shall be
none to deliver. On the contrary, for him that works righteousness, that
herein exercises himself to keep a conscience void of offense, both toward
God, and toward men, that lives an holy life and conversation, his reward is
certain. The certainty of both these depends, 1. Upon the immutable nature of
God. The righteous God loves righteousness, and hates iniquity, he cannot
clear the guilty; he cannot but reward the righteous; as soon shall God cease
to be God, as the persisting sinner go unpunished, or the persevering Saint be
unrewarded. 2. It depends upon the irrevocable will of God. God has said it,
the Lord has spoken it, and it shall come to pass. Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, before a word shall fail of all which the mouth of the Lord has spoken.
3. It depends upon the faithfulness of Divine Providence, in acting
conformably to the Divine Nature, in the execution of the Divine Counsels, and
in pursuit of the Divine Will. Providence is Gods action in time, God cannot
act contrary to himself, nor contrary to his revealed Will. But this is what
none without great impiety can so much as doubt. But I added,

2. That both the punishment of the sinner, and the reward of the righteous man
is constant. This is not now a matter of so sensible demonstration, but equally
true with the other, Psalm. 7.11. The holy Psalmist tells us, He judges the
righteous, and is angry with the wicked every day. Anger in God signifies
nothing of passion, as it does in us. It only signifies Gods just will to
punish sinners, and the execution of this his just will and pleasure. Now I
take that phrase, God is angry with the wicked every day, to be true in both
senses; not only that God has an immutable will, purpose, and resolution to
punish resolved and impenitent sinners, but also that he is every day doing of
it: and so he is every day rewarding the righteous man. But this will better
appear in my Explication of the third thing, where I told you,

3. That neither the reward of the one, nor the punishment of the other are
uniform, or always sensible. And indeed the notattending to this, is all that
gives the least advantage to the complaints of Job, David, Jeremiah and
Habakkuk, concerning the prosperity of the wicked. God sometimes punishes
sinners by temporary afflictions and judgments: these now are obvious to every
eye, and incur into all men's senses. All men take notice of men's being
afflicted in their persons, crossed in their relations, in their estates, etc.
But thus God does not always punish the worst of men.

2. He has another way of punishing, and that more dreadful, that is, by
spiritual judgments; ubi poenalis nutritur impunitas, a punishing them by
suffering them to go unpunished. God never more smartly threatened the ten
Tribes, than when he told them by the Prophet, Hos. 4.14. I will not punish
your daughters, when they commit whoredom, nor your spouse when they commit
adultery. He never spoke more severely, than when he said, Why should they be
smitten any more, they will revolt more and more, Isa. 1.5. Hence impenitency,
hardness of heart: hence they bless themselves in their sinful courses: this
makes them shut their eyes, and stop their ears. This is indeed an insensible
judgment; but as it is with the wounds of the body, the more secret they are,
and inward, the worse they are: so it is with judgments upon a man, the more
inward and insensible, the more desperate and dangerous is the case. The giving
of sinners up to a blindness of mind, (as in the case of the Israelites), Isa.
6.9. to an hardness of heart (as in the case of Pharaoh), Exodus 4.21. to vile
affections, (as in the case of the Heathen), Romans 1.26. to a reprobate mind,
etc. These are of all other the greatest punishment, one or other way God is
angry with the wicked every day. Although he is not every day plaguing them
with sensible judgments; yet when he is not doing this, he is letting them
alone (as God spoke concerning Ephraim, Ephraim is joined to idols, let him
alone) suffering them to go on in their own ways, by which means their hearts
grow more hard and impenitent, more blind and insensible: and this is the
reason that wicked men grow worse and worse, more vile in their affections,
more sottish and reprobate in their minds and judgments, more vile and
abominable in their lives. And as the punishment of the sinner, so the reward
of the righteous man, though it be always certain and constant, yet it is not
uniform, nor always sensible, especially to others. The certainty of their
reward stands upon the very same foundations, that the certainty of the
sinners punishment does, and so does the constancy of it: for as God is angry
with the wicked every day, so God is well-pleased with the righteous every day;
he can every day go to God, and say unto him, Thou art my father; God is every
day well-pleased with him, and delighted in him. But I say, these rewards are
not always uniform, our heavenly Father has more than one blessing; sometimes
he blesses him that works righteousness after one manner, sometimes after
another, but he always blesses them. Let me a little open to you the plenty of
blessings, which our heavenly Father has, and show you how variously he
rewards him that works righteousness.

1. Sometimes some of his people shall be blessed with outward blessings.
Abraham shall be a rich man, and have many flocks and herds. Joseph shall be
the second man in Egypt. David and Solomon shall be great Princes. Mordecay
shall be the man whom the King of Persia shall delight to honor. Daniel shall
be the first president. This is necessary that God may justify his Promises of
this nature: you have such, Psalm. 128.1, 2, 3. and in many other Texts of holy
Writ. They may be necessary to uphold the interest of God in the world. The
world must sometimes say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous. Gods own
people shall sometimes have healthy bodies, numerous families, plentiful
comfort in their relations; many left hand-mercies, added to those spiritual
blessings, with which God has blessed them all in Jesus Christ.

2. Others now God does not reward this way, but he rewards them in their
souls and inward man: and indeed this is the constant reward of them that fear
the Lord: and there is a variety in these too. God does not measure out the
same kinds, nor the same proportions unto all. Some are blessed with a quiet
conscience, possibly they have not ecstasies of joy as others, but their hearts
do not condemn them: and this is indeed the usual reward of the man that
works righteousness: The work of righteousness shall be peace (says the
Prophet), Isa. 32.17. If God brings them to a sickbed, or into any other
strait, they can say with Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.3. I beseech thee, O Lord,
remember me now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, that is, an upright sincere heart; or with Nehemiah 13, 14. Remember me,
O Lord, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds which I have done for
the house of my God. And give me leave to tell you, this is a great reward, but
to be delivered from the sour reflections of a condemning conscience: for as
there is nothing more nauseous and troublesome to us, than the sower recoilings
of our stomach; so there is no greater torment to a man's life, than the
recoilings of a guilty conscience. Nothing is oft-times so great a torture to a
sinner as this, when he says unto his conscience, Is it peace? and his
conscience tells him, What peace? so long as thy drunkenness, thy whoredoms,
thy lies, and oaths and blasphemies, thy cheating and cozening, thy oppression
and violence remain? There is no peace to the wicked (says my God). On the
other side there is nothing so refreshing unto a spirit tired with the crosness
of the world, than to find a peace within himself. Now this is the general
reward of the righteous man, if he misseth raptures and ecstasies of joy; yet he
comes not short ordinarily of a quiet and serenity of a waky and awakened
conscience. I know there are hours of melancholy, and darkness, and desertion,
to which the best of Gods People are exposed; but these are but rare examples
in comparison of those multitudes of godly ones, that walk in some blessed view
of their own sincerity and uprightness. Some he rewards in their inward man,
with raptures and ecstasies of God: They know and are persuaded that nothing
shall separate them from the love of God in Jesus Christ; they defy death and
hell, and challenge the fatal strokes which others tremble at the thoughts of.
They complain of time, and were it not for the Law of God in the case, would
dismiss their souls of their prison, and lie (like men waiting for a wind)
longing for that happy gale, that should carry their souls into the wide Sea of
Eternity. But this is but the portion of a few, and scarce the abiding temper
of them neither; but such hours the People of God have had. Some again he
rewards inwardly with strength, confirmed habits of grace, and contentment
with their portion, etc. Their outward man decreaseth, but their inward man
increases day by day: they are poor in purse, but rich in grace; they have but
little, but they are content with what they have, and tell all the world they
have enough. And let me tell you, that as punishments in the inward man, are
the greatest punishments; so these spiritual rewards are of all other the
greatest rewards, which is matter of easy demonstration, if we will but allow
our souls to be our nobler parts, and the Jewel to be better than the Cabinet.
Whatsoever tends to the debasing and ruining the soul, must be the greatest
evil; and whatsoever conduces to its ennobling or felicity, must be the
greatest reward and good. Besides this, spiritual judgments are the continual
forerunners of such as are temporal, and spiritual mercies draw after them, at
least a proportion and sufficiency of the good things of this life. All these
things shall be added unto you (says our Savior). 2 Chronicles. 25.16. God sent a
Prophet unto Amaziah, the King would not hear him; see what the Prophet says,
I know (says the Prophet) that God has determined to destroy thee: why?
because thou have done this, and have not hearkened unto my counsel: Spiritual
judgments forerun temporal, you have it, Isa. 6.10. When the Prophet asked how
long? how long in seeing, they should see, and not perceive; and hearing they
should hear, and not understand? God answers, Until the cities be wasted
without an inhabitant, and the houses should be left without men, and the land
should be utterly desolate. In like manner spiritual rewards and mercies never
go without something of this life, if not a plenty, yet a sufficiency, food
convenient for Gods People. Finally, as spiritual judgments are the forerunners
of eternal ruin: so spiritual rewards are the more certain forerunners of
eternal salvation; they are the things which (as the Apostle speaks) accompany
salvation, and make men meet for the Kingdom of God.

3. But God sometimes rewards his people with sufferings. This you may think a
strange reward. But yet a reward it is, Christ promises to the losers for him,
that they should receive children, houses, lands, with persecutions; and the
Apostles, Act. 5.41. rejoiced they were thought worthy to suffer shame for his
namesake. God honors that man whom he calls out to be a witness for him,
and to carry his cross after him. Job speaks of other afflictions, and cries
out, Job 7.17. Lord, what is man that thou should magnify him? that thou
should set thine heart upon him? that thou should visit him every morning,
and try him every moment? What need we more than what the Apostle assures us?
Heb. 12. That whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every child
whom he receives: Our light and momentany afflictions (says the Apostle)
shall work for us a far more eternal and exceeding weight of glory: and if we
suffer with him, we shall also be glorified together with him, Romans 1.17. This
variety of rewards our heavenly Father has. The rewards of the righteous from
God are not uniform, but always certain and constant: one way or other, Gods
Providence is always doing them good, and rewarding their righteous deeds: and
this must necessarily be true upon the Apostles Hypothesis, That all things
shall work together for the good of them that love God. But I hasten to the
Application.

Use 1. In the first place let me recommend this to your observation. Though
there be such a vast difference between good and evil in their own intrinsic
natures, as might justly allure us into the embraces of the former, and scare
every man from the pursuit of the latter; yet such is our nature, that we stand
in need of encouragements to the former by rewards, and by the terrors of the
Lord to be scared from the latter; and there cannot be any thing more effectual
with us to discourage sin, and encourage goodness, than if we can effectually
persuade our selves, that the punishment of sin is both certain and constant,
and the reward of righteousness is so also. This is the point I have
endeavored to demonstrate, and you have heard that the reason of any ones
presumption of the contrary, is their looking at nothing as a punishment or a
reward but what is sensible, than which we cannot be guilty of a greater
mistake, nor any of worser consequence, as to the malign influence it will have
upon our lives, and (consequently) upon our eternal state. But consider what
has been said, and judge whether a man can do any thing to the greater ruin of
himself, than to go on in an impenitent and resolved course of sinning against
God. Possibly you do observe, that as to outward things it is much one with a
profane swearer and blasphemer, as with the man that reverenceth the glorious
God, and fears an oath, Eccles. 9.2. with the drunkard, as with him that is
sober; with the chaste, as with the unclean; with the Sabbath-breaker, as with
him that remembers to keep holy Gods day; nay the profane lawless sinner is in
greater honor and power than the other, richer than the other: and this
incourageth thee to join with them. But poor creature! has he that has many
blessings, but one curse, think thou? Observe well that same prosperous
sinner, and tell me if every day he does not grow worse, if according to his
pastures, he be not filled with all the fruits of unrighteousness, if he be not
given up to a blind mind, an hard heart, vile affections, if thou do not
observe that his conscience is seared, and branded with an hot iron, as it
were, that he grows past feeling. If thou see this, say not he is not
punished, he is punished with a witness. Is a sealing up to damnation no
punishment? According to our law you know malefactors are first seared with an
hot-iron, upon their next miscarriage they are hanged. It is Gods method, when
once a soul is seared with an hot-iron, given up to be past feeling, to damn
him next without mercy. Look well upon the sinner, and thou will discern God is
angry every day with him, he is every day fitting for Hell flames, Is this no
punishment? On the other side thou see the man according to Gods heart,
walking sadly; he is plagued every night, chastned every morning, he is poor
and needy, hungry and thirsty, in prisons, in deaths often, pursued by the
falcons of the world, as a partridg upon the mountains, persecuted on all
hands. Thou concludest contrary to the Scripture, That he has washed his hands
in vain, and cleansed his soul to no purpose: verily there is no reward for the
righteous. But harken poor creature. Had Esau's Father many blessings? and has
Jacob's God but one sort? Thou see his poverty and want, but do thou see
how he has learned in all estates to be content, and has changed his name
into a quod vult Deus. And certainly godliness with contentment is great gain.
A poor contented Lazarus, is an happier and richer man, than a discontented
covetous Dives. Thou see how he is afflicted every day, how full of troubles
his life is; but thou do not see the serenity of his spirit, the peace of
his conscience: his joy in the Holy Ghost, his glorying and rejoicing in
tribulations, as his tribulations work patience, his patience experience, and
his experience hope. Mark, sirs, the upright men, consider the just men, you
will see their ends to be peace; yea in this life you will see them more
indisturbed by troubles, and inconcerned in the ruffles of the world than other
men. The more you observe, the more you will be confirmed in this truth, that
the Providence of God will certainly reward, yea is constantly rewarding him
that works righteousness.

Use 2. But secondly, what a trembling and terror should this Observation
strike into the loins of every sinner; what an engagement should it lay upon
them to repent, and turn from the wickedness of their way.! Each part of this
Observation ought to be improved for this purpose. Impunity in sinning, is a
great encouragement to the sinner: the heart of man stands bent to his lusts,
and if he fancieth that he may escape the hands of Divine Justice, or that he
does escape, and thrive, and prosper in his wicked courses, it wonderfully
imboldneth him to go on; but if the vengeance against him be certain, if his
iniquity will certainly find him out, that he may as well hope not to dye, as
not to be thrown into Hell when he dies; and if the wrath of God be already
kindled against him, and God be already punishing him, What hope? what
encouragement can he then have? Now this you have heard is the sinners case. I
remember when that great plague was began amongst the Israelites, upon their
murmuring against Moses and Aaron, after the death of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, Numb. 16.46. Moses bids Aaron take a censer, and put fire therein
from the Altar, and put incense thereon, and go quickly to the congregation
(says he) and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone out from the
Lord, the plague is begun. Is here an impenitent sinner before the Lord? one
that has been a drunkard, a swearer, a profane person, or that has lived
without God in the world, that blesses himself with vain hopes or
presumptions, that he shall escape the Judgment of God, or may escape it; that
his soul is at present free from fears, he thriveth, he prospers in the
world, and his prosperity blinds his eyes, that he cannot see the hell into
which he is dropping, and so makes no haste to deliver himself from the wrath
that is to come? To such a one let me speak, (oh that my counsel might be
acceptable!) take thy censer, put fire thereon from the Altar, and put on
incense, and go quickly, and make an atonement for thy soul. These are indeed
things not in thy power, but my meaning is, Betake thy self quickly to the
great work of repentance, which lies not so much in tears and humiliation, as
in the change of thy heart, in thy turning from the wickedness of thy way,
breaking off from thy sinful courses. Betake thy self unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. It is he who has the golden censer, to whom is given much incense,
Rev. 8.3. It is he, Romans 5.11. By whom we must receive the atonement. Whatever
you may think, wrath is gone forth against you, the plague in your souls is
begun: you are in health, not sick, not in pain as other men; not so crossed in
your estates and relations, as some other men; but for all this wrath may be
gone forth against you, the plague may be begun within you. Let me examine you
a little, do not you find that your mind is more blind, your understanding more
dark, your affections more vile and sensual, your consciences are more benumbed
and stupid? Is not the plague then began? Can there be more dreadful
indications of Divine Wrath against you? The ax is laid to the very root of
your tree; if you do not now bring forth better fruit, you will suddenly be cut
down and cast into hellfire.

Again, What an encouragement to repentance is it, to hear, That he who works
righteousness, shall most certainly be rewarded, yea that he is rewarded every
day? Thou that live and go on in a course of bold and presumptuous
sinning, what peace have thou when thou lie down, or when thou risest up? Art
not thou like a bankrupt in the world, or one who is much behind-hand, that
cannot abide to look into his books? no more can thou endure to behold thy
conscience, or to call thy self to an account; it may be thou have quietem ex
somno, such a quiet as a man in a dead sleep has. The man that works
righteousness, can call himself often to account, and when he has done, lie
down and sleep in peace, either in a full assurance, or a good hope, at least
through grace, that God has pardoned and accepted him. Let therefore my
counsel this day be acceptable unto you, break up the fallow-grounds of your
hearts, sow unto your selves in righteousness, believe that the work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect thereof quietness and assurance
for ever.

Use 3. Finally, What an encouragement here is to the people of God under all
Gods severe dispensations to them, to go on doing good. Do not desame the God
of Heaven, with saying or thinking that you cleanse your hands in vain, nor
that he takes a long day to reward them that work in his work. Behold (says
our Lord) I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every one according
as his work shall be. It will not be long before Christ will come with this
great reward; but as he punishes the wicked, so he rewards also the
righteous man every day: it may be he does not reward thee with a long life, an
healthful body, a plentiful estate, other accomodations of this life; his
wisdom sees not these things fit for thee, he knows thy heart, thy temper;
but have thou not a quiet conscience, a serenity of mind? or art thou not
strengthened with might in the inward man? does not Christ dwell in thy heart
by faith? art thou not rooted and grounded in love, and able in some measure to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that thou
may be filled with all the fullness of God? Thou art (it may be) troubled on
every side, but art thou distressed? thou art perplexed, but art thou in
despair? thou art persecuted, but art thou forsaken? thou art cast down, but
art thou destroyed? Thou bear about in thy body, the dying of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in thy body, 2 Cor.
4.9, 10. Is this no reward? It may be it is not the reward thou lookedst for,
but it is that reward which God sees fittest for thee. It is not all that thou
shall have, when he shall come, whose reward is with him (and he tells thee
that will be quickly), thou may expect fuller and greater things; in the
mean time thou have a viaticum, an enough for thy passage through the
wilderness. The work of God is a wages to it self, but God gives thee wages
besides; yea, and eye has not seen, nor has ear heard, nor can it enter into
the heart of man to conceive, What great things God has further prepared for
them that love him; say not then, that thou servest God for nothing, and faint
not, nor be weary of well-doing: for you shall reap if you faint not.

SERMON XXVIII.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
THe these things mentioned in the Text (as I have formerly told you, and you
may easily assure your selves from the Context of the Psalm), are the great and
various motions of Actual Providence, concerning which, I am recommending to
you diverse things that I conceive as true, so very observable. Thirteen I have
discoursed, I proceed to another, which will also concern the motions of this
Actual Providence, in the distribution of rewards and punishments. The
Observation is this:

Observe. 14. The Providence of God does sometimes reward the intentions of his
people, where he does not allow of, and approve, the actions which should be
the product of those intentions; and very often reward some actions, from which
he has service, where he by no means allows the agents design and intention.
In the handling of which, I shall first justify the Observation by instances.
Secondly, I shall show you the reasonableness of this motion of Providence. And
lastly, I shall make some Application of it.

I say first, The Actual Providence of God does sometimes allow of, approve,
and reward the general good intentions of his people; when yet he does not, and
will not allow of those actions, which should be the product of such designs
and intentions. This evidently appears in that famous instance of David,
recorded in holy Writ, both in the 2 Samuel 7. and in 1 Chronicles. 17. The story is
this: David's life until that time, had been a life of a great deal of trouble
and distraction; he had many Enemies both before and after he came to the
Throne; but at length God (says the Text) had given him rest round about from
all his enemies. The good man presently begins now to think what eminent
service he should do for God. At length he considers, that there was no public
place for the Worship of God, nothing but a Tabernacle; he had built himself a
fine house of Cedar, but the ark, the symbol of Gods Presence with his People,
that dwelt in Curtains (as he expresses it, ver. 2.) But this being a thing
which concerned the Worship of God, as to which above all things the Lord our
God is a jealous God; David, though a great Prince, a great Prophet, a man
according to Gods own heart, would do nothing till he had advised with the
Prophet Nathan: Nathan bids him to go, and to do all that was in his heart; for
(says he) the Lord is with thee. The good man was but a man, and was mistaken;
God did not allow of the action,

1. Because he had not directed as yet any such thing, ver. 7. In all the
places wherein I have walked (says he) with the children of Israel, spoke I a
word with any of the tribes of Israel [or Judges of Israel] whom I commanded to
feed my people Israel, saying, Why build you not me an house of Cedar: he
repeateth the same reason again, 1 Chronicles. 17.6. Indeed there is another reason
given, 1 Chronicles. 22.8. Thou have shed blood abundantly, and have made great
wars: thou shall not build an house to my name, because thou have shed much
blood upon the earth in my sight. So 1 Chronicles. 28.3. For those two reasons God
disapproved the action, and reserved it for Solomon his son, then it became an
institution: Solomon might lawfully undertake it, and did do it. But yet you
shall find, that God eminently rewarded this good intention and purpose of
David's heart, as you shall read at large, 2 Samuel 7.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
and to that degree, that David, ver. 18. thought himself obliged to offer up
unto God a particular sacrifice of thanksgiving, and to offer up those praises
to God, which you shall read at large in that Chapter, from the 18th verse, to
the end of the Chapter. It is plain, that God only rewarded his general
purpose, and good intention; for the act or issue of that intention and
purpose, the Lord accepted not, but accepted his good will for the deed, which
he rejected. For an instance on the other side, take Jehu. Jehu did a good act,
that is, the thing which God commanded him: he indeed did it possibly in an ill
manner, with ill circumstances, which caused God to threaten, that he would
avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, 2 King. 9.7. When the
Prophet anointed him that was his Commission, Thou shall smite the house of
Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the Prophets, and
the blood of all the righteous servants of the Lord at the hand of Jezebel;
when it was done, God rewarded him for it, 2 King. 10.30. Because (says God)
thou have done well in my eyes, in executing that which is right in mine eyes;
and have done unto the house of Ahab, according to all that was in mine heart,
thy children to the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel. But
yet Jehu's design and intention in all this was naught, he intended no more
than to make himself King; he pretended indeed a zeal for the Lord, but
intended nothing but the advancement of himself, and his family; for the
Scripture says, ver. 31. of that 10th Chapter, That Jehu took no heed to walk
in the law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart, for he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin. God here rewarded the
action done at his command, and in the execution of his will, but abhorred the
intentions and designs that were in Jehu's heart upon the undertaking and
performance of it. Take another instance, it is that which I have formerly
insisted upon in the 10th of Isaiah, v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. It is plain that God
approved of the Assyrian's actions against Israel, he calls them the rod of his
anger, ver. 5. he says, ver. 6. That he would send him against an hypocritical
nation, and against the people of his wrath he would give him a charge, to take
the spoil, and take the prey, and to tread them down like mire in the streets:
Howbeit, says God, he means not so, neither does his heart think so; but it
is in his heart to destroy, and cut off nations not a few. The Assyrian had
nothing but sinful intentions, he aimed at nothing but spoil and plunder, and
accordingly executed Gods Will; upon which, ver. 12. God threatens, That when
he had performed his whole work upon Mount Zion, and upon Jerusalem, he would
punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of
all his looks: and ver. 16. That he would send amongst his strong ones
leanness, and under his glory kindle a burning, the burning of a fire. More
instances might be given of either sort, but these are enough. Let me proceed
in showing you the reasonableness of Divine Providence in these motions.

1. On the part of wicked men, it is but reasonable; Because in such actions
they do God service, and it is not reasonable they should serve God for
nothing. You have a remarkable text for this, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19. Son of man
(says God to Ezekiel), Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon caused his army to serve
a great service against Tyrus, every head was made bald, and every shoulder was
peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his army for Tyrus, for the service that he
served against it. Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold I will give the
land of Egypt unto Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and he shall take her
multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey, and it shall be the wages for
his army: I have given him the land of Egypt for the labor wherewith he served
against it, because they wrought for me, says the Lord. The King of Babylon
never intentionally wrought for God, undoubtedly what the Lord said of Assyria,
was applicable to Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon; spoil, and plunder, and
dominion, was all which he aimed at, he never intended to work for God: but yet
the work was what was Gods Will should be done, and what God had incited him to
do; he wrought for me (says God) he did service, and a great service, he has
had no wages for it, none shall work for me and be unpaid, I will give him the
land of Egypt for his pay. So Jehu, he wrought for God, and did a great service
against the house of Ahab; I will pay him, says God. Jehu shall never say he
wrought for nothing, his sons shall sit upon the Throne to the fourth
generation. Nay upon this account oft-times God rewards wicked men for some
actions, and afterward punishes them for the manner of their doing of those
actions; it is possible men may do what God commands them, and yet not obey
God. God may reward men for their action, as it is a service to him, and yet
punish them for their ill-doing of the action.

2. On the part of good men, where God rewards the good design, intention,
and purpose, whiles yet he disalloweth the action, the motion of Providence
seems yet more reasonable; if we but consider, that it is the heart which God
principally requires, looks at, and accepts. And where the heart is right,
the mistake in the action can be but a lapse of humane frailty and weakness.
Now where the sincere purpose and design, and counsel of the heart is right,
there the heart must be right with God. I say the heart is that which God
requires, My son (says he) give me thy heart, and you shall find where that
is right bent and inclined. God passes over a great many errors and failings
in the conversation: and this is what God said in this very case, 1 King. 8.18.
Whereas it was in thine heart to build me an house, thou did well that it was
in thine heart. The Lord looks on the heart, and ordinarily in Scripture he
accounts men to have done good or evil, according as their hearts were
prepared or set. Rohoboam did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek
the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. Now where there is a good intention, design, and
purpose, there the heart is right. Only here I must caution you as to two
things: 1. That you do not think that a pretense of a good heart or intention
will do you any service. It is one thing to pretend a good heart, another thing
to have it. Jehu pretended a great zeal for God, but had nothing less. 2. You
must take heed of thinking, that a good intention will justify a sinful
action; but a sincere and good intention, I say is accepted of God, and often
rewarded by him, where the action is such as God approves not, and makes an
error in action to be but a sin of infirmity; for where the heart stands right,
and truly designs the honor of God, the man cannot in that action wilfully
dishonor God: and this is enough to make this motion of Providence appear to
you very reasonable. Before I come to apply this Observation, I shall only give
you one or two Cautions.

1. They are only rewards of this life, by which God rewards the services of
wicked men, whose heart in the action is not right. Jehis was rewarded, but it
was only with a temporary dominion, his sons for four generations sat upon the
Throne of Israel. Assyria was rewarded for his service against Israel; but it
was only with spoil and plunder, and the enlargment of his Dominions; for the
rewards of grace and glory, they are never given to any, whose heart is not
right with God.

2. They are but temporary rewards, after the enjoyment of which for a time,
God usually punishes the sinner. Such was the reward of Jehu, it lasted but
four generations, and then God visited the blood of Jezreel upon the house of
Jehu: It was but a little time that Assyria, that Nebuchadnezzar the King of
Babylon joyed in the reward which God gave him for the great service with which
he had made his Army to serve against Tyrus, for the Prophets prophesied of the
destruction of Babylon soon after: and the Scripture tells us how it was by the
Persian Monarch. These things premised, I now come to the Application: And, 1.
By way of Instruction.

Use 1. We may learn hence what a good God we serve: no man serves God for
nothing. The least service that men do for God, shall have its proportionable
reward. His very Enemies shall not do actions for him, but they shall have a
recompense for them. The liberality of God, even to the worst of men, serving
him by the by, and looking quite another way when they are at Gods Oars, should
commend God unto us all; and may mightily help the People of God to conclude,
that their labor of love for God shall not be forgotten by him.

Use 2. In the second place, this will instruct you in one great reason of what
is such a beam oft-times in the eyes of Gods best servants: I mean the
prosperity, power, and greatness of vile men. I know it is not always the
cause, but oft-times it is. They have done some actions, from which God has
had a service; it may be God has used them to do some great piece of service
for his Church, so you know he used Cyrus (upon which the Scripture calls him
Gods servant), it may be they have done some service for God against his People
apostatizing: thus Assyria was the rod of Gods anger, though he did not mean
so. God had sent him against an hypocritical Nation. There are many ways by
which wicked men may do God service, while they intend nothing so. It may be
sometimes God will make use of them to relieve his poor servants in distress,
taking advantage of their good natures, or some relation they have to them,
etc. And this, though it may be we cannot always give account of the particular
cause, is the reason why God does great things for them, as to the good things
of this life. But there are two more proper branches of Application, which I
further aim at, the one concerning sinners more properly; the other concerning
such whose hearts are right with God.

Use 3. In the third place, this Observation looks upon all men, even the
worst of men, and speaks to them for two things:

1. That they would employ all the talents which God has given them in some
service of God. Sirs, you can none of you work for a more liberal and bountiful
master; the world is the great thing in the eyes of worldly men, they would be
rich, and great, and honorable, they have no faith, for the riches of glory,
no sense of the riches of grace; their language is, What will you give me? and
understand no greater things that God has to give, than sensible things. Now
admit their judgment were right, yet it were their greatest policy to be doing
those things which are materially good, and which are unquestionably within
their power to do, to be making use of their estates, which they spend in
luxury and wantonness, in drinking and gaming, etc. in clothing the naked,
feeding the hungry; the power and interest which God has given them, in the
protection of such as fear God, and delivering of them from the hands of
oppressors. I remember it was the counsel of the Prophet Daniel, to a Heathen
King, Dan. 4.27. Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and
break off thy sins by righteousness, and thy iniquities by showing mercy to the
poor, if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. It is a text, that is not
without its difficulties, and about which there has been a great contention
betwixt Papists and Protestants, the Papists from it stiffly contending for
their Doctrine of Merits and Satisfaction, by works of mercy and charity. But
whiles themselves grant, that works by which we can merit, must be such as are
more than strict duty, and Justice and Charity are the two only things which
the Prophet does here advise, which we know are duties required of all in
innumerable places of Scripture, there can be little pretense for any such
building upon this foundation. Daniel is plainly giving counsel to that Prince,
how he might, if not finally avoid, yet for a time turn away that fierce wrath
of God which he saw was began to kindle against him; he advises him to do
this, by breaking off his tyrannical oppression, and showing mercy, instead of
that cruelty with which the former part of his reign had been stained. Now mark
the argument, If, says he, it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. I know
your margents, tell you it may be read, It shall be an healing to your error,
about which some less judicious Papists make a stir: but their own great Arias
Montanus reads it, it shall be a prolongation of thy peace. Their vulgar Lat.
reads it, perhaps he will pardon thy sins: the septuagint (...), perhaps God
will bear long with thy sins, etc. However (though indeed in that sense it does
not so suit my present purpose) there is no doubt, but restitution is an
healing of the error of injustice and oppression amongst men, though it be
impossible that it should remove the guilt of sin before God. But I have
digressed too far. Let my counsel be acceptable now to every sinner, that has
any interest in the world, any talent of riches or honor, power or interest,
which he might improve in the doing of any thing which God has commanded. If
he be one that has no regard to his soul, but merely to his interest in the
world, it is the best improvement that he can possibly make of it. If a man had
set his heart against the God of Heaven, and designed never intentionally to
serve and honor him, but to make the world and his belly his God, without any
belief of, or regard to an eternal well-being; yet it were his greatest policy
to do things materially good, in order to the obtaining of that portion in this
life, for him and his posterity, upon which he is wholly intent.

2. But secondly, This observation speaks aloud to all to take heed of
blessing themselves upon their worldly circumstances. It is a thing that we are
very prone to, to conclude, to the acceptance of our persons, and our works,
from our outward prosperity. They neither signify any thing to us, as to the
perfect goodness of the work, nor yet as to any eternal reward, no, nor a
lasting reward in this life. We use to say, Bonum ex causis integris, malum ex
quolibet defectu, a work is made evil by any defect in it, the least fly makes
the Apothecaries box of ointment to stink; the action must be formally, as well
as materially good; not only what God has required, but it must be done with a
true heart, designing the glory and service of God, and in a true manner,
according to that rule which he has given us for the performance of it, or it
cannot be acceptable to a pure and holy God: nor do these rewards signify any
thing as to our eternal reward and recompense. A man may for a work be rewarded
in this life, and yet damned in the world to come: he has had his reward. I
remember Christ says so of the Pharisees prayers and fastings, Mat. 6. They
have their reward: the disciples of Christ that act sincerely, they shall be
recompensed in the resurrection of the just. Hypocrites have their reward, in
the honor and applause they have, in the riches and honor which God gives
them. God is out of their debt. No, nor secondly (which possibly to them is
more terrible) these kind of recompenses are but temporary things for a little
time. Jehu had taken out all his payment from God for his service against the
house of Ahab in four generations. Assyria and Babylon had taken out their
rewards for their services much sooner.

Use 4. In the next place, This Observation may be of very great use, both for
the comfort and encouragement of such, whose hearts are right with God. For
their comfort as to what they have done, for their encouragement to go on yet
in their motions and designs for God. 1. For their comfort. It must be laid
down for a substratum to the following part of my discourse upon this Theme,
That no man can be called a child of God, but he who does not serve God by the
by, tanquam aliud agens, in the mean time eying some other design, and setting
up to himself some other end; but he who in his actions sets himself with a
full purpose of heart, to seek, and honor, and glorify God, he may miss his
mark, either through the mistake of his eye, or his hand, but his face is
thitherward, that is the white at which he aims; he has set the honor and
glory of God before him as his mark, and toward it, it is, that he presses
forward: he may mistake (as David did) thinking something will be for the
honor of God, which will not; or come short as to the issue, not being able to
bring his design to a desired issue; but he takes his aim right, and sets
up his mark right. Now failers in these cases, when once discerned by the souls
of Christians, prove oft-times causes of great trouble, and exceeding sad
reflections to them; and nothing can be thought of as more proper to give them
relief, than what I have been at this time discoursing of. That when God does
not, cannot allow of the action as integrally good and perfect, yet he will
reward the good intention, the design and purpose in the child's of Gods heart.
Methinks in this case it is a sweet text, (they are the words of Solomon upon
the dedication of the Temple which he had builded, 1 King. 8.18.) And the Lord
said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house unto
my name, thou did well that it was in thine heart: Nevertheless thou shall
not build the house, but thy son that is come out of thy loins, he shall build
the house unto my name. There are in that text these things remarkable. 1.
David had an intention to build God an house. 2. He did not build this house.
3. God did not allow of the action. God sent him word by Nathan he should not
do it (as you have heard before). Yet 3. God accepted his good design, his
general good intention. Thou did well (says God) that it was in thine heart.
4. God did not only accept this good design and intention, but he also rewards
it: Nevertheless (says he) thy son that is come out of thy loins, he shall
build me an house: thou shall not have the honor of it, but thy son shall have
the honor of it. David was undertaking a matter in the worship of God, without
any special direction; God upon this creates an institution, and legitimateth
the action for his son. I say it is an admirable text, if it be well digested,
to relieve the spirits of the People of God under their troubles for their
imperfect performances. A Christian prays, he sanctifies a Sabbath, he sets
himself to seek the Lord in any piece of instituted worship; when he reflecteth
upon it, and compares it with the perfect rule, he sits down wonderfully
troubled, considering he has done nothing as he ought to do; he has prayed,
but with a woefully wandering, distracted, and distempered heart; his heart has
not bled while he has been confessing of sins, nor believed enough while he
has been putting up his supplications to the God of Heaven, nor been raised
enough in the Meditations of the Divine Goodness, whiles his tongue has been
uttering the good things which God has done for him: To what purpose should he
do any thing more, who does nothing as he ought to do it? I would but ask a
poor Christian, thus troubled upon any performance, Was it in thine heart to
honor God in what thou did? thou came to hear the word of God, or thou
came to humble thy self before God by fasting, or thou came to prayer, or
to receive a sacrament; thou reflectest upon the action done, thou see it
full of imperfections, thou have not honored God as thou desiredst, thy heart
has not been perfect with God. But what was in thine heart in these
undertakings? was it in thine heart to mock God, or to serve God? was not this
thy design to humble thy soul before the Lord, to pay an homage which thy soul
owed unto God? was it not in thine heart to serve God? If it were, believe that
thou hear God saying to thee, Whereas it was in thine heart to pray, to
praise, to humble thy self before me, to do what I commanded thee to do, thou
did well that it was in thine heart: it may be thou did not well in the
action, it was not well done in thine hand; but this was well, that it was in
thine heart. As we sometimes refuse something from our friend, and say, I thank
you as much as if you did it, but it is needless; I desire you to spare your
pains, I care not for it, or I desire not it should be done yet, but yet I take
it as kindly as if you did it. Or as we sometimes accept of what a poor child
or servant has done for us, though we do not like it as done to our minds, and
excuse it by saying, Poor child! it intended well: so God does with us;
methinks what he said to David, was as much as if he had said, I do not yet
need any other house then I have, I do not care for it: but this thou did not
know, David. Thou did well that it was in thine heart, thou had a good
general design and intention: and so to us, this prayer, this service, this
homage is not every way perfect, but yet it was in my child's heart to honor
me, and to obey my commands. In this he has done well, I will accept it,
because it was in his heart, 2 Cor. 8. If there be a willing mind (says the
Apostle) it is accepted, not according to what a man has not, but according to
what he has. The Apostle speaks there with reference to alms, but it is as
true as to all other duties; if there be a willing mind, a true heart, it is
accepted of God: I shall only caution you, that you mistake not this willing
mind for a pitiful wish and velleity, without a settled steady purpose and
resolution of heart, and such an endeavor, as is within the reach and compass
of our power; so that there wants not a desire and endeavor, but only a
strength and ability to perform. But if there be that, it is of wonderful
comfort to us, under all our accusations and judgings of our selves. There is
no child of God, but it is in his heart to do better than he does, it is in his
heart to glorify God in every duty, in every action, in the whole of his
conversation; why if it be in his heart, God says to him, Thou have done well
that it was in thine heart. Nay this Meditation has this advantage, That God
will reward the good that is in his peoples hearts, not only with temporary,
but with eternal rewards: and for this the Lord Jesus Christ is to be praised,
who has satisfied Divine Justice for us, and perfectly fulfilled the law for
us, and procured this of his Father, That the will should be accepted for the
deed. Do not therefore think ever to live in any view of your own perfection,
you will never do that: Study only to live in the view of your own sincerity,
to find that your hearts are right in the sight of God, take heed of
heart-falshood; ah, that is dreadful to find our hearts false with God. Ah! but
will some jealous soul say, How shall I know this? how shall I know if my heart
be right with God in any action, when I see the action is not right, but comes
short of the glory of God? I answer, thou shall easily know, if thou do but
consider what the heart does in humane actions: and that you shall understand
in three particulars: 1. It is the eye that takes the aim at the mark. 2. It is
that which gives strength to the bow. 3. It is that which gives a man pleasure
in the action.

1. The heart is that which (as the eye in shooting) gives or takes the aim at
the mark. The tongue speaks in prayer, and the outward man moves in actions of
religious worship; but the heart now takes the aim, and directs the intention
of the action. The end of all our actions, is either, 1. The glory of God: or,
2. Our selves, our own honor, etc. If the heart be right with God in actions,
the scope, design, and intention of the soul is to glorify God, Psalm. 38.9.
All my desire is toward thee, Psalm. 25.15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord.

2. The heart is that which in humane actions gives strength to the bow. The
strength of a spiritual action lies in the zeal or heat of affection which
attends the action: now the heat of this is in the heart. Where a man's heart
is not in an action, he acts coldly, he moves slowly, the wheels of a soul are
in the heart. Where the heart is in an action, it runs, it makes haste, and
delayeth not, it acts with vigor and fervency.

3. Lastly, The heart is that which gives a soul delight and pleasure in an
action. Where the heart is not in prayer, in hearing, there is no pleasure, no
sweetness, no delight affecting the soul. Examine now thy self by these things,
thou do that which is materially good, but thou doubtest whether in thy
actions thy heart be right with God. Search and see what thy aim and scope was:
What did thou propose to thy self in the action? with what life, vigor, and
strength did thou set upon thy action? what pleasure and delight did thou
take in the action? though indeed much of the last may be kindled in an hour of
temptation or desertion, where the soul feels not those incomes of divine
assistance, nor that freedom of spirit which it has at other times
experienced; yet always the heart aims right, and puts on with what strength it
has; it (like Sampson) rises up, and says it will do as at other times,
though in doing it discerns, that God is departed from it, and is not with it
as at other times.

Use 5. Again, How should this encourage us all in the ways of God?
notwithstanding the discouragements we may meet with from the temptations of
our grand adversary; or the suggestions of our consciences, founded upon the
demonstrable truth of the imperfections of our best services. We say, Use
makes perfectness, and the Scripture says, That the man of clean hands will
grow stronger and stronger; but in the mean time, acceptance does not depend
upon gradual perfection, but upon the perfection of sincerity, when the design,
the purpose, the intention is sincere; when the heart is set right for God, and
aims truly at the glory of God, and the fulfilling of his Will, then it is
accepted; and indeed it is the most reasonable thing in the world, that we
should agree with this. For that man or woman has either a strange imperfect
notion of the nature of God, or of the law of God, that can expect that his
duties should be accepted for their gradual perfections, or any intrinsecal
value in them. I say he that thus thinks, neither knows God as he ought to know
him, nor yet his own measures. But if God will accept of, and reward a good
intention, a good purpose and design, while we find our hearts right bent, and
inclined for God, we have no reason to be discouraged from action.

Use 6. I shall conclude with an Exhortation unto all, In this thing to be like
God. You have heard that God sometimes allows not an action, where yet he
rewards the good intention designing the action: what an example is this for
us, who may dissent from some of our Forefathers. Our Forefathers might be
mistaken in the Utensils, and Ornaments, and Rites of Gods house and worship,
as well as David was in his design for the building of God an house, and while
we think they were so, we cannot tread in their steps, it would be wickedness
to us.

SERMON XXIX.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am proceeding still, in directing your Observation of the motions of Divine
Providence, especially in the distribution of rewards and punishments. Two
things I have already of this nature observed, I now proceed to a third, which
will make a Fifteenth Observation.

Observe. 15. It is a very ordinary thing for the Providence of God to
distribute the afflictions and punishments of this life, to the very best of
his people; and as to them sometimes to spare the very worst of men. I must
still mind you that there is no rule so general, but it will admit exceptions
as to particular cases, though this has as few as any. The Apostle has told
us, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son
whom he receives: if you endure chastening, God deals with us as with sons:
for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not: but if you be without
chastening, whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards, and not sons.
Hence that so usually quoted passage of one of the ancients, Vnicum Deus
habui^t filium sine peccato, nullum sine flagello; God had one, and but one Son
without sin, but he never had any Son without a cross. Hence some particular
servants of God, have been under some temptations at some times, to question
their state as to the favor of God, because their life has had so little of
the cross in it: but they have been rare examples, to whom Satan has had an
advantage to suggest such a thought. And as Divines determine it difficult to
determine, what sin a child of God may not fall into, and justly too, when as
David fell into murder and adultery, Lot into drunkenness and incest, and even
Peter cursed and swear, and denied his master: so it is a matter more difficult
to say what punishment of this life may not fall upon the best of men. Indeed
some Antinomians have made it a question, Whether the afflictions of Gods
People may or ought to be called punishments or judgments; but it is a strife
which they would raise about words: if they by punishments or judgments, intend
such legal demands as God should make for satisfaction to his Justice, none who
understands what he says, will call the afflictions of good men punishments
in this sense; if they mean any thing else, they much betray their ignorance,
for the Scripture expressly calls them by both. God tells his People that they
should not be altogether unpunished; and the Apostle tells us, That when we
are chastened, we are judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32. Most certain it is,
that it is a very ordinary thing for God in the motions of his Providence to
distribute all kinds of temporary afflictions, to such as most fear his
glorious Name, and sometimes as to such, to spare even the worst of men. Job
expostulates it with God, Job 21.7. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old,
yea are mighty in power? their seed is established in their sight with them,
and their offspring before their eyes; their houses are safe from fear,
neither is the rod of God upon them. David confessed, that his feet were almost
gone, his steps had well-nigh slipped, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked:
though v. 9. they set their mouths against heaven; yet v. 4. their strength was
firm, and there were no bands in their death; they are not in trouble as other
men, neither are they plagued like other men, v. 7. Their eyes stand out with
fatness, they have more than heart could wish. In the mean time, v. 14. David
was plagued all the day-long, and chastned every morning. This motion of
Providence has been evident in the experience of all ages, and there is none
who lives, but may observe it every day: but this is accounted one of the
Chapters of Divine Providence, which are hard to be understood. I shall
therefore reserve my further discourse upon it, till I come to the last part of
my intended discourse, where I shall make it my business to give you an account
of it, and at present pass on to some further Observations.

Observe 16. The next thing I shall commend to your remark, is this: That where
to humane appearance Providence moves most flowly, either in the punishment of
the sinner, or the rewarding the righteous there at last it distributeth most
plentifully. I observed to you before, that both the punishment of the wicked
and the reward of the righteous is certain and constant, though not always
sensible nor uniform. Now I desire you to observe that by how much the slower
it is in the punishment of sinners, or in bringing rewards to the righteous, by
so much the greater the rewards of the godly men, and the punishment of sinners
are when they come. I mean sensible rewards and punishments, for otherwise it
is true, which I before told you, God is punishing sinners and rewarding
righteous men every day. But as to sensible rewards and punishments, God is
very often slow in the distributions of them. The Heathens were wont to say,
tarde molunt Deorum molae, the Gods Mills grind slowly; and that their Gods had
laneos pedes, feet shod with wool. It is most certaintly true of the true and
living God. His Mill with which he grindeth sinners to powder is always going,
He is angry with the wicked every day, but it grindeth slowly; he is moving
always in order to this end, but he has woollen feet: we cannot hear nor
discern his motions. But to speak distinctly, here are two things in this
observation. 1. That the Providence of God does ordinarily move slowly in the
distribution of sensible punishments to wicked men, or sensible rewards to
righteous men.

2. That the more slow it is in the distribution of the one, or of the other,
the greater the punishment or reward is ordinarily when it comes. I will begin
with showing you the reasonableness of the first.

1. How else should God justify his attribute of long-suffering and patience?
The attribute of clemency, patience, long-suffering, slowness to conceive a
wrath, is an attribute which God makes himself known by, and does much glory
in, Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
plenteous in mercy. Nehemiah in his prayer Neh. 9.17. impleadeth God thus, Thou
art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness. Joel makes use of it as an argument to persuade people to
repentance, Joel. 2.13. And Jonah tells God, that he knew him to be such a
God, Jonah 4.2. Now how should God justify this name of his, but in his
bearing with sinners a long time, though they be, as the Apostle says, Vessels
of wrath fitted for destruction.

2. How else should God lead men by patience to repentance, and render sinners
that continue impenitent inexcusable. This is that account which the Apostle
Peter gives us of this dispensation of providence. 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not
slack concerning his promise, as some men do count slackness, but is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance: and St. Paul Romans 2.1. says, Therefore thou art
inexcusable, O man, v. 4. despising the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance. When God gives men and women space to repent, and they
repent not, they become inexcusable, and God is justified in the vials of his
wrath which he pours out upon them at last.

3. How else should God exercise the faith, and patience of his people? The
exercise of faith is upon an unseen reward, believing what we have no sensible
evidence of; the exercise of hope lies in a looking out for it, for what we
see, why do we yet hope for? (says the Apostle) the exercise of patience is in
waiting for it, and a quiet submission to the will of God, in bearing what the
Lord will please to lay upon us, while we are in our way to our promised
reward. If Gods providence were not slow in executing his justice, he could not
magnify his own patience and long-suffering, and if he were not slow in the
distributions of sensible rewards, he could not exercise our faith or patience:
this is the Reason why the Providence of God does often move slowly in the
distribution both of rewards and punishments.

2. But secondly observe, by how much the slowlier God proceeds to judgment
against sinners, by so much the more smart the vengeance is when it comes; and
by how much God appears more slow in the rewards of the righteous, by so much
the greater the reward is. It is observed that those men who pass their lives
with the least sickness, are usually cut off by, or escape very narrowly from
the first sickness they meet with, either because the constitution of their
bodies is so strong, that a light sickness will not shake them but some very
acute and malignant distemper, or because in their long time of health, they
have by degrees contracted a very ill habit of body, so that when they fall
down it is a very hard matter to restore them again. The same may be observed
as to Gods providential dispensations to wicked men, there are some against
whom God proceeds a long time very slowly: though he be angry with them every
day, yet he spares them, and does not fall upon them by any severe
dispensations; but when he does strike he strikes not twice, he makes a full
end. God bore with the Amorites a a great while; they were a wicked people in
Abraham's time, but their iniquity was not full, Genesis 15.16. God bare with them
four hundred years after that, but when he brought judgment upon them, it was
a dreadful judgment, as you may both learn by the several commissions given
out by God to the Israelites against them, and the dreadful destruction of
them, of which you read in the book of Joshua. Before them God bare with the
world a long time, after he had taken up a purpose to destroy them, and
revealed it to Noah, Genesis 6.1, 2, 3. he gives them yet the space of an hundred
and twenty years; but they abusing his patience in that time also, he brought
the flood upon them, and consumed them all but Noah's family. With that
generation of the Israelites which came out of the land of Egypt the Lord
showed himself slow to wrath, forty years long the Lord was grieved with that
generation; (forty years is a great while for one generation, the life of man
being but seventy years) but at length he destroyed them all, so as only Caleb
and Joshua entered into Canaan. God bare two hundred and forty years with the
Kingdom of Israel, (for so many years there were from their Apostasy in the
time of Jeroboam, until they were carried away captive by the King of Assyria)
but then they were so destroyed as to this day none knows where they are, or
any of their posterity. With the two tribes and an half God yet bare much
longer, but at last they were carried into the captivity of Babylon for seventy
years. After their restoration God bare long with them, though they were
exercised under a variety of afflictive providence, till at last they were
utterly destroyed by the Romans from being a Nation. The like observation might
be made of particular persons. It is observed concerning the Kingdom of Israel
after the defection from the house of David, that they never had one good King.
Most of them had very short reigns, except Jeroboam the son of Joash who
reigned forty two years, and Jehu who had done such service against the house
of Ahab who reigned twenty eight years. There were two that reigned twenty two
years, both wicked men, and heads of several idolatry: Jeroboam, he brought in
the worshipping of the true God by Calves set up at Dan, and Bethel; and Ahab,
who brought in the worshipping of Baal, both of them very wicked men, and God
proceeded to execute vengeance slowly upon them; but when it came, it was a
dreadful vengeance. Of Jeroboams house none but a little Son came to the grave
in peace. For Ahab himself, you know, he was slain in a battle, his queen was
thrown headlong out of a window, and her brains dashed out, and the dogs licked
her blood; his second Son was slain by Jehu: seventy more of his Sons were
slain by the command of Jehu. It were easy to give you infinite instances out
of story, but I leave it to your experimental observation. Mark any person whom
you see exemplarily wicked, yet God is patient with him a long time, and
observe what havoc God makes with him and his posterity when he begins to
reckon with him. And indeed it seems very reasonable if you consider,

1. That by reason of Gods slowness to punish the sinner, his sins are
multiplied and aggravated to an exceeding great number and degree. It was
Solomon's observation, which we shall see verified in our daily experience,
Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. The
iniquity of the Amorites had not been full, if God had not been so patient with
them. This makes them, as the Apostle speaks, treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Now the
righteous God rendering to every man according to his work, must proportion his
judgments to peoples sinnings. The more their sins are, the greater shall his
wrath be.

2. The more patience is abused, the more means of grace are lost, the greater
always is divine vengeance. Now where God proceeds slowly to vengeance,
there he exercises most patience. There patience is most abused, there more
space and time for repentance is lost; there is most despising of the riches of
divine goodness, forbearance and long-suffering. Et laesa patientia fit furor,
abused patience turns into fury. It makes a patient and long-suffering God cry
out by his Prophet, Ah! I will ease me of mine enemies, and avenge me of my
adversaries; him that knows not how to give up Ephraim, to set him as Admah
and Zeboim, two of the Cities whom he so dreadfully destroyed by fire and
brimstone. It makes God, who is a Lamb in his own nature, to transform himself
into a Lion, a Leopard, a Bare robbed of her whelps. O it is a dreadful thing to
abuse much divine patience! Now where the providence of God has appeared slow
in punishing sinners, there must much patience have been shown. And it must
have been abused too if a sinner continues hard-hearted and impenitent. I have
given space (says God) to repent of her fornication, and she repented not,
Rev. 2.21, 22. Behold I will cast her into a Bed, etc. into great tribulation,
and I will kill her children with death. Besides, that God seldom exercises
patience long with sinners, but he gives them also other means of grace, and
they are abused and slighted. Noah preached to the old world; says God, My
Spirit shall not always strive with man: and I need not tell you how
dreadfully God threatens Corazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum for their abusing
the means of grace they had had above other places. The like might be proved
concerning the providence of God in the distributions of rewards; the slower
the motion of Providence is in the giving them, the greater ordinarily the
rewards are. It was a great while before Abraham had a Son, but when he had
him, it proved to be one that was a great blessing both to his Fathers family
and to the world. Rebeccah went twenty years without Children, Genesis 25.20, 26.
but then twins struggle in her womb, and she brings forth two great Princes,
and one of them who was to be the head of the only people God had upon the
earth. Rachel was for some years barren, Genesis 29.31. c. 30. v. 1. when God gave
her a Child it was Joseph, who proved such an eminent blessing to his Fathers
house. The Wife of Manoah was barren, Jud. 13.2. she brings forth Samson.
Hannah 1 Samuel 1. was barren, she brings forth Samuel. Elizabeth was barren,
she brings forth John the Baptist. Thus you see it as to the blessing of
Children. It was a long time before God brought the seed of Jacob his servant
out of their difficulties, but when he did he brought them into Canaan, the
Land which the Lord cared for, upon which his eyes were from the beginning of
the year unto the end thereof, a land which flowed with Milk and Honey. There
was a great time betwixt Joseph's dream and his exaltation in Egypt. There were
eight years betwixt David's Unction and Coronation in Hebron. More instances
might be given, but it is no more than we shall ordinarily observe in the
motions of divine providence; the slower the mercy comes, the fuller it is and
greater blessing when it comes: Gods people have ordinarily their greatest
peace and comforts after their longest, and greatest trials, and afflictions.

The reasonableness of this motion of divine Providence appears in this, that
look as in punishing of sinners where Providence moves slowly, it usually has
a great heap of sins to reckon with men for; so here it has great faith and
patience to reward in this case. Tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, says the Apostle Romans 5. where there is long tribulation there
must be the exercise of much faith, much patience, much hope, and this brings
forth much experience: Gods greatest rewards of joy and peace in the inward
man, of eternal life, glory and happiness, come after much waiting. The Apostle
tells us Heb. 10.36. You have need of Patience, that after you have done the
will of God you might receive the promise. The receiving of the promise then is
after much patience in doing the will of God, and Romans 2.6, 7. The Apostle
tells us, that God will render unto every man according to his deeds, to them
who by patient continuance in welldoing, seek for glory and honor and
immortality, eternal life. But I have been large enough in the confirmation of
this observation, I proceed to some application of it.

Use 1. In the first place, What can strike a greater trembling into the loins
of sinners than this? I showed you before that the punishment of a resolved
impenitent sinner is certain and constant. As well may he promise himself that
he shall not dye, as that he shall not be turned into Hell, and at last hear
that dreadful sentence, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting burnings: it
is constant though he is not sensible of it, yet God is angry with him every
day: he every day grows worse and worse, more blinded and hardened, given up
more to vile affections, a reprobate mind, a conscience as it were seared with
an hot iron: all that he has to bless himself in, and for, is that all things
continue with him as formerly, he yet sees no alteration in his estate, he
feels nothing of the wrath of God. Now this observation spoils all the
sweetness of this. The Heathens observed that the Gods though they had laneos
pedes, yet they had ferreas manus; though they had woolen feet and moved
gently, softly, insensibly, yet their hands were of iron; when once they laid
hold of wicked men they crushed them to pieces. I am sure it is true of him who
is the true and living God. He is slow to conceive a wrath, and bears with
great sinners a long time, but when he enters into judgment with men that abuse
his long-suffering and patience, which should lead them to repentance he
falls upon them with a dreadful destruction. O let all sinners that hear
this, fear and tremble. There is no such dreadful vengeance as that which God
takes for abused patience. Bless not your selves therefore in your present
impunity. Hosea 13.12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid,
says the Prophet, bound up as in a bundle. There are some other Scriptures
much to the same sense, Deuteronomy. 32.33, 34. Their wine is the poison of Dragons,
and the cruel venom of Asps. v. 34. Is not this laid up in store with me? and
sealed up amongst my treasures? Job. 14.17. My transgression is sealed up in a
bag, and thou sowest up my iniquity. Lam. 1.14. The yoke of my transgressions
is bound by his hand: they are wreathed and come up upon my neck. It is the
great folly of sinners, they will say with Agag, the bitterness of death is
past; they sin and go on a long time in sin and God spares them, and they
conclude all is forgot. No says God it is not, the iniquity of Ephraim is not
like a loose paper blown away, it is bound up as papers in a bundle, it is not
forgot, it is but hid with me, I have their sins still in remembrance. I held
my peace (said God by the Psalmist) and thou thoughtest me such a one as thy
self, but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee. Some
think that the Metaphor in Hosea is taken from laborers that labor in
husbandry, who bind up in faggots wood that is to be kept some time before it
be thrown on to the fire. Ephraim thinks his iniquity is forgotten because sin
is not presently punished: but said God, his sin, that is, (say some but I see
no need of it) the punishment of his sin (as indeed it often is taken in
Scripture), is but bound up and concealed a little. Others think it a metaphor
drawn from men, who bind up money in bags till the day of payment comes, and
thus it agrees with that Job; 14.17. my transgression is sealed up in a bag.
Besides that the word (...) signifies a purse, or bag, they are bound up, they
are not pardoned or forgotten: thus the binding of sins, Matthew. 16.19.
signifies a remaining unpardoned. Some think the metaphor both in Job and in
Hosea, is taken from Lawyers, who carry their informations and enditements
sealed up in a bag, or bound up in a bundle, that they may not be lost and
scattered, but be forthcoming when they will put them into Court. This is a
dreadful meditation for an impenitent sinner, that all his sins are bound up in
a bundle, sealed up in a bag, hid, not from God (nothing can be so hid) but hid
with God. What loads of Faggots has many a poor creature bound up for him
against the great day of burning! what a bundle of informations and inditements
have some poor creatures bound up for them, against the time that the Judge
shall sit, and God shall come forth to recompense men for their evil deeds!
Thou think the vanity and wickedness of thy youth, thy oaths and
blasphemies, thy lies and sabbath profanations, thy drunkenness and uncleanness
is done with: No such matter poor creature! if thou go on in thy
impenitency, they are but sealed up in a bag, they are but bound up in a
bundle, they are but treasured up (to use the Apostles expression Romans 2.)
against the day of wrath and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God,
which if it be not in this life (as very often it is) yet will certainly be in
the life that is to come. Remember Ahab, he was a wicked Prince, God bare with
him a long time, he shed much blood, was a great persecutor, set up a most
odious idolatry. God held his peace a great while, and proceeded slowly. Two
and twenty years he ran his course, God sealed up all in a bag; but observe
with what a dreadful vengeance God comes upon him at last. It may be thou can
say, oh! but I have gone on longer, twice two and twenty years: it may be so,
but what says the Scripture? if a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his
days be prolonged, yet it shall not be well with the wicked, there are but so
many faggots more bound up, so many enditements more against thee in Gods bag
sealed up, oh! let the sinners in the world be afraid, let trembling surprise
them all. The slower vengeance comes, the more dreadfully it comes. That upon
you may come (says our Savior) all the righteous blood that has been shed
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharias. There were great quantities
of blood shed in Jerusalem betwixt the time of Abel and the blood of Zacharias.
Verily (says our Savior) all these things shall come upon this generation. O
let every impenitent sinner tremble at the hearing of this, that there is
coming upon his soul, his body, his family, all the sin that he has committed,
from the sin that clave to him in his Mothers womb, where he was conceived in
sin, and brought forth in iniquity, unto the sin of the last hour that he has
lived in the world. It was a dreadful reckoning that God made up at last with
Jerusalem for all their blood, and it will be a dreadful reckoning, Sirs, God
will have to make up with every sinners soul, especially with old sinners.

Use 2. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord (says the Apostle 2 Cor.
5.11.) we persuade men. And O that my counsel might be acceptable to every
hard-hearted resolved impenitent sinner that hears me this day; that he would
break off his sins by true repentance, and secure his soul by getting an
interest in the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed is he (says the Psalmist Psalm.
32.1.) Whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, and to whom
the Lord imputes no iniquity. That man is accursed whose iniquity is hid with
God, laid by, bound up, sealed in a bag, reserved and in close keeping for an
after-reckoning. O but that is a blessed man whose sins are covered by God! O
let no man despise the riches of Gods goodness, forbearance and long-suffering,
but let him know that the goodness of God leads him to repentance, Romans 2.4,
5. If he continues in the hardness and impenitency of his heart he does but
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous
judgment of God. Wrath against thee for thy sins lies hid at present,
possibly thy Conscience keeps silence and does not arrest and disturb thee;
the providence of God as to thee keeps silence, judgment is not executed
speedily: but there will be a revelation of divine wrath, either in this life
or that which is to come; oh therefore break off your sins by a true
repentance. He that hides his sins shall not prosper, Prove. 28.13. Our sins
cannot be hidden from God, they are all in the light of his Countenance; a man
then covers and hides his sins from God when he does not confess and bewail
them. So long as a man covers his sins God will not cover them: See that
experience of David which you have recorded Psalm. 32.2, 3, 4. When I kept
silence my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day-long, for day and
night thy hand was heavy upon me, my moisture was turned into the drought of
summer. Selah. verse. 3. I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have
I not hid: I said I will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah.

Use 3. In the last place, this observation calls upon all such as fear the
Lord, and walk before him: for a progress in the ways of God and a patient
waiting for the promise. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 10.36. That we have need of
patience, that after we have done the will of God we might receive the promise.
It is our duty as to do well, so not to be weary of well doing: it is pressed
upon us, Gal. 6.9. And let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we
shall reap if we faint not. And again, 2 Thessalonians. 3.13. but you brethren be not
weary in well-doing. There is nothing so far conduces to make us faint and
weary in our duty, as when we see nothing comes of it: we have hopes and
promises, but no issue, no performance; you know Solomon tells you, hope
deferred makes the heart sick. Now this is a great cordial in such a case for
us to hear, that when providence moves slowly in bringing rewards to the
righteous, it recompenceth our patience at last with the riches and liberality
of the reward. Indeed here are three or four arguments, which together with
this observation the Apostle hinteth me in the aforementioned Text out of the
Epistle to the Galathians, we shall reap, we shall reap in due season. Our
fainting will spoil our reaping. The longer it is before we reap, the greater
the crop of mercy and blessing shall be which we shall reap.

1. We shall reap. He that ploweth up the fallow-ground of his heart and sows
to the glory of God, and to the good of his own soul in righteousness, he shall
reap. The Husbandman that sowes his Wheat and Barley cannot promise himself that
he shall reap; the soldier, the plunderer may reap what he has sown; a
tempest, an east wind, lightning, many other things may hinder his reaping; but
he who sowes righteousness he shall reap, nothing shall hinder his reaping.

2. He shall reap in due season. It may be he shall not reap in his season, the
season which he expected; but he shall reap in due season, in such a time as
the wise God judges most seasonable; and when he comes to reap, he shall also
acknowledge the seasonableness of it that it is in due season; we do not know
the fittest time for our own mercies, God knows the fittest season, we shall
reap in due season.

3. Consider that our reaping depends upon our not fainting, we shall reap
(says the Apostle) if we faint not. If any soul draws back, Gods soul will
have no pleasure in him; he who draws back, draws back to his own perdition.

4. and Lastly, our reward will be so much the greater, by how much it is
slower: the rewards of Gods people are ordinarily proportioned to their patient
waiting. The Apostle Romans 2.6. having spoken of Christ's coming to render to
every man according to his work, adds v. 7. To them who by patient
continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life. Yea and certainly degrees of glory will be proportioned to our patience:
those that have had least sensible rewards in this life (if there be such a
thing as degrees of glory) may expect some of the highest seats, and mansions
of glory in that life which is to come. But I shall add no more to this
Observation.

SERMON XXX.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Go on yet in my observations concerning the Actual Providence of God, and
that more especially in dealing out distributive justice, recompensing the
righteous and the unrighteous. I observed the last time that it is a thing very
ordinary with Divine Providence to proceed slowly in these distributions. But
by how much slower the punishment of a sinner, or the reward of a good man
comes from the Lord, by so much the greater, both the one and the other is. I
now proceed to another Observation.

Observat. 17. That the Providence of God is very quick in the distribution
both of punishments and rewards unto some.

I shall discourse it first with relation to punishments, and then with
reference to the rewards of Providence. First, As to punishments. The Apostle
Paul to Timothy 1 Timothy 5.24. has this expression, Some men's sins are open
beforehand unto judgment, and some men's they follow after: likewise also the
good works of some are manifest beforehand, and they that are otherwise cannot
be hid. I know it is a Text of which Interpreters give various senses, as they
understand it of the judgment of God, some of them, others of the judgment of
men; and amongst those who understand it of the later, some understand it of
the judgment of the Magistrate, others of the judgment of the Church; some of
both these, some of the judgment of God, and the Ecclesiastical judgment also.
I shall not pretend to give the just sense of it, I shall only allude to it in
my discourse. As there are some sins that are open and manifest with respect to
the filth and guilt of them; they do not hide their sin, but proclaim it as
Sodom, they go to the Devil with a trumpet before them, all the world takes
notice of them; others sin more secretly and slily and in corners. So God as to
some sinners sits in judgment presently. Some indeed he is more slow with,
they are kept to the great Assize, or for many years, but he is not so slow
with all, but either immediately by his own hand, (as in the case of Ananias
and Saphira Acts 5.) or else by the sword of the Magistrate, he cuts them off
presently, and gives them a sudden recompense of their evil deeds. Now it may
possibly be asked by some, what are those sins, or in what case is God so quick
with sinners; nor may the inquiry be unprofitable for us, for because judgment
is not executed speedily, the heart of man is set in him to do evil. Gods
deferring judgment and giving day for the execution of his wrath, does much
embolden sinners. Let us therefore see in what cases God seldom grants
reprieves, but is very quick with sinners, and sends them down to Hell
reeking with their lusts; this I shall endeavor to show you in several
particulars.

1. It is hard to name any species of sins, as to which God has not made, or
does not make some present examples of his vengeance: So as no sinner can
promise himself the reprieve of an hour or day. 1. In the case of Idolatry
(which is a grievous sin against the first and second commandment) you will
find that God proceeded very slowly to judgment for this sin, both in the
Canaanites, and in the Israelites; with the Canaanites though they were
abominable idolaters, God bare many hundreds of years. With the ten tribes who
were idolaters, from the time of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to
sin, unto the time when they were finally destroyed, and carried away captives,
God bare with them a long time: but you shall find God quicker at another time,
Exodus 32. The people make themselves a golden Calf. Moses comes down from the
Mount, and finds them at their idolatrous worship. Moses commands the sons
of Levi to put every man his sword by his side, and to go in and out from gate
to gate throughout the Camp, and to slay every man his Brother, and every man
his companion, and every man his neighbor; and v. 28. it is said that the
children of Levi did according to the word of Moses. And there fell of the
people that day about three thousand men. There God was very quick with
idolaters. Blaspheming, Cursing and swearing is a sin, against the third
commandment. God as to the punishment of these sins sometimes proceeds very
slowly: but not always. Look into Levit. 24.10. There was the son of an
Israelitish woman that blasphemed the name of the Lord, and cursed, he was put
in prison. God presently gives order concerning him, v. 14. That he should be
brought forth without the Camp, and stoned to death presently. Sabbath-breaking
(it is a sin against the fourth precept of the Decalogue) God is ordinarily
very slow in the punishing of this sin: many a Sabbath-breaker goes on year
after year, and yet is not punished, but God does not do thus with all. The man
that did but gather sticks upon the Sabbath Day was stoned to death by Gods
express order and command, Numb. 30.35. Rebellion against Parents, cursing them
and dishonouring them is a very great sin, yet God bears with many wretches a
long time that are guilty of it, as we see in the experience of our own lives.
A wretched Child is a plague to his Parents many years: but God does not always
bear with sinners in this case. See what a Law God gave the Israelites in this
case, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. God ordered That he should be presently stoned
to death, that would not obey the voice of his Father and Mother. For Murder,
which is a sin against the sixth Commandment, I shall not enlarge, I shall show
you anon that it is a sin which God rarely suffers to go long unpunished. The
Law of God determined present death, for wilful murder, and the laws of most
nations are accordingly; and we daily see the providence of God strangely
working to make murderers examples of his vengeance. Adultery is a sin against
the seventh Commandment; God sometimes is very patient and proceeds very
slowly, but yet not always; sometimes he strikes a dart through his liver
sooner. God established a law in the Jewish polity; That the Adulterer should
be put to death, Lev. 20.10. Deuteronomy. 22.22. and you know Phinehas presently took
a Javelin, and ran it through an Adulterer and an Adulteress and had an ample
reward given him from God for it. In the case of theft, God may sometimes be
very patient, and doubtless there are many old Thieves in the world, who yet
will not escape the vengeance of God at last. But God is not always patient
with all these sinners. Achan was an eminent Thief, he laid his hands upon Gods
goods, God had first seized upon the goods of the Canaanites, and set them a
part for a sacrifice by fire to himself: Achan steals a wedge of Gold, and a
Babilonish garment; God presently revengeth it, first upon all the Army of
Israel, of which he was a member, then upon himself, and his family, who were
stoned to death with stones. For lying, and bearing a false testimony,
witnessing against the life of another as a criminal, who was not a criminal,
they are sins against the ninth Commandment; God is often very patient with
these sinners, he does not presently enter into judgment with every liar,
every Informer and accuser of the servants of God. Some he reserveth in the
chains of an hard and impenitent heart, unto the judgment of the great day:
but yet with some of these sinners God is much quicker. Ananias and Saphira, as
you know, fell down dead with a lie in their mouths, and the Accusers of the
three children, and Daniel, were presently destroyed; the first by the heat of
that Furnace, which they had made so hot for others; the second by those Lions,
which they had procured Daniel to be thrown unto. But this is enough to have
said in justification of my first conclusion, That it is hard to name any
species of sinners, but God has been very quick with some individuals of their
company.

2. I find some Divines observing, That God is ordinarily most severe upon the
first violators of his laws: and this is the reason that is given by some, why
the Sabbath-breaker was ordered to be stoned to death. God had newly revealed
his will upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 31.14. and repeated it, Exodus 35. Now God
picks out one of the first open presumptuous violators of it to make him an
example; you know this is after the manner of men, who are usually very severe
upon the first execution of their laws. Ananias and Saphira were not the first
that had told a lie, but they were the first that we read of, who had told a
lie in that business. It was the Will of God that to supply the necessities of
his Church at that time, the Christians should have all things for a time
common amongst them; and it was not without a divine instinct at least, that so
many of them sold their goods, and came and-brought the price of them to the
Apostles, and laid it at their feet. Now these two seeming professors to save
their goods told a lie. God takes a very quick vengeance upon them for it. This
Observation is not my own; having therefore named it, I shall leave it to your
further observation, how the Providence of God justifies it.

3. There are, thirdly, some particular sins which God seldom suffers to go
long unpunished. I will instance in some,

1. Scandalous and impudent blasphemy. Blasphemy is a speaking evil of God,
either denying him what is due to him, or attributing that to him, which can by
no means agree to his holy Essence; but yet there is a great deal of difference
betwixt a bare denial of that to God, or to any person in the Godhead, which is
due to them; or attributing that to God, which cannot agree to him from a mere
error of Judgment, and mistake and misunderstanding of Scripture, and doing
this with scandalous reproachful terms, and a bold and daring defiance of God,
for which men can pretend nothing of conscience. God may bear long with
blasphemers of the first sort; such are the Jews, the Socinians, etc. But he is
ordinarily very quick in the execution of his vengeance upon the others; the
instances of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Rabshakeh, and others in Scripture are
very obvious, and it were an easy thing to add to them a great deal out of
Ecclesiastical story: but if you observe the Providence of God in the days
wherein you live, you will see this notion justified every day: it cannot stand
with the honor of God long to bear with bold defiers and reproachers of his
glorious Majesty.

2. A second sort of sinners, whom Divine vengeance uses not to spare or
suffer long, are murderers. God has secured the lives of all men by special
laws, Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. It
is one you know of those Ten Commandments which God gave upon Mount Sinai,
Exodus 20. Thou shall do no murder. God expressly commanded, That no
satisfaction should be taken for the life of the murderer, Numb. 35.31, 32,
33. and tells us, the land where murder is committed, cannot be purged but by
the blood of him that shed it; and it is a very ordinary observation, that
murder will out; and we see it in our ordinary experience. There is nothing
more remarkable in our observation, than the variety of methods, which the
Providence of God uses in the discovery of murder: but I remember in my
former discourses, I have spoken something of this.

3. A third sort of sinners, which God in his Actual Providence, is ordinarily
very quick with, are Persecutors. Persecution is a violent pursuit of another
for the open profession of some necessary truth; whether those that do it, have
an humane law in the case or no, makes little or no difference in the case.
You know the Jews said, We have a law, and by that law he ought to dye, yet I
hope they persecuted Christ: the Persecutors of the three children, and of the
Prophet Daniel, had a law, or what in those Countries, was equivalent, a decree
of the Supreme Magistrate. In short, there has been little or no persecution
ever in the world, if humane Laws will alter the case. It is a most vile and
causeless transgression, and as (I have before observed to you) though History
tells us of persecutions that lasted many years, yet you rarely know God bear
long with furious and individual perfecutors, whether they were Informers,
Delators, Accusers or Judges; you know how quick God was with the accusers of
the three children, and of Daniel. The Providence of God in all times has
justified, and still does so eminently justify this Observation, that it were
to abuse your patience, to enlarge far upon it; it is very rare that a
Persecutor does not carry some mark of Divine vengeance upon him to his grave.

4. A fourth sort of sinners, with whom the Providence of God is ordinarily
very quick, is such as eminently affront, or do some eminent injury to their
superiors. This is justified by all that I said before of the conspicuousness
of Divine Providence, in the protection of those whom he has set to rule over
others. I gave you many instances. That of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram may be
added, you know the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up; to which may
be added that of Miriam, who was stricken with the plague of leprosy, for her
affront to Moses. The Law of God concerning a rebellious Son (which I before
enlarged upon) is another instance. In short, mark it of whom you will, where
some eminent affronts are by any offered to the public government of a nation,
especially where the rulers rule well, and do their duty, or in a Church, or
(finally) in a private family, God does very rarely let it go long unrevenged.
If any one shall ask me the reason of this quickness of Divine Providence with
some sorts of sinners, these particularly which I have mentioned, though I
think it a great presumption for any to undertake to give the reason of any
Divine Motions; yet I do not think it difficult to show you that they are
exceeding reasonable, and what those imperfect remains of right reason, which
since the fall are left in us, must readily so acknowledge.

1. For the vindication of the Divine Majesty and authority, as it is natural
to every creature, to use all its power to preserve its own being; so it is
natural to rational beings to preserve their own honor, and to maintain their
reputation. The Glory, Honor, Majesty, and Authority of God are things which
he will not give unto others, which he will not prostitute to the sordid lusts
of worms. Now though every sin does impeach his Glory, yet not every sin alike:
as amongst men, those who are first in the violation of a Law, seem most to
confront, and dare, and debase the authority that made it; so those who are the
first examples of sinning against a Divine Law, or who teach the world new
kinds of sins and disorders, being the boldest affronters of the Divine
Authority, usually are made more quick examples of Divine Vengeance: so for the
blasphemer, he is the most eminent contemner of the Divine Majesty and Glory,
he speaks evil of the supreme good, and spits as it were in the face of the
most excellent being, and curses him that is the fountain of blessing: God
over all blessed for ever.

2. For the Demonstration of Gods love to mankind, the specialties of his
Providence toward man, and the order and government of humane societies, and
those whom he has set up to rule over others; I have observed to you before,
that man is under a specialty of Providence above all other creatures; that
amongst men those whom God has set to rule well, whether in Church or State,
are under a further special care; that he has hedged them about by more
particular and special Laws. Now if God by his Providence did not make some
eminent examples of his severity and justice, and proceed quickly against them,
how should his special Providence be manifested?

3. It is but reasonable, that God should make Persecutors quick examples of
his vengeance, if we consider what a complication of sin there is in the
violent prosecution of others, for the profession of the truth.

1. There is eminent injury done to God: he is hindered as to the calves of
those lips which the persecutor shuts up. All the immediate honor which God
has in the world, is from the Preaching of the Gospel, from the prayers and
praises of his People. Now if God has any glory from the publication of his
Gospel, from the joynt-prayers and praises of his Saints, the persecutor that
hinders these, robs God of it, and sets himself against the God of
Heaven and Earth in those things, whereby he has chosen to be honored; his
business is to interrupt, disturb, and hinder the making known of Christ to
poor souls, to hinder Gods Peoples joynt-praises of him, and prayers to him; he
says to those whom he persecuteth, You shall not serve God, and thus bids an
impudent and bold defiance to the Lord of Heaven and Earth.

2. There is in persecution an eminent injury done to our neighbor. God is not
only the avenger of his own glory, but concerning injuries done to men, he has
said, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. Now in all persecutions there
must be some great wrong done to our neighbor, either as to his name, or
liberty, or estate, or life. And, secondly, it is an injury done to him
causelessly, not by way of retaliation. In truth it is the Image of God which
the persecutor flies upon, and it is the holiness and righteousness of his
brother, which he is not able to endure, seeing his own lewd and abominable
life condemned, by his neighbors more righteous conversation. It is therefore
but reasonable, that that God who is jealous of his own glory, and the judge of
the innocent person, and who has said, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it,
should be severe in his dealings with such sinners, and for his elect sake
shorten the days of such blood-thirsty men. But this is enough to have spoken
to the first part of the Observation.

I told you, secondly, that the Providence of God, is also sometimes very quick
in the distribution of rewards; and this you shall especially observe in these
cases 1. In rewards of such as have been eminent sufferers for God. God does
variously reward such persons, sometimes by temporal rewards that are sensible
and external: sometimes such as are more inward and spiritual* Now Gods
Providence is often very quick in such distributions, how quickly did God
reward Daniel, after he came out of the Lions den? and the three Children,
after they came out of the fiery Furnace; and Mordecai after h^ had ventured
himself so signally in the cause of God, and saw the very gallows set up on
which his great adversary thought to have had him hanged? For those rewards
that are more inward, and discerned only by those that receive them; how many
instances might be given, of strange incomes of joy, and peace, and strength,
with which the suffering servants of God have been rewarded so as their inward
joy has drowned their pain, quenched as it were the flame, etc.

2. In the rewards of such as have done some great and eminent service for God;
bearing some signal testimony against sin, as in the case of Phinehas who slew
Zimri and Cosbi, Number. 25.11. or been faithful in some great service, in which
others have made some great defection, as in the case of Caleb and Joshua, Number.
14.6. who brought up a true report of the land of Canaan, and gave in a true
testimony for God against all the rest of the Spies, and when the whole people
were in a mutiny.

3. You shall observe, that the Providence of God is ordinarily very quick in
rewarding wicked men for any service they do him. I might give you many
instances of this, that of Jehu is an eminent one; God gave him and his
posterity a present reward for the good service he had done against the house
of Ahab; and he gave the King of Assyria a present reward for the service,
wherewith he had made his Army to serve against Tyrus. The like observation
might be made in many other cases, and it is no more than we may make a daily
observation of: when God rewards those whom he intends not to reward
eternally, he does it in this life quickly. And the motions of Divine
Providence, in these cases cannot but appear to be highly reasonable, if we do
but consider,

1. That this is but after the manner of men, to such as do signal and eminent
services, to give both present and great rewards, for the encouragement of
others: though ordinarily common soldiers sometimes stay for their pay; yet
some persons that have signalized their valor, are often Knighted in the
field, and some mark of great favor fastened upon them.

2. That Divine righteousness is thus fulfilled, and not only fulfilled, but so
conspicuously, that all the world may take notice: that God is a righteous God,
fulfilling his word, and that no man serves him for nothing. Godliness, (as
the Apostle tells us) has promise not only of that life which is to come, but
of this life also. Mar. 10.29, 30. There is no man that has left house, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, for my sake,
or the Gospel; but he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecutions; and in the life to come, eternal life. These and suchlike
promises, respecting this life, or that which is to come; must be justified,
and so justified, that the world may take notice, that God is true to them;
which cannot be, unless God to some such servants of his, should dispense out
quick and present rewards.

3. On the other side, it is but reasonable, that God should presently reward
the services that wicked men do him: Because there is no portion provided for
them in that life which is to come; neither can they trust God for the life to
come: all they look at is present pay, and reward. Thus I have opened to you
this Observation in the Doctrinal part of it, and showed you the reasonableness
of these motions of Divine Providence. I come now to the application; which I
shall shortly dispatch.

Use. This Observation affords us a new, and potent argument. 1. To persuade
sinners from presumptuous sinnings. 2. To engage men to more eminent services
and sufferings for God.

1. I say, first, To dissuade sinners from presumptuous sinnings against God.
The flow motions of Divine Providence, as to the punishment of sinners, as I
told you, do much encourage sinners to go on in their courses of sin; the
hearts of sinners are set in them to do evil, because judgment is not executed
speedily. I endeavored to discourage and check this presumption in my former
observation; where I confirmed to you, that by how much the more slowly
vindicative justice proceeds to the punishment of sin, by so much severer the
punishment is when it comes. This Observation adds further to that check;
for, as that which men call slackness, is but the long suffering and patience
of God, not willing that any should perish, but that all should be saved by a
seasonable repentance. So (as you have now heard at large discoursed to you)
neither is God thus long-suffering, and patient with all: and although God
generally be more quick with those sorts of sinners, which I have specified to
you; yet I desire you to observe what I first enlarged upon, that there is
hardly any kind or sort of sinners, but God at some time or other has picked
out some or other of them, to make them examples of his severity, Thou may be
struck dead, while the lie is in thy mouth. It was the case you know of Ananias
and Saphira. Thou may be cut off in the very Act of Adultery, (It was the
case, you know, of Zimri and Cosbi). Tremble therefore, and do not sin, God may
grant thee many years of patience, he may give thee leave to treasure up wrath
to thy self against the day of wrath; but thou can not promise thy self an
hours patience. But above all, fear those sins which God usually is so quick in
punishing. Fear blaspheming God, or the King; we live in a blaspheming age,
wherein have been more bold darings of God, than in former times. God has
revenged his glory upon some of them, they have been cut off in their youth,
before they have lived out half their days. If another generation rises up,
and approves their sayings, wait but a while, and you will see vengeance
overtaking them also. Fear doing any thing against the life of others, who by
the law of God ought not to dye. Blood-thirsty men shall not live out half
their days, you fee Gods vengeance against this sin is very quick.

2. This Observation affords a great encouragement to the service of God,
especially to eminent actings, and sufferings for God. There is a reward for
righteous men, if they go without it to their dying day; yet they shall be
recompensed in the generation of the just. Heaven will pay for all; but God
does not always take so long a day to recompense them. Many have a reward in
this life, and that which is to come. The Scripture is full of promises, even
of the good things of this life, to godliness in the general; and to the
several parts, and acts of godliness. These promises indeed are not made good
to every child of God, in specie, but only in equivalent, yea transcendent
mercies. But even these promises are made good to many; and they may be thy
portion, however thou shall not miss of the greater things. Particularly, this
lays an engagement upon all that fear God, as God calls them to it, and
gives them advantage for it to signalize themselves, by eminent actings, or by
some eminent sufferings: such you have heard God ordinarily pays presently;
and besides that eternal recompense which they have in glory, they are in more
outward, and sensible things, or in more inward influences of grace recompensed
in this life. Those that eminently honor God, he will honor; and many of them
have a double mess sent them from the Lord.

SERMON XXXI.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am proceeding yet in my Observations, upon the motions of Divine Providence
(that which we call Actual Providence) in its administration of distributive
Justice, both in the punishment of sinners, and the rewarding of the righteous.
Diverse Observations I have already made, I am come to the,

Observat. 18. (Which you may please to take thus) That the Providence of God,
does very ordinarily, with the punishments of this life, chastise the past, and
pardoned sins of people.

In the handling of which, I shall, 1. Justify the Observation.

2. I shall show you the reasonableness of this motion of Providence, and
reconcile it, both to the justice and goodness of God.

3. Lastly, I shall make some practical application of it. That it is so, I
shall prove by two famous instances: the first of David, the second Job. David,
you know, had fallen into two grievous sins, Adultery with Bathsheba, and the
murder of her Husband Vriah. God sends the Prophet Nathan, 2 Samuel 12. to
David to convince him of his sin, who does it by a Parable. David's heart
melts, v. 13. and he says unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord.
Nathan tells him, the Lord has also put away thy sin. The sin you see was both
past, and pardoned, but mark what follows; v. 14. Howbeit, because by this deed
thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the
Child also that is born unto thee shall surely dye. He had told him before, v.
10. That the sword should not depart from his house: and v. 11. That he would
take his wives before his face, and give them to his neighbor, and he should
ly with them in the sight of the Sun. All this was afterward justified by the
Actual Providence of God. The Child died, 2 Samuel 12.18. Amnon defloureth his
Sister Thamar, and is slain by her Brother Absolon: 2 Samuel 13.14, 29. Absalom,
David's own Son, lies with his Fathers Concubines, in the sight of all Israel.
2 Samuel 16.22. Absalom is slain in a rebellion against his Father, etc. Nay, not
only thus, but God punishes David with horrors and terrors in his mind, with
diseases in his body, as you may gather from Psalm. 6. Psalm. 51. and the rest of
those Psalms, in which he expresses his repentance. David prays Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. Job complains unto
God, Job. 7.2, 3. As a servant earnestly desires the shadow, and as an
hireling looks for the reward of his work; so am I made to possess months of
vanity. I know the words are capable of another sense; as vanity may be
understood for affliction and misery, or the frustration of his expectations;
but I should rather interpret it by the words of the same Job 13.26, 27, 28.
For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the sins of
my youth, etc. Moses, and Aaron sinned against the Lord at the waters of
Meribah: I do not think that any of you doubt, but that God pardoned their sin;
yet it is certain that God punished them, and that for that sin; God himself
tells them so, Deuteronomy. 32.50, 51. That the Providence of God does this is evident.

The second thing may seem to have more difficulty in it, viz. How this is
reconcilable, either to the justice, or goodness of God. To his justice who
has accepted a price, and satisfaction for them at the hand of his Son;
concerning whom he has said, that in him (as our Mediator) he was well
pleased. How then can God punish m^n and women for those sins, for which he
has accepted a price, and satisfaction. Or how is this reconcilable to the
fullness of Gods pardoning grace? How are those sins pardoned, which God
afterward punishes.

But this Cavil proceeds upon a double mistake or error.

1. The first concerning the punishments of sin upon the Children of God.

2. The second concerning the satisfaction of Christ's death.

As to the first it supposes, that the afflictions and punishments of Gods
people, are all for satisfaction; which if it were so, they were of all men
mo^^ misera^^^, a, their afflictions do ordinarily more abound, than the
afflictions of others. It is true, that the impenitent and irreconciled sinner,
has no reason to look upon any affliction otherwise, than as an arrest of
divine vengeance; upon every ague, every fever, as Gods taking him by the
throat, and saying to him, Pay me now what thou owe; because they cannot
apprehend any such thing, as that Christ has for them satisfied Divine
Justice: but the case is otherwise with a believer. Supposing our afflictions
and punishments of this nature, these two things would follow from them.

1. A Christian should never be able to see to the bottom of his bitter cup,
were satisfaction to be given by us, when could we so much as hope to say? All
is finished. We might burn, but when could we hope to come out of the flames?
we might be paying, and paying; but when could we think to have paid the
uttermost farthing? Satisfaction in our persons must be an endless work, the
offended Justice being no less than infinite.

2. We could never hope by our afflictions to be made gainers in grace. If it
were possible for us to apprehend, that by our suffering we could make full
payment to the Justice of God, yet we could have no hope by affliction, to grow
more holy: no man grows richer, by parting with money to pay his debts; none
could hope by afflictions, to grow more holy, that his affliction should purge
away his dross, or take away his tin, or he by them be made more conformable to
the Image of his blessed Savior, if our afflictions were for satisfaction. But
the holy Scripture gives us quite another notion of afflictions, so far as
they concern the People of God; it bottometh them in Divine Love, it calls
them chastenings, and calls them fatherly corrections, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. We
are bid not to despise the chastening of the Almighty; we are told, That they
are blessed, whom he chasteneth, and teaches out of his law; we are told, that
he chasteneth whom he loves, and scourges every child whom he receives. Now
it is true, satisfaction is not consistent with the satisfaction of Christ; but
corrections and fatherly chastisements, are consistent enough with the price
which Christ has paid, and the satisfaction which he has given for us;
hanging the malefactor, or otherwise putting him to death, is not consistent
with pardon; but I hope, whipping him, branding, sending him a while to
Bridewel, banishment of him when he deserved death, is consistent enough with
it. The Papists indeed fancy that Christ has only satisfied for the eternal
punishment, but still we are bound to satisfy by temporal punishments. Hence
are their penances and purgatory founded, but that is a very uncomfortable
notion; and the more we look into it, the more dreadful it will appear. On the
other side the Antinomians are as much almost on the other hand, denying the
afflictions of Gods People, to be punishment of sins or judgments, when the
Scripture so calls them. The truth lies in the middle betwixt these two
extremes, they are judgments, they are punishments of sin, but they are no
legal demands of satisfaction, nor giving satisfaction. Christ has satisfied
for the whole guilt of their sins, for whom he died. All of that nature as to
them was finished upon the cross: so that the afflictions of the People of God,
their punishments for sin, have now both another name and notion, than
satisfactions.

2. A second mistake upon which this objection is founded, is, That Christ by
his death paid a price into the hands of his fathers justice for all temporal
punishments due to man for sin, so as to excuse those for whom he died, from
them. Now as to this, whatsoever we may fancy,

1. It is manifest, that our Lord Jesus never did purchase for his people any
such thing as a freedom from temporal death, and the smart of bodily
afflictions. He has taken away the sting of death, but not death; he has
delivered us from the curse, but not from the cross. This is all which the
Scripture says, Gal. 3.13. He has redeemed us from the curse, by being made a
curse for us: himself has told us, That if any one will be his disciple, he
must deny himself, and take up the cross and follow him: And we are told by the
Apostle, That all who will live godlily in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution. And accordingly the servants of God have experienced it, even Paul
himself was in deaths often, and had his thorn in the flesh.

2. Nor was it any branch of that Covenant of Redemption and Grace, in which
Christ was a party with, or a surety to the eternal father. I put in those two
terms Redemption and Grace. I know some make two Covenants; the one they call
the Covenant of Redemption, the other the Covenant of Grace, and that there are
very different notions of the Covenant of Grace. For my own part, I see no need
of asserting more than one Covenant, and that eternal, Isa. 42.6. This I take
to be a paction from eternity, made betwixt the Father, the eternal Father, on
the one part; and the Lord Jesus Christ on the other, wherein Christ Covenanted
with his Father, that he would do his whole will for the redemption of his
chosen ones, Psalm. 40.7. Heb. 10.7. and that we by grace derived from him,
should do what the father requires of us in order to our salvation, in respect
of which he is said to be made the surety of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. The
Father mutually Covenanted with his Son, that he would be well-pleased in him,
that he would give him the souls for whom he should dye, that he might give
them eternal life, and all that grace and good which should be advantageous for
them; but neither did Christ ask of his Father, neither did his Father promise
him on their behalf an immunity from temporal punishments, afflictions, or
chastisements for sin. We cannot understand the terms of the Covenant of Grace,
but from the Exhibition of it in Scripture, which was very various, sometimes
more clearly, sometimes more darkly, to Adam, Noah, Abraham, David, etc. One of
the fairest copies of it, I think is that to David, which we have, Psalm. 89.
from the 20, to the 35. v. Verse. 28. he tells him, That he will keep his mercy
with him for evermore, and his covenant should stand fast with him: but yet he
reserveth himself a liberty to punish him and his seed for sins: verse. 30. If
his children for sake my law, and walk not in my judgments; if they break my
statutes, and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgressions
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes: nevertheless my loving kindness
I will not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail: my
Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. So
that notwithstanding the Covenant of Grace for eternal life, and pardon of sin,
and all grace in order to the obtaining of this life, and notwithstanding the
blood of Christ, which was the blood of this Covenant; God has yet a liberty
to visit the transgressions of his people, even their past, as well as renewing
transgressions with rods, and their iniquity with stripes: yet he does not
break his Covenant, nor alter any thing that is gone out of his lips.

3. Nor is it reasonable that any should fancy, that God by the establishment
of the Covenant of Grace, or by acceptance of the satisfaction of his Son, as
the blood of this Covenant to make an atonement and reconciliation for
iniquity, should have barred himself of his liberty to punish the sins of his
people: or that any who has accepted this Covenant upon the exhibition of it
in the Gospel, should be excused from such chastisements; if we consider,

1. That some of these chastenings are made the matters of a promise, Mark
10.30. Persecutions are reckoned amongst Christ's rewards in this life, Heb.
12.6, 7, 8. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every child whom
he receives, etc. Thence the ancients were wont to call Martyrdom a Crown; and
Luther was wont to complain, That God would not honor him to wear that Crown.
Saint Paul prays to be made conformable to the death of Christ; if the Saints
did not fight, how could they triumph? how should they conquer? yea be more
than conquerers?

2. That afflictions are the pathway to death, and death the door into eternal
life. Every affliction is a blow at the root of our tree, preparing it for its
fall; and if we did not dye, how should we live in Heaven? We must all dye, or
be changed; or our corruptible could never put on incorruption, nor our mortal
put on immortality. It is reported of Zaleucus, a lawgiver amongst the Indians,
that he should say, If God had not appointed that all should dye, it had been
reasonable for men to have made a law in the case: and we read of some Indians,
who being asked why they worshipped the Sun, gave this reason, Because it was
the Author of death. Give me leave to say, That death is so necessary, and
afflictions are so wholesome for Christians, that they deserve rather to be
reckoned amongst those things which Christ has purchased for them, than such
things as he has purchased them a liberty from.

1. All sorts of afflictions of this life, are means of grace; not so much
means of begetting, as reviving, and increasing grace: for as the fire softneth
the wax, and hardneth the clay; so I have usually observed, That afflictions
make the wicked man worse, but godly men better; they revive repentance, they
are times when usually men call sin to remembrance, they draw out the exercises
of faith, and both work and exercise patience. Tribulation (says the Apostle)
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. David, before
that he was afflicted, went astray, after he learned to keep Gods Statutes. God
while he punishes his people for their sins, does not barely chasten them, but
he also teaches them out of his Law.

2. They (secondly) prepare the Saints for glory; and this not only as they
restrain sin, and tend to perfect grace; but as it pleases God of his grace to
reward the sufferings of his people, and the faith and patience of his people
showed in and under their sufferings with the greater glory. Thus the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 4.17. That our light and momentany afflictions work for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And thus much may serve to have
cleared this Objection, that I may hasten to the practical Application of this
Observation. This motion of Divine Providence in punishing with temporal
punishments, past, and pardoned sins, even in the best of Gods People, appears
exceeding reasonable.

1. In regard of the Justice of God. The Justice of God having taken a
satisfaction in the blood of his Son, and been paid a price for the sins of his
people, will not allow him to punish them with an eternal punishment; yet it is
reasonable they should not go altogether unpunished, that the world may see
that he is a God of purer eyes than to behold iniquity in any. I remember what
God said by the Prophet Jeremiah to the Jews, Jer. 30.11. I will not make a
full end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee
altogether unpunished. You have the same again, Jer. 46.28.

2. It is reasonable (secondly) in order to the eternal salvation of their
souls, 1 Cor. 11.32. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world. It is P. Martyrs note upon that Text,
that the Apostle in that passage particularly respects such as fear God; for
the case is otherwise with wicked men, whose punishment but begun in this life,
shall be perfected in the world that is to come. But I have spoken enough to
the Doctrinal part of this Observation. Let me now come to some practical
Observation, showing you what use we may and ought to make of it.

Use 1. This in the first place serves to justify God in those sore
afflictions which we often see him bringing upon his own people. When we look
upon the holiness of a Job, and see him a man fearing God, and eschewing evil,
and see such a person under sharp trials of affliction, we are ready to startle
at it, and cannot understand Divine Justice in it. But God is many ways to be
justified. 1. Who lives and sins not enough against God, to justify the
severest dispensations under which God exercises him?

2. If he did not, yet it is an ordinary thing, and very righteous for God, to
write bitter things against his people for the sins of their youth, though past
and pardoned. Now who has so passed his youth, that he has not been guilty of
sin enough to justify God in his punishments, yea and to make him acknowledge
that he has been punished seven times less than he has deserved. And if
neither of these could be seen as a meritorious cause, yet God has a liberty
by afflictions, to try the faith and patience of his people, (but that is not
the subject of my present discourse). I remember when they asked our Savior
concerning him that was born blind, whether it were for his own sin, or for his
parents: Our Savior replys, for neither, but that the glory of God might
appear. So I doubt not but Gods end in afflicting his people, is neither at all
times the punishment of the persons late sins, nor former sins, but that both
the grace and glory of God might appear in strengthening, supporting, and
upholding of his poor creatures, and that he might be glorified by them in the
fires, by the exercise of their faith and patience, etc.

Use 2. This speaks loud to all, especially to young men, to take heed of
presumptuous sinnings against God. Presumption of mercy is that which much
enticeth out the lusts of our hearts: there are some that will fancy God an
Idol of mercy, and will say, Let them do what they list, yet it shall be well
with them; they will not believe any such thing as Hell, or a Revelation of the
wrath of God against sinners. God did not make them to damn them, etc. God of
old foresaw there would be a generation, that when they heard the words of his
curse, would bless themselves in their hearts, saying, They should have peace,
although they walked after the imaginations of their own hearts, adding
drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Observe, v. 20. what God says as to such,
The Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall
lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven, etc. But
blessed be God there are not many of these in the age wherein we live, not many
but will acknowledge an Heaven and an Hell, and profess to believe, that there
is a reward for the righteous, and for the unrighteous, for the Saint, and for
the sinner. So that what incourageth the most of men in sinful courses, is not
any hope of a total and final impunity, but a presumption of pardon, and
obtaining mercy with God before they dye. They are taught by some wild
teachers, that it is in the power of man to repent, to believe, to turn to God
when he pleases; and this imboldneth them to out-stare all the terrors of the
Lord, and to put off all the tenders of the Gospel, to indulge their lusts, and
to say, It is not yet time to turn unto God: if they obtain pardon at last,
they shall be well enough; if they turn to God (and they are told they can do
it when they please), it is but taking up a resolution in their old age, when
they have had the fill of their lusts in their youth. Now if this Doctrine had
any truth in it, it would quite destroy an old argument we had to press men to
a speedy repentance; because that God, who always gives pardon to them who
truly repent, will not always give unto sinners an heart to repent. No need of
that, say our new Teachers, man has a freedom in his own will, he may repent
whenever he can but get himself of the mind; he labors under no more than a
moral impotency, his lusts are so strong, that he cannot obtain leave of
himself; that is all. But friend, admit this were true, that thou had
repentance in thy own hand, and that thou should upon thy repentance obtain
pardon of thy sins from God; yet God may as to the punishments of this life
make thee go mourning to thy grave for the sins of thy youth: he may plague
thee in thy own person, and plague thee in thy posterity; God had pardoned
David's sin, Nathan told him, The Lord had put away his iniquity, yet the child
dyed, the sword never departed from his house. Absalom requited him by going
into his Concubines in the sight of the Sun; he was weary with his groaning,
all the night long, he made his bed to swim, and watered his couch with his
tears, his eyes were consumed with grief, Psalm. 6. His bones waxed old through
his roaring all the day-long: Gods hand was heavy upon him night and day, so as
his moisture was turned into the drought of summer, Psalm. 32. Who would not
fear such kind of dispensations? Alas! there is no such thing as man's having a
power in himself to repent and turn to God. Can the Blackamore change his skin,
or the Leopard his spots? Everywhit as soon as he who is accustomed to do evil,
can do well; but admit you could, I say it is a thousand to one but God in the
punishments of this life will visit your youth-sins upon you: young men that
are wise, will take heed of wounds and strains in their youth, or surfeits,
which though they feel little of in the heat of their youth, they will be sure
enough to feel in their bones when old age overtaketh them; and certainly, if
sensual sinners would give but their reason leave to guide them, it would guide
them also to take heed of those sins in their youth; for which they may so
severely smart, by wounds, and terrors of Conscience; by doubts, and horrors,
and fears; by diseases, and other kind of punishments: there is a great deal of
difference, betwixt being saved smoothly, and a being saved but through fire. O
let me plead with you, who have little else to say, for the cares and pains of
your youth, but that by it you are but providing quiet and rest for your selves
when you come to be old; that you would admit the force of that Argument also
to persuade you to remember your Creator in the days of your youth; and to take
heed of the sins of youth, which God often so severely punishes upon
gray-hairs, yea and that to his own people, whose iniquities yet he has
pardoned, so as they shall not eternally condemn him.

Use. 3. But (that I may shut up this discourse) what you have heard upon this
Observation, may offer the best of us, some matter, which possibly, we have not
thought of; both of daily humiliation, and particular humiliation, when the rod
of God is upon us. I say,

1. Of daily repentance, and humiliation. We are ready to speak after the
language of Agag (whom Saul had spared upon the slaughter of the Amalekites)
surely the bitterness of death is past. If we find that God has changed our
hearts, that we are not what we were; we are very prone to think, that all the
follies, and vanities of our youth are forgotten. But let us not mistake, God
seals up the sins of impenitent sinners in a bag, for to be brought forth to
their eternal ruin, in the day of the revelation of Gods wrath: he seals up
the sins of his redeemed ones in a bag, to chasten them oft-times in this life,
with the rods and stripes of men. God wrought bitter things against Job, for
the sins of his youth: and David saw reason to pray, that the Lord would not
remember the sins of his youth against him. We stand therefore deeply
concerned, with bitterness, to remember what God has not so forgotten, but he
may deeply chastise us for. O, then my Brethren, let us all look back upon our
youth, and mourn over that first, and wanton time! And,

2. When the hand of God is upon us; and it may be we cannot find wherefore he
contendeth us; then let us remember former sins, and humble our souls before
the Lord for them; and glorify God in the fires, by acknowledging the
righteousness of God in the punishment of the sins of our former years. But
possibly some will say to me, What is to be done in this case? is there no way
to prevent this after-reckoning with us?

Truly I cannot promise you there is, for as a people may be grown in sin to
such an height, that there is no speaking to God for them; so it is possible,
that our former sins may have so provoked God, as notwithstanding our
repentance and conversion, God may be resolved, that we shall smart in the
flesh, though our souls be saved in the day of Christ; but if there be any hope
for such a mercy, it is certainly to be obtained.

1. By frequent humiliations for past sins, much fasting and prayer: thus
Josiah obtained mercy, as to his person, when the sins of his predecessors,
were coming like a storm upon him. David knew that if any thing would do, this
was the way; and therefore while the child was sick, he humbled himself, and
would eat no bread.

2. By showing your selves eminent in the exercise of those virtues and graces,
which are most opposed to your former sins. This was Daniels counsel to the
King; he had sinned by unrighteousness, cruelty and injustice; oppressing his
subjects, griping the poor, etc. Daniel advises him, to break off his sins by
righteousness, and his iniquities, by showing mercy to the poor, if it might be
a lengthning out of his tranquillity, Dan. 4.27. He could not assure him this
would be a lengthning out of his tranquillity; but if it were a thing to be
done, this was the way to obtain it. Paul had eminently sinned, by blaspheming,
persecuting the Lord Christ in his members: he preaches up Christ, and
labors in the work of the Gospel more than all the rest of the Apostles.

3. Walk humbly (in the third place) with thy God; do not be too censorious,
too rash in thy judgment; God resists the proud: thou were once as others
are; it is by Grace thou art otherwise. Now it cannot be pleasing, but highly
provocative to God; to see a great sinner, whom he has pardoned, and received
to mercy, triumphing over, judging, censuring them; and doubtless does often
provoke God to call their former sins to remembrance, that they may learn to
pity others. It is seldom that God by smart judgments makes them sensible of
their errors, who have a daily sense of them; and in the sense of them, walk
softly all the days of their lives. If we would judge our selves (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.31.) we should not be judged.

4. Be much in secret prayer to God, begging of him, That if it be possible,
those bitter cups might pass from thee; but remember to add what our Savior
adds; yet not my will, but thy will be done. For these punishments are not in
themselves evil, and therefore not absolutely to be deprecated; but with
submission to the will, and wisdom of God.

SERMON XXXII.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Am still detained in a Discourse, concerning the observable things of Divine
Providence, Actual Providence; and more particularly, I am recommending to your
observation, some things relating to its motions in the distributions of
Rewards, and Punishments. I shall offer one thing more of this nature.

Observat. 19. That it is a very ordinary motion of Divine Providence, both to
reward and punish Relations in their Correlations.

To visit the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children; of the Magistrates
upon the people, etc. And so on the contrary, to reward the good and righteous
actions of Parents unto their posterity, etc. In the prosecution of this,
keeping my method,

1. I shall justify the observation, by several instances.

2. I shall show you the Reasonableness of this motion of Providence, and clear
it from all (...), or appearances of injustice, or contrariety to what God has
spoken in his word: with reference to the distribution of punishments.

3. Lastly, I shall make some practical Application.

That the thing is true, appears from so plentiful a testimony of
Scripture-instances; as hardly any thing is more clear, and that both as to
Rewards and Punishments. I will begin with the first, but shall be shorter in
that Discourse; because the difficulty lies more as to the second thing, viz.
the distribution of punishments.

Now for Rewards, besides many particular instances, we have two that are more
general; those of Abraham, the Father of the faithful, and David, the man
according to Gods own heart. They were both great, and common Fathers. Abraham
was the Father of the Jewish Nation: The father of many Nations, and the father
of the faithful. I shall only consider him in the first capacity. David was the
father of the Kings of Judah ( Saul's family, you know, was extinguished
presently): Now how frequently in Scripture, do you find God declaring his
goodness, and mercy to the Jewish Nation, for his servant Abraham's sake; or for
the sake of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; or for his servant David's sake! And God
heard their groaning, and God remembered his Covenant, with Abraham, and with
Isaac, and with Jacob, Exodus 2.24. Lev. 26.42. Then will I remember my Covenant
with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac; and also my Covenant with Abraham
will I remember, and I will remember the Land. Hence it was that the Jews
gloried so much, that They had Abraham to their Father: and the faithful
amongst them ordinarily used it, as an argument to plead in prayer with God for
them. It is plain concerning David, from a multitude of Scriptures, 1 Kings
11.11. God threatening to rend away the Kingdom of Solomon, tells him, that for
David his servants sake, he will not do it in his days; and v. 12. For David
his servants sake, he would give one tribe to his Son. So again, v. 32, 34. and
2 Kings 8.19. Yet the Lord would not destroy Judah for David's sake. 2 Kings
19.34. I will defend this City, save it for my own sake, and for my servant
David's sake; hence the Psalmist prays, Psalm. 132.10. For thy servant David's
sake, turn not away the face of thine Anointed, and so in many other texts of
Scripture. The case as to punishments, has yet a far more plentiful evidence
from holy Writ, Exodus 17.8, 9. Amalek smote Israel when they came out of Egypt.
God revengeth this sin upon their children, and posterity. More than 350 years
after, God says to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I
remember that which Amalek did, how he laid wait for them in the way, when he
came out of Egypt. Now go smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have;
and spare them not, but slay both man, and woman, and infant, and suckling;
both Ox and Sheep, and Camel, and Ass. God in the second Commandment says,
that he is a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the Fathers upon the
Children, unto the third, and fourth generation; and conformable unto this, is
the whole revelation of the will of God in Scripture, and the dispensation of
Actual Providence. 1 King. 11.11. God threatens to rend the Kingdom away from
Solomon. Forasmuch as this is done of thee, and thou have not kept my statutes,
which I have commanded thee. v. 12. Notwithstanding, in thy days I will not do
it, for David thy Fathers sake; but I will rend it out of the hand of thy Son;
he accordingly did, 1 King. 12.16. Jeroboam, you know, had the part God rent
from the house of David. He sets up idolatry. God threatens, 1 King. 14.9.
that because of this, he would destroy Jeroboams house; and cut off from him,
him that pissed against the wall, and would take away the remnant of the house
of Jeroboam, as a man takes away dung till it be gone. Now observe, how the
Actual Providence of God fulfils this, 1 King. 15.25. Nadab, Jeroboams son
succeeds; he reigns but two years; v. 27. Baash conspireth against him,
smites him, and slays him; v. 29. He smote all the house of Jeroboam; he
left not to Jeroboam any that breathed until he had destroyed him. v. 30.
Because of the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel to
sin, by his Provocation, wherewith he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger.
The phrase is not exclusive of Nadabs sins; but it plainly proves, that in
Nadab, and the rest of his families punishment, there was a special
consideration of Jeroboams sins: Baasha does as wickedly as Jeroboam. God sends
Jehu the Prophet, who threatens him, that the Lord would take away his
posterity, and the posterity of his house; and make his house, like the house
of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, 1 Kings 16.1, 2, 3. He reigned 24 years. Elah
his son succeeds him, and reigns two years, as bad a man as his Father, 1
Kings 16.8, 9, 10. Zimri, one of his Captains slays him, being drunk. v. 11.
the same Zimri, slays all the house of Baasha; he left him not one who pissed
against the wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor friends. And this v. 13. was
for all the sins of Baasha. Omri sets up against Zimri, and prevails; he
reigns 12 years: Ahab was his son, who reigned 22 years. He was a most vile
man, 1 Kings 21.25. There was none like unto Ahab; which did sell himself to
work wickedness in the sight of the Lord. God in the same Chapter, v. 21.
threatened him, because he had sold himself to work evil in the sight of the
Lord, that he would bring evil upon him, and take away his posterity; and would
cut off from Ahab, him that pissed against the wall, and him that was shut up,
and left in Israel; and would make his house like the house of Jeroboam, the
son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha. In the next Chapter you shall read
that Ahab was killed in the battle at Ramoth Gilead. Ahaziah succeeds him, 1
Kings 22.40. Ahaziah dies an untimely death, occasioned by a fall from a
window; 2 Kings 1. and Jehoram his son succeeds: v. 17. he was slain by Jehu,
2 Kings 9. chapter 10. Seventy sons more of his were slain by the men of Samaria,
at the command of Jehu. and v. 17. When he came to Samaria, he slew all that
remained to Ahab in Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the saying
of the Lord, which he spoke to Elijah. Jehu succeeds in the Kingdom, he slew
the Priests, and worshippers of Baal; and turned the house of Baal into a
draught-house, 2 Kings 10.25, 26, 27, 28. For this God rewards both him and
his posterity, with a Crown and a Throne, 2 Kings 10.30. But he yet kept up the
idolatry of Jeroboam, 2 Kings 10.29. for this, God not only punished him, in
his life time, 2 Kings 10.32, 33. But threatens to avenge the blood of Jesreel
upon the house of Jehu. Hosea 1.4. which came to pass an hundred years after,
in the fourth Generation. Jehoahaz Jehu's son reigned 17 years. Joash his son
reigned 16 years. Jeroboam his son reigned 41 years, which added to 28 years
Jehu reigned, makes a 102 years. Now you know, the service Jehu did, was in the
beginning of his reign. Thus you see this was Gods constant course of
Providence, with the several families of the Kings of Israel. For the sin of
Eli, 1 Samuel 2.27. God threatens him, that because he had honored his sons
above God. v. 29. He would cut off his arm, and the arm of his fathers house;
that there should not be an old man in his house. v. 33. And all the increase
of his house should die in the flower of their age. Christ bids those that
mourned for him, to weep for themselves, and their children. In short, the
proof of this is very full from Scripture. And we shall find this done, not
only in natural Relates and Correlates; Such are Fathers and Children, of which
I have given you plentiful instances; but in such as are moral Relations.
Sometimes we shall find the people punished for the Rulers sin. Thus it was in
the case of David, he numbered the people, the people were plagued for it. So in
the case of Jeroboam, and Baasha, and Ahab; they set up their idolatry; the
people were destroyed, Hosea 5.11. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in
judgment, because he willingly walked after the Commandment, (a Text worth the
studying by many Divines in our age). The famine in David's time, 2 Samuel 21.1.
came for Saul, and his bloody house; and ten of his sons must be haned to
atone God. Again, you shall find it done, when the original guilt was in the
people: this was the case of the Israelites, when they made the Golden-calf,
Exodus 32.22. And when they murmured, at the report brought up by the Spies,
Number. 14.33. The judgment extended to near 40 years. This is a tremendous
motion of Providence, it may not therefore be out of my way to enquire,

1. What sins those are, which God does ordinarily thus revenge on Correlates?

2. How far this Vengeance does extend?

3. How this is reconcilable to the justice and goodness of God, and the
revelation of his will?

1. As to the first, it is hard to say, what sins God may not thus revenge. Eli
was thus (as you have heard) punished in his posterity, for not duly punishing
his Sons; David for numbering the people: but the more eminent sins, which you
read of in Scripture thus punished, are;

1. Corruption in the worship of God, and especially Idolatry, (which is the
highest sin in that kind) This is verified in the instance of the punishment,
for the Calf made by Aaron at the importunity of the people, Exodus 32. and in
all the cases of the Kings of Israel, before mentioned. Princes were punished
for it, not only personally, but in their families; and the people too, for
willingly walking after the commandment. The worship of God is a very tender
thing; and God more severely punishes no sin, than he does corruptions in that.

2. Blood, Cruelty and Oppression, and especially the blood of righteous men.
God Numb. 35. commands that no satisfaction should be taken for the life of the
murderer; he tells us there, blood polluteth a land, and so, as that it cannot
be cleansed, but by the blood of him that shed it. This was the case of Saul,
he had shed the blood of the Gibeonites; for this, vengeance came in a famine
upon all Israel, and particularly upon his family. This was the case of Ahab
also; he had shed the blood of Naboth, and of the Lords Prophets. This was the
case of the Jews; That (says our Savior) upon you may come all the righteous
blood shed, from the blood of Abel, to the blood of Zechariah; and the blood of
Christ by them shed, lies upon that whole people unto this day.

But secondly, How far may this Vengeance extend?

1. I answer, Not to the inward man. The spiritual, or eternal punishment of
any man consists of two Essential parts, the soul and the body; both these
are capable of punishment, both in this life, and that which is to come: hence
arises the distinction of punishment, into that which is Corporal, and that
which is Spiritual; that which is Temporal, and that which is Eternal. Now I do
not think, that God punishes the souls of succeeding generations, not going on
in the same, or equal sins, for the sins of a preceding generation; or the
souls of correlates, for the sins of their Relations. In this sense I take that
Text, Ezech. 18.4. The soul that sins shall dye: the son shall not bear the
iniquity of the father: nor the father the iniquity of the child. As also that
Jer. 31.29. They shall not use this Proverb, The Fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge: but every one shall dye for
his own sin: but whether that be the strict sense of those Texts or no, I will
not dispute: this seems to me a sufficient reason for this determination.
Because the soul of the child is no part of the parent. All souls are Gods, and
derive immediately from him. One thing which is said by Divines, in maintenance
of the justice of God, in this dispensation, is this, That children are the
goods of their parents, and parts of them, flesh of their flesh; but it cannot
be said so of their souls. Hence it follows, that none, for the sins of their
Parents, or Correlates, is given up to hardness of heart, reprobacy of mind, or
vile-affections; nor to any other spiritual wickedness, nor shall any perish
eternally for the sins of others.

2. For punishments of this life, they may extend to the third and fourth
generation, even upon those, who do not tread in the steps of their fore
fathers, nor approve their sayings. You know the words of the second
Commandment -- visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation, of those that hate me. There are that think, that
those later words are a limitation upon the former; and that God only threatens
vengeance to the third and fourth generations, in case those two generations go
on to hate God; and thus the Caldee Paraphrast glosseth, but this will not
agree with the Hebrew. I desire you to observe,

1. Those that hate him (in that Commandment) are opposed to them that love him
in the same Commandment; so that if the threatening be to be limited, only to
those children who persist in the hatred of God, the promise also must be
expounded only of those thousands that love God: and it would rather have been,
that he would show mercy to the third and fourth generation, of those that love
God.

2. Again, What had there been extraordinary in the commination? God will most
certainly punish them that hate him, for their personal hatred of him;
certainly God brings it as a further argument to deter men from sin, that he
would not only revenge their sins upon them, but upon their posterity.

3. This vengeance is not so necessary or certain, but that by the repentance,
and humiliation of a present generation, though it will at last most certainly
come, it may be deferred. The threatening against Ahab and his posterity was, 1
Kings 21.22, 23. Ahab was a little smitten upon it; God promises to defer it,
but tells him it should come in his sons days. v. 29. Ahaziah succeeds him,
and dyed by a fall; Jehoram, or Joram succeeds him: then it began to work,
Jehu slays him, and also all the family of Ahab. God threatened Jeroboam; but
because there was good found in his young son Abijam, it fell not on him: 1
Kings 14.7, 8, 9, 16. but in his Grand-childs time it came. Hezekiah was thus
threatened for showing the hid treasures to the King of Babylons servants. 2
Kings 20.17. Josiah was his Grandchild, the third generation from Hezekiah; he
humbled himself, and God yet deferred it. Thus we find vengeance of this nature
coming on Jeroboam, in the second generation; upon Ahab, in the third; upon
Hezekiah, in the fifth or sixth generation. We find this vengeance taken off
from Abijam, by some good thing found in him, put off in Ahabs time by his
(though hypocritical) humiliation, by Josiahs real humiliation.

4. Lastly, When a generation goes on, and continues in their Fathers sins, we
find vengeance following them to many generations. In that case (says God) I
will not keep silence, but will recompense your iniquities, and the iniquities
of your Fathers together, who have burnt incense upon the mountains, and
blasphemed me upon the hills; therefore will I measure their former work into
their bosom, Isaiah 65.6, 7. This was the case of the Jews, Matthew. 23.35. They
continued shedding the blood of Prophets, and righteous men, and added to it
the blood of Christ; and they continued still in their blasphemies against
Christ. They are not in a state indeed, to execute their malice against Christ,
and his Gospel; but their hatred and blasphemy continues; and the vengeance of
God to this day continues upon them, and God is this day visiting upon them
their iniquities, and the iniquities of their Fathers together. And thus much
may serve to have spoken concerning the extent of this vengeance. I have but
one thing more to do, before I come to the practical application of this
observation, that is, to reconcile this motion of Divine Providence, to the
justice and goodness of God, and the revelation of his will in Ezech. 18.4. and
other Texts. This dispensation, at first view, seems not to comport with the
justice of God, which must give every man his due, and recompense to every one,
according to his work. Now the work of the Father, is not the work of the
Child; how then comes it to be recompensed to the Child? much less does it
seem to comport with the goodness of God, to visit the iniquity of the Father
upon the child; and then it seems to cross what God has said, Ezech. 18.4.
The soul that sins shall dye; and again, Jer. 31.29, 30. Every one shall dye
for his own iniquity; every man that eats the sour grape, his teeth shall be
set on edge. But I beseech you observe,

1. How ready we are to quarrel with God, for what is done every day with men,
and no man accuses it of injustice; to take away the estates of Children, for
the treasons of Parents, for the debts of Parents, etc. How ordinarily in war
do innocent Children suffer for their Parents? yet as to man the law of God is
plain, Deuteronomy. 24.16. The fathers shall not be put to death for the children,
neither shall the children be put to death for the parents; every man shall be
put to death for his own sin: and reason holds much stronger for Gods
punishing, even with death, the sin of the parent upon the child. For,

1. God can compensate the loss of a temporal life to the child, with an
eternal life: this man cannot do. This was Augustines reason.

2. God sees guilt enough in children, to justify his vengeance. To man they
are innocent: yet according to that barbarous custom in war, nothing is more
ordinary, than to take away the lives of children, for the fathers faults; yet
the world does not much clamor at this.

2. The justice of God is sufficiently cleared in this, That God never
punishes any for the sin of their correlate, in whom there is not personal
guilt enough, to justify God in that proceeding. Every one in his punishment,
bears his own burden, though possibly his sin, and the sin of his father be
punished together.

3. Correlates are the goods of their Relations. Children are the great portion
of Parents, so are people the riches and goods of Princes: thus Aquinas solveth
this difficulty, Filii sunt res parentum. Thus the learned Rivet says,
children have in them aliquid parentis; indeed that is something more, children
are not only the portion, and goods of their parents, but they are pieces of
their parents, and their parents are punished in them. As David was punished in
the death of his first child by Bathsheba. Some may say, this is something, if
children were only punished during the life of their parents; but how are their
parents punished in them when they are dead, before vengeance comes upon the
child? Answ. The fear of it all their lifetime is a punishment. 2. Is it no
punishment to them (though dead) to have their names blotted out?

4. The goodness of God is seen in this; That it is a rational means to do good
to the parents, and parents are often advantaged by the punishment of the
children. David was so, you know. If God will say to the child, I will punish
you, and use your punishment to do good to your parents; what have we to say to
it? If we ought to lay down our lives for our brethren (as St. John
determines), certainly if God calls children to it, they ought to be willing to
lay down their lives for their parents, if God impose it upon them. Debent
parentibus hoc officium (says Augustine). Plutarch disputing the justice of
the gods (he was a Heathen, and that his dialect) in this particular, says,
that Physicians use to bleed the arm for a pain in the head, and by a parity of
reason, so excuses the Divine Justice. The Parents have been instruments of
giving life to the Children; and God gives Children many advantages for the
Parents sake.

5. In the mean time, if the children be good and holy, their afflictions are
but fatherly chastisements: Their deaths do but remove them to a better life,
so that they have no wrong, not suffering in their souls, nor by eternal
punishments for the sins of their parents.

6. Lastly, (says Augustine) God by this means does maintain discipline, and
keep up his authority and government in states, in the world, in his Church, in
particular families. Now who shall deny God the liberty of exercising an act of
mere Power and Sovereignty (if it were no more), when by it a discipline and
government is kept up in the Universe, and by it many greater disorders and
wickednesses are prevented? Sinners are terrified, and the thoughts of the
miseries their children may feel for their sins, may affright those who would
adventure their own skins, and necks, and souls too. I have now done with the
Doctrinal part of this Observation, I come to the Practical Application of this
discourse.

Use 1. In the first place this may serve to satisfy us as to the Justice of
God in the distribution of some rewards of this life to the worst of men; by
the rewards of this life, I understand riches, honors, outward prosperity and
blessing. It is a saying usually imputed to Hierom, Omnis Dives est vel
injustus, vel injusti haeres, every rich man is either an unrighteous man, or
the son of an unrighteous man. I do not know but we may say the contrary, That
every prosperous man is either justus aut haeres justi, either himself a good
and righteous man, or the child of such a one; I mean, not the immediate child,
but descended from such a one. I will not assert it too universally, but shall
refer it to your Observation. If you see a lewd and wicked man growing great,
rich, prospering much in the world; observe whether he be not one, who like
Jehu, has not personally done some eminent service for God: so Jehu did, so
Assyria did, so Nebuchadnezzar did, he made his Army to do a great service
against Tire. 2. If you cannot find that, enquire if he were not a descendent
from some that had done some such service. Jeroboam the Son of Joash Jehu's
Grandchild, was a naughty man, yet the Kingdom of Israel had no such time of
prosperity, as in his Reign: God did not reward any personal virtue in him, but
he rewarded the service which his Grandfather Jehu had done against the house
of Ahab. The prosperity therefore of wicked men should not trouble us, nor be a
temptation to us: we should only conclude thus: How much more will the Lord
reward his faithful servants, who worship and serve him in truth, and with a
perfect heart!

Use 2. In the second place, This may serve to rectify the mistakes of those
who may be under a temptation to say with David, That they have washed their
hands in vain, and cleansed their hearts for nothing, or (to allude to the
Apostles phrase), We have been fishing all day, and caught nothing. The error
lies in your misapprehensions, thinking you have no reward, unless it be made
to you personally, yea and sensibly too.

1. Is it nothing, that he who fears God and works righteousness is
accepted of him? And that you have as to this the continual feast of a good
conscience; no recoilings of your own breast, no sour reflections from thence?
surely this is something, you have Christ's peace, when as to the wicked there
is no peace. This is a reward unspeakable, passing all understanding.

2. If your sufferings be any testimony for Christ, are they not rewards in
themselves? does not the Lord honor that person whom he calls out to be a
witness for his name? few are called to suffer for Christ. Luther was troubled
that God did not think him worthy of such a Crown. The Apostles rejoiced, that
the Lord thought them worthy to suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ.

3. But satisfy thy self; It may be God has laid up the reward for thy
posterity, and thy children, and childrens children, shall possibly reap what
thou have sown: be assured, good actions shall not be without their reward, but
rewards are not all of a kind; no man shall ever say, he has waited upon the
Lord in vain, or sought his face for nothing.

Use. 3. This calls upon us all to take heed of sinning against the living
God, especially such sins as I have before instanced in; there are many
arguments to be used to defame sin, and to dissuade from it. To them all let
this be added, the curse which sin entails upon our posterity: our sins are
sometimes hid with God, and sealed up in a bag, and the vengeance of God for
them falls not upon our selves, but upon those that come after us. Now the
force of this argument lies in that natural affection which every man has for
his posterity: he must be a very debauched person that has no regard to his
posterity, every one almost is careful to lay up something for his children,
take heed of laying up a treasure of Divine wrath for them. If you will not
regard your own bodies, the peace of your own breasts, nor your eternal
welfare: yet fear sinning against God, because of the vengeance which may for
your sin come upon your posterity. It is a terrible Meditation, to consider how
many the threatenings of God against children are for the parents sins, Job 5.3,
4. Eliphaz says, I have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly I cursed
his habitation: His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the
gate, neither is there any to deliver them. And again, Job 17.5. He that
speaks flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his children shall fail; the
triumphing of the wicked is but short, and the joy of the hypocrite is but for
a moment, Job 5.20. verse. 10. His children shall seek to please the poor, and
his hands shall restore their goods. And Job 21.19. speaking of the wicked, he
says, God lays up iniquity for his children. And Job 27.13, 14. This is the
portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors which they
shall receive from the Almighty. If his children be multiplied, it is for the
sword, and his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread. David, who was a
Prophet, and by the spirit of Prophecy, did but see and foretell what should
come to pass, having to do with wicked and deceitful men, who, Psalm. 109.2, 3,
4, 5. opened their mouths against him, and spoke against him with a lying
tongue, compassed him about with words of hatred, and fought against him
without a cause; for his love were his adversaries, rewarding him evil for
good, and hatred for his love; prays: verse. 9, 10. Let his children be
fatherless, and his wife a widow, let his children be continually vagabonds,
and beg: let them seek their bread also out of desolate places. Isa. 14.21. In
the threatening against Babel you find these words, Prepare slaughter for his
children, for the iniquities of their fathers, that they do not rise, nor
possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities: and Psalm. 137.8,
9. O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us: Happy shall he be that takes and
dasheth thy little ones against the stones. The Scripture is full of such
prophecies and threatenings, especially in the case of some eminent oppressions
or cruelties used by any parents, or some eminent corruptions in worship, etc.
Now should not this lay a law upon parents, who are so sollicitous for the good
and prosperity of their children when they shall not be? God lays up the
iniquities of parents many times for their children. In short, as there is no
man that can provide better for his children, than he that works
righteousness, and eminently serves God in his generation. I never saw the
righteous forsaken, says David, nor their seed begging their bread: so none
can provide worse for their children, than by laying up a stock of sin to be
revenged upon them. Children are bound by law to pay their Fathers debts to man
(that often proves heavy); but this is more dreadful, they often (as to
temporal punishments) pay their Fathers debts also to the Justice of God: and
this by the way shows us the high advantage of godly parents, as the
disadvantage of those who have had wicked and profane parents; the former
inherit blessing, the latter cursing and judgment, very ordinarily upon the
account of their parents.

Use 4. This observation calls aloud to those that are children descended
from wicked and ungodly parents, (it may be the case of some that are before
me) to be humbled for the sins of their parents and predecessors. And, 2. To
take heed of continuing in the sins of their predecessors. Josia was thus
humbled, and the Lord turned away his wrath that it came not upon him, though
it came upon his posterity, when he was gone to his grave in peace. Daniel in
his humiliation, chap 9. verse. 16. forgets not this, Because for our sins, and
the iniquity of our fathers, Jerusalem has been made a reproach. The Church
complains, Lam. 5.7. Our fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have born
their iniquity. Is there any here whose heart it may be is otherwise, but they
have had a Father or Predecessor, who has been a cruel bloody man, a
persecutor of the People of God, an hater and enemy of Religion and Godliness?
I would have such a one think, that although his heart be otherwise, yet it is
possible, his fathers iniquity may be laid up for him. The only way to prevent
it, and to turn it off, is to get a tender broken heart for thy forefathers
sins; to confess them, and to be humbled before the Lord for them.

2. But let all men take heed, that they continue not in them. You shall
observe it often repeated in Scripture; Such a one did evil, and walked in the
steps of his Father, in all the sins of his Fathers, etc. you shall constantly
observe that it is set as a mark of dishonor upon those that did so, and they
perished in their transgressions. God (according to what he threatened the Jews,
Isa. 65.7.) punished upon them their iniquities, and the iniquities of their
fathers together. We are very prone to walk in the steps of our Fathers
(especially if they have trodden awry, and turned aside from the Commandments
of God): and usually in matters of Religion, though we have nothing to say for
the superstition and vanity of former generations; yet we think it a sufficient
plea, that our fathers did thus or thus: and indeed this was the old plea of
the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. Our fathers worshipped in this mountain. Thus the
Heretic said in one of the Councils, but was well answered -- Immo errantes ab
errantibus; yes, erring children, from erring parents. The wickedness of a
preceding generation (especially in the matters of Divine Worship) is so far
from being a plea for us, or excusing us, that it does but increase and
aggravate guilt upon us. The most righteous persons may without due and
seasonable humiliation smart for the sins of their Fathers; but if they go on
in the same sins, they have nothing to expect, but that God should punish their
sins, and the sins of their Fathers together.

Use 5. In the last place, This observation lays upon us all a new engagement
to holiness and serviceableness to God in the stations in which the Lord has
set us. As sin entaileth a curse, so holiness and eminent service for God
entaileth a blessing to our posterity: Godliness has not only the promise of
this life, and of that which is to come to our own persons; but it has
promises of blessing to those that shall come after us: God shows mercy to
thousands of those who love him and keep his Commandments. Jehu was no godly
man, yet his service he did for God, procured him a reward to the fourth
generation. Abraham was a godly man, David a perfect man, a man according to
Gods own heart. Blessings for their sakes came upon their posterity to many
generations. But I shall add no more to this Observation.

SERMON XXXIII.
Psalm. CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Proceed yet to offer you some further Observations concerning the motions of
Actual Providence. I have already made many. Last of all, some with reference
to its distributions of rewards and punishments. Let me now go on to a

Observe. 20. When God calls any to any new work or relation, he ordinarily
gives them a spirit suited to it.

Every work and relation requires some particular dispositions fitting the
persons for it. Now I say, you shall observe in the motions of Actual
Providence, that it fitteth those persons for work whom God calls to it: you
shall see it in several instances. God called Moses to go in to Pharaoh, to
require him to let the children of Israel go, and so to conduct the children of
Israel out of Egypt. Moses says to God, Exodus 3.11. Who am I that I should go
unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring the children of Israel out of Egypt. God
says, verse. 12. I will be with thee. Again, chap. 4.10. Moses excuses
himself, that he was not eloquent, but slow of speech, and of a slow tongue:
see what God says to him, ver. 11. Who has made man's mouth, or who makes the
dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Now therefore, ver. 12. go, and I will be
with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say. When God called Saul to be
King over Israel, the text, 1 Samuel 10.9. says, That God gave him another
heart. When God called David to the Kingdom, what a spirit of government did
God give him? What courage and valor, that coming from keeping of sheep, he
durst adventure to encounter Goliath? Concerning Solomon the case is plain, 1
King. 3.8, 9. he begged of God a wise and understanding heart to judge his
people. The text tells you, that God gave it him; Lo (says God, ver. 12.) I
have given thee a wise and understanding heart. As to the Ministry, the case is
plain, as to Jeremiah, God ordained him to be a prophet to the nations. Jer.
1.5. Jeremiah excused himself, he was a child, and could not speak, verse. 6.
But the Lord said to him, Say not I am a child, for thou shall go to all that I
shall send thee; and whatsoever I command thee, thou shall speak: Be not afraid
of their faces, for I am with thee, to deliver thee (says the Lord); then the
Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth, and the Lord said to me, Behold
I have put my words into thy mouth, verse. 7, 8. The like you have concerning
Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 2. The like you find upon Christ's sending out the seventy and
the twelve. It is true, God does this several ways, and by several rites and
ceremonies; but God never yet called any to any new relation, or new work, but
he gave them a spirit fit for it. But let us a little understand what the
meaning of that is.

Quest. Wherein lies the sutableness of a persons spirit to his work or
relation?

I answer, It lies in two things: 1. An inclination, or willingness to it. 2. A
fittedness or preparedness for it. 1. An inclination or willingness to it.
Indeed Gods first call of a person to a work, does not always meet with a
willing mind, it did not in Moses, in Jeremy, in Saul; but God always makes
those willing whom he calls to any service; Whom shall I send? here am I, send
me, says the Prophet Isaiah. God made Moses and Jeremy willing before he sent
them. The gravity and burden of the work to which God calls, may discourage
flesh and blood at first, but God makes them willing before they take their
Commission. Hence that in Timothy, He that desires the office of a Bishop,
etc. 2. But this is not all; God never sends any to any work, but he fitteth
and prepares them for it, giving them a frame of spirit, and abilities of
mind, capacitating them for the parts of their work, or duties of that
relation: several callings require several gifts and endowments. For the
magistracy, courage, and wisdom is necessary: for the ministry is necessary,
not only courage and wisdom, but knowledge, utterance, etc. a sound
understanding in the holy Scriptures, which he is to open to the people, and
apply to their consciences; and so in inferior relations, even Bezaliel the
son of Vri, whom the Lord called by name, to the building of the Tabernacle,
Exodus 35.31. Was filled with the spirit of God in wisdom, and in understanding,
and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, and to devise curious works,
to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in the cutting of stones to
set them, and in cutting of wood to make any manner of cunning-work, and God
put into his heart to teach others. Hence it is we see such a strange
improvement (as we call it) in gifts and parts, in persons called of God to
offices of the magistracy or ministry: That once fixed in those relations,
there is (as is said of Saul) another spirit given them, they are quite other
men, than they appeared to the world before. The Actual Providence of God
attending persons in new works, and new relations, with new spirits, new gifts
and abilities.

And indeed this working of Providence seems so reasonable, that the contrary
cannot be supposed without a blasphemous impeachment of the wisdom of God.
Which of us unless surprised by our own ignorance, or overborn with some
foolish lust or passion of our own, would set any person about our work, that
is in nothing fit for it? Indeed our reasonable nature will not allow us
wilfully to commit such a mistake; to suppose ignorance, or any bias of passion
in God, were but to blaspheme. Who can without blasphemy say, God has called a
fool to be a magistrate, or a coward to be a soldier, or an ignorant person,
that cannot speak, or not speak sense to be a Minister? It is true, Gods gifts
are inequally distributed according to the good pleasure of his own will; some
have greater abilities for magistracy and ministry than others have, and so are
more eminently qualified for their work: but there are none called of God to
any employment, but are in such a competent measure qualified for it, and the
principal acts of it, that they are able to do that work; and I say, but to
suppose the contrary concerning God, were either to suppose, that God was
surprised with some ignorance, or biassed with some passion, or did that which
no reasonable creature would do.

But here arises a question. Quest. How then comes it to pass that we see in
the experience of all ages, persons employed in works and relations, by no
means, nor in any degree qualified for the work of their relations; comes this
without God? Is there any thing which escapes his Providence?

I answer, We are now speaking, not of the permissions of Providence, but the
efficiencies of it. Persons at works, and in relations, which they are in no
measure fit or qualified for, are great evils to the world, and these evils are
not in Nations and Cities without Gods permission and sufferance. The short of
it is this, That sometimes it is in the heart of God to bless and prosper a
people, and to vouchsafe his presence amongst them; when he does so, he does
accordingly adequate and proportion means in order to that end. For
Magistrates, if he does not give them men according to Gods own heart, such as
David and Solomon; yet he gives them such men whom he has fitted with a
suitable spirit to their work, that whatever they be as men, are good
governors, men of valor and courage, men of prudence and conduct, that know
how to manage affairs of state. When God has a contrary design to chastise and
afflict a people, and to punish men for their sins, he suffers such to come in
either by election or succession, as are no ways fitted for the duties of those
great relations. So for Ministers, when God designeth to grant, and to continue
to a people, his presence and blessing, he gives them faithful Ministers, and
such as are able to teach others, to reveal the whole Counsel of God to them,
to speak a word in season to the souls that are weary, to bind up the broken in
heart, etc. But when he has designs to chasten and scourge any people, he
suffers such to get into the Ministry, as are described, Isa. 56.10. Blind
and ignorant watchmen, dumb dogs, that cannot bark, sleeping, lying down to
slumber, greedy dogs which can never have enough, shepherds that cannot
understand, etc. you have this, Isa. 1.25, 26. And I will turn my hand upon
thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away thy tin; that is, I will
return in mercy to thee: and what follows? And I will restore thy Judges as
at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning, afterward thou shall be
called the City of righteousness: and so for the Ministry, Jer. 3.14, 15. God
ver. 14. says, Turn, O backsliding children (says the Lord) for I am married
unto you, and I will take you one of a City, and two of a tribe, and will bring
you to Zion: and I will give you pastors according to my heart, which shall
feed you with wisdom, and with understanding. So again, Jer. 23.3, 4. verse. 3.
And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries, whither I have
driven them; and will bring them again to their folds, and they shall be
fruitful, and increase: and I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed
them, and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be
lacking (says the Lord). On the contrary when God is in a course of vengeance
and judgment against a people; when God has forsaken a people, he suffers a
ministry that prophecy lies, but sends them not, Jer. 27.14, 15. For they
prophecy a lie unto you, for I have not sent them (says the Lord), yet they
prophecy a lie in my name: see the same, Jer. 14.14, 15. Jer. 23.21, 22. verse.
38. The sum of this discourse is this:

That when the Providence of God is moving in a way of mercy, toward any
Nation, Church or Family; he sets persons in relations to them, and calls
them to work in them, whom he has fitted, and does fit, for the several parts
of their work, with such gifts and graces of his spirit, as qualify and
capacitate them for the work and relation to which God calls them: and this
he does by way of efficiency, pouring out his spirit upon such persons; but
when he is proceeding in a way of wrath and judgment against a people, either
finally to destroy them, or severely to chasten them for their iniquities, then
he suffers such Rulers, and such Ministers to be over them, or such
governors in any societies as are no way fit for their work; Rulers that have
no wisdom, nor understanding proportioned to their relation, no courage nor
valor, no principles of justice and righteousness, but such as will (as the
Prophet Amos expresses it) sell the needy for a pair of shoes, and the poor
for a piece of silver, and suffers Ministers to rise up and be allowed, that
are blind, dumb, ignorant, greedy, indeed not fitted at all for their work, or
the several parts of it; but only fitted for Gods design, to be a scourge and a
plague to the people, amongst whom they go to seduce them, to tear, to rend,
and to devour them: and this you shall observe to be the constant motion of the
Actual Providence of God. And thus I have opened the Observation to you, I come
now to the Application.

Use 1. In the first place, This observation affords us another sign of the
times. I observed to you before, that we have generally a curiosity to know
what shall come to pass in future times, how it shall go, to know both what God
is doing with his Church in the age wherein we live, and what he will do with
it in the ages following. He that makes this observation, will in this point
be spiritually wise, and will also understand the loving kindness of the Lord;
yea and by this we may understand what the Counsels of God are (in a great
measure) as to families and persons. Observe but what those are whom God sets
over them, or suffers to stand in relation to them, and you will understand
much of this. If God intends mercy and goodness to any Nation or any Church,
he gives them Judges and Counselors as at the beginning. Eccl. 10.16, 17. Woe
to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child, and Princes eat in the morning.
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness. Observe but in the
state who are in the places of Magistrates, whether they be men of wisdom, and
knowledge, of justice, and righteousness, or men of little wisdom, rash and
inconsiderate men, men of little knowledge, men that will take bribes, and
oppress the poor, and needy in judgment, not suffering the causes of the poor
to stand in judgment; and you may easily judge what God is about with that
Nation. Look into the Church of God, and observe what persons they are, that
are in the Ministry: Whether they be men that are able and faithful to teach,
skilled in the words of righteousness, able to open and apply the holy
Scriptures to the hearts and Consciences of people, to pray and to pour out
their souls unto God in supplications: Or men that were Aptiores ad stivam, (as
Beza sometimes said). I may add, ad cauponam vel tabernam, fitter for a
Plow-tail, for an Alehouse, a Tavern, or a Victuallinghouse, and it needs no
interpreter to you, what God is about to do with such a Church. In like manner,
look into families, look upon particular persons; observe what manner of
persons are in the relations of Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children; and you may
easily know Gods present design, or what he is after like to do in such
families, or as to such persons. Where God intends mercy, he fitteth persons
for their respective relations in all humane societies.

Use 2. Hence (again) in the second place, each one may make a judgment of
himself, whether God has called him to this or that work, this or that
Relation. A man can have little comfort in any relation, to which he cannot see
himself called of God; be it Magistracy or Ministry, or any other Relation,
when we see God calling us to it, we may look for Gods blessing upon us in it,
ay and we may, in that case also expect Gods protection; his standing by us,
and standing up for us against Opposition: now neither of these can in other
causes be expected. I say, 1. A person called of God to any work, any relation,
may reasonably expect the blessing of God upon him in it: If he be a
Magistrate, that God should make his government peaceable, and prosperous,
subduing the people under him; and subjecting their spirits to his Government:
If he be a Minister, that God should direct his meditations, assist his heart
in enditing new matter, and his tongue that it should be the tongue of a ready
writer, blessing his labors, and giving in to his ministry the souls of the
people committed to his charge. He may expect Gods protection and defense of
him against the opposition that he meets with. It is a promise you ordinarily
meet with annexed to precepts, by which God has commissioned men to be
Ministers. I will be with you, it is what God said to Jeremiah, to Ezechiel.
What Christ said to his Apostles, I will (says he) be with you to the end of
the world; now that promise reaches to both these, both assistance and
protection; and therefore it is of mighty concern to such as engage in great
work, or are put into any great relation, to see Gods call of them to that work
or relation; without a view of that I again tell you, they can expect the
presence of God no way, neither blessing, nor protecting them. Now from this
observation upon the motions of Actual Providence you may make up a judgment
of that. Actual Providence fits them for that work and Relation, whom God
calls to it; it does not fit every one for it, whom it suffers to creep
into it, but it fits all for their work whom God directs into it, and who are
like to be a blessing to their Correlates: and those who cannot find themselves
fitted of God for the work and acts of that Relation wherein they are, may
conclude, that though they be not in that station without God; yet God has
nothing further to do with them in their station, but to permit them to get
into it for a plague and scourge to the people, to whom they are in relation,
and for their own damnation, and confusion at the last. Is any one a Minister,
(to instance only in that Relation) he stands most highly concerned of all men
living to see his call; (the charge of souls, men will at last find a great and
burthensom charge). If he be faithful, he is like to meet with the greatest
opposition imaginable in that work, he stands in need of the greatest
assistance of God, for the due performance of it: he can look for neither,
unless he can find that God has called him to his work. The great acts of the
ministerial office, are praying and preaching; praying for the people:
Preaching, that is, opening the Scriptures, the will and counsel of God unto
people, and applying it to their Consciences. Would thou know now whether
thou be called of God as Aaron was. Examine then whether God has fitted
thee for the work of the ministry. Has God given thee the Spirit of prayer,
and supplication? has God given thee a knowledge and understanding in the
Scriptures, that thou art (as it was said of Apollos) mighty in the Scriptures;
such a one a Minister should be. If Gods providence has given thee a
willingness, and a desire to it, and an opportunity for the exercise of it, and
has also thus qualified thee for the several parts of it, then thou may
conclude, that God has called thee to it. It is not a Patrons presentation
that will make up the call of God, no nor yet the boldness and confidence of
the person that will venture upon the greatest employment the world affords. I
say none of these things will do it; a man's own needs, and not knowing how to
live, may make him willing and desirous, but they are only the gifts and graces
of Gods spirit, that can make a man fit for the Ministry; and God never sends
any to any work, but his Providence fitteth them for it; and the same may be
said of any other Relations, or of persons employed in any great work. And as
persons employed in any work or relation, may thus judge of themselves: So also
their Correlates, to whom they are in relation, may by this means know how to
judge of those who are in relation to them, whether they be called of God or
no, and be such or no, with whom they can expect the presence of God, and from
whom they may expect Gods blessing; and this if duly thought upon should strike
a terror into men, in places and employments especially relating to the worship
of God, and in trust with souls, who are no more qualified for their work, than
an Ass is for a Fiddle, as we say; what will these men say, when their
Consciences come to arrest them with a what do thou here without thy
wedding garment? That is, without those gifts and graces, without that heart
and spirit, which should have qualified thee for such a work, and which God
never fails to furnish him with, whom he calls to any employment for him. Or
when they shall come to dye, and have no sweeter reflections of Conscience than
this: I have these 20, 30, 40 years been Gods scourge and plague to this
people, soothing up this people in their sins, blinding their eyes, hardening
their hearts, merely eating up that bread which should have fed other faithful
Pastors, who were able to have prayed for them, able to have instructed them,
which I have not been. O the searedness of these men's Consciences; O the
dreadful vengeance of God, that hangs over their heads! O the strange quantity
of the blood of souls which God will require at these pitiful wretches hands!
Let not my soul enter into these men's secrets, let not their portion be mine, O
my God!

Use 3. But in the third place, Let me caution you, that you do not think that
the Providence of God does alike qualify every person for the duties of his
relation. As in the Heavens there are different Stars, and they differ one from
another in glory: Every Star is a light, but some give a far greater, and more
glorious light than others; so it is in the Church of God (Ministers, you know,
are compared to Stars) they must all be lights; they must all be able to show
light, both in their Doctrine, and also in their Lives; but yet some are more
glorious lights than others are, more burning, more shining.

God calls no man to the Ministry, but they are able to pray, able to preach
(he sets no dumb dogs to keep his sheep): he sets none over his people to be
their Bishops but they are blameless, sober, of good behavior, given to
hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no strikers, etc. as in 1 Timothy
3.2, 3, 4. sober, just, holy, temperate, etc. as 1 Titus 7.8. It is little less
than Blasphemy, to say God calls a man to pray or preach, that can do none of
both; that God calls Drunkards to teach men sobriety, or unclean persons to
teach them chastity, or covetous wretches to teach men hospitality, or
liberality. But yet some may be of more eminent gifts for prayer and preaching;
some may be more eminent in grace, more exemplary in holiness than others. God
has several stations for Ministers; some he sets upon Hills, some he places
in obscure Valleys. And indeed herein the Church, I mean the Rulers and
Governors of a Church, seem to have a great judgment. They shall not judge a
person fit for the Ministry, that is apparently unfit, not being able to
discharge any part of the ministerial work: but they shall judge of the degrees
of persons, gifts and abilities, so as to place persons in stations fit for
them, and as will be best for the edification of the whole. But the caution
which I offer you in this branch of Application, if you well consider it, is of
great use.

1. To restrain the unwarrantable judgment, and censures of less knowing, and
prudent Christians; who are ready to censure good men of weaker parts, and
abilities for the work of praying, and preaching, as no true Ministers, not
called of God to their work. Is the person a man of a holy life, and
conversation? Is he a person able to pray and preach substantially, though it
may be not so fluently, not so floridly as some others, not with that life and
affection, not with that learning and clearness of demonstration? Take heed of
judging in this case, God distributeth his gifts variously, though always to
edification of the whole Church. In his Church there are some Babes, some grown
Persons; some that must be fed with milk, others that must have strong meat.
God qualifieth some to give milk to the Babes, others to give meat to stronger
ones: indeed the wonderful wisdom of God is to be seen in this disproportioning
of his gifts to his several Ministers. We are poor vain creatures, and though
blessed be God! some learned men of great reason, and learning are to be found,
that can deny themselves in their ministerial work, and preach to the capacity
and understanding of poor creatures; yet Quotusquisque est, he is one of a
thousand that we see doing so; we are like Pedlars, that think, we must show
all that is in our Pack, though they be little better than gay baubles; and
confound poor souls, either with our Metaphysical Speculations, or logical
ratiocinations, or with our Rhetorical flourishes. God foresaw this vanity in
our hearts, and has therefore graciously provided, restraining the exhibition
of his gifts, and not giving unto many abilities to do so; that if they would,
they cannot wrap up the plain truths of God in such mysteries of phrase and
reasonings (which are but vain Philosophy), but are forced to speak more
plainly and intelligibly to peoples souls; that their preaching neither is, nor
can be in the enticing words of man's wisdom, nor in the language of men that
are puffed up, but is far more in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit,
and in the power of God, though less in the insignificant wisdom of men.

2. This Caution is useful also to relieve the Consciences of good men, who are
oftentimes troubled under the sense of the disparity and disproportion of
their own gifts and parts, to the gifts and parts of others. I have known it
the case of some. Look as it has been with some Christians, for want of some
gifts, which at best have been but common gifts, such as that of Prayer, they
have been ready to question whether they have any truth of grace, yea or no. So
I have known some precious godly Ministers in their melancholic, dark-hours,
questioning whether they have not all their lifetime invaded the Ministerial
function; whether ever they were called of God to the work of the Ministry,
merely because they have been conscious to themselves, that they have not had
those eminent gifts and parts which they have heard others show. This trouble
is as groundless as the other. God does not give to all his Ministers, the same
proportion of parts and gifts. Indeed to every one whom he calls to the
Ministry he gives such a proportion of gifts as shall qualify them, that they
shall be able both to Pray and Preach, so as not be a just loathing to any
honest hearts. I will never believe that God has called any man to the
Ministry, who cannot without his Book, upon any occasion pray for the people
committed to his trust, or for any of them, according to any particular
occasion offered him; or that cannot Preach. But this is a most unjustifiable
scruple; God does not give gifts alike unto all, no not unto all those whom yet
he calls unto his work.

Use. 4. In the fourth place, This observation may be of great use to relieve
the spirits of the people of God, under the temptations of their own fears;
when God calls them to Relations and works, to which they do not find such a
fitness, as (possibly) they desire to find, and according to the exactness of
the Divine rule ought to be found in persons set in their circumstances. It is
a frequent case, and that, 1. With reference to new Relations. 2 To some new
work, especially where suffering attends it; we often find the spirits of good
people disturbed upon both accounts. Some with reference to their duty in their
relations, they are afraid they should not honor God in the Relations of
Husbands, Wives, Parents, etc. they do not find their spirits suited to it. Some
with reference to suffering, they do not find it is given to them on the behalf
of Christ to suffer. Now in this case truly, I think, two things are to be said.

1. That in such cases, Nothing but sin on the other hand, can oblige such
persons to enter any such relations, or to expose themselves to any work. The
case may be so that a necessity may be laid on Christians to enter such, and
such relations. Thus it may be in the case of public Relations, in the case of
Magistrates and Ministers; oftentimes vox populi is vox Dei, the suffrage of
the people is the voice God: and so in case of more domestic Relations, there
may be a necessity laid upon single persons to marry, to become Husbands,
Wives, Parents, Governors of Families; a necessity from nature, or upon some
moral accounts, which may be diverse, obedience to Parents, the comfortable
support of our selves in the world, etc. and so as to work, there may be a
necessity, the work must be done, there is none to do it, I am the person
pitched upon, either I must do it or none. So in case of suffering, either I
must suffer, or I must sin against God. This is certain, there can be no
necessity of sinning; in this case there is a necessity of suffering. Here the
call of God is plain, necessity imposed upon us is an unquestionable call. But,
I say, supposing no such necessity, but that it is res integra, as we say, we
are not urged by any necessity of sinning, I would have none put themselves
into any relation, nor upon any work, nor expose themselves to any suffering,
but such as find in themselves an inclination to it, and some measure of
habitual preparation, and qualifications for it; and it is that, which if I
remember right, the generality of Divines do determine in the case of
persecution, and the lawfulness of flight in the time of persecution; advising
all, that do not find a spirit within them suited to suffering, to fly from one
City to another, where they can do it under such circumstances, as they shall
not be sinners against God for the doing of it.

But, 2. Where the call of God to them is clear, that is, that they must enter
that Relation, they must do that work, they must expose themselves to that
suffering, or they must do that which their Consciences will condemn them for
as sinners: here is nothing to be done, but for the souls that are concerned to
enter into such Relations, to undertake such work, to expose themselves to such
sufferings; committing themselves unto God, believing that he who has called
them to it, will carry them through it; for the Providence of God does very
ordinarily with a new relation, and new work, give a new spirit. And experience
tells us, that none have gone through a new relation or work, better than those
who at first most dreaded it, and distrusted themselves, and trembled most at
the apprehensions of it. You have seen sometimes a Dog, that being about to
take the water, has stood upon the brink, shaking and trembling, who when he
has been tumbled in, or of himself leaped in, has swame through well enough.
And abundance of instances might be given of such, as when the Providence of
God has called them to suffering, have stood trembling, and been afraid to
venture; who when the Providence of God has thrown them upon the work, and
necessitated them to it, or when (having got a victory over their own fears),
they have adventured upon it, none have behaved themselves, nor been more
valiant in the spiritual fight, than they have been: God has made good his
promise to them. When they have been in the waters, God has been with them;
and when they have been in the fires, God has been with them, and has not
suffered the waters to drown them, nor yet the flames to kindle upon them. It
is but an ordinary motion of Providence to come in to the help and assistance
of, and to fit those for a new work and new relation, whom he has called to
it. Only be sure that in case you find a reluctance in your own spirits, and
you cannot see your call from Gods fitting you, and spiriting you for your
relation, or for your work; that you see your call from a necessity, which the
Providence of God has imposed on you, that you cannot avoid it without sinning
against God.

Use 5. In the last place, Does God ordinarily suit men whom he calls to any
new work, or new relation, with a spirit suited to their new capacity? This
should engage all men then to co-work with God, using such means as have any
natural, moral, or religious tendency, to fit them for the discharge of the
trust which God has reposed in them, or the work to which God has called
them. Our relations and works are very various and different, and accordingly
there is a great difference of means to be used for the improvement of our
selves into a capacity to do the duty of our places. It cannot be expected that
I should speak to all, some I will shortly speak unto. Shall God call you, or
any of you to the place of a Magistrate? That now is a place and relation, the
fitting of a person for which requires Knowledge, Wisdom, Courage. You have
heard that when God calls any person to a place, he usually fitteth them with
a spirit for it, as he gave unto Saul another spirit (the Scripture says) a
spirit quite different from what he had when he was a private person. But you
are not now to expect this in a way of Enthusiasm, but in the use of means,
reading books, gaining of knowledge, endeavoring to bridle such passions as
become no man, but are least of all beseeming Magistrates. Courage indeed is a
thing that is hardly got by art, though natural courage be governed and
regulated by it; and often is given by God more immediately, when any whom he
has called to any new relation, has more especial need of it. But above all,
remember the course that Solomon took, when God appeared unto him in Gibeon
(upon his taking upon him the government of Israel and Judah): He prays unto
God, that he would give him a wise and an understanding heart, to judge his
people. O forget not this, has God called thee to be a Magistrate? and do
thou distrust thy self, lest thou should fail in Wisdom, or in Courage, as to
the work of God which in that relation will lie upon thy soul? Remember what
God said in some anger to Moses, excusing himself from what God had called him
to, to go into Pharaoh to speak for the dismission of his people; and Moses
excused himself, saying, Exodus 4.20. O Lord, I am not eloquent, neither
heretofore, nor since thou have spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of
speech, and of a slow tongue; and the Lord said unto him, verse. 11. Who has
made man's mouth? or who makes the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind?
Have not I (says the Lord)? Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth,
and teach thee what thou shall say. Remember that and go, and beg of God to
supply unto thee, what thou find wanting in thy self, beg Wisdom of that
God, who is only wise, and courage of that God who gives courage unto man.
Has God called thee to the work of the Ministry? and though thou dare not
say, but God has in some measure fitted thee for it; yet thou feast thou art
far short of others, far short of what thou conceivest thou ought to be. I
have told thee that God uses with his call to a new work, to a new relation,
to give a new spirit; but it is thy work and duty here to work together with
God. Thus the Apostle exhorts Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12, 13, 14. Be thou an
example of believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in
purity; till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine,
neglect not the gift which was given thee by prophecy, etc. Meditate upon these
things, give thy self wholly to them. Art thou called to be a Minister? Stir
up, neglect not the gift of God which is in thee; study, meditate of these
things. There are means to be used for thy improvement in thy ministerial
abilities: Natural means, that is, exercise; by preaching, thou shall learn to
preach, and by praying thou shall improve in the gift of prayer: Moral means,
these are searching the Scriptures, study, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual, Meditation: Religious, that is, Prayer. The Apostle says of the
work of the Ministry, Who is sufficient for these things? Whatsoever thy gifts
and abilities be, thou had need profit and improve in them. If thou will
improve them, and obtain the blessing from God of a further fitting thee for
the work to which thou art called, it lies upon thee to use such means as God
has appointed in order to that end. Luther was wont to say, that there are
three things which make a Divine, Temptations, Meditation, and Prayer; the two
latter I am sure must be much our own work; we must not expect that God should
immediately qualify us from Heaven, as he did in the first Plantation of the
Gospel, by the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost. God having so supplied
the first necessities of his Church, when the generality of the first Preachers
of the Gospel were illiterate men, and wanted advantages of education (which
then lay on the other side), has since that time left his Ministers to the use
and application of more ordinary means, in the use of which he ordinarily
concurreth with his blessing, and not otherwise. The same might be said of more
inferior relations, such as those of conjugal and parental relations. God
ordinarily when he calls men to them, does suit men with spirits fit for
them; but the concurrence of their own endeavors must be understood, with
which God will concur with his own blessing. Art thou therefore called to the
relation of an husband or wife? and do thou fear thy own spirit (the like
also may be said of a parental relation)? Having entered into it, asking counsel
of Gods Word, and observing the rules of it, thou have reason to trust God for
the fitting of thy spirit for it, and the duties of it; but still using all due
means, which on thy part are to be used, such as the mortification of those
passions which appear to thee most indisposing thee for the duties of such
relations, applying thine heart, what in thee lies, to them, and constant and
fervent prayer to God to make up in thee, what thou find wanting in thy self
for the due managery of them according to the Will of God.

SERMON XXXIV.
Psalm CVII. 43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these things: even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
I Have entered into a large field. How great a Volume might be wrote, de
observandis Providentiae, concerning the observable things of Divine
Providence. I have seen a picture (one of those you call kitchin-pieces)
concerning which it has been proposed to me, that for so many hours I should
view it as curiously as I could; yet the proposer would for any wager undertake
to show me something in it which I did not observe. Truly Providence is such a
thing, I can never look upon it, I can never take the motions of it into my
thoughts, but some new observation tendreth it self to my thoughts. I must turn
my eyes from this wonderful work, for I see they will not be satisfied with
seeing, my mind will never be filled with observing. Many observations I have
already made, and behold yet a troop comes. But they have all a tendency to
the augmentation of spiritual Wisdom in my own, and your souls. Whosoever is wise,
will observe these things (says my Text) they have a tendency to make you to
understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Where can we be better employed?
what can we better do? Methinks I could say with the disciple upon the Mount of
transfiguration: It is good for us to be here, let us build our selves
tabernacles: One for me the speaker, others for you that are to be my hearers.
Let me therefore go on. Does therefore any of you say unto me, Seer, What see
thou? I answer, yet once more. I observe in the motions of Actual Providence,

Observe. 21. That God commands his sensible blessings most upon those
individual persons, and those societies of the children of men, that live in
the most exact conformity to the Divine Rule. Here are two terms in this
Observation, upon the Explication of which I will a little insist.

Quest. 1. What is meant by sensible blessings?

Quest. 2. What I mean by the most exact conformity to the Divine Rule?

Good things are distributed several ways, in order to our comprehension of
them by our understandings: amongst others this is one distribution of them,
they are either sensible, or insensible. By sensible good things, I understand
such as are obvious to our senses, and perceptible by them. By insensible, such
as have a reality of good in them, but yet not such as our senses discern. Thus
David says, It is good for me that I have been afflicted, but yet afflictions
are not sensible good things: all such are the objects of our joy and delight.
Now (says the Apostle) no affliction at the present is joyous, but grievous,
but it brings forth the quiet fruit of righteousness, to them that are
exercised therewith. But I say God commands sensible blessings mostly, upon
persons and societies living in the best square, and most exact conformity unto
the Divine Rule.

2. Further yet, Sensible blessings are capable of a double notion, they are
either such as are obvious only to the inward senses of those that are made
partakers of them: such are peace of conscience, joy in the holy God; that
serenity and tranquillity of mind, which is the effect of righteousness, the
new-name which none knows, but he that has it: but there are other good
things, which are the objects of our more exterior senses; such are health,
prosperity, success in trade, etc. blessings in relations, etc. Now my
Obsersation is, That the Actual Providence of God does usually distribute good
things of this nature, to such persons, and such societies of persons as live
to the truest square, and exactest conformity to the Divine Rule.

That is a general, and must be opened also. The Divine Rule, as to families
and persons, is of a great compass, but the whole of it is reducible to three
heads: viz. Piety, Justice, and Charity; under each of these are several
particulars, but none which fall not under one of these generals.

1. Piety consists in the internal, and external acts of homage which we owe
unto God. Our internal acts are, Fear, Faith, Love. Our external acts are
principally Prayer and Praise, reading the word, etc.

2. Justice is an habit, disposing us to give every one their due.

3. By Charity, I mean here mutual brotherly love. Now look where these things
best prosper, there God commands most sensible blessings in the ordinary
motions of his Provilence. Particular instances may be exceptions from a
general rule: but ordinarily it is so. What the Psalmist says of one of these,
is true of all, There God commands the blessing, Psalm. 133.3. There, where?
it may be interpreted with reference to the words, which immediately precedes,
the mountain of Zion; but I take it to be far more proper to refer it to the
first verse, which contains the argument of the whole Psalm: O (says the
Psalmist) how good, and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity! This he illustrateth by two similitudes; the one is the oil
which was poured upon the head of Aaron, and ran down to the skirts of his
garment. Verse. 2. The other is the dew of Hermon, that descended on the
mountain of Zion, for (says the Psalmist) there the Lord commands the
blessing, even life for evermore. There, where? where brethren together dwell
in unity: it is as true, there, where Religion is exercised, where all
relations give their due one to another: there God commands the blessing. Now
for the proof of this, I shall but appeal to your experience, and what you see
every day.

1. Look into the world, there you shall see nations of various complexions,
some in which the true God is worshipped in a true manner; others wherein
Devils are worshipped, or stocks or stones: or if the true God be indeed
worshipped, yet it is not as he has directed, but by images and superstitious
rites and observances; some nations that are nothing else but rapine and
violence, and oppression, full of strife and hatred, and malice, and wars, and
dissensions. You on the other side will see other Nations, amongst whom the
true God is worshipped, and that in a true manner, where are good laws against
oppression and injustice, and for distributive and commutative Justice, where
men are not hunted and persecuted for their consciences toward God. Mark if
God does not command the blessing of riches, trade, etc. more upon the latter
than the former. It is true, some of those Countries where these iniquities are
found, are naturally richer than others, in minerals, and the Native
Commodities of the Country; but for adventitious riches, which come from Trade
and Commerce, and for other sensible blessings, observe if they be not poured
out in a greater plenty upon Nations, that in matters of Religion, civil
Justice and Unity, have been regulated by laws conformable to the Word of God,
than upon other Nations, where none of these things have been regarded.

2. If you will straiten your prospect, look upon any Cities, or Towns, or any
kind of political societies, you will see some of these places, such as Egypt
was, of which Abraham said, The fear of God was not in that place, where all
their Religion is to persecute those that have any thing of Religion in them.
No rules of justice and brotherly love are observed, but they are full of
violence, and oppression, and fraud; there is nothing in them but the
inhabitants biting and devouring one another, the cry of the oppressed is in
their street. Other places you will find, where Religion is cherished and
countenanced; where the word of God is livelily and powerfully preached, and
men live in some seeming awe of it; where rules of civil Justice are observed,
and men can have Justice in Courts of Judicature, and the people live in peace
and amity one with another; observe again which of these God most commands
his blessing upon. I might appeal to your like observation, concerning families
and particular persons. But it is no more than every one may observe. Consider
what an Hell upon Earth, some Cities, some Families are in comparison of
others, and see what makes the difference both in the beauty and in the
prosperity of them: And it needs must be so, if you please to consider,

1. The natural tendency of these things to so happy products.

2. That God in pursuance of his many promises, does there command the blessing.

First, In the first place it will appear to be but a reasonable motion of
Providence, there to distribute sensible blessings, where men either in their
single capacities, or in their political societies live in the exactest square
and conformity to the Divine Rule, in matters of distributive and commutative
justice, and brotherly love and amity; if you but consider the natural tendency
of these things to promove the felicity of any persons or societies, together
with the direct tendency of a contrary converse to the ruin and undoing of
them. Justice and Unity, or amicable living each with other, are the two
pillars of humane society, as the Scripture says of Rachel and Leah, Ruth.
4.11. They two did build up the house of Israel: so it must be said of these
two, Justice and brotherly love, they are the two things which build up humane
society; and the Nation which keeps not up these two pillars, and preserves
them not in those due repairs, which the lusts and corruptions of men will make
them to stand in a daily need of, will quickly fall under the ruins of them; it
must necessarily be a Kingdom divided against it self, which (as our Savior
has told us) cannot stand. Where the first, viz. Justice fails, no man
knows what to call his own; every man's estate is exposed to the fraud,
violence, and rapines of his wicked neighbor. Where Amity and Unity (which is
the other) fails, men are continually biting, and devouring, rending, and
tearing one another; none are willing to trade or traffic, or to have any
commerce with any such people; or if they have, it is so sparingly, and with so
much caution, as is no way consistent with that liberty and freedom, and that
mutual confidence each in another, which such a state requires, as is capable
of those kind of blessings, or in a rational or probable way to receive them.
You cannot but observe how every one is willing to be acquainted, and to deal
with persons that have a reputation; for moral honesty and matters of justice
in bargains, and barters, in buyings and sellings, and exchange. Now the
outward blessing of riches and prosperity, as to business, depending much upon
society, good understandings betwixt each of other, and good opinions of
persons engaged in the same societies, which may dispose men to just and mutual
confidences each in other; it is not at all to be wondered at, if those places
and persons thrive best, amongst whom these are found which are the rational
means agreeing to such an end. The like might be said of other moral virtues,
such as are temperance and sobriety, being rational means, tending to the
preservation of men's lives and health, which are other sensible blessings. It
is not at all to be wondered, that these blessings which are the end, do
naturally follow the proper means, even as the thread follows the needle in
the hands of the sempstress. God has so ordered it, that ends shall be
ordinarily obtained in the use of means, always supposing the ordinary
Providence of God, which must give the blessing upon any means used in order to
any end.

2. But secondly, There is more than this in it, God in the pursuance of his
many promises, does there command the blessing. I am speaking of ordinary cases
(for Gods particular design to chasten any persons, or to try them, makes an
exception to these however general rules), God has promised his sensible
things, Matthew. 6.32. To those who first seek the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, he has told them, that these things shall be added to
them. Godliness has the promise as of that life which is to come; so of this
life (as the Apostle tells us): the promise to brethren living together in
unity, Psalm. 133. you heard before, there God commands the blessing (says
the Psalmist); and (mark) what blessing it is, it is like the oil poured upon
the head of Aaron, which ran down to the skirts of his garment, like the dew
upon the hill of Hermon, which made the Earth fruitful, the blessing of plenty
and prosperity. And for promises to the doing justice and judgm^nt, they are so
many in Scripture, that it were almost infinite to repeat them. I shall only
commend this observation to you, That you shall quite through the Scripture
find the execution of justice and judgment, made one term that God puts upon
people, in order to the receiving of any mercy from him, and injustice,
violence, and oppression, constantly enumerated as those sins, to which are
annexed all the threatenings of taking away those temporal blessings which a
Nation does enjoy. Indeed, unless profaneness and irreligion, or idolatrous
and undue worship of God, almost all the sins for which you find threatenings of
the deprival of temporal sensible blessings are reducible to one of these
heads, either being failers in matters of civil justice, or of that brotherly
love and amity which God has required. So that this is as a very ordinary, so
a most reasonable motion of Divine Providence, and what we cannot but in reason
expect from its hand. But I come to the Application of this discourse.

Use 1. As my other Observations, so this also is of great use to us, to
increase in us spiritual wisdom, and to make us understand the loving kindness
of the Lord.

1. To increase in us spiritual wisdom. Wisdom is a practical habit, disposing
us to order our affairs in the best manner, in order to our own good. Good is
that which every man desires; who will show us any good, is the general
language of the world. There be many (says the Psalmist) that say, Who will
show us any good? And though the hearts of Gods People be after spiritual good,
Lord (says David) lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me: yet this
is not that good which the many look after, but the increase of their corn, and
wine, and oil. We will take men at that advantage, and suppose the question to
be what course a man should take to be blessed with corn, wine and oil, with
the good things of this life, long life, riches, trade, success in worldly
affairs: if this observation be true, the best course, is for Nations, Cities,
Persons to govern themselves, by the Divine Rule, to set up and promove the
profession and practice of Religion; to execute justice and judgment, to live
in brotherly love, unity and amity one with another. Whosoever therefore would be
wise for himself, according to the worlds measures of wisdom, is obliged to
this: hence it is that in Scripture, and especially in the book of Proverbs,
the sinner is called a fool, the godly man is counted a wise man; and the truth
is, whether persons consider themselves, as beings ordained to an eternity, or
merely as flesh and blood, and bodily compositions, who (as is natural to all
creatures) have a natural desire to live, as long as they can, and as free from
pain and misery as they can, and with as many sweetnesses, and advantage of
life as they can, I say, which way soever men will consider themselves, or
whatsoever they will place their ultimate felicity in; whether it be in the
enjoyment and vision of God to eternity, or in living long, and happy; Still it
is their highest wisdom, both in their personal capacities, and in their
relative capacities, as they stand related to others in their political, or
oeconomical relations, as Princes, Subjects, Husbands, Wives, Parents,
Children, Masters or Servants, to govern them according to the rules, and by
the square of the word of God. Now the observation, I say, of these ordinary
dispositions of Divine Providence, must therefore be exceedingly conducive to
the increase of spiritual wisdom in our souls.

2. This Observation will also teach us, to understand the loving kindness of
the Lord. The glory of God is by all Christians, confessedly, the end of man's
creation, and ought to be made the end of his action; but herein appears the
transcendent goodness of God, That no man can act for his glory, but he must
also by the same actions consult his own good, and be wise for himself. So that
in truth there is no man serves God for nothing, but in the same action, by,
and in which he obeys God, he also consulteth his own life, health, riches,
success in business, and whatsoever can contribute, not only to his eternal
felicity, but to his felicity, and happiness in this life. Now how wonderfully
does this speak the love of God to the children of men? Every man's reason will
tell him, that there is a duty of homage, and honor which is due from man unto
God. God is our Creator, we are his creatures. In him we live, move and have
our being, and equally depend upon him for our preservation, and sustentation
from his Providence, as derive from him as our Creator and the first Author of
beings to us. Now as it is in the power of any man in the cause, to prescribe
the honor and homage which shall be grateful and acceptable to him; so
undoubtedly it was in the power of God, and free to him, to have prescribed us
an homage and service that should have impeached, and prejudiced, or some way
disadvantaged us, as to our external felicity, and the accommodations of this
life, which should make it sweet to us. But in this see the great loving
kindness of the Lord, That no man can possibly at more advantage serve himself,
and the good of his Family, or City, or Country, than by serving God, and
endeavoring to square his whole converse, to the rule of Gods word; governing
himself by the Scriptures, and the rules of life which it gives: nor does God
require any thing of us that is ungrateful to that true Reason which is in
every man. All the commands of God, do but pinch us in the exercise of our
Lusts and Passions: the exercise of which (if they have their liberty, and were
not by a Divine Law restrained,) would have no better an effect, from their
natural tendency than the imbittering of our lives, by aches and pains, and
grievous diseases; by the rebellion, crosness, and undutifulness of our
relations; by a liberty to injustice, fraud, deceit, and oppression. This is a
great demonstration of Gods loving kindness, that in his rules for the
government of us, he has twisted our interest with his own, and made it
necessary, for those who most consult his honor and glory, most to consult
their own good and happiness, and that not only as to a life to come, but as to
this life also.

Use 2. We may learn from hence the true reason, why the most of men are cursed
with the want of temporal blessings; I say the most of men, for what I told you
before must be remembered; that from these general rules, we must always except
those particular causes, where God either for the punishment of some sins in
his people, or for the trial of their faith and patience, (having reserved a
better portion for them in the world to come) does think fit to exercise them,
with the denial of the sensible blessings of this life. But setting aside those
cases, the general cause is, their not living up to that conformity, or square,
to the Divine rule to which they ought to live; but either failing in the
duties of piety, and exercise of Religion, to which the Divine law binds
them, or in the duties of probity and moral honesty, justice, temperance,
sobriety, unity and amity, which the same Law does require of them. What wonder
is it to see the lazy sluggard poor? Has not God said to him, Prove. 6.9. How
long will thou sleep, O sluggard, when will thou arise out of sleep? v. 11. So
shall thy poverty come, as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man.
Or to see Oppressors, and Gripers of their neighbour-poor: God has told them,
Prove. 10.15. The destruction of the poor is their poverty. Or to see the
penurious man grow poor; has not God told us, That to withhold more than is
meet tends to poverty, Prove. 11.24? What wonder is it to see Drunkards, and
Gluttons poor? Has not God said, The Drunkard and Glutton shall come to
poverty, and drousiness shall cloth a man with rags, Prove. 23.21? what wonder
is it to see those that are companions of lewd persons, drunkards, adulterers,
Gamesters, etc. grow poor? Has not God again said, Prove. 28.19. That he who
follows after vain persons shall have poverty enough? O Israel (says God by
the Prophet Hoseah) Thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. Hos.
13.9. it is true as to men's eternal ruin, but the Prophet there primarily
speaks of men's destroying themselves, by being the causes of punishments in
this life to themselves: men destroy their own lives, healths, bodies, by
drunkenness, gluttony, uncleanness; their estates by sloth and luxury, the
comforts of their own lives, by giving an unbridled liberty to their lusts, and
passions, indulging the lustings of their flesh. The righteous God is not to be
accused for any of these things. He has given men a righteous law, which to
their reason approves it self to be holy, spiritual, just, and good, but they
are carnal, sold unto sin, slaves to their appetites, to their sensual
faculties; and either ruin themselves by their irreligious, or immoral
behaviors, and doing those things over, which if God had not by his severe
threatenings in his word, hung a sword of Divine Vengeance; yet in themselves,
and of their own nature they have a tendency to destroy life, health, to wast
and consume estates, and to deprive them of all those good things which may
accommodate their lives, and make them sweet, and pleasant to them: and in the
day of their affliction they must lay the fault upon themselves, and excuse God
in the motions of his Providence, acknowledging that it has but fulfilled his
word, and brought to pass the just threatenings of his word; nay not so only,
but that it has only brought natural things to pass in a natural order, and by
natural ways and means; suffering poor sinful wretches, to walk in their own
ways, and then penally producing the effects, the natural and proper effects of
such courses, and giving them the fruit of their own doings, filling them with
their own ways, and with that calamity and misery, which they like foolish
people have pulled down upon their own heads, and could reasonably expect no
other issue than what they meet with.

Use 3. In the last place, how does this call upon all men after the example of
holy David to make the word of God a lamp unto their feet, and a light unto
their paths? Not to be conformed to the world, but transformed through the
renewing of their minds, that they may prove what is the good, and acceptable,
and perfect will of God, Romans 12.2. You remember I reduced the whole will of
God concerning us to three heads: indeed two comprehend all, 1. Piety toward
God. 2. Probity or honesty of conversation before men; now that last
comprehends all acts of justice, and charity, or kindness and Brotherly love.

1. Let Magistrates command their Subjects, Masters of Families command their
Eamilies the fear of the Lord; and set examples of Religion before them; let
them give people liberty to serve and worship God, and exhort and encourage
them to do so. Let them restrain irreligion, and profaneness; observe if those
Nations, those Towns and Cities, those Families do not most thrive, amongst
whom God is most strictly served and worshipped; if in those places where there
is least of Religion, there be not also most beggary and poverty, like an armed
man rushing in upon them. Hark what Solomon says, Prove. 3.13. Happy is the man
that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding. v. 16. Length of
days is in her right hand, and in her left riches and honor.

2. Let every one maintain justice and judgment, giving to every one their
due, according to the capacities in which they are: Magistrates truly dispense
distributive justice, giving out rewards to good men, and inflicting
punishments upon evil men, according to their merits; discountenancing all
violence and oppression, all luxury, and intemperance; in short, all manner of
sin, and debauchery. Let private persons give their due to their Superiors,
their Inferiors and Equals: for what is that which God requires, but to deal
justly? Let them be just in their dealigns one with another, not cozening, and
cheating, and defrauding one another.

3. Finally, Let all men according to the Apostles exhortation, study to be
quiet, to forbear biting, and devouring one another; and endeavor to live
peaceably and at unity, following peace with all men, and doing what good
offices lie in their power each to another, according to the command of God.
All these things now have promises of spiritual blessings, and eternal
happiness of a life to come; but if that be too far off, for men who have not
faith, to be affected with, and moved by; there are, you see, other promises to
encourage these things, even promises of sensible goods, length of days, riches
and honor, and whatsoever our sensitive appetite desires, and calls good, as
grateful, and acceptable to it. Mal. 3.10. Bring you (says God) all the tithes
into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in my House; and prove me now
herewith (says the Lord of hosts): If I will not open unto you the windows of
Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room to receive
it; and I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the
fruits of the ground, neither shall the vine cast her fruit, before the time,
in the field (says the Lord of hosts). The Prophet there mentions but one
thing, not robbing God of his tithes, but certainly it is to be understood
synecdochically.

We may certainly (by warrant of that Text) speak to all people, all families,
all persons. Worship God, set up the practice of Religion in all your
Societies; do justly, study peace and amity one with another, and try God
herewith, if he will not open to you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a
blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. We complain that
poverty is breaking in upon us, like an armed man; Trade fails, Estates
waste, men everywhere come to beggary. We must lay all the fault upon our
selves; God is not altered in the course of his Providence; the change is in
us. The world as to matters of justice, is grown but one great cheat: every one
studies by violence to oppress his neighbor, the greater devours the less,
like the fish in the Sea: men in their Trades and dealings, do but study to
circumvent one another, and to go beyond them in buyings and sellings, and
bargains and exchanges. Men are grown generally like Ishmaelites, every man's
tongue and hand is against his Brother, and his Brother's is against him again.
God never commanded a blessing upon any part of the world that was of such a
complexion. Let me conclude all with the Apostles words, 1 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12.
He has been persuading in that Chapter, the relative duties of Wives, and
Husbands, in the seven first verses; verse. 8. he speaks more generally,
Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another; love as
brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing, etc. Now mark the Argument he uses, verse. 10. For he that will love
life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips,
that they speak no guile: let him eschew evil and do good; let him seek peace,
and ensue it; for the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous and his ears are
open unto their cry; but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil. And
this is demonstrated by the frowns of his Providence upon them. The Apostle
takes this out of Psalm. 34. So that you see it is the Doctrine of both
Testaments, and what you shall observe, God confirming every day in the issues
of his Providence daily fulfilling his word. But I shall add no more upon this
Observation, and also here shut up my discourses upon the Observanda
Providentiae. And hereafter pass on to the last part of my intended Discourse,
concerning the (...), the difficult things of Divine Providence; in the motions
of which, it is true which the Apostle says of Paul's Epistles, there are many
hard things, difficult to be understood, which ignorant and unstable persons
are very prone to wrest to their own destruction: to prevent which, God
willing, I shall attempt something in my succeeding Discourses upon this
Argument.

A DISCOURSE Concerning DIVINE PROVIDENCE.
PART. III. Goncerning the difficult things of Divine Providence.
Galat. III. 22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin: that the
promise by faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.
I Am now come to the last part of my designed Discourse. In my first, I
asserted the Doctrine of Divine Providence, against ancient and modern
Atheists. I opened it in the nature and principal Acts of it. In the Second, I
1. showed you the specialties of it. 2. Wherein you must stand still, and
admire it in the depths, and unsearchable things of it. 3. I directed you how
to make some observations upon the more ordinary and intelligible motions of
it. I am now come to open some hard Chapters, in this great and excellent book;
and to reconcile this great work of God, to his most holy nuture, and that
infinite justice goodness, wisdom and truth, which are inseparable from it. I
take it to be a work worthy of a Divine, to make a rationale divinorum operum;
to give a reasonable account of the Divine works, humbly adoring God in them,
yet inquiring into them, and that, non tam ad mentis otium, quam ad cordis usum
(as Nierembergius says) not so much for the exercise of our wits, as for the
use of our souls. It advantageth the works of God to our souls, when they
appear no other than reasonable to us; and I think the same Author speaks
well, when he says, Nullum puto consilium Divinum, cujus non aliqua ratio
reddi potest, nullum cujus omnis reddatur, ita and inscrutabilia sunt divina
opera, and digna ut scrutemur, and facilia; that is, I do not think any Divine
Counsel can be named, of which we may not give some reasonable account, though
there be likewise none, of which we can give a perfect account; so as the
Divine works, are at the same time both unsearchable, and also worthy and
easy, to be searched out. I shall not so much as propound to my self or you,
to resolve all the seeming riddles and difficulties of Actual Providence. I
shall only discourse some of them, which seem most obvious, and readiest to
stumble our thoughts; and those which I shall speak to, shall chiefly refer to
these heads.

1. The exhibition of the Covenant of works, after the establishment of the
Eternal Covenant of Redemption and Grace; and the exhibition or tender of grace
indefinitely to all, after the decree of election, and the fall of man.

2. The permission of sin, and so much sin in the world.

3. The punitive Providence of God.

4. The dispensation of the external, or internal and more effectual means of
grace.

I shall speak to diverse seeming difficulties, that will fall under these four
heads; and at this time begin with the first of these.

It was one of the first acts of Divine Providence that we read of, immediately
succeeding the creation. Genesis 2.15. And the Lord God took the man, and put him
into the garden of Eden to dress it, and to keep it; and the Lord God commanded
the man, saying, of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat, but of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil; for in the day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely dye. Under that threatening is a promise of life, upon condition of
obedience, as to the Law of God written in Adams heart. So to that positive Law
given him for the trial of his obedience. I shall not engage my self deeply in
the question, what death it is which God there threatens to Adam. I am aware
of the varieties of opinions: I take it for granted, that whatsoever falls
under the notion of death in Scripture is all comprehended under that
threatening, In dying thou shall dye (says the Hebrew phrase), which we
translate, Thou shall surely dye. The threatening mentions neither one death
nor another, but is indefinite, and of the same force, as if universal, and it
is accordingly used in Scripture, to signify all kind of death, as Ezekiel. 18.
and in many other places, and out of doubt there falls under that threatening
whatsoever was contrary to the felicity of Adam in that estate. I do therefore
agree with the ancient and modern Divines, who understand death, Corporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal, there threatened in case of disobedience, and life,
Corporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, there promised in case of obedience. Now
hence arises a great difficulty, there were two great Acts of God, with
relation to man, passed before this Act of Providence. 1. The decree of
Election, by which God had not only stated the number of those that should be
saved, but chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.6. 2.
The eternal Covenant of Redemption and Grace. By which the salvation of man was
settled, to be obtained not by working, but by believing in him that justifies
the ungodly; that is, not to be obtained by the merits of our own works, but by
the merits of Christ, imputed to us for righteousness, and to be by faith
apprehended and applied. Now here arises the difficulty.

Quest. How it could consist with the wisdom and truth of God, having thus in
his eternal counsels resolved, that there should be no other name under heaven,
no other way or means of salvation, but by believing in the Lord Jesus Christ,
to propound a way of salvation to be obtained by men's working and obedience to
the Law of God, especially when he did aforeknow that man would break this
first Covenant, and no man should be saved upon the terms of it. That I might
speak something to show you the reasonableness of this motion I have made
choice of this Text, in which you have,

1. An assertion. The Scripture has concluded all under wrath.

2. The end or reason of the thing asserted, That the promise by faith in Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe. A text much parallel to that, Romans
11.32. He has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.
This Text says, the Scripture has done it; that text says, God has done it,
there is no contradiction in it, the Scriptures are the word of God; if the
Scripture has concluded all under wrath, God has done it. Now how has the
Scripture done this? or how has God done it, but by first making man in his
own image, writing his law in his heart; then adding that positive law,
forbidding him to eat of the tree of forbidden fruit; after this suffering him
to eat, by which not Adam only, but all mankind (then in him) lost the Image of
God, and all were concluded under sin: and to what purpose was all this? The
text tells us, That the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to
all that believe. If you please, I shall make my whole discourse, but a
demonstration of this Proposition.

Prop. That God in infinite wisdom, by his Providence gave out the Law or
Covenant of works, suffering the first man to fall; and all (in him) by the
fall, to be concluded under wrath. My business must be to show you the
exceeding reasonableness and wisdom of God in this dispensation. I shall open
this to you in five or six particulars.

1. It neither was, nor could be Gods design in it, that any one soul should be
saved by the fulfilling of it, but that he might by it make way for the
exhibition of the Covenant of Grace, which is indeed what the text says, That
the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. It is
manifest that it was never any part of Gods design and counsel in his first
exhibiting the Covenant of Works (or making it rather, for that was made
immediately betwixt God and Adam in paradise), that any soul should be saved by
it, for as to this the Apostles words are true, Gal. 3.21. If there had been a
law, which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the
law. The Apostle in that text may be speaking of the law given to man in his
lapsed estate; but I say it is as true concerning the law given in the estate
of innocence. But why could not the law give righteousness? As to our lapsed
estate the Apostle tells you, Romans 8.3. Because it was made weak through our
flesh. But this cannot be said of man in his estate of innocence and original
integrity, he then certainly had a posse non peccare; but then the eternal
Counsel of God hindered, who had fixed the salvation of man upon another foot,
having from eternity set apart the son of his love, for the head of his elect,
and chosen us in him, and ordained man's salvation by faith in him. The law
given in innocence, in respect of it self might have given life, what should
have hindered? Eternal life was then the gift of God, and God had annexed the
promise of it to man's obedience; but it is as true, that if we respect the
eternal Counsels of God, having fore ordained men to salvation upon a Covenant
of grace made with the Son of his love; even that law could not give life, it
was not consistent with our being chosen in Christ. In short, the power in the
law to give life, may be considered in a threefold habitude or respect.

1. With respect to the law it self. Thus the law could have given life, if man
had kept it; the law given to Adam could in this sense have given life, the law
afterward upon Mount Sinai could have in this respect have given life. If thou will enter into life (says our Savior) keep the Commandments. As to our
lapsed estate, the Apostle says no more than, that it is weak through our
flesh; that is, because we are not able to keep it; or else, secondly,

2. The law may be considered with respect unto man; and he is considerable,
either in his primitive state of innocence, or in his lapsed estate: if we
consider man in the first estate, the law again might have given life; for it
was the perfect rule of God at that time concerning man, and man had a power to
keep it so, as nothing hindered, but that the law might have given life: but
indeed if we consider man in his lapsed estate, the case is quite otherwise;
for man was now made weak through his flesh, and unable to keep that law, which
yet approved it self to his reason in that state, as holy, spiritual, just, and
good.

3. But (thirdly) the law may be considered in its power to give life, with
respect to Gods counsels and purposes, fixed concerning the end and means of
man's salvation from all eternity; and so the law never had a power to give
life, that is, it never was any ordination of God in order to such an end, nor
ever was designed by God as an effectual means in order to that end: nor indeed
is it possible that it should, for then it had been possible that the counsel
of God could have been frustrated of its intendment, for never yet was any
saved by any works of their own: But the giving of the law to man in innocence,
was not, nor could be intended by God further than as a proper mean for the
exhibition of the Covenant of Grace: and for this it was so proper, that upon
this Hypothesis, that the elect were (as the Apostle says) chosen in Christ
before the foundation of the world, and that a Covenant of Grace, was made for
men's salvation through faith, and believing in Christ; yet it is very difficult
to imagine how the Providence of God could have brought this about otherwise,
than by first making a Covenant of Works with man, then suffering him to fall
and violate it, and so be concluded under sin and wrath; I say it is hard to
imagine, how otherwise God could have given out the promise to them that should
believe in Jesus Christ. This I shall yet further open to you in five or six
particulars. To this end I shall entreat you to consider,

1. That man was created in a state of innocence. The Scripture says so, that
in the image of God he created man, and that is expounded to us by the Apostle,
to have been in knowledge, righteousness, and holiness; and indeed it was
impossible, that he should come out of the hands of God, other than holy and
righteous. Divines say, the Image of God lay in Righteousness and Holiness, and
that dominion over the Creatures, with which God invested him: the last indeed
was not necessary, but coming immediately out of the hands of an holy God, it
was necessary that he should be created in righteousness and holiness. God saw
all that he had made that it was good, good according to the nature. Every
inanimate and sensitive creature had a goodness suitable to its nature, a
natural goodness; man must also have a goodness suitable to his being, and
considering him a rational creature, he must have a moral goodness, a purity,
and integrity, a freedom from any spots or stains of sin, and so
consequentially from any guilt of sin. God made man upright: this is a
confessed principle, and needs no further enlargement of discourse.

2. Man in this state was not capable of salvation in that way wherein God had
foreordained the salvation of men, viz. by a Redeemer: the whole need not a
physician, but the sick; men must be lost, before they are found; they must be
captives, before they are capable of Redemption; they must be unrighteous,
before they can be capable of a bring made righteous. Christ came not (as
himself tells us) to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

3. Man could no other way become lost, than by some actual transgression: The
first man could have no original guiltiness. We are guilty by imputation, as we
were all in the first man, and sinned in him, and sell with him; but Adam being
the first man, could derive no guilt from any proparent. We become guilty by
traduction, deriving guilt from our immediate parents: we were conceived in
sin, and in iniquity did our mother bring us forth, and so we were by nature
the children of wrath. But Adam came immediately out of the hands of God, and
therefore must necessarily be without spot or wrinkle.

4. From hence follows in the fourth place, the necessity of a law to be
given unto man in his state of innocence: For (says the Apostle) where there
is no law, there is no transgression, sin being the transgression of the law.
Now this Law, with the promise annexed to it, was the Covenant of Works on Gods
part; and the restipulation on man's part must be presumed, or man had been a
transgressor before the fall, by a rebellion to the Divine Will: and this
formally makes up the Covenant of Works, God promising him life upon condition
of his Obedience, and man accepting the promise, and agreeing to the terms, or
condition of life imposed on him. Now God having given this Law, and made this
Covenant, man by the violation of it became guilty, a debtor to the Justice of
God, and so capable of a Redemption, a Remission, and Justification.

5. I desire you to consider, That the Covenant of Grace, and promise by faith
on Gods part, could not possibly have been made good, without the destruction
of the first Covenant of Works, and the promise of life made upon that: this is
that which the Apostle says in my text, That the promise by faith of Jesus
might be given to them that believe. I pray observe, here are three things to
be considered, 1. The matter of the promise. 2. The means by which the promise
is to be obtained. 3. The objects of it. The promise intended, is doubtless the
promise of eternal life; so often called in Scripture, (as being indeed the
great and most valuable promise), what is the means of obtaining it? On Gods
part it must be given out, on man's part it must be received by faith, for it is
given to them that believe, and it is therefore called the promise by faith in
Jesus Christ. Now the promise of life by works, under the first Covenant, was
wholly inconsistent with this promise of being saved by faith in Christ. Though
the first Covenant comprehended a faith in God, as being a piece of that
internal homage, which every soul owes to God; yet it could not comprehend a
faith in Christ as our Mediator, there being no need of a Savior, till we were
in danger, nor of a Mediator, till we were become transgressors: How therefore
was it possible that the promise of faith in Christ to those who believe in him
should be given out, till first the Covenant of Works was both given out, and
also violated? Though the law by the promise of says in Christ, was not
destroyed so far forth, as it was a directive and obligatory rule of life and
conversation unto all; yet so far as it was a Covenant of life, it must be both
given out, and also destroyed, that the promise of faith might be given out.

6. In the last place, I desire you to consider, That as on Gods part, the
promise of life by faith in Christ, was inconsistent with the promise of life,
upon the doing of the works of the law: so on our part, we should never have
come to Christ that we might have life, if we had not first been concluded
under wrath: And this will appear to every intelligent soul, that will but
consider, That the going out of the soul unto Christ for life, is a disclaimer
of its own righteousness; and a very great piece of self-denial, to which the
soul will never move naturally, but must see it self constrained to it by
necessity, Isa. 57.10. Thou have found the life of thy hand, therefore thou
were not grieved: so long as a man sees help in himself, and thinks that he
has found life in his own hands, so long he is not grieved, not at all
concerned as to his eternal state: And this is the true reason why you see the
greatest brokenness of heart, and sense of sin, yea and the greatest holiness
of life too in those men that yet look to be saved by faith in Jesus Christ;
for our free will men that maintain a power in man to believe, and repent, or
to keep the Law of God perfectly; they have said, they have found life in their
own hands, and then I hope they have none but themselves to blame, if they
miss, and come short of it; if they do not repent, and turn unto God to day,
they can do it to morrow. It was necessary as on Gods part, in order to his
giving out of the promise of faith in Christ, and exhibition of the Covenant of
Grace to the world: so also on our part, in order to our acceptance, and
taking hold of any such Covenant, and the application of our souls unto God,
upon the terms of that Covenant, for the sure mercies of it; that there should
first be a Covenant of Works made with man, and a law of works given unto him;
for had there been no such Covenant made, no such Law given, man could not have
broken, and violated it; and if he had not violated, and broken it, he could
not have been a transgressor, he could not have been a lost sinner, and
consequentially had needed no Savior; nor would man have ever been persuaded
to have gone out of himself, and to have accepted of the righteousness of
Christ for his righteousness, had he not first been rendered in a forlorn,
desperate, and hopeless condition, without Application unto Christ.

Use 1. For the practical Application of what you have heard now in this
discourse. This, in the first place, should mind us, not to be hasty to deny,
nor too forward to stumble at some things in the dispensations of God, which at
first seem to us hard to be understood. Who can find out God, or search out the
Almighty unto perfection? I do not know any thing that looks more
inconsistently in appearance to us, at our first view of it, than this; That
God should from eternity six the salvation of man upon a Covenant of Grace, and
write it in his book, That there should be salvation in no other, than in Jesus
Christ, nor any other name given under heaven amongst men, whereby they might
be saved: that he who believes should be saved, and he who believed not should
be damned, for all these things were decrees in the rolls of eternity, or they
could never have been Revelations of Gods Will in Scripture, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
and Psalm. 40.7. In the volume of Gods book it was written of Christ, that he
should come into the world, and do the Will of God, relating to the salvation
of man: I say, that God should thus setle man's salvation in the order of its
causes, and upon the terms of free grace, the merit and satisfaction of Christ
and Faith in him; and yet when mankind was created, God should treat him upon a
Law of Works, and make a Covenant with him for life and salvation, upon
condition of his perfect obedience both to the Law written at that time upon
his heart, and this positive precept of not eating of the tree of forbidden
fruit; yet there is nothing clearer in Scripture, than that God did do this:
for to say that these were second thoughts about man's salvation, when he was
lapsed and fallen, were to blaspheme by attributing change of mind and purpose
to God, and a successive knowledge of things, such as we have upon the events,
so ascribing humane imperfections to a most holy God. If God from all eternity
did settle the business of man's salvation (as the Apostle says he did), Ephesians.
1.4, 5, 6, 7. Cousing us in him before the foundation of the world (that is, in
Christ, as ver. 3.) that we should be holy, and without blame before him in
love, having predestined us unto the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory
of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved, in whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches
of his grace: and this, as verse. 8. was the mystery of his will according to
his good pleasure which he had purposed in himself; sure we are, he created man
in a state, that was not capable of these spiritual blessings, until he was
fallen from it, and that God according to that holy and guiltless state,
wherein he made man, did first stipulate with him in a Covenant of Works, and
offered him life upon his doing the Law of God. I would gladly know of those,
who so flutter with their little ratiocinations, about the seriousness of Gods
actings in his offers of grace, and would make us believe that God does not
serio agere, act seriously in calling men to believe and repent, unless there
were a possibility of salvation for them all; or unless Christ intentionally
dyed for all, or men had a power in their lapsed estate to do things
spiritually good; I say, I would fain know of them, whether God was in earnest
or no with Adam, when he promised him life upon the Covenant of Works. It is
most certain, that he either never intended that Adam, or any of his posterity
should go to Heaven that way, or that he was frustrated of his intention (which
God cannot be). If he never intended that any should be that way saved, I would
know of them whether God was serious or no with Adam in such a proposal of life
unto him; if they can find out an answer in this case, it will also serve in
the other. God was serious with Adam in the making of the Covenant of Works
with him, serious with respect unto his own end, which was not that any should
be saved by the fulfilling of that Covenant, which he knew none would, but that
it should be as a Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ (as the Apostle speaks
of the Law contained in Ordinances) and introductive to the exhibition of that
better Covenant which God had established with the Son of his Love, and upon
which he had fixed the salvation of the Elect.

Use 2. We may learn from hence, That it is consistent enough with the holiness
of God, to require things of persons, which it is not his Will of purpose that
they should do; and to make conditional promises to them, who he knows will
never fulfill the condition. These are two things which some make a great pudder
with, that they might establish their universalities, and obtain against the
Election of Grace. They think that if God had determined the certain number of
those who should be saved, or for whom Christ dyed; others should not be called
to, or required to believe, or repent, nor a promise of life and salvation, and
life made to them in case of their repenting and believing; for they apprehend
it inconsistent with the truth and holiness of God, to require that of men,
which it is not his will or purpose they should do, or to offer them life and
salvation upon a condition, from the performance of which they are precluded by
the purpose of God. We must adhere to this, that there is nothing contingent to
God, no event which he did not from eternity foreknow, and therefore foreknow,
because he willed either to effect, or to permit it. We can neither allow of
any ignorance to be imputed unto God, nor any succession in his knowledge, nor
apprehend it possible that God should from all eternity know who would believe
and repent (which none could without his special grace) without willing that
grace to them, by virtue of which they should put forth these saving acts; and
therefore such to whom he did not by his eternal purpose will those habits of
grace, must be passed over. But then say they, who have other apprehensions;
How is it consistent with the truth and holiness of God to call all men to
believe, and to repent, and to promise them eternal life and salvation, upon
the terms of faith and repentance? We ask them how it was consistent with the
truth and holiness of God, to require of Adam under the Covenant of Works, not
to eat of the tree of forbidden fruit, and to promise him life upon his not
eating thereof; when as it is plain, that God had purposed to permit him to eat
thereof, and foreknew that he would eat thereof, and never intended that Adam,
or any of his posterity should come to Heaven, by the fulfilling of that
Covenant. But then say they, to what purpose are these Precepts, or Promises?
Diverse answers are given by Divines, as to that question concerning those who
are called to repent, and to believe, which possibly will hereafter fall in my
way to touch upon. At present, as to this purpose it is enough to say, Gods end
in making the Covenant of Works with Adam, was to make way for the publication
of the Covenant of Grace. For the exhibition and publication of which to the
world, there was no room, until the Law and Covenant of Works was violated, and
man that was created in the Image of God, and state of Holiness, had fallen
from that state, and become concluded under wrath. In the mean time observe,
here is a precept given, which God had never intended, should be obeyed; a
conditional promise made, from which God never intended that any man should
have any advantage: and in that appears the advantage of this instance, for
in the calls of the Gospel to faith and repentance, though the Lord has told
us, Many are called, and few are chosen; Although all to whom the Gospel is
Preached, be not the chosen of God, and within his purpose of eternal life and
salvation: yet some are, and some say, Non proprie and per se reprobos hortatos
esse ad fidem and poenitentiam, sed per concomitantiam, quatenus electis
externa societato permiscentur; That is, that reprobates are only called to
faith and repentance, as they are mixed together with the elect. But here Adam,
and in him all mankind were called to a fulfilling of the Covenant of Works,
and life was upon that condition promised to them all, when as yet it was never
Gods purpose and intendment, that any of them should fulfill it, or that way
obtain everlasting life.

Use 3. In the last place my discourse upon this argument may let you see, how
uniformly the Providence of God in the conversion, and bringing home to God, of
a particular sinner, moves to its motions and workings, in order to the
general publication of the Covenant of Grace, and the way of salvation through
him unto the world. The way of God in making known of Jesus Christ to a
particular soul, is ordinarily first by the law to humble the soul, and to
conclude it under wrath, and then to open to it a door of hope: and indeed this
is but a reasonable working of Providence, and exceedingly suitable to the
principles of reason, and humane nature. What signifies the news of a Redeemer
unto him, who either is no captive, or is not sensible that he is; the news of
a Savior to him, that apprehends not himself lost, or to stand in need of
any salvation? God therefore ordinarily in the conversion of a sinner, lays
the Law to him, shows him what God has required of him, how much he is a
debtor to God, how much he lies open to wrath, and is subject to the curse:
this lets him see what need he has of salvation by a Redeemer, and induces
him to be willing to go unto Christ for life. Now this motion and working of
Providence, as to particular souls bears a just proportion to Gods first
Revelation of Christ unto the world. God first gave unto Adam a Law of Works,
and made a Covenant with him, and then permitted him to violate this Law, to
break this Covenant, and then discovers the Covenant of Grace and Redemption,
which to this time lay hidden with God, although as to the paction of it, it
was eternal. And hence also appears an easy answer to that question, whether
men and women unregenerated, be under the Covenant of Works, or under the
Covenant of Grace; that all men since the fall of Adam, are not under the
dispensation of the Covenant of Works, but under the dispensation of the
Covenant of Grace is out of doubt, for the Covenant of Works expired with Adams
fall. But thus far they are under the Covenant of Works, viz. That there is no
salvation for them, but by keeping the whole Law in thought, word, and deed,
which is a state sad and miserable enough, it being that which no man in his
lapsed estate is able to do. Adam indeed might have done it, none since the
fall can do it; and from hence follows the impossibility of salvation for any
soul, that is out of the Lord Jesus Christ. The law they cannot keep, so as
from the fulfilling of that to expect salvation; and whereas (as the Apostle
tells us) what the law could not do, because it was made weak through our
flesh, that God himself has done, sending his son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and condemning sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might
be fulfilled in us; they have no part nor portion in this matter, no state nor
interest in Christ, but are without Christ, and consequently during their
present state incapable of any lively hope. But this is enough to have spoken
to this first difficulty, and the inferences by way of Application to be made
from it.

SERMON XXXVI.
Acts XVII. 30. But now God commands all men everywhere to Repent.
I Am endeavoring to expound to you some of the hard Chapters of Divine
Providence; These times justifying that to be true of the book of Providence,
which the Apostle Peter says of St. Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16. There are in
it some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable, wrest unto their own destruction. It is truly said of Tertullian,
Deus omnium conditor, nihil non ratione providet, disposuit and ordinavit,
nihil non tractari intelligique voluit; that God the maker of all things, has
rationally disposed and ordered all things, and would have us to understand all
his works. It is most certain, that all the Lords ways are equal; and it is a
noble employ to study the equality and reasonableness of them: it may be
sometimes we shall wade beyond our stature, and be forced to cry out O the
depth; but I think that grave Ancient said true, that told us, That the
Counsels of God do so exceed our capacity, that in some particulars they yet
wonderfully accommodate themselves to our intellectuals: and men might
understand more of the reasonableness of the motions of Divine Providence, if
they would bring to their observation not so much discutiendi acumen, as
discendi pietatem, acuteness of wit to quarrel, as an humble desire to learn of
God, and to understand his will. We are prone for the directing of our
conceptions of God, to make to our selves images graven with the tools of
philosophy and humane reason, and then to bow to them. Whereas could we be
content to regulate our Philosophy, so far as it relates to God by the rules
of his word, and not to think to crook the word of God to our Philosophy, many
rough ways would be made plain, and matters of question quickly rendered out of
question. I am speaking to such (...) of difficulty as arise to considerate
souls, from the consideration of the motions of Providence, relating both to
the Covenant of works, and that of Grace. I spoke to one in my last exercise. I
now proceed to a second, which I shall state thus.

Quest. Supposing the Covenant of Redemption and Grace made betwixt the eternal
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, not to have been general for all men: nor
uncertain for persons that should be so, and so qualified: and that the blood
of this Covenant was intentionally shed, in proportion to the nature of the
Covenant: How it could consist with the truth of God to offer salvation to all
in the ministry of his word upon the Gospel-terms of faith and repentance; or
to what end it should be done.

Here are two or three things here supposed, which by a great many will not be
granted.

1. We suppose here (first) A Covenant made from eternity betwixt God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ relating to the salvation of the children of
men. This, I know, some will not understand, but the Scripture speaks
plainly. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made, he says not to
seeds as many, but as of one, and to thy seed which was Christ, Gal. 3.16. Isa.
42.6. -- and I will give thee for a Covenant to the people; hence Christ was
called a surety of a better Covenant; he was both the party Covenanting, and
the surety of the Covenant. God the Father taking the word of his Son, for the
fulfilling of the matter of the Covenant, both what was to be done by himself,
upon which account it was called a Covenant of Redemption; and by us, with
respect to which it is called the Covenant of Grace: God in and by it relaxing
the rigor of the Law, which required personal satisfaction to Divine Justice,
from the persons offending, and a perfect performance of the whole Law; and
accepted the satisfaction given to Divine Justice, by the nature offending,
hypostatically united to the person that was the Son of God, and accepting from
us sincerity, instead of perfect obedience; the sincerely willing mind, instead
of the perfect deed: Such a Covenant we suppose and believe to have been made.

2. We believe it not made for all, but conformably to the purpose of Election;
if it had been made for all, we could not understand but that all men must be
saved.

3. Nor can we think it was made for an uncertain number; but as there are
individual names written in the Book of Life, so we believe the same concerning
the rolls of this Covenant. The Lord (as the Apostle tells us) knows who are
his. Christ was not Sponsor incerti foederis, a surety of an uncertain, but of
a certain Covenant. Some would make Christ's Covenant with his Father, not to
have been for these, or those persons, but indefinitely for those that should
believe, and so to have been conditional. But certainly no considerate
Christian can allow this, who observes that amongst men, nothing but ignorance
of future contingencies, is the cause of uncertain, and conditional bargains:
the Parent that dies and gives his Child a Portion conditionally, that he or
she marries so and so, or be subject to such or such Governors, would have
left out that condition, if he or she had certainly known what the Child would
have done; and it seems to us strangely to derogate from the eternal perfection
of the Divine Being, in point of Knowledge, so much as to fancy, that God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, (who both from eternity knew who would, or
would not repent and believe, and needs must know it, because they could do
neither but by virtue of special grace infused by, and derived from God,)
should make a Covenant each with other; that such or such persons (who they
knew would not repent nor believe,) if they believed and repented, should have
a share in the satisfaction and death of Christ.

4. We do suppose and believe the blood of the Covenant (that is, the blood of
Jesus Christ) was intentionally poured forth, according to the Covenant, and
for the persons concerned in it. The blood of Christ is called the blood of the
Covenant, Zech. 9.11. Heb. 10.29. Heb. 13.20. and the Antitype to those ancient
types of the blood of Beasts, which was so called, Exodus 24.8. So that we think
it a very unreasonable assertion, to extend the blood of the Covenant, beyond
the persons concerned in the Covenant.

But yet notwithstanding all this, there is nothing more evident in the issues
of Divine Providence, than that this Covenant is held out to all indefinitely.
Mar. 16.15. Christ's commission to his Apostles runs thus, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every Creature: He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. Here both
the benefit of the New Covenant, eternal life, and salvation is offered to all;
and the terms, believing, and being baptized are also propounded unto all; and
according to that direction, and commission is all our Preaching. Now hence
arises the difficulty: If there be not a possibility of salvation for all men,
if they all be not within the verge of the Covenant: If Christ has not died
for all, why is the Gospel preached to every creature? how can it consist with
the truth and honor of that God who cannot lie, by his Ministers to tell men,
that if they will but repent, and believe, they shall be saved? To what end is
the Gospel preached unto them? To which I answer,

1. That the Gospel only asserteth the infallible connection of faith and
salvation. What says the Gospel? He that believes, shall be saved; and will
any say that a believer shall be damned, or did ever any penitent and believing
soul perish? if there had, then indeed we might have quarrelled at the truth of
God: but God will be true, though all men be found liars. What though ten
thousand be told, and have it rung in their Ears, That he who believes shall
be saved, and but ten of those ten thousand should believe, provided that they
be saved, God I hope is true, and what he has said, is to a tittle made good.
But you will say, why then are all told, if they believe they shall be saved.
The Minister of the Gospel may go to every particular soul, and say to him or
her, if thou repentest and believe thou shall be saved. I answer,

2. God is pleased to hide from his Ministers, his secret counsels concerning
the salvation of individual souls. They therefore may, and must say, whosoever
believes shall be saved; and God will confirm in Heaven whatsoever they
deliver on Earth: and by virtue of this Commission they may say to every
individual soul, Believe and thou shall be saved; they know not who are
ordained to life, and shall have effectual grace bestowed upon them inabling
them to believe, but they know the general proposition of the Gospel is true.
But still you will say, why has God by his Providence so ordered it, to what
end should the Providence of God order the publication and tender of the
Covenant of Grace to a greater number than are concerned in it.

3. What if we should say, It is (O Father) so because it pleases thee, and be
forced here to cry out with the great Apostle, Romans 9.33. O the depth of the ri
hes, both of the wisdom and know ledge of God; how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! verse. 34. For who has known the
mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Who is able to give a just
account of Gods designs and intentions, to what purpose he does things? It is
enough for us to know that God does them, and that God may do them, and there
is no unrighteousness with him if he does do it. We ought to believe that God
has wise ends in what he does, though we are not able to find out what they
be. Yet it may not be amiss to tell you what Divines do say in the case, though
they cannot by searching find out God, nor find out the Almighty unto
perfection.

1. There are those that say, that Reprobates are only called to faith and
repentance, as they are mixed with the elect, and the exhortations reach them
only by way of concomitancy; and possibly it may be doubted, if there were any
society, or company of people in the world, amongst whom there were not any
ordained to everlasting life; whether God would at all send his Gospel to them,
or direct any of the Messengers of his word to go and call them to repentance.
God encouraging Paul, Act. 18.10. to preach the Gospel undauntedly at Corinth,
adds this, for I have much people in this City. Now supposing a City in which
God had no people, it might be much questioned whether God would. Certain it is
that the Apostle tells us, that God has given Pastors and Teachers for the
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. I remember that when the Prophet Elisha was
sent for to Jehosaphat, Jehoram and the King of Edom, when they were in their
distress for want of water, (you have the story 2 Kings 3.13.) Elisha says to
the King of Israel (who was a wicked King) what have I to do with thee? verse.
14. Were it not that I regard the presence of Jehosophat, the King of Judah, I
would not look toward thee, nor see thee. I am very apt to think God speaks
so to every one whom he has passed over in his eternal purpose, and knows
that they will not repent and believe; Were it not for the sake of his elect,
with whom these men are mixed, God would never regard them, nor look to them in
his Gospel dispensations: but as the Gardener waters the weeds amongst the
herbs, because he cannot at present well pluck them up; so God having resolved
that the Tares should be suffered amongst the Wheat, till the great harvest
waters them with the dew of the Gospel; pariter adeunt, pariter audiunt (as
Augustine says in another case) they living amongst the elect of God, hear the
words that are spoken from God to them; the Ministers of the Gospel they know
them not, and therefore cannot distinguish; and it has pleased the wise God so
to order it. And this answer indeed almost takes away the subject of the
question, for then it is as it were by accident only, that they are called to.
The Elect are those spoken to, others only as they are in their company; as a
Father intending only to give good counsel to his own children, may yet give it
to others, who accidentally are in their company.

2. But there are others who think, That God does this, that he might declare
to all what is their duty; Alii vocantur, ad officium solum, alii etiam ad
beneficium, Spanhemius. A Creditor may, I hope, mind his Debtor of his debt,
though he knows that he is not able to pay a tenth part of it, and be
resolved never to lend him money to do it; and so in calling upon him cannot be
supposed so much as to intend his own payment, and satisfaction; for none
intends what he knows is impossible. This is an answer which our learned
Pemble gives: but this answer does not satisfy some other very learned men;
for what is it to exhort another, but to declare his duty to him; and to say
that the end why God declares unto Reprobates their duty, is that he might
declare their duty to them, is something uncouth, for idem non est finis
suiipsius: The question is, what end the wise God can have in declaring their
duty to them in, and by such exhortations.

3. It is therefore possibly better answered, That God does this for
maintaining discipline, and government in the world. It is but a common
observation, that the Preaching of the Gospel generally restrains, and
civilizeth those, or very many of those whose hearts are not yet changed by it,
and converted to the obedience of the Gospel. Take in your eye but two places,
one where there is no Preaching of the Gospel, or none which truly deserves
that name; another place where the Gospel is Preached duly, daily and lively;
and observe if the generality of the people in the later place, be not
strangely more civilized than those of the other Town or City. So that God by
the Preaching of the Gospel to all, and the work of his Providence in so
ordering and disposing it, though he does not intend the salvation of
Reprobates; yet may have a wise and excellent end for the good of the world, in
bridling and restraining the outrageous, and unbridled lusts of such men; so
that the world is not such a heap of confusion, such a place of universal
disorder, as it would be, were it not for the influence of the indefinite, and
universal Preaching of the Gospel amongst them; nor is this an end at all
unworthy of a wise and holy God, as well with relation to his own glory, which
is impeached by the exorbitancies of men's lusts, as with reference to the good
of humane society, for which (as I have all along showed you in these
Discourses) our good God in the motions of his Providence shows a great
kindness, and this may be said to be another end of Gods, which also he does
generally obtain.

It is said by some, That God causes the Gospel to be Preached unto some, that
they might be without excuse. The Apostle tells us, That the invisible things
of God, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even his eternal power, and Godhead, so that they
are without excuse, because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, Romans 1.20. he speaks of the Heathens; and why may not we say of others,
that the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ is Preached unto many, and
the riches of Divine Grace displayed before them, so that they are without
excuse, while they continue in impenitency and unbelief: we may say of them as
the Apostle says of the Jews, Have they not heard, Romans 10.18. did they not
know? God has stretched forth his hand to a disobedient and gainsaying people.
verse. 21. I know Arminius does object against this answer, telling us, this
cannot be Gods end in sending his Gospel, for exhortations, to faith and
repentance, do not of themselves render persons without excuse; but this is
added to the nature of them. But this reason also would prove that the faith
and obedience of the elect is not intended by God, for their obedience also is
added to the exhortations. But enough is spoken upon this Argument, as to such
who have an ear open to receive an answer. Supposing that God has chosen but
some to eternal life, that Christ has made a Covenant but for some, nor
intentionally dyed for more than his Father had chosen in him, and given to
him: yet God might cause the Gospel to be preached unto all the world, and have
very wise ends in the doing of it. So as that the universality of the call to
faith and repentance, is no argument either against the election of grace, or
for an uncertain Covenant, no nor yet for an universal redemption.

And from hence also an easy solution may be made of another appearing
difficulty. It is certain, according to the letter of my Text, That now God
commands every man to repent. How can this be?

Quest. 2. Supposing that a man or woman has of himself no power to believe,
or to repent; how stands it with the sincerity and truth of God to command
them to repent or believe; or how will it stand with Divine Justice, to condemn
them for not repenting, or believing? For this general command of men to
repent, and to believe, is not only made use of to destroy the Doctrine of
Election and the certainty of the Covenant of Grace, but also to destroy
special and effectual Grace.

My business is not at present to establish those great truths which are
abundantly spoken to by others; and I have elsewhere, and at other times spoken
abundantly to them: but only to vindicate the Providence of God, upon the
supposal of the truth of them, and to show you that the Universality of the
Ministerial Gospel-call makes no argument against them. I say then, supposing
man in his lapsed state to have no power to repent, yet it is consistent enough
with the truth and seriousness of God, with his purity and holiness, or any
other attribute of his perfection, to call all men to repent; neither does such
his call of them imply any such natural, innate power in them.

1. What if man in his lapsed estate by nature has no power to any action that
is spiritually good, not to believe, nor repent; yet is it not his duty to do
both, and had not our proparent a power given him of God to do whatsoever was
necessary in order to his eternal salvation? His duty is, because God
commands it; my Text says, he commands now all men to repent: and
certainly in Adam both he, and all of us had a power to do whatsoever was the
will of God as to his own, and our salvation, in that estate wherein God
created him, and us in him. Has God lost his right to demand his due, because
man has lost his power to pay it? I know the Remonstrants and Socinians
generally deny this, and say (and they say true) that Adam had not a power to
repent and believe in Jesus Christ (that is, a specific power): but neither
were these necessary in that state, nor indeed practicable. Adam was created a
just man, that needed no repentance, needed no faith in a Mediator; but Adam
had a power, and we in him, to all in that estate necessary; if Adam and we (in
him) have by voluntary transgression, made any thing more necessary, and God
upon a Covenant of Grace, has restored us upon the performance of such other
things; I hope Gods justice shall not be impeached, for his not giving us a
power to do those things also, whereas we originally had a sufficiency of power
to do all God required of us in that state. Aquinas sufficiently determines
this point; Aq. sum.. 1. quest. 95. art. 3.
Adams reason (says he) in the state of innocence being subjected to God, and
his inferior faculties being subjected to his reason; he had in some sense all
graces [omnes virtutes] and that both in habit, and act, which do not imply an
imperfection repugnant to that state; others, only in the habit, etc. He
instanceth in repentance only, and says, Adam had faith both in the habit and
act; but he speaks of faith only as respecting God, and the proposition of the
word, not as respecting a Mediator, for the object; for we all know that in
that state there was no need of a Mediator, and consequently, faith in the
Mediator implies the imperfection of a lapsed state, repugnant to the
perfection of the primaevous state of innocence. It is enough we had in Adam a
sufficiency of power to do all necessary to our salvation in that estate. It
was our transgression made any thing else necessary.

2. You heard under the former head, That God may have many wise ends why he
now calls all men to repent, though he did not intend that upon that call
they should repent or believe.

3. Although lapsed man has no power of himself, to repent, or believe,
without the special effectual grace of God; yet he has a power by virtue of
that Common-Grace which God denies to no man, to do much in order to his
repentance and believing.

4. What if we should leave it for a question to be decided at the great day:
whether Reprobates shall be condemned, strictly for not believing, in sensu
diviso, that is, not receiving of Jesus Christ, and resting upon him as their
Savior; or for not believing, in sensu composito, not doing what in them lay,
that they might believe. God calls all men to repent and to believe; it is
true, it is not in their power to exert an act of faith, or a salvifick act of
repentance; but it is in their power to read the word, to hear it, to meditate
upon it, to consider their sins, to leave many of them, as to the external act.
I always thought it a very idle question, An homine faciente quod in se est
Deus teneatur gratiam dare, Whether if a man did what lay in his power to do,
God be bound to give his effectual saving grace. For I dare say, an instance
cannot be given of any that has done what lies in his power, to whom God has
denied his effectual grace; but Deus tenetur, is a very hard saying. Who can
make God a debtor to his creature? who has given unto him, and it shall be
repaid him? If we could not say any thing to justify God in condemning sinners
(who have no power to any spiritual act) for not believing, not repenting; yet
I think the matter would not be much, for in the great day we shall find God
will have enough to say for condemning sinners, for omitting what was in their
power to do, or acting contrary to it; though he should say nothing to them,
for not doing that which without his special grace is confessedly not in the
power of lapsed man. But enough is spoken to vindicate this motion of Divine
Providence. My Text is true, God now by his Ministers calls all men to
repent, and he may do it with consistency to his truth and sincerity, to his
holiness and goodness, notwithstanding the certainty of his election, and his
certain knowledge of who are his, having wrote their names in the book of life;
and notwithstanding the certainty of the Covenant of Grace, as to persons, and
the certainty of the persons for whom Christ has died, and the impotency in
fallen man, to exert any truly spiritual act, such as those of faith, and
repentance must be. Let us now consider how this Discourse may be useful to us
by way of practical Application.

Use 1. And in the first place, this may be of use to you to restrain you from
approving of the bold sayings of those who reflect upon the truths of God, and
would turn them into falsehoods, because forsooth, their narrow apprehensions
cannot reconcile them to the truth, sincerity, holiness and goodness of God.
Let God be true and men liars; let him be good, infinitely good, though all men
be bad, This quarrelling at God is an old humor of corrupt hearts. O house of
Israel (says God Ezech. 18.25.) Is not my way equal, are not your ways
unequal? When a righteous man turns from his righteousness, and commits
iniquities, and dies in them; for his iniquity that he has done shall he dye:
again, when the wicked man turns away from his wickedness, that he has
committed, and does that which is right, he shall save his soul alive. When a
sinner repents, and believes, he shall live, he shall be saved: when he
apostatizeth from his profession, and returns with the Dog to his vomit, or
goes on impenitently in his course of sin, and dies in it, his soul shall
perish. What then, are not the Lords ways equal, is not God in all this holy,
and righteous, and just, and good?

O but it is not equal, say some, that God should offer life, and the benefits
of the Covenant of Grace, to those to whom he intends not to give them. How
does it appear, that God offers any such thing to them; why may not Gods offer
be only to the elect, and others no further concerned, than as they are in the
company of those to whom such grace is offered? But the Ministers of the Gospel
who are Gods Messengers, do offer life to all that will believe: they do so,
and God will make it good; where now is the inequality of Gods ways? But why is
the Gospel at all preached to those who shall have no benefit by it? I answer,
What if God please to make use of this as a means the better to restrain the
lusts of men, and to keep the world in order, and a temper fit for mutual
society. But why are they commanded to repent and believe, that have no power
to do either? Had they never a power in Adam? If they had, surely God may
require his debt although they be not able to pay. Have they a power to do
nothing toward these things? If they would do what in them lay, would God deny
his grace? Did ever any soul perish, think you, that did what was within its
power in order to its salvation? If there did not, why do men quarrel with God?
their destruction is of themselves.

Use 2. What remains then, but that leaving our disputing with God, or
quarrelling either with the truths of his word, or motions of his Providence;
all men apply themselves to be obedient to the Heavenly Command? The days of
ignorance God winked at; but now, says my Text, God commands all men to
repent. Supposing an election of grace, and that not of qualities, but of
persons. Supposing an eternal Covenant, and that certain, made betwixt the
eternal Father, and the Son of his Love for those that shall be saved.
Supposing that Christ did not dye intentionally for all, but for such only as
were foreordained of God to eternal life and salvation. Supposing lastly, that
man in his lapsed estate, has no power to repent or savingly to believe. Yet I
shall show you there is encouragement enough for any that will mind their
eternal interest to do what in them lies, that they may repent and believe: to
that end I beg of you to consider these things.

1. That God commands all men to repent. It was John Baptists work to call to
all to Repent, because the Kingdom of God was at hand. It was the Apostles
Doctrine, it is our doctrine and the substance of our Preaching: certainly the
commands of God are the measures of our duty; and every creature by the law of
his creation stands obliged to obey his Creator. If God commands him to do
something which he cannot do by his natural power; yet surely he is bound to do
what he can do, and then to cry to God to help him where he is at a loss. God
commands you all to repent, and to believe; certainly none can pretend but he
is under the highest obligation imaginable, to go as far as he can; or else his
blood will lie upon his own head, and his own Conscience will fly in his face,
and in the great day he will have nothing to say why the sentence of eternal
death should not pass upon him.

2. God has prepared an object for the faith of every soul that will believe.
This is that now, that some keep a mighty stir with, that if Christ has not
died for all, then they have not objectum paratum, not an object prepared for
their faith. As if the counsels of God, or Christ's intention in dying were the
object of our faith, not the proposition and promise of the Gospel, that is
held forth indefinitely: whosoever believes shall be saved. Now what is that
which God requires of man? But that he should search and try his ways, and
acknowledge his offenses, and disclaim his own merits and righteousness, and
hearing the proclamation of the Gospel; that whosoever believes shall be
saved, that he should lay hold upon the promise. Is not here an object
prepared? is not the indefinite propounding of the grace of the Gospel, ground
enough to encourage a soul to trust God upon his word?

3 As thou do not certainly know that thy name is written in the Book of
Life, that Christ has covenanted and dyed for thee; so neither do thou know,
nor any one tell thee that thou art not chosen unto life, or that Christ has
not covenanted or died for thee. The Lepers in the famine, which you read the
story of 2 Kings 7. they did not know that the Syrians were fled, nor that they
should find any victuals amongst them; but this they knew, that if they sat
still at the entering in of the gate they should dye, and if they entered into
the City they should dye, verse. 3.4. Now therefore come (say they) let us fall
into the host of the Syrians, if they save us alive, we shall live; if they
kill us, we shall but dye. It was encouragement enough to these poor Lepers,
that it was possible they might save their lives by that motion. Esther did not
know that the King would hold out the Golden-Scepter to her, if she went in to
the King; but she knew that if she did not go in, she and her people would all
be cut off, and that in a short time: she ventureth in. Thou know that if
thou fittest still in thy sinful state, thou shall perish; if thou go on
from sin to sin, thou shall certainly perish without hope of mercy. But thou
have heard, that the number of them that God has chosen unto life, for whom
God has made a Covenant with his Son, and his Son has died, and satisfied
Divine-justice, is a certain definite number, and thou do not know, that thou
art one of that number; but thou do not know on the other side that thou art
none of that number, thou may be one for ought thou know; there is no law
against thee: certainly this is ground and encouragement enough for thee to
make the adventure: if God will save thee alive thou shall live, and that
eternally; if thou fittest still, if thou go on in thy sinful courses, thou
shall certainly dye.

4. Have thou not as much encouragement, to repent and to believe, as ever any
had? Have not thousands and ten thousands of the Saints of God, upon no other
encouragement than thou have, broken off sinful courses and sought the Lord
while he might be found; and have they not succeeded and found rest for their
souls. Did God yet ever from the beginning of the world, encourage any soul in
its first motions by faith, and repentance toward him, by assuring them that
their names were written in the Book of Life? Or that Christ did dye for them
in particular? Is it not encouragement enough to thee, to tell the thou have as
good a ground of hope and encouragement as the three thousand that were
converted at St. Peter's Sermon; as any of those servants of God had, of whose
conversion thou read in the Acts of the Apostles: what art thou that thou
should look for more?

5. Consider, That there is no other way for thee to know that thou art
elected, and that Christ has paid a price for thee but by thy turning unto
God, and believing in the Lord Jesus Christ. The election of God is in it self
sure and certain, but it must be made sure and certain unto us, by our
repentance and faith. Did ever any one hear of any soul reaking in its lusts,
and going on in its course of sin, ascertained; that God had chosen it unto
life, that Christ was the head and surety of a better Covenant for it, or dyed
for it? first our calling; then our election must be made sure, and we must not
think to pervert Gods order.

6. What have thou to do with Gods effectual Grace, until thou have improved
his common Grace. There is a common Grace which God denies to no man, by
virtue of which men may read, hear, pray, live a civil life and conversation,
leave gross and flagitious courses of sin; why complainest thou of God for not
giving thee his special distinguishing grace, inabling thee to exert true
spiritual acts, while thou do not use his common Grace, and do what in thee
lies to reform and amend thy ways, and to turn unto God?

7. Lastly, Though no exercise of common grace, can be meritorious of the
special Grace of God; yet I dare assure thee, that God neither ever yet was,
nor ever will be wanting in his further grace, unto those souls that have made
a due improvement of his common grace, and done what in them lay toward their
own salvation. Let us therefore leave our enquiring into the Counsels of God,
and disputing questions, which are insignificant to our greatest concerns. Let
us leave quarrelling with his truths, and our little foolish and vain
endeavors to argue an inconsistency of his Counsels with his Actual
Providence; when we have done and said all we can, it will be found that God is
consistent to himself, and that his ways are equal, and the iniquity and
crookedness is only in our own hearts and ways. We cannot with our spoon
comprehend (it may be) the Ocean, the great Ocean of his Wisdom and Counsel.
Let us apply our selves to our own duty, and do what he commands us, for
which, as you have heard, we have encouragement enough.

SERMON XXXVII.
Romans V. 20. Where Sin abounded, there Grace did much more abound.
I Am endeavoring to open to you the (...), the hard Chapters in the book of
Divine Providence, solving those Phaenomena's, or appearing difficulties, which
Atheistical Wits have raised, to make the holy God appear otherwise than he is,
his Counsels, Truths, and Works, other than indeed they are. I have already
spoken to one, relating to the making and establishing a Covenant of Works with
Adam, after the settlement of man's salvation upon the Covenant of Grace. The
other relating to the dispensation of Providence, in the exhibition and
publication of the Covenant of Grace. I come now to some relating to the Actual
Providence of God in the permission of sin and sinners, so much sin, and so
many sinners in the world. And for this discourse (as an head to it) I have
chosen this text, which in it contains two great points: The abounding of
sin, and the aboundings of grace. The Apostle brings in these words in a
magnifying of Christ, whom he had compared with the first Adam: The first Adam
brought mankind under sin and guilt. The second brought him under a state of
Redemption and Salvation, bringing life and immortality to light. First, the
Apostle shows whence sin came, then whence grace came. Paraeus tells us,
that the Apostle in this part of the Chapter, opens to us the use of the Law,
lest any one upon what he had before said should ask; Wherefore the law was
given: he tells us, That the law entered, that sin might abound; for though
the law of it self does not cause sin, yet by accident it does; for where there
is no law, there is no transgression, and the corruption of man's nature
enclineth him the more to what is forbidden him -- Nitimur in vetitum: sed hic
de action peccati sermo est quae fit per manifestationem (says a learned
Author upon my Text). The law makes sin to abound by way of manifestation, as
the glass makes the spots in a man or woman's face to abound, that is,
discovers them that are. P. Martyr reckons five ways, by which the Law
contributeth to the aboundings of sin. 1. By forbidding it. 2. By increasing
the guilt of it. 3. By assigning the punishment of it. 4. Multiplying it by the
variety of the precepts in it. 5. By accusing him, and condemning him for it.
Well, But why should the law enter, that sin might abound? has God then any
pleasure or delight in the aboundings of sin? The text tells you, that Gods
design was to advance grace; that where sin abounded, grace might much more
abound. But my design is not largely, and strictly to handle my text, but only
to make use of it, in pursuit of my further design to open to you the difficult
things of Actual Providence, which is by all confessed to have an influence
upon men's sins; that is, to permit them, and to govern them, the first of these
is what I have here to do with. What the Providence of God does, or does not in
the permission of sin, I have before showed you, and may by and by again speak
shortly unto it. The Question is,

Quest. How it can consist with the holiness of a pure and mighty God, having
it in his power to restrain, and hinder sin, yet to permit it, and so much of
it in the world? The difficulty of our apprehensions in this matter, arises
from these things:

1. That God in his own nature is a most pure and holy being. Who as he has
nothing in him that defiles, so neither can he abide any iniquity. This
seems to have stumbled the holy Prophet, Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes
than to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity: wherefore look thou
upon them that deal treacherously?

2. There is nothing in the world so contrary unto God as sin is, nothing so
repugnant to his nature, nothing so prejudicial to his glory, nothing that he
hates with so perfect an hatred.

3. That it always was, and is in the power of God to hinder sin; God could
have hindered Adams fall, and all the sin which has since that been committed
in the world. Now these things considered, that yet God should not hinder sin,
but suffer men to walk in their own ways, and to fulfill their unbridled lusts,
seems at first view of difficult apprehension.

It has been so hard a Chapter to some, that they have fancied two Gods, the
one to be the Principle of all the good, the other of all the evil that is in
the world; they were not able to conceive how a pure and holy God could permit
sin. The Operations of Providence about sin, I have heretofore more largely
discoursed. Amongst others I have instanced in these two.

1. He does permit, and suffer it when he might hinder it.

2. Providence does cooperate as to the natural action, though not as to the
malice and sinfulness of the action. It is most certain that in him every man
lives and moves. The blasphemer, the liar, the profane curser, and swearer
could not speak, if the Providence of God did not in the mean time uphold the
natural faculties, whose operations are necessary to such actions. Now this is
that which sometimes startles our deliberate thoughts; if God indeed be so holy
and pure a God, as we have heard he is? if he so hates and abhors sinful
actions; and if he be so mighty and powerful a God, why does not God withdraw
that Providence of his, which upholdeth the sinner to the natural action, while
he sees and knows which way the lust in the sinners heart will incline his
action? I conceive now my text gives some relief to our disquieted thoughts
about this particular. Why did God first suffer the law to enter? That sin
might abound, that the offense might abound (says the Apostle) v. 20. But why
should sin abound? why did the Providence of God suffer sin to abound? That
grace might much more abound: For, says the text, where sin abounded, grace
did much more abound. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so grace might
reign through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ. The Apostle
is here doubtless speaking with a great respect to the first man's sin, of which
he had been speaking in the former verses. Death passed over all men, for that
all have sinned: and v. 15. Through the offense of one, many be dead: and so in
the following verses you read of one man's sin, one man's offense, one man's
disobedience, etc. But yet he is not speaking only of Adams sin, for he tells
you, Many were made sinners, and all have sinned; and he is also speaking of
sin as consequent to the law given, which I do not think is to be understood of
the law given to Adam, and the Covenant made with him; but of the law given by
Moses, and in that latitude I shall discourse this subject, showing you that
God in a great deal of wisdom, did first suffer sin to enter into the world,
and still suffers sin to abound in the world. You may take that for the
Proposition.

Prop. The holy and omnipotent God in an infinite wisdom of Providence
suffers sin and sinners to abound in the world, though himself be of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity: he hates, and abhors every sin, nothing so
grieveth and dishonors him; yet I say, in infinite wisdom his Providence
does permit it, suffering men to fulfill the lusts of their own hearts, and to
walk in their own ways. My business must be to give you some account of the
Divine Wisdom in it, and to make Gods ways of Providence in this thing to
appear unto you equal. It is a true saying of one of the Schoolmen, Plus est
bonum, vel numero vel quantitate quod Deus elicit per mala, quam quod
destruitur per mala, Al. Al. There is one way or other, either in number or in
quantity, more good which God fetches out of sin, than is destroyed by sin. We
may be confident of this, or God would never suffer it. And indeed the
Doctrinal part of my discourse, will be nothing else than a justification of
that maxim. I shall therefore this day entertain you with a resolution of this
riddle, much like that of Sampson, when he had killed the Lion, and eaten of
the honey the Bees had made in the carcass, Jud. 14.4. showing you, how out of
the eater comes meat, and out of the strong comes sweetness: How out of sin,
which is the vilest thing in the world, the most opposite and repugnant thing
to the glory of God, the glory of God is yet fetched, and that in a proportion
to compensate the loss and prejudice to his glory from the sin of the sinner.
It is certain which Augustine long since said, and gave as a reason of Gods
permission of sin; Deus judicavit melius de malis benefacere quam mala esse non
permittere: God judged it better to bring good out of sin, than not permit sin
to be committed.

1. In the first place, let me show you how many Attributes of God are
glorified by his permission of sin and sinners in the world.

1. In the first place it is I think well observed by an acute Author, That God
in this motion of Providence magnifieth his equity to our humane nature. Equity
indeed is but a piece of justice. (But when I come to speak to that Attribute,
I shall restrain my discourse to Gods Punitive and Vindicative Justice). Our
great master, who has commanded us to give unto our servants that which is
just and equal, will much more do it himself; and it is said of God, He shall
judge the people with equity, Psalm. 98.9. and he took it very ill, when his
people said, That his ways were not equal. The equity of God required that he
should leave humane nature to its liberty; man was created with a reasonable
soul, and the very nature of it had been destroyed, if it had been left under a
coaction: and in this the condition of humane nature had been worse than that
of sensitive creatures, which freely use their natural faculties, and exercise
their natural motions. It is a saying of Aquinas, That it is not the work of
Providence in its government of man to destroy its nature, but to heal and save
it. God in suffering men to walk in their own ways, does but leave men to their
natural liberty, and thus magnify the Equity of God to humane nature. But this
is one of the least.

2. God by the permission of sin and sinners, and the aboundings of sin in the
world, has infinitely magnified his own goodness. It is the saying of a very
ingenious Author, Satis usui sunt scelera, si artem and peritiam divinae
beneficentiae provocant; Sin is of use enough to God in the business of his
glory, if by it the act and skill of the Divine Goodness and Bounty be made
appear to the world; the goodness and mercy of God is that Attribute of his,
which above all others he has made choice of to glorify himself in and by: it
is that in which he delights, which is above all his works. Now without the
permission of sin, yea of the aboundings of sin, it had been impossible that
Divine Goodness and Bounty should have been so commended to the world. Let me
open this a little.

1. Christ's coming, and dying for sinners, was the greatest act of love that
was ever showed to the children of men. What greater love could the eternal
Father show, than to give his Son out of his own bosom, to be a sacrifice for
sins: God so loved the world, says John, 3 Chap. 16. that he gave his only
begotten son. Moralists make a question about taking the true measures of the
magis and minus of love, whether the greatness of love be to be measured from
the affliction, intention, and self-denial, of the party loving, or the benefit
redounding to the person beloved; but measure which way you will, it was the
greatest love on the Fathers side, and the greatest that Christ could show, for
greater love than this has no man showed, John 15. and herein God commends his
love toward us, Romans 5.8. Besides, the inhabitation of the spirit was a
benefit of Christ's death, an effect of his purchase. And what greater love
could be showed on the part of the Holy Spirit (which is the Spirit of Christ),
than for it to come down, and to dwell in the heart of a poor creature; for the
person of a believer, to be made the temple of the Holy Ghost, the receptacle
of the Spirit of Grace. Now if there had been no sin, no sinners in the world;
what room had there been for a Savior? what needed one to have turned away
iniquity from Jacob, to have been wounded for our iniquities, bruised for our
transgressions? He dyed for our sins, says the Apostle. How could the love of
the eternal Father in sending his Son, or the love of the Son, in taking upon
him our nature, and dying for us; or the love of the Holy Spirit, in
sanctifying us, and renewing us, and dwelling in us, been manifested to the
world? If a strong man had not kept the house, what need had there been of a
stronger than he to have come and dispossessed him? All the love of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost magnified in the business of man's Redemption, and the whole
Economy of a Gospel-salvation, had been concealed, and not known to the world.

2. Again, How could the love of God, in the conversion of sinners, in the
pardon of their sins, in their justification, the sense they often have of his
love have been manifested to the world? What need were there of any pardon, if
no sins were permitted? where were the aboundings of grace in pardoning, if
there were no aboundings of sin? What love of God could be seen in the
conversion of sinners, if no sinners were permitted in the world? How should
God magnify his grace, by saying to any soul, Be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee, if he did not suffer sins to be committed? Thus you see the
greatness of Divine Goodness and Mercy, could never have been declared to the
world, but for the motions of Providence, in the permission of sins and
sinners, yea and of the aboundings of them.

3. Did not the Actual Providence of God thus permit sin, and much sin in the
world; How should the long-suffering and patience of God be magnified in the
world? This also is a piece of Gods Name, and such a one by which he designeth
to make himself glorious: he styles himself, Exodus 34.6. Gracious, merciful,
long-suffering, slow to anger: and Numb. 14.18. The Lord is long-suffering, and
full of tender compassion. Now sin and sinners are the objects about which the
long-sufferance of God is exercised: He endured with much long-suffering (says
the Apostle, Romans 9.22.) vessels of wrath fitted for destruction. How often do
we find this in our own experience? when we hear wretches blaspheming God, and
daring Divine Justice, how often are we ready to say (and it is a good
reflection), O what a patient God do we serve! which of us would endure such
affronts and defiances, as God endures every day? The aboundings of sin in the
world make the considerate part of the inhabitants of it admire, and adore the
long-suffering and patience of God.

3. The wisdom of God is also wonderfully magnified by Gods permission of sin.
The Apostle calls God, the only wise God. None so wise as God is, and the
wisdom of God is eminently magnified by his permission of sin. One great
business of wisdom, is to make an Election of the best end; but this is not
that which I am here speaking to, God has fixed his end, it is his own glory;
and as I have often told you, he can aim at no other end than himself and his
own glory. But next to a good Election of an end, wisdom is eminently seen in
the choice and conduct of means, in order to a proposed end; but herein is the
height of wisdom, to be able to make use of the most unlikely means, and make
them to serve our purpose. It is a point I have touched something largely upon
in my former discourses upon this Argument, and therefore I shall not here
enlarge upon it. To bring a notbeing into a being, to make a thing out of
nothing, argues an infinite power; though there be aliquid materiae, something
of a matter; yet if there be nihilum subjecti, no aptitude in the matter to
produce an effect of that nature: as when God took the rib of a man, and made
of it a woman; this argued also an omnipotent infinite power. But yet,
methinks, for God to produce his glory out of the aboundings of sin, argues
yet something more, if not of power, yet of wisdom; to make the wrath of men to
praise him, and the lies of men to glorify him. O how does this commend the
infinite wisdom of an only wise God! Sin, all sin is quite opposite and
repugnant to the glory of God: it speaks the great Wisdom of God to bring out
his glory from it. Thus God has glory by accident from the permission and
sufferance of sin in the world.

4. But let me further show how God is further glorified by reason of the
aboundings of sin, in the manifestation of his Justice, his Punitive and
Vindicative Justice, Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to
make his power known, endured with much long-suffering, vessels of wrath fitted
for destruction: there is a great deal in that verse. 1. The Apostle hinteth us
in that text, that we are Clay, and God is our Potter; it was what God had said
of old by his Prophet Jeremiah, chap. 18. verse. 6. and Isaiah, chap. 45. verse.
9. and what the Apostle himself had said in the two verses immediately
preceding: upon this account it is, that he here calls such as perish, vessels
of wrath; Earthenvessels, with relation to the Potter beforementioned. 2.
Being such Potters vessels, God had undoubtedly a jus absolutum, an absolute
right and dominion over the Sons of men, verse. 21. Has not the Potter power
over the Clay, of the same lump to make one a vessel of honor, another a
vessel of dishonor? 3. He shows, that God does destinate some to dishonor,
not using his absolute right, and prerogative merely, but for just and
righteous causes: and he instanceth in three things:

1. Gods will to show his wrath. The wrath of God is nothing else but his just
will to punish Violaters of his Law. God is willing to show his hatred of sin
in the just punishment of it.

2. Gods will to make his power known; that is, in breaking the stubbornness of
sinners: thus ver. 17. it is said of Pharaoh, For this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throughout all the earth: and this God calls a getting himself glory
upon Pharaoh, Exodus 14.17, 18.

3. The third reason he gives, is, That they are fitted for destruction.
Divines start a question from these words, How, or from whom, they are fitted
for destruction? Some say of God, as their Potter, others will have it to be
from Satan, others from themselves; the different notions may be reconciled.
Paraeus tells us, there are three things to be considered in these vessels of
wrath, their nature, their sin, the end: as to their nature, they are not from
themselves, nor from Satan, but from God, he is the Maker of all. As to their
pravity and natural corruption, that is not from God, but from themselves, and
from the Devil; the end is either preximate, that is, their own dishonor, and
destruction, or remote, and ultimate, that is, the showing forth the Justice
and Power of God. Neither of these (says that learned Author) is from
themselves, for they do not ordain themselves to destruction, nor design the
manifestation of the Lords Power and Justice. Thus therefore (says he) are the
vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, according to nature, they are created,
and made by no other than by God: as to their sin and corruption, by which they
are made children of wrath, guilty of sin, and subject unto wrath; they are
made so by Satan, by their own spontaneous fall, and that sin which followed
it: as to the ends, they are from God, and according to his eternal Counsel of
predestination. And this is the reason, as is not only observed by Paraeus, but
by P. Martyr probably, why the Apostle only says fitted, and not by whom
fitted for destruction: that fittedness referring partly to God, partly to
themselves (as they are by sin fitted, it is their own act). Now when he speaks
of the vessels of mercy, he speaks in the active voice (...), v. 23. Which he
had before prepared unto glory. So that it being the work of the sinner to fit
himself for destruction by the multiplyings and aboundings of sin, and God
glorifying his Justice and Power in breaking and destroying sinners, it is
easy to understand how Gods suffering the aboundings of sin, tends to the
glorifying of his Power, and Vindicative Justice. And thus I have showed how
the various Attributes of God are glorified by his permission of sin. But this
is but one way by which God has glory from the permission of sin.

2. He has glory from it, from those exercises of grace which are occasioned
by it, from his own people; and these are more internal, or more external; for
such as are more internal, repentance, faith, humility, several other graces
have either their Original motions from this Providence, or are greatly
advantaged in their exercise by it.

1. For repentance, that is considerable either in the inward affection, or
more external act. As to the former, if no sin were permitted, how could there
be any humiliation for sin, any godly shame, or sorrow, any bleeding or
brokenness of heart in the sense of sin? Were no sin permitted, there could be
no repentance, no godly sorrow for sin, etc.

2. God has a great deal of glory, by men's believing on the Lord Jesus Christ.
It is a great piece of the Will of God, that men should believe on him whom God
has sent, and God is glorified by our doing his Will. It were a large Theme to
discourse to you how variously God is glorified by men's receiving of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and believing in him. But God had had none of this glory if there
had been no permission of sin in the world: what is it to believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, but to accept of him as our Savior, to expect Salvation from
free grace, through the merits of Christ, and to depend upon him for it? Now
should God permit no sin there would be no need of a Savior, no occasion for a
redeemer, no need of going out of our selves, relinquishing all confidences in
the flesh, and in our selves. Believing in Christ as our redeemer and Savior
supposes sin making us lost undone Creatures to stand in need of such a
Salvation.

3. Again, Humility is another habit of grace, in the exercise of which God is
glorified: it is one of those things which God by his Prophet tells us that
he requires of man, to walk humbly with his God; nothing more contributes to
this, than a Child of Gods continual walking in a view of his own past, and
renewing Sins. Thus far even the best of Gods people are beholden to their
sins, they make them walk more softly, and to have more humble and mean
opinions of themselves, and to be more low in their own eyes, neither exalting
themselves against God, nor censoriously, and rashly judging their brethren,
and the more or less that any Christian looks at home, and considers himself,
and his own ways, the more or less he walks humbly toward God, and charitably
toward his brethren.

4. Finally in the 2 Cor. 7.11. You shall find a whole quire of graces, all
singing forth the praises of God, and all occasioned by sin. The Corinthians
had offended in the business of the incestuous person, the Apostle in his
former Epistle had brought them to a sense of their sin, and to a godly sorrow
for it. Now (says he) this self-same thing, that you sorrowed after a godly
sort, what carefulness it wrought in you? Yea what clearing of your selves? Yea
what indignation, what fear, what vehement desire, yea what zeal, what revenge:
these now are all exercises of grace, which bring glory to God; if God should
not sometimes suffer his own people to fall, all the revenue of his glory from
these exercises would be lost.

5. Again, has God any glory from any more external Acts of Worship and
Homage, which we perform unto him; from our Prayers, Praises, from our hearing
his word, receiving the Sacrament? Prayer is made up of Confession of Sin, and
Supplications for pardon of Sin, and strength against Sin. Confession of Sin
gives glory to God, my Son (says Joshuah to Achan) confess and give glory to
God. Supplication for good things gives God glory as it owns him to be the
Fountain of all good, and our whole dependence to be upon him. It is true, had
Sin never entered into the World, our daily dependence upon God, would have
evinced Prayer to have been our daily, and a natural homage, which derived,
inferior beings do owe unto the first being. But there would have been no need
of Prayer, either for the pardon of Sin, or for strength against Sin. For
Praise, that also is a piece of Homage, which Adam would have owed unto God if
he had stood in his first integrity, and state of Innocence; and the Angels of
God who never fell are continually occupied in singing the praises of God. But
the praises of God both by his Saints upon the Earth, and by his glorified
Saints, are highly advantaged, by the forgiveness of their Sins, and their
having their garments washed in the blood of the Lamb. Now if no sin were
committed in the World, none would be remitted and forgiven, and all the glory
which the God of Heaven has from his Saints on Earth, or in Heaven for the
free forgiveness of their Sins, would have been lost. Certainly the fall of the
evil Angels advantages the praises of the elect Angel, it being doubtless a
piece of their song to bless God, who suffered not them to fall as the infernal
Spirits did: and indeed this needs no further evidence than what it has from
every gracious Soul, that has tasted any thing of the love of God in pardoning
mercies. I appeal to any such Soul, to what a pitch it raises his Soul in the
thoughts of God, and the admirings of his Divine love and grace. Psalm. 103.1,
2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my Soul (says David) and all that is within me bless
his holy name: Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits, who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases. Thus I have
showed you a second way by which God gets himself glory from Sin, the
permission of Sin in the World.

3. Holiness and Piety are advantaged by Sin, Sin is a foil to holiness.
Pulchriora apparent bona ex malorum deformitate. As the dark shadows are
advantages to the Picture, and the wanton thinks at least that her black
Patches are advantages to her beauty; so are the Sins and Debaucheries which
God permits in the world advantages to holiness. The beautiful and
well-proportioned works of Nature are the more beautiful for the Monsters, that
it erreth in. Sin is but (monstrum morum) a monster in men's manners. I am
persuaded that in the very times wherein we live God has made use of the
prodigious intemperance, lust and luxury, Atheism and foolish superstitious
vanities of some, to make true Religion, Godliness, and Virtue, appear more
lovely unto thousands than before they did.

Lastly, From what is said abundantly appears, that it is not without infinite
wisdom that the Lord though he be pleased to manifest the riches of grace upon
some, to change their hearts, and to turn them from the wickedness of their
ways, plucking them as brands out of the fire; yet suffers multitudes to walk
in their own ways, till they drop into that Pit from which there is no
Redemption for ever. We may all of us be assured, that the wise God consulteth
his own glory in this. In the same Text, Pro. 16.4. Where he tells us that he
has made the wicked for the day of evil, he says in the former part, that he
has made all things for himself. Though we be not able to see the particular
reason of many dispensations of God, yet we ought to presume they are not done
without excellent Counsel, admirable reason, incomprehensible wisdom; yea and
infinite love toward those that shall be saved. I shall close this discourse
with an excellent saying of one of the Ancients. If (says he) an ignorant
person goes into a Smiths shop, what matters it if he does not knowof what
particular use the Sleth, the Anvil and other utensils are, yet it is enough if
the workman knows and can make use of every utensil in it is season: what if
we do not know, if we cannot comprehend, of what use some particular sinful
actions of men should be for the glory of God; it is enough for us that God
knows, the vilest action that was ever done in the World, the crucifying of
the Lord Jesus Christ, was of the greatest use for the manifestation of the
glory of God.

Now after this discourse of the reasonableness of Divine Providence, in
permitting Sin, for the further manifestation of the glory of God, and the
acquisition of glory to his sacred name, etc. It may seem an idle question, why
the Lord suffers so many sinners, so as his own number is but a little flock
in comparison of those Herds; for sin being a quality must inhere in some
Subject, and if there were no sinners tolerated there could be no sin: but yet
let me a little further enlarge upon this Argument.

1. God suffers so many sinners, that some of them might be made Saints: by
Nature there is none righteous, no not one, all are Children of wrath, one as
well as another, all that are implanted into Christ, were natural branches of
the wild Olive; they are made otherwise by an engraffing, and implantation into
the Lord Jesus Christ. (It is the Metaphor which the Apostle uses, Romans 11. v.
17, 19.) Those, all those whom the Lord quickens, were at first dead in
trespasses and sins. It is the saying of a very ingenious Author, Non est
sterilis Deo patientia sua, ut saltem fatigatione taedeat peccatores
voluptatum. Gods patience, says he, with sinners is not barren, if it were
only for this, that God by suffering sinners, many sinners, does at last tire,
and weary some out of their delight and pleasure in their lusts: thou that
say, why does a pure, and holy God endure so many vessels of wrath fitted
for destruction, do but remember that thou thy self were once a Child of wrath,
thou were once a person fitted, both by Original sin, and by many actual sins
for destruction; God suffered thee to go on a long time in thy own ways, that
he might weary thee of thine own ways, and bring thee home unto himself; why
may not God do so by many others? They are yet as wild Asses, but why may not
they also have a month in which God may take them? The Children by adoption
are picked out of the Children of wrath. Reservat Deus injustos misericordiae,
per inducias justitiae. God by the truce of his justice, (as Nierembergius
phraseth it) that is, by forbearing the execution of his punitive, and
vindicative Justice, reserveth unrighteous persons for mercy. This is one end
doubtless of Gods enduring so many sinners in the World, that he might bring
some of them, even so many as he has chosen unto life, to obtain eternal
Salvation. But yet some will say why does God permit such as he knows his long
suffering, and patience will never lead to repentance, let me a little answer
thy curiosity in this, and show thee, that even in this the Lords ways are
equal and his wisdom infinite.

2. Whether they well repent, and turn or no, it is but reasonable that that
God, who has sworn by his life that be desires not the death of a sinner, but
had rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live, should give them a
time to repent; and how should this be, if God should not bear with them, and
give them a space of life? If they never were suffered to think a thought, how
should their own thoughts another day accuse them? It is an aggravation of
judgment against sinners, That God gives them a space of repentance, and they
do not repent. How should God condemn them for their filthy speeches, their
hard speeches, their Oaths and Blasphemies, if God should not suffer them to
vent these things? How should they repent if they had no time to repent? If
they will abuse the patience of God, and after the hardness and impenitency of
their hearts treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, their blood is upon
their own heads, God is vindicated in his Justice.

3. The permission of sinners in the world seems reasonable, that if they
will not be made better, others may be made good by Gods patience toward them,
and forbearance of them. If there were none of these Briars and Thorns in the
world, how could God teach his people by them? Indeed this is one of Gods great
ends in the permission of sinners. But let me open this a little in two or
three particulars.

1. God by the exemplary punishment of them for their sins oft-times turns
others from their sins. It is true, God does not make all prodigious sinners
examples of his judgment in this life; but some he does, and by it makes others
to fear and tremble, and to avoid those Rocks upon which their Souls split. If
I remember right it is reported of Waldus, the Father of the Waldenses, that he
was converted by the sudden death of one of his companions: I know that
examples of judgments are not Gods ordinary means of conversion, nay they are
rare instances of converts that are made that way, especially where the word is
ordinarily preached. When Dives in the gospel fancied, that if one were sent to
his brethren from the dead they would believe, and avoid those flames, he was
told by Abraham, they had Moses and the Prophets, and if upon the reading and
hearing of them they would not believe, if one should go from the dead they
would not believe. Those that harden their hearts under the word, are
ordinarily judicially hardened against judgments, or other means that to the eye
of reason seem probable means to change their hearts, but are not under a
Divine institution for that end, as the word of God is. But yet to some they
are so far sanctified; God sometimes goes out of his ordinary road. Besides,
though such examples of judgment seldom prove sole, and principal causes or
means; yet they often prove partial causes, and social means, and together with
the word conduce much to such a blessed end. I have known one my self that has
owned the ringing of Bells, giving notice of persons that he knew, who probably
died in their sins, as a great means to awaken him to a consideration of his
ways and a change of heart and life, whiles his Soul reflected upon the sound,
and he said to himself what should become of me, if this Bell now rang for me;
if my Soul (as this poor wretched creatures Soul) were now before the Judgment
seat of Jesus Christ. Princes the time they go to School use to have their
Vmbraes, some other person (I forget it may be the name they use to give them,)
that they may be corrected for them, and their Prince by their correction might
learn to take heed of errors. The elect of God, those whom he has foreordained
to eternal life, they cannot die in their sins, but God suffers some vile and
wicked neighbors they have to perish in their reaking lusts, and makes this a
means to awaken them, to consider what sin will at last bring them to.

2. God defameth sin, by a plenty of sinners. It is one of the idle pretenses
men in this age have for their filthy stage plays, that sin is there
discredited by the representation of it; and showing the Spectators how ill it
becomes men to be debaucht: the truth is, virtue, and sobriety is discredited
there (for in the debauchery of them our age has exceeded all Heathens.) But
for those that will see the vileness and ugliness of sin, they need not see it
in a play in effigy: they may see it more livelily in the converse of their
neighbors, and I doubt not but much sin is restrained in the world, by the
much sin that is committed in the world: the reeling of the drunkard from one
side of the street to another, defameth drunkenness, and the indecent
immoralities of others both in their words, and actions, make sin more
abominable to many considerate Souls; as they say the fire is hotter in winter
by the Antiperistasis of the cold, so the heat of love to God and zeal for him
is advantaged by the excess of hatred to God, and his ways which they see in
others.

3. There is yet a third way by which the sinners of the world do good to the
Saints, and that is, augendo fidem, and ampliando patientiam, increasing their
faith and patience: every sinner is a grieving thorn, and a pricking briar to
the house of Israel, and by these briars and thorns God teaches them (as it is
said that Gideon taught the men of succoth.) It was the saying of an ancient
writer, Nullus bonorum habet inimicum nisi malum, qui ideo esse permittitur ut
vel ipse corrigatur, vel per ipsum malus exerceatur; that is, no good man has
any enemy, but a wicked man, whom God does therefore permit that either himself
may be amended, or the good man may by him be exercised. Thou that wondrest why
God permits so many sinners in the world, wonder why there are so many rods,
and ferulars for Children, why there are so many whipping-posts and racks, so
many bride wells, etc. Assyria is the rod of Gods anger, Isa. 10. God has many
Children, and his Children will have their wanton vagaries, and extravagances,
and must be brought through the world to Heaven, under the discipline of
persecutions, and many afflictions; wicked and profane men in the world are
Gods gaolers, and bride-well men, that keep his houses of correction; when his
servants are wanton and offend him, he sends them to these gaolers, he turns
them over unto wicked men. It was David's curse of his enemies, Psalm. 109.6. Set
thou a wicked man over him, and let Satan stand at his right hand. God when
his people offend him, sometimes sends them to the Extortioner, to catch all
that they have: Sometimes to a barbarous Soldier, to spoil all their labor;
sometimes to a persecutor, to rifle their houses, and plunder their pleasant
things, to lay them up in gaoles, etc. And thus a multitude of sinners is
necessary to Gods government of the world.

But yet (for we are very apt to dispute with God) how is it that the
providence of God suffers such an excess of riot, such a world of iniquity in
the world; if some sin be suffered, if some sinners must be endured in the
world, yet why so much sin? Though an easy, and manifold answer might be easily
drawn up to this from my former discourse, yet let me add 3 or 4 things.

1. Do thou that speak thus, consider what a dependency there is of one
sin upon another, and what an use God makes of one sin to punish another? Let
me a little discourse each of these. The moralist says, Virtutes sunt
concatenatae; Divines say as much of the graces of the Spirit of God, they have
a causative virtue, and influence upon one another, patience works
experience, experience hope. The Apostle tells us, faith works by love, it is
indeed productive both of love and hope, etc. It is also true that Vitia sunt
concatenata, vices and sinful habits are also linked together, and are
productive one of another. Lust conceives and brings forth, and sin finisheth
and then brings forth death. And, as it is observed in nature, the most
noxious Creatures are most fruitful, and teeming; so vice and sin is a most
fruitful teeming mother, one sin brings forth a multitude of sin. Drunkenness
is the ordinary mother, of whoredom, filthy, and profane discourse,
quarrellings and contentions. Who has contentions? who has babbling? (says
Solomon, in Pro. 23.29.) They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek
for mixed wine. 2. Again, God in his providence makes use of sin to punish sin.
But the equity of God in that motion of his providence, God willing I shall
hereafter more fully discourse.

2. To quiet your thoughts upon this permission of Divine Providence, I shall
offer to your consideration what Nierembergius, an acute Author, (though a
Papist) says upon this argument, That the quantity of sin which God permits
in the world, is nothing to what he bindreth in it. What a Brothel house of
uncleanness, what a Field of blood and oppression? What an universal Ale house
would the world be, were it not for the restrainings of Divine Grace? what but
this hinders, that every man is not a Cain unto his Brother, a Judas to his
Master, that every one is not an Heliogabalus for lust and luxury, as much a
monster of cruelty as Nero? The child of God jealous for the glory of God, is
often stumbled to see so much sin in the world; whereas he should rather be
taken up with the admiration of Divine Goodness, that there is no more
prodigious wickedness committed in it. Gratulor (says the aforementioned
ingenious Author) compendium peccandi, supremae illi bonitati fontanae and
miserationi qua tantus malorum ardor extinguitur. Would you blame a man, who
seeing your House all on fire, should quench that fire, and only leave some
straw burning in the Yard. The whole world lies in wickedness, there is a
great depth of lust and sin in all our hearts by nature. God so orders it in
his Providence, that though he thinks fit to leave some lust burning, yet he
smothereth and restrains the far greater part. He suffers not the
thousandth part of that blasphemy, that uncleanness, that drunkenness, that
oppression, fraud, cruelty and injustice which would be in the world, if he
took off his hand of restraint from men's spirits. What he does suffer, his
infinite wisdom knows how to make an advantageous use of, for the glory of his
great name.

3. Consider that the time of sinning bears no proportion to that time, that
the Creation shall be without sin. The world has lasted five or six thousand
years; (Chronologers differ in their calculations) how long it shall last none
can tell: many have guessed and already find they have been mistaken. But
suppose (which is not very probable) that it should last five, six, ten
thousand more: this indeed is a long time for the Devil (who is the god of this
world) to reign, and have a kingdom in, and a world of sin has been committed,
and is committed daily in the world, and doubtless will yet be committed,
before God puts a period to the world, and to sinning-time: but if it were
twice ten thousand years, what is that to eternity, that eternity that shall be
consequent to the day of Judgment, when there shall not be a sin committed,
nor a sinner seen? The wicked, and all they, who forget God, shall be turned
into Hell. There shall not be the black patch of a sin in the beautiful face of
the new heavens and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness; when that
blessed time comes, it shall be all spent in praises and Hallelujahs. Stumble
not then at Gods Providence in permitting some sin in the world, who has made
so good a provision for his own glory unto a long eternity; which also shall
then be advantaged by the much sin suffered in the world. For those who have
much forgiven them, will love much here, and praise God much, both here and
hereafter: the high praises of God in the mouths of glorified saints, are
doubtless elevated by the high and much sin which they were guilty of in the
world. You read Rev. 7. of many thousands of Gods sealed ones which John saw,
and verse. 9, 10. A great number which no man could count of all Nations, and
kindred, and people, and tongues, that stood before the Throne, and before the
Lamb; clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; who cried with a
loud voice, salvation to our God, who sits upon the Throne, and to the lamb:
and again, verse. 12. Amen, blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving,
and honor, and power, and might be given unto our God, for ever and ever. Now
St. John desiring to know who these were, had this answer. These are they who
are come out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the lamb: therefore are they before the Throne of God,
and serve him day and night in his Temple. Had they not been defiled with sin,
they needed not have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb; and having
their robes so washed, they are elevated in the praises of God.

4. Finally, We may, as I said before, be assured that God would not suffer so
much sin in the world, If much sin did not tend much to the glory of God at
last. Here may be applied all that I said before in the former part of my
discourse on this Argument: showing you how the aboundings of sin, conduce to
the aboundings of grace.

1. That grace wherein man is merely passive and recipient, abounds by the
aboundings of sin. The Apostle tells us, that love covers a multitude of
faults: the more faults be covered, the greater love is discovered; God
magnifieth grace in abundantly pardoning; and there could not be abundant
pardoning, if there were not abounding sin; a multitude of mercies could not be
magnified, but upon a multitude of Sin. The breadth of the robes of Christ's
righteousness could never have been seen but for the extension of our
nakedness; it is the height, and depth, and length, and breadth of Sin, which
makes all Saints to comprehend what is the length, and breadth, and depth, and
height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that we might
be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.17, 18.

2. That grace in the exercise of which we are active, is also advantaged by
the much Sin which God permits. Our Savior tells us, Luke 7. those who
have much forgiven will love much, and those to whom little is forgiven will
love but little. It wonderfully aggravates pardoning mercy in the sense of a
gracious heart, to think how many are grinding at the same Mill of sin, that he
was formerly employed in, and that he should be taken, and they left: again, we
should never fight the good fight so well to the glory of God, if we had not
many enemies to fight with. But I have enlarged far enough in the Doctrinal
part of this discourse, showing you the reasonableness of this motion of Divine
providence in the sufferance of sin and sinners, so much sin and so many
sinners; notwithstanding the opposition that sin has to the honor and glory
of God, and to the purity and holiness of the Divine being: nothing remains as
to this discourse, but to consider how this may be useful to us.

Use 1. In the first place, Let me appeal now to the reason of every one that
hears me, whether God in the sufferance of Sin and sinners, does not act
consonantly to the wisdom of the Divine being. It is nothing but our ignorance,
and inconsiderateness, that can be any temptation to us to have any derogatory
thoughts of God, for these motions of his providence; God does all his own
works in infinite wisdom; and it is in infinite wisdom, that he suffers
sinful men to walk in their own ways. What though he be an holy God? This will
indeed conclude, that himself cannot be tempted, and that he tempts no man,
but it will not argue that he may not suffer any one to be tempted, that is, as
the Apostle James expounds it, drawn away by his own lusts, and enticed. What
though he has a power to put a period to sin every moment, yet certainly God
is not obliged to do all that he can do, but his power (as ours also is) is
governed as to the exercise of it by his will. What though sin dishonors
God, and impeacheth his glory, he knows how to vindicate himself, and to
recompense himself as to his glory, and that many ways, from the sins of men.
True it is, that it is from the lusts and wickedness of sinners hearts that so
much sin is committed in the world, yet it is also from the sufferance and
permission of Divine Providence. God being directed by his own infinite wisdom
to govern the world in this method, and thus to make a difference betwixt Earth
and Heaven; so to order it, that hereby the vessels of wrath may be fitted for
destruction, and his chosen ones by many tribulations occasioned generally from
the sins, and sinners suffered in the world, may be prepared for the Kingdom of
God. O the height and depth of Divine wisdom? How unsearchable are Divine
judgments, how are the ways of God past our finding out?

Use 2. But (in the second place) let every one take heed of taking any
occasion from this discourse, to give himself a liberty to sin. This is the
Apostles reflection upon this, he foresaw the ill conclusion which corrupt
hearts, would draw from these premises; therefore adds, Romans 6.1. What shall we
say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid: he makes
it his business in that Chapter to show that no gracious justified Soul can do
so. How (says he) can they that are dead to sin live any longer therein? So
again, Romans 3. v. 7* He foresaw that some would say, if the truth of God has
more abounded through my lie, why then am I judged as a sinner? Such thoughts
are ready to rise up in our hearts, why am I blamed for sinning if God has
glory from my Sns? Or why should I be judged as a sinner, if the aboundings of
sin, advantage, and make way for the aboundings of grace? Surely God ^hen
cannot so severely revenge himself upon me for sin. To restrain such wild
thoughts, as these from entering, or prevailing in any of your Souls, let me
offer some few things to your consideration.

1. Consider first, if any good come by sin, to the particular soul that
sins, it must be from the abounding of gra^e. Sin does not of it self, or
from any particular affection or disposition in it, do any soul good; God
indeed sometimes turns it for good, so that a soul may say, it is good for me,
that God suffered me to fall into such a sin. Sin in its own nature tends to
nothing, but the ruin and eternal destruction of a Soul: it must be from the
aboundings of grace, if any good come to the soul from sin; the aboundings of
Divine grace in the free pardon, and forgiveness of sin; or the aboundings of
grace in the infusion of gracious habits, by which the soul is made more
brokenhearted, more humble in the sense of sin, more watchful against it for
the time to come, and careful to avoid all temptations to it. The wages of sin
is death, and the work of sin tends to death, to debauch, and to debase a
soul. If a sinner gets to eternal Life, it is through the gift of God; if by
reason of his former sinfulness, he now loves God more, and be more zealous for
God, and more afraid to offend God, all this is of grace, and grace is free.
Now reason teaches every man, not wilfully to run upon his own ruin, in hope
that he shall experience the kindness of a friend in such a ruined estate. Who
will hang himself, that his friend may show him kindness to cut the halter? or
commit Treason against his Prince, to give him occasion to pardon him? We use
to account it no prudence to lie at the mercy of another, either as to our
lives, estates, or reputations. Who will give away his estate, that the charity
of his friends may appear in relieving him? The mercies of God are indeed
beyond the mercies of men; but as infinite as they are, presumptuous sinners
have no reason to lean upon them. Oh, consider sinner, that it must be through
grace, if thou ere be saved. And though where sin has abounded, God sometimes
does make grace to abound; yet it is not thy wisdom to sin that grace may
abound.

1. Because Grace, pardoning grace, does not abound toward all in whom the
aboundings of sin are found: grace abounds but to some that have sinned. How
know thou (seeing grace is nothing else but love acting freely) that it
shall abound toward thee? If it does not, thou perishest for ever: that it
shall, thou do not know. Thousands sin, toward whom grace never abounds in
the pardon of their sins.

2. Because presumptuous sinning, is as great a block as it is possible for
thee to lay in the way of Divine grace. The soul that does ought
presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord, and has broken his commandment,
that soul shall be cut off from his people: because he has despised the word
of the Lord, and has broken his commandment; that soul shall be utterly cut
off, his iniquity shall be upon him, Numb. 15.30. Now what soul can possibly
sin presumptuously, if he does not, who says in his heart, I will sin that
grace may abound?

Cons. 2. Secondly, Consider, duty is never to be measured by the event of our
actions, but by the rule of our actions. If thou sinnest thou breakest the Law
of the Lord, thou violatest his commandment, and despisest his word. Sin in it
self is an inordinate action, and therefore to be avoided; though the
Providence of God orders these actions very often, both to his own glory, and
for the particular good of sinners: we are to measure our actions by the Divine
rule, and by that to square them, not from the event of them which Divine Grace
and Power makes. Certainly, thou will say that Judas, and Pontius Pilate, and
Herod, and the rest of those who were in a confederacy against the life of
Christ, were all exceeding guilty before God, and will, some of them, in the
great day, most righteously be turned into Hell, for crucifying him who was the
Lord of life; though God used their action, as a means to procure the
expiation, and atonement of the World: thousands shall be saved by the effusion
of that blood, for the spilling of which yet they will be damned. What though
God will suffer sin to abound, that his Grace may much more abound; yet this is
no license for thee to suffer sin to abound, thou art to guide thy action by
the Divine rule. God governs his by his own infinite Wisdom, God makes the
best of thy bad market; but yet it is thy concern to make the best market thou
can, both for thy own soul, and for the glory of God.

Cons. 3. Thirdly. What if God may get himself glory, and may get himself glory
from peoples sins; yet this glory, 1. May be from others, not from thee. 2. It
may be only a glory gotten upon thee. 1. I say, first, possibly the glory which
God will get from thy sins, shall be from others, not from thy self. Many
times, the sin which makes the sinner worse, subjecting him to the wrath and
vengeance of God, debauching and defiling his soul, makes others better; so God
has a glory from his sin. The persecutor tries the faith and patience of the
Saints, and is a means to help them to the Kingdom of Heaven, and so God has
glory from his sin; but it is from others, not from the sinner; he in the mean
time damneth, and destroys his own soul. 2. Possibly God will get himself
glory upon thee, upon occasion of thy sin, as he said, I will get me honor
upon Pharaoh: That was by breaking him in pieces, by destroying both him and
his Army in the Red Sea. This is small encouragement to thee to go on in
sinning, because God will get glory from thy sins; thou can not assure thy
self, that he will get himself the glory of his pardoning, or sanctifying grace
from them.

4. Will thou say, But if I may bring glory to God, I ought to do it, though it
be by my damnation? Consider, That no man can in any sincerity, pretend to the
willing of the glory of God by sinning. The Reason is, because sin is directly
opposite to Gods Glory. What sense is it to will the glory of God by
dishonouring him? Sin is a thing, which of its own nature dishonors and
reproacheth God. Can thou pretend to design the honor and glory of God, by
doing that which is directly contrary to it? It is a question, whether our
reasonable natures will suffer us to will the glory of God in our own
damnation? but it is impossible, that any should sincerely wish the glory of
God, and pursue this wish by wilful and presumptuous sinning.

Object. But still will the poor creature say, Why am I judged as a sinner?
What reason has God to condemn me for my sins, if he gets glory by them?

Sol. 1. I answer, Because the judgment of God is a righteous judgment, he
proceeds against men according to their actions, and the merit of them, not
according to the event of their actions, wisely ordered, besides, and beyond
their natural tendency to the glory of his own holy name: That the sinners
works issue in the glory of God, is Gods work, not theirs; and they can
therefore expect no reward upon that account. Besides, the eventual necessity
which the Providence of God puts upon things, does by no means justify the
obliquity of the actions. Our Savior tells us, it must needs be, that offenses
come; but woe be to those by whom they come. It must needs be that sin should
be committed in the World: God has determined to permit them, men's lusts hurry
them into the commission of them; Gods Providence must fetch him a great deal
of glory from them; but yet, woe be to the sinner, without a timely repentance.

Use. 3. In the last place, Does God in infinite Wisdom (as you have heard)
permit sin in the World, and that for the end that I have showed you, that he
might be glorified? Let us then make it our business, to make such uses of the
sin that we see in the world, and the sins our selves have committed in the
world, as by occasion of them God may be more glorified by us. If you ask me
how this may be, it may easily be gathered from my preceding discourse; but yet
for the sake of those who are of meaner capacity, let me in this branch of
Application recapitulate a little, 1. For the sins of others which we see
permitted in the World.

1. Let us be quickened upon the view of them to adore the patience, and
long-suffering of God. Do thou hear a wretch curse and blaspheme, and profane
the great and dreadful name of God, and defy the God of Heaven, challenging
his own damnation? and do thou see God suffering him to live from year to
year, and to go on in this course? Do thou see another in the height of
rage against the people of God, endeavoring if it were possible to root out
all Religion, and daily devouring those that are more righteous than himself?
Let it help thee to recognize the patience of God, do thou upon occasion of
others profaneness and blasphemy, give God the glory of his patience. Let it
make thee many a time reflect and say, O what a patient God is the God in whom
I trust! he sees these vile wretches, he could as easily crush them, as I with
my foot can crush a worm; yet he spares them, and with much long suffering,
endures the vessels of wrath fitted for Hell.

2. Let the view of the sins of others which thou see God permitting for his
own wise ends, make thee adore the wisdom of God. Thou art posed to think what
glory God can procure to himself, from the profaneness and blasphemy of wicked
men; but God will certainly do it, and would never suffer their profaneness, if
he did not know how to do it. O! the infinite wisdom of God, that can make the
wrath of man to praise him! Let thy heart be affected with that meditation.

3. Again, Do thou see the world of sin that abounds, do thou hear of
prodigious lusts, blasphemies, cruelties, etc. which make thy soul tremble? Let
God upon this occasion, have the glory of his free-mercy and grace toward thy
soul. Bless God that he has given thee another spirit. Say, Lord, why was not
I as one of these? I had the same seed of sin in me, my heart was as full of
original lust and corruption as theirs? Oh! what reason have I to adore the
free grace of God, that I am not as this beastly drunkard, as this unclean
wretch, as this monstrous blasphemer! If it had not been for free and rich
grace, I had been as bad as they: It is that which made me to differ.

2. But let God have glory from us upon the occasion of his so long suffering
us to walk in our own ways. Now that may be many ways, let me a little
particularly direct here also.

1. Let it make thee live in a daily admiration of free grace, both in
pardoning thy former guilt, and in renewing, and changing thy heart. This, this
is a work not for a rapture, not for an hour, or a day; but for eternity. It
will doubtless be a great piece of our work when we come to Heaven, to cry
salvation to our God and to the Lamb. Blessing, and glory, and honor, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving be to the Lord for ever and ever. It should be much of
our work upon the earth, if we have either obtained the sense of the pardon of
our sins, or a good hope through grace: you shall find St. Paul beginning most
of his Epistles with such a blessing of God. O you redeemed of the Lord, you
that are come out of a state of deep guilt, you can never think, nor speak
enough, what God has done for your souls. It is a great work of God, and he
does his great works, that they may be had in remembrance. Let God have some
glory from thee, for pardoning those sins by which he has been much
dishonored by thee; and as for his pardoning, so for his sanctifying grace.
Admire God, bless God upon the view of thy former hard heart, profane and
unclean spirit; say, Ah Lord! that ever such an Ethiopian as I was, should
through grace change my skin, that ever such a rebellious spirit should be made
obedient, such a profane wretch should ever have an heart toward Heaven; that
ever one that loved his lusts so well as I have done, should be taught of God
to love him, and fear him, and delight in him! that a Saul should be amongst
the Prophets! a Paul a persecutor, a blasphemer should be amongst the Apostles!
a Mary Magdalen should wash her Lords feet, and be so humbled, as to wipe them
with the hairs of her head! the offering up of these praises glorifieth God.

2. Let thy former sins make thee more abundant in penitential tears, and in
confessions of thy sin unto God. God delights to hear a soul acknowledge its
iniquities, and take shame to it self. Let thy reflection upon thy former ways,
make thee with Peter to weep bitterly, make thee go alone, and confess thy sins
unto him that has forgiven them; the more vile thou make and ownest thy
self, the more thou glorifiest God, as a God of free grace, and infinite mercy.

3. Let thy former sins engage thee to love God more. Has much been forgiven
thee, O love much: Say with thy self, O, I can never love God enough, I can
never do enough for him. I that have done so much against him, I that have been
so profane, so vile, that have spent my youth and strength in the service of my
base lusts and pleasures, and am yet received to mercy at last; What shall I
render unto the Lord? Let my burning love to God, and whatsoever bears his
image and superscription, make some amends for my burning lusts, which had
consumed my poor soul, if God had not mercifully quenched them.

4. Let thy former sins, and thy reflections upon them, make thee to walk
softly, and humbly, with God all the days of thy life. Do thou find thy
heart at any time begin to swell in an high opinion of thy self? Say, my soul,
What has a sinner to be proud on? what have thou that have been so filthy, so
polluted to glory in? High thoughts become not one that has been so dirty, so
polluted, and unclean as thou have been.

5. Let your reflections upon your sins, bring forth that brood of graces which
the Apostle mentions, 2 Cor. 7.11, Indignation, carefulness, fear, vehement
desires, revenge; Indignation at your selves for your former errors. Anger
never has a truer object, than when it is exercised upon our selves for our
miscarriages. Revenge, a revenge upon our selves, this doubtless lies much in
acts of mortification, and self denial; men's denying themselves in the lawful
use of the liberty of those things which they had before smfully abused. Fear,
a fear of again salling into such remptations, as they had before been overcome
with. A Care in looking to your ways, and vehement desires in all things to
please God, and to walk more perfectly before him.

6. Finally, You shall make an improvement of your sins, if your reflections
upon your former sins, both of omission and commission, shall engage you to
more frequent acts of homage to him, to be more in prayer, in praise, in
hearing, etc. Thus it was with St. Paul, he reflected upon himself, as not meet
to be called an Apostle, because he had persecuted the Church of Christ. But
(says he) by the grace of God I am that I am, and his grace bestowed on me was
not in vain, but I labored more abundantly, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10.

SERMON XXXVIII.
Job V. 6, 7. Although affliction comes not out of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground: yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks
fly upward.
THe words which I have read to you, are the words of Eliphaz, the Temanite,
unto his friend Job, who Chap. 3. had made so bitter a complaint of his
afflictions: whether he had this title from his Ancestors, as some think, Genesis
36.11. where we read of one Eliphaz (a descendent from Esau, who begat Teman),
or from his Country (which I take to be most probable); for we read Jer. 49.7.
concerning Edom, thus says the Lord of Hosts, Is wisdom no more in Teman?
Teman was certainly a City in the dominion of Edom, famous both for wise and
valiant men, as you may learn from verse. 8. of the Prophecy of Obadiah; Shall I
not in that day (says the Lord) even destroy the wisemen out of Edom, and
understanding out of the Mount of Esau, and thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be
dismayed: It is not much material. This Eliphaz in probability was an Edomite,
an inhabitant of Teman, a friend of Job, who by appointment was come with the
two others to visit Job, upon the report of his great affliction: he began his
discourse in the former Chapter, and continues it in this. I shall not concern
my self in the other part of Eliphaz his discourse, in the Verses which I have
read to you, he seems to comfort Job from a twofold Consideration.

1. That the hand of God was in his affliction; for that is implied, when he
says, Affliction comes not out of the dust, neither does trouble spring out
of the ground.

2. From the consideration of the fate of man. Man (says he) is born unto
trouble, as the sparks fly upward. The Proposition of these two Verses, is
plainly this:

Prop. That God has a great hand in all the evils that come upon us. Man is
born unto trouble, and it is as natural to him, as for the sparks to move
upward, and his afflictions come not out of the dust. It is the observation of
an Eminent Divine of our own (in his excellent commentary upon this Verse),
that this is a Proverbial speech, and the sense of it, That affliction comes
not by chance or fortune; and so the dust, and the ground in my Text stands
opposed, 1. To God, and 2. To our selves. What if I should offer my thoughts,
that it is an Eliptical speech, and much parallel to that, Psalm. 75.6, 7. For
promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South:
But God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another: So here
affliction springs not out of the dust, nor trouble out of the ground, but
God has an hand in all; only this latter part is left to us to be understood.
My present design will not lead me to consider how far man is felo de se and
the author of his own evils, having the meritorious cause in his own soul; but
I shall only discourse of God as the efficient cause, the other will fall in,
as that which moves God to such an execution of Providence.

Here are two branches in the Proposition.

1. That man is born unto affliction and trouble, as the sparks fly upward; it
may be understood that he has a right to it, as the sparks have by the Law of
Creation, disposing and ordaining them to such a motion; so man has a legal
right to trouble, by virtue of the first Covenant, In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall dye. Now this man has as a sinner depraved, and fallen
from that Original rectitude in which God created him. 2. He has a natural
fitness and disposition to it, and is by his nature subjected to a variety of
afflictions and troubles. As the sparks, by reason of their levity, have an
aptness to move upward; so has man through his natural constitution, ever
since the crasis of his humors was impaired and spoiled upon the fall, a
native fitness and disposition to receive impressions of affliction and trouble.

2. That this trouble, these afflictions come not upon us by chance, but by the
hand of God. It was the saying of a good Prophet, 2 Kings 6.33. This evil is of
the Lord. The Prophet speaks of evils more generally, Amos 3.6. Shall there be
any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? and verse. 5. Can a bird
fall in a snare on the earth, where no gin is for him? And this is true of all
species of penal evils, which we call troubles and afflictions, whether they
fall upon our bodies or spirits, or in our estates, or from our relations, etc.
The Question is,

Quest. How this is consistent with the goodness and mercy of God? Can God be
the Author of evil? Lam. 3.33, 34. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve
the children of men to crush under his feet all the prisoners of the Earth.

Sol. The answer is very easy, there is an evil of sin; of this God cannot be
the Author, he can neither be tempted with evil, nor tempt any man: but there
is an evil of punishment, indeed in it self not evil, as I shall show more by
and by. Of this none doubts but God may be the Author, yea there is no evil
of this nature in the City, which he has not done.

2. Nor is this at all inconsistent, either with the purity and holiness, or
the mercy and goodness of God; for, as I said before, these kind of evils are
only nuncupatively so, and have no more evil in them, than as they are
ungrateful to our pallats, and but nicknamed evils by us, following the
fallible judgment of our senses. Quae vulgus infamat malorum titulo arcanis
suae benignitatis decrevit; God in his eternal thoughts of love, has decreed
the effecting those things which we scandalize with the name of Evils: Evils of
punishment are good under a disguise, and we should not call them Evils, if
sense did not cast a mist before our eyes. It Is sense, deceivable sense, that
both makes us call the real evils of sin good, and the real good things of
afflictions, and troubles, evil. When God once dispelleth this mist, and opens
the eyes of the spiritual understanding, it sees after another manner, and it
then cries out with David, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray,
but now I have kept thy word. Verse. 71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Thus the child, when it comes to
understanding, blesses the rods and ferula's with which he was corrected; and
which, when he was a child he deprecated, and would gladly have cut in pieces.
Let me show you a little, that these things which we disgrace with the name of
Evils, and of which the holy and gracious God is not ashamed to be the Author;
are not Evils, but such as deserve a better name, and such good things as are
some of the greatest goods the child of God meets with on this side of Heaven.
To this purpose we will consider them,

1. As they contribute to the Predication of the Holiness and Justice of God,
and the making him to be feared and adored in the world.

2. As they many ways contribute to the happiness of those that shall be saved.

1. I say, first, as they predicate the glory of Gods Justice and Holiness.
Justice and Holiness are two eminent Attributes of the Divine Being, so
essential unto it, as if he should not be just and holy, he could not be God.
Now the Holiness and Justice of God could never be so known in the world, but
for the afflictions, troubles, and punishments which are abroad in it; God is
infinitely removed from our senses, we can only read him in his word, and in
his works. The word of God evidenceth these two Attributes to us by faith, for
the word is the object of faith, and faith is the evidence of things not seen.
The word of God speaks God a just and holy God, and therefore we believe it:
but as in a State, the Justice of the Magistrates would never be seen in making
good Laws, and discoursing just things, if he never put them in execution; so
neither should we ever have any demonstration of the Justice and Holiness of
God, if it were not for those afflictions and punishments of sinners, by which
he declares to the world his abhorrence of sin, and the exactness of his
Justice. I remember the Apostle, Romans 3.25. tells us, That Christ was set
forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare Gods
righteousness: and God being about to destroy Pharaoh, says, I will get me
honor upon Pharaoh. What honor? the honor of his Justice and Righteousness.
It is the great interest of God, to declare unto the world his Justice and
Holiness; How else should he have the revenue of his glory from these
Attributes? Now I say, Evils of punishment are upon this account great goods,
and were necessary, if they were causative of no other than this good. If God
obtained no more from them, than the Proclamation of his Holiness, and
Predication of his Justice and Righteousness, yet this were enough: and thus
much he gains from his punishment of the worst of men; if they be not made
better by them, yet God is by them made more glorious, and declares his
righteousness. The argument is this: Those things cannot be evil, however we
may miscall them, which immediately tend to make God more glorious in the eyes
of the world: but this all Evils of punishment do, they speak God a pure and
holy God, and a just and righteous God. But there is much more to be said than
this is.

2. They very much contribute to the good of such as shall be saved. 1. They
contribute to make us better while we live here; and, 2. To make us eternally
happy hereafter. It is only the foolish child that (as I said before)
quarrelleth at the rods and ferula's that correct the wildness and wantonness
of its youth. The grown man blesses God, and thanks his master for them: He
that spares the rod, says Solomon, hates the child: but he that loves him,
chasteneth him betimes, Prove. 13.24. and advising Parents, again says, Prove.
23.13, 14. Withhold not correction from the child; for if thou beatest him with
the rod, he shall not dye: thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver
his soul from hell. In short, 1. By afflictions, Souls ordained to life, are
kept from hell. 2. By afflictions, such souls are fitted for the Kingdom of
Heaven.

1. I say, first, By afflictions, as by a divine sacred means, the souls of
such as are ordained unto life, are saved from hell. If man's rod may be a means
to such a blessed end, Gods rod will certainly do much more: the rod and
reproof give wisdom, Prove. 29.15. Solomon tells us, That foolishness is bound
up in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction shall drive it far from
him, Prove. 22.15. It is as true as to the Children of God, as it is with
reference to the Children of men. Have not you observed a tender Mother,
sometimes seeing a foolish child too busy with the fire, or candle, taking the
child's hand, or finger, and holding it so near, that it scalds, or burns it
self, so learning the burnt child to dread the fire? God has never a child,
but is too too ready to be playing with hellfire, playing over the hole of the
Asp, and den of the Cockatrice. God takes his childrens fingers, and scalds
them a little with the fire of Hell in their Consciences, making them to be a
continual terror, instead of a continual feast, or with the Candles of
Afflictions and outward trials, and thus they are delivered from Hell. Adam had
never seen death, he had only heard of it in the threatening, in case he did eat
of the Tree that stood in the midst of the Garden: he put out his hand and took
of the fruit, and did eat, his posterity shall now see and feel death; they
shall be in deaths often, and have leisure to think, if the torments of the
stone, or the gout be so great, what will the torments of Hell be? If I am not
able to stand under the terrors of an affrighted Conscience for a few months,
how shall I abide everlasting wrath? That so he may be more wary and afraid.
Demonstrations of the truth of the word, have a great force with our
unbelieving hearts. God has therefore in infinite wisdom and goodness, so
ordered it, that one while his people shall be in the fire of a Fever, another
while in the darkness of a divine desertion. By the first they shall learn to
conclude how hot the fire of Hell must be; by the later, how dreadful that
utter darkness shall be, which shall be the impenitent sinners portion: what it
is to be forsaken of God for ever, upon the hearing that dreadful sentence,
Depart from me you cursed, into everlasting burnings, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. They shall sometimes find Satan at their right hand, to learn
them what it is to be with the Devils to all eternity; they shall sometimes
want bread to eat, and water to quench their thirst, and left from thence to
conclude, what the condition of a Dives is, that would in those flames be glad
of a cup of cold water to cool his tongue: they shall have extremities of pains
for a little time in some particular joints and limbs, and thence gather what
the torments of the whole body and soul must be for ever and ever; when all the
Vials of Divine wrath shall be poured out upon them. I do not doubt, but many a
soul in glory, is this day blessing God for its life of trials, pains and
afflictions; and could we hear them speak, they would tell us, they were
beholden in a great measure, to the thousands of little hells, they suffered
here, for the Heaven to which they have crowded, through much tribulation, and
waded through many waters of Marah, which they found it difficult (while they
were in their delicate flesh) to drink of, because their taste was bitter.

2. By afflictions and troubles the saints are fitted for the Kingdom of God.
They are such good things as accompany salvation, and make the heirs of
salvation fit for the Kingdom of God. We must be made meet for the inheritance
of the saints in light before we come to it, Col. 1.12. and we are made so by
afflictions in a great measure. Do you sometimes see some beautiful stones in a
famous structure, shining with variety of Colors, and adorning the places
where they are? How came they (think you) by this beauty? were they only
beholden to the Painter for an ingenious mixture, and laying on of colors?
This would never have made them so without hewing, and smoothing, and
polishing; but both these together complete their beauty. The Stone-cutter
first hews off their roughness and polisheth them; then the Painter lays his
colors upon them. Amongst other expressions, by which the Scripture expresses
the blessed state of the saints, this is one promise, Rev. 3.12. I will make
him that overcomes a pillar in the house of my God. To make a Soul a Pillar, a
beautiful glorious Pillar in the House of God; it is not enough that the holy
spirit comes, and like a Painter adorneth the soul with its varieties of
gracious habits; but the Providence of God (especially as to some of them, who
are of courser rougher constitutions,) must also come and hew, and cut, and
polish them, with varieties of trials and afflictions; and thus they become at
last beautiful Pillars, beautiful for faith and patience, for self denial and
meekness; strong to bear the cross, and submissive to the burden of it. Thus
by many tribulations they enter into the Kingdom of God; by many tribulations,
not only as the road to Heaven, the dark entry into that place of light, but as
means fitting them for Heaven; Files, filing off that rust with which they
could never enter in there. Even the man according to Gods own heart confessed,
that before he was afflicted, he went astray; and that his afflictions had
contributed to his learning of the Lords Statutes. We sillily call afflictions
evils; but consider thy self (says an acute Author) how often have thou been
made better by those things, those afflictions which thou defamest with the
name of evils? Augustine lamented, that a Fever had corrected that lust in him,
which the love of God, and the meditation of that could not extinguish.
Certainly the same reason which forbids us to call that good which makes us
worse, will likewise restrain us from calling that evil which makes us better.
God does ex dispendio naturae, parare compendium gratiae; (in the phrase of an
ingenious Writer) he makes the outward man decrease, that the inward man may
by it increase: so that troubles and afflictions seem but Divine inventions to
make the saints both more holy, and more happy. How should we have lien
grovelling on the earth, if God had not prepared us there a bed of thorns; and
lien always sucking at the worlds breasts, if God had not rubbed them with this
wormwood? How often would the pitifully wanton heart of a good Christian have
been priding it self at a Looking-glass, if God had not spoiled her smooth face
with the Small Pox, or some other deforming disease? How often is the love and
delight of a soul cantoned out to a Wife or an Husband, to a Child or a Friend;
and how little a share has God of it, until he cuts off these suckers from the
roots of our souls? How little time can a man or woman often times find for
Meditation or Prayer, for examining his heart, and reflecting upon his ways,
till God shuts him up in a Prison, in a sick Chamber, etc. that he has
nothing else to do? then he cries with the Church, Let us search and try our
ways, and turn again to the Lord. How little, how seldom should we with any
seriousness, or in any solemn manner remember God, if God sometimes did not
forget us? When should we be willing to entertain thoughts of a better life, of
a more enduring substance, if we always had full measures of the contentments
of this life? The uncertainty we have of earthly riches, makes us look for the
more enduring substance. A banishment from our Country, or daily persecution
and vexation in it, makes us think of, and prepare for a better Country. By
dying daily, we become willing to dye, and to be with Christ. If we did not see
the gourds that refresh us, and keep the heats of the world from our heads,
come up in a night, and go down by an East wind the next night, we should cry,
it is good for us to be here, let us build us Tabernacles. We should be married
to the world, and unwilling ever to think of a divorce, or a being married to
Christ, if God did not sometimes let us experience that we had a lie in our
right hand, were fond of a picture, and embraced a shadow. The Gaols, and
prisons of the earth make the earth more bitter, and the liberty of the sons of
God more sweet. The pains of the earth, and the labors of the world, make the
rest of Heaven and the joys thereof more desirable. Besides, that faith and
patience are no Summer-graces: if we should never have any Winters, when should
they have any exercise? Tribulation works patience, and the hour of trial is
the time for its perfect work. But this were almost an infinite Theme to
discourse in its latitude, the variety of good which flows to the souls of
Gods people from afflictions and troubles; they are by them tried, purged, made
white; they are by them made more holy and humble, all which good justly
entituleth God to a being the Author of them; they do not only flow from his
justice, as the just punishments of sin, but they are the noble effluxes of his
goodness, and are so far from derogating from the glory of that, that they
exceedingly tend to the commendation of it; and we are mistaken in the notion
of them when we call them evils, and make up the judgment merely from sense,
which indeed so nick-nameth them. I know indeed there is another Phenomenon of
difficulty here, and that is, how it can stand with the justice of God to
punish his people for those sins for which he has accepted a satisfaction from
the Lord Jesus Christ, and given an acquittance in the actual justification of
a sinner, and the forgiveness of his sins? but I have spoken to that before,
when I spoke to that Observation, That God with the afflictions of this life,
does often punish past, and pardoned sins. I shall therefore pass on to the
application of this discourse, which I shall dispatch in two words of
exhortation. 1. To own God in all your troubles and afflictions. The second
shall be to study such an improvement of your afflictions, as instead of
quarrelling at Divine Providence in these dispensations, you may see reason to
bless God for them.

Use 1. In the first place, Does not affliction spring out of the ground, nor
trouble out of the dust? O then, in the day of your troubles look not only upon
the ground, let not your eyes be merely upon the dust. It is the silly Dog that
runs after the stone that is thrown at him, and biteth that: wiser creatures
(such as man is) overlook that, and consider the hand that hurled it.
Afflictions of all sorts, are but stones out of the sling of Divine Providence,
they are Gods messengers; he says to the Disease, go, and it goes; come, and
it comes. Art thou sick? see the Lord calling for the disease that disordereth
thee. Art thou reproached? see also this affliction not rising out of the dust.
Shimei cursed David; Perhaps (says David) God has bidden him curse. It is
strange how much light to this purpose shone upon the Heathen. I remember
Virgil an heathen Poet, in the story of the taking of Troy, brings in Aeneas
telling great stories of his valor, in that night Troy was taken: he tells us
that he at last saw Helena the strumpet, for whom (as that fable goes) all that
misery came upon that place, and was about in his heart to kill her: two things
the Poet represents as hindering him. 1. That he should get no reputation by
killing a woman: But a second was, his Mother Venus appeared to him, and tells
him. Non tibi Tyndaridis facies invisa Lacenae
Culpatusve Pani, verum inclementia Divum
Has evertit opes, sternitque a culmine Trojam.
That he was not so much to blame Helena (the Grecian strumpet) nor Paris the
Trojan adulterer, that by his fetching her from her Husband, a Nobleman of
Greece, had given occasion to that war, but the anger of the gods: (they were
Heathens, that was their dialect) and then the Poet goes on, describing how
Venus showed her son Aeneas, Neptune o'returning the foundations of the walls
with his Trident. Juno keeping the gates open, and calling in the enemies her
favorites from the Ships to invade the City, and Minerva in another place
battering down the Towers, and Jupiter himself putting valor into the Grecians.
Even the Heathens by the light of nature understood their afflictions coming
from a Divine hand. Certainly Christians that have the Scriptures should
understand more. Art thou, or are thy relations sick? See God standing at thy
beds head, and giving strength to thy disease: art thou in Prison, see the hand
of God locking the prison door upon thee, and keeping thee in bonds: could we
do this, let me but instance in two or three excellent effects which would
follow our recognizing God, as the Author of our afflictions.

1. It would restrain both our hands and tongues from all thoughts of private
revenge upon instruments of evil to us. O how ready, if any has done us evil,
are we to say, I will do unto him, as he has done unto me. How natural is a
Lextalionis, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, and an ill word for an
ill word, and an ill turn for an ill turn. Indeed the Magistrate ought
sometimes to give it; he is the Minister of God to revenge evil: but could we
but say with David, perhaps God has bid him curse, God has bidden him to
smite me with his tongue, or with his fist of wickedness. We should leave
vengeance to him, who has said, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it; I
speak not this exclusively to any thing but thoughts of private revenge. It is
lawful enough to seek for satisfaction for injuries done us in our names or
estates, by the Magistrate, and according to the laws of the Nation in which we
live. But I say, the consideration of the hand of God in all the evils that
come upon us, should bridle our thoughts as to private revenge.

2. A due consideration of this, would also stop our mouths as to all effluxes
of impatience; could we but say concerning every evil that befalls us, this
evil is of the Lord: we should presently think, Who shall say unto him what
do thou? It is the Lord (said that good man) let him do what seems him
good: I held my peace (says David) when I understood it was thy doing. Indeed
our rational nature is so far convinced of Gods sovereignty and justice, and
right to do with his creatures (especially sinful creatures) what seems him
good, that it is in some measure disposed to be silent before the Lord: but
especially every renewed and sanctified nature, readily puts its mouth in the
dust, and cries out, Why does the living man complain, a man for the punishment
of his sin? The justice of God, the wisdom, goodness and mercy of God stopeth
his mouth. It Is true, we are but flesh, and the best of Gods people have their
fits of impatience; Job (you know) had so; but Godly men will quickly come out
of them, as Job did, Job 40.4. Behold (says he) I am vile, what shall I
answer? I will lay my hand upon my mouth: once have I spoken, but I will not
answer: twice, but I will proceed no further.

3. This would turn our eye (in the days of our afflictions) upon our hearts,
and make men think of searching and trying their hearts, and turning again unto
the Lord. While men think of their afflictions as springing out of the ground,
and arising merely from the dust, the natural accident of their frail bodies,
which being dust, must be crumbled again to dust by such means, they only look
to the Physician for a repair of their lapsed health; while they only eye their
troubles as arising from men, they look for nothing but a Buckler to defend
themselves, or some cudgel to thresh their adversaries with, requiting them for
the evil they have done them. But when they come once to see God in their
afflictions, and to look upon them as coming from a Divine hand, from the great
God of Heaven and Earth, then they begin to smite upon their thighs, and to
say, What have we done? Let this be therefore our business, of what kind soever
our Affliction be.

Use 2. In the second place, let not this only engage us to own God as the
author of our evils of punishment, but also to apply our selves unto God as to
him who alone can help us in our times of trouble. Nature directs it; how ready
are we in our bodily pains and afflictions to cry out -- O God help me, etc. I
remember the saying of our Divine English Poet. My heart did heave, and there
came forth, My God;
By which I knew that thou were in the rod.
The word of God directs it. Is any man afflicted, let him pray, says the
Apostle. Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee and thou shall praise me. This was the practice of the Saints in all
times. It was Asa's fault in his Affliction, that he sought unto Physicians
more than unto God; it is the condition upon which help, and deliverance is
promised, be the species of the trial, and affliction what it will.

Use 3. In the last place, let us learn from hence, instead of quarrelling at
Divine Providence and Justice in afflicting, so to behave our selves under our
troubles, as we may see cause to bless God for them, and to admire Divine
goodness in them. Nazianzene tells us a story of one Philagrius, who in his
affliction brake out into this expression, Gratias ago tibi Pater! tuorumque
hominum conditor, qui nos invitos, and reluctantes beneficiis afficis, and per
externum hominem purgas internum; that is, I thank thee, O Father, and maker of
man thy servant, for that thou do us good against our wills, and while we
reluct to it and by the outward, purgest the inward man. And I have read a
remarkable passage of Plinius Secundus (an Heathen too, in an Epistle of his to
Maximus) The sickness of a friend (says he) has lately informed me, that we
are best when we are weak for who is there, who while he is sick is covetous,
or proud, or wanton, who then serves his amors? who is ambitious? Then says
he a man remembers that there is a God, and that he is but a man, then he
admireth none, envieth none, despises none; then he neither hears nor
carries false tales. O (says he) that we could be as well, when we are well
as when we are sick. This is that I could wish too. But the worst is, we are
very religious, and innocent when we are in affliction, but when we are got out
of the net we are as foolish, and wanton as before. God by trouble and
affliction for the time does us good, Subtilissima ejus beneficia (says an
ingenious Author) Sponte dantur sed non sponte recipiuntur. But for the most
part, that goodness proves like a morning-dew. But in order to the improving
trouble, and affliction, let me only commend to you four things with which I
shall shut up my discourse on this argument.

1. The first is Meditation. Affliction is a seasonable time for much
Meditation. It is a fit time for thee to meditate wherefore it is that God
contendeth with thee, Job 10.2. I will say unto God do not condemn me, show me
wherefore thou contendest with me. The time of affliction is a fit time, when
man sits alone, and keeps silence; and the noises and hurries of the World do
not disturb him, to be thinking what he has done, communing with his own heart
upon his bed; and certainly this will have a good influence upon thee, if thy
sickness will make thee avoid eating a dish of meat for the time to come; which
appears to thee, the proximate cause of thy disease, surely it will lay some
Law upon thee as to the favoring of such lusts, which appear to have been the
more remote cause provoking God in that dispensation against thee. It is also a
fit time for thee to meditate of the vanity of all the contentments of the
world.

Non domus and fundus non aeris acervus and auri,
Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febrim.
Experience then teaches a man. That Riches profit not in the day of wrath;
all a man's house, and Land, and Gold, and Silver, will not relieve him in a
Fever; what a pitiful thing is beauty, or strength, which one fit of sickness
depriveth us of, what a lamentable excrement is well set hair; which a cough
turns into baldness? what vain things are fine clothes, which in sickness are
exchanged for rags? It is a seasonable time also for thee to meditate of Divine
goodness, what a mercy it is that the Rattle snake has a rattle; The Tiger,
another beast to give warning of it is being near? that thou have diseases to
put thee in remembrance of thy latter end? It is a fit time also for thee to
meditate of the power of Divine wrath?

2. Vow unto God in the day of thy trouble; Jacob did so, Genesis 28.20. So did
David, Psalm. 132.2. Lord (says the Psamist) remember David and all his
afflictions, how he swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of
Jacob. Jonah did so, Jonah. 2.9.

3. But then remember to pay thy vows. Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God,
Psalm. 76.11. Better you should not vow, than that you should forget to pay what
you have vowed. This were to snare thy self in the words of thy own lips.

4. To this end (lastly) Pray that you may keep your sick bed impressions upon
your hearts. In your troubles, you had thoughts of your eternal state upon your
hearts, then you were thinking what you should do if you should be called to
Gods judgment seat. Then you were saying, If I live, I will be another man, I
will keep Sabbaths better, be more in Prayer, more in reading, and hearing the
word, more watchful over my heart, more careful of my ways, more conscientious
in my dealings, more strict in my Family. If ever I recover, I will by the
grace of God never be so worldly, so carnal as I have been: well thou art
recovered, now pray that thou may fulfill thy vows, and that these
impressions may not be off thy heart for ever.

SERMON XXXIX.
Job 5.6, 7. Although Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground.
IS there any evil in the City, and I have not done it? (says God by his
prophet Amos.) The interrogation is an undoubted Negation; Vain man would be
wise, though (says Job chapter 11.12.) he be born like a wild Asses colt. Hence it
employeth it self in traducing the equal ways of God, as if they were unequal.
Hence he says how can that God who is infinite in goodness, be the Author of
evil? Is it good for him to oppress, to despise the work of his hands? Job
10.2. In my last discourse I showed you that it was consistent enough with the
goodness of God to be the Author of the evil of punishment. We look upon a
staff in the water, and it appears to us crooked, when the fault is not in
our staff, but only in the weakness and imperfection of our sight, and the
unquietness of the water; pull the staff out of the water, and look upon it by
a due medium, and that is straight. We look upon things with blood shotten
Eyes, and they appear of strange colors but when our Eyes are rectified, then
we see them in their true and native colors. We look upon a star at a
distance, and it appears to us as a spark, or a very small body of light, when
indeed it is a great Globe; we see a little man standing by a Dwarf, or Pigmy,
he appears of a great stature to us, remove the little body from him, and then
you see his true dimensions.

1. Gods ways of Providence, as apprehended by our imperfect and weak reason,
are seen like a staff in the water. The ways of God are right ways, but we have
a very imperfect faculty of arguing, judging, and concluding; and can see them
no otherwise than our lapsed reason represents; this makes us call them crooked.

2. Our hearts are also vitiated, and blood-shotten, with lust, prejudice and
passion, and this makes the ways of God appear to us in strange colors; when
once a Christian has cleared his Eyesight with Gods Eye Salve, then he sees
them as they are; and having quitted himself of lust and prejudice, he finds
no difficulty to conclude them holy, just, and good.

3. The wisdom of God in the ways of his Providence, is like the Sun or Moon in
the firmament, which are vastly great bodies, but appear to us but small
Globes, and full of spots, by reason of our distance from them. Who can by
searching find out God? who can find out the Almighty to perfection? it is as
high as Heaven, what can thou do? deeper then Hell, what can thou know? the
measure thereof is broader then the Earth, and longer then the Sea, Job 11.7, 8.

4. We look upon the great God in his ways, and motions of his Providence, as
standing by our reason, and fancy, and compare his wisdom with ours, measuring
the Divine reason and actions, by our yard-wand, and the wisdom of God seems to
us a deformed crooked thing, but let our natural reason be rectified, and
sublimated, and once Sanctified by Divine grace; let our minds be enlightened
by the Spirit of God, and we shall then see things clearly as they are. These
are the general causes of men's misjudgings and misapprehensions concerning the
Equity of Gods ways. But let God be true, and every man a liar: let him be
holy, and let what will become of man's reason and judgment. It is bad Logic,
but it may be good Divinity sometimes, to hold the conclusion, when we cannot
deny the premises which seem to argue against it. There goes a story of
Melancthon, that being once pressed by Eccius the Papist with an argument, to
which he had not an answer ready, he took time, and said, Cras Respondebo; that
he would the next day give answer to it. It may be a Christian may sometimes be
put hard to it in his thoughts to solve all the Phaenomena's. Which a subtle
Sophister will make appear upon the ways and motions of Divine Providence, but
in this case let him hold to the conclusion, and say I am sure the Judge of the
whole Earth cannot do unjustly; however it be, God is holy, and just, and good,
I will study an answer to this Objection. Socinus some where says, that if he
should meet with any thing in Scripture which were contrary to his reason, he
would not believe it to be the sense of Scripture. Proud man! Must he think to
measure infinite wisdom with his bucket, and to scoop out the Ocean of wisdom
that is in God, with his spoon? How much better had it been said I believe what
God has said, and I will study to reconcile it to my reason if I cannot do it,
I will rather deny my own reason than the Revelation of the Divine will and
wisdom. Luther I think was in the right when he would have the Christian say,
Tu Ratio stulta^es, audi verbum Dei and tace: Thou, reason, art a fool, hear
the word of God, and hold thy peace. But to proceed yet further in my
discourse. You have heard it is not inconsistent with the purity, and holiness
of the Divine being to be the Author of evil of punishment. Because evils of
punishment, are indeed no evils, only so miscalled by us. They are great goods
to the people of God. But once more vain man that would be wise, the man of
reason that thinks he can show us a mote in the Sun, or a crooked angle in the
straight lines of Divine wisdom, comes forth and says.

Quest. Supposing it consistent with the purity, holiness, and goodness of God,
to bring evils of punishment upon men, who he knows will be made better by
them, and be helped by those little Hells to escape greater, and by much
tribulation be fitted for the Kingdom of God; yet what is this to those whom
God knows will never be made better, never be made conformable to the image of
his Son. If these evils of punishment, are true and perfect evils how can an
holy God be the Author of them?

1. I answer. We must grant, that there are some stones in the Earth, that no
hewing will fit to make pillars for the house of God. God by his Providence may
knock them in pieces, and by afflictions break them, but afflictions and
troubles shall never mend them: and indeed this is an ordinary observation, as
Fire softneth wax, but hardneth clay, so affliction which often makes the
people of God better, ordinarily make wicked men worse, they come out of the
fire worfe than they went in, Pharaoh was such a one, ten plagues one after
another, wrought no change in his heart but for the worse, he was more hardened
than he was before, Ahaz was such another, who when he was afflicted, yet did
more wickedly; the Scripture sets a brand upon him for it. This is that King
Ahaz, and we have too too many instances of such in the age, and generation in
which we live.

2. Again, what if some be afflicted, who grow worse, and get no good by their
Afflictions, yet may not God use means that have a rational tendency to their
good? Trouble and Affliction is the voice of God unto the worst of men, crying
to them for repentance and reformation; they will not hear the rod, must not
therefore God use it? Or does it not speak when he uses it? What if God
knows that affliction will do them no good, but give them occasion further to
harden their hearts; is God bound by his Providence to act according to his own
Omnisciency or counsel? God deals with men who are reasonable creatures in a
reasonable way, one while persuading and exhorting, another while chastising
and corecting; shall not God by his Ministers persuade all men to repent, and
to believe, because he knows from Eternity who will or will not obey those
precepts? Shall not God by his rod teach men to repent and believe, because he
has determined not to give special grace to all? certainly it is but
reasonable, that God should allow them reasonable means in order to what he
requires of them, though he knows they will make no use of them; in their
not doing so, they at least render themselves inexcusable.

3. This Question proceeds upon a grand mistake, viz. That all punishment is
(...), for the amendment of the person punished; and that if such an end cannot
be propounded, or shall not be obtained, Punishments are things not
reconcilable to the holiness and goodness of God. This now is a very great
mistake, and not only contrary to Divinity, but to the reason of human Policy.
It will the more Illustrate this matter, and make the way of God in this appear
more easy and plain, if I show you,

1. That all men agree, that the amendment of the offender, is not the only end
of punishment, but there are other ends for which the wisdom of man judges
punishments necessary.

2. That as to God Reason holds much more, and the Scripture has revealed
other ends which he aims at in punishment, than the amendment of the person
offending, which are highly consistent with his holiness and justice. Seneca, a
great (Pagan) Philosopher, mentions three ends in punishments. 1. The amendment
of the person offending. 2. The security of others who may be in danger by his
lawless sinful courses. 3. The amendment of others. It is true there is a
punishment, the end of which is only the amendment of the person offending.
Thus Parents punish their Children, Masters their Scholars and Servants: to
this purpose Magistrates use whippings, brandings, houses of corrections,
goals, etc. But these kinds of punishments cannot reach unto death; because
there can be no amendment of a person after the determination of his Being. It
is true, sinners by being cut off sometimes, are stopped from further sinning;
but properly, none can be said to be made better by being put to death; and if
there were no other end of punishments dictated by humane reason, than the
amendment of the person offending, humane Laws could ordain no capital
punishments: But the wisdom of the Politicians of the world, we see has
ordained capital punishments for some offenses, and some offenders; yea, and
degrees of torment in death, according to the degree of the offense. Amongst
us, in case of Treason, Malefactors are hanged, drawn and quartered; in case of
murder, and other Felonies, they are beheaded, hanged, burnt, etc. and we
shall find this wisdom of men justified by the supreme Wisdom of God, who
ordained capital punishments for diverse offenses, as you read in the Law of
Moses. Although therefore the amendment of the offender be one great end of
punishments, for as much as deliberate, and ordinary acts of naughtiness, beget
in us a further proneness and inclination to them, and beget ill habits in us;
punishments are ordained, the smart of which, may wean us from the pleasure
which arises to us from sinful acts: but though this be one, and that a great
end of punishment; yet it is not the only end for which the wisdom of man
teaches him to make use of them. There are others, such as are, The
vindication of the authority of the superior from contempt, the amendment of
others, the security of others, etc. It is indeed true, That man not being his
own end, can do nothing rightly, but what he does for some good out of himself;
there must be something out of himself, for which he acts, and that something
must be good, or his action will be evil and bad: But it is not necessary, that
this good which he makes his end in punishment, should be the amendment and
reformation of the party punished: If it were, he could never punish with
capital punishment. Besides, there is a twofold greater good than this, which
he may aim at. 1. The glory of God, and the vindication of the Divine Majesty.
2. The good either of the whole body of the political society, with which he is
betrusted, or some considerable a part of them. Hence it is, that Magistrates
rightly cut off Blasphemers for the vindication of the glory of God, as well as
for the example of others: and cut off Murderers for the security of other
men's lives, as well as in execution of the Divine Law concerning such
offenders. But

2. Let me show you, that as to punishments inflicted by God, Reason holds
much more; and as the Scripture reveals, so Reason justifies other ends
which he both proposes, and obtains in the punishment of sinners, to whom
affliction does no good in order to their amendment and reformation. Let me a
little open this.

1. Grotius de jure belli. l. 2.
It is truly said by a learned Author, That Gods actions may be right, though
they have no other end beyond themselves. Man's cannot be so, he must act for
some end, some good end, and that must be out of himself; but the case is
otherwise as to God; he is his own end, and may punnish a sinner for no other
end than that he may be revenged upon him. He has made the wicked for the day
of wrath, Prove. 16.4. and says that Author, The Scripture declaring, that God
takes a pleasure in his vengeance upon sinners, that he will mock at their
calamity, and laugh when their fear comes: as also the last judgment, are all
evident demonstrations of this. Now, supposing this to be true, it is apparent
enough, that Gods bringing evil and trouble upon such sinners, concerning whom,
he knows that they will never be amended by their troubles, but made worse;
is reconcilable enough to the purity, holiness, and justice of God. I will
(says God) get me glory upon Pharaoh. I told you in my last Exercise, that if
there were no other good that came from evils of punishment, than the
predication and magnification of the justice and holiness of God; yet that were
enough to warrant the entituling of God to be the efficient cause and Author of
them: The making of Gods Power and Justice known, the vindication of his
Sovereignty and Holiness, is a noble effect of Divine Providence. Now, where
God does not obtain the reformation and amendment of the sinner, yet he
obtains this, he gets himself glory upon the poor wretch which actively
refused to give him glory. Divines and Philosophers too truly say, That in
punishments, Respicitur, aut utilitas ejus qui peccavit, cujus intererat
peccatum non esse, aut indistincte quorum libet; that is, there is always a
regard had, either to the good of the offenders, or to the good of some others,
whose interest it had been not to have had the offense committed. Supposing God
not always in punishments, to have a respect to the good, and amendment of the
sinner that is punished, which is most certainly true, as to the punishment;
yet he has respect unto another, and that a far greater good, the glory of his
own great name. Now certainly, it is consistent enough with the holiness,
justice, and goodness of God, to act for the glory of his name, though it be to
the prejudice and ruin of his creature; considering that it is such a
creature, as by his rebellions has reproached the Sovereignty of his maker:
but this is but one good which God obtains by those punishments.

2. Again, God by the punishment of sinners, though he obtains not their
amendment and reformation, obtains yet another more Universal good; and that
two ways. 1. In the reformation and preventing at least the wickedness of
others. 2. In the upholding of the government and discipline of the world. This
is one end of punishment by men's Laws; therefore are some malefactors hanged up
in chains by the way-side, that all who pass by, may take notice, and be afraid
of committing such wickedness. God by punishing and troubling sinners, strikes
a terror into the hearts of others, that if he pleases not to sanctify their
affliction to their salvation; yet by it much sin is hindered in the world, from
whence his name had been dishonored. Yea, and Lastly, Government and
discipline is in some measure kept in the world, and Gods authority is upheld:
These ends now God obtains in the punishment of the vilest and worst of men;
though it may be they, instead of being reformed and amended, do but blaspheme,
because of their plagues; yet others seeing them, are afraid, and take heed of
such courses. O! what a place of murders, and frauds, and beastly lusts, and
all sorts of disorders would the sordid passions of men make the world, were it
not for the troubles and afflictions with which God follows some sinners! for
though some are to be corrected and restrained by nothing; yet doubtless
multitudes of people are at least restrained by the exemplary vengeance which
they see God taking upon some sinners, either immediately by his own hand, or
by the hands of magistrates, who do not bear the Sword in vain, but are a
terror unto evil doers. Now let us but consider the great God, as willing his
own glory, and that in every attribute, that of justice, as well as that of
mercy; or consider God as the great and mighty sovereign of the world, whose
interest it is to keep up his authority amongst men, and an aw and reverence of
those rules which he has pleased, to prescribe for the regulation of men's
lives: Or as he is a most pure and holy God, offended and injured by the sins
of men, whose concern it is to restrain the exorbitancies of creatures; or
finally as an only wise and prudent governor, to whom it belongs so to carry
himself (observing rules of justice still) toward individuals, as may best
conduce to the peace, good, and tranquillity of the whole. I say, which way
soever an intelligent person does consider God, it appears but an exceeding
reasonable motion of Providence, that he should plague and chastise some
sinners, though he knows they will get no good; but instead of being amended,
will be made worse like Ahaz.

Use 1. Let us observe from hence (in the first place) how just and reasonable
the ways of Divine Providence are. O house of Israel (says God) are not my
ways equal? are not your ways unequal? The reason of our quarrellings at the
motions of Divine Providence, is our weighing them with false weights, and a
deceitful balance, or our superficial and perfunctory consideration of them.
The truth is, we do ordinarily accuse God as inequal in those things, wherein
he acts after the manner of men, whose equity yet we never question; we will
allow the Potter to have power over the clay, and to make this piece of clay a
vessel of dishonor, and that a vessel of honor; yet we will not allow the
Lord of the whole earth, the Potter to the whole world of men, who are but so
many pieces of clay in his hand to do the like: we will allow a sovereign
Prince a power to kill, and to save alive whom he pleases; but we will not
allow that Princes maker to have the same jus absolutum, the same sovereign
power, though it be granted, that he never executes it, but upon the demerits
of his creature: we can allow an earthly Prince a power to punish Wives for the
errors of their Husbands, and to disinherit Children for the treasons of their
Parents; but we think it much to allow a power to God justly to punish
relations for the sins of their correlates. We can understand the justice and
reasonableness of men in punishing some malefactors, with such punishments, as
leave no room for repentance and amendment; but must call Gods justice,
holiness and goodness in question, if he does but the same thing we do every
day. But O you sons of men! are not the Lords ways equal? Let us learn under
tremendous dispensations of vindicative justice, to lay our hands upon our
mouths, to acknowledge and confess the Lords righteousness, and instead of
disputing the issues of Divine Justice, to adore them, and fulfill the Lords
ends in them.

Use 2. This in the second place, may show us one cause of rejoicing in the
executions of Divine Justice, upon mischievous, and incorrigible sinners. The
truth is, it speaks both an ill temper, and worse Christianity, to rejoice
merely in the evils that befall the worst of men. Charity wishes well unto
all, and obliges men to mourn with those that mourn. But upon other accounts,
the cutting off of sinners is matter of joy. Psalm. 58.10, The righteous shall
rejoice when he sees the vengeance, and he shall wash his feet in the blood of
the wicked. Gods coming with vengeance is made the matter of a promise, Psalm.
35.4. It has been made the matter of Gods peoples prayer, Jer. 11.20. But, O
Lord of hosts, that judge righteously, that triest the reins and the heart,
let me see thy vengeance on them; for unto thee have I revealed my cause, so
Jer. 20.12. And certainly it is also matter of praise, and thanksgiving, and
that upon more accounts than one.

1. As God, by it, gains the glory of his justice, and gets himself honor.
Gods glorifying of himself, and making his name great, is what the people of
God ought continually to rejoice in. We see sometimes persons, and parties in
the world, opening their mouths against Heaven, and bidding a bold defiance to
the God that reigns there, and daring Divine Justice a long time; we cannot
but stand and tremble at it. The patient God at last takes these wretches so
doing, and cuts them off in the midst of their bold defiances. They have it may
be some years, as complements of their discourse, challenged God to damn them,
and the Devil to take them; God at length falls upon them, teareth them in
pieces, makes them to know there is a God in Heaven that judges the earth. Now
when the righteous man sees this vengeance, he has reason to rejoice, that
God has made known himself, vindicated his glory, etc. It is matter of trouble
to them, to see any go down into the pit; but it is matter of rejoicing, that
by this they are made to know that there is a God.

2. As God by it fulfilleth his word. All a good Christians comfort and hope is
laid up in the Scriptures, and he is highly concerned in the truth of them; if
they be true, he is well enough; if they be not, he has trusted in a lie. The
Scriptures are very full of threatenings of Divine Vengeance against impenitent
sinners. Now it is a great temptation to the People of God, to question all the
Scripture says, when they read it full of threatenings and revelations of
Divine Wrath against blasphemers, perfecutors, oppressors, and bloody men; and
yet see the world full of such vile miscreants, and them prospering, daring God
to vengeance, and yet having their houses safe from fear. But when they see God
after some months and years of patience, hanging up these wretches in chains,
cutting them off it may be in the strength of their years; however in their
full career of persecution and mischief, with their oaths, curses, and
blasphemies in their mouths; there they see God fulfilling his word: and this
is matter of joy and rejoicing, though that such souls are gone down into the
pit, is a lamentation to them, and shall be for a lamentation.

3. It is matter of joy and thanksgiving, as they are secured by it from those
evils which they felt from those men: Every good man has reason to be thankful
to the judge, for doing justice upon such as are notorious murderers, highway
men, firers of houses, etc. because his life, his goods are by it in a measure
secured. Every good man has reason to rejoice, and to bless God when he cuts
off Sons of violence, men of blood, persecutors, etc. as their peace and quiet
is by Divine Justice secured. Who will not say, that Joseph had reason to bless
God, when he told him, He might now again return into his own Country, for
those were dead which sought the young child's life, Mat. 2. It is said of the
man according to Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 25.39. And when David heard that Nabal
was dead, he said, Blessed be the Lord that has pleaded the cause of my
reproach from the hand of Nabal. An Heathen Philosopher puts mischievous men in
the same rank with Foxes and Serpents, and defends men's natural right to
destroy them. I am sure it is matter of rejoicing, when God keeps us from
private revenge, and lets us see his vengeance upon them.

4. Again, It is matter of praise and rejoicing, as God by this means upholds
the discipline and government of the world. We ought to rejoice, and to give
thanks unto God for all those acts of his Providence, by which the world is
kept in order, and preserved from running into that confusion, into which the
exorbitancies of men's lusts and passions, and the remission of the reins of
government by Magistrates, sometimes would presently hurry it, if it were not
for some extraordinary acts of Divine Justice, by which God lays a law upon
men, and strikes a terror into them. It is therefore a great mistake for any to
think they may not rejoice upon occasion of the ruin and downfall of the
Churches Enemies. It is true, in the ruin of others none ought to rejoice. But
in the Vindication of Gods glory upon them, in the deliverance of his people
from them, in Gods fulfilling of his word in their destruction, in the
preserving and upholding the peace, government, order, and discipline of the
world, put out of order by them, they ought to rejoice, and heartily to praise
God for them.

Use 3. In the third place, Has God other ends to be obtained in the
punishment of wicked men, besides their amendment and reformation? Let us
endeavor then, that he may obtain them. That a sinner by his trouble and
afflictions should be amended, reformed, and made better, must be the product
of his personal endeavor, with Gods blessing upon it. But for those other ends
I mentioned, we may contribute to Gods obtaining of them, when at any time we
see any such tremendous dispensations, as Gods subverting wretches in their
heaps of sin, making some dreadful examples of his vengeance.

1. Let us first give God the glory of his Justice, and Truth, and Goodness,
reflecting upon these Attributes of God in our Meditations, speaking of them
unto others. Do you see God executing vengeance upon some sinners (for he does
not make all examples of his wrath)? but do you see him at any time remarkably
punishing some notorious transgressors? Be thinking with your selves, Oh how
righteous a God is our God? who shall not fear before him? how true is his
word? I have had sometimes Atheistical thoughts, and been ready to think God is
not so severe against sin, as I have heard; or his word is not so certain and
faithful: but, as I have heard, so I now see in the dealings of God, he has
said, Blood-thirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. Lo
here men of violence, bloodthirsty, cruel men, persecutors of the People of
God, cut off in their youth, in the height of their rage, and be speaking to
your children, to your servants, to your friends, of the Justice and Truth of
God upon such occasions: you have heard that God does many times execute
vengeance upon finners, that he might get glory upon them; that being they
would not actively glorify him, he might fetch his glory out of them; and he
may be taken notice of in the world as a just and righteous God, and as a pure
and holy God, of purer eyes than to behold any iniquity; and as a mighty and
powerful God, that is able to break in pieces the proudest and stoutest rebels,
that set themselves in opposition to him.

2. Let us take example and warning from the harms of others. This is one end
that man aims at in his punishments, to make others afraid of committing the
same things: and this is one thing which (as you have heard) God aims at. It
was Gods command, Deuteronomy. 13.11. that those that tempted others to Idolatry,
should be stoned to death, verse. 9, 10. God in this could not propound the good
or reformation of the person so stoned. Well, what does he then aim at? Verse.
11. And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and do no more any such wickedness:
you have the same thing in the case of the Rebel, that should do any thing
presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17.13. And all the people shall hear and fear, and do no
more presumptuously: you see this is one thing God aims at in punishing
notorious sinners; and indeed, what he does most generally aim at, where the
punishment reaches to death, especially if sudden; for although it be truth,
that that God who had mercy upon the thief upon the Cross, may have mercy upon
a profligate notorious wretch in the last hour, yet there is little hopes of
it: but I say, in such punishments, undoubtedly next to the vindication of his
own glory, the great end which God aims at, is the terror and affrightment of
others, that they may hear, and fear, and do no more wickedly. Let us therefore
make it our business so to improve such Providence, that God may have his end
upon us, by our hearing, seeing, fearing, and avoiding those sins against which
we see the wrath of God so remarkably revealed: Thou see in the world
debauched drunkards, filthy adulterers, profane Sabbath Breakers, prodigious
blasphemers, mischievous Nimrods, great hunters, and persecutors of such as
fear God; some of them (it may be) young men, some with numerous families,
others of fair estates, etc. healthy bodies like enough to have lived in the
world many days. On a sudden with David, Psalm. 73.18. Thou see them cast into
destruction, brought into a destruction, as in a moment, utterly consumed with
the Lords terrors; thou see them written childless, or with Ananias and
Saphira struck dead; thou see them as David, Psalm. 37. saw the wicked in
great power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree; by and by he passed
away, and lo he was not; thou soughtest him, and he was not found; thou see
them, their families, their estates, consuming like the fat of lambs, into
smoke consumed away. This age (if you observed it) has afforded you many such
sights: how many young wretches have you seen cut off in the beginning and
strength of their years! Knots of Hectors (as this age calls them) in whose
constitution nothing could be seen, but that they might have outlived hundreds
of us, and in a few years they are tumbled into their graves: you seek for
them, and not one of the old brood found. O let all of us hear, and fear, and
take heed of those lewd courses, which God has in our sight so revenged upon
them. It is one end of these severe punishments of God, that others should
learn righteousness. Let us by these warnings be startled, and take heed of
those sins in which they lived, and which we may reasonably judge brought this
quick vengeance upon them.

Use 4. Lastly, Does God sometimes punish sinners, who he knows will but be
worse, not at all amended by his rod: And is this consistent with his Holiness
and Justice? O let every one of us then that has been afflicted, or that shall
fall under the afflicting hand of God in any kind, make it our business to
search what Gods end was in his afflicting us, whether he aimed at our good, or
merely his own glory, and the good of others. Let me tell you, it will be a
very sad reflection for us, to reflect upon Gods visiting us with some grievous
sickness, or punishing us in our estates and relations, etc. and not to be able
to satisfy our selves, that God aimed at more in his bitter Providence, than
the getting himself glory upon us, or the bettering of others; for there is
none comes out of an affliction, but he comes out better or worse, more
hardened, or with a more softened and tender heart, more holy, or more profane
and stupid. But you will say to me, How shall we be able to make up this
Judgment? who knows the aims and intendments of a man in action, but the spirit
of a man that is within him? and who knows the aims and intendments of God,
save only God himself? I answer, God is never frustrated of his end; man may,
as not being able to accomplish it, God cannot. It Is easy therefore to know
the Counsels of God concerning thee in this case by the effects: Examine
therefore what effects has thy affliction had upon thee. Wherein art thou more
amended? The amendment of a person upon the sad Providence of God lies much in
these two things, Repentance and Mortification. 2. Having a better heart for
duty, and being more diligent in the practice of it. Search and examine thy
soul then upon these two points. Say to thy self, 1. My soul, thou have drank
of the waters of Marah; God has dealt bitterly with thee; I have been at the
very brink of the grave: I have lost a fair estate, God has crossed me in my
dearest relations. What sins have I the more reflected upon for these things?
wherein have I been more humbled for the mighty hand of God upon me, or mine?
what sin more have I left? am I grown less worldly and carnal? what lust have I
got a further victory over? have I a better command of my passions? am I grown
meeker? am I more humble? is my spirit more broken? do I see more of my own
vileness than I did? have I learned with Job, to abhor my self, and to repent
in dust and ashes, to lay mine hand upon my mouth? Or, 2. Enquire of thy soul,
wherein by this affliction, either thy habits of the grace, or practice of
piety and godliness has been advantaged; whether thy faith or patience be
improved, thy meekness and humility improved, or any of those habits of grace
which use to grow under the rod. Enquire of thy self, wherein thou art improved
as to the practice of Piety; whether thou have since thy affliction learned to
keep the Lords statutes, to walk in thy house in a more perfect way. Give me
leave to mind you what you see every day. It is the sign of a decaying plant,
not to shoot forth, and look more green, after a shower, much more to wither,
and dwindle after it: Afflictions are Gods showers, almost all sorts of people
in this Nation, have had great plenty of them within the age we have lived in;
the face of Religion amongst us at this day, gives little evidence, that Gods
aim in it, was the amendment and reformation of the persons under those
troubles and afflictions which they have met with; it concerns us to look to
our selves. If Gods end was only to try what we would be, to vindicate his own
glory, his power, justice, and holiness upon us, to deter others from the like
practices; whatever good may by our afflictions be occasioned to God in the
vindication of his glory, or to others in their learning righteousness, it is
but a sad symptom of ruin to our selves.

SERMON XL.
1 Kings XIV. 1. At that time Abijah the Son of Jerobam fell sick. Verse. 17.
The child dyed.
I Am opening to you the hard Chapters of Divine Providence, Actual Providence
justifying the Lords ways to be equal, even where they appear less equal to our
sense and reason. I am at present discoursing the Equity of Punitive
Providence. I have here showed you how consistent it is with the Justice,
Holiness, and Goodness of God, to be the Author of evil to, though not in the
Sons of men; the Author of the Evil of punishment, though not of the evil of
sin. I have showed you how consistent it is with the Attributes and Perfections
of the Divine Nature, to punish and trouble his own people, even such as he
has accepted of a satisfaction for their sins at the hand of his Son, whose
iniquities he has pardoned, etc. How consistent it is with the Wisdom,
Justice, Holiness, and Goodness of God to punish wicked men, though he knows
afflictions will do them no good, but make them worse, hardening their hearts,
and giving them occasion to blaspheme, because of their plagues. But we do not
only see adult, and grown persons smitten of God and afflicted, and those as
well such as fear God, as those who have no fear of God before their eyes; but
we also see children smitten of God, such of whom we say, They have neither
done good nor evil. The Question is,

Quest. How this dispensation of Actual Providence is reconcilable to the
justice and goodness of God.

That which blinds our eyes, and makes this motion of Providence appear more
hard and difficult to be understood by us, is the supposed innocence of
children, they perish oft-times before they come to exercise any acts of
reason. Concerning the eternal state of children, dying in their infancy, I
shall determine nothing, because indeed the Scripture (that I know of) nowhere
determines all so dying within the election of grace, nor that Christ as to all
such has expiated the guilt of Adams sin, or original corruption; nor that
effectual saving grace does always attend the Ordinance of Baptism, though they
be brought under it, which yet many are not. This is a great secret what God
does with the souls of children dying in infancy. But this is not what I have
to do with, what God does with the souls of such we see not; we have no
sufficient means to understand, and therefore freely leave them to the good
pleasure of God. But we see they are afflicted as well as others, they dye as
much as others, if not in greater numbers. Shall we say the hand of God is not
in this thing? Or that their sicknesses and deaths are no effects of punitive
Providence, or vindicative justice, but the mere product of a disordered nature
and temper? this were certainly to contradict the holy Scriptures, where we
find the afflictions of children made the matter of threatenings, the executions
of punishments upon them ascribed to God. God by his Prophet threatened the
death of David's child by Bathsheba; and of Jeroboams child in this Text, see
verse. 12. The afflictions and troubles of children rise no more out of the
dust, nor more spring out of the ground than others; their afflictions come at
his command, work at his command, bring forth the issues which he wills them,
and are punishments as well as the afflictions of more adult and grown persons.
My business must be to reconcile this motion of Divine Providence, to Divine
justice and goodness. In order to which, I shall offer you several
considerations.

1. Could I assure you, that all children dying in their infancy, are
undoubtedly saved, either as being within the decree of election, and all of
them chosen in Christ to eternal life before the foundation of the world, or as
having their share in the guilt of Adams sin expiated by Christ, and their
original pollution washed away in his blood, this question were determined, and
the objection of no value. It is a privileged soul that first gets out of the
prison of the flesh into the liberty, the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
Supposing this, it would be no act of justice and severity, but mercy and
goodness of God, to cut off our children from the womb, and from the breasts;
to deliver them from the bodily pains and aches, from all other vexations,
crosses and disturbances which they shall be sure to meet with in the world;
happy, thrice happy is that soul certainly that makes but one leap from the
womb into Abraham's bosom, that takes but one step into the world, and the next
into Paradise: and certainly this is the case of very many; Christ has told
us, that of such is the kingdom of God: if all such be not there (as to which
the Scripture is silent) yet many such are there, all chosen in Christ are
there. There is good hopes of the seed of those that fear God; the Covenant of
God is with his people, and with their seed: and how happy are they that can
get to Heaven with a groan or two, with such a degree of pain and aches, as
those little bodies can only bear, and that before their reason is improved by
its reflections, to make their pains and miseries more bitter. So that as to
all such as are ordained unto life, the case is plain; Divine goodness is
eminently seen in giving them so short a passage through the vale of misery,
and showing them a far shorter and nearer way to Heaven, than what more grown
persons must go, through much tribulation. Now though I cannot assure you this
concerning all, yet I can concerning many, which makes the day of their
afflictions and death to be much better than the day wherein it was said of
them, There is a child born into the world: and surely if the Thracians (who
were heathens) upon the prospect of no more than the miseries to which humane
life is subjected, could alter the common custom of rejoicing at Nativities,
and mourning at Burials, into a mourning at the birth of their children, and a
rejoicing and triumphing at the death of their friends; we to whom a life and
immortality is brought to light by the Gospel, and to whom the immediate
transition of elect souls out of a state of mortality and misery, into a state
of happiness and eternal blessedness, is matter of faith, have much more reason
to adore the goodness of God in the present determination of our childrens
lives, than to quarrel at Divine Providence for bringing such things to pass,
while it does us, nor ours, any further harm than depriving us of the little
pleasure we take in beholding those pictures of our selves, dandling them in
our laps, hugging them in our bosoms, while also this pleasure is embittered to
us by a thousand fears, and cares, and sollicitudes, and troubles, for, with,
and concerning them. But because I cannot assure you this concerning all,
something further must yet be said to vindicate the justice of God in this
dispensation.

2. Therefore, I say, the original sin of children is enough to justify God in
all his afflictions of Children: nor is this, that I know, denied by any
valuable or considerable party. It was indeed the opinion of Arminius, That no
person was damned, merely for original sin; but upon what grounds none of his
disciples have been able ever to tell the world, to any satisfaction: and it
were strange if they should, when the Scripture says expressly, Ephesians. 2.3.
That we are by nature the children of wrath, that is, (certainly) heirs of
wrath, and exposed to the wrath of God: and the Apostle tells us Romans 5.18.
That by the offense of one man, judgment came upon all to condemnation. Now
when as all men were by Adams sin subjected to wrath and condemnation, and by
their original sin, children of wrath: what ground has any to assert that none
shall be eternally condemned merely for original sin, would pose the thoughts
of any intelligent person, I think. I do indeed know that some tell us, that
Christ as to all men expiated the guilt of Adams sin, some add also original
sin; others tell us that is all washed off in Baptism. I want one clear
Scripture for any thing of this, but yet Arminius never denied (so far as I
have read him) that infants have not upon them the guilt of original sin, which
God may punish certainly, if not with eternal, yet with temporal punishments;
for even past and pardoned sins may be thus punished, as I have before showed
you in my Observations upon the motions of Actual Providence. Every infant
comes into the world under the guilt of the first man's transgression reckoned
to him, as he was in the loins of Adam, and under the want of original
righteousness, with an innate pravity and corruption of nature, averse
naturally to all that is good; prone and inclined unto that which is evil.
Supposing now what Arminius would have, and can never be proved, that God will
eternally condemn none merely for this sin; yet surely he may justly scourge
and correct with the utmost punishments short of eternal punishment, even this
guilt in children, which have not actually finned. It was Gods threatening
annexed to his Covenant with Adam; In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye. Some question how God justified it when Adam lived to nine hundred and
thirty years before he dyed. Divines therefore expound it, by eris mortalis,
thou shall be subject and liable unto death: in the day in which he did eat, he
became mortal; from that day he began to dye, and was made liable to that
change. Every child as soon it comes into the world eats of this forbidden
fruit, I mean, becomes liable to the guilt of its proparents eating, and so is
liable unto death. It is true, the Lord does not cut off all children, how then
should the world be replenished and stand, but yet he cutteth off some for the
declaration of his justice: as a Prince, when a whole City or Province is in a
rebellion, he will not cut them off all, because he will not waste and
depopulate a Country; but he will cut off some for the declaration of his
justice. Thus you see this motion of Providence is easily reconcilable to the
justice of God upon this hypothesis, that children are sinners, and under an
original guilt: and if we could be so confident, as some are, that none shall
be damned for that sin only, or that it is expiated on the behalf of all, or
washed away in Baptism, as to all born within the pale of the Church: Yet
nothing hinders but by the same justice by which God punishes past and
pardoned sins, (which I have formerly at large opened to you) God might yet
justly trouble and afflict little ones: they might be sick, and they might dye,
as Jeroboams child mentioned in the Text did; though verse. 13. says of him
expressly, That there was some good thing found in him, toward the Lord God of
Israel. Let this be a second consideration to satisfy you as to the
righteousness of God in these dispensations. But I proceed yet further.

3. This motion of Providence seems very reasonable, and competent to the
wisdom of God. That he might declare to the world, that he is that God in whom
all breath, he in whom they live, they move and have their being. If we should
see none dye but in an old age, we should be ready to think, that our candle
never went out but for want of oil; and should not understand how much we were
beholden to God for every hour of life: how much we depended upon him for our
daily breath, as well as for daily bread. Now it is but reasonable, that the
world should understand God to be the fountain of life; that sickness and death
do not merely depend upon second causes; but there is a first cause, that is
the efficient, the principal efficient cause of these changes, though he uses
a variety of second causes: he will therefore suffer irregular motions of
humors in children, which shall in them cause sicknesses and death, though
they never were surfeited with meats, nor Inflamed with drinks. He blows out
Candles newly lighted, to let us know, that the issues of life and death are in
his hand, and that the breath of man is not merely in his own nostrils; and it
is but reasonable that God should make himself thus known to us as the God of
our lives.

4. Again, this dispensation of Providence is reconcilable to the goodness of
God. God by this means does deliver little ones from the evil to come. This is
the very case in the Text, God was bringing evil upon the house of Jeroboam, as
he threatens, verse. 10, 11, 12. he intended to take away the remnant of the
house of Jeroboam, as a man takes away dung from the earth. Abijah falls sick
and dies, and this out of mercy to him that his eyes might not see, nor he have
any share in the evil which God was about to bring upon his Fathers house. God
gathers up the Lambs before the storm comes. It is said of Babylon, Psalm.
137. That he should be happy, that should take their little ones and dash them
against the stones: and we read in Scripture of such famines as enforced women
to eat their own children. Now God often cuts off little ones in his mercy to
them. I might here further add, that God by this dispensation preventeth much
sin in those that are thus taken away: But I pass on yet to some further
considerations, clearing Gods justice.

5. It is but reasonable that God should do this to punish the sins of the
Parents, and to do them good. It was one of my observations concerning the
motions of Actual Providence. That God does very ordinarily punish Relations in
their Correlates, Parents in their Children; and I showed you the
reasonableness of Divine Providence in this motion. It was for the punishment
of David's sin, that his child by Bathsheba died; and the death of it was
threatened by Nathan as a part of David's punishment, 2 Samuel 12.14. Possibly God
may sometimes do it to abate our affections to our children, and that he might
have more of our heart and affections; as the Gardener cutteth off the suckers
which draw too much from the root; and the country Housewife takes away the
Calf when it sucketh so much as it leaves no milk for the pail.

6. Finally, Why may not this motion of Providence seem reasonable, That room
might be left in the world. The world is a great Theater, in which he has many
to act their parts: God at first lengthned out the lives of the Patriarchs to
seven, eight, nine hundred years, that the world might be replenished with
Inhabitants. He now shortneth the lives of those that are born into the world,
that the world might not be overburdened with Inhabitants. More might be added.
By the death and sicknesses of little ones, all are warned to be continually
upon their watch, not knowing when the Lord will call for them; every little
Bell that tells us a child is gone sounds to us, would we but understand
it, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days come.
Further yet, God by this dispensation (in which as you have heard he is just)
does mind all of the duty they owe unto their children, to bring them up in the
knowledge of the Scriptures, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; and
particularly not to defer the ordinance of Baptism beyond a reasonable time. It
is doubtless Gods ordinance as to children, not only a sign of Gods Covenant,
but a medium in order to salvation, though efficacious only when God is pleased
to make it so, not ex opere operato, upon the work done. I have now showed you
the equity of God in this particular way of his Providence.

Use. It is a dispensation under which there are few Parents that are not
brought. Let me therefore enlarge a little upon some practical Application of
this Discourse, showing you what may be our duty, reasonably concluded from
this dispensation. I shall open to you something of it in three or four
particulars.

1. It is doubtless our duty, yea the duty of all flesh, To be silent before
the Lord under such Providence. The loss of a child, especially if it be a
firstborn, or an only child, sometimes goes very near us. But oh, let us not
be tempted from it to open our mouths against the God of Heaven, nor to
entertain a thought in our souls derogatory to the justice and goodness of God.
Our children are sinners, and obnoxious to the justice of God; God may in
justice punish them for their own sins, or for our sins: I hinted to you
before, that it was a beam of Arminius his new light, that none should be
condemned for original sin only; and he is followed in it by all the
Remonstrants in their Confessions, Apologies, as also by others of that tribe:
Socinus also and his followers shake hands with them in that notion. Yet
Arminins answering Mr. Perkins (who to disprove Arminius his doctrine of Gods
rejection of any, because he foresaw they would reject the grace of the Gospel)
had pinched him, telling him this could be no cause of the rejection of infants
out of the pale of the Church. God could not foresee they would reject the
Gospel, who he foresaw should never have the Gospel preached or tendered to
them, answers him thus, At inquam ego in parentibus, abavis, avis, atavis,
tritavis evangelii gratiam repudiarunt, quo actu meruerunt ut a Deo deserantur.
That is, But I say (says he) they rejected the Gospel in their Parents, their
Grandfathers, their great Grandfathers, or former Progenitors. Now how this is
consistent with his other doctrine, I cannot understand: for certainly if God
may be justified in rejecting the souls of some infants from eternity, because
he foresaw that their Great-Grandfathers would reject and refuse the Gospel,
when as they by no personal act should do any such thing; he may be justified
even in the eternal condemnation of children for the sin of Adam, or the
personal obliquity and corruption of their natures; and so it is not
unrighteous with God eternally to condemn a child for its original corruption
only. But we are not now speaking of eternal condemnation, but of bodily and
temporal; yea and temporary punishments, which may very well consist with the
eternal salvation of the soul: and it is very absurd for us to think, that for
such punishments the infant may not be punished (without the impeaching of the
justice of God) though it has been guilty of no actual sin, deserving so early
a chastisement of it. Oh, therefore suffer not in such cases your hearts or
lips to transgress, God may do it in righteousness. He may thus justly punish
original sin in the child; he may justly punish our sins upon the backs of our
children. Speak not a word against God in this Providence.

2. Do what in thee lies secondly to find out the cause. When the Jews queried
our Savior concerning the man that was born blind, for whose sin it was,
whether his, or his parents? Our Savior answers them, that it was neither
for his sin, nor yet for his Parents, but that the glory of God might appear in
that famous miracle, which our Savior wrought in restoring him to his sight.
It is an hard thing to find out Gods ends in his dispensations of punitive
Providence; God may sometimes afflict, and take away little ones for their own
sins, for the sin of Adam; for the iniquity in which they were conceived, and
the sin in which they were brought forth. God may sometimes do it for the
Parents sins. Sometimes he may do it principally neither for the one, nor for
the other of these ends, but for the good of the Parents, or for the good of
the Children: you have heard that this motion of Divine Providence, is highly
reasonable upon more then one account. But yet when we feel the smart of such a
dispensation, we know not how to look upon it otherwise than as a punishment;
but now our business under such providence is to enquire, what sin in us God
does in that manner revenge. The Scripture will guide us a little in the
finding out of this, and we may possibly find out some other helps, to make us
understand these dispensations. It was threatened to David, 2 Samuel 12. For his
sins in the matter of Vriah and his wife, and for that by them he had given
occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme. It is one of those common scourges
with which God chastises some Parents for their sinful lives; and whosoever is
conscious to himself of a sinful course of life, need not enquire much for what
cause God brings him under such dispensations. It is matter of more narrow
enquiry why God thus chasteneth his own people. Possibly if they will search
narrowly under such a Providence, they may find, if not the very sin for which
God contendeth with them, yet some laps of their lives of that nature, as may
give them a just ground of jealousy and suspicion, that that is the sin for
which God so troubles them. I shall not be positive in this determination
lest, I seem too boldly to inquire into the secret counsels of God: men should
do well under these Providence to listen to their own consciences, which often
times tell them the truth in such cases. But let me ask of thee, or rather
desire thee to ask thy self, these two or three following Questions.

1. Did thou never sinfully distrust the Providence of God concerning thy
Children; And secretly repine, at Gods bounty to thee in them? this is now a
temptation incident to such as are of meaner condition in the world, and not so
able as others to maintain their Families. God promises the fruit of the womb
as a blessing; and blesses him, that has his quiver full of these shafts, but
now the poor man, knows not how to understand this; and it is hard for him
not to repine at the multiplying of it: a great error doubtless, but such as
for ought I know good people may fall into; we cannot trust God to provide for
those which he gives us, if this has been thy error, God but pays thee in thy
own kind, by shortning thy number, and makes thy own secret, sinful wish now
to be thy Plague and Torment; but this ordinarily is the sin of the poorer and
meaner sort of Christians.

2. Did thou not let thy heart run out too much upon thy Children? God is
jealous, and it is the nature of jealousy not to suffer a rival in the object
beloved, be it a person, or a thing. God is the object, and he will be the
prime object of his peoples love, desire, and delight, It is his Law. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with
all thy strength; it may be thy Child had more of thy heart, more of thy love
and and delight than God had, no wonder if he has taken it from thee: this is
now usually the sin of those whose circumstances in the world are better, they
have a fair estate in the world, and Children few enough to leave it to, and in
such cases it is a very hard thing to keep our hearts within due bounds; but
our affections are ready to overflow, especially if there be nothing in the
temper, or behavior of the Child, that takes off the edge of our affections to
it.

3. Does not thy heart smite thee for the neglect of thy duty to thy Child,
especially if it were of any years? Thy duty in instructing it, or thy duty in
reproving and admonishing it. Elie's Sons were indeed men grown, but God cut
off his Children; though their personal guilt justified God in his severity
against them, yet Eli smarted in their punishments for honoring his Sons more
than God, for dealing too gently with them for their most enormous
wickednesses. Thou may also neglect thy duty toward them in instructing
them, in making them acquainted with the holy Scriptures; in admonishing them
to keep the Lords Sabbaths, and seeing to their external Sanctification of
them. This is undoubtedly a second piece of thy duty upon such a dispensation,
and to be humbled before God for those sins which thy conscience smites thee
for, and suggesteth to thee as probable causes of this rod of God upon thee.

3. It is doubtless thy duty, whatsoever thou find, to be satisfied with
Gods good pleasure. Rachel mourned sinfully while she so mourned as that she
refused to be comforted. If thou find that probably God has punished thy
sin, in the sickness, pain, and death of thy Child, it is indeed matter of
humiliation to thee; it offers thee a just opportunity to resolve for the time
to come, to amend thy errors as to any survivors which God shall lend thee: but
yesterday cannot be called back again, God has done what pleased him. It may
be in mercy to thy Child, though it be in judgment unto thee, thou have no
reason to quarrel or murmr at God for any of his dispensations. If it be for
thy Child's Original sin, still thou have no reason to blame God, he is just and
righteous in what he has done. But if God has done it to give thy Child a
quicker passage to Heaven, to bring it sooner to a state of perfection, to
deliver it from an evil to come, here thou have reason to admire, and adore the
Divine goodness rather than to quarrel at Divine Justice. There are a great
many things that may conduce to the relief of a godly man or woman disturbed at
this dispensation of Divine Providence. It is a very ordinary dispensation of
God; though therefore it may look like a digression from the principal argument
of my discourse, yet it may possibly be not so judged by some of you, whose
case it either at present is, or may be to instance in some heads of arguments,
which occasionally you may make use of, for the quieting of your Spirits.

1. Consider, whatever was the moving cause on Gods part, yet the will of God
is revealed. The will of God is such a thing to satisfy a Christian with, as
nothing can be more, nothing greater. We have our Heaven by the will of God
fear not little flock, it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom. We have
all our grace, all our glory from the will of God, and shall we not thankfully
accept a cross, when it is the will of our Father to lay it upon our necks? We
pray thy will be done, and shall we murmr against it when we see it done.
This silenced Aaron, David, Heli, Hezekiah, it leaves no room for a good
Christians reply to it, it is our Fathers will, that is enough. It is our
Fathers will revealed by an Act of his Providence. The Lord has given ( says
Job) and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord.

2. Consider how many sadder cases than thine there have been. Thou have lost a
Child, an infant; Job lost all his Children when they were grown up, feasting
at their elder Brothers house. Aarons was a sad cause, he lost his two Sons
grown up, in an act of sinning, yet he held his peace. Helies case was sad, to
lose two such wicked Sons in a Battle. David's case was sad, God had expressly
told him the Child should dye, because of his sin; and that by it, he had made
the enemies of God to blaspheme. What does David do? He fasteth, he prays, he
humbles himself before God so long as the Child lived, and while he had any
hope; but when the will of God was revealed, when the Child was dead, he
arises, and eats bread as he was wont to do, he says, that he should go to
it, it should not return to him.

3. Consider, Let the case be as sad as it will, yet if thou look round
about it, there is mercy in it; either mercy to thy Child, or mercy to thee, or
mercy to both: if thy Child be gone to Heaven, there is mercy in that; if it be
delivered from evil to come upon the World, or that part of the world where it
should have had its portion, there is mercy in that. David's case was as sad as
one can well think of any of this nature; yet there was this mercy in it, the
living monument and remembrance of David's sin and shame was taken away.

4. Suppose that God has for thy sin taken it away, and thou can not
satisfy thy self but it is so; yet consider, God eternally punishes none for
the sins of their correlates. God may punish persons with bodily and temporal
punishments for the sins of their Parents, but not eternally; as to those
punishments, every soul shall bear no more than its own iniquity. Arminius I
remember tells us, that he can see no reason, but that Children may be
equally punished eternally for the sins of their Parents, as well as the whole
posterity of Adam for his sin: but certainly there is a vast difference; the
first Adam was a public person, with whom God made a Covenant for life or
death for himself, and for his posterity; and he had a power as well to have
conveyed life as death to all his posterity: but surely none will assert this,
as to any Parent since his time.

5. Consider how much comfort there is laid for parents mourning, in that
speech of our Savior, for of such is the kingdom of God. Men that have large
Gardens and Orchards, have places for slips and Inlays, as well as for old
Stocks; Nurseries for Plants, as well as places for full-grown fruit trees. God
has his garden of Grace (that is, his Church) and he has his garden of Glory,
to both belong Nurseries. The Children of believers are (though imperfect
members) yet members of his Church; and they may be heirs of Glory, though they
go out of this world under age, as to any earthly inheritance: Yet they may be
of full age for the inheritance that is immortal, incorruptible, and which
fades not away; they will be of age in that Country where is no infant of
days, nor old man of years. The possibility of little Childrens entering into
the Kingdom of God, yea the probability that the seed of such as fear God,
dying in infancy are so entered, ought to be a wonderful relief to Godly parents
mourning upon this account. Some Mothers only people the earth with sinners;
God puts an honor upon thee if thou stockest Heaven with Saints, and bring
forth to the kingdom of Glory.

6. Consider, Thou can never lose a Child with more hope than in its infancy.
Some have thought that the death of Christ has as to all expiated the guilt of
Adams sin; both the Socinians and Arminians seem so to judge. Others think,
that by virtue of the New Covenant, the water of Baptism washes away original
sin. Augustine was called Durus pater infantum, an hard Father to Infants,
because he thought all unbaptized Infants were damned; by which it seems, he
deferred much to Baptism: but I do not remember that I ever read in him, or
heard from him, that he held, that all baptized Infants should be saved, if
dying in infancy. I durst not fix the comfort of mourning Parents upon these
foundations: But yet this is certain, the Infant within the pale of the Church,
the Child of the believing, the true believing Parent especially, is in
Covenant with God: It has not yet been defiled with wilful presumptuous
sinning; we cannot say so of our Children when they are grown up to years. A
godly Parent can never lose a Child with more hopes of its eternal Salvation,
than in its infancy.

7. Again, Possibly what God has done, he has done in mercy to thee, to thy
soul, that thy affections may be more entirely upon him. God knew thy heart
better than thy self; it may be, by such a stroke he has secured thy heart
more unto himself, it may be in mercy as to the comforts of thy life. Zedekiah
could better have followed his Children in their infancy to their grave, than
have seen them slain by a barbarous enemy before his face. Thou know not
what evil is coming upon the world.

8. Lastly consider, That for those that keep the Lords Sabbaths, and choose the
things that please him, and take hold of the Lords Covenant, God has, Isa.
56.45, promised a better name than that of sons, and daughters, even an
everlasting name which shall never be cut off. But I shall digress no further
on this Argument.

4. Lastly, Having stilled thy impatience, what have thou to do, but to fulfill
the Lords will and ends under such a dispensation? Let those do it that are
patients under such providence. Let us all do it, who are spectators of them.

Are any of us patients under such Providence, let us fulfill the Lords ends in
them. You will say, what are they? I Answer.

1. Submission to his good will, is doubtless one thing. God by all afflictions
of his people, designeth to humble, and to prove his people, that he may do
them good in the latter end. Such dispensations are the rod of God upon us, and
his rod has a voice, and we are bound to hear his rod. God is now trying thy
obedience; Abraham's trial, was a greater trial: he had but one Child, him a
Son, the Child of the promise, God required him to kill him with his own hand,
he submitted, and the Lord accepted his will for the deed. Thy hearing the
voice of one rod, may prevent the Lords taking of another to scourge thee with.

2. Humiliation for those sins which thou suspectest to have been the provoking
cause of such a dispensation; that is another end which thou may probably
think that God aims at. Afflictions are to humble us, and to prove us.

3. God calls aloud to thee to take thy heart off thy creature comforts. Thou
see what gourds, what blossoms they are, what shadows they are which thou
huggest, what lies thou have in thy right hand; he calls now to thee to fix thy
heart and thine eyes upon him alone, and to make him alone thy portion, to fix
all thy delight upon him.

For us that are spectators of such Providence, let us also by them learn
wisdom.

1. By taking heed of such sins, as may provoke God to such dispensations: we
stand concerned if we love our children, to love God, and to fear him, to walk
closely with him; the wicked life of a Parent may shorten the life of a Child,
for that God in judgment may write him childless, a man who shall not prosper,
nor his name outlive a present generation. Take heed of those particular sins,
which may provoke God to such a stroke. Take heed of murmuring at the blessing
of a numerous off spring, and distrusting the Providence of God, as to a
providing for them. Take heed if Children be given you, that you do not set
your heart upon them. Look upon them as fading flowers, and such flowers as
never fade sooner, than while they are worn too near your heart. Take heed of
sins by which the enemies of God shall be made to blaspheme. David for such
sins lost his new born Child from his beloved Bathsheba.

2. More especially, take heed of neglecting your children. Neglect not the
ordinance of Baptism as to them. I do not think that is damnable; but I do
think it is provocative of God. I remember God met Moses in the Inn, and was
about to kill him for his omission of Circumcision. Circumcision was in it self
a pitiful thing, but it was Gods ordinance, it was his Covenant in the flesh
with the seed of Abraham. We are not upon a Divine institution, to say, To what
purpose is it? or what good can it do? If the Jewish Child had dyed before the
8th day, its want of circumcision doubtless did not endanger its salvation; but
the deferring it beyond that time, might for ought I know, endanger the wrath
of God upon the Parent, and that wrath might be executed in cutting off the
Child. I take the case to be much the same under the Gospel, I am sure the
Covenant is the same; take heed of neglecting to instruct your Children
betimes, or to reprove and admonish them; God may cut them off betimes, and
then your neglects will be a grief of heart to you.

Finally, This calls to all young ones, not to neglect the remembrance of
their creator in the days of their youth. O let your tender years be no
temptation to you, to put off your duty toward God, and your own souls; in the
morning of your life, be plowing up the fallow ground of your hearts, and
sowing the seed of righteousness; indeed, in the evening our hands should not
be slack; but who knows whether he shall see an evening, yea or no?

SERMON XLI.
Romans I. 26. For this Cause, God gave them up to vile Affections.
MY business is to clear up the equity of the Lord in the ways of his Actual
Providence, and to vindicate the justice and holiness of God from those, who by
the Sophistry of their humane wisdom, seek to darken Divine knowledge. I am
resolving the difficulties relating to the motions of Divine Providence in
punitive dispensations. I have showed you, how just and reasonable it is, that
God should be the Author of the evil of punishment: And that 1. to his own
people, notwithstanding the satisfaction of Christ accepted for them, and the
remission of their sins as to eternal punishment. 2. As to those whom yet he
knows to be such, as will be worse for their afflictions, and not better. 3. As
to children who have not been guilty of actual sins: I proceed now a step
further. God does not only punish sin with smart, with pain, diseases, crosses,
etc. but he sometimes punishes sin with sin; for sin, giving men up to be led
captive by their lusts. The Text speaks of such a Providence. It relates to
the Heathens, of whom the Apostle had been before speaking, verse. 19, 20, he
had been declaring what means they had to know God; they had not indeed the
light of the Gospel, but they had the light of nature. That which might be
known of God was manifest in them, for the invisible things of him, from the
creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. Then he shows how they abused
and misimproved these means, for v. 21, when they knew God (in some measure, as
the light of nature, and works of creation, would discover him to them) they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened; professing themselves to be
wise they became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an
image, made like to corruptible man, to birds, to four-footed-beasts and
creeping things. The business was this: The Heathens had indeed but an
imperfect knowledge of God, no more than the light of nature, and the works of
God in nature showed them; but yet this was enough to have let them know that
God could not be like a man, or a beast, or a creeping thing; yet such images
and representations of God they made, and worshipped: wherefore (says the
Apostle, verse. 24.) God also gave them up to lusts of uncleanness, etc. and so
again in my Text, verse. 26. For this cause, God gave them up to vile
affections; and so again, verse. 28. And even as they did not like to retain God
in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which are inconvenient. Being filled with all unrighteousness, etc. Now the
Question is,

Quest. How it can consist with the holiness and purity of God thus to punish
sin with sin; for their committing of some sins to give them up to commit
others?

The difficulty is, because it is hard to conceive how God should do this,
without a willing of sin. Although therefore it is plain enough in the Text,
and twice more repeated in the Chapter, it be said, God gave them up to
uncleanness, and God gave them up to a reprobate mind: yet it will not be amiss
for us from other Scriptures to take some auxiliary help for the proving of
this, That there has been, and doubtless are still such dispensations of God.
Then I shall attempt to reconcile these Providence to the justice, holiness
and goodness of God; after that I shall make some application of my Discourse
upon this Argument. It is a known Text which you have, Isaiah 6.9, 10. Go and
tell this people, hear you indeed, but understand not; and see you indeed, but
perceive not; make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy; and
shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. It is a Text which you
find quoted six times in the New Testament, Mat. 13.14. Mar. 4.12. Luke 8.10.
Joh. 12.40. Act. 28.26. Romans 11.8. In the first place Mat. 13. it is said that
in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Isaias, By hearing you shall hear, and not
understand; and seeing you shall see, and not perceive. For this peoples heart
is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, etc. That Text plainly
makes it out, that Gods judicial giving them over to their blindness, was
consequent to their sinful stopping of their ears, and shutting of their eyes.
But Christ there says, that for this he spoke to them in parables, Mat. 13.13.
but Romans 11.8. it is said, God has given them the spirit of slumber; eyes that
they should not see, and ears that they should not hear; and certain it is,
Isaiah had Gods commission, chap. 6. and Acts 28.26. Well spoke the Holy Ghost,
by Isaias the Prophet to our Fathers, saying, Go unto this people, and say,
Hearing you shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing you shall see, and
not perceive. For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are
dull of hearing; and their eyes have they closed. By all which it clearly
appears, that God punished the former sins of the Jews in their wilful shutting
their eyes, and stopping their ears against the revelation of the Divine will,
by a judicial giving them up to a blindness of mind, and hardness of heart. To
this purpose is that, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. And for this cause God shall send them
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie: for what cause? verse. 10.
Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. Many
other texts there are, speaking of Gods hardening the heart of Pharaoh, and the
hearts of others; but these are sufficient to evince, that there is such a
dreadful dispensation of God. St. John reciting the aforementioned text of
Isaiah, Joh. 12.39. says, Therefore they could not believe, because that
Isaias said again, that he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts,
that they should not see with their eyes, and understand with their hearts, and
be converted, and I should heal them. So, as I say, it is clear there is such a
penal act of Divine Providence; and now that we are upon this argument, it will
not be amiss for us to enquire what sins those are which provoke God to such a
degree.

In the general they were sins against light; sins against the light of nature.
The Apostle speaks of such sinning, Romans 1. When they knew God, they
glorified him not as God; they knew God by the light of nature, and sinned
against that light. All the other texts speak of sinning against the light of
Revelation. God for men's bold and impudent sinning against natural light, or
against the light of his word, does many times deliver up men in this manner.
But the great question is,

Quest. How is this reconcilable to the goodness, purity, and holiness of God?

God in Scripture does frequently declare that he delights not in the blood of
sinners, his willingness that all should be saved, etc. He does as plentifully
declare, that he is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; that he tempts no
man, and cannot be the author of sin. Now how can God give up men to blindness
of mind, to hardness of heart, without willing it? and if he wills it, how
shall he be excused from being the author of it? To which I answer:

1. If we mean by the goodness of God, his kindness unto sinners in order to
their conversion and healing, and being saved; there is nothing of that nature
to be expected from God under this dispensation. It is the seal of reprobation
and damnation; those poor souls are left to the judgment and condemnation of
the last day, without any great hopes of mercy; they have had their time, their
means, their mercies; the patience of God has a long time waited upon them;
their glass is now run out; Gods day of grace is come to an end, as to them:
Lest (says God by the Prophet) they should convert and be healed. Gods
frequent declarations, that he desires not the death of sinners, do not oblige
God for ever to strive with sinners, shutting their eyes, and stopping their
ears, and hardening their hearts. It is enough that God has a long time waited
upon these sinners, and has had no fruit of his patience with them. But now if
by the goodness of God we understand his justice, purity and holiness, so I
doubt not but to evidence to you, that under such tremendous dispensations, yet
God is a just, pure and holy God. To this purpose

2. In the second place let us consider, 1. What God does under these
dispensations. 2. Under what circumstances those sinners are, whom God brings
under them.

Let us understand, What God does in these dispensations.

1. Negatively, We say God does not infuse any malice into a sinners heart;
this indeed were to make God the author of sin. God puts no malice into the
heart of sinners; he excites no malice in their hearts; and this both the
Jesuits and Arminians (who conspire together to reproach Calvin, and other
eminent servants of God, with the odious reproach of making God the author of
sin) have been told by as many as have treated upon this argument; but they
have a mind to revile, The Lord rebuke them. This is the meaning of the
Schoolmen, when they say, that God does not harden any, quantum ad rationem
defectus, but only quantum ad rationem ordinis. Now how they should make God
the author of sin, who freely grant this, they should do well to make us
understand: and I would fain have them show me, where either Calvin, or Beza,
or Zuinglius, or Pareus, or P. Martyr, or any other whom Bellarmine, and
Tilenus, or any other so boldly traduce, as making God the author of sin, have
said any thing of this nature; they all agree with Augustine in saying, that
God hardneth none impertiendo malitiam: but this only tells you what God does
not.

2. In the second place, God does undoubtedly withdraw those means, which
should effectually keep them from such sins; and certainly this is not
unrighteous with God, for he may do with his own what pleases him. Had not the
Lord withheld this grace from the Angels, and from our first Parents, neither
had the first fallen from their glorious state, nor the second from the state
of innocence; by which it appears, that this is no more than the Lord might
have done if the sinner had not sinned: to say the contrary, were to make God a
debtor to his creature; but this is no more than Bellarmine himself, and all
the Arminians will grant.

3. God does undoubtedly leave this poor wretch whom he thus punishes, to act
according to the impetus of his original lust and corruption, according to that
lust which is in his heart. No man can deny but this is consistent with the
justice, purity and holiness of God. If for God to leave or suffer men to walk
in their own ways, not to quench the original lust which is in their heart, but
to suffer them to put it forth in actual sin and wickedness, would make God the
author of sin; God must be concluded the author of all that sin which is
committed in the world. But it is written, He will have mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and his grace could not be grace if it were not free. But thus far
all are agreed, that God does harden negatively and permissively. I hope there
is none will doubt, but that if a traitor deserved to dye, and to starve to
death, though a Prince had it in his power to pardon him, or supply him with
bread to keep him from dying in that manner; yet the Prince were just if he did
neither of these, but suffered him to perish according to his deserts; but (as
I said before) this is denied by none. All the dispute is, whether God does any
positive act in the hardening and blinding of sinners: this is denied by
Bellarmine and the Jesuits, and by the Arminians also. In opposition to which I
say,

4. Though God does not positively harden nor blind any sinners, yet he does do
some positive acts, that relate to the hardening and blinding of them. I say he
positively hardneth none, he does not make their soft hearts hard, nor
positively blind any; he does not shut their eyes, and of seeing make them
blind. Here now the difference lies betwixt Bellarmine with Arminius, and those
eminent Divines whom they would asperse with this imputation, of making God the
author of sin, because these Divines cannot allow God to be a mere spectator,
an idle looker upon his works of Providence: they insist upon this Argument,
which certainly is not to be answered.

In all acts of punishment God does something positively. But the Scirpture
mentions the giving up of soms sinners to vile affections, to a reprobate mind,
etc. as acts of punishment. Therefore God as to them does something positively.
The minor is evident from the style of the Scripture. Now for the major,
Certainly in all all punishments God acts as a Judge, and therefore must do
something positively. The infliction of a punishment, argues a positive
judgment of God. Besides (which is noted by Pareus) God is said seven or eight
times over to harden Pharaohs heart, and many others who never had any grace to
be withdrawn. Besides, it is very observable, that the words which the
Scripture makes use of to signify Gods penal action in hardening sinners,
Exodus 4.21. and 7.3. and 10.1. are such as cannot be expounded by a bare
permission or desertion, and signify a vehement intension of the action, being
verbs of the second and third Conjugation in the Hebrew. This is a great point
in Divinity, let me therefore tell you what our Divines say in their own words,
and then examine if it be not reconcilable by our reason to the justice and
holiness of God. Parens says, That it is sufficient that God in these
tremendous dispensations, acting as a Judge, by way of punishment (which as the
Scripture plentifully affirms, so Bellarmine himself grants) God must act in
it not merely privatively but positively; we need not be curious to examine the
manner how he acts. Fit illa traditio explicabili, sive inexplicabili,
occulto quidem, sed semper justo modo, whether we be able to open, or not open
the manner; God does it always by a just, although a secret judgment; but,
says he, in three things it seems to be explicable: 1. By leaving men to the
impetus and force of their own lusts. This, says he, is a general way; for all
that perish, are thus left to themselves; yet it cannot be said properly of all
such, that God has delivered them up to hardness of heart, etc. 2. By giving
them means of softning; such are precepts, miracles, his works, etc. which they
through the wickedness of their hearts only use to their further hardening.
Thus it was in the case of Pharaoh, Sihon, etc. This on their part was a sin,
on Gods part a just judgment; but it may be this is not the case of all, and
seems hardly applicable to the Gentiles whom God so gave up, Romans 1: 26. 3. A
third way (says he) (which is more universal) is by delivering them up to
their lusts, and to Satan, to be further blinded, seduced, and hardened, as in
the case of Ahab, and the Gentiles mentioned in this first Chapter of the
Romans, and 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this world has blinded the eyes of those
that believe not. Now that Satan seduceth souls by command from God, appears
by the story of Ahab, 1 King. 22.22, 23. The Lord has put a lying spirit in
the mouth of all these thy prophets. Another great Divine opens it in these
particulars: God (says he) hardneth sinners,

1. Alesbury de eterno Dei decreto, p. 226.
By immediately depriving them of reason and counsel, or punishing them, so as
their rage is increasod against God; for this he gives us the instance of
Pharaoh, whose heart was the more hardened by the plagues which he felt; and
for this he quoteth Gregory the Great, one of the Popes.

2. God immediately hardneth the hearts of sinners (says he) by giving them up
to Satan, that they may be by him hardened, as in the case of Saul and Ahab, and
those mentioned in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians.

3. (Says he) he hardneth them per se ipsos, by themselves, giving them up, as
my Text faith, to vile affections. Thus Pharaoh is said thrice to have hardened
his own heart; Pharaoh by his own free will hardened his heart, and God hardened
it by his just judgment. God permitted the Heathens to sin yet more and more,
and by an actual motion moved them to an act of sin (so far forth as it was an
act).

4. Lastly, (says he), God positively hardneth sinners, By giving occasions,
which through the lust that is in them, incline them to evil. God proposes to
them what things in their own nature should induce, and persuade them to that
which is good, but they through their lust and malice make them an occasion to
evil. Thus, says he, God provoked the Jews to emulation by a foolish nation;
by showing grace and mercy to the Gentiles, the rage of the Jews against Christ
grew greater. Thus Christ's Preaching and Miracles, were occasion to the
Pharisees of further blaspheming. But (says that excellent Author) if we
rightly understand it, it is not of so much moment, whether we say that God
hardneth men positively, or negatively; for though as to the execution in the
event, the act be negative, yet this event flows from the positive purpose of
God. It is therefore all one, whether we speak in the words of Moses, Deuteronomy.
29.4. and say, God has not given them an heart to perceive, or eyes to see,
and ears to hear; or in the phrase of the Apostle, Romans 11.8. God has given
them the spirit of slumber, eyes they should not see, and ears they should not
hear until this day; for the will of God is as effectual in his negative as
positive actions. And now I think I have told you the utmost our Divines have
said in this cause, unless some of them have said, that God is the Author of
his own judgments and punishments, which I think none can with modesty deny,
Twiss. Vind. gratiae, 3.163.
it being no more than the Scripture says of all those things which are of a
positive nature, but not of those things which are of a privative nature, which
yet he may will should be done by his permission, though not by his efficiency;
and this is no more than Arminius himself confesses, that God is effector
actus, though no more than permissor peccati. The sum is, if we understand by
the punishment of sin with sin, Gods judicial act, by which he withdraws his
grace, or his leaving of sinners to the satisfaction of their own lusts; there
is no question, but God for men's former sins may do this, yea more than this:
he may judicially deliver men up to their lusts, and to Satan to be seduced at
his pleasure, and offer them occasions (in their own nature leading to good)
which they through their corruption may turn to further sinning. But God cannot
punish the former sins of any, by putting any lust or malice into their hearts,
by which they become more evil, or otherwise than accidentally, stirring up
that lust and malice which is in their heart. This is the sum, so far as I
know, of what Divines say, as to Gods acts in the punishment of sin, by
delivering them up to farther sinnings, though I think Paraeus says true, that
besides these ways in which God acts positively, and more than barely
negatively and permissively, God has many other ways which we cannot
explicate, by which he punishes sin with sin; for who knows, or is able to
unfold all the ways of God?

Thus far we have seen (so far as we are able to comprehend) what God does in
this his judicial act of punishing sin with sin.

Let us now consider under what circumstances those are whom God brings under
so severe a dispensation. I answer, They are not only sinners (for God does not
deal thus with every sinner), but such as have provoked him to a very great
height and degree, shutting their eyes against that light which has shone
upon them, and contemning the precepts of God, and the means he has used to
reclaim them: Such was Pharaoh, first he hardened his own heart, which I think
is said three times over; then God says he would harden his heart: such were
the Heathen, mentioned in this Chapter, they had prodigiously sinned against
the light and law of Nature: Such were the Jews, to whom this judgment is
denounced, Isa. 6. compared with Matthew. 13.

Now this being rightly understood, I appeal to the reason of any one that
hears me, although this be a most tremendous dispensation of God; yet whether
it be not such as is very consistent, both with the Justice, and Purity, and
Holiness of God. Is it not just with God to punish sinners, especially
prodigious sinners, and such of them as have shut their eyes, lest the light
should shine upon them? If it be just with God to throw such into Hell, why
should it not be just with him to seal them up to that damnation? might he cut
them off by death, and immediately turn them into Hell? why may he not leave
them destitute of his grace, and give them up to a reprobate mind, and to vile
affections, and an hard heart, which are but the praeludia to this damnation?
Does any doubt whether this be consistent with the purity and holiness of God?
I ask, why may not God deny his means of grace to whom he pleases, and yet be
an holy God? and may he not then deny it to, or withdraw it from those that
have abused his patience, and turned his grace into wantonness and
lasciviousness? does he deliver them up to Satan to be tempted, seduced,
hardened? Is not Satan Gods instrument in punishing sinners? may not the just
and holy God use what instruments he pleases for the execution of his wrath?

Object. 1. But does not God by this become the Author of sin?

I answer, If sin be considered in its true nature, as it is a defect, a filthy
action contrary to the Law of God, surely none can be the Author of it, but
either he who does it, or who persuades, or commands, or inciteth to the
doing of it. God neither infuseth that lust which is exercised, nor commands,
nor persuades the exerting of it. If we consider sin as the punishment of sin,
so the permission of it is but a just dispensation of God, and a judicial act;
and why God should not be the Author of punishments, I cannot understand.

Object. 2. But does not God in this dispensation will the sins of these poor
wretches?

I answer, He does not will the doing of them, but he wills that they should
be done; and in this sense he wills all the sin that is committed in the
world; for as nothing could be done contrary to his will, so he does not govern
the world as an idle spectator, only looking on to see what his creatures will
do. But he is far from willing the actions, either soliciting, or commanding,
or persuading, or assisting them.

Object. 3. But God gives occasions to them?

I answer, It is true, but it is through the lusts of men's hearts that they
become such occasions. They are in themselves either of such a nature, as they
might improve for their good, and ought to have done so: such were the Miracles
which God showed Pharaoh, or which Christ did before the Pharisees, and the
Sermons which he and his Apostles preached to them, or at least such as had in
themselves no tendency to produce such an effect. The Governess of the house
does not think that she is either principal or accessory to a servants theft,
because she suffers pieces of Plate to go freely up and down for the use of
her family, which possibly becomes a temptation to the lust of her servant, to
make him or her to steal.

Object. 4. But God knew that these sinners would take these occasions to grow
worse.

I answer, That must be granted: but what then? suppose one of us did know that
our good counsels, or reproofs, or corrections of our Children would but make
them worse, must not we therefore use these which in themselves are means to
make them better? Suppose a Mistress in a Family did know that her servant
would steal some of those things which she suffers to go up and down and be
commonly used in her house, is she therefore bound to look them up, and let her
whole Family want necessary utensils? Will she not rather say, I will have
those things in my house which are fit; if any of my Servants will steal them,
let it be at their peril, they shall be hanged for it. Yet surely the Law of
Charity, which God has laid us all under toward our Brethren, obliging us to
beware laying of stumbling blocks, and giving unnecessary occasions of sin unto
them, does not tie up God. But there is no end of disputing with such as are
resolved to hold their conclusion, and seek nothing but occasions of reviling.
I have enlarged my self far enough upon this argument to show, I think, every
unprejudiced hearer, that it is neither contrary to the justice, nor purity and
holiness of God, to punish sin with sin; giving up stubborn sinners to vile
Affections, and a reprobate mind.

Use. Let me now shut up this Discourse with a few words of Application.

Exho. And what application can be proper to this discourse but an Exhortation
to all to take heed of presumptuous sinnings against Light. That sort of people
amongst us whom we call Quakers, call to all men to take heed to the Light
within them. I will not profess perfectly to understand their principles. But
they seem in some of their discourses, to me to think, that men have Light
enough within them to show them the way to Heaven; and if so, that will prove a
great mistake: but thus much is certain, That every man has a light within
him. That which may be known of God is manifest in them, Romans 1.19. Every man
that is born into the world, has a natural light, discovering something of
God, and of his duty to him, and is under a natural Law, which obliges him to
some duty in proportion to his light. The Apostle in this, Romans 1. says of the
Heathens that they knew God, and hinteth, that they ought to have glorified him
as God, that is, to have paid an homage to God proportionable to the knowledge
which they had of his glorious being. But we who are within the pale of the
Church: have (as the Apostle says) a more sure word of Prophecy. Whereunto we
shall do well to take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet.
1.19. Besides this, many have a common illumination of the Spirit, so far
ordinarily attending the Ministry of the word: of such the Apostle speaks, Heb.
6.4. And the Law of conscience, ordinarily works according to this Light. It
is indeed true there are and will be differences, as to all these Lights. The
light of nature varies according to men's parts and education. The Light of
Revelation according to the Ministry of the word men sit under, and the other
according to Gods pleasure who by his Spirit irradiateth some more than others;
but according to our light so does conscience lay a Law upon us. Now men and
women are highly concerned, to behave themselves both toward God, and toward
men according to the light they have, that is, according to the discoveries
they have either from natural principles, or from the word of God, or the
illuminations of the Spirit of God, what God is, and what God requires of them
either as acts of homage immediately toward him, or as acts of Justice and
brotherly love toward their neighbor; especially to take heed of bold and
impudent actings to the contrary: for this cause it is that God judicially
gives many up to blindness of mind, hardness of heart, vile affections, a
reprobate mind, having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life
of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their hearts, who being past feeling have given themselves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. You see
both from this Chapter in which my Text is, and from that Text, Ephesians. 4. That it
is what may befall poor Heathens, which have no more then a natural light, yet
even they for not living up to that, may so far provoke God: what do you think
Christians may do then, that besides the natural light, have the light of the
Law and Gospel, the sure word of Prophecy? that have consciences further
enlightened, and under a further Law than the Heathens could possibly have?
such as have, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4. Tasted of the heavenly gift,
and been made partakers of the holy ghost, as have tasted of the good word of
God and the powers of the world to come? If the Heathens came under such a
judgment, because when they knew or might have known by the very light of
nature, that the Lord that made Heaven and Earth; could not possibly be like a
man, nor a beast, nor creeping things, yet would not attend to the workings of
their own reason, nor give their consciences leave to speak, nor hearken to
them, but in their practice changed the image of the incorruptible God into an
image made like to a corruptible man, etc. were for this deserted of God, and
given up to that dreadful degree of judgment this Chapter mentions; what
shall become of those amongst Christians, think you, who besides the advantage
which they have common with Heathens, from that of God which is manifest in
them, and from the things that are made, to know what manner of being God is,
have also the holy Scriptures telling them, That God is a Spirit and will be
worshipped in Spirit and truth; That images are teachers of lies, and mediums
by which God will not be worshippped, and revealing his wrath so plentifully
against those that in so idle and wretched a manner did worship the true and
living God, yet will worship him by images? Does not the light of nature, and
the light of Scripture shine in men's faces, and clearly discover to them, that
God is not to be pleased with rude and confused noises, with mere formalities,
and lip-labours, but with a simple, pure, and Spiritual worship, where the
understanding, the heart and the affections go along with the tongue, and
outward man; and where these are wanting all the cringings, and bowings, and
roarings in the world, are abominable to him, and no better than the howling of
a Dog, and grunting of a Swine. O Sirs, take heed of sinning against this
light, for fear of being given up of God to superstitious vanities: for so it
oft-times falls out, that as a liar, though at first he knew he told a lie,
yet by repeating and telling it often, he has forgot it was a lie, and
possibly himself thinks he is relating a true story. So I am persuaded it falls
out with many whose consciences at first grumbled a little at what they did,
and told them this was no service of God; but through a just Judgment of God
they shutting their Eyes against the light, at last think there is no other
true worship of God besides what they have taken up, as to which it will at
last appear, that it was none at all; for who required any such things at their
hands? We can hardly think otherwise of the Jews, who at the first setting up
of idolatry by Jeroboam, and that worser idolatry by Ahab, could not but think
(many of them) that that was not the true worship of God; but by practice in it
afterward grew so warm for it, that none else must be true, but they must slay
the Lords Prophets, and persecute all those who either taught or practiced any
other way of worship more according to the mind and will of God.

2. And do not only take heed of shutting your ears, as to your duty toward
God, lest God judicially give you up to vile affections as to superstitious
vanities; but take heed also that you do not shut your eyes against convictions
of your duty toward your selves and others, in matters of morality. Have you
not startled sometimes to see to what brutish degrees of sensuality and
immoralities many have fallen from high degrees of profession? To me it has
been one of the prodigies of our age. If one should have told some that were
professors twenty or thirty years ago, that within such a time they should be
transgressors through wine, so famous for impudent uncleanness, such Apostates
from all Religion, such bruits almost in every part of their conversations,
such persecutors of those that fear God, and with whom they sometimes professed
to be of the same mind, they would certainly have said with Hazael, are we dogs
that we should ever do any such things? Yet we have lived to see it. I am loath,
I tremble to speak what I think; certainly God has forsaken these poor
creatures; they professed the truth, to have embraced it in the love of it, but
they were hypocrites, they received it not in the love of it, but merely in a
faction, and for some base sinister ends, and for this cause. God has given
them up to strong delusions, God has thrown them off his hand of restraint,
withdrawn his common grace from them, given them up to the Devil even in this
life; God is now punishing upon them their former falsehood. Give me leave to
speak my fears, I profess they are my thoughts, my sad thoughts, that we live
in an age as full of persons that have sinned the sin that shall never be
forgiven, as any age ever was since our Lord was upon the Earth. The sin unto
death, for which St. John says we should not pray, must certainly be
prodigious sinning against light, let but malicious be added to it in any Soul;
and I then shall believe he has not sinned the sin against the holy ghost,
when I shall see God renewing such a one by repentance, and not before. To such
persons I have little or nothing to say. But O let them that stand, take heed
lest they fall. Foelix quem faciunt, etc. That is an happy Soul that can learn
to take heed by the dreadful falls of others; it has been the saying of
others, that Religion stands on tip-toes in our Land. I can say nothing to
that, I hope better things; but give me leave to say to those particular Souls
in this City, that hear me this day, Your Souls stand on tip-toes. I have now
been a witness of the Gospels being preached to you thirty years, if it be hid
I fear it is hid to them that perish. It is much to be feared that you who
being of years of understanding have been hearers of the means of grace you
have had for these years (yet the faithful preaching of the Gospel, did not
commence with my first knowledge of this City) are sealed one way or other,
either to Salvation or to damnation. when I speak of being sealed to Salvation
I do not understand blessed with a full assurance of it; but the Spirit of God
has made ere this time such impressions upon their hearts, as will make
Salvation sure to them though it may be they have not within themselves
(sensibly) the witness and assurance of it. I say for those of you who are not
thus far sealed, it is much to be feared that you have another Seal upon you,
even a Seal of eternal condemnation. It may be you are not in despair, possibly
if you had less hope it might be better for you, hope slays the hypocrite;
but has not God given you over? Do not you find your hearts are grown more
hard, and insensible, more filthy, and vain, and frothy? there is a Seal and a
dreadful one too. For old professors to lose their profession, to have cast off
their awe, and dread of God, their practice of Religion in their Families and
conversation, to grow loose and vain, to turn scoffers, and enemies to Religion
and Godliness. You that yet stand, O look to your standing, I would have you
look upon men, that have had formerly much light, made great profession and are
fallen off to open courses of Sin, as sad examples of Divine vengeance, as if
they were turned into Hell. They are no better than brands of Hellfire, yet
stinking, and smoking in the Land of the living, that others may hear and
fear; and take heed of sinning against the degrees of light which they have
sinned against. O be afraid, you that have yet light before you, how you behave
your selves toward it; instead of disputing the justice, holiness, and
goodness of God in punishing sin with sin, be afraid lest this should be your
portion, shut not your eyes against the glorious light of the Gospel, take heed
of quenching the Spirit, smothering the reflections of your conscience,
resisting your convictions, struggling with and against the Spirit of God,
quarrelling with God for any lusts contrary to the Revelation of his will;
lest, as God said of Ephraim, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone, so God
should say concerning any of you, such a one knows better, but he is joined to
his formalities, to his vain superstitions, Let him alone; or such a one must
have his Cups, his Lusts, his unjust gain, Let him alone: be assured, if God
once resolves to Let thee alone, thou will find thy Soul rouling to Hell fast
enough. Satan besides will not let that Soul alone of whom God has pronounced,
Let him alone. But this is enough to have spoken to this Subject.

SERMON XLII.
2 These. I. 9. Who shall be punished with Everlasting destruction, from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power.
I Am yet endeavoring to make those ways of Divine Providence plain, which to
our apprehensions appear difficult and hard to be understood by our weak
capacities. In my last discourse I trod upon the brink of the infernal Pit,
clearing up to you the justice of God in punishing sin with sin, giving men up
for former sinnings to blindness of mind, hardness of heart, a reprobate mind,
vile affections: that is, in effect a placing them in the very Suburbs of
Hell. My discourse this day will be about the pit it self. Atheists doubt
whether there be such a pit or no, it is their interest to deny it; others
cannot tell how to reconcile an everlasting punishment to the Divine Justice,
there being no proportion between the pleasures of sin for a season, and the
torments of Hell for ever. My Text you see plainly mentions a punishment with
everlasting destruction.

If you consider the words of my Text with their reference to what went before,
you will find the Apostle, v. 3. Blessing God for the Thessalonians increase,
in their Faith, Charity; and v. 4. Their patience in all the tribulations which
they had indeed.

You must know that these Christian inhabitants of Thessalonica, lived in the
first and most furious times for Gospel persecutions, when the Heathen amongst
whom they lived, had gotten a law, and by that law (as the Jews said of Christ)
those that owned the name of Christ ought to die, or to be plundered of their
Estates, and imprisoned; and amongst so many Heathens it was not possible, they
should want Informers. Nor did they want some Judges that would to the utmost
execute those severe Laws upon them. Now in the enduring of all those hard
things for Christ and his Gospels sake, these Christians had showed admirable
patience; and for this the Apostle thinks himself bound to bless God, For it is
given to us on the behalf of Christ to suffer, as well as to believe, Phil.
21.9.

Having mentioned these persecutions he inlargeth a little further, v. 5, 6, 7.
Comforting them under them,

1. From the Consideration of the testimony in them, of the righteous judgment
of God. Which he proves, v. 6. It is, says he, a righteous thing with God to
render tribulation to them that trouble you. 2. To give you who are troubled
rest and peace. Lest these Christians should say, but when shall these things
be? He tells them, When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his
mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking Vengeance on them who know not God and
obey not the Gospel of Christ; who (says he in my Text) shall be punished with
everlasting destruction. The Text will afford us two Propositions.

1. Prop. That those persons who in this life have not known God, or have not
obeyed the Gospel of Christ, when Christ shall come to judgment shall be
punished with everlasting Destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power.

2. Prop. That amongst sinners, the persecutors of others unjustly for their
conscience toward God, and for the Gospel of Christ shall least escape this
righteous Judgment. These above others shall be punished with everlasting
destruction.

The Emphasis of the proposition, so far as I desire to handle it, lies in the
word everlasting; they shall (says the Text) be punished with everlasting
destruction, which is no more than our Savior had said, Math. 25.46. And those
shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal, and
Math. 9.44, 46, 48. Where you read of a worm that never dies, and a fire that
is not quenched. The Revelation of Scripture in the case is plain enough: only
here is the Question.

Quest. How it can stand with the Justice, or goodness of God, to punish
momentary Sins, with everlasting destruction?

The grounds of this Question or doubt are.

1. The proportion which Justice seems to require betwixt the offense, and
the punishment. Justice amongst men requires a proportion, as well as
punishment it self; and it is with us accounted injustice not to keep a measure
in punishment. Every one condemns the Roman taking away the life of his
Servant, in compensation of a cup-board of glasses he had broken, and we count
it hardly just, to do the like for little things stolen from us: now there
seems to be no proportion betwixt momentany singings and eternal punishments.
Tertullian rightly calls sins vaporata libidinum momenta, And the holy ghost
calls them the pleasures of sin for a season. It is the same case as to the
profits of sin, man that is born of a woman has but a short time to live; and
no longer time to sin in, then he has to live.

2. Eternal torments seem to bear no proportion to that infinite goodness and
mercy of God, which we have read of to be in God. They say indeed of Nero, that
having condemned a malefactor to long torments, and pleasing himself to see him
so tormented, when the poor wretch called to him for mercy, he gave him no
other answer, then Nondum tecum in gratiam redii; stay Sir, you and I are not
friends yet, but is it possible without blasphemy to imagine any such thing of
God, of whose nature it is to forgive, and to show mercy? Can he please himself
with the eternal torments of a creature which he has made? No, no, (says the
Atheist) Hell is but a bugbear, there can be no such thing consistent with the
Justice and goodness of God as Eternal Destruction.

But the Scripture affirms it, suffer me therefore in general to cry out, O you
Sons of men, are not the Lords ways equal? Are not your ways inequal? who art
thou, O man, who reasonest with God? Shall the clay say to the Potter why have
thou made me thus? Is not our Reason debauched think we when it can agree no
better with the Reason and wisdom of God, whence it deriveth, and that in a
lefs proportion, than a drop of water bears to the Ocean, or the Fountain
from which it deriveth?

Know therefore that all these vain and Atheistical reasonings of our hearts
proceed upon one, or more of these mistaken principles.

1. That Gods compassion, goodness or mercy, must be Eternally extended to, and
exercised upon, the most notorious desperate despisers and contemners of it.
Now this is indeed to fancy an idol to our selves instead of God: we have no
reason so to conceive of God, partly because we find no humane nature so tame,
though we be under a Law of showing pity and compassion; partly, because the
Scripture nowhere teaches us such a notion of God. Besides, that such a
notion of God as this is would disarm the most excellent and perfect being of
all power to protect it self, from the greatest injuries which the most
debauched persons should offer to it. I would gladly know what reason, or what
part of Scripture, can induce any to dream of a goodness, and mercy of God
toward finners beyond this life?

2. That the goodness and mercy of God must be estimated, and measured by his
dispensations to individuals. Amongst men, mercy to some particular persons
that are eminent disturbers of humane Society, is cruelty to thousands
possibly. Gods mercy may be exercised, and he may be a God in whom all that the
Scripture says of that goodness, that is in the Divine being, may be verified,
and yet hundreds yea thousands of impenitent sinners may eternally perish.

3. That the proportion which the Divine Justice observes in punishing
sinners, must be measured by the proportion of time which the sinner has to
sin in. Than which there nothing more false, nor (as I shall anon show you) is
there any such rule kept to in the justice of men.

4. That the Justice of God is to be measured by the same measures as the
Justice of men, and nothing which amongst men is injust can be just with God;
where-as among men, we see the same rewards and punishments are not judged just
as to all men: all Nations (though the fact be the same) otherwise punish
injuries done to superiors than to inferiors, and it is thought but just to
proportion the punishment to the quality and greatness of the person to whom
the injury is done.

5. That the condemned sinner satisfies by his suffering, than which there is
nothing more false. No creditor takes his debtors lying in prison, whatever
misery he feels there, to be any part of payment of his debt. These are some
of the mistaken Principles, from which vain man quarrelleth at the Divine
Justice, in the eternal destruction of sinners. Now these things premised, I
shall easily show you, that eternal punishment is not inconsistent with the
Justice of God, nor does any way derogate from that infinite goodness and mercy
which is inseparable from the Divine Being.

1. Why should we not (in the first place) allow that to be just with God,
which we allow to be just and righteous in man? What does man less than this
according to the extent of his power? Does not the Magistrate for his offense
deprive the Traitor, the Murderer, or other Malefactor, of his life, and all
the comforts of it for ever? Divines say, that in Hell there is a pain of loss,
and a pain of sense; and the Schoolmen argue the former to be greater than the
latter: you see man inflicteth an eternal pain of loss, and counts it just; he
takes away the malefactors life, and all the sweet concomitants of it from him
for ever; he imprisoneth him during life, banisheth him from his Country, never
to return, confiscates his estate for ever: Yet who quarrels with him as if he
did unjustly?

Object. But will some say, God does not only adjudge a sinner to an eternal
loss of his life, estate, liberty, this indeed man does; but God adjudgeth him
also to eternal torments, to a neverdying worm, a fire that never shall be
quenched.

Sol. I answer, Had man the same power, he would also do the same thing, and
yet hope to be acounted guiltless: where eminent injuries are done to persons
of great place and power, How many are angry, and will not be reconciled,
though they be under a Divine Law obliging them to the contrary? How does man
sometimes divide a Malefactors last punishment, and suffers him not to dye at
once, but by piecemeal, to make his punishment as long-lived as he can? What
will you say of those condemned to be starved to death? Yet in some great
crimes, who calls this cruelty or injustice? The greatness of the offense is
in this case judged to justify the extraordinariness of the punishment.

2. What injustice can it be in God, to be ever exacting satisfaction to a debt
which is never paid, especially when the debtor has also refused his pardon
for it? Suppose one of us has a debtor who owes us a great sum of Money, we
offer him, that if he will come to us, and upon his knees but ask pardon, we
will forgive him the debt; he refuses, we lay him up in Prison, still he
pays us nothing; Which of us counts it unjust to keep this wretch in Prison
as long as we can? The reason why we do not for ever keep him in Prison, is
because that neither we, nor he, are of eternal duration. If indeed the
suffering of the sinner a Thousand, Ten thousand years, did give any
satisfaction to God; this were unjust: But who counts a debtors lying in a
Gaol, any payment of, or satisfaction for his debt? There are two things may be
said of every sin, which should make the thoughts of sin very dreadful to every
understanding Christian. 1. That all the holy actions of all the men in the
world, cannot make God amends for one sin. It is a true saying of Drexellius,
Omnium bonorum sanctae actiones unius lethalis noxae pondere superantur. 2.
That the severest punishment which any poor wretch can suffer for sin, cannot
give God satisfaction for the least sin.

3. What pretense can there be of charging God with unjustice, for continuing a
punishment upon that sinner, that continues his impenitency. If a sinner in
everlasting torments indeed either ever could, or did repent, there might
possibly be some pretense for this imputation of injustice to God, or at least,
something might be colourably said to derogate from the goodness and mercy of
God, in not delivering him from those torments: Though that Text, Rev. 16.9,
11, possibly be not to be understood of Hell, yet you have in it, a true
picture of such as are under the condemnation of it. When the fourth and fifth
Angels poured out their vials, and had power to scorch men with fire, it is
said, verse. 9, That they were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name
of God, which had power over those plagues, and repented not to give him glory.
And again, verse. 11, They blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains,
and their sores, and repented not of their deeds. I say these two verses give
you as to this thing, a true picture of Hell. Sinners are there plagued, and
scorched with heat, but they repent not, to give glory to God. Had they in this
life repented, they had never come into those flames. In that state indeed,
there is no place, no means for repentance, nor has any sufferer there any
heart for it. Non decebat justitiam dei poenitere non poenitentium injustitiae
humanae; It did not become the justice of God to repent, as to their
punishment, who never repent of their own injustice, and unrighteousness. What
man pitieth a person laid in Gaol for contriving Treason against his Prince, or
Country? Because he continues there, whiles even in Prison he goes on to
revile, and threaten, and act what mischief is in his power under his
circumstances? And will not so much as say that he has done amiss, nor beg his
Princes pardon? This is the case of the damned soul: in this life he sinned,
but refused to repent, though he was often called to, and admonished to repent;
God throws him for his sin, continued in impenitently, into Hell; there he
repents not, he says not so much as, I have sinned, Lord have mercy upon me:
Is God think you unjust in keeping this hardened, stubborn, and impenitent
sinner in an eternal Prison? In this the sinner is like to the Devil, and to
his evil Angels; as the Saints in the resurection are made like to the good
Angels: so sinners are like to the evil Angels. The Devils never repent, they
never say, what have we done, they never ask God pardon; no more do sinners
that are once condemned to a fellowship and society with them for ever.

4. What injustice can there be in God, never to cease from punishing that
sinner, who never cease from his acts of sin? I shall not here concern my
self in that question, whether the blasphemies of the damned be sins, yea, or
no: For my own part, I see no reason why they should not be called sins, they
are the acts of rational creatures contrary to the Law of God. If the sinner
had in this life ceased to do evil, he had never come in those torments; if he
ceased not to sin in this life, I ask when he ceased, or by what other name we
can call the blasphemies of damned souls because of their torments, than that
of sins against God? If they be sins, I say, damned souls never cease to sin.
Are not the blasphemies of the Devils sins? And are not the blasphemies of
damned souls of the same nature? But I will not enlarge upon this, for it has
a great cognation to the former.

5. If it were not unjust with God to annex the penalty of eternal destruction
to his threatening against sin, it cannot be unjust with him, having enacted a
Law under such a penalty to execute it. The truth of this depends upon this
principle, That it can be no injustice, to put a just Law in execution, which
is so plain, as that it demonstrateth it self to every man's reason. For what is
Justice in the execution or practice of it, but the putting of just laws in
execution? Besides, what is necessary cannot be unjust. Has the Lord spoken
it, and shall he not do it (says the Prophet)? God having enacted such a Law,
and affixed such a threatening to it is concerned in truth, to give being to the
execution of it. So that all I have to do, is to evince the wisdom and justice
of God in making such a Law, which will appear to you, if you please to
consider,

1. The influence which it has upon those who shall be saved, as a means to
bring them to Heaven; this appears, from that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11, We
knowing the terrors of the Lord, persuade men: as also from the frequent use
which both our Savior and his Apostles make of this argument, to deter men
from sin, and to engage them to that duty which they owe unto God; in the
performance of which they shall obtain everlasting life and salvation. John
Baptist uses it, Matt. 3.7. Our Savior uses it, Matt. 25. The Apostle uses
it, 1 These. 1.10, and in many other places of Scripture.

2. Such a Law has undoubtedly a great influence upon the worst of men, and
keeps them in awe, so as they dare not be so vile, as they otherwise would
be. I have told you of that Heathen who is reported to have said, That if God
had not established death by his Law, it was yet so necessary for mankind, that
it had been reason that Governors should have established some Law, to have
determined men's lives at such or such times. The Heathens knew nothing of the
Revelation of Gods Will, as to the eternal destruction of any; but saw such a
sanction so necessary for the rule and government of the World, that they
figured such a thing, a place where thirsty Tantalus should have rivers just
washing up to his lips, and yet he should not be able to drink of them; where
weary Sisyphus should be always laboring to roll a stone up the hill, for
which he should never be able to find a resting place. The Heathens saw the
necessity of frighting the world with a Sanction, for eternal punishments, for
the punishment of wickedness. It is a saying of Cicero, Itaque ut aliqua in
vita formido improbis esset posita, apud infero ejusmodi quaedam supplicia
impiis antique constituta esse voluerunt, quod videbant his remotis, non esse
mortem ipsam pertimescendam. Orat. 4. in Catilinam: That is, That wicked men
might in this life have upon them some fear of punishment, the Ancients would
have some punishments appointed in Hell; for they saw, that without this, even
death it self would not be feared. Hence it was that Origin (one of the
Ancients) though (as he had many other errors) he thought the punishment of the
damned should one day have an end; yet (as they say) he would never openly
publish his opinion, being aware what a deluge of wickedness it would let in
upon the world. I would offer it to any reasonable man's thoughts, to consider,
what less than a threatening of eternal destruction could be in prudence
judged, to bear any proportion to the impetuous lust of rage and passion, that
disturbeth humane nature. Governors affix to their Laws, the penalties of
perpetual imprisonment, banishment, whippings, brandings, burning, hanging,
hanging drawing and quartering: we see this is not sufficient, hundreds of
persons throughout England in a year, are cut off, notwithstanding these Laws,
and these punishments: It is true, some hope of escaping, and not being
detected, may a little encourage; but this is not the main, they know if the
worst comes that can come, it is but exercising patience for an hour or two,
and they are out of their misery. I appeal to every considerate persons
judgment, whether he does not think, that if the aw of an eternal destruction
were of the world, the world would not be a Thousand times more full of
Traitors, Murderers, Blasphemers, Adulterers, Thieves, Defiers of all Divine
and humane Laws than it is at this day, though it be now full enough; if they
do not think so, their thoughts are very shallow, and they will be at a loss,
to tell us how the Christianized parts of the world are more civil, and have
fewer of these exorbitancies, than are to be found amongst Indians and
Barbarians: if they do think the world would be much worse, I would fain know
of them, whether the establishing a law for the eternal destruction of sinners,
were not both just, and a piece of infinite Wisdom in God. Now, if it were just
for God to establish such a Law, I am sure it must be a piece of distributive
Justice in God to put it in execution; yea, and his truth must be also
concerned in it: he has spoken it, and he must do it; for he cannot alter the
thing that has gone out of his lips. It is I think reasonably said by an
ingenious Author, That it more concerns the glory of God, to keep many from
sin, than to keep a few from Hell. The Glory of God is far more highly his
concern, than the salvation of particular persons. Gods Glory is more advanced
by the restraint of sin in the universality of mankind, than it is hindered by
the damnation of any part of them: And methinks we might without any great
difficulty agree this, when as it appears, both by our Laws, and the daily
proceedings of our Courts of Judicatory; we agree it to be more for the public
good of a Nation, that the Government and Laws of a Nation should be
maintained, than that the lives of hundreds of Traitors, Murderers, Thieves,
and other miscreants, that are disturbers of humane polities, and societies
should be preserved.

3. But this is further advantaged from the consideration, That this righteous
Sanction of eternal destruction, is executed under the Gospel upon none to whom
it has not been a mean before to keep them from it. I have told you, that as
to those ordained to life, it is a means to preserve them from wrath to come,
to hear of it, the Ministers of the Lord knowing the terrors of the Lord
persuade men; and by the consideration and the hearing of these terrors, as by
a partial mean, they are brought into a state opposite to it, a state of
eternal joy and felicity. To the whole of mankind, it is a mean to restrain
them from sin: I now add, that these poor wretches, who at last drop into the
Pit as the demerit of their sins, continued in without repentance, have, or
might have formerly heard of it denounced against them, as a means to keep them
from it, and to bring them to an eternal felicity. Now does man judge it a
righteous thing, having made, and promulged Laws to his Subjects, telling them
what shall be judged Treason, and what shall be the punishment of a Traitor,
and therefore promulged his Laws, that they might take heed of Treasons,
Murders, or other enormous crimes; If afterward they will commit them, that
his Law should be rigorously executed upon them, to the confiscation of their
goods, the depriving them of their liberties, yea, and lives too: I say, does
man thus judge? and shall we think it an unrighteous thing with God, when he
does not surprise sinners in their heaps of sin, but publishes his Law in his
word, promulgeth it by Ministers, and therefore publishes it, that men and
women might be by the terrors of the Lord persuaded, and warned to flee from
the wrath that is to come, and take heed of having their portion in that place,
where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out; yet notwithstanding,
in defiance of the authority of God, and in the contempt of his Law, they will
go on, and take no warning to execute this Law upon them? To conclude this
Meditation, to execute a just Law, can be no injustice, no cruelty, and in God
it is necessary to vindicate both his authory, and truth. This Law of eternal
destruction, as the punishment of sin, considered in its first establishment,
was a just Law: Just, because a means to bring many to Heaven, because an
universal mean and most prudential, and almost alone effectual to restrain sin
in the world; and because it was first a mean to preserve them from the pit,
who at last through their own choice, stubbornness, and wilfulness, do fall
into it. It is therefore impossible that it should be any injustice in God to
put this Law in execution, to punish impenitent and incorrigible sinners with
eternal destruction.

6. The proportion which Justice is to observe, and adjust betwixt a punishment
and an enormous sinful act, is by no means to be measured, by comparing the
time, or degree of pleasure, which the sinner has had for his sinning, or in
his sinful act, but by comparing the punishment, either with the dignity of the
person injured and contemned, or with the damage done by the offense, or with
the malice, treachery, and perfidiousness of the person offending. It must be
acknowledged that distributive justice is to observe a proportion betwixt the
punishment, and the nature of the offense: And upon this true principle it is,
that this objection, these reasonings of ours, against the justice of God in
the eternal destruction of sinners do proceed. But I say,

1. This Proportion is not to be measured, either by the time the sinner has
had to commit his sins in, or by the degree of pleasure, which the sinner has
had in his inordinate sinful actions. That Is all which the caviller in this
point against Divine Justice has here to say: What proportion is there between
the sins of a few years, and eternal destruction? being tormented in Hell Ten
thousand times ten thousand years? But who amongst men measures thus the
proportion of any punishment to any kind of offenses amongst men? The Murderer
has killed his neighbor, the Traitor his Prince, his work was done in a small
part of an hour; it may be very few days were taken up, either in the
contrivance or execution of his design. Does justice require, that the time of
these Malefactors Imprisonment, or torture in Death, should not exceed the time
of the contrivance, or execution of their sin? who ever so judged? There is
nothing more ordinary in Philosophy, than to say, that distributive Justice
ought to proceed according to Geometrical proportion between persons and
things, not according to an Arithmetical proportion, observed in dealings
between man and man. The measure then of a sinful action is not to be taken
from the duration or continuance of a sinful Act. But,

1. From the dignity of the person offended, injured, and contemned. He that
murthereth his Prince is punished otherwise, and more severely than he who
murthereth his equal. By Gods Law, if the Daughter of the High Priest committed
uncleanness she was to be burned, Levit. 21.9. So was not every one who was an
adulteress; but she had defiled her father, and therefore was not to dye an
ordinary death. It is only said, he that curses his father or mother shall
dye, Levit. 20.9. In our Law, If a person murthereth his equal, or inferior,
he or she shall be hanged, they shall dye the ordinary death of malefactors;
but if the Woman murthereth her Husband, the Child his Parent, the Servant his
Master, they shall be burned; if the Traitor murthereth his Sovereign, he shall
be hanged, drawn and quartered: The injury is done to their superiors. Now
there is not so great a disproportion betwixt the greatest Emperor, and the
meanest Villain in the world, as there is betwixt the great God of Heaven and
Earth, and his creature: Nor is there so great a disproportion betwixt hanging,
burning, and torturing to death, and eternal punishment, as there is betwixt an
infinite and a finite being. Sin takes an infiniteness, from the infiniteness
of that God against whom it is committed. And so is objective infinitum,
objectively infinite; so as there is no disproportion, though the punishment be
as they say durative infinita, infinite in duration. The durative infiniteness
of the punishment, is adequated to the objective infiniteness of sin.

2. Sin is to be measured by the damage it does to the person injured, or to
the public. Upon this principle of Reason proceeds another reason of
different punishments: He that merely curses or speaks evil of his Prince,
shall not be punished as he that murthereth him. Now sin wrongeth God infinite
ways. In his Sovereignty. The sinner says, God has no Authority over me, no
power, no right to command me; my thoughts are free, I will think what I list;
my tongue is my own, I will speak, God has nothing to do with me; it wrongeth
God in his holiness, it says the Laws of God are not holy, it wrongeth him in
his Omniscience, Omnipotence, All sufficiency, in his Justice, in his Wisdom,
in all his Attributes: It were a great work to show you how many ways sin
wrongeth God; it is intensive infinitum, intensively infinite, and therefore a
punishment of an infinite extension, is but proportioned unto it. I pass over
the injury done by it to man, as not to be compared with this.

3. Sin is to be measured by the falsehood, treachery, malice and perfidiousness
of the person offending. Hence the traitor, the rebellious child, the bloody
wife and servant are more severely punished than others that do the same things
to other persons, because they violate a trust, and show the greatest treachery
and perfidiousness. Iniquity takes the greater heinousness from the greatest
obligations to the contrary duty. Now in all sinning against God there are the
greatest failers of faith and duty, the greatest abuses of love and goodness
imaginable. So as if we thus take our measures, justice keeps but a due
geometrical proportion in the eternal punishment of the momentary sins of
sinners; for as is the punishment to the offense, so is the party offended to
the party offending. As the punishment is without end, infinite, whereas the
sins were momentary and temporary: so the party offended was infinite, and the
sinner who dared to defy infinite Majesty, and disobey an infinitely great and
glorious God was but a finite worm. As is the injury in sinning to a man, so is
the vengeance in punishment to the sin. Man is a poor pitiful worm, but by sin
he does an infinite wrong to God; it cannot be expressed how he dishonors
God: there is no measuring the depth of the guilt in sin. Sin is indeed a
finite thing, but it is punished with an infinite punishment; proportioned well
enough to the infinite wrong done to the Divine being by it. Let this be a
sixth Demonstration of the justice of God.

7. The justice of God in the eternal punishment of finite temporary sins, is
cleared in this, That the sinner has sinned, in suo aeterno, in his eternity.
There is in every sinner infinita voluntas peccandi, a will to sin infinitely
and without end. This I remember a learned Author calls pessimam adhaesionem
peccati, one of the worst circumstances of sin. That the sinner does not sin
eternally, is from Gods quicker cutting asunder the thread of his life: had the
thread of a sinners life run out to eternity, he would have sinned to eternity.
Suppose one amongst the damned who had not spent above twenty or thirty years
in the world in sinning, I would appeal to the judgment of any deliberate man,
whether this man would not willingly have lived fifty, sixty, or an hundred
years, and if he therefore did not desire to live so long, that he might take
his fill of sin, satiate himself with his lusts; he who says otherwise must
charge God with damning a soul, who, he knew would have repented, if God would
have suffered him to have lived long enough; and can any entertain such a
thought of God? If the sinner had lived for ever he would have gone on in his
sins for ever; then there was in him a kind of infiniteness in willing sin.
This account of the justice of God in the eternal destruction of sinners, is
given us by Greg. Mag. I will give you his words in English.

They who cavil (says he) at the justice of God in this speak right, if the
just Judge of the whole earth did not proceed against men, as well for their
thoughts as their actions: wicked men's sins are therefore finite, because their
lives are so. They would have lived eternally, that they might have sinned
eternally; for they more desire to sin than to live, and therefore they desire
to live always, that they might never cease to sin. Gr. Mag. mor. l. 4. c. 18.

It is therefore righteous with God that their punishment should never end,
whose sinful hearts knew no end in their willingness and lustings to sin. The
sinner has no end as to Divine Vengeance, because as long as he could he would
know no term in sinning. It is not just with man to punish the intentions and
motions of the heart, because he can but guess at them; he cannot certainly
know them till they appear by some overt actions. Our Law makes it treason to
imagine the death of the King; indeed the Traitor is not punished till his
imagination be discovered by some overt words or actions, by which alone man
can judge of intentions and imaginations: but to show us how just even man
sometimes judges it, especially in some great crimes, to punish intentions;
very small overt actions will sometimes serve to judge of the counsels,
designs and intentions of a malefactors heart.

8. The justice of God in punishing sinners with everlasting destruction, is
apparent by his proposal of an eternal reward to the greatest sinners, if they
will repent and turn unto him. God sets before every sinner an eternal life,
as well as an eternal death; the sinner makes his choice, he chooses death
rather than life; so as the proportion of Justice in the punishment, is
justified by the proportion of the reward offered, in case the sinner would
leave his sins and turn unto God. This account Aquinas gives of the justice of
God in this particular. The sinner (says he) refuses and puts from him an
infinite good, and despises an unchangeable good for things that are mutable.
Gods punishments are no greater nor of longer duration, than his rewards are
which are proposed to the same persons, if they would have turned from their
sins, that they might have lived.

9. Who can so much as in a secret thought charge God with injustice, in the
eternal punishment of a sinner, who remembers that God for the sin of man laid
a punishment upon an infinite person, who was the Son of his eternal love: and
this the Apostle says, Romans 3.26. Was to declare his righteousness: To
declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
Justifier of him who believes in Jesus. Now in this we are so far from
quarrelling at the justice of God, that there is no Christian that does not
adore and admire it: what is the difference? There God punished an infinite
person for a time; here he punishes finite persons in an infinity of time,
that what they cannot suffer in the intension of their suffering, they might be
ever doing in the extension of time: yea and this difference more is
observable, God in punishing his Son, laid our iniquities upon another; here
the sinner bears none but his own burden, and does but suffer the punishment
due to his own iniquity. Now if we will quarrel at Gods righteousness in this
loading of his own Son with the burden of his wrath, we quarrel at the highest
contrivement of Divine and Infinite Wisdom for the salvation of men: yet it is
much more reasonable to dispute that than the justice of God, in the eternal
personal punishment of a sinner. It is the saying of Nierembergius.

Illud mihi videtur ridiculum, mirari Divinam severitatem in aeterna
scelestorum punitione, nec intendere infinitam illam justitiam in innocentia
unigeniti dilecti sui: Quid mirum torqueri in aeternum scelestos pro peccatis
suis si passus est pro alienis justissimus Dei filius? Qui potuit sustinere
sine contumelia suae bonitatis charissimum natum una hora pati injuste, multo
melius tolerabit aeternis injustos suppliciis affligi justissime. Nieremb.

It to me (says he) seems ridiculous to admire at Divine severity in the
eternal punishment of wicked men, and not to attend to that infinite justice in
the innocence of his only beloved Son. What wonder is it that wicked men should
be for ever tormented for their own sins, if the most righteous son of God
suffered for the sins of others. He that without a reproach to his goodness
could endure his most dear Son to suffer so long as one hour, will much better
endure unjust sinners to be tormented with eternal punishment.

10. Lastly, It is the greatest error and madness imaginable for any soul to
dream of mercy in God, after the contempt and despising of his goodness and
mercy, to a final impenitency. What is Divine goodness and mercy, but the will
of God inclining him to do good to miserable creatures. This, we say, is to be
found in God, and that to an infinite degree; and is abundantly seen in his
long-suffering and forbearance of them, and patience to them; in his waiting
upon them all the days of their life, giving them his Gospel, sending them his
Ministers, beseeching them to be reconciled unto God, knocking by his Spirit at
the doors of their hearts. Thus the merciful God extends his goodness unto
all sinners, a long time he declares that he desires not the death of any
sinner, but is willing that all should be saved, by coming to the
acknowledgment of the truth. The vile sinner through the pride of his heart,
will not seek after God, but vexes, grieveth, resists his holy Spirit from
time to time, refuses to repent and to turn unto God, defieth him, mocketh at
the tenders of Divine grace: thus he lives, thus he dies, yet has heard of,
and knows the threatenings of eternal destruction: he looks upon them as
bugbear things, not to fright such men as he is, but children only: he drinks,
he swears, he curses and blasphemeth God; lies, breaks Sabbaths, he will
venture it. Who is that God that shall restrain the lusts of his heart? He will
try whether there be such an Hell, such an eternal destruction yea or no. What
do we talk of mercy after this, to such a bold defier of the Divine Majesty?
What kind of being must we fancy the eternal God, if we should imagine him to
have one drop of mercy for such a contemner and defier of Divine goodness?
Surely he that made this man will have no mercy on him, he that formed him can
show him no favor, without a dethroning himself, and making himself the
contempt of his creature. This every sinner does, one more openly and boldly,
another more secretly and tacitly. Every fool, if he does not speak it with his
tongue, yet says in his heart, there is no God. Whiles vain man talks of mercy
in God in this case, I am afraid he fancieth mercy in God to be a passion as it
is in us, which necessarily stirs to compassionate every object of misery.
Alas! it is no such thing, it is nothing else but the good will of God to do
good to sinners if they will be made partakers of his goodness: The same will
moves, and that justly too, otherwise after this life the red flag is then
held out. The last grains of sand in the glass of mercy are dropped out, when
this life is determined. There is no more sacrifice for sin remaining, but a
dreadful looking for of Judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the
adversaries. He that despised Moses law, died without mercy; of how much sorer
punishment shall they be thought worthy, who have trodden under foot the blood
of the Son of God, and have counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified, as an unholy thing, Heb. 10.26, 27. These men have done despite to
the Spirit of Grace, and we know who has said vengeance is mine, and I will
repay it, I will recompense (says the Lord) and again, the Lord shall judge
his people. I conclude then with the Apostle in that place, It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. There is a time for all things,
and as it is so with men, so it is with God: There is a time for mercy, that is
the time of this life; and there must be a time for the execution of Justice,
when God shall declare his righteousness upon sinners who have despised his
goodness and patience, that is the time after this life. The inch of Candle is
out when the sinners life is expired: no more coming to the waters, and buying
then what before was offered without money, and without price. Mercy has done
its utmost as to such sinners: no more mercy is to be found in God for them, no
more compassion in that God who is full of mercy and tender compassion. Nor
shall we need at all to stumble at this, for to oblige Magistrates to be always
pitiful to them that are in misery, though they have been the causes of it to
themselves, and have brought themselves into misery by the highest contempts of
Authority and Government; yea and of the clemency and patience of the
Magistrate, were quickly to prostitute all Government, and to expose those that
manage it to the basest contempt and scorn imaginable: and if the Princes and
Judges of the earth, and Generals of Armies upon the prospect of this, see a
necessity of setting limits to their bowels of compassion, and no one judges
them either unjust or cruel in so doing; why may not the same be allowed to the
holy and righteous God? But I have spoken enough to convince those who observe
the principles of justice allowed in the practice of all States and
Governments, with the general observation of the wiser sort in the world, That
God is neither cruel nor unrighteous in punishing with an eternal destruction
those that know not God, and obey not his Gospel, although their time and
pleasure of sinning has born no proportion, either to the time or degree of
their torments. I shall apply it but in a word or two.

1. The first, To sinners who are yet impenitent, who have not yet by
repentance and faith saved themselves from this wrath to come.

2. The second to those who through grace have saved themselves from this wrath.

Use 1. To the first I shall only speak after the great Apostle of the
Gentiles. We knowing the terrors of the Lord, persuade you. 1. Not to stand
disputing with God about the justice and equity of his ways. 2. While your time
lasts to save your selves from these eternal burnings, from this worm which
never dies, this fire which never goes out.

1. Dispute not then Divine Justice, as to the eternal Destruction of sinners.
You see if you do, you will fall in judgment, though you should be tried by
the common laws of men, by the customs and practices of all Nations. Flatter
not your selves, that whatever your Ministers tell you, the goodness and mercy
of God will not allow him to see his creatures eternally tormented; or that the
justice of God cannot allow him to punish the sinnings of a few hours, or years
with an eternity of torments. What have they to do with mercy who have
out-sinned their days and years of mercy, and despised the long-suffering,
patience and forbearance of God, that for twenty, thirty, forty years together
was leading them to repentance, and waiting for their conversion, and turning
to him; who had a day and time of repentance, but repented not; an eternal life
and happiness offered them, but refused it, and have judged themselves unworthy
of eternal life? O let all sinners cease disputing Divine Justice, and
presuming upon I know not what mercy in God, and let them to day, while it is
called to day, not harden their hearts, but study to save themselves from this
wrath that is to come! Let me but offer you one or two Meditations.

1. Consider with your selves, how often you have deserved this eternal
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; and
how many are dropped into it, who never lived so long, nor sinned so much as
you have done? Do not you think that an High-way-man, or some other notorious
villain, as he passes by a pair of Gallows upon the road, has many such a
cold thought as this: How many have perished upon this tree for stealing but a
few shillings, or some things of little value? how often have I deserved the
same punishment, though I as yet escape? Oh that you who are yet in a state of
guilt and impenitency, would reflect upon your selves, and say, Lord! how many
are dropped into the pit of eternal destruction, who never lived so long as I
have lived, nor sinned to that degree that I have sinned! yet they are
perished, and for ever perished, yet I live, and am out of that pit.

2. Consider what an hairs-breadth there is betwixt you and this eternal
destruction. You see some in a moment going down into the pit, some in an hours
time, some in a weeks time; you sleep over it every night, you tread over it
every day; you need not be told how little there is betwixt us and death every
day: How suddenly do you see some snatched away on your right hand? others
snatched away on your left hand, Ananias and Saphira drop into the pit with a
lie in their mouths? What know you what this day, what the next night may bring
forth upon our souls? Let me conclude this with an Exhortation much of that
nature, which Daniel used to that great King.

Wherefore, O Sinners! let my counsel be acceptable unto you, break off your
sins by a true repentance, and your iniquities, by a coming unto Christ; if so
be you may save your selves from this wrath to come.

Use 2. In the second place, Let the People of God, who are delivered from this
wrath, and by grace translated into the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, look
back with thankful hearts upon this danger which they have escaped. They tell a
story of a person, who being disordered with drink, and riding over a bridge,
where he very narrowly, but insensibly escaped the danger of his life; coming
back the next day, and viewing his danger, he was so astonished, as that he
dropped down dead: your reflection upon this eternal destruction, which (through
grace) you have escaped, ought to have no such influence upon you. But from the
sight of this dreadful wrath to come, which you have escaped, reflect these two
more profitable Meditations upon your souls.

1. What has God done for me, delivering me from such a death? Oh how patient
was God with me? how many nights did I sleep over hell? how many days? how many
years did I tread over these endless torments? Oh! what has God done for me,
in plucking my foot out of this snare, as a brand out of this fire?

2. What shall I do? what, can I do enough for that God, who has saved me from
such a death? how often might he have thrown me into Hell? O Lord, I am thy
servant, I am thy servant, thou have saved me from that wrath which is to come.
What an engagement should this lay upon us? in nostro aeterno, to serve the
Lord while we have any being. Let us therefore go away singing with David, We
will extol thee, our God, our King we will praise thee for ever, and ever;
every day we will bless thee, and we will praise thee for evermore, Psalm.
145.1. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy
name; bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth
all thine iniquity? who heals all thy diseases? who redeemeth thy life from
destruction [yea from eternal destruction] who crowns thee with
loving kindness and tender mercies, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4.

SERMON XLIII.
Psalm. LXXIII. 12, 13, 14. Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the
world, they increase in riches. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence: For all the day long have I been plagued, and
chastned every morning.
I Am endeavoring (as I have before told you) to make the seemingly rough ways
of Actual Providence plain, expounding to you the hard Chapters of Divine
Providence; I am still speaking to such questions as relate to distributive
justice, considered as in the hand of Actual Providence; and here also I have
already spoken to several things: I am now come to the last which I intend to
speak to. It is the great question which has posed the great Philosophers of
the world, and has made some of them deny the being of God; others deny the
care and Providence of God, or at least restrain it to some particular objects;
How it stands with the justice of God to punish and chasten his own people,
whiles in the mean time he suffers the way of the wicked to prosper. To
handle this, I have made choice of this Text: it is no wonder that the greatest
Philosophers have been posed here, when we find the most eminent servants of
God whose names stand upon Sacred Record, at a loss to find out this riddle,
and finding it a sad temptation to them. You shall find that Job stumbled at
it, Job 21.7. and Jeremy, though he humbly prefaceth his complaint, Jer. 12.1.
with, Righteous art thou, O Lord, in thy judgments; yet he must, he must talk
with God about his judgments in this thing. Habbakuk was also something
disturbed at it, Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to endure any iniquity:
wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and hold thy
tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is better than himself? In my
Text you find the man according to Gods own heart stumbling also at this stone,
you have an account of his fall by this temptation, from the first ver. to the
16. 2. His recovery of himself, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20. The Propositions which
may be observed from this verse, are two.

Prop. 1. That in this life ungodly men often prosper, and increase in riches,
when in the mean time holy men are plagued and chastened.

2. Prop. That this is often a temptation to the best of men, to think that
they have cleansed their hearts in vain.

I say first, God in this life does often measure out prosperity to the worst,
and afflictions to the best of men. The truth of the Proposition as to matter
of fact is evident, both from the Records of Scripture, and the whole course of
Divine Providence in the dispensations of it, as through all ages, so in our
present age, so as I shall not need spend any time in the proof of it. The
Question is,

Quest. How this is consistent with the Justice, Wisdom, or Goodness of God,
that the ungodly should prosper in the world, and increase in riches, when his
people are visited with afflictions every night, and chastned every morning? I
shall add further, to make use of the most vile and wicked men in the world, to
chasten those that are more righteous than they are. This was David's case, Saul
and Absalom, who (you know) were his great Enemies, were both most vile and
wicked persons, and that which Habbakuk expressly complained of, Hab. 1.13. And
suffer the wicked to devour the man that is more righteous than he; The
Caldeans, a vile and wicked people, to devour the Jews, who were the only
people God had upon the Earth at that time. Here are three Questions to be
spoken to:

1. How it stands with the Justice of God to measure out good things to the
vilest and worst of men?

2. How it stands with the Justice and Goodness of God, by his Actual
Providence to dispense out evil things to the best of men?

3. How it is consistent with the Justice of God, to suffer the wicked to
devour the man that is more righteous than himself?

I will begin with the first, where we must enquire, 1. What good things wicked
men have. 2. We must vindicate the Justice of God in the distribution of them
to them. The good things which a wicked man has, can be only the good things
of this life; for the good things of another life, they have no part nor
portion in that matter. 2. They can be none of the good things of grace,
special grace; they are without God, without Christ, without hope. Hence must
follow, that the good things of which alone they are capable, are either bona
corporis, the good things of the body; such are life, health, strength, etc. or
the good things of fortune, as the Heathens call them, such are riches,
honors, pleasures, or the good things of the mind, such as are learning, wit,
etc. These good things wicked men are capable of, the wicked may live, become
old, be mighty in power, Job 21.7. There may be no bands in their death, their
strength may be firm, they may not be in trouble as other men, as the Psalmist
speaks here in this Psalm. Now this being first premised, I come strictly to
speak to the Question.

1. In the first place I desire that may be remembered, which in some of my
former discourses I commended to your observation, That as adversity is not the
portion of every child of God, so prosperity is not the portion of every
sinner: nay if you fix your eyes upon any certain number of good men that live
up to the rule of Gods word, and a like number of lewd and wicked men, who live
without a God in the world; you will find that as to outward prosperity is on
the side of them that fear God: Wisdom has riches and honor in her hand, as
well as grace and glory; that which cheats us, is the odds that is in numbers
betwixt men who fear God, and such as fear him not, but fix your eye upon any
number of certain persons on either side, and you will see that Gods fulfilling
of his promises to good men for the things of this life, such as health,
long-life, riches, honor, etc. to such as fear him are not made in vain, and
the justification of Gods truth in them, does not stand in need of those
distinctions which we ordinarily make use of, they are only some that God
prospers.

2. As there is no godly man but has sin enough to justify in his afflictions;
so there are many wicked men, who may have done some service for God, which
will justify God in such rewardings of them. It is but just with God (as I have
showed you) for God to reward men for the service which they have done for God;
he rewarded Jehu, Assyria, and Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon.

3. I have showed you, that God with the rewards of this life, does often
reward, and with the punishments of this life does often punish relations in
their correlates; so God may reward, if not the person, for some service he
has done for God; yet he may reward a Father, a Grandfather in the riches, and
honor, and outward good things which the present sinner does enjoy: it was
thus you know in the case of Jehu, the prosperity of Joash and Jeroboam, and
another or two descended from Jehu, was but the reward which Jehu had for his
service against the house of Ahab. But I have enlarged my discourse upon all
these things before, and do only hint them here.

4. The good things of this life, are not truly good; they are only called by
us good, because of their gratefulness to our sense; they are in themselves but
things of a middle nature, good or bad, as we use them well or ill. It is the
saying of Nierembergius (an acute Author, though a Jesuit), Fortunantur
improbi larvatis hujus vitae bonis ad correctionem nostrae opinionis, ne
putemus illa bona posthumae nostrae foelicitati comparanda. Wicked men, says
he, are enriched with the specious good things of this life, to correct our
judgments, that we may not judge that those things are worthy to be compared
with that felicity, which we after this life shall enjoy. The wiser
Philosophers, in their disputes about the happiness of man in this life, which
they rightly enough determined must lie in the enjoyments of the greatest good,
and their further quest, what that summum bonum was, determined it could not be
the good things of the body, nor the good things of fortune (as they call them,
we speaking more like Christians, call them the good things of Common
Providence), but at last determined (the wiser of them I mean) that it was the
goods of the mind in conjunction with a competency, or a moderate portion of
the good things of the other natures. But Religion teaches us to consider man
in another notion than they by the conduct of mere natural reason could
consider him, as a creature under an ordination to an eternal existence, and
capable of an union with, and an enjoyment of God. Now upon these two
Hypotheses, it is impossible that the good things of this life should be vere
bona, truly good things, and that upon these two grounds: 1. They reach not to
another life. What is our inch of time to Eternity? Now all these things leave
us in the very hour that our soul goes out into an eternal state; Riches,
honors, pleasures, strength of body, etc. all leave us when the body dies.

2. Again, While we are in the possession of our breath, all these things do
signify just nothing to the felicity of the soul, which is far the better and
nobler part of man: the interest of the soul lies in its union and communion
with God, to which none of these contribute any thing, so that the objection
proceeds upon an hypothesis that is merely false; it supposes that God
distributeth things truly and properly good to wicked men, he only distributeth
such things to them as have a show and appearance of good, such things as to
their palats and sense are good, but have nothing of goodness in them, further
than that they are a viaticum, things of necessary use to support us in our way
to eternity, and to uphold our beings in the world, while we are here doing the
work which God has given us to do, and finishing our course; and for that,
what our Savior said is true, Our life does not lie in the abundance of that
which we possess.

5. Though they be not things in themselves good, nor absolutely and completely
good; yet having something of goodness in them, and a great goodness relative
to the fancy, apprehension, and desires of sinners (for there be many that will
say, Who will show us any good)? understanding nothing else but corn, and wine,
and oil, a long-life, an healthful body, a great estate, honor and power, etc.
It is but equal that God should gratify their senses, and please them with some
such things as they account the goods, the greatest goods, That they might not
be without some experience of the riches of divine liberality and bounty. God
must be allowed to have a relation, unto the vilest men and women; he is not
indeed their Father by Adoption, but he is their Father by Creation. It is not
reasonable that any of Gods Creatures, Absque ulla liberalitatis experientia
elabantur, should go out of the world without some experience of the divine
liberality and goodness. I remember it is said of Abraham, that for the
Children he had by Concubines, he gave them portions, and sent them away, Genesis
25.5. Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac: but unto the sons of the
concubines which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away, etc. We
may say the same of God, he gives grace and glory to his Isaacs, to the
children of the promise; but as for others, he gives them gifts of the good
things of this life; festinat largiri, says an acute Author, God makes have to
give out his largesses of mercy to them, because they are not capable of the
mercies of another life. God has time in eternity to reward his Saints, but
after this life he has no time to give sinners any thing. And this appears
the more reasonable, because the worst of men are not only Gods Creatures, but
may be in some things Gods Servants, as the Assyrian and Nebuchadnezzar, and
Cyrus were Gods Servants: there are very few wicked men but God makes some use
of, if it be but to scourge his own people, for that was the service which the
Assyrian did God, Isa. 10. But this I have before spoken to more largely.

6. It is very reasonable, if we consider what there is in these good things of
this life, which God gives out to sinners, of the nature of means on Gods
part, to allure and persuade them to turn unto him. The Apostle tells us,
That the goodness of God leads men to repentance, Romans 2.4. It does so ex
natura sua, of its own nature, though through the wickedness of their heart, it
but makes them worse; so Acts 14.17. He left not himself without witness, in
that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling
our hearts with food and gladness: and this he did, verse. 16. to nations whom
he suffered to walk in their own ways. The business is not what these things
prove eventually to sinners, so indeed they prove but snares to their souls,
that is, accidentally through the misimprovement they make of them, by reason
of the lust and corruption that is in their hearts: nor is Gods intention and
design in giving them the thing to be considered, but what they are in
themselves, and of their own nature; so they are things which they desire more
than better things, which are grateful and pleasant to them, and should
therefore oblige them to serve, and please that God, who so gratifyeth and
pleases them in things which they make their delight, and the matter of their
choice.

7. What in the last place, if we should say, that it is reasonable God should
give them these things, as one expresses it, In infortuniis apparatum; that if
they will not use them to their own good and advantage, yet they might give
Gods glory an advantage by justifying him in their condemnation upon their
abusing the goodness of God. They tell us a story of Philip King of Macedon,
and of some noble Romans, that they were wont to pray to their Idols, that they
would mix their prosperity with some grains of adversity. It is a dreadful
speech, Luke 6. Woe to you that are rich, for you have received your
consolation. It is a saying of an ingenious Author, a Jesuit,

Insignitur solum titulus opulentiae ad justitiam damnationis, quia licet ipsa
crimen non sit multis fundatur criminibus, aut fundat multa; vel sceleribus
paritur, vel scelera parturit -- solitarius titulus fortunae infamis est, nisi
aliquid pietatis agnomen purget; Merem. That is,

Riches is only a famous title to justify God in the damnation of a sinner, for
though they in themselves be no crime, yet they are a building founded on many
sins, or they lay a foundation for many; they either are bred of many sins, or
else they bring forth many -- The title of outward prosperity alone, is an
infamous title, if it has not some addition of Piety. The wrath of God smoaked
against the Israelites, whiles the flesh was betwixt their teeth. God tells
them by the Prophet Hosea, chap. 13. v. 11. He gave them a King in his wrath.
There is a wonderful wisdom of Divine Providence seen in the prosperity of
sinners, their long-life, health, successes, riches, honors: for one of these
two things follow; some of them are by them made better, and brought home to
God, as children by some slighty rewards are won unto their duty; or if the
Providence of God obtains not this effect, it fails not in another, viz.
The justification of God before Angels and men, in his righteous condemnation
of them: He has given them time to repent, and they repented not; he has
given them mercies alluring them to their duty, but they have not been won by
them; he has piped unto them, but they have not danced: and thus much may
serve to have justified the Providence of God, and showed you the
reasonableness of its motion, in the distribution of the good things of this
life to sinners.

Quest. 2. It remains in the second place to show you, how it consists with
the righteousness and goodness of God to dispense out evil things to his own
people. Job complains of his sad trials, and David, that he was visited every
morning, and chastened every moment; and we see in our daily experience, that
many are the trials of the most righteous servants of God, and those of all
sorts.

1. I say in the first place, This is not the lot of all the servants of God,
it is only the portion of some of them; some of those who fear God are rich,
honorable, mighty in power, men of good estates, prospering in the world:
there was a rich Abraham, a rich Joseph, a great man in Egypt, and a rich
Joseph of Arimathea; David, the man according to Gods own heart was a great
Prince, so was Solomon; nay, as I said before, were we not deceived by the odds
in the number of Sinners and Saints, I doubt whether we should not find that
God with the good things of this life, does not more universally bless his own
servants than he does others.

2. Suppose that some, yea that many of the People of God in this world are
tossed with tempests, and afflicted; yet surely there is none of them but has
sin enough to justify God in their punishments of this nature. I have in my
former discourses proved to you, that notwithstanding the satisfaction which
Christ has paid to the Justice of his Father, and the Covenant of Grace made
betwixt Christ and his Father, on the behalf of his Elect, and the pardoning of
their sins; yet it is consistent enough with Divine Justice, to punish the sins
of Gods own People, with the afflictions and punishments of this life: they may
be chastened of the Lord, that they may not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor.
11.32. Now the most righteous man sins seven times a day; nor does any know
how often he offends: and why should a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his iniquity? Lam. 3.

3. If you could imagine any person to have lived so innocently, as that he had
not by his personal sins deserved those temporal afflictions with which God
visits him; yet (as you have heard) God may visit the sins of Parents, of
proparents, upon Children, and afflictions of this nature, may come upon good
people, although not for their personal sins, yet for the sins of their
Parents; and this is but righteousness with God, as I have heretofore showed
you in a set discourse upon that Subject.

4. But there is yet a fourth thing, which I would speak to a little more fully
in answer to this Question, and that indeed takes away the Subject of the
question upon the point. As I said of the good things of this life, they are
not truly good, so I may say of the evil things of this life, they are not
truly evil: as the other are but larvata bona, such things as have but a Vizard
of goodness; so these are but larvata mala, such things as have but a show and
appearance of evil in them; they are only sensible evils, and our senses do but
cheat our Souls in judging them evil. This I will spend a little time to evince
to you.

1. In the first place, These are not those things which desile the Soul. It
was a saying of Augustines, There is a great deal of difference betwixt a man's
being evil, and suffering evil. Many a Soul is made better by affliction, none
is made worse by it, unless it be by accident. Nothing but sin defiles a Soul:
a man may be poor in this world yet rich in grace, he may have a sickly body,
yet an healthy Soul he may be ignoble in the world, yet have the honor to be
called the Child of God; those things alone are evil, which make the Soul
filthy, and unclean in the sight of God. Afflictions tend to make the Soul
white, to purge it and to cleanse it, they are therefore compared to fire, and
help to make our faith to appear more precious than Gold that perishes; they
do not prejudice a Soul as to its grace, nor yet as to its glory; none was ever
condemned by God because he was sickly or low in the world: Afflictions are
only ungrateful to our sense grievous to our flesh; but as to our Soul and
inward man, they touch it not, they do only sully the surface of a man, they do
no injury to all to his better part.

This Argument is plain, what does the Soul of a Christian no hurt is no evil.
Why should I call that evil which neither ever did me any hurt nor ever will?

2. The Afflictions of this life are such things as the best of Gods people
have chosen and preferred before the contrary supposed good. This is a piece of
that answer which Salvian long since, gave to this difficulty of Providence.

Humiles sunt Religiosi? hoc volunt: pauperes sunt? pauperie delectantur? sine
ambitione, ambitum respuunt; in honor sunt? honorem respuunt: lugent? lugere
gestiunt: infirmi sunt? infirmitate delectantur, Salvian. de Prove.

Are good people (says he) in a low condition? they desire to be so. Are they
poor? they are pleased with poverty; they without ambition refuse the objects
of ambition, hunt not after great things. Are they without honor? they refuse
the honors of this world. Do they mourn? they rejoice to mourn. Are they weak?
they triumph in their weakness, Heb. 11.24. By faith Moses refused to be called
the Son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the
reproach of Christ, greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. The Apostle
refused Simon Magus his money, and that with a more than ordinary detestation.
Agur indeed prays against extreme poverty, as a condition exposing him to
temptation; but he also upon the same account prays against Riches. Lord,
says he, give me neither poverty nor riches. Most glady (says the blessed
Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.10.) will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me; therefore I take pleasure in my infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake,
for when I am weak, then am I strong. The Apostles sing in Prison, and rejoice
that they are counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. The primitive
Christians suffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods. No man chooses what
he apprehends evil, but those things the world call evils have very
ordinarily been the choice of the best, and most judicious servants of God.

3. How can those things be called evils, which have a tendency to make the man
better. Afflictions both from Gods intention, and their own nature, have a
tendency to the making of the Souls of Saints better. God intends them for that
purpose, for they are his fatherly Providence for them; all those twigs which
make up the rods with which God lasheth his people, grow out of the root and
stock of Divine love. The rods with which God scourges Sinners, are gathered
of a Tree that stands upon the brink of the bottomless pit; but those with
which God chastises his people, are gathered of a Tree that stands in the
midst of the Paradise of God. Nay afflictions have in themselves a tendency to
better the Souls of Saints. They are but like a warm wall to the fruit-Tree,
which makes the fruit fairer; you observe that young Children shoot out in
sickness, you may observe the Saints too shooting out upon their afflictions; O
how many of them have we seen shot out, in humility, in faith, in patience, in
heavenly-mindedness, and contempt of the world, etc. It is a saying of Salvian
upon this Argument, Ideo Sancti viri sunt infirmiores, quia si fortes fuerint
vix Sancti esse poterint. Saints, says he, are therefore weak, because it is
an hard thing to be strong and Saints too: we may say it is hard to be rich in
Gold and Silver, and rich in grace too; to be great in the world, and great
with God too; to have an healthy body, and an healthy Soul too. It is true
there is not an absolute inconsistency, betwixt worldly presperity and grace.
Job and Abraham were rich, Joseph and Daniel were both honorable, and had
great places; Our Savior does not say that it is simply impossible, for a rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of God; but he says, It is easier for a Camel to
go through the Eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom
of God. Let the word be understood of the beast called a Camel, or for a
Cable-rope, and by the Eye of a Needle, whether you understand what we call so,
or a gate, a little gate in Jerusalem which some say had that name; It is not
simply impossible for a Camel, or a Cable rope to pass through the Eye of a
Needle: it is a thing may be done, if you cut the one into pieces small enough,
or sufficiently untwist the other; but it asks a great deal of labor, it must
be done with a great deal of difficulty.

There are three things in which the felicity of the Soul lies, 1. In its
favor with God. 2. In its conformation to God. 3. In its beatifical vision of
God. I shall show you that some of those things, which we call evils, have an
influence upon all these.

1. They do indeed none of them merit the love and favor of God, but they are
testimonies and indications of this love, and this is eminently true of such as
are sufferings for the name of Christ: the Apostle speaks of Afflictions in
general, whom he loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Child whom he
receives. Christ says particularly of the sufferings of his people for him,
They shall turn unto you for a testimony, Luke 21.13. And the blessed Apostle,
2 These. 1.5. says of them, that they are manifest tokens of the righteous
judgment of God, that, says he, you may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of
God, for which you suffer. It is a saying of Salvian; Quis tam profundi Cordis,
etc. He means, who is so shallow as to think that the rewards of the Saints are
carnes and fortitudines, abundance of the good things of this life; the love of
God, says he, is seen in higher things than these, and in things of a quite
different nature from these. It is a passage of Augustine, Surgunt procellae
hujus stagni, vides malos florere, bonos laborare, tentatio est, fluctus est,
and dicit anima tua, O Deus! Deus! Haeccine est justitiae tua, ut mali
floreant, and boni laborent: Deus tibi respondet, Haeccine est fides tua?
Haeccine tibi promisi, aut ad hoc factus es Christanus, ut in saculo floreres?
Aug. in Psalm. 25. The storms (says he) of this Pit arise, you see sinners
flourish and Saints in adversity, this is a temptation; it is a wave, and your
Soul says, O God! O God! Is this thy Justice, That Sinners should prosper, and
thy Saints should be oppressed? God answers thee, is this thy faith? were
thou made a Christian for this that thou should flourish in this life?

It was the rich glutton in the Gospel, who had his good things in this life.
Gods Lazarus had evil things; far be it from us, says Salvian, to think that
an Argument of Gods neglect of us, which is an Argument of Gods further love to
us.

2. Does the happiness of a Soul lie in its conformation to God? to the image
of his Son? (as the Apostle speaks) Afflictions highly conduce to this end.

1. This is peculiarly true of such Afflictions as a Christian suffers for the
gospel and for the name of the Lord Jesus; and therefore the Apostle triumphs
in this, 1 Phil. 20. That Christ should be magnified in his body, whether by
life or death; and therefore speaks of his sufferings of this nature, as the
matter of his expectation, his hope, his boldness, and what he was confident he
should not be ashamed of: and he prays for a fellowship with Christ in his
sufferings, Phil. 3.12. Ignatius is reported after all his sufferings to have
said, Now I begin to be a disciple. Now (says Anthony Person a Martyr of our
own Nation) I am dressed like a Soldier of Christ, when he had put some of the
straw that was prepared to kindle the wood which was to burn him, on the top of
his Head.

2. But, All sorts of afflictions have an influence upon the Soul to make it
more like to the Lord Jesus Christ. Sufferings in the flesh for Christ's sake
make us conformable to Christ's flesh, to Christ in his state of humiliation, to
Christ upon the Cross, but all the Afflictions of the Saints conduce to make
them like unto the Lord Jesus Christ in his holiness, and purity, that now
belongs unto Christ, and is inseparable from him in his estate of glory, and
exaltation: in that he died, he died once and but once, and shall hang on the
Cross no more, wear a Crown of thorns no more, but his purity and holiness,
that is essential to him: now the Afflictions of Gods people make them like
unto Christ in this. This is an argument which I have had occasion before to
touch upon, and therefore I shall be the shorter in it now.

1. They wonderfully conduce to take the hearts of the people of God off from
the Earth, and to six them upon Heaven. Poverty takes off the heart from the
love of riches, and delivers it from an evil covetousness; sickness weaneth
the Soul from the love of this life. Now holiness lies so much in the
Sequestration of the heart from the world, that in Greek, an holy man signifies
a man that is not earthly. it is an hard thing for a man to be possessed of
much of the Earth, and not to have his heart buried in it: it is true we should
rejoice as if we rejoiced not, and possess as if we possessed not; but this is
an hard saying to flesh and blood, Who is there almost who can hear, who can
learn it? how rare is that Soul which lives in the full fruition of the things
of this life, that can yet keep his heart loose from them, and sequestered for
God? Prosperity, plenty, a great affluence of the good things of this life are
as birdlime to a Souls wings, and keep it from mounting up to God. I remember
it is a saying of Salvian, Repugnanti corporis valetudine quae optamus facere
non facimus; many a time, the want of strength, and health in our bodies,
hinders us from doing that sin which we have a mind to commit. The great
enjoyments of the world are not only the things which make men unwilling to
die, but both they, and the great businesses and employments of the world, are
those things which keep Christians fettered; they cannot pray, they cannot wait
upon God in ordinances, they cannot fast, they cannot solemnly worship God as
others less entangled can: amongst other advantages therefore of a poor and
afflicted state an ingenious Author reckons this for one, he says it is
puritatis condimentum, the pickle of purity and holiness. They are the very
salt of the Earth, without which the best of men would putrify in their full
enjoyment. They are (you know) sharp, and acrimonious things, that are the
Enemies to putrefaction: salt seasoneth things, vinegar makes a good pickle
preservative of things Sugar quickly corrupts. It is true there are too too
many that have little enough of these things, and as little of any gracious
habits, poverty, and afflictions will not give grace; but that is a rare
Christian that abounds with the affluences of this life, and yet keeps his
integrity, is as pure, as holy, as full of duty, as others who have less of
this worlds goods; they are no fountains of grace, but they are great
preservatives of it.

2. Nay this is not all; in the second place, they conduce much to the
improvements of grace, especially of faith and patience. They are two habits of
grace, that like Solomon's brother and friend are made for adversity. Tribulatio
patientiae Robur operatur, patientia fidei probationem parit. Tribulation
adds to the strength of patience; and patience brings forth the trial of
Faith. If the people of God never met with affliction, how should the trial of
their faith appear more precious than that of Gold which perishes? How should
their patience have its perfect work? Faith is never seen till we be out of
sight of the thing which we pretend to trust God for. Hope which is seen is no
hope, but if we hope for that which we see not, then do we with patience wait
for it. Job's faith in God, and love to God, was seen in his trusting in him,
and adhering to him while God seemed to be killing of him. Practical habits are
improved by exercise. The Souls of the Saints ordinarily come out of their
trials, more strong in faith, more confirmed in hope, more exercised in
patience, more flaming in love to God; how then shall we call those things
evils which instead of depraving the Soul and making it worse, do tend to the
improvement of the Soul and making of it better?

3. Lastly, the highest good which the Soul is capable of is, the beatifical
vision, and enjoyment of God to all Eternity. To this the low estate of the
people of God does exceedingly conduce, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light Affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. Those who shall sit with God upon thrones, are those which
continue with him in tribulations. The great multitude which St. John saw, Rev.
7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. which no man could number, of all Nations, kindreds,
people, and tongues, which stood before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed
with white robes and palms in their hands, upon inquiry were found to be those
who came out of great tribulation, and had washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb, v. 14. Our sufferings in this life do not merit
glory, alas there is no perfection in our suffering, and sufferings are but our
duty; nor is there any proportion, betwixt light and momentany afflictions, and
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; but they work for us a far
more exceeding weight of glory. Thou art mistaken then, O Christian in thy
Judgment. God does not (as thou dreamest) distribute good things to his
Enemies, nor yet evil things to his friends: the business is no more than this,
Deus per ficta mala punit suos, and per larvata bona impios remunerat. Nierem.
God indeed by things in appearance good rewards wicked men, and by things in
appearance evil he punishes those that are his own people.

Nor let any one think to quibble here, as if God mocked either the one or the
other, for although these things which the wicked enjoy, are not real and
substantial good things; yet as they are the things which they desire, delight
in, which they choose above other things more solidly, and substantially good,
they are to them really good, and they have a tendency to make them better; and
the afflictions of the people of God, as they have in them an enmity to their
flesh, and are ungrateful to their senses, so they have something of real evil
in them; but comparatively with other evils, or the greater good things which
God has prepared for his people, they have nothing of evil in them. In short,
every observing man discerns the difference betwixt the love of an indulgent
cockering mother, and a wise, and prudent father. The father shows his love
to the Child, by fitting it to live in the world another day, learning it to be
a man, to know the world, and to converse with it: to this purpose, he inureth
it to hardship, he sends it to school, and keeps it under a severe
discipline: thus he shows his love to his Child, and when the Child comes to
years of discretion the Child thanks him for it, though under the discipline of
its youth possibly the Child thinks the father its worst enemy. The mother
possibly shows her love by cockering the Child, dandling it upon her knee,
providing fine clothes for it, giving it sweetmeats, etc. Which things indeed
have nothing of true love in them, and do only tend to emasculate the Child,
and make it of an effeminate temper, and more unfit to converse with, or live
in the world another day. Patrium Deus habet in bonos animum, (says an
ingenious Author) God loves good people, not like a mother but like a father:
whom he loves he chastneth, and scourges every Child whom he receives; he
keeps them at the school of affliction, and educateth them under the discipline
of the rods, and ferulaes of many trials, and afflictions: he suffers not the
world which is their natural mother according to the flesh, to hug them in her
bosom, nor to dandle them upon her knees; he chasteneth them that they might
not be condemned with the wicked; he has said, blessed is he whom thou
chasteneth, and teach him out of thy Law. This is but a fatherly dealing of
God with his people. God thus fitteth them for Heaven, polisheth them for
shafts in his own quiver, by this darkness makes them fit for the Saints in
light. Why say thou, O Christian, that the Lords ways are not equal, or that
the Lord deals hardly with thee? God deals with thee, but as every wise and
prudent father deals with the Child of his dearest love: and thus I have
spoken to two of the Questions which fall under this head. But there is yet a
third would be spoken to, and the rather, because it may be a temptation that
seized the hearts of many of Gods people in former times, that is, How it
consists with the justice, wisdom, and goodness of God in the motions of his
Providence to make the vilest, and worst of men his Instruments to chasten the
best, and dearest of his own people: it was Habbakuks complaint, Hab. 1.13. why
hold thou thy peace, when the wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous than he, and makes men as fishes of the Sea, as the creeping things
which have no ruler over them? But that will be my next Text, where I shall
speak something relating to that dispensation of God, and afterward shall more
largely apply both what I have spoken, and what I shall further speak on this
Argument.

SERMON XLIV.
Habbakuk I. 13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold evil, and can not look
on iniquity: wherefore look thou on them that deal treacherously and hold
thy Tongue, when the wicked man devoureth the man that is more righteous than
he; And make men as the Fish of the Sea, as the creeping things, that have no
ruler over them?
I Begin (as you see) where I left in my last exercise. I left with a quotation
out of the prophecy of Habbakuk which is now my Text, nor could any thing be
more proper; for you see it contains in terms the Question I am this day
speaking to. In the beginning of this Chapter and Prophecy, the Prophet had
been complaining unto God of the exceeding wickedness, and incorrigibleness of
the Jews. God replying to him had told him, what possibly he did not expect
(desiring not the ruin but reformation of his people) that he was about to put
an end to their wickedness, v. 6. Raising up the Caldeans a bitter and hasty
nation, which should march through the breadth of the land, to possess the
dwellings which were not theirs; terrible, and dreadful, etc. An enemy every
way qualified to execute Gods utmost vengeance upon this people. This quite
surpriseth and astonisheth the good prophet, and sends him in have unto God
again, v. 13. says he, Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy
one? we shall not dye, O Lord, thou have ordained them for Judgment, and O
mighty God thou have established them for correction; then follow the words of
my Text, Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity: wherefore look thou on them that deal treacherously, and hold
thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man, that is more righteous then he?
Habbakuk looked upon this as a very sad dispensation, and what stumbled him as
to the righteousness of God, therefore he puts it in that phrase, the man that
is more righteous than he, and adds, and make men as the fishes of the Sea,
as creeping things of the Earth which have no ruler over them. Those brute
sensitive creatures are not ruled by any rules of justice or righteousness;
those of them that have most natural strength and power, devour those who have
less: but now men are reasonable creatures, and should be acted by principles
of reason and justice amongst them, might should not overcome right. But, O
Lord, in this dispensation of thy Providence thou seem to govern the
reasonable part of the world like the brutish, and sensitive part of it. The
Jews though they be a sinful people, yet they are more righteous than the
Caldeans, they are a brutish people and have no right against the Jews; shall
thy Providence so order the affairs of the world, that those who have most
power in their hand, though they have no right, shall trample down thy people,
and eat them up like bread? Lord! this were to make men like the fish of the
Sea, like the creeping things of the Earth, which have none over them, to
govern them by any rules of justice or righteousness. Lord, why does thy
Providence thus govern humane affairs? This I conceive the sense of the words.
The question which remains to be spoken to is this.

Quest. How it can consist with the Justice of God in the motions of his Actual
Providence to suffer wicked men to devour those who are more righteous than
themselves.

I am the more willing to speak to this because it is a dispensation under
which many, of those that fear the Lord in this nation have suffered: we have
seen good men rifled, their goods taken from them, we cannot say but they have
deserved this, and far more than this from the hand of Divine Justice; but
though they have deserved this, yet we are ready to think it is hard that they
should suffer this from such miscreants as take the Spoil, and God will
certainly one day fetch the blood of his people and their abominations out of
their mouths. We are prone to think that God should not suffer his people to be
devoured, by those who are more unrighteous then they are. The Text gives you
an account.

1. Of a great disorder in the world, at least a dispensation of Providence
which Habakkuk thought so. Men dealt treacherously; the wicked devoured the men
who were more righteous than themselves.

2. It gives you an account of Gods carriage under this disorder. God looked
upon men, that is, he seemed to look upon the men that dealt treacherously, and
to hold his peace while Sinners devoured the more righteous persons. God by the
motions of his Providence seemed rather to favor, than frown upon these
disorders. Hence might be observed these two propositions.

1. Prop. That it is no unusual dispensation of Providence for God to suffer
the wicked to devour those that are more righteous than themselves.

2. Prop. That this dispensation has been matter of stumbling, and a very sore
temptation even to the servants of God.

For the first as to matter of fact there is nothing more demonstrable, look
over the whole History of Scripture, the History of all times, you will find it
true; the world began with Cains killing Abel, it went on with the Egyptians,
the Amalekites, the Philistines, the Babilonians devouring of the only people
which God had in the world. Now I say this has been heretofore, and doubtless
is at this time a great temptation to Gods people. Habakkuk complains of it in
the Text. Job complained, Job 30.1. That those who were younger than he had him
in derision, even those whose Fathers he would have disdained to have set with
the dogs of his table. Shemei a dead dog, as he called him, cursed David and
Doeg the Informer prevails against all the Lords Priests, Judas another
Informer devoureth him who is the Lord of life. It is a dispensation that has
often put the servants of God into unseemly passions, James and John would have
had fire come down from Heaven as in Elijahs time, to have destroyed the
Samaritans. Peter was out of patience to see the Informer come with a company,
with Swords and Staves to take his Master, and in his passion draws a Sword,
and with it cuts off the ear of the servant of the high priest. David himself
when God offered him the choice of three Judgments, desired rather to fall into
the hands of God than into the hands of men. I say it is and has often been a
very sore temptation, advantaged partly from Nature, partly from some Religious
reflections.

That which in humane nature advantageth this temptation, is, 1. The disdain
every man naturally has to suffer an injury from one beneath himself: when
Gideon would have had his Son Jether, have fallen upon those two Eastern
Princes Zeba and Zalmuna, they said rise thou up, and fall upon us; men have a
natural disdain and scorn to suffer from their inferiors, we see it in every
days experience. Now although every child of God is low in his own eyes, and in
honor prefers every Saint before himself; yet, as St. Paul sometimes
magnified his office against the false Apostles, and counterfeits of his age,
though he judged himself the least of the Apostles, and unworthy of that great
Name: so they cannot but magnify themselves, in comparison of open profane
miscreants, that are the scum, and off scouring of the place in which they
live; such as are common drunkards, liars, swearers, Sabbath Breakers, and
guilty of other debaucheries, the very scabs of the body politic, and spots of
the Assemblies to which they are united.

2. Every man naturally has a regret at the receiving of injuries from those
from whom he has deserved no such thing. Now the People of God are persons of
innocence, who have done no wrong to their worst Enemies; they have loved their
Enemies, prayed for them, been ready to do any offices of love to them, and
know not how to bear an injury from those to whom they have done no wrong. This
was that which troubled David's Spirit, Psalm. 35.12, 13. They rewarded me evil
for good to the spoiling of my Soul, but as for me when they were sick, my
clothing was sackcloath, I humbled my Soul with fasting, and my prayer
returned into my own bosom; I behaved myself as though he had been my friend,
or brother, I bowed down heavily, as one that mourned for my mother. But in
mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together, yea the abjects
gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; yea they did tear
me, and ceased not, with hypocritical mockers at feasts they gnashed upon me
with their teeth. Lord how long will thou look on? Rescue my Soul from their
destructions.

2. This temptation is likewise advantaged from some Religious reflections.

1. From a reflection upon the purity, and holiness of God. O Lord (says our
Prophet in my Text,) thou art of purer Eyes then to behold iniquity. How a just
and pure and holy God should look on, and hold his peace to see a company of
vile wretches tearing and devouring his own people, this is a knowledge (at
first view) too wonderful for them.

2. From a reflection upon the promises and threatenings of God; they look into
the holy word of God, and find that full of promises of good to Gods People, of
threatenings of wrath and vengeance to wicked men; instead of this, they see
vile men building up Palaces to themselves upon their ruins, and adorning
themselves with their Ornaments; the houses of the profane furnished, and
adorned with that which is not theirs; instead of the wicked man's preparing
garments, and the just man's putting them on (as Job speaks) they see good and
righteous men preparing garments, and lewd and ungodly men put them on; they
see the spoil of such as fear the Lord in the tents of lewd and ungodly men.

3. From a reflection upon the Decrees of God: O Lord, (says our Prophet) thou
have ordained them for destruction; O mighty God, thou have established them
for correction: they consider lewd and wicked men, as men whom God by a fixed
act of his Will has ordained to judgment, as persons who by the established
counsel of God are to be destroyed, and they cannot expound the Providence of
God into a consistency with his eternal purpose, when they see them not only
live, prosper, and grow old, but also live by the death of such as fear God,
and build their nests on high with feathers which they have plucked from their
wings. From these, and other causes, arises this trouble and coil in the
spirits of Gods people. Fluctus est, Tentatio est (as Augustine says) it is a
great wave, a great temptation and trouble; and even Gods own people here, are
ready to think they see a knot in the thread of providence, a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense in the even ways of the Lords dealing. Let me
endeavor in a few words to unty this knot, to remove this stone. Four or five
things I shall speak, one or other of which, or all together, will make this
way of the Lord plain to every sober and understanding Christian.

1. How is God to his people more hard, or unrighteous in such a dispensation,
than he was to the son of his dearest love? Our blessed Lord has taught us,
That the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord; it
is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his
Lord, Matt. 10.24, 25. It Is true, the chief Informer against our Lord, was one
of his hoshold, Judas; but he was a son of perdition, the only ill member of
all the 12. Who were his witnesses, but a company of perjured wretches, who
could not agree in their testimony? Who mocked him and scourged him? Herod, a
monster for all manner of wickedness. Who were they that spit upon him; that
cried out crucify him, crucify him; that gave him Gall and Vinegar to drink?
were they not the abjects of the people? Thou art not able to conceive of Gods
righteousness, in giving thee over, and thy estate over to a Renegado, an
apostate from his former profession, to wretches who make no conscience what
they say, what they swear, what they do: How was he righteous in giving over
the Son of his love to such wretches? We are never so like to our Lord and
Master, as when we are betrayed by a Judas, informed against, and testified
against by false and perjured wretches, mocked and abused by the abjects and off
scouring of the people: If God might be a just and righteous God in suffering
these things to be done to the green tree, surely he may suffer them to be done
unto us who are dry trees. Thou art troubled that God should suffer profane
scoffers to call thee hypocrite, and have a temptation to think God is not just
to thee in suffering it; know, or remembrest thou not what contradiction of
sinners Christ endured, how they said of him, that he did cast out Devils, by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils? When thy spirit rises against thy adversaries,
oh think of Christ who was the Captain of all our Salvation. But further yet,

2. Before thou in thy thoughts passest sentence against God and his
righteousness, consider with thy self by whom would thou have God to
chastise his people? It is written That all who will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer persecution. Now supposing persecution one of those species
or kinds of affliction which, God has a liberty to Scourge, and chasten his
people by; Who should be the persecutors? could thou expect that the seed of
the woman should break the woman's head? That such who have tasted of the love
of God, should bite and devour one another? Indeed sometimes (through the
prevalence of lusts and passions) it proves so through mistakes, and such
misapprehensions as the best are subject to and this but in particular rare
cases.

1. But it suteth not the ingenuous nature of Gods people to do injury to
others: Indeed it suteth not any persons (though of little acquaintance with
God) if they be persons of any goodness, and ingenuity of nature; you see
amongst us, none but one saved from the Gallows for that purpose, will be a
common hangman: we see how ordinary persons they must be that will be persuaded
to be Bailiffs; but now to fall upon the Lords Priests is a work only fit for
an accursed Edomite. The Child of God is yet under a further Law than that of a
good nature, he is here taught of God to do good to all, to love his enemies,
to do good to them that hate him; to love and pray for those who hate him and
despightfully use him; he is so far from requiting evil for evil, that he
takes himself obliged to return good for evil: Now it is not reasonable to
think that God should make use of his own people, who are by himself taught the
clean contrary; and are obliged by a contrary law, which they have so far
imbibed, that it is written on their hearts, and engraven in their souls, to
punish and chasten his own children. Who ever set a Sheep to worry a Sheep? The
work of informing against, accusing, chastening, scourging the people of God,
is a work fit for none but profane wretches, drunkards, swearers, the
debauchees of the world, who have in them such a radicated hatred of God, and
such an antipathy to that holiness which is fountain'd in him; that like as the
Basilisk, they say, will fly upon the picture of a man, out of its antipathy to
humane nature, they will fly upon every person that has the image and
superscription of God upon his soul, and is called by the holy name of God: it
is a work that only fitteth those whose hearts are possessed with the poison of
unrighteousness, and all superfluity of wickedness. To do injury to others,
suteth not an ingenious nature in any person; but it much less suteth the
Sanctified nature of a Child of God: few creatures will prey upon their own
kind. If a Child of God be to be rent and torn in pieces, to be chastened and
scourged by men, that he may not be condemned in the world; there are none so
fit to do it, as the Dogs and Swine in the world. I would ask of thee (says an
excellent Author) who art under such a temptation as this, Would thou have
the Saints of God persecute, imprison, plunder, destroy one another? Surely
they would then lose their Majesty of virtue, their title of Saints. Supposing
then the work must be done; it is as reasonable to conclude, that it must be
done by those who are less righteous then they are; and not that God should
first possess his people with principles and habits of grace diametrically
opposite to such courses, and then set them on work to practice such things.

2. Give the Lord, I beseech you, leave to make some use of the very worst of
men. It is the saying of an acute Author, Cur non ex perditis hominibus hoc
lucraretur Deus, etc. Why should not God make this profit of the vilest men? It
is true, it is not all the service which God makes wicked men do; but give me
leave to tell you, it is one of the greatest pieces of service God has from
them; they are left in the Land, as the Canaanites were left in Canaan, Judge.
2.3, to be Thorns in the sides of Gods Israelites, to keep the Lords Gaols and
Bridewell, his houses of correction for his people. Take a profane vile wretch,
he has his being from God, and his well-being he has from God, he eats Gods
bread, and is clothed with Gods wool and flax; What has God for all this? He
swears profanely, he blasphemeth God prodigiously, he breaks the Lords
Sabbaths, God is dishonored by him every day. This service he has from them,
when he has a Child to be whipped, he turns him over to him; God makes the
same use of wicked men he does of the Devils, they are his peoples tempters and
tormentors. Wicked men are to God, as the Dog to the Shepherd, as the Hawk or
Bird of prey to the Faulkener; God uses them, to let them fly at his own
people sometimes, and to pick out the eyes of them who are as dear to him as
the Apples of his eye. The Assyrian in the world signifies little to the
service of God, but as as he serves well enough to make a Rod for his anger,
and a staff for his indignation, to be sent against an hypocritical Nation,
which God can no longer bear with, but is at last resolved to make the people
of his wrath.

3. The worst of men must be suffered to fill up the measures of their
iniquities; you know God told Abraham, that the iniquity of the Amorites was
not yet full; God will have sinners fill up their measures. Now, there is no
such way for wicked men to fill up the measures of their sins, and make
themselves ripe, full ripe for Divine vengeance, as for them to fall upon this
work of devouring the Servants of God, who are more righteous than themselves
are. I have a good authority for it, Matt. 23.34, Wherefore, behold, I send
unto you Prophets, and wise men, and scribes, and some of them you shall kill
and crucify, and some you shall scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them
from city to city, that upon you may come all the righteous blood that has
been shed upon the Earth, from the blood of Abel, to the blood of Zechariah,
etc. Mark what went before, verse. 32. Fill you up then the measure of your
Fathers; you Serpents, you generation of Vipers, how can you escape the
damnation of Hell. As the Child of God must finish his work which God has
given him to do; so the reprobate must fill up his measures too. It may be a
poor wretch has been a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, a drunkard, an unclean
person, many years; God has born with him, let him alone, there want yet some
drops to fill up the measures of his sin, he falls upon the people of God,
turns a persecutor, smites his fellow servants with the fist of violence and
wickedness; then comes the master of that servant in an hour when he looks
not for him, and presently gives him his portion with Hypocrites, where there
is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth: offenses must come, they will
come, but woe be to those by whom they come. Methinks there is a great Emphasis
in those words, That upon you may come all the righteous blood that has been
shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel, etc. There was a great deal of
righteous blood shed from the time of Abel to the time of Zechariah: what had
God let it all sleep? had God in those hundreds of years reckoned with sinners
for none of it? Yes, certainly God had revenged himself of many a blood-thirsty
man. But yet Abels blood was not expiated in Christ's time; there was yet an
arrear of reckoning for Abels blood. Well, who shall pay for it? even every one
that was Cains successor in that kind of sin. You read no such expression in
Holy-writ with reference to any other sin. This sin, this devouring of persons
more righteous than our selves, has many grains of guilt in it more than any
other sins have; men by it fill up the measure of the sins of a Nation, and
they fill up the measure of their own personal sins. It is a saying (as I
remember) of Augustines, Nemo habet injustum lucrum sine justo damno, lucrum
habet in arca damnum in conscientia. No man gets any unjust gain without a
just loss; his gain is laid up in his chest, but his loss is in his Conscience;
he gets a penny or two into his purse, but a seal of damnation in his soul. I
am sure all the gains any get by devouring the persons who are more righteous
than themselves, is an unjust gain. Yea, though God gives it them, it is unjust
gain; God is but permissive in the case, and Gods permission does not salve
them, but that they are possessores malae fidei. God gave the Assyrians, the
Caldeans, and other enemies of the Israelites, the prey they took from the
Jews; yet he often calls it by his Prophets, that which is not theirs: the loss
is in their Consciences, they are hardened to destruction, sealed up to the
condemnation of Hell: they fill up the measures of their iniquities by their
violence.

4. But lastly, Why should not God be righteous, in suffering wicked men to do
his people good? This is a point I have something largely before spoken to, and
therefore may be shorter in this Discourse: prosunt and gelu, and nix quia
incommodant (says one); they do them good, by doing them hurt, as snow and
frost do good to the Corn. The Apostle tells the people of God, that all things
are theirs, 1 Cor. 3.21. that is, for their good, profit, and advantage; and
again, All things work together for the good of them that love God. The dignity
of the people of God is such, that not only bruit beasts, but brutish men (St.
Paul's Ephesian beasts) shall be harnessed for their service in order to their
eternal salvation; and if the Angels be ministering spirits for the good of Gods
elect, it is no wonder if the children of the Devil be beasts ministering for
their service too. They say Vespasian had a wretched saying, that the smell of
money was sweet from whencesoever it came. I am sure the odor of grace is sweet,
whatsoever be instrumental for the sending it forth. The truth is, what the
wiser Philosophers said of a morally good and wise man, is much more true of
one spiritually wise and good; He is out of the jurisdiction of evil. Seneca
says, that a wise man cannot be contemned of any, quia magnitudinem suam
novit, because he knows his own riches. A gracious man can be imprisoned by
none, because he knows his own liberty, and will enjoy it when the world has
done what it can: he can be plundered by none, because he knows his own
riches. It were a vast work to open to you how many ways the persecutions of
the saints advantage and profit the people of God; but I have in some measure
done it before, and shall not again further enlarge upon it. The Apostle
tells you much in short, when he tells you, that Tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. I shall add no more to
the Doctrinal part of this Discourse.

Use 1. Now hear, O Israel, hear all you sons and daughters of men, are not the
Lords ways equal? Is not your judgment of them unequal? This is the great
argument against Divine Providence, because in the world there appears such a
confusion of things, The wicked walk on every side, while vilest men are
exalted: profane lewd persons, live, grow old, are rich, and great in power.
The Sun (which seems to go down upon the Tabernacles of some that fear the
Lord) shines bright upon the Tabernacles of the ungodly; the people of God are
afflicted, plundered, nay and (which seems hardest of all) the holiest and
best of men are devoured by the vilest and most profane wretches; this is that
which is a sore temptation to men, and makes them think that certainly there is
no God who judges the world, or that God regards not the affairs of the
world; there is no strength in this argument, no reason for such a conclusion:
the love or hatred of God is not to be concluded from any thing which is before
us in this life, as with reference to actions, we call good evil, and evil
good; so through the deceitfulness of our senses, we miscall things; we call
those things evil which separate them from the affection of our sense, have no
evil in them; and things good which have no real goodness. Now the judgment of
sense is a very fallible judgment: do you see the wicked prosper, the godly
man visited every morning, and chastned every moment? come but up into the
sanctuary, and you will be able to unriddle this Providence: Job saw the wicked
flourishing and taking root, but suddenly he cursed his habitation. You see the
innocent children of God imprisoned, plundered, etc. Dives clad in purple and
faring delicously every day, while poor Lazarus lies at his door full of sores,
begging what falls from his Table, and cannot get any relief. Come up into
the Sanctuary, and you shall there see Lazarus, this poor begging Lazarus, in
Abraham's bosom, and Dives that fared so deliciously, and was so richly clad,
begging a cup of cold water to cool his tongue. Had you been with St. John in
his vision, Rev. 7. you would have seen a great number of all nations, kindred
and people, stonding before the Lamb, and clothed with white robes, and with
Palms in their hands; and these were such as come out of great tribu^^tion, and
had washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb, and were in triumph serving
God day and night.

Use 2. What you have heard upon this argument, looks very wistly upon every
prosperous sinner which this day hears me, and boasts in his large
possessions of the good things of this life. The sum of what you have heard is,
that the things which you glory in are not truly good; that they are but
temporary rewards or gifts of God; that they are means to bring you to the
acknowledgement of God; that oft-times through men's corruptions they prove the
means of their greater ruin.

1. In the first place, How should this take down a sinners plumes. Let not the
great man glory in his greatness, nor the rich man in his riches. Let not any
say in his heart, if God had not a favor to me, he would never give me such an
estate, such a success in my trade, such an healthy body, etc. The method of
Providence is quite contrary. I have somewhere met with a story, that anciently
according to the laws of Persia, a malefactor had liberty for an hour before he
died to ask what he would, and it was not denied to him. One they say condemned
to dye, and being according to their custom asked what he would desire, answers,
Neither this nor that, but only That I may see the Kings face; which being
granted, he so plied the King in that hour, as that he obtained his pardon;
whereupon they say that the Persians altered their custom, and covered the
Malefactors face as soon as he was condemned, that he might see the King no
more. God to thousands of sinners gives what their hearts could wish, riches,
honors, pleasures, they are poor condemned wretches by the law of God for all
this, vessels of wrath fitted for destruction; when the hourglass of their
life in this world is run out, they are to be turned into Hell, to depart from
God as accursed creatures into those everlasting burnings that are prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Only God, that all his creatures might taste something
of his bounty, for that hour gives them all good things of this life; had it
not now been a silly and unreasonable thing, suppose the Malefactor had asked
for, and had a House full of Gold or Silver, or all the great titles the world
could have dignified him with, to have gloried and boasted of them as tokens of
the Kings love, when in the mean time he knew he was a poor condemned wretch,
and by and by to be cut off from the enjoyment of them all. Is not this the
very case? thou know thy self to be a drunkard, a swearer, a liar, an
unclean person; thou know that for these courses the righteous law of a
righteous God has condemned thee; it says such persons shall never see God,
shall never enter into the Kingdom of God, but be thrown into the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone: God out of his bounty gives thee for the few
hours thou have to live out of Hell, health, riches, honors, pleasures, all
thy heart can wish in the world: have thou any reason to boast thy self in
these things, or to be proud of them? thy condition is infinitely worse than
the Philosopher's, that could eat no dainties at the Kings Table, because he
saw a naked sword hang over his head by a twine-thread. Certainly (poor
wretch!) it were thy wisdom for this little time of thy life, to do as it is
said that Malefactor in Persia did, despise all things, and only desire thou
might apply thy self for the little time of thy life with tears, fasting and
prayer to God, that thou might see his face, and obtain the pardon of thy
sins through the blood of Christ. Poor wretches! what (in the mean time) have
you to glory in? what have you to be proud of? What should make you walk with a
stretched-out neck, or a lofty eye? thou art not master of one good thing; thou
call them good, because they are grateful to thy sense, and please thy
sensitive appetite; and they are so far good as they serve thy outward
necessities, but of no significancy at all, either to thy spiritual or eternal
happiness. Yet these are the things which make the wicked man proud, swelling
in an high opinion of himself, despising others. Oh! that God would make you
understand, that you have not only perishing fleshly bodies, to be covered with
soft and gay clothing, but immortal souls; that you are creatures under an
ordination to an eternal existence, and that nothing can be worth naming as
good, but what will profit you as to your immortal capacity, What shall it
profit a man if he should gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what
can a man give in exchange or ransom for it. You have heard of a Prince that
in his extremity of thirst, cried out, a Kingdom for a draught of water. The
time will come when every impenitent sinner shall wish that he had not had a
foot of land in the world, nor a rag to cover his nakedness, so be it that he
had had the pardon of his sins, and the robes of Christ's righteousness to cover
the nakedness of his soul. Let him therefore that glories, glory in this, that
God is his Lord, and Jesus Christ is his Savior.

2. This speaks to the prosperous sinner, as not to be high-minded, because
he has nothing to be proud of; so to fear, and to keep, and enjoy what he has
with fear and trembling. James would have the Rich man rejoice when he is
brought low; Jam. 1.10. Because as the flower of the grass he passes away: and
when he has lost his riches, his honor, his outward felicity, he has lost
all: but here are greater reasons yet, because by a prosperous condition,
oftentimes, poenalis nutritur impunitas, a penal impunity is nourished.
Prosperity slays the fools, and sinners are ordinarily by it fatted and
prepared for the day of slaughter. David saw that God set the prosperous sinner
in slippery places: upon Pinacles and Towers; but slippery places: you observe
that the bloughtiness (as you call it of the body) is but an ill sign of
unhealthiness; the sinners growing fat in outward enjoyments, I am sure, is no
good sign, Psalm. 73.17, 18, 19. Surely thou did set them in slippery places,
thou castest them down to destruction; how are they brought to destruction in a
moment? they are utterly consumed. If a child of God has reason to rejoice
when he is brought low, surely a sinner has reason to tremble when he is up on
high. Godly men have used to be afraid of prosperity; it is an hard thing for
the most watchful Christian to keep his feet, when he is set upon the slippery
mountain of riches, honor, successes, etc. David himself never had a slip like
that he had when he came into the highest state. Even the best of Gods people
have great reason to rejoice with trembling in the midst of full cups; but
sinners have far more reason; when they are not plagued as other men, when
there are no bands in their death, when their eyes stand out with fatness, and
they have more than heart could wish; that is the time when their mouths are
set against Heaven, then their day of destruction is not far of; and indeed
those are the two dreadful considerations, and therefore they have reason to
fear and tremble. 1. Lest their prosperity should slay their souls. There is a
latent poison in sinners hearts at all times, but poverty and adversity keeps
it in. The poor man uses entreaties (says Solomon), but the rich man speaks
proudly; honor and power are great temptations to oppression: Riches and
abundance to all sorts of Luxury. So as if a man be a fool, and has no
spiritual wisdom to rule and to govern himself in a prosperous state; his
prosperity slays him, giving advantages to those lusts that are in his heart
to discover themselves. It is the prosperous sinner that oppresses his
neighbor, that does acts of injustice, and thinks by his power to defend
himself. 2. Again, Prosperity bodes ill; The sinner is never so near a fall as
when he is upon a pinnacle of honor and power. When the worldling says, Soul
take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years; then comes the voice,
Thou fool! this night shall thy soul be taken from thee; and one reason of this
is because that is the time when his sin ripeneth, when he lifts up his heart
highest, and opens his mouth widest, and lifts up his hands most fiercely
against the God of Heaven. O then let the prosperous sinner fear and tremble.

3. Lastly, You have heard that it is but a righteous thing with God, to give
unto the worst of men, the good things of this life, because they have
something in them of the nature of means to convince sinners, both of their
sins against God, and also of their duty to God: Indeed, they ordinarily prove
the quite contrary, but this is not of themselves, or from their own nature;
but from the lust and corruption of sinners hearts. O then let the goodness of
God lead you to repentance, Romans 2.4. The Apostle lets us know, that the
patience, long-sufferance, and goodness of God leads us to repentance. The
long-suffering and patience of God, if there were no more, ought to do it: And
certainly were there any ingenuity in the heart of a sinner, it would do it.
For him to sit down and think, I have been a drunkard, a liar, a swearer, a
Sabbath-breaker these Twenty, Thirty, Forty years; God has seen, and known me
all this time, there has not been a thought of my heart but has been naked
before him; I have not told a lie, nor sworn an oath, but as soon as the word
has been out of my mouth, the news of it has been in Heaven, and it has been
written in Gods Book of remembrance: God has all this while been an Almighty
God, and has had it in his power every moment of this time to throw me to
Hell. He could have struck me dead with my lie in my mouth, as he did Ananias
and Saphira, Acts 5, or with my oath, my curse, my blasphemy in my mouth; but
God has been long-suffering and patient with me, willing that I should at last
be saved: Shall I yet go on in my sinful courses? Shall all this patience of
God be lost upon my desperate soul? Surely I am bound humbly to acknowledge thus
many years of patience, and to sin no more, lest I turn Divine patience into
fury. But then the riches of Gods goodness, though it be but in the things of
this life, adds great weight to the argument; for a poor creature to sit down,
and think that he has not been plagued as other men, he has not had such a
sickly body, nor such a scant estate; but God has made his cup to overflow, he
has had success in his trading, whiles others have been blasted. O shall not
this goodness of God lead thee to an acknowledgment of God? Shall it not lead
thee to a repentance for thy sin? will thou treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath, and the Revelation of the most righteous Judgment of God? Consider
that the good things thou have enjoyed, have a natural tendency to change thee,
if thou had not banished that common ingenuity which teaches all to love
those that love them; and most certainly it will make thee worse, if not
better: if it does not soften thy heart, it will harden thy heart; if these
things tend not to make thee more holy, they will certainly make thee more lewd
and profane. And think with thy self what an aggravation of thy eternal misery
it will be, to fall into it, out of as high a state of content and external
felicity as thou were capable of. I would have every prosperous sinner say with
himself, What has God done to me that I should be thus vile, and so
presumptuously sin against him? There are very many, that if they would listen
a little to their own consciences, might hear God by them, speaking to them,
and saying, What could God have done more for you than he has done? Would you
have strong and healthy bodies? God has given you them. Would you have large
possessions? great and plentiful estates? God has given you such. Would you
have desired a loving Wife, hopeful Children? You have had them. God
aggravateth the sin of David from the outward blessings he had blessed him
with; he had raised him to be King over Israel from following the sheep; he had
given him his Masters Houses, and his Masters Wives into his bosom, 1 Samuel 11.
Will not God, think you, from hence aggravate your sins another day? Will not
this make Hell twice more Hell to you? will it not add more heat to the fire
that never shall go out? and pain to the gnawings of that worm that shall never
dye? Oh harden not your hearts; to day, while it is called to day hearken to
God speaking to you, not only by the voice of his Word, but by the voice of his
Mercies. O let not that riches of Divine goodness make you worse, which in
reason ought to make you better. Let not your honors, your riches damn you.
Take heed that there be not cause to say of you, that if God had not been so
good to you, you had not been so lewd and profane, so wicked and abominable in
his sight. Thus far I have applied this discourse, as to wicked men; it
remains yet, that I should apply it as to the people of God, showing them
their duty under such dispensations of providence; but it is a point fit in our
times to be further enlarged upon, than my time will now allow me to do.

SERMON XLV.
Psalm. 37. v. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7. Fret not thy self because of evildoers; neither
be thou envious at the workers of iniquity. Verse. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do
good. Verse. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord. Verse. 5. Commit thy way unto
the Lord, trust also in him. Verse. 7. Rest in the Lord, wait patiently for him.
Verse. 8. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath; fret not thy self in any wise to
do evil.
THe point I am upon, is to clear up the justice, equity, and reasonableness of
the motions of Gods Actual Providence, in the prosperity of wicked men, his
afflictings and chastiseings of his own people, and delivering them up into the
hands of those, who although the best of Gods People are sinners, and deserve
the severities of God, yet are more wicked, more unrighteous than they. This I
have cleared, and made Application of my discourse, so far as may concern
wicked men; That which only yet remains, is to inform the People of God of
their duty under such a dispensation: This has been the case of God's people in
former times; the estates at least of many who truly fear God, and desire to
worship him according to his Will, have been exposed to the vilest men; and
this may be a sore temptation to Gods own people. I will therefore enlarge this
discourse a little, showing you the duty of Gods People at such a time, and for
this I have chosen this Text. No other portion of Scripture so fully setting it
out together, as the 7 or 8 first verses of this Psalm, which partly show them.

1. What they are to avoid. 2. And then what they are to do.

The prohibitive directions are three. 1. They must not fret, this is repeated
three times, v. 1. Fret not thy self because of evil doers. v. 7. Fret not thy
self because of him that prospers in his way, because of the man that
brings wicked devices, to pass, v. 8. Fret not thy self in any wise to do
evil.

2. They must not be envious. v. 1. Neither be thou envious at the workers of
iniquity. 3. They must not be angry. v. 8. Cease from anger, forsake wrath. The
instructive directions are four.

The first is the exercise of faith. v. 3. Trust in the Lord. v. 5. Commit thy
way unto the Lord, trust in him. v. 7. Rest on the Lord.

2. The second is the practice of holiness. 1. They must not do evil. v. 8. so
v. 27. They must depart from evil. 2. They must do good. v. 3. v. 27. The same
is repeated.

3. The third is, They must delight themselves in the Lord. v. 4. Delight thy
self also in the Lord.

4. They must wait patiently for God, v. 7. You have it again repeated. v. 34.
Wait patiently for him. Wait on the Lord and keep his way.

In these 6 or 7 particulars I shall open to you, and press upon you your duty
under such dispensations as these. I will put the three first together, because
they have a great affinity, and cognation one with another.

1. It is your duty under such a dispensation, Not to fret, to be envious or
angry. The words in the Hebrew Text are (...) which signify to inflame, to
kindle, to burn, and in a secondary sense to be angry, because anger puts a man
into an heat; the heating of the blood about the heart by the disorder and
disturbance of the gall, is assigned as the natural cause of it. The moral
Philosopher, calls Anger the irrational perturbation of the mind: others tell
us it is a desire of Revenge, and use to distinguish betwixt ira and iracundia,
making the first to be where we have a just cause, the other where there is no
cause; but in short, as to our purpose, anger is to be considered,

1. As a passion, a natural passion; and so is not in it self sinful, it is a
power created in us by God, which we may use well or ill.

2. As a Virtue when it is used in a good and justifiable cause when a man is
troubled and desires the punishment of another secundum ordinem rationis,
where according to Gods will he ought to be punished.

3. As a Vice, such the exercise of this passion proves, when a man is angry
either for no just cause, or in an irrational and undue manner. When wicked men
prosper we are commanded not to be angry, not to fret wickedly and sinfully, so
as either to be displeased at Gods Providence, as Jonah was for the gourd, when
God asking him if he did well to be angry, plainly implies that he did ill and
not well; or to desire an unjust, and undue revenge upon him, either when the
person has not deserved it, or in an undue order or measure. This Anger first
boileth in the heart, and there discovers it self in evil wishes, and
thoughts of sinful revenge; then breaks out at the lips, and shows it self
in uncomely speeches, reproaches, and revilings; and lastly shows it self in
rendering evil for evil. The anger which is here forbidden us under this
dispensation of God is such as tends to the dishonor of God, to the
disturbance of our own Spirits, wiling them, and putting them into disorder;
and to the unjust disturbance of others. From this anger it is the will of God
that his people under such dispensations should cease. This is the wrath they
should forsake.

The word translated [envy] signifies to envy or emulate. Envy is properly an
hatred of or a trouble for the felicity of another, whether the cause of it be
a fear of some hurt to our selves, or a discontent that it is well with them,
or that they are in a better estate than our selves. Hence is hatred,
detraction, rejoicing in the evil of our neighbor, Affliction at their
prosperity, etc. There is a just anger at the prosperity of wicked men as, God
is dishonored by reason of it, and the interest of God in the world suffers
by it; for the heart of a man to be hot and zealous for God, yea and to desire
Gods just revenge of his own name and glory upon sinners, is but what he may
and ought to crave and do. Thus we find Moses, the meekest men on the Earth
often angry, and executing the vengeance upon God but for a man to be
displeased and discontented at Gods Providence for it, or to be angry at their
Bretherns good, this is sinful, the first is against the love which we owe to
God, the second against the love which we owe unto our Neighbor. To desire an
undue or unjust punishment of them, is a sin against Justice, that Justice
which we owe unto all men; this envying at the prosperity of sinners, is
forbidden also in other Texts. Prove. 3.31. Envy not thou the oppressor, choose
none of his ways, Prove. 24.1. Be not envious as the evil doers, neither desire
thou to be with them. In sum, God in this precept, forbids his people under
such dispensations: all coffeehouse at their own low estate, all displeasure
at Gods dealings with others, all accusations of God of injustice or hard
dealings with his people whatsoever, as a fruit, or indication of any of those
passions, is certainly here forbidden us, under the notions of fretting, being
angry, or envious. Let me now press this negative or prohibitive part of your
duty upon you by some few arguments.

1. I beseech you to consider the exceeding sinfulness of it: when God said to
the Prophet Jonah. Do thou well to be angry, it is certainly employed that he
did not well. It is in this Psalm twice forbidden us, twice in the Book of
Proverbs, at least. Envy is by the Apostle reckoned up as one of the fruits of
the flesh; now certainly if no more could be said than this; It is the will of
God, that if thou see the wicked prosper, grow rich, and great, thou should
not be displeased at God, nor envy them, etc. This should be enough to engage
the people of God to take heed to their Spirits in this thing; and indeed we
had need watch, for we shall find our Souls under very great temptations in the
case, and that it is a very hard thing for a good man to look with a good Eye
upon the prosperity of wicked men.

2. But I shall show you, that it is a sin which receives more than ordinary
aggravations. 1. As first, it is against the express letter of the Divine Law,
1 Kings 11.9, 10. It is said, that the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his
heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice,
and had commanded him concerning this thing that he should not go after other
Gods. God has commanded us concerning this thing, this particular thing, and
has been pleased to make it the matter of a precept many times repeated. If
God had commanded us some great thing, should we not have obeyed him in it? How
much more in the forbearing of a little Just, or passion! It is not concluded a
sin, merely from consequence of Scripture, or to be concluded from some
precepts that are laid down there, it is the express letter of Scripture, he
that runs may read the will of God concerning this.

2. Again, by how much the more precepts are violated by any sinful action, by
so much the sin is greater: you have heard this is a Sin against both Tables; a
sin against the duty which we owe unto God, and the duty which we owe to our
Neighbor; that which we are forbidden in many Scriptures, those so plain that
he who runs may read them.

3. Again, Some sins are in their own nature more heinous than others, amongst
others the sin of Murder is a very great transgression. Solomon says, Prove.
6.32. Men do not despise a thief if he steals to satisfy his Soul when he is
hungry, but, v. 32. whosoever commits adultery with a woman lacks
understanding, he does injury to his neighbor of an higher nature. But now
Murder that is an higher transgression; St. John tells us no Murderer has
eternal life. Our Savior reduces Anger and Envy under the commandment, Thou
shall not kill; and makes him that is angry with his Brother without a cause no
less than a Murderer.

4. Further yet, a sin that breaks out at the lips in sinful words, or in the
conversation by irregular actions, is greater, than that which is only in the
heart defiling that; Now it is a very hard thing for men to keep the fire of
anger and envy within the chimney of their corrupt hearts: Even the best men
have not been able to keep it in.

5. Finally by how much any sin is more the mother of Sin, and brings forth
more sins, by so much the greater it is. This fretting, and envying at the
prosperity of sinners, besides the discontent, and impatience of the Spirit
which constantly attends it, brings forth a world of sin at our lips, and
in our conversation, reviling speeches, detracting words, spightful thoughts,
words and actions, etc.

2. Again, this sin receives an aggravation from the persons offending. In
that Text, 1 Kings 11.4, 9. I observe two aggravations of Solomon's sin of
Apostasy. The first, that he did it when he was old, so had he great
experiences of God. v. 9. there is another expression, it was after God had
appeared to him twice: for men that know not God, nor have had any experience
of his ways, to fret and vex that others have more of the world than they have,
is not such a guilt as for the people of God to do it. They are called the
Children of Light, and that not only in respect of grace, and mercy, which may
be compared to light of which they are Children, but with respect to knowledge;
they are a people who know better things than others and should know the
riches, the honors all the good things of the world are not worth valuing, now
for you after that you have been thus far enlightened, still to be so enamoured
upon them as to fret, vex, and be envious, because others have more of them
than you have; must be a great transgression; Especially to consider that you
are the Children of God, hears of grace, yea and of glory too. Thus I remember
the Father of the Prodigal, rebuked his Son fretting for the fatted Calf slain
for his Brother; Son (says he,) remember thou art always with me, and all that
I have is thine, for those whom God has made the heirs of grace and glory, the
heirs of the Kingdom, to whom God has said All that I have is thine. I say for
these to fret, vex and repine that wicked men prosper in this world, and have a
little of this worlds goods, must be a great provocation. And to this, there
are not many of Gods people but in one degree or other, have had an experience
of the incertainty, and vanity of all these things, enough to depretiate them,
and render them invaluable to any good and gracious heart.

Further yet, what does any man get by fretting, vexing, or being envious at
the prosperity of sinners? as our Savior said of thought-fulness, none can by
thinking add one cubit to his stature. So I may say, none by fretting, vexing,
or envy, can either detract a cubit from the stature of a sinner in prosperity,
nor add a cubit to his own, it is a sin, that can end in nothing but murmurings
and repinings against God, in tormenting and macerating of our selves, and in
the discomposure of our Spirits. To shut up this discourse by how much any sin
is more causeless, by so much the greater it is, there is neither so much good
in the highest prosperity a sinner is capable of, nor so much evil in the
lowest and most afflicted estate of the people of God, as to give a reasonable
ground or occasion for a Child of God, to give himself the disturbance so much
as of one hour, or to wile his Spirit, for -- tolluntur in altum, ut lapsu
graviore ruant, they are set in slippery places, they are mounted up to Heaven,
but they shall be thrown down to Hell. It will be a great piece of a sinners
infelicity in Hell, that he has had an external felicity upon earth. But I
have showed you this largely in the opening of the Doctrine. This is enough to
have spoken to the first thing in a Christians duty under such a dispensation.

2. I proceed to a second thing, wherein the duty of a child of God lies under
such a dispensation of Providence, as I have been discoursing of; That is,
living a life of faith. This is called Trusting in the Lord, verse. 3.
Committing our way unto the Lord, verse. 5. Resting on the Lord, verse. 7. Trust
in the Lord, verse. 3. and verily thou shall be fed: it may be read, and is read
by some, Feed upon truth: the words are (...) The Psalmist uses three or four
words here expressive of this Duty (...), which some translate hope; so the LXX
(...). (...) that all translate feed, (...) devolve: it is also translated
dirige, detege, confide; the last word is (...), which some translate expect;
some, beg or desire. The first word is used verse. 3. which, as I told you, some
translate hope, some translate trust; there is no great difference, for all
hope does imply trusting; and no man trusts but he will hope. I will turn you
to some other texts where the same word is used, Psalm. 25.2 O my God, I will
trust in thee, let me not be ashamed. Prove. 28.26. He that trusts in his own
heart is a fool. Jer. 7.8. Behold you trust in lying words, that will not
profit. Psalm. 118. It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in
man. In short, it signifies to repose a confidence in another for the
effecting of something for our advantage; from which act of the mind proceeds
another, which is hoping, which is the souls motion in expectation of a thing.
The second expression, as we translate it, is verily thou shall be fed, as
others feed on truth. It is the word that is ordinarily used in Scripture, and
translated truth: the word translated feed, is also what is ordinarily so
translated; those that translate it verily, take it adverbially: but how (...)
is translated thou shall be fed, I do not understand, and therefore prefer the
other reading of some learned men; and feed upon truth: so truth is the object,
and feeding signifies the act. And thus it bears a proportion to that Text,
Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by faith; wicked men feed upon the wind, Hos.
12.1. upon Ashes, Isaiah 44.20. But (says the Psalmist) feed thou upon truth,
the truth of Gods word. It may be thou can not feed upon bread, thou haste
not that to eat; but if thou can not feed upon bread, feed upon the promises,
feed upon truth, O doctrinam auream (says a grave Author) debere (...) ^^stram
alimoniam, omnem vitam in hac terra conjunctam habere fidem, O golden sentence,
that all our livelihood in this world is faith. A third expression is, Commit
thy way unto the Lord; Ar. Montanus translateth it roll, the Arabic version,
discover thy way unto the Lord: the word is used Genesis 29.38. and they shall
roll the stone. Prove. 26.27. He that rouleth a stone it shall return upon him.
The fourth time is (...), we translate it rest in the Lord, others, be silent
to the Lord; So Lam. 3.26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly
wait. I shall not much insist on that word: there is a double rest, 1. A rest
of confidence. 2. A rest of silence; of which more when I come to speak of the
duty of patience under this dispensation. You have heard the words expressive
of the Act; there are two words in these verses, that express the object of
this Act; Truth, The Lord Jehovah. God is the objectum quod: Jer. 17.3, 4.
Cursed be he that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm. God is the object
which the soul is to trust in. The word of truth is the next object, the object
by and through which, and upon the account and encouragement of which, we trust
in God at such a time. The object of faith is the truth, power and goodness of
God revealed to the child of God in the word. There are usually mentioned two
acts of faith. The first is called Assent, by which the soul agreeeth to the
Proposition of the word, as a true saying. The second is an Act of recumbency,
a resting upon the promise, a resting upon Gods truth, power and goodness, as
declared and held forth in his word. This is that which profane persons in our
age (to show their Atheism as well as wit) call a lolling upon Christ and his
promise. Rolling our selves and resting upon Jehovah, and upon the word of
truth, are (as you see) Scripture-terms of which we need not be ashamed. Hence
if you ask me, what it is for the soul of a Christian to live by faith in an
evil time. I answer it lies in two things.

1. In the souls fixed and steady assent unto those Promises which God has
made to his People, suited to such a dispensation. These are many and more than
one sort: they are written in the Scripture, and brought to our minds by
reading and by hearing the word of God: the business of faith is to unite the
soul to these words, and to command the soul into a fixed and steady assent to
them, that the soul shall no more doubt of the fulfilling them, than of any
thing of more sensible demonstration. These Promises might be brought under
several heads: I intend not to enlarge this discourse so far as to treat of
all. I shall only instance in two sorts, and speak something to them.

1. The first is those promises which God has made for the destruction of
wicked men, though set upon the highest pinnacle of honor, power and
prosperity: of which you have diverse in this very Psalm, verse. 2. For they
shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither like the green herb: verse. 9.
For evil doers shall be cut off: verse. 10. Yet a little while and the wicked
shall not be: yea thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not
be. So verse. 13, 15, 17, 20, 22, 28, 38. Psalm. 1.4. They shall be as the chaff,
which the wind blows to and fro. The Scripture is full of such words as these.

2. The second sort are those Promises which God has made for the protection
and preservation of his people, under the pressures of ungodly men. Psalm.
125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous.
Psalm. 46.5. God is in the midst of his Church, therefore it shall not fall.
Mat. 16.18. The gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Psalm. 94.14. For
the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance.
Mica. 4.4, 11, 12. So quite through this Psalm there are many promises of the
same import. Now the work of faith is to persuade the soul, of the certainty,
and undoubted verity of these words of God, to settle the soul in this
persuasion. That sooner shall Heaven and earth pass away, than any of these
things shall fail which God has spoken. Then the work of faith is further to
carry out the soul without any carping, trouble or disputing, to rest wholly
upon these words. A Christian sees the word of God what he has said for its
relief: now faith teaches the soul to agree this as the word of him who cannot
lie or repent: and calls upon the soul to trust in God for the fulfilling of
it, to roll it self upon the promise, and to commit it self, its cause, its way
unto the Lord: the soul of a Christian is very solicitous and careful for the
concern and interest of God in the world: faith teaches the soul to cast its
care, the burden of its spirit upon the Lord, assuring it that God cares for
it. Faith speaks to the soul in the language of Solomon, Eccles. 5.8. If thou
see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Justice, and
Judgment in a Province; marvel not at the matter, for he that is higher than
the highest regards, and there be higher than they. I say, this is a great
piece of the Child of Gods duty in such a time when the vilest men are exalted,
and the wicked walk on every side, and the people of God are trodden under foot,
as the mire in the streets. It is the Will of God concerning them, The just
shall live by faith. This is the proper time for the exercise of Faith, when
the eye of sense fails; Faith is the evidence of things not seen, the
substance of things hoped for: The proper operation of Faith is, where sense
fails, where God is trusted, and not seen: Blessed are they, (says our
Savior) who have not seen, and yet believe. This is Opus diei in die suo.
Though the people of God ought to be careful of all duty at all times, yet they
ought to have a special regard to the duty of their day; the seasonableness of
a duty, adds much to the weight and importance of it. The foundations are
shaken (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 11.3, 4, What shall, what can the righteous
do? Mark what follows: The Lords Throne is in Heaven, his eyes see, his
eyelids try the children of men. This is that life which the Saints have
lived, yea, and they have lived well upon it. When David had lost all, the
Amalekites had taken Ziglag, and in it all that he had, 1 Samuel 30.6, the Text
says, David encouraged himself in God, the Truth, Power, and Goodness of God;
nor did he hope in God in vain, as you shall read in that story. What had
Hezekiah to live upon but Faith, when Sennacherib had besieged him with his
mighty Army, and ranted against him, and the God of Heaven too after that rate
you read. What had all the Patriarchs, all the Saints and Servants of God to
live upon but Faith? of whom you read, Heb. 11. Nor is there any life which so
glorifieth God as this; it eminently glorifieth three Attributes of his, his
Power, Goodness and Truth. No man will trust in a bruised Reed, or lean upon a
broken Staff; therefore the Apostle speaking of Abraham's faith, Heb. 11. says,
He believed that God was able to raise him from the dead: and again, Romans 3, He
believed that he who promised was able to perform. It gives God the glory of
his goodness, for the expectation of his soul, is the Mercy and Goodness of
God; and it also gives God the glory of his truth, for the proximate object of
Faith, is the Word, and Promise of God. O therefore let this be your care, when
you cannot live by sense, live by Faith. It is the happiness of a Child of God,
he has something to live on in the worst of times, Psalm. 34.10, The young
Lions shall be hunger-bit; but there is no want to them that fear the Lord. One
would think that of all creatures the Lion should be most out of danger of
being hunger bit. The Lion the King of the Forest, all other Beasts are subject
to this Beast: yet if an old Lion, that cannot run for its prey, that has lost
much of its strength may be hunger-bitten; one would think a young-Lion that is
in its full strength should not. Yes, says the Psalmist, a young Lion may be
hunger-bitten: those that have most of the world, wicked men that have greatest
honors, greatest power, great advantages to provide for themselves, they may
be hunger bitten, they may come to want; but there shall be no want to them who
fear the Lord, there shall be no time so ill, but they shall live; if they
cannot live upon bread, they shall feed upon truth. How much better is the
estate of a godly man, than that of his neighbor? It is a great point this, a
great piece of duty: Let me therefore a little further enlarge upon it three
ways; 1. Showing you how a Christian may know if he lives this life. 2.
Directing you in order to it. 3. Persuading it by Arguments.

1. Will some Christian say, how shall I know if I live this life? Suffer me to
give you five or Six Characters of it. 1. It is a Spiritual life. Our life
(says the Apostle) is hid with Christ in God. What Christ sometimes said to
his Disciples when they would have had him to have eaten something, that a
Child of God may say to all the world; I have meat to eat you know not of. His
life is a spiritual life; such is the life of Faith, both with respect to the
subject, and to the object of it. As to the subject of it, it is the soul that
lives; the body lives by bread, the soul lives by truth, by the promise. There
are many that in evil days, their bodies have enough to feed upon, but their
souls have nothing; hence their hearts become like Nabals, dead as a stone:
yea, and as to the object it is spiritual too, he that feeds upon truth,
feeds upon Jehovah: It is the truth of God in the word, which the soul lives
upon; the soul of a Believer can no more live upon Words and Syllables, than
another soul. No but it is the truth of God in these words, his power and
ability to perform what he has said, his inclination and good will to the
performance, and his truth and faithfulness. Every life in an evil day, is not
a life of faith; some may live upon fancy and foolish hope, some may live upon
means, with which their eye feeds them; another may live upon a Roman spirit
of his own. Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito. These men may live at
Sea, in the midst of troubles, and never think of God and Christ, nor upon the
power, goodness, and truth of God, but upon an, O socii neque enim ign^ri sumus
ante malorum,
O passi graviora, etc.
or some such thing; but this is not to live upon faith, if thy soul lives the
life of faith, thy heart is alive in an evil time; and the life and courage of
it is maintained from God, thy heart is maintained from the Truth, Power, and
Goodness of God.

2. This life of Faith is a quiet life: It is a quiet life as to passions.
Faith has a wonderful power, to keep the mind in a calm serene temper: It is
the unbelieving soul that fretteth, and sumeth, and vexes; all turbulent
passions upon Gods providence are the products of unbelief. The Prophet tells
us, He that believes makes not haste: Faith dries up immoderate tears,
scatters the storms of fears, makes the soul to cease from anger, and forsake
wrath: It quieteth the tongue, so as it does not charge God foolishly; it keeps
a man from all murmuring and flyings out against God, from all indecent and
extravagant flying out against men, who are Gods instruments; I held my peace,
because I knew it was thy doing. David believed that God had done what was
done, he dust not mutter or repine, because the Lord had done it. And so as to
action, I mean irregular actions, Take an unbeliever, and let him be in any
straight or distress, he is unquiet, and turbulent, and makes no conscience
what means he uses to set himself at liberty, but he that believes makes not
haste, he who by faith eveth the promise, gives credit to it, and has
committed himself to the Power, Goodness, and Truth of God for the
accomplishment of it: as he is not hasty with his spirit, to murmur, fret, and
vex, because it is not presently made good to him; so he is not hasty with his
tongue to charge God foolishly, nor in his action: He dares not use any
sinister or unlawful means, to quit himself of any difficulty in which he is
entangled; he believes that God will preserve, uphold, deliver him, and in his
own time find out some lawful way and means, and the belief of this restrains
him from impatience, or any thing which should be a fruit, and indication of it.

3. Again, The life of Faith, is an expectant life. The Apostle tells us,
that Faith is the evidence of things not seen: Hence Faith has always two
daughters which are its genuine off spring. 1. Hope, which is the souls looking
up, or looking out for those things of which Faith gives an evidence or
assurance. Faith assures, hope expects, and this is so inseparable from
Faith, that it is often in Scripture put for Faith, and only differs in this,
that Hope is an expectancy upon faith's evidence; and the certainty which it
gives the soul of the thing promised in the word. Every hope indeed does not
speak faith, but every grounded hope does; there is an hope of an hypocrite
which grows up like the rush without mire, and the flag without water.
Patience is another daughter of Faith (I shall have occasion to speak to that
more fully hereafter). Faith assures the thing to the soul, Hope looks out
for it, and expects it; Patience keeps the soul still, and waiting for it: If
you ask me what the soul expects, what it waits for; it must needs be that,
of which Faith has given the soul an evidence, that is the Promise. The
Promises are of various natures, for outward mercies, such as Protection,
Deliverance, etc. Spiritual mercies, such as inward Support, Strength,
Consolations, Eternal happiness.

4 Again, The life of Faith is an active life: The operation of Faith does not
terminate in a mere speculation. The activity of Faith lies,

1. In the diligent use of all natural and rational means which God has
appointed, in order to the obtaining of the mercy, of which faith has given
the soul an evidence and assurance. As Faith does quiet the soul, and restrain
it from the use of all unlawful means; so it does quicken and engage the soul
in the use of all lawful and proper means. The reason of which is,

2. It lies in the use of all spiritual means; and here Prayer in a special
manner, Prayer being the general spiritual means to be used for the obtaining
of any mercy. Daniel, chap. 9, understood by Books, that the time was come, for
the fulfilling of the 70 years captivity; and this faith of his, as to what he
read in the Books, quickened him up, to pour out that fervent prayer unto God,
Dan. 9.

5. The life of Faith is a cheerful and joyous life: you read in Scripture of a
joy and peace which attends believing, Romans 15. Believing the glory of God,
is a great means to make the soul to rejoice in the hopes of it: Now the reason
of this joy, is the strength of that evidence which faith does give the soul;
for joy is nothing else but the complacency of the soul, or rather the
expression of this complacency, upon the souls union to its desired object. Now
according to the nearness and fullness of this union, so is the joy. Faith
giving the soul a great and unquestionable evidence of the thing, does also
give unto the soul a proportionable joy.

6. The life of Faith is a crucifying, dying life to the world. This is the
victory (says the Apostle) by which we overcome the world, even our faith.
Faith looks up to the Cross of Christ, and by it, the heart of a Christian is
crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to his heart. The proper
operation of Faith is to work against hope; for indeed, if once the mercy
comes in sight, so as sense comes in play, faith cease as well as hope:
Hence the operation, and exercise of Faith, must needs crucify the heart of a
Christian, to the world, to sense, and to all sensible objects. Faith made
Abraham overlook his own body, which was now dead, and Sarahs dead womb; it
made him to overlook the Knife and the Altar, and the loss of Isaac's natural
life, and only to consider, that God was able to raise him up from the dead; it
makes a Christian overlook all seeming difficulties, in regard of sense, and
all contrarieties whatsoever indeed seems to be in his way: Now by these
things, you may try your selves whether you live the life of Faith, under sad
and dark Providence, yea, or no. By this time methinks I hear some of you
saying to me, But how should we come to live this life? what should we do, that
in dark and troublesome times we might live this life of Faith? Let me give you
something of advice in the case, and then conclude with two or three Arguments.

1. Study the Scriptures, and observe the promises reposited in that storehouse
for the people of God at all times, and for all sorts of mercies. The promises
are those words by which men live, The Scripture is a rich Storehouse of
mercy, it is full of promises, promises for this life, and that which is to
come; there is in them a salve for every sore, and this is well worth a
Christians observation, to see how God in his word has fitted him with a
plaster for every wound; when thou find the promises respecting thy state
in particular, endeavor to whet them upon thy heart. It is a metaphor which
God uses as to his precepts, Deuteronomy. 6. and as it is the duty of a Child of God
to whet the Precepts upon his heart, to engage, and quicken him to obedience:
so it is his duty to whet the promises upon his soul for his consolation. The
Scripture is full of comfortable words; O be not ignorant of them! it is a
large and full storehouse, O be acquainted with it!

2. Learn to live upon God in prosperity and fullness. The Soul that makes the
Lord its portion in a time of prosperity and fullness, will scarce be to seek in
a day of emptiness and adversity. Our too much living upon the creature, while
we have it: will hinder our wholly living upon God when we want it. Take heed
of living too much upon your creature-enjoyments when you have them, learn in
the greatest affluence of the creatures, in the greatest overflowings of your
cup, to live upon God, and to say of them, This is not my portion. Saint Paul
had his heart crucified to the world, and dyed daily. O how hard does the Soul
find it to live upon God in an evil time; that has not learned to live upon
God in a good day? and while it goes well with him as to outward enjoyments.
You that are at ease in the world, and do not know the evil that others meet
with; learn this lesson before the evil day comes upon you, and surpriseth
you. Learn to live upon God, before you have nothing else but a God to
encourage your self in.

3. Observe the practice and experience of the Saints of God. David lived by
faith, when he had nothing in the world left him, he encouraged himself in his
God; Job lived by faith when he said. Though he kills me, yet I will put my
trust in him. Say to your Soul, my Soul, why should not I go, and do likewise.
Why should I not do as David and Job did, I have the same promise, the same
power, truth, and goodness of God to trust to, and to live upon which any of
the Servants of God have formerly had.

4. Call thy heart off its disquietments, endeavor to convince thy self of the
sinfulness of them: there is much in this as to one that is a true Christian;
if one that is a Child of God can effectually persuade himself that it is his
sin to have his heart dead in an evil day, to have his heart dejected because
the Providence of God blows a cross upon him, it will go a great way with him
to command his heart off its disturbance. Thus does David, Psalm. 42.11. why art
thou cast down, O my Soul, why art thou disquieted within me trust still in
God, for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my God.

5. Lastly, strengthen your hearts with a resolution to trust in God; though he
kills me, says Job, I will put my trust in him. See what David does Psalm.
55. He had been bitterly complaining of the prosperity of the wicked, and his
own afflicted state; in the close of the Psalm he comes to give both himself
and others good counsel. v 22.23. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, he shall
sustain thee, he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. But thou, O God
shall bring them down into the Pit of destruction; bloody, and deceitful men,
shall not live out half their days, but I will trust in thee. I have done with
this discourse when I have commended this life of faith to you by two or three
arguments.

1. It is a life in death, light in darkness, strength in weakness, comfort in
misery: the Soul that can live this life is a great conqueror over
tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril Sword; yea it is
more than a Conqueror, Romans 8.35. You shall see how it is with a Christian
which has learned to live the life of faith, 2 Cor. 8.9. he may be troubled on
every side, but he will not be distressed, he may be perplexed, but he will not
be in despair, he may be persecuted but he will not be forsaken, cast down, but
he will not be destroyed; is not this a rare life? A persecutor may take away
the life of nature from a Christian, but he cannot deprive him of his life of
faith; faith will keep the head of a Christian above water in the greatest
deeps of trouble, and affliction. Read Heb. 11. and observe in how many
difficulties, in how many deaths that noble army of Martyrs lived, by virtue of
faith. Yea and they lived well and cheerfully (as you will find there) Our
Savior advises his disciples, to lay up for themselves treasure in Heaven,
where no moth came to corrupt, no thieves to break through, or steal. Is it not
an excellent thing for a Christian to have a life beyond the gun shot of a
persecution, beyond the mercies, or cruelties of bloody wretches? The life of
faith is such as makes a man post funera vivere, nay in funere vivere, to live
when he is dying. Paul was in deaths often, yet lived by fatih; he says of
himself and others of the servants of God, that they were killed all the day
long, yet they lived still, they lived by faith. The life of faith cannot be
taken away by any evil hand: No nor can the comfort and sweetness of it be
touched or empaired by the Sons of Belial.

2. It is a distinguishing life. The unbeliever may live the life of a beast,
which is the life of a beast, he may live the life of a man, which is the life
of reason; but notwithstanding this, he may perish for ever: but he that lives
the life of faith shall not perish, he who lives this life shall live for ever.

3. Lastly, It is a free, and independent life. We account in the world, that
that man lives the best life, that lives the freest life, in least dependency
upon others. Hence we do not account the life of a Beggar, or a Servant, or a
Child, so good a life as the life of him, that lives upon none, but upon what
he has of his own. There Is none in the world lives so free a life as he who
lives by faith upon the promise, his life is independent upon the whole
Creation, it is hidden with Christ in God. But this is enough to have spoken to
this piece of a Christians duty in an evil time.

SERMON XLVIII.
Psalm. XXXVII. 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. Verse 1. Fret not thy self because of
evildoers, neither be thou envious at the workers of iniquity.

Ver. 3. Trust in the Lord, and do good.

Ver. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord.

Ver. 5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, Trust also in him.

Ver. 7. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him, fret not thy self
because of him that prospers in his way.

Ver. 8. Cease from anger, and forsake wrath, fret not thy self in any wise to
do evil.


HAving showed the equity and wisdom of Divine Providence in governing the
affairs of the world, so as that oftentimes, the vilest men are exalted, and
the wicked walk on every side, The rod of the wicked lies upon the lot of the
righteous, and they are chastned every morning, and plagued every moment,
whiles the eyes of the wicked stand out with fatness, and they have what their
hearts can wish, and are often suffered to devour those who are more righteous
than themselves: I am inquiring what the duty of a Child of God is under such a
dispensation of Divine Providence; and for this purpose I have chosen this
text, perhaps more fully expressive of it, than any other single portion of
Scripture. Part of it I have opened. I have showed you Negatively, they ought
not to fret, to be angry, or to be envious. Positively, I have showed you it in
their duty to live the life of faith. I now proceed.

3. Thirdly, It is their duty to delight themselves in the Lord. You have it
here v. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord. Such a time as this is usually a
time when the Child of God, cannot delight himself in the Creature: it may be
he has a dear, a loving Wife, dutiful, and pleasant Children, and would
delight in them; but a Prison must separate him from them, or an Exile, or
Banishment must make their Company very unpleasant to him. It may be he has a
full, and plentiful estate, and could take a pleasure in that; but he sees
that is by Peecemeal pulled from him every day, and because he will enjoy his
conscience, and keep peace there, he shall not enjoy that property which the
Laws of the Nation, and his honest Labor, or the gifts of his Friends have
invested him with: now at such a time, and under such a dispensation of
Providence as this is, what shall a righteous man do, what is his duty in such
a day; my Text tells you, he shall delight himself in the Lord, Delight thy
self in the Lord. Delight is nothing else, but the Souls Complacency, Rest,
and Triumph in an object. So that to make a thing or person the object of
Delight there must be an apprehended goodness in the object, and the Soul
delighting it self in it, pleases it self with it, and rests, and
Triumphs, and even leapeth for joy in the Enjoyment of it. There is in
delight more than a content, pleasure and rest of the Soul in its object; the
Soul Triumphs, Leapeth, and even Shouteth for joy. God is to be considered in
himself, so his name is Jehovah, Elshaddai, a Fountain of Sufficiency, Power,
and Goodness. There are three things which must concur to make a reasonable
Soul to delight in any object, how good and excellent soever it be in it self.
1 Propriety, 2 Possession and Application. 1 Propriety. Let a thing or Person
be in it self never so good, never so excellent, and let it be so apprehended
by me, this may render it the object indeed of my love, but not of my delight.
For says the Soul what is all this to me? here it is impossible that a wicked
man should have any Delight in God, because he has no propriety or interest in
him. He may possibly from Reason conclude that in God there is an infinite
Power, Sufficiency, Goodness, he can have no true notion of God but he must
conclude this. The first being must necessarily have an infiniteness of Power,
and consequently of Sufficiency, and the Fountain of Good from whom all good
flows, must necessarily have all good in him; but let him be never so
apprehensive of this, yet so long as his Soul says, what portion have I in
God? God is a stranger, an enemy to me, he can never delight himself in God:
will the Hypocrete delight himself in the Almighty? Job 27.10. If thou will
return to the Almighty, then shall thou delight thy self in the Almighty. None
but the Child of God can delight himself in God, because he alone has an
interest and propriety in him, he alone can say, my Lord, or my God.

2. Possession also is necessary to delight. Suppose a man to have a right and
title to an Estate; and consequently a propriety in it yet if he be kept out of
the Possession of it he can take no delight in it. Hence it is that a Soul that
has a true right and title to Christ and a real interest in him, yet if it
lies under dark apprehensions of this title, and interest, he cannot delight
himself in the Lord, for delight requires not only propriety, but some degrees
of the apprehension of that propriety: Now while he apprehends, that his Sins
have separated betwixt God and him, he wants such a possession as is
necessary to delight.

3. A third thing is Application. Let a Soul have never so true a propriety in
God, never so true a possession of the promises of God; yet if he does not make
application to his Soul of that knowledge of God which he has and of the
promises in which he has an interest, his Soul will have no delight in God or
in the promises: now this application is made two ways.

1. By Meditation, often thinking of God, Psalm. 104.34.
and upon the promises. My meditation of him (says David) shall be sweet:
David speaks of a great delight he had in Gods Commandments, they were his
Meditation night and day.

2. Secondly, by Faith, assuring the Soul, and giving it certain Evidence of
the truth of the Promises. Now, from this discourse both appears, 1. What
there is in God for a Soul to delight in, in such an evil day as I have been
discoursing of, when his People are very low, and his Enemies are very high. It
is that power, and sufficiency which is in him, by which he is able to Relieve
them; and that goodness which is in him, and rendereth him always ready to
help, and willing to save so as nothing can stand betwixt us and our desired
Salvation, help and deliverance, but only his wisdom, by which he better
knows times, and seasons, and what is good, or bad for us than we do. The
Soul knowing and apprehending these things, and likewise its own propriety, and
interest in God, and being put into some possession of this Propriety, in a day
of evil makes its application to such promises, and portions of his word, as he
has revealed his will in, proper to such a State as the Soul is in: hence it
comes to be well-pleased with God in his dispensations, it is brought to a
sweet, and pleasing rest, and triumphs in its portion, in the day of greatest
Evils, and sings with David. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven hut thee? and
there is none upon the Earth that I desire besides thee? My flesh, and my heart
fails, but God is the strength of my heart and my Portion for ever, v. 26.
Now this is both the duty, and privilege of every Child of God, and indeed
these are both great arguments to persuade it. It is their privilege, for
though there be a Power, a Sufficiency, an infinite goodness in God, which is
inseparable from his Divine being; yet this not being enough to bring the Soul
to a pleasure, delight and complacency in an object, without a Propriety,
Possession and Application of it, it is manifest, that only those Souls, who
have such a propriety, interest and possession, and are in capacity to make
such an Application, can delight themselves in the Lord; and as this is their
Privilege, so it is also their duty: which will appear to you if you please to
consider,

1. That there is enough in God, for the Soul of a Child of God to please it
self with, under all dispensations. Shall I show you what that is.

1. Whatsoever is done in the World is done by him. It is the Lord who lifts
up one and throws down another, there is no Evil in the City which he has
not done.

2. In all God does pursue the noble, good, and wise ends of his own glory.
Whatsoever the intentions of men are, whether Assyria mean so, or so, God
pursues still the same design of his own glory, being his own end, in all his
Efficiencies, and in all his permissions, and to this end he orders all
things.

3. That he is a God infinitely wise, and it must be said of all his works of
Providence as well as creation, In wisdom he has made them all. His Judgments
are indeed a great deep, but they are a deep of Divine wisdom; and all that
God does or suffers to be done in the World, he does, he suffers all to be
done according to his infinite wisdom, and counsel.

4. That he is the same in power that ever he was. Once have I spoken, yea
twice have I heard it (says the Psalmist) that power belongs unto God; so as
if he pleased he could when he pleased alter the state, and complexion of
things, and turn the wheel, that now runs upon the lot of his people, upon the
neck of his Enemies, and put wicked men in the stead of his afflicted people.

5. That his love is the same that ever it was toward his people, and is
working toward, and for them under the darkest, and most gloomy dispensations
of Divine Providence. God loves his children in Prisons, as well as in
Palaces, in a poor and low, as well as in a more high, and prosperous
condition, upon dunghils as well as upon Thrones: now lay all this together and
Judge if a child of God has not ground enough to delight himself in the Lord
under all dispensations of Divine Providence. It is not enough to please his
Soul, and to bring it to a rest for him to think, what is now done in the
World, or in that part of the World where my Lot is cast, my heavenly Father
does it all, and he orders all things for his own Glory, he is infinitely
wise and knows how to fetch out his honor from all, he has all power in his
hand, and can turn his hand upon the little ones, upon the poor and afflicted
of his flock whenever he pleases; and he loves me as well in this low
afflicted, poor, despised estate as he did when the world went better with me,
and I had more credit and repute in it, more of the riches, honors, power, and
enjoyments of it than I now have. Is not here ground enough for a Soul under
such dispensations to delight himself in the Lord, especially considering the
promise in the Text; Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the
desires of thy heart? But besides this, how often does God call to us for this
duty? Psalm. 33. v. 1. Rejoice in the Lord, O you righteous. Joel. 2.23. Fear
not, O land, be glad, and rejoice, for the Lord will do great things, v. 21. Be
glad then you children of Sion, and rejoice in the Lord your God. Phil. 3.1.
chapter 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say rejoice. We
shall find this has been the constant refuge and practice of the people of
God. David his third Psalm was composed when he fled from Absalom, his 7th
Psalm when he was afflicted with the words of Cush the Benjamite: his 34.
Psalm, when he changed his behavior before Abimelech the Philistim King: his
52. Psalm upon occasion of the villainy of Doeg the Edomite: his 54. when the
Ziphites made a discovery of them to Saul: his 56. Psalm when the Philistines
took him in Gath. The former part of his life, until the Lord settled him upon
the Throne of Israel and Judah, was indeed nothing else but a time of trouble
and great afflictions, when his enemies were very high, and he was very low, he
had little, or nothing in the creature to delight in now at this time, the
Psalms tell you his relief, and practice, which was to delight himself in God.
Thus Habbackkuk, chapter 3. v. 17. Although the fig tree shall not blossom,
neither shall be fruit in the Vine, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat, the flocks shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no herd in the stall, that is, though all sensible relief, and
comfort, shall fail: yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my Salvation. To press you to this duty, I shall only mind you of what I have
already told you.

1. That there can be no such providence befall any Child of God, but he may
find enough under them still to delight in God: when he can see nothing for a
Sensual eye to delight in, he may yet find enough for his Spiritual eye to
delight in. Is it not matter of pleasure to thee to think, Well let times go
how they will, I have a God to go to, though (says Job) Worms shall eat this
body, yet in my flesh I shall see God? To think that now God is but doing his
own work, and though men oppress, yet he that is higher then the highest
considers the matter? To think that God is able to turn the ball when he
pleases, that in the mean time he is in the love and favor of God, he may
have communion with God, and God will provide for him? These and an hundred
such things as these afford matter enough for the child of God to delight
himself in the Lord at all times.

2. Consider again, how equitable it is, that Children should at all times
delight themselves in him, because he at all times delights himself in them:
whom the Lord loves he chastneth, as a Father his Son in whom he delights;
his chastening is not a dispensation of wrath, but of wisdom. Observe how he
speaks to his afflicted Church. Isa. 54.11. O thou afflicted, tossed with
tempests and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and
lay thy foundations with saphires. Christ was anointed to appoint unto them
that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 64.1,
3. Though his people have lien amongst the Pots (as the Psalmist expresses it)
yet he has a pleasure in them.

3. Let me Thirdly, offer to your consideration, the advantage of this
delighting your selves in the Lord in a day of Evil. It would arm the Soul
against all the temptations of an evil time. 1. It would abstract the mind from
the world: we see if the Husband delights in his Wife, or a Father on his
Child, how it draws off their hearts from all other objects, that all are
nothing to them in comparison of that object in which the great delight of
their heart is. 2. It would fill the mind of a man, so as it should say to all
the world, as Esaias, I have enough, I have enough, keep what thou have unto thy
self; or as Jacob (whose delight was in Joseph) It is enough: is Joseph yet
alive? It is enough. 3. It would give the Soul a rest. The mind of a man
rests in the object of its delight. 4. Finally, it would wonderfully quiet
the mind as to the Will of God; we are usually satisfied with what is done by
those persons whom we principally love, and delight in. Let this therefore be
our study, our great labor and business, to bring up our hearts to a delight
in the Lord. Study his attributes that you may know what he is in his Power,
Goodness, Truth, Wisdom etc. Study his promises, which concern this life, or
that which is to come; particularly those which more specially suit thy
circumstances: Consider the examples of the Saints, and Servants of God, in thy
circumstances; meditate upon these things, whet them upon thy heart; say often
to thy self, This God is in himself, Thus and thus he has revealed himself,
and he who has said it, is Power, Goodness, Truth, etc. But this is enough to
have spoken, to this other piece of a Christians duty, under such dispensations
of Divine Providence. I proceed to another piece of Duty.

4. Depart from evil, and do good. You have it. verse. 8. Fret not thy self in
any wise to do Evil. And verse. 3. Trust in the Lord and do good; you have them
both together, Psalm. 34.12. and 1 Pet. 3.12. Now this doing of good, is a very
large term according to the intent of all that duty, which is required of us by
the precepts of the first and second table. There is a duty which we owe unto
God, all which is comprehended under the first and great commandment, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart and all thy Soul, and all thy
Strength. Thus that man does good, that loves, and fears God, that prays
unto him, and performs all those acts of homage, and worship which God has
in his word required, as much and as zealously and warmly in the worst, as in
the best of times: this is properly a doing of good, it is honest and just, and
what God requires of us; it brings profit and advantage to our selves; it
will bring comfort, sweetness, and peace to the Soul. So that take good in what
notion you will, this is a true doing good. Again, there is a good which may be
done to our selves, or to others: the Apostle commands us to do good to all,
Gal. 6.10. thus our Savior commands us to do good to them that hate us, and
the Apostle Heb. 13.16. commands us not to forget to do good and to distribute;
and it is one piece of our doing good, Isa. 1.17. to judge the fatherless, and
relieve the oppressed. Further yet, there is a good of our general calling:
This is comprehensive of the whole duty of a man considered in no further
capacity, than that of a creature toward God, or that of a Christian relating
to the Lord Jesus Christ, and owning him. There is a good of our particular
calling, respecting us with reference to our Relations, as Magistrates or
Subjects, Husbands, or Wives, Ministers, or flock, Parents, or children,
Masters, or Servants. Finally, there is a good of a particular season, the
works, and business of our day relating to the particular circumstances, and
dispensations of Providence, under which it pleases God to bring us. Having
thus far discoursed of good, and distinguished of that, it is easy to
understand what Evil is. It is either the omission of some of these duties, or
the commission or doing some things which are opposite to them. I take the
precepts of the text in the large sense. A Christian ought to do all manner of
good, and to abstain from all omissions of any duty, or commissions of any
thing which is contrary to that duty, which God expects from him, either in
his general calling, or in his particular Relation; he is at all times to
eschew evil, and to do good. The precepts of God, Psalm. 37.26. Isa. 1.16, 17. 1
Pet. 3.12. concern him, and oblige him at all times; but it is their more
especial duty, with reference to evil times; and indeed this is the readiest
way to make times better. Evil times are so called upon a double account,
either with respect to sin, or to punishment, These times are evil times
wherein sin abounds, and the love of many grows cold; now our sins
contribute to the aboundings of sin, in the time wherein we live: we use to say
that if every man would sweep his own door, the streets would be clean. Times
are also called evil with respect to punishment, to some judgments of God that
are abroad in the world: now for us to do good, to depart from evil and do good
is the way to have the judgments of God averted from us. Wash you (says God (
Isa. 1.16, 17. make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from you: come
let us reason together, though your sins be as scarlet, you shall be as snow;
though they were as crimson, you shall be as white as wool. You have it verse.
6. Do good, and thou shall dwell in the land, and (as we Translate it) verily
thou shall be fed. Zeph. 2.3. Seek you the Lord all you meek of the earth, it
may be you shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. Ten righteous persons
would have saved Sodom. Besides, evil times being usually times of suffering as
to the people of God; it is unquestionably their great concern to take heed,
that they suffer not as evil doers. 1 Pet. 3.14. If you be reproached for the
name of Christ, says the Apostle, happy are you; for the Spirit of God and of
glory rests upon you. On their parts he is evil spoken of, but on your parts
he is glorified; but let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as an evil doer,
etc. We ordinarily call suffering-times evil times; now it is the great wisdom
of a Christian to make the best of the worst of times, that they may suffer
with comfort, and not lose their Crown in suffering; there is no such way to
secure this, as to suffer in, and for doing of our duty. Again, there is no
such way as this to convince, or condemn Adversaries; who are the Instruments
of evil toward you: It is our duty as much as may be, so to live, as to
reconcile the world to the ways of God; at least so to live, as if we cannot
win and gain them, yet we may shame and condemn them. This you shall find the
Apostle did, who lived in the first and most furious times, 1 Pet. 2.13. Having
your conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, that whereas they speak evil of
you as evil doers, they may behold your good works, and glorify God in the day
of their visitation. As there is an error of Opinion, and an error of Practice;
so there is a double way of conviction. The first is by Argument, as Paul
convinced the Jews, Acts 18.28. The second is by a contrary Practice. The first
reaches the Judgment, the second the Conscience, Joh. 8.9. They who heard
Christ were convicted by their Consciences. If by doing good thou do not
convince sinners, and reform them, thou will most certainly condemn them, Heb.
11.7. Noah condemned the old world. Further yet, by this means thou shall have
peace within: In the world (says Christ to his Disciples, Joh. 16.) you shall
have trouble, but in me you shall have peace: we are sure enough in, and from
the world to meet with trouble; it is our great concern to secure our peace
within: now there is no other way to secure this, but to keep a Conscience void
of offense, both toward God and toward men. If a man has a troublesome
Neighbor, if yet he has a quiet Wife, he will do well enough, he has peace
at home: If he lives in wicked and disturbed times, yet if he has a quiet
indisturbed Conscience, this is something, and he will the better graple with
his other troubles: I say this is the way for a man to keep a quiet Conscience,
to depart from evil, and to do that which is good. Finally, thus a Christian
shall evidence his Faith in God's rewarding him; for that man who in an evil
day does evil, or neglects to do good, cannot be said regularly to trust in
God; because he uses not the means, in the use of which he may expect Gods
fulfilling his Promise: Take heed (says the Apostle,) that there be not in any
of you an evil heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God. All departing
from the living God in an evil day, is a certain sign of unbelief, or distrust
in God as to the issues of his Providence. Let me therefore beseech you that
fear God, and are brought under such a dispensation of this, to take care as to
this. Let not the evil of others be a temptation to you to omit doing good: I
will yet further open it in a few particulars.

1. Be sure you keep close with God in the duties of his Worship. It is a sad
thing for a state of affliction to drive a man from God; God chasteneth his
people to make them better: In their affliction they will seek me early, Hos.
5.13. It Is very sad, when affliction has a quite contrary effect upon us; when
as the Scripture speaks of Ahaz, when he was afflicted, he did more wickedly.
So God has reason to say of any person: This is that person who when he was in
affliction, left prayer, reading, hearing, left his closet-walking with God,
etc. It is a mark of an ill Servant, not dutiful Son; when he is beaten for his
faults, not to ask his Fathers blessing, but to run out of his doors.

2. Be not ashamed nor afraid to appear for the interest of God in evil times.
St. Paul in the worst of times was not ashamed of the Gospel. Our Lord speaks
dreadfully in this case, when he tells us, that he who is ashamed of him
before men, of him he will be ashamed when he comes with his Angels. This is a
particular Service every good Christian owes unto God, not to be ashamed of
the cause and interest of God in an evil time; own thy self a Servant of God,
when his Name is most blasphemed, his truths and ways most disparaged, his
people most exposed.

3. Perform all that duty, which thou owe to the worst of men. It is a woeful
error for any Christian to think that he can do no wrong to wicked and ungodly
men, as if they had no civil rights; doubtless the Apostle spoke chiefly with
relation to Heathens, when he commanded the Romans that were Christians to give
unto all their dues, honor to whom honor, etc.

4. Do good to them that hate, and persecute thee, bless them that curse thee:
It is our Saviors lesson, Mat. 5.44. I remember God gave his people a charge,
Jer. 29.7. To seek the peace of that City, whither they were carried captive,
and to pray unto the Lord for it. It was an evil time, when they were in
Captivity, and the Babylonians were very evil persons; yet God commands his
people to pray for them, and to seek their peace: Let them curse, but bless
you; let them persecute, but do you pray. Thus David did for his Enemies, when
they were sick he humbled himself with fasting, and with mourning; as for his
Brother, he tells you, he lost nothing by it, his prayer returned into his own
bosom.

5. Take heed finally of using any unlawful means to be rid of the evil that is
upon you: This is a temptation will much molest us in an evil time, and to
which all our hearts are too too prone; this is a pecular evil which a child of
God in such a time, should study, and make it his business to depart from; but
I shall have occasion to speak more to this under the next head of Duty, upon
which I shall enlarge, as it is contrary to the duty of Patience, and the fruit
of a Soul making too much haste. But I know this is an hard saying, we have
many temptations to the contrary, for a man to do good to others when they are
doing evil to, and against him; this is very hard and much a cross to the grain
of flesh and blood. Let me therefore conclude with a few Motives or Arguments
to enforce what I have been speaking unto you. For

1. Consider First, That not to do this, is to be overcome with evil: It is the
Apostolical Precept, Romans 12.21, Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil
with good. Consider first, how dishonorable it is for one that is a Christian
to be overcome with evil, whether the evil of Punishment, or the evil of Sin;
that the lust, wickedness, and sin of another, should make him also sin against
God. I would fain know what it is that should in an evil time make the
Christian to be worse than at another time: It must either be, the prosperous
state of the wicked, or the sadness of his own condition; for when the wicked
are exalted, God's people usually mourn; to be overcome either of these ways,
is to be overcome of evil. For the lusts of another to overcome me, to make me
sin as much one way, by fretting, fuming, vexing, omitting duty, doing what is
contrary to it as they do another, through the pride, lust, and cruelty of
their hearts; here now the sinful evil of another heart plainly overcomes me.
Is this, this temptation, because it fares so ill with thee; this is yet
worse, for then thou proclaimest that thou did only serve God for the loaves
he gave thee.

2. But Secondly, Consider, how honorable it is for thee to overcome thy
neighbors evil with thy good? For me to have so confirmed, and healthy a Soul,
that let a boisterous sinner do what he can, he shall not make me worse; he
shall not make me fret, fume, vex, or be impatient, or to do any thing short
of, or contrary to my duty; do what he can, he shall not turn me from my course
of duty either toward God or Man: how honorable a thing this is for one who
names the name of a Christian, to be certain, and constant, and unmovable in
the work of the Lord; so as a wicked man's wretched usage of him shall make him
but more holy, to walk more close with God, and to pray more for him, and be
ready to show him more kindness, and to do more offices of love for him. I have
heard it given as the Character of an excellent Person, That the way to have a
kindness from him, was to do him some injury.

3. Confider again, There is nothing which more than this will distinguish one
that is a child of God, from one that is not. It is a great piece of
self-denial, for a man or woman to deny himself in his passions, especially
those of lust and revenge. Observe the difference betwixt Job and his Wife: Job
suffered much from the hand of God, yet he would not charge God foolishly, he
did not speak unadvisedly with his lips; his Wife presently would have him to
curse God and die.

4. Again, Think with your self what a base thing it is for a Christian to walk
beneath his Principles, or to change his Principles with his condition. There
is nothing more unworthy of a Christian, than to walk beneath his professed
Principles, or to change his Principles, and course of life with his condition.

5. Lastly consider, How great an Argument it will be for thee to use with God
to bring thee out of that state of affliction and misery, into which his
Providence has cast thee, when thou can plead: That God's severe Providence
to thee, have been to thee no temptation to depart from him, or from any part
of thy duty; you shall find the Church pleading this as an Argument with God,
Psalm. 44.9. Thou have cast off, and put us to shame, and go not forth with
our armies. Verse. 10. Thou make us to turn back from the Enemies, and those
that hate us, spoil for themselves. Verse. 11. Thou have given us like sheep
appointed for meat, and have scattered us amongst the heathen. Verse. 12. Thou
sellest thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wrath by their price,
etc. Verse. 17. All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee,
neither have we dealt fasly in thy covenant. Our heart is not turned back:
neither have our steps declined from thy way. Though thou have sore broken us
in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death. If we have
forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange god:
Shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the heart. Yea,
for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever.
Thus I have opened to you a fourth branch of a Christians duty, under such a
dispensation of Providence, as I have been discoursing of; I shall add but one
thing more.

5. Lastly then, It is the duty of a Christian to rest in the Lord, and to wait
patiently for him; or in short, under such dispensations, quietly, and silently
to wait upon, and for God. The performance of this duty, will, I conceive lie
much in Four things.

1. A quiet submission to Gods present dispensation; a submission, and a quiet
submission; this is implied in the command of keeping silence to God. There is
a manifold silence. There is a natural silence which is opposed to speaking;
thus he is silent, that has nothing to say, or says nothing: Thus, Lam. 1.10.
The Elders of Zion, sat upon the ground, and kept silence. There is a prudent,
and politic silence, which is good or evil, as it is circumstanced, Amos 5.13.
The prudent man shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time. There
is a sinful silence, which is a withholding prayer from God, or forbearing to
stand up and speak for God, Isa. 62.6. You that make mention of the name of the
Lord, keep not silence. Lastly, There is an holy and Religious silence, Isa.
41.1. Keep silence before me, O you Islands. Hab. 2.20. The Lord is in his holy
Temple, let all the earth keep silence before him. Zech. 2.13. Be silent, O all
flesh, before the Lord, for he is raised up out of his holy habitation. Now
this is that silence which the people of God ought to keep before the Lord in
an evil time: But to open it yet a little more fully. The Philosopher
distinguishes, betwixt an internal and external speech; there is the Language
of the heart, as well as of the lips; for the words that we utter with our
lips, are first formed and conceived in our hearts; our hearts speak first. It
is not a natural silence upon either account that is our duty, but an holy and
Religious silence; not a silence from thoughts, but from passion: not a silence
from speaking, but a silence from speaking unadvisedly. Such a silence as Job
kept, of whom it is said, That he did not charge God foolishly, nor speak
unadvisedly with his lips. 1. A silence from passion, mourning within our
selves, fretting, vexing, etc. a man breaks this silence, when he is overborn
with fear, or grief, or anger. These three ways the Soul is disturbed, and
makes a noise under the dispensations of God, which breaks this Religious
silence. 1. By Anger, fretting, fuming, and vexing himself at Gods
dispensations: This was Moses and Aarons failing at the waters of Meribah; and
Jonas his error when the Gourd failed him as to its shelter. But of this I have
spoken fully already when I handled the Negative part of a Christians duty
under Gods dispensations of nature. 2. Fear, Immoderate fear, is another
passion that spoileth this silence of the Soul; fear makes an Earthquake
within us, and causes great unquietness in our Spirits: The Soul that is
overborn with fears never keeps silence. 3. A third passion is immoderate
grief; this also breaks the Souls silence and quiet, Psalm. 42. Why art thou
cast down, O my soul? why art thou disquieted within me? So as that Soul, that
under Gods dispensations of this nature, either fumeth, vexes, or fretteth at
God because of them, or is overwhelmed with immoderate, or unreasonable fears,
or is overwhelmed, or drowned in immoderate grief; that Soul does not keep
silence: but that Soul only keeps a due silence to God, which under such
Providence abides in a calm and quiet temper; neither shaken with fear, nor
overcome with immoderate grief, or sorrow. This is now silentium animae, the
silence of the Soul before, and unto God.

2. But there is also a silence of the Tongue: this is a piece of this
Religious silence; this is opposed to murmuring, cursing, and blaspheming of
God; to speaking hardly of God, as if he were an hard Master, and did not deal
justly, or equally with us; to any speaking, which is derogatory to the honor
and glory of God: all this now falls under the first general duty, by which I
open a silent waiting for God, which I call a free and voluntary submission to
the good will and pleasure of God, without any disturbance of passion, or any
sinful expressions of our Tongues.

2. A Second thing, wherein this duty lies, is, A steady dependence upon God
for the fulfilling of his Promises made to his people in such a condition; he
that has nothing to depend upon, or trust to, will not wait; so as there can
be no patient waiting, where there is no secret trust and dependence: This is
indeed the proper exercise of Faith, I have spoken fully to it when I opened
the life of Faith in such a time.

3. A Third thing, in which this duty lies, is in the Souls expectation and
looking out for God: Early in the morning (says David, Psalm. 5.3.) I will
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. Thus when Habakkuk, in the first
Chapter of his Prophecy, had put up his Prayer to God, he says, Chap. 2. that
he would go up to his Watchtower: A man goes up to a Tower, or to some high
place to see whether a friend or an enemy be coming, yea or no: It is a piece
of our duty in our waiting upon God under his dark dispensations of Providence,
while we are waiting, to be also looking up, and living in the expectation of
the fulfilling of those promises, which we have discerned, and fixed our souls
by Faith upon; and which we have been praying for. Our hearts should not be
dead, we must take heed of saying, I look for no good, the heart is dead when
it comes to that: The Soul that waits upon God under dark Providence must be
looking for good, and confident in its expectations of it from God.

4. Lastly, This waiting must be in the use of such means as God has appointed
us for the obtaining of the mercy designed, and promised; and therefore Psalm.
37. v. 34. they are put together, wait upon the Lord, and keep his way. Now you
have this duty of silent waiting upon God opened to you, The Sum of it is this:
It is the duty of a child of God under these Providence, to keep his Soul from
being overmuch shaken, and overcome with fears or drowned in grief; from
fretting, fuming, and vexing at Gods dealings; to keep his tongue from all
murmuring, all foolish and unadvised speaking with his lips; to keep his Soul
in a quiet dependence upon God for the fulfilling of his word, daily looking up
for him after the use of such means, as he by the Law of Nature or in his
revealed will has appointed for the obtaining of the mercy or good thing,
which is the matter of our desires, and he has made the Subject of his
Promise, and consequently the Object of our Faith. You have heard your duty,
Now give me leave to plead with all you that hear me this day for the Practice
of it. I have in this Discourse been exhorting to several duties of a child of
God under dark dispensations of Providence, when wicked men have been set up
high, increased in riches, honor, every way prospered, and the people of God
are kept in low, despised, afflicted states and conditions. I remember the
Apostle calls to us, to add to our faith, knowledge, to both virtue, to virtue
temperance, etc. Do you also add to your not fretting, not being angry, and
envious, a steady exercise of Faith, and dependence on God; to your dependence
on God, and trusting in him, an universal departing from evil, and doing that
which is good; and to that a patient quiet waiting for God. I shall in order to
your better performance of this, offer some counsel, and then press it with
some arguments, and so shut up this Discourse.

1. In the first place, There are three things which in order to your
fulfilling this point of duty, I shall commend to you to get a through
acquaintance with. 1. Be acquainted with Gods name. It is David's expression,
Psalm. 52.9. I will wait upon thy name, for it is good before thy Saints. It is
the Name of God which we wait upon: now it is reasonable in order to our
waiting upon his name, that we should know his name; for as the Psalmist says,
They that know thy name will put their trust in thee, and truly they that do
not know the Lords name, will never wait upon him: Well, you will say, What is
his name? I answer, whatsoever he has revealed and made himself known by, or
to be, that is his name. I might instance in many particulars. His name is God
allsufficient, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God. His name is I am, the
unchangeable God. His name is Jehovah, the sovereign Lord God, and therefore we
ought to wait upon him. His name is The Lord, the Lord Gracious, Merciful, etc.
they that know the Lords name, that are thoroughly acquainted with the nature of
God, as he has in his word made himself known to us; they will wait upon God,
they will see it a reasonable thing that they should wait upon God.

2. In the second place, get an acquaintance with the promises of God. Two
Sorts of promises you must be acquainted with, if you would bring your hearts
into this frame of silent waiting for God. 1. All those promises that are made
to the Church, and people of God; for support and comfort in, and under
troubles, and deliverance out of them: of which the Scripture is full, such as
these, Psalm. 94.14. The Lord will not cast off his people, nor forsake his
inheritance. Read at your leisure, Psalm. 128.6. Jer. 29.10. Mic. 4.4, 11, 12.
Isa. 27.5, 7, 8. Isa. 33.20. Jer. 33.6. A second sort of promises are those
that are specially made to this waiting upon God, Psalm. 37.9. Psalm. 27.14. Isa.
40.13. Wait upon the Lord, and he shall strengthen your heart. They that wait
upon the Lord shall renew their strength like the Eagle; they shall run, and
not be weary, they shall walk, and not faint. The promises in Scripture of this
nature are very many. These are but a specimen of them.

3. Lastly, Labor to be acquainted with the ways, and methods of Divine
Providence, which is to deal out dispensations of mercy to his people; not
presently, but after their waiting upon him some time. Habakkuk 2.3. The vision
is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak; it shall not lie,
though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.
The Church in her Song says, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him; to
this is our God, we have waited for him; we will rejoice and be glad in his
Salvation.

2. Secondly, Beg of God a waiting frame of Spirit. As there is nothing more
sinful in it self, nor more tormenting to our selves in an evil day, than an
impatient, hasty Spirit; so there is nothing more conducive to our glorifying
of God, nor to the quiet of our own Spirits, than a silent waiting Spirit: This
the God of Heaven must give, and he gives it to them that ask him; beg of God
those graces which may dispose thee to this patient waiting: I might instance
in many habits of grace necessary to bring the soul into this waiting temper: I
will touch only upon 4 or 5. 1. Beg Faith of God, Faith in his Word and
Promise. He that believes makes not haste. The hastiness and impatience of
the Soul flows from its distrust in God for the fulfilling of his Word. 2.
Hope is another gracious habit which disposes the Soul to waiting, we hope for
what we see not; for what we see, why do we any longer wait for? 3. Humility is
a third: the proud soul thinks much to wait, he looks upon mercy as his due;
and thinks that God wrongeth him whiles he withholds it from him; the humble
soul believes that it deserves nothing, and is therefore willing upon the
least crevis of hope to wait upon God. 4. Pray for patience, a passive
patience, this is necessary in order to the bearing of evils. Lastly, Pray for
meekness, a froward Spirit is always an hasty Spirit, and knows not how to
wait. Now to press this duty upon you, I shall but name to you several
Considerations, leaving them to be digested, and enlarged upon in your private
thoughts.

1. Consider first, It is the work of thy day. The question is, what God would
have a child of his do? when the enemies of Religion and godliness are very
high and rampant, and the people of God are low, poor, and afflicted; and God
suffers wicked men to devour those who are more righteous than themselves, as
if men were under the same providence as the Fish of the Sea, and the Beasts of
the Earth, where, without any regard to right or wrong; the greater devoureth
the less: at such a time as this, what should a good and righteous man do? Let
Solomon answer, Prove. 20.22. Say not, I will recompense evil, but wait on the
Lord and he shall save you. Hence you shall everywhere in Scripture find the
Church, and people of God resolving upon it; and the Lord when he instructs his
people what to do in an evil day: this is that which he directs, Isa. 60.9.
Zech. 3.8. Hab. 4.5. Isa. 8.17.

2. It is that which God has alone left for you to do in such a day. Our Eyes
of sense in such a time are quite put out; we have nothing to do at such a
time, but to stand still and see the Salvation of God. Jer. 14.22. Are there
any amongst the Gentiles that can give rain? therefore we will wait upon thee:
we have nothing else to do, we have none else we can wait upon; therefore we
will wait upon thee.

3. It is that which has been the practice of all the people of God, and what
they have called their souls to in evil times, Psalm. 52.9. Psalm. 62.5. Indeed
it is the whole business and life of a child of God: It was the practice of the
Church, Mic. 7.7. And of Job. The Saint has the promise of heaven, but he must
wait for it.

4. Thou have ground enough to do it, the Power of God, the Goodness and Truth
of God are certainly a sufficient ground of encouragement to any soul to wait
upon God, who has promised help; and is so true, that he cannot lie; who is
able to help and to do more abundantly than we stand in need of, and who is
Infinite in Goodness, and wants no love to prompt him to come in to the
relief and succor of his people.

5. Waiting upon God gives God the honor of many Attributes: It gives Him the
glory of his Sovereignty, His Wisdom, His Power, His Truth, and His Goodness.

6. It is a great evidence of your Faith: He that believes makes not have.

7. It is that which in a day of evil, will distinguish you from wicked and
ungodly men: they cannot wait upon God, but break out into fits of impatience,
etc.

8. There is nothing so effectual in an evil day, to help thee to keep down thy
corruptions, to silence thy temptations: You have heard it in that to which
many promises are made, That your waiting upon God is pleadable as an argument
for the mercy which you desire: In short, there are very many Arguments might
be used to persuade this silent waiting upon God, but I have before spoke to
many of them, and shall therefore add no more to this Discourse.

SERMON XLIX.
Romans IX. 15. For he says unto Moses, I will have mercy upon whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion upon whom I will have compassion.
I Am (as you know) attempting to expound the hard Chapters of Divine
providence, giving you some account of those Motions of it, which to us appear
most difficult; I have brought these under some heads propounding to speak,

1. First, To such as concerned the exhibition of the Covenant of works, after
the establishment of the Eternal Covenant of Redemption and Grace. And 2. The
Exhibition, or tender of grace to all indefinitely, after the Decree of
Election, and the fall of Man.

2. The permission of sin, and so much sin; sinners, and so many sinners in the
world.

3. To such as related to the Remunerative, and punitive Providence of God.

4. Lastly, To such as concern the dispensation, both of the more external, and
the more internal and effectual means of grace. I have spoken to diverse
Questions, that have fallen under the Three first of these heads; such as fall
under the last, remain yet to be spoken to: but before I come to speak directly
to such Questions, I shall lay down Two preliminary Propositions, to which I
shall speak something.

1. Prop. That God in his Providential dispensations of grace, and the means of
application of it; whether more external, or more internal; acts freely and
unaccountably, yet is in it both holy and just and good.

2. Prop. That God in the dispensations of his paenal Providence, in the
withholding, or withdrawing of the means of grace; whether more external, or
more internal; never acts upon mere Prerogative, but upon the demerit of the
sins of people; and in this he acts justly, and holily. I will begin with the
first of these, and for that purpose I have made choice of this Text; which is
a Quotation which our Apostle brings out of the Books of Moses: you shall
find it, Exodus 33.19. Moses said unto God, verse. 18. I beseech thee show me thy
glory: And he said, I will make all my goodness to pass before thee, and I will
proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will
be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. This is the Text
which the Apostle quoteth here: The Argument which the Apostle is upon in this
Chapter, is the rejection of the Jews; as to which he vindicateth God in Two
things. 1. As to the promise made to Abraham, a thing which the Jews bare up
themselves much upon; that they were the seed of Abraham, and so in Covenant
with God; and if God should cast them off, what could be said to justify the
truth and faithfulness of God? What should become of the promise, the Covenant
made with Abraham and his seed for ever? The word of God would have no effect.
This the Apostle answers, verse. 6. and so to verse. 13. He tells them in the
first place: They were not all Israel which were of Israel. And verse. 7. That
all who were the seed of Abraham, were not all children: and this he proves,
verse. 7. Because God said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called; and that the
promise was given to Sarah, that is, (says the Apostle) they which are the
children of the flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of
the promise are counted for the seed. And he tells them, that it was the same
case as to Rebecca. Esau and Jacob were both the children of Rebecca, but yet
God loved Jacob, and hated Esau, verse. 13. But some may possibly think, this
did not answer the Objection of the Jews: for admitting that the promise was
made to the children of Isaac, the Jews were such. Abraham indeed had a child
by Hagar, that was Esau, and he had Sons by Keturah; but all the Nation of the
Jews were descended from Isaac, who was the Son of Sarah, to whom the promise
confessedly was made. To which I answer, The Apostle had yet gained One main
point, viz. That the Jews could lay claim to nothing upon this account, that
they were the seed of Abraham; for the promise was not made to the whole seed
of Abraham, but to a peculiar seed: Now this peculiar seed was not all the
children of Isaac; this he proves by the instance of Jacob and Esau, who were
both the children of Isaac; for says he, verse. 11. The children being not yet
born, neither having done good or evil; that the purpose of God according to
election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls; It was said unto
her, The elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated. This now proves, that God was not by his promise tied
to all the children of Abraham by Isaac, but was yet at liberty, to what part
of his seed he would fulfill his promise. Well, but might some say, being they
were both the children of Abraham; how could God in righteousness show mercy
and compassion to one of them, and not to another? verse. 14. What shall we say
then? Is there unrighteousness with God? This the Apostle denies, and that
with his ordinary aversation, and detestation, God forbid. Now he proves that
there is no unrighteousness in this dispensation of God: Because God had said
to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion on whom I will have compassion. So then, (says the Apostle,) It is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy. If there could be unrighteousness with God, it must be because God has
somewhere by promise obliged himself to show mercy to all the Jewish Nation:
but, says he, the promise made to Abraham and to his seed, will not reach so
far: that was not made to the whole seed of Abraham, no, not to all that
descended from Abraham, through the loins of his Son Isaac, as appears by Gods
hating Esau, who was the Son of Isaac, and his eldest Son too: But more than
this, says the Apostle, God when he declared his glory to Moses, Exodus 33.
sufficiently expounded himself: That his promise to Abraham's seed, did not
determine his grace to any parts, or Nation; but that he had a liberty left to
him to show, or not to show mercy to whom he pleased; for he says to Moses, I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. So that the Proposition from this
Text is of easy deduction.

Proposi. That God in his Providential dispensations of grace, and the means of
its application, acts freely, and unaccountably; and in doing so, there is no
unrighteousness with God. In this Proposition there are Two branches, 1. That
God in the dispensations of his grace acts freely and unaccountably. 2. That
in his doing so, there is no unrighteousness with him. I say first, God in
these dispensations acts freely and unaccountably: the one of these
necessarily follows upon the other; if he acts freely, he must needs act
unaccountably: for who can give an account of what man does, ex mero motu, out
of his own free inclination, without any motive out of himself; (for that is
meant by freely) nothing compelling, nothing moving, or alluring him, merely
from the good pleasure of his own will. The reason of his having and showing
mercy, is, because he will thew mercy. The Scripture gives so plentiful a
testimony to this, as one would wonder that any owning the Scripture, should
deny it: for whereas all grace, or mercy is to be considered; either in the
first willing and purpose, or in the actual exercise of it; whether we
consider, the one way, or the other; we shall find, that both flow from the
free will, and goodness of God, and have no other cause; but because God will
show mercy to whom he will show it.

1. Let us consider it first in the purpose. Gods purpose of grace was nothing
else but his Eternal willing of some persons, to obtain everlasting life and
salvation, in, and through Christ; and in the use of that means which he
appointed thereunto; for the counsels of God, ordered the means, as well as the
end: we do therefore suppose that God from all eternity knew who should be
saved; and that he therefore must needs know it, because he willed it: for
whereas all mankind from eternity are to be considered alike, nothing but the
Will of God could bring any part of them more than another, into a salvable
estate; especially into a certain state of Salvation. God therefore decreed, or
willed some persons to so glorious an end. Now the question is, what made God
to will these, not others? what can be imagined but his will, of which we are
able to give no account. Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will: hence, it is called the election of grace, Romans 11.5. and 2 Timothy 1.8. Who
has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ, before
the world began. Arminians and Papists tell us of Gods electing men out of a
foresight that they would believe and obey. If indeed men were to have risen
out of the Earth like Mushromes, and to have given a being to themselves, and
to have created their own Souls, they might have quarrelled the Scripture a
little upon this point; but when the bodies of all men were to be of the same
clay, and all souls were Gods, which were to inform those bodies, how they
should any of them have a disposition to believe, or obey more than others;
unless God had created it in them, or willed that in time they should have it,
I cannot understand: and if they say, that they had it from the will of God,
the matter (as to our point) comes much to the same issue. God purposed them
grace from his own mere good will and pleasure; he willed them, in time to have
a disposition to believe and obey; and upon their Faith and Obedience, to have
everlasting life.

2. If we consider Gods acts of grace in time, they are distinguished, either
into the more external means: Or secondly, those gracious habits which
accompany salvation, and make a soul meet for the inheritance of the Saints in
Light. The means of Salvation are either the means of Purchase, and Redemption;
such was the giving of Christ, of which Saint John, (Joh. 3.16.) could give us
no other account, but God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son. For the means of application, they are either more external, or internal.
The more external, is the promulgation, or publication of the Gospel: See what
our Savior says as to this, Mat. 11.25, 26. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, who have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them to babes: Even so, O Father, because it pleased thee. 2. For
these acts of grace by which the Soul is prepared, and made fit for the
inheritance of the Saints in Light: they are Effectual Calling, Justification,
and Sanctification, or Regeneration.

1. For Effectual Calling, we are said to be called with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose, and grace. Not
according to our works: so that any thing in our selves is denied, but
according to his purpose: Now what is the purpose of God? but the will of God
determining this, or that; and it is further added, And grace; which speaks
the free love and good will of God in the case; for grace is nothing else but
free love. So 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all grace, who has called you: so that
God in the calling of Souls acts as a God of grace, yea, of all Grace. Who
can give a reason why God by the Preaching of the Gospel effectually calls
one, and not another, out of darkness into mavelous light? but merely because
he wills. The Evangelist, 1 John 13. tells us, that we are born, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

2. Justification is another act of grace, whereby God pardons our sin,
looks upon us, and accepts us as righteous, only for the righteousness of
Christ reckoned unto us for righteousness. Herein also God acts freely: being
justified freely by his grace; he gives of the fountain of life freely. To
this purpose is that, I will heal your backsliding, and love you freely.

3. For Regeneration, or Sanctification, which is that act of grace by which we
are renewed in the inward-man, and made conformable to the image of God: This
is our being born of the Spirit; and our Savior compares the motion of the
Spirit to the wind, which blows where it lists.

2. But further yet, the dispensations of grace by the hand of Providence, must
necessarily bear proportion to the purpose of grace. We are blessed in Christ
with all spiritual blessings, according as he has chosen us in him, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Nothing comes to pass in the world, either as an act of
grace, or a paenal dispensation; but it is in pursuance of some purpose of God.
Now it was impossible that the purpose of God should have any other foundation
than his Will; for the eternal purpose must be antecedent to any good, or evil
done by us; we are but of yesterday. That man, or woman knows nothing of God,
and has very false conceptions, and apprehensions of the Divine Being, that
does not conceive of him as a God from all eternity; knowing whatsoever should
come to pass in the world; nor is it possible for us to apprehend how God
should know any future thing, but because he willed it; for what but the will
of God should bring it out of a not being, into a being; out of the order of a
contingency, into a certainty; which it must have, or God could have no certain
knowledge of it. Now it was not possible that any thing in the creature should
move God from eternity to will any one grace, because there was no creature
pre-existent to this eternal act of God; nor yet co-existent with it. It is
true, say some, but yet God did foresee, that such, or such, would believe,
repent, obey, etc. using the liberty of their wills better than others; and to
such God willed eternal life. But I cannot understand any thing in this more
than trifling. For I demand, from whence is that better inclination and
disposition of one man's will, than another? Where was the principle of this
good, was it to proceed from God? then it little differs from what we say, at
least in this case it does not; for still in the dispensations of his grace he
moves freely, and from his own mere will; only he wills, first to give
grace, then glory. Will they say, this foreseen good disposition (as is
pretended) is from a man's self, then there must be another fountain of good
besides God, all good acts proceed from some habits, and powers as their
principles. I demand whence is that principle, that power, and habit in us,
which God should foresee, and therefore will a Soul to life? Will they say it
is from man? then say I, every good gift comes not from God; man is thus made
a fountain of good, indeed of all good; for he is thus made the fountain of
that good, upon the foresight of which, it is according to this Doctrine; that
God wills all his providential dispensations of grace and mercy; and if this
be not to set up man in the Throne of God, and to take away from God the glory
of that Attribute, in which, above all he delights, I understand nothing.

3. Again, If acts of grace and mercy were not free and unaccountable, only
fountain'd in the good will and pleasure of God; grace could not be grace: for
what is grace, but free love? To him that works the reward, (says the
Apostle) is reckoned not of grace, but of debt, Romans 4.4. If by grace, then it
is no more of works, otherwise works would be no more works, Romans 11.6. The
very notion of grace imports freeness: grace not free, is no grace; if you
take away liberty, you take away grace; I mean Original liberty. I know when
God has promised, he is just and righteous to forgive, as the Apostle says,
But God had an Original liberty to promise, or not to promise: In short, they
are no better than enemies to the grace of God, who go about to found the
reason of its acts any-where else than in the Divine Will: God will have mercy,
because he will have mercy; that is all the account which we can give, either of
Gods purpose of grace, or of any acts of grace pursuant to that purpose: And so
I pass to the Second part of the Proposition.

2. Memb. That supposing this, There is no unrighteousness with God. This is
consistent with the holiness, justice, and goodness of God; and consonant to
the Divine being and Nature. It is exceedingly agreeing to the Nature of the
Divine being, to be the first cause of all that is upon any account good; and
in this sense it is true, eminently true, which our Lord tells the Pharisee,
There is none good but one, and that is God; other things are derivatively
good, he is Originally good: now I say it is but reasonable, that he who is the
first being, should be owned the first cause of any good that is in the World;
all dispensations of Grace, being effluxes of goodness: he also must be the
first cause of them; and they could be originated in nothing but the Divine
Will. 2. Besides, there is nothing more consonant to the Divine being, than to
be the Sovereign Lord, and the sole cause of his own actions. God every where
in holy writ, makes himself known to us under the notion of the Lord; it is an
impeachment of the Divine Sovereignty, to assert God originally not at perfect
liberty, as to his own Acts, to have mercy upon whom he will have mercy; and
extend compassion, to whom he will extend compassion. God in Scripture is set
out under the notion of a Potter, the Creature, under the notion of Clay: God
showed Jeremiah this, when he carried him down to the Potters house, Jer. 18.
and showed him the Potter at work; making a Vessel of Clay, and when it was
marred in his hand, making another Vessel as it seemed good unto him; then
telling him, Ver. 6. O house of Israel! Cannot I do with you, as this Potter?
Behold, as the Clay is in the Potters hand, so are you in my hand, O you house
of Israel; which also (alluding to that Text) confirms, Romans 9.21. Has not
the Potter power over the Clay of the same lump, to make one Vessel of honor,
another of dishonor.

2. Nor can this possibly be judged unrighteousness with God, for for then
would God be in a lower capacity than his Creature; what man of us is there,
who does not think he has a free, and absolute power, over his own acts of
goodness, and mercy? To show them to whom he pleases, and to withhold them
from whom he pleases; yet is there a vast difference betwixt the Creature, and
the Creator in this point; for all Creatures are under the Law of their
Creator; they are things and persons under authority, and are not sovereign
Lords of their own actions; yet which of us does judge our selves accountable to
our Neighbor, for an act of mercy; now if there be no unrighteousness with
man, in this case, if a man does not think himself bound to give any account to
his Neighbor, why he is more kind to one than to another? Why gives he a gift
to one, which he gives not to another? How is God unrighteous in such a
discrimination? What if God wills to show mercy, and the riches of Divine
Grace to one, and not to another? Though God in these motions, be free and
unaccountable, yet he is also just and righteous; and the reason is, because he
is neither bound, nor a debtor unto any. But this is enough, to have spoken to
the Explication, and Confirmation of this Proposition. For Application,

Use 1. In the first place: We may learn from hence, what vain dreamers those
are, that go about to find out another Fountain, for acts of Divine Grace; and
seek a cause in man, for the Grace bestowed upon him. They say, the head of the
great River Nilus, could never yet be found; It has been sought for, and many
have traveled possibly some thousands of miles, but yet it cannot be found.
But the head of Nilus will be found, before men will find any cause of Divine
Love out of the Divine Will. It speaks a wonderful arrogance in men, to make
God accountable for his acts of Divine Grace; what greater arrogance, and
vanity can be imagined than this? When a poor Creature, will not himself be
brought to an account, why he gives one Beggar money, and not another; or why he
gives to one Child a greater Portion, than another (though they both be the
acknowledged fruit of his Body) that yet this Worm should dream, that God must
be accountable to his reason, why he shows mercy to this man, and not to
another; when they are both the work of his hands. It is certainly enough to
say, He will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy; and extend compassion, to
whom he will extend compassion. What Pride, what Arrogance is this, not to
allow to God whom we confess to be the supreme, and most free agent; the
liberty which we will yet claim, and challenge for our selves? Nor is this more
unreasonable pride, and arrogance, than it is folly and Vanity: It is searching
for a bottom in an Abyss; searching for a cause Antecedent to the first cause.
God, they say, from all Eternity, foresaw that such, and such would believe,
would obey, would incline their hearts to his Testimonies; it must be then
certain, that that they would do so; God could have no certain knowledge of that
of which there was no certainty. Now I would fain understand, whence this
certainty should be, otherwise than from the will of God, determining their
wills to these certain good inclinations, more than the wills of others; all
others have Souls, reasonable Souls as well as they; whence is it, that their
Souls incline to that which is good, and the wills of others to that which is
evil? Surely, to will, and to do, are both from God. Thus vain Man would be
wise: when as he indeed is but like a wild Asses Colt: Proud men torture
themselves in vain, to find out a principle of good, and of life in themselves;
And how unreasonable a thing is it, to charge God with unrighteousness, upon
this hypothesis? Shall a man be master of his own favors, who is yet a debtor
to the Law of God, and under an obligation to do good to all, because God has
so commanded him; and shall not God, who cannot in any wise become a debtor to
his Creature, farther than he is so made by his own Covenant and promise? Shall
it be a reasonable thing for a Man to say, I will be kind to such a one,
because I will; and does he think he is not further to be accountable to his
fellow Creature? And shall not the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth say, I
will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy, and because I will have mercy; but
Man shall for it call him before the Tribunal of his own Reason.

Use 2. In the second place, what reason have we who are made partakers of this
mercy of God which brings salvation, to adore, admire, and be thankful to him
for it? Now this concerns either all of us in general, or else some
particular Souls. 1. Let us first consider this so far as it respects all of
us: whosoever lives within the pale of the Church, under the preaching of the
Gospel, may see reason, 1. To adore and admire the goodness of God toward
them. 2. To tremble and fear, lest we be found unprofitable under the means of
grace. The Apostle propounds the question concerning the Jews, Romans 3.1, 2.
What advantage then has the Jew above the Gentiles? Or what profit is there of
Circumcision? He answers, Much every way, because unto them are committed the
Oracles of God. Whether the Gospel in the preaching of it be a sufficient means
of Salvation, having such a constant operation of the Spirit attending it; that
if men will they may believe and be saved: and the ministration of the Spirit
be little differing from the ministration of the Gospel, and inseparable, or at
least never separated from it, though affirmed by some, may be justly doubted.
But that it is a great and high means of Salvation, and there is no man living
under the faithful and powerful preaching of it, but if he misseth of Life and
eternal happiness it will be his own fault; and the proximate cause of
damnation will be in himself I do not doubt. Now God has not dealt thus with
every Nation, O consider how many Nations, and People there are in the World,
who never heard of Christ; amongst whom, the joyful sound of the Gospel did
never come; People that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, whom the
day star from on high did never yet rise upon? Does any say? But what good does
the Gospel, or how is the preaching of the Gospel such a mercy, if God does not
give unto them that are under the sound of it, effectual Grace; so as their
hearts are changed upon the preaching of it, and they converted and eternally
saved? I answer, The Apostle thought it a mercy, and no small mercy, that the
Jews had, the Oraeles of God committed to them, to them and not to other
People; yet for all this it is most certain, That there were many amongst the
Jews, who kept not the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of God; the Jews might
have said the same thing, yet Moses cries out, Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation is there
so great, who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord your God is to you in all
things? That has Statutes and Judgments so righteous? Again (as I have often
told you) though I dare not say with some, That all men sitting under the sound
of the Gospel, have a sufficiency of grace given them, that if they will, they
may turn unto God and live; yet I do think that there is such a sufficiency of
Light, and means, that if men will do what in them lies, God will not be
wanting to them in his effectual Grace; Men shall never have this to say: Lord,
I did what was in my power to do, I would have repented, believed, but thou
deniedst me that Grace which was necessary to it. Now herein appears the
greatness of the Grace of the Gospel. The Heathen walk in darkness, and in the
shadow of Death; they have not a sufficient Light to guide their feet into the
way of Peace. But where the Gospel is Preached, there a great Light shines, a
Light sufficient to direct men into the way of Life. But,

2. This looks dreadfully upon all those who wilfully shut their eyes against
Gospel Light, and stop their Ears against this joyful sound. This (says our
Savior) is the condemnation, that when Light is come into the World, men love
Darkness more than Light, because their deeds are evil. Matthew. 11. Our Savior
upbraideth the Cities where his mighty works had been done, and his Gospel
preached. Capernaum and Bethsaida, he says, they had been lifted up to Heaven,
but they should be thrown down into Hell: that it should be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah, yea for Tire and Sydon in the day of judgment, than for
them; when the Gospel has been long in a place, faithfully preached, it is
much to be feared, that God has had mercy in that place, upon as many Souls of
that Age, as he will have mercy. But this is but a Digression, we have reason
to adore God for his free mercy to us in giving us the Gospel, the faithful and
powerful preaching under the Gospel, many may and do perish, but where the
Gospel comes not, there is no hope. Now whence is it, that the rain of the
Gospel falls upon one City, not upon another? Upon one Country, not upon
another? That some Nations have not so much as the sound of it, the feet of
them which bring the glad tidings of Peace, come not amongst them: and in the
same Nation where the Gospel is preached, some have a sound, and little more:
Preachers in some places, in stead of preaching the Gospel, Preach human
Philosophy; or the lusts of their own hearts. In other places the Word of God
is preached faithfully, and powerfully; so that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force; Men are compelled to come in. This
difference, in the external ministration (which let me tell you, has no small
influence upon the eternal concern, and interest of men; for God does not
ordinarily work by way of miracle, and heal the eyes of the blind, with Clay,
and Spittle) is fountain'd only in the free will, and Grace of God.

Use 2. But I trust I speak to some, who have tasted further of the mercy and
Grace of God, than receiving the general Dispensation of the Gospel with their
outward ears. God has by his holy Spirit, upon the preaching of the Gospel,
effectually moved their hearts, and conquered their Souls into a subjection to
Christ. They have embraced the Lord Jesus Christ, by a Gospel-faith; they are
brought by a mighty hand out of darkness, into marvelous Light; and translated
out of this Kingdom of Sin, and Satan, into the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus. I
have this day been discovering to you, the Fountain of this Grace; of which God
has made you partakers: you have heard that it is the will of God only, which
has distinguished betwixt you and others; It is not because you were more
nobly born than others: nor because you were more rich, more honorable, or by
nature better complexioned than others; God saw no more goodness in your
natures, than in the natures of others, you were all the same flesh; he infused
into all Souls of the same nature, and species; only he has willed rather to
show mercy unto your Souls, than to the Souls of others, because he has set
his love upon you. There are three duties that hence lie very obvious.

1. The First is, Praise, Thankfulness and Admiration. Certainly, every such
Soul, stands highly obliged with the Psalmist to cry out: Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not all his benefits. If free Grace will not affect our
hearts, and fill our mouths with a new Song, nothing will. It must certainly be
an amazing consideration, for a Soul to sit down and think; I was in the same
mass, and lump of lost mankind, that others are; I was by Nature a Child of
wrath, as much as any; my Childhood and Youth were Vanity, as much as any
others; I was grinding at the same Mill, it may be in actual sins, I
outstripped many others: Now that the Lord should look upon me, and pluck me as
a brand out of the Fire; that God should open my eyes, and change my heart:
What did God see in me? Possibly, my more external circumstances, were far
less, and more unvaluable, than those of thousands of others; my House was of
small account, and little esteem; there are many more great, and noble, more
wise, and prudent than I am; many, who in all appearance, so far as man can
judge, might have been more serviceable to God than I am, or am ever like to be:
now that the Lord should pass them over, and show mercy to me; certainly, no
Soul can seriously think of these things, but must be ravished with the
apprehensions of the inaccountable love of God in these things; and say, What
shall I render unto thee, O Lard, what shall I render unto thee?

2. This notion of Gods Sovereignty, freedom, and inaccountbleness in the
dispensations of his Grace, should teach every Soul that has been, or shall be
made a partaker of it, the great lesson of humility. The Apostle, Romans 3.27.
gives this as the reason, why God has settled the justification of a Sinner,
upon a bottom of free Grace; and has excluded works, that he might also
exclude boasting; and teach those who glory, to glory in the Lord; upon this
Argument, the Apostle exhorts the Gentiles, not to boast against the Jews,
Romans 11.22. Behold the goodness, and the severity of God (says he) to those
who abide in their unbelief, severity; to thee, goodness. Pride is a sinful
habit, disposing the Soul to swell in the opinion of some excellency in it
self; and a little thing will swell our corrupt hearts. The Apostle propounds
this very consideration, as a cure for that tumor in the Souls of Christians,
1 Cor. 4.7. For who makes thee to differ from another? And what have thou
which thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory, as if thou had not received it? It is nothing but the will of God,
that has made a difference betwixt thee, and the vilest Sinner breathing;
betwixt thee and the most filthy Drunkard, the most furious Persecutor, etc. It
was not for any worth, any goodness, or holiness which the Lord saw in thee;
but of his mere free will, and Grace; God has showed mercy to thy Soul, what
have thou now of thy own to boast, or glory in? Thou have indeed reason to
glory, and to make thy boast in the Lord; and to bless God for what he has
done for thy Soul, more than for a thousand others; but there is no thanks to
thee, his will, his own will, was the fountain of his Grace extended to thee.
God has had mercy upon thy Soul, only because he would have mercy. O therefore
be not high-minded, but fear, and walk humbly before God.

3. Lastly, this calls upon all of you who have tasted of this free and
unaccountable Grace, to live a distinguishing life and conversation. There is a
Generation that fancyeth that the Doctrine of Free Grace, opens a door to
Liberty. It is but the old Cavil, in Saint Paul's time, there were those that
thus accused the Doctrine of Free Grace, as if it gave men a liberty to go on
in sin; as appears by the Apostles anticipation of that Cavil, Romans 6.1.
What, says he, shall we then continue in sin, that Grace may abound? God
forbid: and so he goes on, showing that any such conclusion from his
principles was unreasonable. How shall we (says the Apostle) who are dead unto
sin, live any longer therein? Special distinguishing, Free Grace both deadneth
the Soul to Sin, and inflameth the Soul with a love to God, who has made the
Soul to differ; so as that Soul cannot live as other men, the love of God
constrains him, he must apprehend himself obliged to do more for God than
others, because God has shown more mercy to him than unto others; and that
merely because he would show mercy. What can possibly be imagined to have a
greater, and lay an higher obligation upon the Soul, to all manner of holiness
in conversation, to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, as the Apostle
speaks.

SERMON L.
Hosea XIII. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help.
I Am now come to the second general Proposition, which I promised you to
discourse upon a little. In my last exercise, I discoursed to you of the
Fountain of Life and Grace, which we found to be the free will of God: There is
no other account to be given of Gods showing mercy, but because he will show
mercy, which is most certainly true, as of Gods eternal acts of Grace, so of
his Acts of Providence, as to the dispensation of his first Grace. The next
Proposition I mentioned was this,

2. Prop. That God in his providential Dispensations of punishment never acts
by mere Prerogative, but according to the demerit of his Creatures. In his
Dispensations of Grace, and the means of it, he acts merely from his own
Will: he will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy; and there is no other
account to be given of those Dispensations, he sends the Gospel to this
place, rather than another, because he will send it; he changes this Man or
Woman's heart, and turns it to himself, because he will show mercy: But the
case is otherwise in his penal Dispensations; there God acts not upon
Prerogative. God there has a Prerogative; for may not the Potter do what he
will with his Clay? But it is one thing to have Jus absolutum, an absolute
right, and power which we must claim for God, so long as we know him to have an
absolute right, and Sovereignty over the works of his hands; it is another thing
for God agere secundum jus absolutum, to act according to his Sovereignty, and
absolute power: this we say God does not. I pray observe: I restrain my
Discourse, to Gods Dispensations of actual Providence: I shall not meddle with
the eternal Councils of God in this case, that is quite beyond my Subject
propounded. It is unquestionable, that the punishments of Sinners, both in this
Life, and that which is to come, as well as the other great issues of his
Providence, concerning the rewards of righteous men, were set in order by an
Eternal deliberation; but whether by a mere negative, or positive Decree;
whether upon consideration of sin, or no, are points I am not at all concerned
to interest my self in; having all along restrained my discourse to the motions
of Actual Providence: and certain it is, that God in those Dispensations, does
punish none either here, or hereafter, merely because he will, but upon
consideration of Sinners demerits. Showing mercy, is an Act of Grace;
punishments, are Acts of Justice. The gift of God, (...), is Eternal Life, that
is a gift; and what is freer than gift? But the Wages of Sin, is Death; (...),
a Man must earn Death, before he has it from the hand of a merciful God: but
Eternal Life must be given him, if ever it be his Portion; so says my Text. O
Israel thou have destroyed thy self: I will open this in two or three
conclusions.

1. I understand it of all kind of destructions: possibly, the Text may chiefly
relate to temporal destructions, it is Ephraim to whom the Prophet is speaking;
and it is about a bodily destruction: but the Conclusion is general, and the
Text is well enough applied by Divines, to Eternal destruction; all
destructions, whether of Body, or Soul, are of our selves; yea, I take the
Aphonimy of the Text, to be more eminently true, of the destruction of the
Soul, than of the destruction of the Body. A Child may dye for the sins of the
Parents, Subjects may dye for the sin of their Prince; as in the case of Readiness
Children, that were hanged in David's time, and in the case of those many
thousands, which in David's time were cut off for his sin in numbering of the
People. The Children of God may be involved in a common destruction, and suffer
as they are a part of a sinful Nation; God may take them off, to deliver them
from an evil to come, as in the case of Abijam the Son of Jeroboam. God may
punish his people with afflictions of this Life, for the trial, and exercise of
their graces; but in Eternal destructions, God can have no other end, than the
punishment of the person, and all such destruction, is for a man's sin; his
personal sin.

3. When we say, that Men's destruction is of themselves, you must understand,
of themselves as the meritorious cause; not of themselves, as the principal
efficient cause. God is rightly enough entitled, to all the Evil of punishment
in the City. It is no dishonor to his Majesty, to be the Author of his own
Judgments; which is all, that Mr. Calvin, or any of the same mind with him,
have said; which has made some so clamor against them, as having asserted God
to be the Author of Sin. For God to be the Author of punishments, is no stain
to his Glory; but a Declaration of his Justice, and of his Righteousness.
Christ himself shall come (as the Apostle tells us) in flaming fire, to take
Vengeance upon them who know not God; and obey not his glorious Gospel. God
shall say to those on his left hand, depart from me you cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But our destruction is
from our selves, as the proximate, and meritorious cause; though from God as
the efficient cause. It is not from the Sovereign will of God merely, but from
the stubborn and rebellious will of Man, that any Soul perishes. Divines do
say, that though God cannot will the doing of any Sin, yet he may will that it
should be done. The Holy Ghost tells us, that Herod, and Pilate, and the
Jews, employed in accusing, condemning, crucifying of Christ; did no more, than
what the Council of God had determined should be done. But I say,
notwithstanding this, the proximate cause of man's Damnation is not, because God
has willed their Damnation; it is the guilt of their own Sins, the demerit of
their own Transgressions, which brings them to the Pit of Destruction. The
Gracious God shows mercy, and saves all who are saved by Prerogative; by
Grace you are saved, says the Apostle: he has the same Prerogative in matters
of Death, that he has in matters of Life; but he uses it not, but there
acts according to his Statute Law, The Soul that sins shall dye. He who
saves men without themselves, damneth none without themselves. Men are saved
by Grace, but they are damned by Sin. The wages of Sin is Death. Omne peccatum
est voluntarium, all Sin is of ourselves, it must have something of our own
will, and consent to, and in it.

3. Thirdly. Although this be certain, that all destruction, all punishment is
for Sin, yet the particular proximate cause of some punishments is unknown to
us. I will instance in one particular, a punishment, undoubtedly, a most severe
punishment; The withholding the Gospel, and so the ordinary means of Grace and
Salvation, from the far greatest part of the world. They hear nothing of the
Lord Jesus; they have not the Oracles of God, the ordinary means of Grace are
hidden from them; There is no doubt, but their own wilful sinning is the cause
of it. But whether the Sin of their Progenitors who had the Gospel, and sinned
it away, which to me seems a little hard; (for I can hardly be brought to
agree, that God for the sins of Relations punishes their Correlates in
Spiritual things.) Or that prodigious sinning, which they are guilty of; not
living up to what may by them, by their natural Light be seen of God; (for the
Apostle, Romans 1. gives you a true Copy of the lives of all Heathens) is not so
easy to determine. I should incline much to fix the cause here, they have
(though not the Book of Scripture) yet the Book of Gods Works, and Nature;
(though not Men Ministers of the Gospel to them) yet the Heavens declaring the
Glory of God, and the Earth showing his handywork; those standing Preachers, of
the Power, Glory, and Greatness of God; whose sound is gone out, and going
daily out, over all the world: they have the Sun, and Moon; they see much of
God, in and by them, and may learn much of God from them: but knowing God, and
not glorifying him as God, but becoming vain in their imaginations; they
worship Devils, and Stocks, and Stones, the work of their own hands; and
shutting their eyes against the Light of those common notions, which are
engraven in all reasonable Natures; they give up themselves to commit all
filthiness, and unrighteousness. So not using the Light of Nature and Reason,
which God has given them, God justly withholds from them the Talent of the
Gospel. If God does grant it to others, which yet it may be are guilty of the
same sottish abuse of their natural Light, and Reason, therein he is good and
gracious; but if he denies it unto them, therein he is not unjust or
unrighteous. But I say, there may be some particular instances, as to which it
may be hard for us to assign what particular sins God so securely proceeds
against the Nations, Families, or Persons for: but this is certain, Sin is
certainly the next cause of all severe dispensations of punishment. Now this
will appear to us. 1. From the evidence of Scripture. 2. From the evidence of
Reason, concluding from Scripture-Principles.

1. First, from the plain evidence of Scripture. In the case of the Heathen,
amongst whom the Devil has the greatest harvest of perishing Souls: of these
the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men: Observe the words, God does
not reveal his wrath against the Heathen, merely upon the account of his
Sovereign Power, because he will do it; but against the ungodliness and
unrighterusness of men: he goes on declaring their ungodliness, and their
unrighteousness. Verse. 21. Because when they knew God, they glorified him not
as God. They had light enough from the Works of God in Nature, to show them
other kind of Ideas of the Divine Being, than it was possible for them to find
amongst created beings; but they turned the Incorruptible God into the image of
a corruptible man, yea, of creeping things, and four-footed beasts. The Apostle
tells them also of their unrighteousness, Verse. 29. Fornication, wickedness,
covetousness, malitiousness; they were full of envy, murders, debates, deceits,
etc. Now for these things the wrath of God was revealed against them. The
Apostle tells us, Romans 2.14, That when the Gentiles, which have not the Law,
do by nature the things which are contained in the Law, they are a Law to
themselves. And Verse. 26. If the uncircumcision keep the Law, their
uncircumcision shall be accounted to them for circumcision. I am not of their
mind, who think that the Heathen have light enough to show them the way to
Heaven. I know not, Isa. 9.2. Mat. 4.16. Luke 1.7, 9.
if that were true, why the Scripture should set them out under the notion of
persons, or people that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; until
Christ, as the dayspring from on high, has visited them: But I am sure they
have sin enough to justify God in damning them; and permitting them to walk in
their own ways, until they have filled up the measure of their iniquities, and
brought judgment upon themselves. I also believe, that if there be found a Job
in the Land of Vz; If there be one found amongst the Heathen, who fears God,
and escheweth evil; who walks up to his natural light; God has his secret
way to reveal, and apply Christ to them, so as he shall not perish. But yet I
cannot believe that his natural light shall save him, because the Scripture
tells us, That there is no other name under heaven, than the name of Jesus
Christ, by which any can be saved; neither is there Salvation in any other.
There are several things in nature that we know are so, but we do not know the
way of them. In the matters of grace there are several things also which we
understand not the way of God in: Three come into my mind at present. The way
of God with an infant, we are not sure that all infants, no, not that all
Baptized infants shall be saved; but we doubt not, but of many such is the
Kingdom of God: but for the way of God with the Soul of one that lives not up
to the exercises of reason, and the intelligentness of the ordinary means of
Faith, and Regeneration; this we do not understand. 2. The way of God with a
thief upon the Cross, I mean with a sinner forgetting, or neglecting to turn
unto God until his last hour; we do believe that God has mercy upon some such
Souls, but how God works in them these habits of grace, which are necessary
according to the ordinary rule; how they are born again of the Spirit, and
Baptized, not with water only, but with the Holy Ghost, and with fire: this we
do not understand. And so Thirdly, The way of God with an Heathen, that never
comes to the light of the Gospel, nor has any external Revelation of Christ:
I say, how the Spirit of God moves, and which way it comes into such a Soul;
this we do not understand, but leave it amongst the unsearchable things of
Divine Providence, which we believe and revere: If there be (as I said before)
a Job in the Land of Vz, he shall know that his Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the last day upon the earth, and he shall see him with his eyes:
But which way God reveals this to him, we understand not. In the mean time
these hidden things being left to God, revealed things belong to us and to our
children; and this is revealed: That the wrath of God, as to the Heathen, is
revealed against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men.

2. But this is much more evident concerning such as live under the means of
grace, and offers of salvation: Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem! (says our Savior)
how often would I have gathered thee as an Hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, but thou would not? I would, what hindered then? thou would not.
Thus God of old spoke to the Jews, Jer. 23.24. This thing I commanded you,
saying, obey my voice, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people, and
walk you in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well with
you: But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels
and imaginations of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward. So
Jer. 16.13. and in a multitude of places in Scripture: Indeed this is the
Language of God quite throughout Scripture. So in the New Testament, You would
not come to me that you might have life, Joh. 5.40. I hear some bold Disputer
against God, saying, How is this possible, if it lies not in the power of a
man to believe, and to turn unto God? I have fully answered this before. All
mankind in Adam certainly had a power to do so much as God required of man in
order to his Salvation; but certain it is, that every man has a power to do
something; to do much more than he does in order to his repenting, and
believing: God will find at the day of Judgment, matter enough to condemn
sinners for what was their duty to have done, and in their power to have done;
and an instance will be wanting at that great day of one Soul, who did what was
in his power; both as to the doing of Good, and the avoiding of sin; to whom
God denied his special, and effectual grace: Christ Mat. 21.32. Lays this to
the Jews charge, That when they had heard John, they repented not afterward,
that they might believe: But this is a theme I have before enlarged upon, and
shall now add nothing to that Discourse. Having thus far opened the
Proposition, I shall only give you Two Reasons of it.

1. First, That no imputation might be laid upon an holy, a most holy God:
Though the Scripture does justly assert a Sovereignty to God concerning the
work of his hands, and the same power over his creature, which the Potter has
over the clay; yet it everywhere avoideth all imputations of rigor, injustice,
cruelty; God will not be accounted an hard Master: what if this man has but
one Talent, another has five, and a third has ten; yet I hope he that has
but one, may trade proportionably to that one, as far as that will go; and if
he does not, and he be punished, his Master is not to be condemned for an hard
Master, in taking that one Talent from him; or otherwise punishing him for the
non-improvement of the stock betrusted to him: Suppose men to have but the one
Talent, of the light of Nature, which is the case of the poor Heathens; another
to have five Talents, the advantage of Gospel Light, and the ordinary means of
grace; a third to have ten Talents, effectual grace superadded to both these:
If he who has but one Talent, or that has had the five Talents, have not done
with them what he might have done; and God condemn him for such omissions, or
actions contrary to his duty; here can be no imputation upon God, he cannot be
said to have done cruelly, severely, or injustly. God was under no obligation
to trust him with five Talents, that abused, or would make no good use of one;
nor to trust him with ten Talents, who would not use, or did abuse his sive;
but now should God have punished, or condemned any without their sins as the
meritorious cause, there might have been some imputation upon God.

2. Secondly, God has so ordered it, That the sinner shall be inexcusable: It
is but reasonable, that the holy God should so dispense out his punishments by
the hand of Providence, that a sinner should be without excuse; this the
Scripture lets us know once and again. In the Parable it is said, That he who
was turned out from the Wedding-feast for want of the Wedding Garment, was
speechless; he was without an Apology, he had nothing to say for himself. So
Romans 1.20. Then they are without excuse. So Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art
inexcusable, O man: This is one design that God drives, so to manage and govern
by the motions of his Providence. Now supposing this, that all destruction is
of a man's self: That God does not condemn any out of mere Prerogative, or
because he will, (whatever he might do, vi absoluti juris) every sinner must
stop his mouth, and be speechless in that day, when God shall say, Take them,
bind them hand and foot, and cast them into utter darkness, where is weeping
and wailing, and guashing of teeth. What has any sinner to say for himself, if
his destruction be of himself? I have done with the doctrinal part of this
Discourse, I come to apply it.

1. Use. In the first place, observe the great difference between Gods
proceedings in the methods of his grace, and of his paenal dispensations;
dispensations of mercy and judgment, are both Gods work: But the one is his
Natural work, the other is his strange work, Isa. 28.21. Gods workings in the
methods of his grace, are, ex mero suo motu and beneplacito, they merely flow
from the nature of God, without any meritorious cause in the creature; he
shows mercy because he will show mercy, and extends compassion to whom he
will, and because he will extend compassion; he gives grace because he will
give grace: here God acts from mere Sovereignty and Prerogative; but he never
deals out punishments, but there is some cause in the creature, something
which moves him to proceed and deal in such a manner, and meriteth such a
punishment: He saves Souls because he is gracious, he condemns sinners
because he is righteous, cum largitur gratiam per misericordiam hoc fit, cum
negat, per judicium, says Nieremberg, wrath is not declared, says he, unless
when it is due, lest there should be unrighteousness with God; mercy is showed,
when and where it is not due; this makes no unrighteousness with him: So that
I say, there is a vast difference to be observed betwixt Gods dispensations of
mercy and goodness, and his dispensations of wrath and severity.

2. Use. In the second place, you may from hence conclude; How little reason
there is for that clamor, which some make against such as are called
Calvinists; under which nickname, they indeed wound, not only Augustine and
Prosper, and others of the ancients; but many Divines in England, especially
that lived three, or fourscore years a go. Two great Accusations they bring:

1. That they affirm God to be the Author of sin; yet neither Mr. Calvin, nor
any of his Followers ever said so, nor dare any now say so: What Is the matter
then? because they say, That God has willed, that sin should be committed,
though he has neither commanded, nor approved the action, nor any way
influenced it by the way of efficiency: Therefore God must be the Author, or
these Divines make him the Author: Or because God is the Author of his own
judgments, and paenal dispensations; and God sometimes punishes sin with sin;
therefore God must be the Author of sin: taken properly as it is an oblique
action, contrary to his Law. This is (forsooth) their proof of that
crimination; when as there are no Divines in the world, but think it, not only
blasphemy, but nonsense, to talk of God as the Author of sin; which must be an
action contrary to the will, liking, and approbation of God, as the very nature
of sin does import.

2. Their second Crimination, is, That God has damned his creatures, out of
his mere Prerogative and Sovereignty. We do indeed think, and must so think,
till our Adversaries can possess us with other Idea's and notions of God, than
either Scripture, or reason will help us with; That there is nothing which
either has, or shall come to pass in the world, but God did know from all
eternity; neither can we conceive how God should know any thing, but because he
willed it; either in a way of efficiency, or to permit it. We do say, that God
had a jus absolutum, from eternity; an absolute right over his creatures, to
determine how he pleased concerning them: But we also say, That in his paenal
dispensations he acts not according to his Sovereignty and absolute right;
and that every man's destruction is of himself; and the proximate, and
meritorious cause of the punishment, and eternal ruin of any Soul, is his own
sin: God does not condemn any Soul, but for sin, recompensing their own
iniquities upon their heads; and whatsoever is absolute and Sovereign right,
his Law, from which he never varieth, in the motions of his Providence, is, The
soul that sins shall die. Where is the difference then? What makes this
great clamor, and odious representation of eminent Divines, as to the method
of Gods proceedings in his actual Providence? Papists, Arminians, Calvinists,
all are agreed, That the wages of sin is death, The soul that sins shall
die: God will condemn none but for sin. Only it seems they are not agreed, as
to the Nature, and Attributes, and Prerogatives of God. Those Divines whom they
call Calvinists, must assert God to have the same Power over his creatures,
which a Potter has over the clay: This the other will not understand, though
God expressly told it the Prophet Jeremy; and the Apostle from him has
expressly told it us: and this is all the difference that I can understand.

3. Use. Thirdly, you may from hence learn, How the Righteousness of God shall
be cleared in the last day, in the condemnation of sinners, although it has
not pleased him to give to all a power to that which is truly, and Spiritually
good. This is a point which very many in this Generation also will not
understand, but the fault is in themselves. If God (say they) has not given to
all men a power to repent, and to believe, how shall he be righteous in the
condemning of Sinners? There is no consequence at all in this, but upon this
Hypothesis: That except men have a power to do that which is Spiritually good,
they are in no capacity to do that which is morally evil. Whether they have a
power to repent, or to believe, without the effectual Grace of God, yea, or no;
Certainly, they have a power in a thousand things, to break the Law of God;
yea, and to do also many things which are contained in the Law of God: and
although the doing of these things would not save them, yet certainly, the
omiting of them, or doing contrary to them, may give God a righteous cause to
condemn them. Suppose one of you who are Fathers, to have two Sons, both of
them wild, and fond of their play, and eager at it; you call them both to come
to you, and tell them, that if they will come, you will give them both money to
go and buy such things; but if by such a time, they have not those things, and
appear to you in, and with them, you will certainly whip them. One of these
Children hearkens to you, leaves his play, comes running to you, and begs the
money you promised him; then procures the things, and appears to you in the
habit you desired, and you are well pleased with him. The other Child, is mad
of his play (which if he would he might leave) he could not have the things
without money out of his Fathers Purse; but he will not leave his play, nor stir
a foot toward his Father, nor so much as ask his Father for money; his Father
indeed, sends him no money, but shuts him out of his sight; and orders him to
be severely whipped, because that he would not leave his idle game, and come to
him, and ask the money of him which he promised; and because he had not bought
the things, and appeared before him, in that habit, and dress, which he had
commanded: will not one say, this foolish Child, is right served? shall his
Father be judged unrighteous or severe, because he gave the Child no money (as
he did the other) and the Child could come by the things without money, and if
it had them not, could not appear in, or with them, before his Father? The case
is much the same, betwixt God and us. God sees two Men, or Women, both his
Creatures, alike in Adam, both born in Trespasses and Sins; wildly playing over
the hole of the Asp, and the den of the Cockatrice; sporting themselves in Sin,
and in an hourly danger of Hellfire: God calls them by his Ministers, to
leave their Sins, and to turn unto him; he says, let him that has been drunk,
be drunk no more; let him that has been unclean, be unclean no more; let him
that has told a lie, that has broke my Sabbaths, lie, and break my Sabbaths
no more; let him read my Word, and hear my Word; and let him come, and pray
unto me, and beg of me, an heart to believe and to repent, and I will give it
him; and he that believes shall be saved; but in the great day, it shall be
found, That he who has not repented, and has not believed, shall be damned.
One of these sinners, leaves off his lewd courses, falls to an external
Discipline, reads the Word, hears the Word of God, applies himself to God
by Prayer, beggeth of God an heart to repent, and to believe his Gospel: God
hears him, gives him a power, gives him repentance unto Life, and a saving
Faith in Christ; and he obtains everlasting Salvation. The other is mad of
his Lusts, and after them he will go, let what will be the issue of it; he will
not read the Word, not hear that his Soul may live; nor so much as ask special
Grace of God, not to plead with God for Faith, or Repentance; God gives them
not to him, he dies in his impenitency and unbelief: God throws him into
Hell, for his not repenting, not believing, according to his Word. Is there any
unrighteousness with God in this case, more than in the Fathers dealing with
the Child, upon the former Supposition? What pretense is there for it? The
Sinner, you will say, could not repent, could not believe, without the special
Grace of God, which was never given him. No more could the Child buy those
things the Father willed it to have, and come before him with, unless the
Father first gave it money; the Child had no money of its own: But the Child
might have left its play, it might have read, and heard the Word, he might have
come to God by Prayer; and begged of him a soft, and contrite heart, and a
believing heart, he had power to do all this; and had he done this, God had not
been wanting to him in his further Grace. To him that has shall be given
((says our Savior) that is, to him that has, and uses, and proves what
Gifts and Graces he has as he ought to do, shall be given more Grace. But this
the poor wretch has not done, but dies an hard-hearted, an impenitent and
unbelieving wretch; what unrighteousness is there with God in his condemnation?
he perishes in his own iniquity; his blood is upon his own head, his damnation
lies at his own door, his destruction is of himself, his help might have been
from God, if he had not been wanting to himself. O sinful men, are not the
Lords ways equal? Yes, yes, they are our own ways that are unequal; the
straight ways of the Lord, are only made crooked, by our idle fancies, our
proud hearts, and corrupt reasons, and foolish misprisions.

Use 4. In the last place, let me apply this discourse, by way of Exhortation,
it will afford matter of Exhortation. 1. To the people of God. 2. To the men of
the World, those I mean that are not yet converted unto God. 1. To Gods People.

1. To you it speaks, to make you more afraid of sin for the time to come.
Sin in Scripture is ordinarily resembled by sickness, and a disease. Now what
is true of sickness is true of Sin, every sickness is not unto death; but every
sickness has something of death in it; it leads to the Grave: it is not the
last stroke, at the giving of which, the Tree falls; but it is a blow, in
order to the fall of it. Every sin does not bring forth death; yea as to you,
No sin shall bring forth death; because Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Jesus Christ; but every sin has something of the nature of a
self-ruining, and destruction in it. The wages of every sin is death; the
natural tendency of every sin is unto death. It is the Gift and Free Grace of
God that as to you prevents it; and although your sins do not bring forth an
Eternal ruin and destruction to you, because the Blood of Christ, and the
Intercession of Christ has prevented, and will prevent that; yet your sins may
bring forth many lesser deaths to you: for them, you may be in deaths often;
for them there may be a death of your peace, and comforts: as there are no
temporal Evils, which sin may not bring upon the people of God; so there are
few spiritual Evils on this side of Hell, to which it does not subject them: So
that although you be not under the danger of an Eternal ruin, yet you are
under the danger of so many deaths, so many destructions, as may justly lay a
Law upon you, and make you afraid of sinning against God.

2. But Secondly, This calls to all of you, to admire the Divine Grace by
which you are saved. I hope it is the portion of many of you to whom I am
speaking, you are not yet got up to the new Jerusalem, but you are in the
right way that leads thereunto. O cry, Grace, Grace, unto the hand which set
you upon that Shore. It is true of you, you also by sin had destroyed your
selves, by Grace you are saved; you were once Firebrarnds, as well as any
others; are you now brands plucked out of the Fire? It was the hand of Grace,
that plucked you out. You has he quickened (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.1.) who
were dead in Trespasses and sins. Amongst whom also we had our conversation of
old according to the Lusts of the Flesh; you also were once acted by the Prince
of the Air, who yet works in the Children of Disobedience; and were by
Nature, the Children of Wrath, as much as others. It is a sweet, though in some
sense, a bitter meditation to cast a thought back, and think, Lord! How had I
also destroyed my self? How near was I going to the Pit of Eternal ruin and
destruction? Nay, how often yet is our Salvation from God? We are every day
destroying our selves, we lie down with sin enough to justify God in destroying
us before the Morning; and rise up every day with sin enough to justify God in
destroying us before the Evening. By Grace we are saved.

2. But Secondly, let me speak to those which can have no such good hope
through Grace. They yet are in their natural State and condition, in the Gall
of bitterness, and in the very bands of iniquity. Sirs, it is that which I have
often told you, and I wish the sound of it may never be out of your Ears; you
are Creatures ordained to Eternity, when you dye, you dye not like
brute-Beasts; Death will not determine your beings, you shall be either
Eternally happy, or Eternally miserable: All that I have to say to you, is to
plead with you, that you would not ruin your selves; and let me tell you, that
if ever you perish, it must be because you have destroyed your selves. Do not
fright your selves with thoughts of Gods eternal decrees: secret things belong
to God, revealed things to us. Whatever Gods secret counsels and purposes be,
this is his revealed will; The Soul that sins, and that alone shall dye.
Trouble not your selves with any such thoughts as these, If I be not elected,
do what I will, I shall be damned; If God has cast me off, I shall labor in
vain; It is the Sluggard (says Solomon) which says, There is a Lion in the
way. We cannot ascend up into Heaven, to search Gods Books, there is no need of
it. The Word is near us, even in our mouths; that tells us, that God never
destroys any Soul, but the meritorious cause of it is in himself: and this we
know, that all sin is voluntary; O then, take heed of destroying your selves,
by wilful, and presumptuous sinning against God. Nature teaches every Man, to
look to himself, as to his Life, Health, Estate; and shall not our reasonable
Nature, instructed by the Word of God, prompt us to take care of our selves, as
to our Eternal Interest? You will say unto me, what shall we do, that we may
not de destroyed; for who lives, and sins not against God? I have before
told you, that in Scripture I find three Answers to this Question. The one is
that of St. Peter's, Acts 2.31. Repent and be Baptized; another is that of St.
Paul, Acts 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved.
The other, is that of our Savior, to the young Man, asking him, What good
thing he should do, that he might inherit Everlasting Life. Says our Savior,
Keep the Commandments. Those three Texts will give you complete directions.

1. Keep the Commandments. You will reply, but you tell us, that no Man is able
to keep the Commandments; but because you cannot do all which God does require,
can you do nothing? Well, but you will say, Shall we be saved if we do all that
we can to keep the Moral Law? I Answer, No, What then?

2. St. Peter tells you, Acts 2.38. Repent, and be Baptized: you will reply,
but it is God who must give repentance unto life. True, we say, God must change
the heart; the Blackamore cannot change his skin, nor the Leopard his spots:
But cannot you consider your sins? Cannot you turn from open sins? Do what in
you lies in order to your Repentance: Well, but you will say, If we do this,
Is this enough? I Answer, No, What then?

3. St. Paul tells you, Act. 16. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you
shall be saved: Still, you will say, But is not Faith the gift of God? Have we
a power to believe? We Answer, No, It must be given to men on the behalf of
Christ to believe; But cannot you read the Word of God? Cannot you come and
hear the Word preached? When you have heard it, Cannot you meditate therein?
Cannot you apply your souls to the Word, though it be Gods work to apply the
Word to your souls, and make it to dwell in you? Cannot you beg of God a power
to believe? God will not be wanting to that soul, that is not first wanting to
it self. The difference betwixt us, and the bold Patrons of free will, lies
here: They hold, that a man has a natural power and ability to actions
formally, and spiritually good: This we deny, but yet say, That man has a
power to actions that are morally, and materially good: and if he would go
about as far as his Natural power would help him, though indeed he could merit
nothing at the hand of God; We do not believe, that God would be wanting to
him, as to habits of spiritual and effectual grace. Now this is that which I am
pleading with you for, that you might not destroy you selves.

1. That you would not give your self a liberty, and let your selves loose to
do things contrary to the Law of God, wherein you might restrain your selves.

2. That you would not neglect to do those things which God requires of you,
and which are in your power to do. I shall conclude this, but with Two very
weighty considerations.

1. No punishment is more justly and smartly inflicted, than that which a man
has chosen, and wilfully brought upon himself; when a man has chosen death
rather than life, and judged himself unworthy of everlasting life, and despised
his own mercy; certainly every man must say, he is justly punished, and
adjudged to that portion which he has chosen to himself.

2. Secondly, As no punishment is so justly and smartly inflicted, so none is
more intolerable to be born. There will be in Hell another fire which shall
never go out; but this will be the worm that shall never die: I have done, and
shall shut up my Discourse with the words of Moses: I have this day set before
you life and death, blessing and cursing. I have told you which way you must go
down into the pit of destruction, if ever you come there; you must of your
selves go into it: O let not your destruction be of your selves, especially
considering what God has done, and what he is daily doing; to evidence that in
him is your help, if you will apply your selves unto him.

SERMON LI.
Romans 2.12. For, as many as have sinned without the Law, shall also perish
without the Law, and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the
Law.
THE business I am upon (as you know) is the expounding some hard Chapters in
the Book of Divine Providence; I am upon the last head, upon which I propounded
to speak to some appearing difficulties, viz. Gods unequal dispensations of
Grace, whether such as are more common, or such as are more special and saving,
as a basis to this Discourse: I have premised, and handled Two preliminary
Propositions.

1. Prop. That God in the dispensations of his grace, acts by Prerogative in
a way of Sovereignty, freely, and unaccountably.

2. Prop. That in his paenal dispensations of this nature, he never proceeds
but justly upon the previous demerits of sinners.

I now come to speak to some Questions relating to these dispensations of
Divine Providence. The Two first of this nature, which I shall speak to, relate
to Gods unequal distributions of common grace, but such as are spiritual means,
in order to the obtaining of special and effectual grace; and his unequal
distributions of special and effectual grace, without which none can be saved:
I shall put both these together, and for a short Discourse upon these, I have
made choice of this Text.

The business of the Apostle in this excellent Epistle, is to establish the
great Doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the Justification of the soul before
God by the righteousness of Christ, on Gods part imputed, and reckoned to
sinners; and on man's part, apprehended, and applied by Faith; in opposition to
the Doctrine of the Doctors of the Jews, who held the Justification of the Soul
by the works of the Law: In opposition to whom he had laid down his grand
Proposition, Romans 1.17. That the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to
faith: That is, That righteousness wherein a Soul another day, must stand just
and righteous before God, is not a righteousness of our own, arising from our
performance of the Law; but the righteousness of Christ revealed in the Gospel,
which is apprehended, and made ours by Faith. His first Argument by which he
proves this, is, obvious to any considerate Reader: If any be justified by
works, they must either be the Gentiles, or the Jews; but neither are the works
of the Gentiles, such, as will justify them: Nor are the works of the Jews,
such, as will justify them. As to the Gentiles, he proves at large, Chap. 1.
That their works were such, as were so far from Justifying them, That the wrath
of God was revealed against them; for the wrath of God is revealed against all
the ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men; and, as he at large shows, the
works of the Heathen were works of most notorious ungodliness, and
unrighteousness; and therefore could not possibly justify them. So in this
Chapter he proves that the works of the Jews were not such, as could justify
them before God; for though they condemned others for sins, yet they did as bad
themselves. From Verse. 11. He takes away all pretense of Justification by
works, both from the Jews and from the Gentiles: For the Gentiles, he says,
they had not the Law; For the Jews they indeed had the Law, but they broke it:
Now, says he, There is no respect of persons with God, those that sin shall
perish; let them sin with the Law, or without the Law: For (says he in my
Text) as many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law, and as
many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. By the Law is here
plainly understood the Word of God, which God has given us to be a light unto
our feet, and a lanthern to our paths; a light to show us the way to Heaven:
Here is plainly implied, That as some sinners perish having the Word of God,
and the external means of Salvation; so others perish having not the Law and
Word of God, nor the outward and ordinary means which God has appointed in
order to the obtaining of eternal life and salvation. 2. In both these
dispensations God is just, for there is no respect of persons with God. Now
hence arise Two Questions,

1. Quest. Whether God grants to all men sufficient aids and assistances, or
means of Grace in order to their Salvation.

2. Quest. If God does not grant unto all men sufficient means, aids, and
assistances of Grace, in order to their Salvation: how he can be just in the
condemnation of any, to whom he has not given, such a sufficiency of means.

1. Quest. Whether God grants unto all men sufficient means of Grace, in
order to their Salvation?

We affirm that he has not. But here we have many Adversaries, to encounter.
There are some that affirm that there is a sufficiency of the means, aids, and
assistances of Grace afforded to all men in order to their Salvation. Some of
the Arminians will not go thus far, but they affirm, That to all those to whom
the Gospel is preached, and who are by the preaching of it called to Faith and
Repentance, there is a sufficient grace given. Thus far we do agree as to this
point of sufficient grace.

1. That in our first Parent Adam, all mankind had sufficient grace, whether we
respect external, or internal means; he had a sufficient Revelation of the Will
of God, and a sufficient power in himself, in his own will; in the rectitude of
his own nature, to have made use of, and applied the Revelation he had of the
Divine Will, in order to his Salvation; and so all mankind had in him: For as
in Adam all died, so in Adam all men were at first a live, or they could not in
the fall have died in him: The Question is not therefore of man, as he at first
came out of the hand of God, but of mankind in their lapsed estate, whether
they have all such a sufficiency.

2. Secondly, Neither is the Question about the sufficiency of external means
as to all those to whom the Gospel is preached, and who have the Scriptures; we
grant a perfection in them, and that they are able to make men wise unto
Salvation: the word of Faith, is a sufficient external means; this is again on
all hands agreed betwixt us.

3. Thirdly, It is out of doubt, that there is such a Revelation of the means
of grace, as is sufficient for the manifestation of the Glory and Justice of
God, which is the great end which God aims at in all his dispensations of
Providence.

4. Yea, and Fourthly, There is such a sufficiency of outward means, as is
enough to keep up external order, and discipline in the world, in humane
Societies; and as will render men inexcusable before God, Romans 2.1.

5. Lastly, We do grant that there is a sufficiency of grace given to many that
live in the world, even to as many as God has foreordained to eternal life:
But still there are Two Questions behind.

1. Whether those who never heard of Christ, to whom the Gospel was never
preached, have a sufficient external means in order to their Salvation?

2. Whether either those, or any of those to whom the Gospel is preached, have
a sufficiency of means in order to their Salvation, unless God be pleased to
influence their souls by the powerful operation of his Spirit upon their
hearts, overpowering their wills, and in the day of his power making them
willing to receive the Lord Jesus Christ freely tendered in the Gospel. We do
judge, that as the Heathens, who have not heard of Christ, nor had the Gospel
preached unto them, have not a sufficiency in respect of outward, ordinary
means; so neither those who have the Scriptures, and Ordinances of God, have a
sufficiency of grace while they want the internal effectual operation of the
Spirit of God. So that indeed no Reprobates, only the Elect of God, have a
sufficient aid and assistance of grace given them for their Salvation, though
in the way of outward means; those indeed who have the Gospel published to
them, may be said to have a sufficiency in respect of external means. This we
affirm, upon these grounds.

1. This pretended sufficiency must be either of External means, or of Internal
means, or of both: indeed it must be of both, or it is not a sufficiency. The
External means is the holy Scriptures, and the preaching of them; they are
those which are able to to make the man of God, (as Apostle tells us) wise unto
Salvation: And how shall they believe, (says the Apostle, Romans 10.) on him of
whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how
shall they Preach except they be sent? The Apostle is there, discoursing of the
ordinary means of Salvation: you see, that is fixed in the word, for that is,
that which is to be heard, and the Preaching of the word. So that what secret
way soever, God may have to reveal himself, and the knowledge of Christ, unto
some particular persons, in places where the Scriptures are not found, nor the
name of Christ heard of, nor his Gospel Preached; yet, certain it is, the
outward and ordinary means of Salvation is the Preaching, hearing, and reading
of the word, and the Ministry of the Gospel. Now we know, that in the far
greatest part of the World, the Scriptures are not found, read, preached, they
have no Ministry; and therefore it is very absurd to say, That as to the
External ordinary means of Salvation, there is a sufficiency afforded all; for
if the word, and the Ministry of it be the outward and ordinary, means; it is
matter of demonstration, that a very great part of the World has nothing of
it: those therefore that will maintain a sufficiency of means, must make the
works of God, and the view of them, and conclusions, which men may make by
their Natural light and reason from them, a sufficient means, to give a man the
knowledge of God, and such a knowledge as is sufficient. And this indeed some do
seem to say, When they find out for us another object for saving Faith than
Christ and his Gospel; and tell us, that Abel and Enoch excercised their Faith,
and such a Faith as pleased God; whose object was not Christ, but only such
Propositions as these, That God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek
him. This is indeed a new Doctrine in our Nation, but it is but a Transcript,
of what the Socinians, and Arminians, V. Bertium contra. Sibran. P. 69. 70. 71.
have long since said, That the Gentiles were saved by a Faith in God,
believing, That God is, and that he is a rewarder of those that seek him: By a
Faith only apprehending things remote from humane sense (as some amongst us
Phrase it now, Bertii discep. Epist. 73.76.
but translating Bertius) and after the same rate speak the Socinians,
generally denying Faith in Christ necessary to Salvation, and making only a
Faith in God necessary; but the Scripture tells us, That there is no other
name under Heaven, by which a man can be saved, besides that of Jesus Christ;
neither is there Salvation in any other. But upon that Hypothesis, That the
Preaching of the Gospel is the ordinary External means, it cannot be said, That
God has given to all means sufficient. 2. But Secondly, For the more Spiritual
Internal means, which is the effectual grace of God, it is certain; that is not
given to all, for then all would be saved, (but of that more, by and by.) There
are those that think every man has a sufficiency of inward Spiritual means,
who lives under the preaching of the Gospel. The Socinians, in their known
Catechism, Confess. Rem. cap. 17. Episcopius. disp. 46. Colloq. Hag. P. 258.
propound this Question. Whether there be not a need of an inward gift of the
Spirit, to enable us to believe the Gospel? They Answer; No. The same Song is
sung by Smalcius, Socinus, Ostorodius, and the Arminians, generally say the
same thing, the business is they make no more necessary, than a moral Suasion;
which all have to whom the Gospel is preached; that supposed, they say, Man
has in his own will, a power to believe, repent, etc. But the Scripture tells
us, It is given to us on the behalf of Christ to believe; That Faith is not of
our selves, it is the gift of God; with a multitude of Texts more of the like
import: now most certain it is, that if there be any such operation of the
Spirit necessary, all men have not a sufficiency of means: If we be not
sufficient of our selves, to think one good thought, as the Apostle tells us: If
without Christ, we can do nothing: If God must give to will and to do, what
power has man to any thing which is truly, and Spiritually good? For those
that sit under the preaching of the Gospel, they have all the same moral
Suasion; they have all the same rational powers, and faculties; how comes it,
I would fain know, to pass, that one of them repents, and believes, when
others are hardened and continue locked up in unbeleif? Is it from themselves,
that one man's will inclines well, and not another? then surely there is
another Principle of Spiritual life; another Fountain of good besides God,
which is plainly to contradict the Scripture, which every where makes God the
Fountain of life, and of all good. But this is the first thing only which I
offer to you, in this cause.

2. Secondly, How is it possible, that all should have sufficient grace, but
that all must be saved? God tells St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace shall be
sufficient for thee; was it possible, after that promise, he should have been
overborne, or overcome with his temptation? I would ask for what this pretended
grace, given to all should be sufficient? Will they say for Salvation? How can
any be said, to have a sufficiency of grace to save them, who yet are not
saved, nor ever shall be saved? All that can be pretended, is, That every man,
and woman, has a reasonable Soul; (that is not denied) and that is naturally
endued, with power enough, to do whatsoever Spiritual action God has required
of man, in order to his obtaining Salvation; having either the works of God, to
represent God unto him; (which is all that the Heathen have) or the word of
God, the holy Scriptures, which they may read, and hear preached. So that this
same sufficient grace, which they contend for, is nothing else but a reasonable
Soul: The works of God in Nature, and the word of God in the Scriptures; or, at
most preached to them. Those who restrain sufficiency of grace, to those who
have the Gospel preached to them, Grevinchovius, Con. Ames. 212. Remonstra.
Colloq. Hag. P. 258.
tell us plainly, That the word preached, is the instrument, the consummatory
instrument of God for our Faith, conversion, etc. And deny that in the business
of conversion, the holy Spirit puts forth any other power; and they say,
There is more force in the word of Reconciliation, than in a Lazare prodi,
Lazarus come forth: Well, but what shall become of the Heathen, who have not
this word of Reconciliation? how have they a grace sufficient? It cannot be
denied, but they have the works of God, sufficient to convince them, That God
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him; and they have reasonable
Souls, to make such conclusions upon the prospect of the works of God; and a
Faith in Christ as Mediator, is not, they say, necessary to Salvation; for thus
none could believe in Christ, before he came (if you will believe them.) A
Faith in God as a supreme being, and as a rewarder of them that seek him, being
sufficient; especially, considering that Faith is nothing else, but an
obedience to the commands of Christ; Socinus. in praectel. Theol. 1.17. fol. 93.
and this is the very form and essence of Faith, Socin. fragm. de Just. P. 51.
Now this must be understood, so far as we know them, and they are revealed to
us. This was the old Doctrine of Socinus, and his followers; and in this sense
they say, Sufficient grace is given to all, in order to their Salvation,
because they believe nothing of what we call grace, viz. A particular internal
influence and operation of the holy Spirit, begetting in us a lively Faith in
Jesus Christ necessary to any; but that every man has a natural power to do
all that God required of him, and may be saved if he will but use that power,
to the use of which there needs not any special influence of God: But man may
be a God to himself, a principle of the greatest good inclining his own heart,
to that which is Spiritually good. For that God should give unto any grace,
sufficient for his Salvation, and yet it should not be effectual, is indeed a
contradiction; for it must be sufficient, and insufficient.

3. Again, If there be such a sufficient grace granted to all; It must be
sufficient, either as a Physical, or Natural cause, or as a Moral cause.
Physical causes, we know act necessarily. All that can be pretended, is, a
sufficiency as a Moral cause. Now certainly in the Gospel, and the preaching of
it, there is only a proposition of things to be believed, and done, and
arguments used to persuade the belief or doing of them; the Question still is,
by what: power it is, that a man does believe, and do? What is in the word
written, propounded, in the word preached, so persuaded, and argued? We say it
is not of our selves, it is the gift of God; and it is given to them, who
believe, on the behalf of Christ to believe, Phil. 1.29. Now this means is not
given unto all, the Habits are not infused from whence, as from their Roots,
and Principles, these actions must proceed. To this they have nothing to say,
but that these actings flow from a Principle in man's will; yet all men have the
same reasonable Souls: thus God gives Faith and Holiness, no more to Paul,
than to Judas. The upshot is therefore: That there is in man a self sufficiency
to his own Salvation, and need not to be beholden to Father, Son, or Holy Ghost
for it; being once brought forth into the World, and possessed of a reasonable
Soul, he has a sufficiency to his own Slavation, and may be a God unto
himself: but it is not proper to call this means; we are otherwise taught from
the Holy Scriptures, and therefore cannot agree it, That all men have an
auxilium sufficiens; a sufficiency of grace, and gracious assistances in order
to their obtaining Eternal life, and Salvation.

2. Quest. But the Second Question still remains, viz. How can God be just in
the condemnation of any Sinner, to whom he has not given a sufficient aid, and
assistance of grace, in order to his Salvation. To this in my former
discourses, I have spoken sufficiently. But yet I will speak something to it,
here falling so fully in my way.

Answ. 1. I answer first. God did give unto Adam, sufficient aids and
assistances of Divine grace to have carried him, and all his posterity to
Heaven. What was given unto him, was given to him, and his; to him as a public
Person, in whom we all were, Arnoldus contra Mol. c. 6. Sect. 2. Episcopius
disp. 5. these. 6.
and fell. Arminians stiffly deny, That Adam, in his state of innocence had a
power to believe in Christ, because (say they) there was need of any Faith in
Christ, in that estate, no: Episcopius says it is a silly Question,
considering we make Faith a Supernatural habit; and such a one as in that state
there was no need of. This is no better then trifling, and equivocating; surely
all habits of grace since the fall, are Supernatural habits, we must be taught
of God, to love God, and to love one another; to fear God, to delight, or to
hope in him; had Adam therefore no such powers in his state of innocence think
we? Further I would gladly know, whether Adam had not a power in innocence to
do whatsoever was necessary, in order to the obtaining of everlasting
Salvation? If God does not give now to every man such a sufficiency of power,
and Spiritual assistance; yet, he is just in the condemnation of Sinners: Man
had such a sufficiency of power, and lost it; but God has not lost his right
to require the exercise of it, and to condemn Sinners for sin, though they now
want it.

2. Especially considering, that God has given unto all such a sufficiency of
external means, as is sufficient to render them without excuse. This the
Apostle expressly says, Romans 2.1. But you will say, If God has not given to
all a sufficiency of means, how shall man be without excuse: shall not one say,
Lord! I never heard of Christ, I never saw thy Law, how should I believe on him
of whom I never heard, how should I obey that Law which I never saw, nor heard
of? Again, shall not another say? Lord, I did indeed hear of a Savior, the
Scripture I read, I beard, but I had no power to believe, I could not chonge my
own heart, thou would not change it; thou indeed, Lord, did stand at the
door of my heart, and knock, but thou did never put in thy hand at the hole
of the door. I answer, these Sinners yet shall be inexcusable, because they
walked not up to that light, and mercy, which God gave them. This is what the
Apostle gives in plea for God, concerning the Heathen, Romans 1.18, 21. The
wrath of God, says he, is revealed against the ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men; for says he, That which may be known of God, is
manifested in them, for God has showed it to them, v. 21. Because when they
knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain
in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. It is true we say,
the Heathens have not a light, shining amongst them, they have nothing, but the
light of Nature to guide them, and this light makes no discovery of Christ:
but yet, the light shines with them; a light which will show them there is a
God, and discover to them, that this God is Eternal and powerful. So that
(says the Apostle) they are without excuse, because, that when they knew God,
they glorified, him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations; they improved not what light they had, nor became thankful for
it, nor obedient to it. Christians are much more inexcusable, for besides that
they have an equal share in Natural light, and have the same dictates of
Natural conscience with others, there is much more of Christ, and his Gospel
manifested to them. Christ tells the Jews, Mat. 21.32. That John came unto
them in a way of righteousness, and they believed not, but Publicans and
Harlots believed in him, and you (says he) when you had seen it repented not
afterward, that you might believe. Christians have the preaching of the
Gospel, the preaching of Faith, and of repentance, and they repent not that
they might believe; you will say, but it is God that must give a power to
repent, he gave unto Gentiles, repentance unto life. I answer, repentance is
taken either more largely, or more strictly. More stricty it signifies, the
turning of the heart from all Sin unto God; this indeed is the work of God, he
alone has an hand upon the heart of man: but more largely it is taken for the
turning from some sin, and the performance of external discipline: now as to
this, the Lord denies unto none a sufficiency of grace, and if men do not what
in them lies, they are without excuse.

3. Finally, It is most certain, that God (whether he gives sufficient grace
to all, or no, condemns none but for sin. I have showed you at large, that a
sinners destruction is of, and from himself as the meritorious cause. If
indeed, God did either condemn any righteous person, or were any way obliged to
give out effectual grace to all, and did not, this indeed would argue
unrighteousness with God; but he does neither of these, his wrath will indeed
one day be revealed against them, to whom Christ and his Gospel were never
revealed, to whom grace sufficient to bring them to Heaven, and Eternal life
was never given; but it shall never be revealed, but (as the Apostle says)
against the ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men: now certainly, God cannot
be unrighteous in punishing unrighteousness or ungodliness. If God indeed were
a debtor for his grace to his creature, he might be charged with
unrighteousness, if he did not give it out; but he does not deal out death and
destruction, but as a wages, nor Salvation, and Eternal life, but as free gift?
Who asks a reason, why August Caesar, did not bestow gifts upon all his
Courtiers in proportion with those bestowed on Maecenas? We may say of God as
to all his dispensations of grace, Placuit, hoc satis est; ubi non aliud jus
aut ratio, ipsa voluntas jus and ratio est; that is, It so pleased God, that is
enough; where there is no other right or reason, the very will of God is Law,
and reason enough: Besides, if the distributions of Divine grace were equal,
how should God to any show forth the riches of his Grace? Let me but acquaint
you with a passage of Augustine, upon this Argument.

Do thou ask, (says he) why grace is not given to all according to desert?
I answer, because God is merciful: you will say, Why is not God merciful to
all? I answer, (says he) because he is just. In this (says he) that grace is
given freely, he shows what grace does, and works in those to whom it is
given: Let us not therefore be unthankful to God, that according to the good
pleasure of his will, and for the praise of the glory of his grace; he has
delivered us from so great a death, whereas if he should deliver none, yet, he
would not be unjust. -- Let him therefore who is delivered, love grace; let him
who is not delivered, acknowledge justice; if Divine goodness be understood in
remitting the debt, Justice also may be understood in exacting of it, no way is
there any iniquity found with God. But you will say then, Why is there in the
case of Infants, yea, of Twins such a difference? Is it not (says he) the like
Question; why in a diverse cause, there is the same judgment; and the Workmen
in the Vineyard, who wrought the whole day, had but a Penny, as they had who
had wrought but one hour? The Case was different, the judgment the same; they
murmured, what says the Master of the Vineyard to them, Volo. I will make the
last like unto the first. Thus because bounty was showed to some, there was no
iniquity toward others, so far as respects Justice, and Grace. As to the
guilty person that is saved, God says, I will: As to others he says, Take
what is thy own, and go thy way. I will give unto this man, that which I do ow
unto him: Is thine eye evil, because mine is good? If he shall say, and why not
unto me? Here he shall hear, Who art thou, who disputest with God? Whom thou
find as to one man a bountiful giver, as to another, a just exactor, as to
none at all, unjust; for whereas he should be just, if he should punish both;
he that is saved, has indeed reason to give thanks; he that is damned, has no
cause to find fault.

I wish all those, who so talk of Fathers, would show us, that they were the
Children of this ancient Father, to whom that name is usefully given. But I
come to the Application of this discourse.

1. Use. In the first place, let this Caution you, against an hasty listing
your selves in the Number of those, who so cry up Universal grace, and a
sufficiency of the means of grace for all, both the means of purchase, and of
Application; I must confess it is a plausible point, and appears to us very
pleasing, as well as reasonable, that God should not punish any, nor condemn
any to whom he has not given a sufficiency of grace, and assistances in order
to their Salvation: but as smooth and plausible as it appears, take heed of
too hasty embracing it: it leads to strange notions in Divinity, as you may
partly learn from this discourse; the maintaining, ordinatam sufficientiam, an
ordained sufficiency (for we are not now speaking of the value of the merits of
the blood of Christ in it self) in the Death of Christ, for all those who shall
perish, as well as for those who shall be saved: it will lead you either to
deny that Christ's death was any purchase at all, or to affirm, that Christ
purchased a possibility for some to be saved, but under an impossible
condition, (let it be Natural, or Moral, the absurdity is the same;) for so it
must be, if there were an Eternal Election, or except man has a power of
himself to repent, and believe, etc. And the maintaining of a sufficiency of
grace, given to all for the Application of Salvation, will lead you to
maintain; That there is a Salvation, may be had without a Christ; That the
Heathens may be saved, by the light of Nature; And that any Christians may be
saved without any special operation of the Spirit of grace, indeed without any
grace at all, taken in a strict, and proper sense: Doctrines of that
consequence, that although it may be possible that those who hold such things
may be saved, as having some further work of God upon their hearts, than they
understand, and will own; yet, I fear it will be found impossible, that any who
have tasted the grace of God no further, should ever come in the Kingdom of
God. Let not therefore the smoothness and plausibility of such notions in the
sound of them, deceive any of you; for it is but a sound, and no more: And if
the consequences of those notions be thoroughly considered, and examined, they
will be found at last to bottom in such strange notions, and apprehensions of
the Nature of God, as do no way suit the perfect nature of the Divine, and
Supreme being, and what the Scripture reveals concerning God; yea, and the
very light of Nature, and natural reason will evince it to us, upon the
Hypothesis of Gods being the first and Supreme being, and the Fountain of all
good; and the Lord Jesus Christ's being Eternal God, and equal with the Father.

2. Use. This discourse calls once more aloud unto all, To walk up to the
light which they have. Though we deny, that God gives unto all, yea, that he
gives to any (unless such as are ordained unto life) a sufficiency of grace,
and gracious assistances in order to their eternal Salvation; yet we say, God
grants to all, though in very different degrees, some means. The very
Heathens have something of God manifested to them, and manifested in them: For
the invisible things of God, (says the Apostle) are manifested by the things
that are made, even his eternal power, and Godhead: they have natural light,
and a natural reason, and something of a natural conscience too. The works of
Creation they have, and the works of Providence, showing them a great deal of
the eternal power and Godhead of God; sufficient to convince them that there
is a God, a Great, Infinite, Powerful God; for he leaves not men without
witness, giving the very Heathens fruitful times and seasons. But I am not
speaking unto Heathens, you that are Christians have yet further means, though
in different degrees too. All have the Scriptures, Protestants have them in
their own Language, so as they may read, and in a great measure understand what
they read; all have the Ministry of the Word, they have the Gospel preached to
them; though it is true, that also is in very different degrees; yet all have
something of what they call a moral Season, and are persuaded, and entreated to
turn unto God. This we say, is not a sufficient means to bring a Soul unto
Heaven: if God does not more for Souls, than let them have the benefit of the
works of Creation, showing them his glory, and the benefit of the light of
Nature and Reason, and the works of his common Providence; yea, and of the
Scriptures, and the preaching of them; and that not only in a cold, flat, and
dead, and dull manner, but in the most lively, powerful manner; they will never
repent, never believe, and turn unto God: Paul may plant, and Apollo may water
long enough, if God does not give the increase. It is not in him that
Preaches, and persuades, nor in him that Prays, and hears, but in God
that shows mercy; he must give both to will, and to do; he must give
repentance unto life, and be both the Author, and the finisher of our Faith.
But yet I say, all these are means, some of them very great and excellent
means; and the highest in the order of external means: And though they be not
sufficient, though used with the best natural improvements of our own will, and
power, to bring us to Heaven; yet sufficient to render us without excuse unto
God, if we do not make a due, and just improvement of them. Let me therefore
plead with you, that you would live up to the means of grace which God gives
you. That sort of people amongst us, whom we call Quakers, call to men to
Hearken to the light within them: I do not well understand what they mean by
the light within us; but thus much is certain, that all men have a light within
them, and they have a light without them. The light without them is the light
of the works of God in Nature, and of his works of Providence; The Scriptures,
and the Ministry of the Word: all men have some, or other, or all of these. All
men have also a light within them, the light of Nature, and of Reason: This
light (as I have showed you) is not sufficient to show a man the way to Heaven,
but it is enough to show a man much of God, and much of his duty; and the way
to obtain a full and sufficient light, to bring him to glory, is for him to
walk up to the light which he has: This will be the condemnation, that when
light is come into the world, men love darkness more than light, because their
hearts, because their deeds are evil. But to shut up this Discourse.

3. Use. In the last place, What an obligation does this lay upon the children
of God, to cry out with holy David, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is
within me, bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and sing of all his
benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquity, and heals all thy diseases. Who
redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with lovingkindness, and
tender mercy. To heighten your souls apprehensions of the Divine goodness
extended to you, and raise up your hearts in the high praises of God, I shall
but offer Two things to your Meditation, with which I shall shut up this
Discourse.

1. Consider, What is done unto you. God has undoubtedly given unto you a
sufficient grace: The sufficiency lost in Adam, is restored to you by the Lords
giving Christ to you; I can do all things, (says the Apostle) through Christ
that strengthens me. So that God may say to you, (as to his Vineyard, Isa. 5.
What could I have done more for my Vineyard, than I have done?) What could I
have done more for such a soul, than I have done? God has displayed the riches
of his grace upon your souls. God could do no more for you than he has done.
God has nothing more to give, than grace and glory; he has given you grace,
special, distinguishing grace: Glory is hereafter to be revealed, in the mean
time special effectual grace is glory begun.

2. Consider, Secondly, Why to you? to you rather than unto others; others may
easily understand, Why not to them? because they despised the riches of his
Grace, they sinned against their natural light, they lived not up to their
light of Revelation. But Why to you? Did not you also sin against your light?
Did you make that improvement of the works of God, the light of your natural
Reason, or Conscience that you ought to have done? If not, Why has God done
more for you, than for them; discovered more of Christ unto you, than unto
them? Here you will be lost, and at last be forced to resolve it into this; God
has showed me mercy, because he would show me mercy, and has extended
compassion to me, only because he would extend compassion. Oh sit down alone
sometimes, and say, My soul, Why should the God of grace show mercy unto thee?
Have thou not sinned often against the very light of Nature, and Reason? Have
thou not despised the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and trampled under foot
the blood of the Son of God? What high praises of God, are high enough for
every true believers heart? How precious should Christ be unto his soul? How
can he ever have thoughts of God high enough, or with his tongue sing the
praises of God loud enough? How does he stand concerned to cry out with David,
Awake my glory? Oh! What manner of person should a believer be in all boliness
of conversation? He can certainly never do enough for that God, who has done
so much for him, and has made such a difference betwixt him, and others: This
is praising of God, not in word and in tongue only, but indeed, and in truth:
Oh this is to perfect holiness! It is for that God who has from eternity
chosen you to obtain everlasting life, and has left others to perish in their
iniquity; for that God who in the dispensations of his gracious Providence, in
the execution of that purpose, has given his Son for you, to purchase a
certainty of Salvation for your Souls: who has sent the Ministers of his
Gospel to you, publishing this Salvation by Christ, when others never heard of
the Gospel; nay, who has done much more than this, when others sat under the
Gospel, and their hearts were never wrought upon by the preaching of it; God
has especially changed, and wrought upon your hearts, and conquered your souls
into the obedience of his Gospel. I shall conclude with that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 107.1, 2. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has redeemed
from the hand of the enemy.

SERMON LII.
Romans 11.33. -- His ways past finding out.
I Have (as you know) in this Discourse, formerly made use of this Text to
found a Proposition upon, concerning the unsearchableness of the ways of Divine
Providence, (for of those ways it is, that this Text speaks) I beheld, (says
Solomon Eccl. 8.17.) all the words of God, that a man cannot find out the ways
of God which are done under the Sun, yea, though a man labor to find it out,
yet be shall not find it, yea, though a wise man think to know it, yet he shall
not find it. I have showed you that the ways of Divine Providence cannot be
found out, 1. As to the Compass and Latitude of them. 2. As to the Tendencies
of them. 3. As to the Method and Tract of them. 4. As to the Indication of
them. 5. Lastly, As to the Reason of them. This is as true, with reference to
the motions of special and effectual grace, as to the workings of Providence,
in its more ordinary and common motions, relating to the affairs of the World.
Now one of the Reasons why the ways of the Lord cannot be found out, is because
he does not always tread the same steps. God does not always do the same work
in the same method: and this is true as to the motions of Providence, in the
distribution of special grace, as well as with reference to its motions,
respecting the affairs of this life. I shall not pretend to find out these
depths, I shall only Discourse some of these distributions, so far as to show
you, that they are reasonable motions. I shall first Discourse shortly
concerning the works of Divine Providence, in the bringing home of Souls unto
himself, in the work of Conversion and Regeneration.

2. Secondly, In Gods carrying on of his work in the souls of his Saints,
thereby preparing, and making them meet for the Inheritance of light.

That which I intend at this time to speak to, is the variety of Gods ways in
bringing home souls to himself: Even there the way of God is like the way of an
Eagle in the Air, a Serpent on a Rock, and a Ship on the Sea, which can none of
them be trackt, nor found out in the methods of their motions. God in the
Converting of souls unto himself, does not keep an uniform motion, nor tread
certain steps; but sometimes he works one way, sometimes another; sometimes
by one means, sometimes by another. For some order in this Discourse, I shall
Discourse,

1. Concerning the varieties of Divine Providence in the Conversion of souls.

2. What reasonable account may be given of that variety of Gods motions in
this thing.

3. What practical conclusions may be drawn from hence, or inferred upon this
Discourse. I begin with the first of these.

Quest. 1. What varieties of Divine Providence are observable in this great
work of changing hearts, and the Conversion of souls unto God?

The truth is, there are some that will understand none at all; poor souls,
they will understand no other Conversion, nor Regeneration, but in Baptism;
every one that is Baptized, is Regenerated. There was indeed such a thing as
Conversion, when the world was all Jews and Heathens; and to be brought to
embrace the Doctrine of the Gospel: But for any such thing, as the turning the
heart from sin unto God, this they understood not; and indeed by their lives,
one would judge they did not. But I am speaking to those, whom I believe taught
better things, and who believe other things; surely conversion, or turning from
Idols, and erroneous Opinions, is not all that we read in Scripture of the
change of the heart, and turning unto God: But in the Converting of sinners,
you shall observe a great variety, chiefly remarkable in Three things.

1. As to the time, the particular time of man's life, when God is pleased to
call home souls unto himself; some in their youth, some in their age, etc.

2. As to the External means, which God makes use of in this work.

3. As to the manner of Gods dealing with souls, in the Converting,
Regenerating, and bringing home souls unto himself.

1. First, As to the time. This our blessed Lord excellently sets out to us
in that Parable, Mat. 20. Where he tells us: That the Kingdom of heaven is
like unto an householder, who went out early to find out laborers, whom he
might send into his Vineyard; some he called early in the morning, some about
the sixth hour, some about the ninth hour, some at the eleventh hour; he called
them in at several hours. The Kingdom of God is the Church of God, which
properly consists only of such as are Saints by effectual-calling; though
others that are visibly and professionally such, have that denomination, being
mixed with others, who are the true members of the Lord Jesus Christ. Gods
calling men into his Vineyard, is his adding to the number of such as shall be
saved. Now God calls some early in their youth, some in their middle-age,
some (but very few) in their old age; some even at their dying hour, though of
them there be, of all, the rarest examples. As God had Nazarites from the womb,
so he sanctifies some from the womb; Samuel was from the very womb Dedicated
to God, and accepted of God. God tells Jeremiah, Jer. 1.5. That before he
came out of the womb, he sanctified him. I am a-ware, that Sanctifying in that
Text may be taken in another sense, as it signifies a Separation to the Office
of a Prophet; and so it may be understood, to be interpreted by the following
words; and ordained thee to be a Prophet: but why it should be limited to that
sense, I do not understand. St. Paul says, He was separated from his Mothers
womb, and called by his grace: but there separating must be understood of Gods
design and purpose, for we know Paul was a blasphemer, a persecutor. But
certain it is, that God calls some very young; Timothy, from a child, was
acquainted with the Scriptures. Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.1, 2. at eight years old
began to reign, and ver. 2. did that which was right in the sight of the Lord;
and ver. 3. at sixteen years of age he set upon his famous reformation. It is
said of Abijam, the young Son of Jeroboam, that he only of the house of
Jeroboam, went to his grave in peace, because there was some good thing found
in him. Sometimes, and most ordinarily, God works upon peoples hearts in
their riper state, of which are the most plentiful instances in Scripture. You
read of the thief upon the Cross, converted in the last day of his life: and
what we find in Scripture, we find God still doing in the dispensations of his
Providence. The age in which we have lived, has afforded many instances of
children, whose hearts we may charitably judge, from the accounts we have had of
them, God had in their very childhood Regenerated, and Sanctified them. Blessed
be God, we are not without some instances of persons, and those not a few, whom
God has wrought upon in their more adult estate, and some also in their old
age; though Examples of that still are, and ever were very rare. This is the
first variety, obvious to every Eye.

2. A second variety observable, is in the means which God is pleased to make
use of: For these God never tied himself to the same means. The preaching of
the Gospel, was always made use of by God, as the most ordinary means: It was,
at the preaching of Peter, that Three Thousand Souls were in one day converted;
and the Apostle tells us, that it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching
to save them that believed, 1 Cor. 1.21. And the Apostle tells us, that faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. But yet, God has made use
(though more rarely) of other means: the means which God first used to the
Eunuch, seems to be his reading in the Prophet Isaiah. Sometimes God made use
of Providence: you read of many converted, and induced to believe in Christ,
upon the account of his Miracles; and still God is pleased to use the same
variety of means. Generally indeed, God makes use of the preaching of the
Gospel; sometimes he sanctifies the reading of the word; sometimes he makes
use of Providence. I think, I have sometimes read concerning Waldus, the
Father of those ancient Protestants, called the Waldenses, that the seeing of
one of his companions suddenly drop down dead, was the first means of his
conversion; we read of a great dread that fell upon People, upon the sudden
death of Ananias, and Saphirah. My self have known one that would acknowledge,
that his hearing of Bells Ring for persons dead, was a great means to beget
serious thoughts in him, First, of turning unto God. It pleased God to make use
of Manasses his Chains, to turn his heart; and the imprisonment of Paul, Acts
16. to convert the Jailer, and his whole Family. Sometimes God uses the
instructions of Parents; sometimes one means, sometimes another, as it pleases
him.

3. A third observable variety, respects, The manner of Gods working upon
Souls. It is true, in some (especially two) respects God deals a-like withal.

1. He forces no Soul, he indeed makes it willing, and gives to will; but
the Soul in its conversion to God, moves willingly, and freely.

2. Secondly, He puts forth an Almighty power, as to every Soul that is
converted. The Soul is made willing, but it is in the day of the Lords power,
Psalm. 110.3. But yet the effects of this power are not always the same; all are
not drawn in the like manner, some are drawn by a Silken Thread; others by
Iron-Fetters: some God works upon in a more rough way, some in a more soft, and
gentle way. Some are a little, or not at all under the Spirit of bondage:
others are Months, and Years under it; they are filled with the Lords terrors,
and cry unto him out of the belly of Hell, before he hears them: some are
drawn with the Cords of love only, others with the Chains of fears. Some are as
it were insensibly drawn, and the Spirit of God as it were, slippeth into their
Souls without any noise; they become Temples of the Holy Ghost, and there is
neither the noise of Ax, nor Hammer heard about the Spiritual building; others
are terrified like the Jailer, Acts 16. cast down to the Earth like Paul, both
in order to conversion, and their reception of converting Grace.

2. Secondly, You shall observe, That God sometimes makes his way to the heart
by the head, sometimes, he begins at the heart, and by that makes his way to
the head: my meaning is, sometimes God begins his work upon knowing persons,
who have been Catechized out of the Law, and from Children have had a knowledge
of the Holy Scriptures, sanctifying their first Principles to them, and
reflecting upon their Hearts and Consciences, the notions of truth, which they
have been bred up in, the Holy Spirit bringing to their remembrance, what of
God they have formerly heard from Ministers, Parents, or Goverours. As to
others, God makes his way from the heart, to the head. They have great degrees
of ignorance, as to the truths of God; but God blesses his word so far, as
that they can apprehend, they are in a lost condition, and must look for
another righteousness besides their own, and take up a new course of life; they
hear of a Savior come into the World, of a fullness in him, and a readiness to
save unto the utmost, those who by faith come unto him: this makes them to
inquire, return and come, to seek for Spiritual knowledge as for Silver, and to
dig for it, as for hidden treasure, and by following on to know the Lord, they
came to know him. But this is enough to have hinted you, as to the varieties to
be observed in Gods methods, of working in the conversion of Souls. Let me in
the next place show the reasonableness of the Divine workings in this great
work.

1. And first as to the variety observed in point of time.

1. Some are converted young. Possibly God may do it, that he may Crown the
endeavors of Parents, and Governors, and thereby engage others to take care
of the Souls of their Correlations committed to their charge. Some Parents are
very solicitous for the Spiritual good of their children, whetting upon them
their lost condition by Nature, often minding them of Eternity, and calling
upon them, to remember their Creator in the days of their youth; now where any
will do this, God takes notice of it, and will often Crown those Domestic
labors with a desired success; for the encouragement of others, God gives in
to their prayers, the Souls of their Children oft-times, while yet they are
Children. It is said of Monica, the Mother of Augustine, that she was a woman
of many tears, and prayers for her Son; and Ambrose was wont to comfort her,
telling her that it was impossible, that a Child of so many tears should
perish. It is not impossible indeed that some should perish, who have been
Children of many tears, and prayers, for whom godly Mothers have travailed in
pain again, till Christ should be formed in them: there is no merit in our
prayers, and tears, neither has God made us any promise, that he will convert,
and Eternally save all our Children, on whose behalf we labor and wrestle with
God; but as Hannah obtained her Child by Prayer, upon which account it was,
that she named him Samuel, Begged of God; so I doubt not but that there are many
good Parents, that by Prayer have from God obtained the Conversion, and
Regeneration of their Children; and that early, that the Lord might as it were
show them, that he gave in the Souls of their Children to their prayers, and
their godly instructions, exhortations, reproofs, catechizing, etc. If we
should never see grace appearing in tender years, we should conclude it in
vain, during those years, to use any means with them, tending to such an end.
The Apostle tells Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. That from a Child he had known the
Scriptures; and 2 Timothy 1.5. He mentions an unfeigned faith that was both in
his Grandmother Lois, and in his Mother Eunice, and he was persuaded in him
also, in him (doubtless in great measure by their means.) God honoring their
labors with the conversion of Timothy.

2. Secondly, Possibly God does intend some elect vessels of his no long time
in the World. God intended Abijam the Son Jeroboam, but a short time in the
World, and therefore there was early found in him some good thing. I observed
that amongst all the Patriarchs, which are reckoned up, Genesis 5. He of them who
(before Enos) lived the shortest time, lived 895 years, the rest lived longer,
only Enoch lived but 365, about a third part of the time of the other. It is
said, He walked with God, and was not, for God took-him; and we see this of
times in our experience, God takes away those in their youth, whom he calls
in their Childhood and youth. You have an observation, that beautiful Children,
or Children of composed serious countenances, (when very young) or such as
being very young are very toward, and fond of their Books, seldom live long;
how true that is I cannot say, but you shall (I believe) more certainly observe
it of such who earlily have their hearts changed, and are converted unto God.
God sets those to work young, to whom he has not appointed long time to
work; of all whom God has given unto Christ, he must lose none; and though
Infants elect, are saved upon the Covenant of grace, before it appears to the
World, that they have laid hold upon it, or are in a capacity in order to it,
to exercise their reason; yet, that is not Gods usual way: where he allows to
any a longer life, till they come to exercise their reason, he expects they
should keep the ordinary road to Heaven, by repentance and faith, and in order
to this he works upon their hearts betimes, giving them repentance unto life,
and faith to lay hold upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. Thirdly, Possibly God does intend some a longer time in the World, but has
designed them for some great and eminent service in it; such the Lord uses to
call betimes. I will show it you in two or three eminent instances. The first
is that of Samuel. Samuel was to be a great Prophet, yea, and a Judge in
Israel; God accordingly betimes took him unto his more special tutorage: he was
designed by his Mother, and from the very time of his weaning, by her dedicated
unto the Lord; and the Lord while he was yet a Child, eminently communicated
his mind to him; as you read in the story, 1 Samuel 2.3. chap. Josiah was a
Second. God had designed him for a great and eminent service, he was Prophesied
of many years before he was born, and that by name, as who should work a great
and eminent Reformation, and he did do that. God earlily prepares him for it,
he was but 8 years old when he began to reign, and he began to seek the Lord
God of his Fathers; and when was but 16 years of age, he began a work of
Reformation, of a long and most grossly corrupted state. Timothy is a third. God
had designed him for an Evangelist, to have a great hand in settling the
Gospel Church. God called him very young, from a Child he knew the Holy
Scriptures, which are able to make the man of God wise unto Salvation. To these
I may add an instance of an eminent Prince in our own Nation. King Edward the
Sixth, who laid the first Principles of our reformation; (King Henry the 8th.
did little, and what he did seemed rather to be out of interest so biassing
him, than otherwise) God was pleased in his very young and tender years, to
seize upon his heart. He had intended him (as the event proved) but a short
life, and he had laid out for him a very great work, to purge such an Augean
Stable, as the Popish rabble had left. Two observations I have made upon
reading the Scripture. 1. That when God had long kept some women his servants
barren, they ordinarily proved the Mothers of very eminent Children. Rachel,
Manoahs wife, Hanna, and Elizabeth, are instances of that. 2. That God very
often when he designed Persons for some eminent work, prepared them for it, by
an early seizing upon their hearts, and sanctifying them from the Womb unto
himself. And this will appear to you very reasonable upon a double account.

1. Those which do a great deal of work for God, must have a great deal of time
to do it in. All humane actions you know require time, and a proportion of time
according to the work.

2. Those who are to excel in work must not be much blotted in their previous
conversation. Jacob in his blessing of Reuben, Genesis 49. v. 4. has this
expression, Reuben shall not excel, because he went up unto his Fathers bed, he
went up unto my Couch. God seldom allows any one eminently to excel, whose
youth has been stained with many eminent and notorious blots; they may come to
Heaven upon their conversion, but they shall not excel in the world. I can
think but of one instance in Scripture to the contrary, which is that of Saul,
he was a persecutor (himself tells us) and a blasphemer, yet received to
mercy; but he says, it was because he did it ignorantly. St. Paul's
persecution was not rooted in a malice against godliness, and holiness, but in
an error of judgment: he says of himself, that he verily thought, that he
ought to do many things against Jesus of Nazareth. There is a great deal of
difference betwixt scandalous sinners: one man is profane, and a persecutor
only by a mistake, another man is so by principle. St. Paul was of the former
sort: it is true, he was a profane, and mischievous persecutor, a profane
blasphemer; but it was by a mistake, not that he had any prejudice, or ill
Opinion of the ways of holiness, which Christ's Doctrine led to; for he was
never, that we read of, scandalous in those things which the light of Nature,
Reason, or the Law of Moses required, or forbad; but only as to the matters of
the Gospel, which his Countrymen did not own, especially those who had
Educated him; for after the strictest Sect of Religion amongst the Jews, he
lived a Pharisee; so that his scandalous actions were bottomed only upon a
mistake. But others now are profane by a principle: What principle? not a
principle of error in the understanding, not rightly conceiving of the truths
of God: But a principle of malice and hatred in the will and affections, to any
thing which crosses their lusts; they hate the image of God wherever they
see it; they would have the strait-gate wide enough for Drunkards, Adulterers,
Sabbath Breakers, Liars, all sorts of sinners against the very light of Nature
and Reason, and the most indisputed Texts of Scriptures, to enter in, and
persecute all those who oppose them in this thing; (a sin under the Gospel very
near to, if not the sin against the Holy Ghost) you never read of one of these
converted. Now these and suchlike other profane persons, are not only
scandalous in the Eyes of Gods people, but in the Eyes of the men of the world:
and although God sometimes changes the hearts of debauched, and profane
persons, (though seldom the hearts of persecutors from this principle) yet he
rarely suffers them to excel, or to be in any eminent station, or of any
remarkable note in his Church: when as therefore he designeth any soul to any
eminent station, or place in his Church, or to do him any eminent service in
any civil state, the Providence of God ordinarily seizes upon their hearts in
their youth, and keeps them from those debaucheries in their life, as may
expose them to the obloquie of the world; and make them say, Is Saul also
amongst the Prophets? For a former profane, and notoriously scandalous life,
would much hinder that reputation of theirs in the eye of the world; which is
necessary in a rational way, to make what they shall afterward say, and do for
God, acceptable unto the world. Hence it is that you shall observe, that
Ministers, if they be lewd in their lives, seldom or never do any good in their
places, Ducimur praeceptis, trahimur exemplis; they are reasonably judged but
to act a part, who call men to holiness, and live unholily themselves: every
one is ready to say to them, Physician, heal thy self, and to say within
themselves, If these men did in very deed believe what they talk to us, they
would not themselves live contrary to what they teach: And although a converted
soul (who has formerly been profane) does not so, yet his former life is a
wound upon his honor and reputation, which is of great concern to those, to
whom he preaches. God therefore ordinarily where he designeth a person for an
eminent station, or work, does prepare him for it, seizing him when young for
himself.

4. Fourthly, God calls some in their old age, at their very last hour; That
there may be no room left for any soul to despair of Divine grace. It was
Augustines Observation of old, He called one, that none might despair, and but
one, that none might presume. God calls men into his Vineyard, some of them
at the eleventh hour, that the oldest sinners might have hope; that the most
decrepit sinner might not say, I am a dry tree, it is too late for me to think
of repenting, and turning unto God: yea, indeed God may be conceived for this
reason, to call some at all hours; some at the sixth, some at the nineth, some
at the eleventh hour; that sinners in all the periods of their lives might have
hope, and some grounds of encouragement to turn unto God, when they see, that
at all hours, some have been converted, and turned unto God, and have found
favor with him. But this is enough to have spoken, to have shown you the
reason of the variety which the Providence of God shows us, as to this his
first work, of conversion and bringing home souls with respect to time. Let us
now a little consider the reasonableness of the Providence of God, making use
of a variety of External means; most ordinarily (I told you) he makes use of
the public preaching of the Gospel. Thus you read of most in Scripture
converted, sometimes of the private instruction of friends: Thus when John the
Baptist's preaching, had been blessed to send Two of his Disciples unto Christ;
Andrew being one, he brings Peter his Brother; and when Christ had found
Philip, Philip was an instrument to bring Nathaniel; and the woman of Samaria,
Joh. 5. was an instrument to commend Christ to those of her City, though
indeed, when they came to hear and see Christ, they told her, That now they
believed, not so much for what she had told them, as for what themselves had
heard, and seen; and sometimes God makes use of other Providence, as I have
more largely showed you in my former Discourse. Now this is very reasonable,

1. That God may honor his own Ordinances. He has appointed the foolishness
of preaching for the salvation of the Elect. He has said, Hear, and your souls
shall live. He has told us, that Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God: and has told us, How shall they believe, on him of whom they have
not heard, and how shall they hear, without a preacher, or preach except they
be sent? It is but reasonable therefore, that God having set up such an
Ordinance as Preaching, and established such an order of Officers in his
Church, as that of Pastors and Teachers, should in the ordinary, and most usual
course of his Providence, concur with it, and bless it, and the labors of
those, who are employed in it, to the conversion and bringing home of souls: He
has said of old, Wheresoever I record my name to dwell, there I will meet my
people and bless them. Gods name is stamped upon the Ordinance of Preaching; he
has Commissionated his Ministers, to go, Preach, and Baptize; he has told
them, that he will be with them to the end of the world. God must honor his
own Institution, and give a being to his own word.

2. Yet secondly, It is also reasonable that we should understand, That God is
not tied up to any means, and know, that Conversion is Gods work, not a
Ministers; Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God must give the
increase: now this would not be understood, if God never used any other means
than the preaching of Ministers to convert souls. God will therefore sometimes
work immediately, sometimes by different means; Reading the word; (as in the
case of the Eunuch) the counsels, reproofs, and exhortations of others, as in
the case of Peter, and Nathaniel: Afflictions, as in the case of Manasses:
Miracles, as in the case of many, of whom you read in the Gospel, that they
were converted; to let us see, that God, although he uses means, yet is not
limited to them.

3. Thirdly, God may be conceived to use the means of private instructions, and
counsels for the encouragement of all persons, set in relation to others, to a
faithful performance of their duties, and a watching over, and for souls
committed to their trusts. It discourageth all sorts of labors, when we see
nothing of that fruit from it, which we expected, or intended. But of this, I
have spoke before.

Further yet, to show you the reasonableness of the variety of Providence in
the manner of converting, and bringing home of souls unto himself, I noted it
to you in Two things.

1. God sometimes makes his way by the head, to the heart; sometimes by the
heart, to the head. This appears exceeding reasonable.

1. That God may commend knowledge of spiritual things to us, and (as I said
before) encourage duty. We are persons whose understandings are pitifully
imperfect in the things of God, and are very prone to take up false notions and
measures; and because the influx and operation of the Spirit of God, is by all
men (of sound judgment in the things of God) determined necessary to
conversion, we are apt to think that we have nothing to do with our children,
and servants, but only to wait until God shall move the waters, (I mean change
their hearts) and all Instruction and Catechizing is needless; and that
bringing up youth to a knowledge of the form of sound words, is only to learn
them to be Hypocrites, etc. God therefore to show us the advantage of spiritual
knowledge, and to mind us of, and encourage us to our spiritual duty, is pleased
sometimes to make his way to the head, by the heart; reflecting the notions of
truth, which have been instilled into us while we are young upon our
consciences, making that knowledge instrumental to our conversion, and eternal
Salvation; and so letting the governors of others know, that they have not
labored in vain with the souls committed to their charge.

2. On the other side, God sometimes making his way by the heart to the head,
making impressions upon the hearts of some poor blind ignorant Souls, and
setting them on work to inquire after Salvation; lets us know that the
conversion of a Sinner is a work of grace, and divine power, not a mere
rational effect of notions imprinted upon the understanding, nor of moral
Suasion, (alas these poor creatures possibly are not fit objects for such a
thing;) but the finger of God is in it, who has the hearts of all men in his
hand, and turns them as it pleases him: thus by this variety of his
Providence, he does both honor his own ordinance, and show the profit, and
usefulness of means, and also the mighty power that is put forth, in the
changing of the heart by effectual grace, both which it is necessary the World
should be convinced of. And this is enough for a reasonable account of the
second variety.

The last variety which I observed, was Gods keeping some Souls a longer time
under the Spirit of bondage than others. Some he is pleased to draw to himself
more sweetly, rather by arguments of love, than terrors and arguments of wrath;
others he is pleased more to fill with terrors, yea, and to keep their Souls a
long time under them: and this we find by experience, is oftimes matter of some
trouble to others, whom God has dealt more gently with; they begin to doubt
and suspect whether God has wrought any real change in them, because they have
not been in the belly of Hell, as others have been: now there may be a
reasonable account also given of this difference, though we must not pretend to
find out the bottom of the Divine counsels in this dispensation of his
Providence.

I shall say little of the difference of Natural complexions and constitutions,
which is not inconsiderable in this case. He is little read in men and women in
the World, who does not observe, that as in the earth, (of which man is made)
there is a great difference of Soil, that one Soil does more easily suck up a
shower of Rain, and digest it, than others. So in man there are some
complexions that are far more tenacious of grief, and impressive by fear, than
others are; (such are chiefly Melancholic, and some Phlegmatic complextons.)
Now it is true, God in his work of conversion, could cure this, but he
ordinarily does not work miraculously; and where God begins a work upon the
Souls of any who have bodies, which they inform of these sad, and dark
constitutions, it is not at all to be wondered, (they being Naturally more
prone to fears, and jealousies, to doubts and suspicions, and more tenacious of
grief, and sorrow,) if by the working, the Natural working of these passions,
to which their Natural complexion, and constitution, more fully subjecteth
them, if they be longer under the Spirit of bondage, than others. You will see
at the same case with them in other things exciting those passions, and unless
you would suppose, that God in the conversion of such, should work
miraculously, and alter their natural complexion, and constitution, it is not
reasonable to suppose that it should be otherwise, it is but according to the
natural workings of their Spirits, who can get off no occasions of sorrow and
trouble, so soon as others can, who are of more airy, and chearly constitutions.

2. But a Second reason of this variety, may reasonably be conceived to arise
from a difference of guilt. It is true, every sin deserved the Eternal, and
utmost wrath of God. Every sin is against an infinite God, and has a kind of
infinity, and unmeasurableness of guilt in it; but it is as true that every sin
does not lay a like load, and burden upon the conscience, nor is every sin
equally heinous in the sight of God; but is very much varied by the
circumstances of it, both by the circumstances of the fact, and of the persons
that commit it. Some sins do more Vastare and onerare conscientiam, and
consequently a Christian finds it an harder matter to persuade himself that God
will forgive him, than others: and hence it is not at all to be wondered, that
when God comes to call home such a Soul, a Manasses, a Saul, a Mary Magdalen,
etc. He makes them to feel more of his power, and terrors, and keeps them at a
longer distance, from any apprehensions of his love; they have more highly
provoked him, and possibly been a more eminent scandal; and it is but a
righteous thing with God to make them feel the smart of it.

3. A third thing, which may make this variety of God Providential dealings
appear unto us, not unreasonable, may be, The design which God has upon such a
converted Soul; and that either with respect unto others, or, with respect to
the carrying on of his work in his own Soul. 1. With respect unto others; when
God has a design to make some Soul eminently useful to the Souls of others.
The Apostle tells us, Heb. 2.18. That Christ was himself tempted, that he might
be able to succor those that are tempted; and blesses God, 2 Cor. 11.4. Who
(says he) comfort us in all tribulation, that we may be able to comfort
those which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God. It is said of Luther, that he was wont to say, that Three
things make a Divine, Temptations, Meditation and Prayers. Luther was himself a
man of great temptations, and by them became able to succor those that were
tempted. No knowledge is like experimental knowledge, none knows either how to
sympathize with, or how to succor those that are under temptations, desertions,
or any Soul-troubles, so well as those who themselves have been under them;
experience is a great Mistress: when therefore God has a design upon some
Souls, to make use of them for succor, and relief of others under Soul-troubles
and afflictions, he often first brings themselves under them, and supports and
comforts them, then they know how to speak a word in season, how to comfort and
relieve. 2. Again, God may be conceived reasonably to do it, upon a gracious
design, in order to carrying on of his work in their own Souls: we know not
what manner of Spirit we are of, God knows all our tempers, sees all our
inclinations and dispositions. 1. I have told you that some persons are more
complexioned to some sins than others. Every man has his (...), his proper
lust and corruption, by which he more ordinarily offends, than other ways;
God to prevent the breaking out of this corruption afterward, lays the Soul
under the load, and burden of it, and makes his former miscarriages of that
Nature, more exceedingly bitter unto him, that so he may see, how little fruit
he may afterward expect of those things of which he has been to that degree
ashamed, and which he has tasted to that degree bitter unto his Soul. 2. He
may possibly see some of more brisk, and airy tempers, more inclined to pride,
and being lifted up above measure, and therefore thinks fit to keep them longer
under the Spirit of bondage; as he did with Paul, after he had been rapt up
into the third Heaven, and heard unutterterable words, lest (as he says) he
should be exalted above measure, God gave him a thorn in the flesh. Thus now I
have given you some little account of the variety of Gods Providential
dispensations toward Souls, in the collation of the first grace; but now I have
done, I can only say with Job, Chap. 26.14. Lo these are parts of his ways,
but how little a portion is heard of him! The end of all this discourse is not
to pretend to give you all the reason of God in these his dispensations, for
who can by searching find out God, who can find out the Almighty unto
perfection? we must say such knowledge is too wonderful for us, but only to show
you, that this various way of Gods dealing with Souls, whom he intends to
bring to Heaven, is not such, but it will approve it self to the reason of
every reasonable Creature, and such as is very equitable, and proper for the
wise God, in order to the compassing of his most wise and glorious ends. Let me
now show you what use is proper for us to make of these meditations and
observations.

Use 1. In the first place this may mind us to take heed of a rash judgment,
either in our own case or in the cases of others; we are very prone to give our
selves needless trouble, and to pass unrighteous Judgments concerning the work
of God upon our own, and others Souls. One concludes he has as yet no work of
God upon his heart, he was never humbled, never so broken upon the Wheel, never
under such legal terrors, nor so long under the Spirit of bondage as some
others; he cannot give an account to himself of any certain time, nor of any
certain Sermon, when, or whereby God wrought upon, and changed his heart; and
we are too too ready, to sit in Judgment upon the work of God, also on the
Souls of others. You have heard that the ways of God are past finding out. God
does not always tread the same path, and the variety which God uses toward
Souls under different circumstances, and for different ends, is very
reasonable: we have all of us reason enough to be troubled if we do not find
this great work wrought in our Souls; but if we do find, that our hearts are
changed, that the work is done for the way or means, or time, which God has
taken or used to do it in, or by, we have no such reason to be sollicitous;
those who are come to work in the Vineyard at the Ninth, or Eleventh, hour
shall have their Penny, as well as those who were called, and came in at the
Sixth hour: God does not always work in the same order, and method, he is not
to be tracked in his ways. The conversion of the Soul lies in the change of
the heart; (I would not with any trust to Baptismal conversion, or
regeneration) If the heart be changed, if the Soul be renewed, according to the
Image of God; if old things be passed away in it, and all things become new,
whether it was done, this, or that way, by this, or that means, in this, or
that manner, is no just cause at all of trouble to us: God has several ways to
do his work by; we must pass a judgment upon our selves, from what we find
within our selves, the frames, and tempers of our Spirits; for what man knows
the things of a man, but the Spirit of a man, which is within him. But we must
judge of others from the change we see in their lives and conversations. Man
looks upon the outward appearance, but God looks upon the heart, 1 Samuel
16.7. If we look upon our Neighbor, and there appear no spots upon him, but
what may be the spot of Gods people; no marks of profaneness, or impiety
toward God, nor of unrighteousness toward man, but he appears to us one, who
herein exercised himself, to keep a good conscience both toward God, and
toward men, we ought to judge this person, one whose heart God has changed.
If we look into our own hearts, and can find that we truly love God, and hate
evil, that we are afraid to sin against God, and are desirous in all things to
please him, though we cannot find, that the ways of God with our Souls in our
conversion, have been like the ways of God with the Souls of other men; yet we
ought not in this case to judge, or to condemn our selves, Gods ways are not
alike with every Soul. Its work in the effect (as to the main) is alike, for it
is true, as to every man, that except he be born of water, and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; but his way of working is not the same.

Use 2. In the Second place, what you have heard affords great encouragement
to every Soul under any circumstance to turn unto God, that it may live, and
not dye. God calls into his Vineyard, at several hours; some he calls at
the Sixth, some at the Nineth, some at the Eleventh hour. Happy, thrice happy
are they, whom God finds at the Sixth hour, in their youth, and persuadeth to
go into his Vineyard; they ordinarily find not so hard a labor of the
new birth, they have the privilege of a longer familiarity, and acquaintance
with God, they have more opportunities of doing God service; God often honoreth
them to do him some more eminent service: but if you have slipped that hour, if
it be the Ninth hour; nay, if it be in the wane of your life; if it be toward
Evening with you, that you have nothing to do, but to repent and dye, singing
the Song of old Simeon. Now Lord, let thy servant depart in peace, for mine
eyes have seen thy Salvation; yet, thou have no cause to discourage thy self.
God does not work upon all Souls at one and the same period of time. Great
sinners have no reason to discourage themselves; the gate to Heaven may appear
something straiter to you, than unto others; you may have an harder work of it:
it is an hard thing for those that are accustomed to do evil, to do well: but
yet, if God will give you an heart to repent, if the Lord shall change your
hearts, and incline you to turn unto him, there is mercy with God even for you,
God can men make to bring forth fruit in their old age.

Use 3. Lastly (and with that I shall shut up this discourse.) This speaks
aloud unto all such as have the charge of others, as Parents, Masters, Tutors,
and Governors, to be daily laboring with them, for the good of their Souls,
using all possible means to bring them unto God. It is Solomon's advice, Ecc.
11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand be
slack; for thou know not, which shall prosper, this, or that, or whether
both shall be alike good: you that are Parents of Children, Masters of
Servants, in any relation Governors of youth; see what an engagement lies
upon you to bring up your Children, to Reading the word, Catechizing, to bring
them to hear faithful Preachers, sow the seeds of Spiritual learning, and
instruction in them, in the Morning of their lives: hearken not to those, who
would persuade you that Catechizing in your families is useless, and that a
Notional knowledge signifies nothing until God come to work in their hearts:
that is true, but ill applied, when used as a discouragement to the use of the
means of knowledge; God does his work by the use of means on our parts, and
Preaching is not the only means. God sometimes in the conversion of sinners
makes his way to their hearts by their heads, sanctifying notions of truth
dropped into Souls of persons in their tender years, and reflecting them many
years after upon the conscience; you know not which shall prosper, this or
that: use them to read the Scriptures, to be examined, questioned, and
catechized out of the Scriptures, to hear lively and powerful preaching; you
know not which shall prosper in order to the conversion of their Souls, and
turning them to God, this, or that, whether reading, or preaching, or
Family-instruction: God that can work without means, uses as you have heard a
variety of means, and does not limit himself to this, or that. Or whether both
may not prove alike good, God may use one means to begin, another to perfect;
one to plant, another to water; one for laying the foundation, another for
building thereon, and laying the cornerstone; and yet when the building is
finished, you shall see reason enough to cry, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us,
but to thy name be given the glory, to cry Grace, Grace unto it. The Knowing
person, when converted has usually (if not guilty of notorious sins against
his light) the easiest new birth, and the most quiet and peaceable life. Many
more doubts and fears, trouble those that are more imperfect in their knowledge
of the things of God, than trouble others. O let it not be said of you as it
was said of Herod, (upon occasion of the killing of his own Child amongst the
rest of the Infants) That it was better to be Herod's Hog, than his Child. Let
it not be said of any of you, that it is better to be your Horse, or Swine, or
other Beast, than your Child, or Servant, or Scholar. For your Beasts, you
provide all things suitable to their Natures, and capacities. O remember your
Children have Spiritual beings, and are born into the World with a capacity of
Eternity, nay under a certain ordination to a miserable or blessed Eternity.

SERMON LIII.
Isaiah. 28.29. This also comes from the Lord, who is wonderful in Counsel,
and excellent in working.
THE Particle This, in the front of my Text, is relative to what went before,
where the Prophet had been speaking of some works of Divine Providence, and
those but of an inferior Nature, if compared with others; the discretion by
which men having diverse sorts of Grain, and Seeds, are taught to get them out
of their husks, and ears, by instruments not always the same, but suited to the
respective Grain, or Seed, they intend to get out. Of this it is, that the Text
speaks, This discretion, and says, it comes from the Lord, who is wonderful
in Counsel: So that I desire you to observe, that my following discourses which
I shall bottom on this Text, are not founded on the first words, and the
relative Particle This; but upon the latter, where Gods wonderfulness in
Counsel, and excellency in working are joined together. Gods excellency in the
workings of Providence flows from his wonderful Counsel; and if such little
instincts as the foregoing verses speak of, be from the Lord, the Lords
workings, and from a wonderful Counsel, an easy argumentation will conclude,
that Gods dispensations of special grace by the hand of his Providence, must
needs be the effects of infinite wisdom, and proceed from the Lord, who is
wonderful in Council; which is the point I have in hand, and to vindicate
Divine wisdom from our exceptions against it, because of the variety which God
uses in his dispensations of it, and the inequal distributions of it to the
Children of men. I have spoken already to the varieties of Providence, in the
dispensations of the first grace, by which a Soul is converted, and turned from
sin unto God, in which work the Soul is merely passive. I come now to speak to
those dispensations of Spiritual grace, wherein the Soul is not merely passive,
but active; as to these, also we shall observe a great variety in the motions
of Divine Providence, and a great inequality in the distributions of it, of
which I shall give you some account, and then shut up the discourse. To this
inequality of distribution, good Christians often find it an hard thing to
reconcile their thoughts: and although God must be allowed to have a power, to
do with his own what he pleases, and if Grace were not for Gods own, it would
be no Grace; yet, we are too too much like Children, who considering not their
Fathers power, and Prerogative, nor it may be their own demerits, and their own
unworthiness to receive such a favor, nor possibly their incapacity, to
receive, enjoy, or use it: Yet because they are Children, as well as their
Brethren and Sisters, know not how to brook it, that their Father should appear
more kind to any of them, than he is to them. Let me therefore attempt the
vindication of God in the inequality of these dispensations; and that you may
know in what order to follow me, I shall lay down this method.

1. First, I will show you wherein this inequality lies.

2. Secondly, I will endeavor to show you the reasonableness of the motions of
Divine Providence, in making this unequal distribution.

3. Lastly, I shall make some Application of it practically.

1. Let us first enquire wherein this inequality lies. In the general, It
lies not in any influxes, and dispensations of grace necessary in order to the
Salvation of their souls. There is an union betwixt Christ and every believer;
in this union lies the spiritual life of a Christian: as the natural life
lies in the union which is betwixt the soul and the body, so the spiritual
life lies in the union betwixt the soul and Christ; and as the union betwixt
the soul and body is preserved, and maintained by bodily nourishment; blessed
be God, in order to that end: so the spiritual union betwixt the soul and
Christ must also be maintained by a spiritual aliment: this aliment, or
nourishment is the influx of the spirit of grace; for though Ordinances be
external means, yet Ordinances signify nothing without the influx of the
spirit upon them, and in them. Now for such an influence of grace, as is
necessary to uphold the spiritual life of the believers, to keep the soul, and
its beloved together, God gives it to every believer; Whom he loves, he
loves to the end: for if this were not so, there were a possibility of a total
Apostasy, and of the intercision of a state of Justification. This would infer
a mutability in the counsels and purposes of God, and subject the gifts and
calling of God to repentance: For let Jesuits and Arminians say what they
will, their fictitious purpose and council of God, to love those that are
believers, will not salve this sore; for according to this Doctrine, a man may
be a believer, and in favor with God this month, and an unbeliever and out of
favor with God the next month; and so God may love and hate the same person a
thousand times in his lifetime: and whether this be consistent with the
unchangeableness of God, let any one judge, who understands any thing of
common sense. We therefore stand fixed in this, that God neither is, nor ever
will be wanting to any soul, as to those influxes of Divine grace, which are
necessary to maintain the union, and spiritual life of the soul: and (by the
way) this well considered, might much tend to satisfy a soul dissatisfied at
Gods unequal distributions of special grace; which although they are
exceedingly sweet, and of high advantage to gracious souls; yet are such, as
are not of the necessaries of Salvation, but only gradual manifestations, and
such as are spiritual accomodations, and advantages to it in its way to Heaven:
but this is enough to have spoken to this question Negatively. I come now to
speak nore Positively: In the general, they are such only as respect the porro
esse, or the advantages of spiritual life. Now what they are, comes next into
our enquiry: They are I think reducible to Three heads; the influences of 1.
Strengthening. 2. Quickening. 3. Consolatory grace. That there are such
influences, and that all have not a like measures of them, no, nor the same
soul at all times; is so obvious to the experience of all Christians, that
little need be said of it.

1. For strengthening grace, I can do all things, (says the Apostle) through
Christ that strengthens me. It is that which the Apostle prays for, in the
behalf of the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.16. That he would grant you according to the
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inward-man. And thus Christ tells us, John 15. Without me you can do nothing.
Now the Object of this influx of grace, is duty, or sin and temptation to it.

1. Duty; I can do all things (says Paul) through Christ that strengthens
me: Christians duty is various, and lies in such motions of the inward, and of
the outward man; both in doing, and suffering, as God has any-where in his
Word required of us. Strengthening grace, with respect unto duty, is nothing
else but the graeious influence of Christ, Phil. 1.3.14. 2 Timothy 4.7.
and the Spirit of Christ upon the soul, by which the Soul is made more able
both to do, and suffer the will of God. Now, that there is a great variety, and
unequal dispensation of this influence of Divine grace, both to different
souls, and to the same soul at different times, is so obvious, as would be
perfectly needless to spend any time in the proof of it; neither do all souls
find the same degrees of spiritual strength, nor do the same souls find it at
all times.

2. Another Object, about which strengthening grace is exercised, is sin, and
motions and temptations to sin. That which we call strengthening grace, with
reference to sin, is a secret influx of the spirit of holiness, by which the
soul of a Christian finds it self enabled to resist its inward motions to
sin, and to repel temptations from the World, and the Devil. St. James tells
us, That every one is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and
enticed. This is that which Divines call, tentationem a carne, a temptation
from the flesh: besides, we know that the evil spirit has a power to make
impressions, and to offer suggessions to us; and that either immediately, or by
wicked men, and sinful instruments: this is that which they call, tentationem
ab host, a temptation from our grand Adversary: and there is a temptation
wherein both these concur; this is that which they call, a mixed temptation: Now
as to all, It is our duty to resist, and this is the fighting the good fight,
the maintaining that spiritual combat, which the Scripture speaks of. Now
there is nothing more evident in matter of Fact amongst Christians, than that
some Christians are more strong, and able to resist motions to sin, of any
nature, than others; they are more able to mortify their members, and the
deeds of the body (as the Apostle calls them, Romans 8.) through the spirit. Yea,
one and the same Christian does not find the like degrees of this spiritual
strength and ability at all times. There was a time when David complained, that
iniquities prevailed against him, Psalm. 65.3. When St. Paul cried out, Who
shall deliver me from this body of death: And another time when he could say, I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

2. A second dispensation of Grace, is that which I called quickening grace: An
influx of the spirit of grace upon the soul, by which the soul in all its
spiritual conversation, is made more free and lively; that it makes haste, and
delayeth not, to keep the Lord's Commandments. It finds an enlarged heart,
and runs the way of the Lords Commandments: that this proceeds from an
influx of grace, is plain: David prays unto the Lord, that he would quicken
him in the way of his Commandments. Quicken me in thy way, Psalm. 119.37. It is
as manifest upon the experience of all Christians, that God distributeth this
influence of this grace unequally, neither the like measures unto all
Christians, nor to the same Christians at all times: Hence are the complaints
of Christians, of the dullness, and deadness, and straitness of their hearts:
they indeed, through grace, keep on in the Lords ways, and are kept from
Apostasy, they return not with the Dog to the vomit; but they move heavily, the
wheels of their Charots are taken off, they almost force themselves to duties
of Communion with God, and do not find a freedom to them, and a delight and
sweetness in them; but are secretly saying within themselves, When will the
Sabbath be done? When will the duty be over? it is no pleasure to them to serve
the Lord; when as at other times, their souls are full of spiritual life, they
are longing for Sabbaths, and for times of prayer.

3. Lastly, There are also dispensations of consolatory grace: these are the
influences of the Spirit of God upon the soul, by which the soul is refreshed
and comforted in the apprehensions of the love of God. These admit of a variety
of degrees, as they arise in the soul, either, 1. From the view of the souls
own sincerity, and its ability to apprehend its interest in the promises, and
to apply the Scripture unto it self. Or 2. From some more extraordinary
witnessings, and sealings of the holy Spirit, who, you know, is called the
Comforter, and who, as the Apostle speaks, witnesses together with our
spirits, that we are the children of God. Now the sadness, and dejections of
some Christians spirits over others, and of the same Christians Spirits, at
some times more than others, is a sufficient evidence of the inequality of
these distributions. There was a time, when David himself cried out, When will thou comfort me? Psalm. 119.82. as much as at other times, he triumphed, and
made his boast in God: and from hence now you may understand the nature of what
we call Desertions. God never leaves nor forsakes his people, so as he does not
supply them with influences of Grace sufficient to uphold the Union betwixt
Christ and their souls, nor does he deny such influences to any soul that
believes in Christ: But God may and does often withdraw himself, as to the
gradual manifestations of himself to them, in such dispensations of grace
whereby he strengthens them against sin, or unto duty; or whereby he
quickneth them, and makes them free and lively in his Service; or finally
such, whereby he comfort them with the apprehensions, or assurances of his
love in Christ. Now these varieties being observable in matter of fact, in the
dispensations of Divine grace, even to Gods own children; My next work must be
to show you the reasonableness of the motions of Divine Providence, in this
unequal distribution, and to proportion some answer to these following
Questions.

1. Quest. Why God suffers some more than others to be tempted, and to fall
by temptation, yea, some of his own people?

2. Quest. Whence it is, that some of the children of God find much more
strength unto spiritual duty than others find, and the same children of God, at
some time find more strength than they do at others times?

3. Quest. Whence it is, that some godly persons find more freedom and
liveliness in the service of God, than others do; and the same persons find
more liveliness and freedom at one time than they do at another?

4. Quest. Whence it is, that some Christians are more full of spiritual joy
and consolations than others are? To these which properly relate to the
varieties before observed, Two more may also be added.

5. Quest. Whence it is, that godly persons who are all informed by the same
spirit of truth, have such different apprehensions of the things of God, one
from another, and that some times in very momentous points?

6. Quest. Lastly, Whence it is, that some Christians grow faster in grace than
others do?

1. Quest. Why God suffers some, yea, some of his own dear servants to be
more tempted than others, yea, and when he knows that they will fall?

That it is so, is past all dispute. Satan obtained leave of God to tempt Job,
and Christ told Peter, that he had desired to winnow him like wheat; he tempted
David to number the people: The Text says, that Satan stood up against Israel;
and we know that Satan prevailed against all these: And it is expressly said
concerning Hezekiah, that God left him to his temptations, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. And
we see it in daily experience, that some of the people of God are both much
more buffetted by Satan's temptations, and overcome by them than others are;
wanting strength to say, get thee behind me Satan.

1. In the first place, I do think much of this is founded, or at least highly
advantaged from nature. Concerning temptations which are, a carne, from the
flesh, when a man is only drawn away by his own lust: There is nothing more
certain, than that diverse persons have more strong inclinations and
dispositions to some sins than unto others; and there needs a more eminent
assistance of Divine grace, to restrain such lusts in such souls: and although
it be true concerning such temptations as are impressions, or suggestions from
Satan, that they are not natural, but preternatural; yet one soul may have a
more natural aptitude to receive them, either from its complexion and
constitution, or from its disease and distemperature, under which it may at
some time labor more than another; and this may by one, and that a great
cause. For God is not always, nor ordinarily pleased to work miraculously. It
is usually said of Melancholy, that it is balneum diaboli, a melancholic
temper, state, or constitution of body, is a temper very receptive of
impressions and suggestions from the Devil. Now I say, where a man is naturally
more complexionated to some sins, or where any persons are from their
complexion, or from some bodily distemper more apt to receive such kind of
impressions, it cannot be expected, but that they should fall oftener into such
temptations, and be troubled more with them, and by them, than other
Christians, who have not those natural disadvantages; and it can hardly be
expected that they should ordinarily be freed from that natural encumbrance, by
special, and eminent assistances of Divine grace.

2. In the second place, Men's different sinnings may make this also appear but
a reasonable motion of Providence: It is true, it is a dreadful punishment of
sin, for God to punish the sins of people, by suffering them to be led into
temptation. It is a dreadful curse, or imprecation of David upon the enemies of
the Church, Psalm. 109.6. Set thou a wicked man over him, and let Satan stand at
his right hand. God does thus often punish peoples sins, by letting Satan loose
upon them: the effects of this are sad enough, none need a greater evil than to
have Satan always at his right hand, assiduously and violently moving him unto
evil; and though it be not so ordinary, yet God may thus punish his own people.
Satan was at David's right hand, when he would number the people. St. Paul had
a messenger of Satan sent to buffet him: what that messenger of Satan was, is
not so easy to determine; it was certainly some great affliction in which
Satan had a particular ministry, 2 Cor. 12.7. Some Divines do think it was
some great temptation; indeed the Scripture does not mention it as the
punishment of Paul's sin, but as preventive of sin, lest (says he) I should be
exalted above measure. Undoubtedly temptations may be punishments of sin, and
in those desperate temptations to self-murder, etc. which have prevailed
against men, the sin has been often made evident: and possibly as to St. Paul,
God might discern Paul's heart begin to swell, upon occasion of his
Revelations, and might send him a messenger of Satan to buffet him, as well for
the beginnings of the workings of Pride, which he had discerned in him, as to
prevent the further increases of it. It is not so easy to determine what
David's sin was, but in probability it was pride: David's heart was lifted up,
upon the view of the great number of people which God had put under his
Government; God lets loose Satan upon him, he moves David to number the
people, by which he knew God would be sufficiently provoked, to abate that
wherein he gloried. The case was much the same with Hezekiah, though we do not
read of so eminent and immediate a ministry of Satan. The Text says, God left
him: it was in the pride of Hezekiahs heart, that he would show his Treasure to
the King of Babylon; God leaves him, the temptation prevails upon him. This by
the way, does not only let us see, that God sometimes by temptations punishes
his own people for their sin; but that pride and swelling of our hearts, upon
the account of our enjoyments, is one of those sins for which God suffers
Satan to stand at our right hand. Guriosity is another sin, an itch after
knowledge, which God has hidden from us: It is a sad story how many have been
thus catched in the snare of the Devil; indeed our first Mother Eve was thus
catched, but this were too large a Theme to instance in all those particular
sins which God has thus punished, or may thus punish. Now in regard that the
sins of all Gods people are not equal, but they may fall (some of them) into
more great, and heinous sins than others: It is but a reasonable motion of
Divine Providence, that such as do so, should be more troubled with Satan at
their right hand, with messengers of Satan sent to buffet them, than others.

3. A third reasonable account of this may be Gods Prerogative. God may do it
for the trial of their graces. I know not what other account we can give, than
this, of Gods dispensations to Job. God himself gives thus, this account of
him, then he was a just and upright man. Yet he gives Satan leave to stand at
his right hand, he tells him, all that he had was in his power, but only his
life. It is said, that God left Hezekiah to try what was in his heart; to try,
that he might know all that was in his heart. Divines dispute about that
Pronoun He, whether it refers unto God, or to Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. The
matter I do not conceive much, whether it refers to one, or to the other.
That God might know what was in his heart. Did not then (you will say,) God
know what was in the heart of Hezekiah? Doubtless, he to whom all contingencies
were naked, who knew all things past, present, and to come, could not be
ignorant what was in Hezekiah's heart, and what he would do when he left him.
But the Scripture often speaks of God, after the manner of men; they know not
secret, hidden things, till they be brought to demonstration: God left him,
that he might know, that is, that he might in matter of fact see what was in
his heart. This could be no matter of pleasure, and delight to the Holy God,
but only a just medium, in order to the punishment, which he intended Israel in
the posterity of that good man. But God leaves many of the Souls of his
People, that they may be tempted, and in the hour of their temptation, put
forth, exert, and exercise their grace, in the exercise of which the Lord has
a great deal of pleasure and delight. This seems to be the case of Job, the
second time that you read Job 1. of Satan's appearance before God: God glories
in Job, Job 2.3. Have thou (says he,) considered my servant Job, that there is
none like him in the Earth, a perfect, and upright man, one that fears God,
and escheweth evil, and still he holds fast his integrity, although thou
movedst me against him to destroy him without cause, Job 2.3. God delights in
the combats of his People, where they come off conquerors; yea, more than
Conquerors. I remember those two great Commanders, Joab and Abner, once said,
Let the young men arise and play before us: that was a bloody game, for they
mutually killed each other: so were the Romans Gladiators games, and the
combats with wild Beasts, to which they exposed some miserable Creatures; yet,
those men of blood took a pleasure in them: God knows the good fight shall
have no such issue. Christ was not tempted for nothing, the Apostle tells us,
he was therefore tempted, that he might be able to succor them that were
tempted: himself told Peter, that although Satan had desired to winnow him like
Wheat, yet, he had prayed, that his faith might not fail. This being secured,
God delighted to see Satan, and a believing Soul play before him; to see his
People exercising their knowledge, faith, love, patience, courage, and
fortitude, in resisting Satan's temptations and making him to flee from them.
Now who can deny unto God the satisfaction and pleasure which he takes in the
exercise of those habits of grace which he has given them? The use of that
Spiritual armor which he has armed them with?

4. Fourthly, It is but a reasonable motion of Divine Providence, with
reference to the different service which he has for some to do. It is said of
Christ that he was therefore tempted, that he might be able to succor them
that are tempted. We are not ignorant of his wiles, (says the Apostle) the
Apostle not being himself ignorant of Satan's wiles made him more fit to
caution, and instruct others with reference to them. You know it is a great
advantage to a Family, with reference to the small Pox, or other contagious
Diseases, to have some members of it, to have labored under, and escaped those
Diseases. The Church of God, which is his Family, could not well be without
some Souls, that have been under temptations; none knows so well, how to speak
to, and apply themselves unto those that are tempted, as those who themselves
have gone through that fire; they are best able to teach others in their own
former circumstances, what to do, and what to avoid. They know how to
strengthen them, with those words which themselves in their circumstances heard
from God, and to comfort them, with those consolations with which they
themselves were comforted by God. It is therefore reasonable that some should
be tempted, because all are in subjection to temptations, and may be tempted,
and therefore had need of some Nurses to be provided for them. On the other
side it is unreasonable that all should be tempted, for who then should there
be Ministerial to succor the tempted? Nor let any say, This were indeed
something, if none were tempted, but such as conquered the tempters; but how
does God suffer those to be tempted, who he knows will fall?

5. Fifthly therefore, Neither is this unreasonable: For there is a difference
of fallings: God suffers none of his own People to be tempted, who shall
finally fall. They may fall, but let not their enemy rejoice over them; though
they fall, they shall rise again. Job fell, but he rose again; Peter fell in
the hour of temptation, he denied his Master, and that with cursing and
swearing; but his Master looked upon him, he went out, and wept bitterly. God
indeed may suffer a reprobate to be tempted, who he knows, will fall, and so
fall as to rise no more, but he never suffers his Saints to fall finally.
Satan may stand at Joshua's right hand to resist him, but God will say unto
Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem
rebuke thee, is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? Believers may be
tempted, but God will bruise Satan under their feet shortly. Now, if the
question be intended of mediate fallings, not a final falling; why suffers
God his People to be tempted, who he knows will get a fall under the
temptation, though they shall rise again? I have answered it before, when I
showed you, why God permits his People to sin; he would certainly not do it,
if he did not know how from their falls, to extract his own glory. An ancient
Writer gives us a large account of this. That (says he) the wisdom of God
might be manifested, who can bring good out of evil, for God is so good, and
infinitely wise, that he would never suffer evil to be, if he did not know how
from it to elicit, and draw out that which is good: That the goodness of God
might be made glorious, in pardoning and raising up the elect, and the Justice
of God might be glorified, in the righteous condemnation of others. That men
might be deprived of their natural freedom in acting: nor, says he, is it
reasonable, that the sinfulness of the Creature should hinder the exhibition of
the Divine goodness: That by his Saints repentance and victory at last, they
might have a more glorious Crown; and that they might know, and see what is in
their own hearts, and how much they live upon Divine grace, and like burnt
children, they might more dread the fire, and take heed afterward of having any
confidence in themselves. Finally, which is all in short, (for enumeration of
particulars in this case, would be endless and uncertain) thus much we may be
assured of God, he would never suffer any elect Vessel, to be bored through
with a temptation, if he did not know how to make it issue in his more abundant
glory, and their more abundant good.

Applic. Suffer me now before I proceed to the other Questions, to make some
short Application of this discourse, the sum of which is no more but this, That
as to converted Souls, God does not equally distribute the influence of special
grace. Although he distributeth to all, so much as is necessary to the
upholding of the Union of their Souls with Christ, and to maintain the
Spiritual life, so as the Oil does not fail from the Cruise, nor the Meal shall
not fail from the Barrel, until they come into their glory; yet, for the
manifestations of his love, in such influences of grace, as are only of further
advantage unto Souls in their way to Heaven, such as strengthening, quickening,
and consolating influences, God variously distributeth them according to his
infinite wisdom: he gives to some an Omer, to others an Ephah, particularly I
have showed it you in those influences of grace, by which God strengthens the
Soul, in the resisting of temptations; and I have showed you the
reasonableness, and something of the wisdom God, in these dispensations. Now
from this Discourse let us learn diverse things.

1. Inst. First, the differences betwixt the necessary influences of grace, and
such as are not absolutely necessary, but of high advantage to a Soul in its
way to Heaven. Grace is necessary, ( by grace ye are saved, says the Apostle)
but all grace is not necessary. The grace of justification is necessary. Except
a man be born again, says our Savior, he can never enter into the Kingdom of
God. Every Believer has this, he is born again, he is sanctified in body, and
mind and spirit. But now there are further manifestations; which make gradual
differences in Christians, and the receipt of which also does much depend upon
our action. For although in the first grace, the Soul be purely passive; yet,
as to the receiving of further grace it is active, therefore the promise of
Christ's manifesting himself, Joh. 14.21. is made to them who love Christ, and
keep his Commandments. I pray observe this, for it is a thing of no small
concernment. From hence,

2. Inst. Secondly, you may easily conclude, how unreasonable it is for any
Soul to quarrel at God, or murmur against his dispensations, though it finds
not those gradual manifestations of Divine love unto it, which others do
experience from God. If thou be equally dealt with, as to the necessaries of
Salvation, thou might sit down, so far satisfied as not to murmur at God, if
as to the gradual manifestations of his love in some things, he will give unto
another, more than unto thee. Every thing of Divine grace is sweet, you must
not therefore mistake the tendency of my discourse, as if I were persuading you
to such a satisfaction, as not to thrist and breath after, and labor for
perfection in Spiritual strength, life, and comfort, they are all things to be
valued above Worlds: but only not to murmur, and repine against God as an
inequal Father, or an hard Master, because he does not every way make your
Spiritual life is sweet, and perfect as others. And any complaint of this
Nature is the more unreasonable; because for the most part it is to be laid
upon our selves, and is like the Wifes quarrel with her Husband, for want of
Children, when as the Scripture generally lays the defect upon the Woman. So
it is here generally; the reason why some Christians have more sadness, less
strength, and Spiritual life, or liveliness, and vigor than others, is because
they have more sin and corruption, and are more wanting in the use of that
means, whichly upon them to use in order to their obtaining of such degrees.

Use 3. In the third place from this discourse, it will not be hard for you to
conclude, the duty of tempted Souls, in order to the abating of the force of a
temptation, or wholly driving the tempter from them. Indeed, the whole of a
Christians duty, in order to this end, cannot be concluded from this discourse,
but much of it may.

1. First, The use of Natural means, which may be proper for the correcting
that bodily humor, or removing that natural distemper of which Satan takes
advantage; that is in short, whatsoever hinders the free exercise of our
reason, and consequently keeps us from passing a just judgment upon our
selves, which you know we must do by the use of reason. I have often thought
upon my experience of Souls under these circumstances, that the Physician is
many times Gods Ordinance, as well as the Minister, for the succor of tempted
Souls; for Souls under these circumstances, are not delivered miraculously, but
in an ordinary way of Providence generally, which cannot be without some
freedom of the exercise of their own reason, and judgment, to apply what they
read in, or hear from the word of God. Hence it is, that I have often seen poor
Souls under these dark circumstances, to whom all reading of Scripture, all
discourses of Ministers have signified little, or nothing, or at most nothing
beyond a little present refreshment: the reason is, because their minds are
darkened, and they have not the free use of their reason to make a conclusion to
themselves from premises, and principles, and propositions of the word brought
unto them, and opened unto them by the most able Ministers of the Gospel, who
in these stresses of Providence have Ministered to them: not that I think there
is nothing in what we call temptation, but melancholy: there is hardly any
thing more demonstrable to me, than that there is an hand, a great hand of
Joab, of Satan I mean, in the impressions we often find made upon, and
suggestions that are made to persons laboring under these bodily distempers.
The suggestions to such Souls to blaspheme God, to destroy themselves, etc.
(which are very ordinary,) are certainly when they fall upon persons, who are
of knowledge, and have lived in aw, dread, and high reverence of God, more than
the natural Products, and results of a disordered Nature; which we may the
rather conclude from the strange violence, and impetuousness of them so
frequently returning, (as they often do) and so strangely resisting all
arguments, and means used against them: besides, melancholy, mere melancholy of
its own Nature, renders the Soul fearful, jealous, and suspicious of any thing,
which may be hurtful to it; and though indeed the Philosopher disputes,
self-Murder to be the effect not of a valorous and courageous, but of a
cowardly Spirit; yet it argues a more Natural valor, than melancholy
disposes and inclines one unto. But this I think, the Devil takes advantage
of this bodily distemper, under the prevailing of which the Soul is weaker,
being hindered in the exercise of its reason, that it is not able, either it
self to conclude as at other times, from what it has read in the word of God,
nor yet to apply what is offered unto it, from Ministers of the Gospel. So as
in reason, unless we should expect that God should work out of the road of
common Providence; the first thing to be done, is the use of Natural means,
(with earnest prayer to God for his blessing upon it,) for the correcting of
that bodily humor, which prevailing clouds the mind, and hinders it from
concluding reasonably, in making a judgment upon it self; and I have often
known, that in these cases upon the use of due natural means, the temptation
has also vanished, and gone away with the disease. I could give you one
instance of a Person, a young Woman known to many of you, who of a sudden had
fallen under a great temptation, and was narrowly prevented in the destroying
her self, in the nightime; in the Morning, my self was sent for: she having
formerly often used to discourse freely with me about her Eternal condition;
when I came to her, I found her in great sadness, and heaviness of Spirit, but
could draw out little discourse from her: only she was not Elected, she was
damned, etc. with some few other desperate conclusions. I left her advising her
friends to send for a learned experienced Physician to her. Upon the use of a
little means, she recovered her distempers, and I never heard of her temptation
more. It is true, it is not thus always, the natural distemper is sometimes
more stubborn, and resists natural means, and Satan working at the advantage
of that, does many times much longer molest some; but I have seldom or never
known any, but in these cases with the recovery of their health, have likewise
recovered themselves (through Gods blessing) out of that snare of the Devil,
which he has laid for them in their disease, and distempered condition of
their body.

2. A second thing which this Discourse prompteth tempted souls to, as proper
for them, is a searching and examining their ways, a repentance and turning
again unto the Lord. I have showed you in this Discourse, that temptations
oft-times are punishments of sin; and that the reasonableness and wisdom of God
in these motions of Divine Providence, not equally strengthening all souls in
the resistance of temptation, appears, as in other things, so in this; that
God by keeping them longer under the buffetings of Satan, than he keeps
others, may make them more sensible wherein they have sinned more than others:
I know some Divines have thought, and do think, that God uses not to keep his
people long in an hour of great temptation, but in deep punishment for hidden
sins. I do doubt that, especially where the temptation is advantaged, from a
continuing bodily melancholy: but withal, oftimes it is so; that some past
sins, concealed and hidden, give an advantage to the Adversary; and that not
only when we hide them from God, by not freely confessing them, and humbly
bewailing them before him, who alone has power to forgive them, (which alone
is necessary in order to forgiveness.) This was David's case, Psalm. 32.3. When I
kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long: For day
and night thine hand was heavy upon me: my moisture was turned into the drought
of Summer: I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity I have not hid: I
said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sins. There you have both the case and the cure. But sometimes
the concealing of some sins from men, is a great cause of the long abiding of a
temptation; and this mostly happens in souls that are weak in knowledge, and
not able of themselves to find out, and apply to themselves, that relief which
is in Scripture for them under such guilt; and therefore had need of the help
of some spiritual Interpreter. But I say, in every hour of temptation, it is
very proper to a tempted soul, to search and see, if he can find no Achan that
troubles him, or that provokes God to punish him, by setting Satan, or by
suffering Satan to stand at his right hand: oftentimes (by the way) I have
found sins which have been acts of unrighteousness toward men, where
restitution has not been made, or where restitution has been unpossible, have
a long time given advantage to the tempters suggestions; but where particular
sins cannot be fixed upon, (as it happens in many cases, souls fall under
great and exceeding troublesome temptations, whom God has yet all their life
kept and restrained from such erroneous transgressions) I say where this
happens. As Herod in great cruelty sent and killed all the children to two
years old, that he might be sure not to miss him, who was born King of the
Jews; so it will be great policy and piety in a Christian to confess all his
sins which he can remember, and charge himself with (...); to study the
mortifying of every member, that he may be sure to fall upon that which does
offend him, and give the Adversary advantage against him: hence it follows,
that frequent humiliation and prayer, frequent confessions of sin, and prayer
for the forgiveness of them through the blood of Christ, are exceeding proper
works for souls under temptation. We may indeed concerning violent temptation,
say as Christ said of possession with the Devil, it seldom comes off without
much fasting and prayer; yea, and holiness of life, and watchfulness against
sin, is the singular duty of poor tempted souls; the soul is at such a time in
the spiritual fight. It was Gods special command to the Israelites, that when
the host went forth to battle, then they should take heed of every wicked
thing: By a parity of reason, when the soul goes out to the spiritual fight,
and especially when it is in the fight, it stands concerned to take heed of
sinning against God; sin weakens the hand, and there is nothing more ordinary
than for Christians in those circumstances to be, de novo, troubled for their
slips while they have been in that condition.

3. Hence (Thirdly) may easily be concluded the duty of Christians, to take
unto them the whole armor of God, that they may be able to stand against the
wiles of the Devil, in the evil day, and having done all to stand, Ephesians. 6.13.
not to yield, but to resist. Many arguments might be brought to persuade this
spiritual resistance; you have to do with a foiled Adversary, you want not a
spiritual assistance; Christ was therefore tempted, that he might be able to
succor you when tempted: he cannot conquer you, but by your voluntary
surrender; (The will of man is a Fort, that is not to be stormed) many are the
presidents of those that have resisted, and come out of the field conquerors,
look unto Jesus, the Captain of your salvation; he resisted, Mat. 4.11. The
Devil leaves him, and behold Angels came and ministered to him. After great
temptations usually come great consolations, great manifestations of God to the
souls of his people: But that which follows from this Discourse, is, because
thus you shall fulfill the Lords end; this is good, acceptable, and
well-pleasing unto God. God himself (as I before showed) glories in Jobs
conquest, and checks the Devil upon it: God therefore brings you into the
Field, that you might fight valiantly, resist manfully, and at last come out
with a Garland of honor: O therefore take heed of casting down your Arms, of
entertaining any thoughts of running away! They observe in Battles, that more
are slain in a running away, than where they manfully maintain the fight; but
in this fight none falls, but he who yields, and throws down his Arms.
They observe also in War, that the presence of the Prince in the Field, viewing
his Soldiers, who behave themselves more or less valiantly, does much animate
Soldiers. You may be assured of this, That when you are in this Spiritual
combat, your great General is in the Field: God is observing you, particularly
observing, how you gird up your loins, stand to your Arms; how you behave your
selves in the managery of the fight, and that he therefore suffers you to be
tempted, that he may see, what faith, what patience, what love to God, is in
your hearts. But thus much shall serve to have spoken to this particular, to
show you the wisdom of God, and the reasonableness of his motions of Providence
in suffering Souls to be more under temptation than others.

SERMON LIVE.
Isaiah. 28.29. This also comes from the Lord, who is wonderful in Counsel,
and excellent in working.
I Proceed now to the Second Question, whence it is that God does not equally
strengthen all the Souls of his People, unto the performance of their duty
toward him; yea, and that the same Persons do not at all times find the same
mesures of Spiritual strength, unto their Spiritual duty?

Answ. There is nothing more demonstrable in matter of fact, than that it is
so; nothing more certain, than that God could make it otherwise: the Question
is, whence it is, and how the wisdom, and the reasonableness of Divine
Providence appears in this dispensation? let me, before I come to speak
directly to the Question, premise something, 1. Concerning Spiritual duty. 2.
Concerning Strengthening grace. Duty is a word of very large extent,
comprehensive of all the Acts, both of Piety and Probity, wherein the Law of
Nature, or the Law of God in Scripture makes us debtors to our great Creator.
It is usually divided into our duty toward God, which is that which we call
Piety, or, our duty toward man, which we call Probity; both of them ly in the
motions of our hearts, tongues, or more external actions. Our duty toward man
is much comprehended under the two generals of Justice, and Charity. Now for
much of this duty, God denies unto no man a sufficient strength and power, so
as if he will, he may do it. No man will deny but a man has a power, to deal
justly, to give Alms to the Poor, and many other things, so as he is but an
Hypocrite, that pretends want of strength to many external actions which God
has commanded him; which are but acts of moral discipline: hence it is no
great wonder to hear the Patrons of freewil urge this as the whole duty of man.
But alas, though this be his duty, yet it is but the least part of his duty.
Our great duty to God lies as in external acts of Piety, so in the internal
government of the motions of our hearts affections, according to the rule of
the Divine law; it lies in external actions, such as praying, hearing the
word, etc. But chiefly in the government of our inward man, that we may perform
all our actions, whether respecting God or man, in such a manner as he has
required. Now that which we call strengthening grace, is, That influence of the
holy Spirit upon the Soul, by which the Soul is enabled to perform whatsoever
God requires of it, both in doing and suffering in such an acceptable manner,
as God requires at our hands. Duty may be divided, 1. Into such acts which are
in our own power, as to the external acts, to perform without any Spiritual
gifts; or more special influences of grace: thus a man may read the word, he
may hear Sermons, he may do acts of justice, and charity, and many other
things, by virtue of the common Providence of God, keeping up in man his
natural faculties; for this now there needs none of that special strengthening
grace, about which I am discoursing. Secondly,

2. Such as a man may perform by virtue of common gifts, and influences, such
as knowledge, utterance, etc. Which although God does not give unto all, yet he
does give unto many, who never taste any thing of his distinguishing grace. Thus
men may pray, preach, etc. It is true, some have more ability unto these acts
than others, and some Christians at some times may find more strength and
ability, than at other times: but this depends not upon any influence of
special strengthening grace; but upon the different tempers, and complexions of
persons, upon their different measures of knowledge and gifts, and parts; and
their strength as to these acts, rises and falls, as their gifts and parts
increase, hold, or decay.

3. But thirdly, there are duties, that are more internal; such as meditating
of God, delighting, believing in him, breathing after him, fervency of Spirit,
in his service, the right manner of performing all external acts. Now to the
performance of this, there needs a special influence in the Spirit of God;
besides all the advantage, which any man can have from natural parts, or gifts.
And the experience of every Christian justifies, that God uses a great
variety in his dispensings of it: some Christians find much more than others
do; others find much more at one time, than at an other, both for the
performing the acts of Mortification, and of Vivification; the practice of
dying to sin, and living to righteousness; and also for the bearing any
burdens, which God in his Providence lays upon him, and going through any
sufferings, which God has laid out for him: and these gradual withdrawings of
these Divine assistances, are what we call Divine desertions, as to these
manifestations of grace. Now my next business must be, to show you the wisdom
and reasonableness of the motions of Divine Providence, in the inequality of
these dispensations, which sometimes proves matter of great trouble to Gods
People.

1. For the differences of strength, and ability, to the more external acts of
our homage to God; it is not so properly within my subject to be discoursed: I
shall therefore speak but shortly to it: something I am willing to speak,
because I fear too many Christians mistake this for strengthening grace. This
difference arises, 1. from a difference, or decay in knowledge, and other
parts, and common gifts. Knowledge of the things of God, is the foundation of
this practice, and it cannot be expected that Christians weak in knowledge,
should be able to express themselves so freely in prayer, or in Spiritual
conference, or any other exercise, which depends upon knowledge, as the more
knowing Christian can. 2. Secondly, As difference as to degrees of knowledge is
one cause, so different frequency in Practice, is an other: a man in practical
things is perfected by practice. As he that never almost writes, will forget
his hand; and he that uses not himself to read, or speak Latin, or any other
Language, will in a short time lose the very ability, he once had to do it: so
it is but a reasonable thing for us to imagine, that he who seldom or never
prays, should lose his gift, and ability to pray; and he who seldom, or never
Preaches, should lose his gift, and ability to Preach. We find by experience,
and may find it, whenever we try it, that a man, that has an excellent ability
to pray, neglecting that gift, in a short time will lose his gift, and not be
able to continue Ten lines of sense without a Book. To this may be added, that
these performances do also depend upon other natural, and common gifts, which
if they fail through age, or other infirmities; it cannot without a Miracle be
expected, but that this strength and ability, should abate also: I know also
that God may blast these gifts, and often does for men's sins, their neglect of
the use of them, their not glorifying of God with them; but Gods usual way of
doing this, is, either by permitting the decay of these gifts upon which these
exercises depend, or leaving the Hypocrite to fall into such a senslesness, and
sottishness in life, as quite takes him off from any regard of these pieces of
homage unto God: but thus much shall serve to have spoken to these varieties
and decays of strength in the inward man.

2. For the other which are the influxes of Divine, and special grace, it is
certainly reasonable that God should not dispense equal measures to all, if we
consider; 1. That all are not of a alike grows, and standing in the Church.
There is nothing more ordinary in Scripture than to compare the Church, to a
Fold of Sheep, to a Family, etc. Now there is no Fold, where all are are grown
Sheep alike; scarce any Family, where are not some Infants, or young Children.
Christ must carry the Lambs in his Arm, while he feeds his Flock like a
Shepherd. The Scripture speaking of Christians distinguishes betwixt Babes,
and grown Persons; betwixt those that are perfect, and such as are not perfect;
such as are Spiritual, and such as are Carnal; such as are fit for strong Meat,
and such as have need of Milk: now although it be true, that this influx of
Grace is from the Spirit of God; yet, the Spirit of God ordinarily works,
Secundum quod nactus est Organon, according to the subject it works in; and
by our own Spiritual actions we are prepared for the receptions of these
Spiritual habits, which are not the influxes of the first grace, but of further
grace, and distributed to Souls which have their senses exercised to discern
good and evil: should God grant out equal measures of this grace unto all,
there could be no such thing as grows in grace; no such persons as Babes in
grace, the Kingdom of grace, would be like that of glory, in which there is no
Infant of days, nor old men of years: and indeed this were enough to have
spoken to this case, if God did equally dispense out Spiritual strength to
those who are of equal standing in the ways of God; for though God will give
Heaven at last (which answers the Penny in the Parable) to him, who comes
into the Lords Vineyard at the Eleventh hour; yet, he does not give equal
degrees of peace and strength, to those that come in to his Vineyard, and work
there but one hour, with those who have wrought all the heat of the day. Grace
strengthens by exercise, as habits are strengthened, and confirmed by frequent
acts: But yet, this is not enough to say in this case; for all those that be of
equal years, and standing in the ways of God, are not of an equal faith, nor
have an equal zeal, fervency, and intension of affections: Nay often Christians
of a much younger standing, find more Spiritual strength to mortify their
corruptions, and perform Spiritual duties, than those who have been of many
years standing in the ways of God.

3. Thirdly, Therefore God doubtless does it many times to punish sin, and
guilt in his own People; either in the neglect of ordinances and duty, or some
other moral miscarriages. Sin doubly infeebleth a Christians Soul.

1. As it Naturally deadneth the heart, toward God, and discourageth its
exercises upon him.

2. As it provokes God to withdraw himself. Sin is the aversion of the Soul
from God, and its Conversion and turning to the embraces of the Creature; hence
it is impossible that the Soul that delights in sin, should equally breath
after, and delight in God, as that Soul that hates sin, and is more perfectly
turned from it. Sin quenches the Holy fire in the Soul, it also discourageth
the Soul from its confidence in God, and in its addresses to God; it makes the
conscience fly in a man's face, and repeat to him the words of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 50. What have thou to do, to declare my Statutes, or that thou should
take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my
law behind thee? Or in the Words of the Apostle, What fellowship, has light
with darkness? God with Belial? Righteousness with unrighteousness? Sin
enfeebleth the Soul in all its addresses to God, and discourageth it in all it
exercises. And 2. It provokes God: your iniquities have separated betwixt God
and you, (says the Prophet) and your sins have made him to hide his face from
you. It was said by a great Commander of Soldiers, That he was never afraid to
dye, but when his conscience smote him for some guilt of sin; when the
conscience of a Christian reflecteth guilt upon him, he is discouraged from
exercising any faith, and confidence in God, and ashamed in the duty of prayer
to go unto God. There is no Christian, but finds this in his own experience,
that the conscience of sin does wonderfully prejudice his Holy boldness, in his
approaches to the Throne of Grace; How weak is thine heart, says the Lord God,
seeing thou do all these things, the work of an imperious whorish Woman,
Ezekiel. 16.30. It is indeed a weakness to sin, and weakness to any Spiritual
acting, is the first fruit of sin in the Soul; for what are the Souls exercises
upon God, but Holy Meditation, Faith, Hope, Spiritual desires, delight, a
fervency, zeal, or heat of the whole Soul in Gods service? Now sin rendering the
Soul guilty, and defiled; how is it possible, it should delight in, or desire
communion with an Holy God, exercise any strong Faith, and Hope in that God,
who has declared his wrath against sinners; or care to draw near to God, when
it apprehends God looking upon it afar off, with an angry countenance? This
is another thing, which makes this motion of Divine Providence reasonable,
that God by it may punish the failings, errors, and miscarriages of People.

4. Fourthly. It appears reasonable upon the Consideration of the great
differences of Christians in their practice of Godliness. The promises of
strength are made to those that wait upon the Lord for it. Psalm. 27.14. wait on
the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart; wait I say
on the Lord. Isa. 40.31. They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their
strength; they shall mount up with wings like the Eagles; they shall run, and
not be weary; and they shall walk and not faint. Now it is true every Child of
God waits upon the Lord; but every one waits not alike, nor walks with
God to the same degree. Experience will tell every Christian, that the more
strictly, and closely, and constantly he walks with God, the stronger he
grows in all Duty. Infused habits are advantaged by exercise, as the fire
that kindled the wood for sacrifices upon the Altar, first came down from
Heaven; but then was to be kept alive by the care and labor of the Priests; so
habits of Spiritual Grace, are indeed infused from God, yea and must also be
mantained by daily influences from God, yet with a concurrence also of our own
labor, in waiting upon God and exercising our selves unto Godliness; and the
more a Christian does so exercise himself, the more strong he shall grow, Job.
17.9. The righteous shall hold on in his way, and he that has clean hands,
shall add strength, or, (as our translation reads it) grow stronger, and
stronger. The more a man excels in acts of Righteousness, the more he
grows in Spiritual strength; ordinarily therefore, men, and women, which have
most communion with God and walk more closely with him, have most strength to
Spiritual Duties.

5. Christians differences in Knowledge; and Experiences of God, is one great
reason of their differences, as to Spiritual strength. 1. Their difference in
Knowledge: our external acts of Piety (such as Prayer) as to the true, and
excellent performance of them, do depend upon our internal motions toward God:
as is our Faith, our Love, our Hope, so will our fervency in Spirit, in Prayer,
and the exercises of our Faith or hope, or any other grace be; for those inward
habits are the principles from which our actions flow, the powers which in
action we exert, and put forth. Now these inward workings of our Souls do very
much depend upon our knowledge; It is true they are not the Natural and
necessary fruits, or consequents of knowledge. Knowledge must be sanctified
before it will produce any such effects; many a one has a large knowledge of
God, of the holy Scriptures, and whatsoever they reveal of God, to render him
to the Soul a fit object to be believed, and trusted in, loved, desired,
delighted in. But this is certain that without knowledge there can be no such
Exercises. No man who is wholly ignorant of God, and the Scriptures, can breath
after him, delight in him, hope in his mercy, trust in his promises. etc. Some
knowledge is necessary to the working of any of these habits, and the motions
of these habits, will be proportionable to the degrees of Christian knowledge;
Hence you shall observe that Christians who are weak in knowledge, are always
weak in faith, weak in an hour of Temptation, indeed weak as to the Exercises
of all Spiritual gracious habits. Now that there is a vast difference in
Christians knowledge, and understanding of the holy Scriptures, is a thing of
evident demonstration. 2. Secondly as there is a great Difference in
Christians, as to their intellectuals, upon intelligence from which our wills,
and Affections move; so there is yet a greater difference in their Experiences
of God. The Apostle tells us, Romans 5. That tribulation works patience, and
patience, experience; and experience hope. Experience is a mighty advantage to
diverse exercises of grace, especially those of faith, and hope. 1 Samuel 17.
David tells Saul, wondering that he being so young a stripling, should dare
to encounter Goliath: That he had kept his Fathers sheep, and there came out a
Lion and a Bear, and took a Lamb out of the flock. v. 36. Thy Servant slew both
the Lion and the Bear, this uncircumcised Philistine shall be like one of them:
his experience of Gods protecting him from the Lion and the Bear, begot in him
a confidence in God, that he would also deliver him from the Philistine: thus
Paul with the same breath, with which he said, God had delivered, says also
and shall deliver; now that Christians of more experiences, should have more
strength and confidence, is but the natural working of man's Soul.

6. Sixthly, God does often by the withdrawings of the assistance of his Grace,
punish too great adventurousness, and presumption of our own strength (this
falls properly under the third head, but being forgot there, I shall add it
here.) This I take to have been the Case of Peter, when Christ told his
Disciples they should all forsake him; Peter tells him, that if he died with
him he would not deny him. He adventureth into the Highpriests Hall after his
Master, and proves not strong enough, to resist the temptation of a Silly
Damosel, Charging him to have been one of Christ's Disciples. God often
punishes thus men's leading themselves into Temptation, adventuring upon
precipices, when he has commanded them to abstain from all appearances of
Evil, and to give no advantage to the Adversary. It is said that God will teach
the humble, and that he will give grace to the humble, whiles he resists and
sets himself in Opposition to the proud. Much more might be said, to justify
the wisdom and reasonableness of the motions of Divine Providence in not giving
equal degrees of strengthening grace, to those who are his own people. Before I
come to the Application of this discourse, I shall speak to the two other
Questions relating to Quickening, and Consolatory grace; because almost the
same things will justify the wisdom of God, in them, and the same Application
will fit them all.

Quest. 3. Whence is it that all have not the like measures of Quickening Grace.

There is a 3 fold Quickening of which you read in holy Scripture. 1. The
Quickening of a dead body. That which thou sowest (says Christ) is not
Quickened except it die. 2. There is the Quickening of Souls dead in trespasses
and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. Neither of these is that which I here intend. 3. There is a
Quickening, which is but the adding of further life and vigor, to a living
Soul. Thus David prays the Lord, Quicken me in thy way; that man or woman that
is not dead in trespasses and sins, may yet labor under a great dullness and
deadness, to the Operations of a Spiritual life; nor is there any thing more
evident than that as to this, there is a great variety amongst Christians, yea
in the Spirit of the same Christian at different times: the Souls of good
people often find another kind of freedom, and livelyness in Spiritual duties,
than they do at other times: now whence this is, is a question not unworthy to
be answered, the sweetness of a Christians life very much depending upon it.

1. To which I must answer, (as to the other) that this also is often caused
from the temperature, or from the distemper of the body, and that more
generally than either of the other before mentioned; for though there be
nothing more true, than that a Christian of an healthy temper and constitution,
may yet complain of this spiritual distemper, and find his heart dead and dull
enough to spiritual things; yet it is rare for a Christian under bodily
distemperatures, especially such as affect the head, or any of the vital parts,
to find himself as at other times, as to his duties, especially some duties of
communion with God. There is such a close relation of our souls to our bodies,
that their distemperatures do mutually affect each other: the distemperatures
of the mind, either through immoderate fear, or sorrow, do often very much
affect the body; and again, the distemperatures of the body, do often very much
affect the mind; and this dullness, ineptitude to, and heaviness in its
Religious performances, is one of the first evils with which the soul is so
affected: and indeed this makes one of the greatest difficulties which the
spiritual Physician meets with, to make up a true judgment, whether the
disorder and distemperature which he meets with oft-times in disturbed souls,
be originally in the mind, or only there reflexively by a sympathy with a
distempered body, for accordingly applications must differ: and where this
dullness, and heaviness is an effect of a bodily disease, it very often removes
with the cure of that.

2. But it is not so always. The guilt of sin, has also a great causation
here: For it is neither reasonable to imagine, nor indeed possible to be, that
a soul burdened in its Conscience with the load and guilt of sin, should run
the ways of Gods Commandments, as cheerfully, and as fast as that soul, who
through grace has been enabled to cast this burden upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, and comfortably, at least, to hope, that its iniquities are forgiven,
and its sins covered; much less, as that soul who walks in the more clear
Vision of God, and under the full assurance of the pardon of its sins, and its
acceptance with God. A soul continually pulled back by Conscience, and told,
that it is a guilty person whom God accepts not, cannot possibly make such
haste without delayings, as another soul to keep Gods Commandments. The guilty
soul therefore, is but an heavy moving Soul in Spiritual performances. Nay,
thirdly, The tempted, the deserted Soul, though its temptations, or desertions,
be not the punishment of Sin, but only probatory of grace, cannot be so free,
and lively, as another Soul: and if it be but a just and reasonable motion of
Providence, to let Satan sometimes stand at a Christians right hand, and be
continually buffeting it for a season, and to withdraw from some Soul, the
influences of strengthening, and consolatory grace; It cannot be unreasonable to
leave it under some Spiritual deadness and dullness, which are but the proper
consequents, and effects of the other: how can any one imagine that a Soul
continually moved to some sinful actions, and possibly so violently moved, as
the Soul knows not how to deny the motion, should find as much freedom, and
cheerfulness in the service of God, as a Soul under no such encumbrance; or
that a Soul, under doubts, and fears, and jealousies of Gods favor to it, and
its acceptance with God, should at the same time enjoy the like freedom in the
service of God, and unto Spiritual duty, as that Soul which walks (as at
Noonday) in the full, and brightest light of Gods countenance, and under the
fullest confirmations of the love of God unto it.

4. Fourthly, The freedom, and liveliness of a Soul, to, and in Spiritual duty,
does also much depend upon its freedom, from entanglements, and businesses of
an Heterogeneous Nature. 1. The Soul of a man has not an infiniteness in its
powers; if they be eagerly working, and busily exercised this way, they cannot
be as eagerly, and busily exercised another way, which is quite of another
nature. Christ has told us, that no man can serve two Masters. No man can
serve God and Mammon, That is, eagerly, and intensly serve both; he will serve
the one, and neglect, or despise the other: you never knew one deeply engaged,
and entangled in worldly concerns, freely, lively, and active in the service of
God; businesses, and cares of the World are like thick clay, which clog the
Chariot-Wheels of the Soul and keep it from moving nimbly. The Soul then acts
most lively and freely, when it is most sequestered from the World, and the
concerns of it. Souls in separation serve God with the greatest freedom,
alacrity, and cheerfulness, as well because in that state they are freed from
the cares, and businesses of the World, as from the impediment of the Body, by
whose Organs they act, while they continue in a state of conjunction with it.
These now are some of the chief causes of this difference in Souls as to this
freedom, and liveliness, in the service of God; now God giving these influences
of grace also in the way, and use of means, and dispensing his grace according
to the circumstances of the Soul receiving it (I mean his dispensations of
further grace, and manifestations of himself unto the Souls of those who are
his own People) while there are in the World, Souls under such different
circumstances, as according to an order of Nature and reason, they cannot be so
free, and lively as others in their Spiritual operations; Gods inequal
distribution of these dispensations, must needs appear exceeding just and
reasonable: and thus much may serve to have spoken as to these. I proceed to a
Fourth Question.

4. Quest. Whence is the variety of Gods dispensations of consolatory grace?
Consolatory grace is that dispensation of Grace, by which the Souls of such as
fear God, are filled with joy, and peace: The Psalmist tells us, That light
is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart: Every child of God
has a right to a joy and peace, for joy and peace in the heart, and
conscience, is but the Copy of a peace with God. Now every Child of God, has
peace with God. For that is the immediate product of justification, Romans 5.1.
Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. But a jus ad rem, a right to
peace, is one thing, that every Believer has; a jus in re, or an actual
possession of this joy, and peace is another thing. The light that is sown for
them, does not always shine; the peace that is for them in the Fountain, is not
always in their Souls as a River, making glad their hearts. Christ has left
them Peace as a Legacy, John 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you; but as Legacies, are ordinarily left to be paid at different times,
and oft-times upon certain conditions, which not being performed, the payment
of the Legacy is withheld, or deferred: So it is as to this Legacy.

There is nothing more certain, than that consolations of the Soul, are the
influences of the Spirit of God, for he is upon this account called the
Comforter; and they are the effluxes of special grace, for there is no peace to
the wicked (says my God;) it is but an ignis fatuus, or a false fire, which
sometimes flasheth in the face of an Hypocrite. For all peace of Conscience,
being (as I said before) but a Transcript in our Consciences of the peace our
Souls have ratified with God, and confirmed in the Heavens; a Soul whose
iniquities are not forgiven, is not subjectum capax, a subject capable of this
inward joy and peace, which is consequent to believing, and although not
inseparable from it, yet never but subsequent to it. It is our unhappiness to
live in times, when all the influxes of special grace are denied by some; so
that it is no wonder, if some make a mock of these Divine consolations, and
will allow no other Operations, to relieve sad, and comfortless Souls, than
conclusions from Reason, either working upon Natural, or revealed Principles;
taking no notice of the Spirit of Gods influence, 1. Either to enable the Soul,
to make such Applications, and conclusions from true Premises; Or 2. Further to
elevate, and raise up the Soul, beyond the force of these Principles. But be
their Sentiments what they will, and their Discourses suitable to their
Principles as they will; we know that the Holy Spirit, is not for nothing:
called a Comforter. That we Read of the Consolations of God, Job 15.11. And
that God is called, The God of Consolation, and he that has given us
everlasting Consolation: That, in the midst of David's perplexing thoughts, they
were Gods comforts, which refreshed his Soul, Psalm 94. v. 19. That it is God,
who comfort those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. And who comfort us in
all tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4.

But it is as certain, that the consolations of all Souls, even those who are
true Believers, are not equal; nay, the same believing Souls are not always
under the same consolatory influences of Divine grace. David himself cries
out, why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Why art thou so disquieted within me?
the instances of Job, Heman, Asaph, David, stands upon a Scriptural Record; but
if we had not them, the experiences which we have every day of believing Souls
(if we can make any Judgment of Believers) do sufficiently evince this to our
Souls: my business is to inquire the Justice, and the reasonableness of the
motions of Divine Providence in the inequality of this distribution. This will
easily appear to you upon three hypotheses, which I take to be all very true.

1. That God does ordinarily dispense out these influences of grace, to souls
which by his Providence he has prepared for them. This which I call Gods
Providential preparation of souls, for the reception of these influences, I
conceive lies chiefly in Two things; 1. The freedom of it from those bodily
encumbrances, which in a natural working make the soul sad, heavy and dejected:
such distempers we know there are, as in a natural working sadden the spirit,
and fill it full of fear, sorrow, dejection, and despondency, which are all
contrary to the comforts and serenity of a soul; and, as I have once and again
told you, it must be a miraculous operation, contrary to the bias, tendency and
natural operations of a man, for a soul to be filled with consolations, while
it is influenced with a body lying under these disadvantages: God therefore,
when he intends any of these consolatory influences, does ordinarily prepare
the soul for it, by delivering it from those influences of an ill affected
body, which dispose it quite another way.

2. A second way, by which God prepares the soul for it, is by filling it with
knowledge proportionable to it; for the comforts of a gracious soul are not
irrational and unaccountable things, but the results of Scriptural conclusions,
which the soul is by the Comforter enabled to make. God has in his Word sown
the seed of light and joy for them; the Ministers of the Gospel (who are the
Interpreters of Scripture) have an Office and Ministry in the Interpretation
of this Word, and working the souls of Gods people to understand the sense of
them. The soul it self has an action in it using its reason and natural powers
to conclude from the Scripture. The Holy Spirit gives unto the soul to see the
things which are freely given it of God, 1 Cor. 2. and further possibly,
sets to its Seal, and gives it a further and more undoubted confirmation;
so as in an ordinary working, the comforted soul must be a knowing and
understanding soul: It is true, we sometimes find some honest souls full of joy
and peace, whose knowledge does not appear proportionable; God so relieving some
particular souls, after their lying under the discouragements of the spirit of
bondage: But commonly such comforts are not of long continuance, rather present
reliefs to the soul from an extraordinary working of the blessed Comforter,
than any settled consolation, and the abidings of the Comforter with them.
Seldom any but knowing and judicious Christians, have a settled and continued
joy and peace upon their believing.

2. Secondly, That God does ordinarily give out these dispensations more or
less, or nothing of them; though, not according to the merits of those souls
that have them, yet according to their behavior, and misbehaviour toward him:
That famous promise, John 14.21. We will manifest our selves unto him, is made
to those that love Christ, and who keep his Commandments: And when Judas asks
him, Lord! How is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not unto the
world; Christ, answers him, saying, ver. 23. If any man love me and keeps
my sayings, my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him: He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings, as much as to
say, The reason why I manifest my self more to you, is because you love me, and
demonstrate that love to me, by keeping my Commandments: For the world they
love me not, and proclaim that they love me not, by their disobedience to my
Commandments; and therefore it is, that I do not manifest my self to the world,
as I do unto you. In the receiving of the first grace, man is merely passive,
and the subject of preventing and operating grace; but as to the receptions of
further grace, the child of God is active, and the subject of cooperative,
adjuvant, and assisting grace, and God gives out his assistances according to
their motions.

3. Lastly, The reasonableness of this different dispensation may appear in
this: That in the dispensations of this grace, God acts often by Prerogative,
showing mercy where he will show mercy. Indeed he does so as to the first
grace, as I have before at large showed you: But now he does not so as to these
influences of grace, which are necessary to the upholding of the mystical union
between Christ and the Soul, and the upholding of a Christians spiritual life;
if he did, it were possible that a child of God might fall away from his state
of grace, and there might be an intercision of the state of Justification: But
Christ has told us, That if any man drink of the water which he shall give
him, he shall never thirst, but it shall be in him a wellspring of living
water, springing up in his soul to eternal life, etc. so that in the
dispensation of that, God acts upon a Covenant, and as a debtor to his
promise. If any one says, God has also promised to manifest himself unto his
people: I answer, those promises are made to those that love him and keep his
Commandments; but for the upholding of the spiritual life, he has made a
Covenant with his people, as that he will never depart from them to do them
good; so that he will put his fear into their hearts, that they shall never
depart from him: which promise, although it be not to be extended to a being
kept from all sin, yet it is to be extended to the preservation of souls from
such degrees of sinning, as shall extend to the alteration of the state of the
soul, and the extinguishing the spiritual life, and killing the seed of God in
the soul. But for those manifestations of grace, which are not necessary to a
souls Salvation, and the upholding of spiritual life; in it God acts more
freely according to the counsel of his own Will, derected by his own infinite
Wisdom. Now upon these Hypotheses, supposing that all Christians are not of
equal degrees of knowledge, nor are equal as to their bodily circumstances; that
every soul that belongs to God, does not walk up to an equal degree of duty;
but some may be, and are guilty, of more, and more eminent failings than
others: Or that God may be by his infinite Wisdom directed, to try one soul
more than another, to prove their patience, or their faith, which is most
tried; when his people have least sensible consolations; the motions of Divine
Providence, in distributing to several Christians, nay, to the same Christians,
several degrees of consolatory influences of grace, cannot seem either unjust,
or unreasonable to any sober and intelligent Christians. This is all I shall
speak to this Question, I proceed to the Fifth Question.

5. Quest. Whence it is, that there are such manifest differences in Christian
growth in grace?

There is a growth in spiritual gifts, and a growth in gracious habits, and
these must be carefully distinguished; for from a want of a just distinguishing
these, many doubts and mistakes arise concerning this point of growing in
grace; there may be the one, and a great increase and growth in them, where
there is nothing either of the beginnings or increase of the other. By
spiritual gifts, I understand those powers by which persons are enabled to some
more external spiritual operations. You read much of them in the First Epistle
to the Corinthians. These are usually distinguished into Extraordinary, such
were the gifts of Tongues, Prophecy, Healing, Interpretation, etc. Which God
was pleased to deal out in the Infancy of the Church, both to supply the want
they had of ordinary means, and also to give a reputation to, and to confirm
the Doctrine of the Gospel. The Gospel having got a larger footing and
acceptance in the World, needed not these aids to its reputation, nor such
miraculous confirmations; these therefore soon ceased, and have rarely, if at
all, been since given out. But there are other gifts that are more ordinary,
and of constant and daily use in the Church of God; such are the gift of
Prayer, of Preaching, of Spiritual Conference, etc. Now Christians are capable
of growth and increase in these.

But besides these, there are gracious habits; which are powers and abilities
in the soul, inabling it to acts of more secret and inward communion with God:
Such as Faith, Love, and others. And these are capable of increase, if not in
their number, yet in their degrees of intention: Hence the Apostles pray, Lord
increase our faith. And this left room for the Apostle to pray for the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 9.10. That the Lord would increase their fruit of
righteousness; and for the Thessalonians, that the Lord would make them to
increase, and that they might increase more and more; 1 Thessalonians, 3.12. 4.10. Thus
you read of an increasing with the increase of God; Col. 2.19. and of the
prospering of the soul; 3 Ep. John v. 2. and the Apostle Peter exhorts those
to whom he writes, to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ. This growing in grace, is not without the special influence of God:
Thence it is that both the Apostles pray for it. Christ is both the Author and
the Finisher of our Faith. Now it is apparent that this growth in grace is not
equal in all the souls of them who are the children of God; as we see in that
which is born of the flesh, some children grow faster than others; so is it
true as to those that are born of God, born of the spirit, they all grow, but
some grow much faster than others grow; and the thriving and prospering of
their souls is much more evident to the world. In this also the actual
providence of God has its hand. Let me, before I shut up this Discourse,
attempt to give you an account of this, to show the reasonableness of this
motion of Divine Providence; and that in this the ways of God are equal.

1. I shall only in this Case premise this: That there may be great mistakes
as to growth of grace. I shall instance in two: 1. Some may mistake a growth
and increasing in spiritual gifts, or moral habits, for a growth in grace. A
man may so mistake himself, and his neighbors may so mistake him. Spiritual
gifts are glistering things, and often dazzle our eyes. We hear men mightily
improved in their abilities fitly to express their own and others wants unto
God in prayer, and to implead them with proper arguments. We hear a Minister
improved in preaching, an ordinary Christian improved in his knowledge of
spiritual things, and his utterance and ability to maintain a profitable
discourse; we are perfectly apt to conclude these persons are grown in grace,
and it may be so; but withal it may not be so too: for these are separable from
any thing of truly gracious habits, which are the in-dwellers in a regenerate
and sanctified heart. When the Apostle had been persuading the Corinthians to
covet the best gifts, he by and by tells them, That he will show them a more
excellent way. What was that? The way of special distinguishing grace, love to
God; without which he tells them in the beginning of the next Chapter, that
all gifts, all action, all suffering, prophesying, speaking with tongues,
knowledge of all mysteries, giving all his goods to the poor, and his body to
be burned, would signify nothing but a little noise in the world, and render
him no more than as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal.

2. Secondly, As some may judge they are grown in grace, because they are grown
in gifts; so others may judge they are not grown in grace, when indeed they
are. And the common mistake here, is men's calling nothing a growth in grace,
but further passion and intention of the Affections; when as the truth is, as
we say concerning Women (the Apostle you know calls them the weaker Vessels)
yet they have the strongest passions: So it is true concerning Christians,
those that are the weakest Christians have the strongest Affections and
Passions. Conformably to this, it is ordinarily observed, That Christians
usually in the beginning of their Conversion, have the strongest Affections,
the most passionate grief for sin, the most unsatisfied pantings and breathings
after God and his Ordinances; but at this time weaker and less confirmed habits
of Faith, of Self-denial, and Mortification; and are more easily than
afterward, turned aside by a temptation. But these mistakes being easily
obviated, I easily grant it, That there are real differences, as to Christians
increase, progress, and growth in grace; of which I shall now come to give you
a short account:

1. I might tell you, That all growth supposes time. It is a motion that is
not in an instant. Adam was the only man that God brought into the World at a
perfect Age, others you know come into the World little Children, and are
perfected, and grow up by degrees; and as the first Adam was the only man, who
came into the World perfect as to natural parts and growth. So Jesus Christ,
the second Adam, was the only man that at first appeared to the World perfect
in grace; for in him the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily. All others are
first Babes, then stronger ones, and perfected by degrees. So long therefore as
there is a successive Conversion and bringing of souls to God, there must be
Christians in the World of different sizes and statures, as to growth, and
increase in grace. But yet this is not a perfect account of this variety, for
all Christians of the same standing in the ways of God, are not of the same
proficiency and stature in them.

2. Secondly, therefore, One great cause may be a difference in spiritual
nourishment. Though it be true in Bodies, that all who are fed with the same
bread, and drink the same drink, do not thrive alike; yet suppose a body to be
fed with improper food, or not to have half enough, it is no great wonder if it
does not grow so fast as another body that has a plenty of food, and that food
too which is good and proper for it. It is the same case with the soul, that
also must have its food. The souls food is the Scriptures, Ordinances,
Influences. For the first indeed we have them, we have them in our own
language; so that we can understand them: but yet every one cannot read (an
inexcusable fault in Parents and such as have the government of youth,
especially in the age wherein we live;) nor have all the like means of having
them read to them, and being made to understand them. But the great difference
lies in Ordinances; St. Peter advises Christians to desire like Newborn
Babes, the sincere milk of the Word, that they might grow thereby. He
(doubtless) speaks of the Word preached, the Promise, Psalm. 92.13. is, Those
that are planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our
God. The House of the Lord is the Church of the Lord, and there is a promise of
growth to all those that are planted in it; yet as in our Gardens and Fields,
there are different sorts oft-times; so in the Church of God (which is a large
Field) there are different soils for Christians: There is a great deal of
difference in that preaching under which Christians sit, One man preaches in
the enticing words of man's wisdom, another in the persuasive words of man's
wisdom; another in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit and with power.
Some Christians possibly live, where they scarce ever hear a good Sermon, but
some Harangues of Oratory, or some rational Philosophical Discourses, of which
they understand little or nothing: Others live under plain, lively, powerful
preaching; where the Preacher makes it his business to study the souls of his
people, and proportioneth his preaching accordingly: so as the Babes have their
milk and others their stronger meat. Teaching them as they are able to receive
instruction. It is no wonder if such Christians who are under the best means,
be found most thriving; God working in the use of means, where means can be
had. It is true, Christ once (and never but once that we read of) made use of
clay and spittle to cure the blind man's eyes. And when our Lord was himself
upon the Earth, attending his own Garden, and the Plants in it, though he had a
fullness of wisdom and power too, and had many things to say unto them; yet
says he, John 16.12. you are not able to bear them now. And it is said Mark
4.33. With many such parables spoke he the Word unto them, as they were able to
hear it. Now if Christians live under preachers, who either make no conscience
what they preach unto people, but fill up their time either with idle Fables,
or Invectives against Parties, or some florid or Philosophical Discourses; as
if their study were directly contrary to that of the Apostles, whose great care
(as he tells us) was so to order his preaching, as the faith of his hearers
might not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God: Now their
preaching seems to be so directed and ordered, as that the faith of their
hearers might not rest in the power of God, but in the wisdom of men. It is no
wonder if such Christians do not grow in grace in proportion with others, who
live under more adequate and proper means. God uses not ordinarily to work
miracles, and their ordinary spiritual food is not proportioned to any such
thing as the spiritual proficiency of those that hear them.

2. Secondly, A great reason of this difference lies also in the differing
natural tempers of Christians. Amongst other Metaphors by which the Holy Ghost
expresses the Conversion and Regeneration of souls by, that of Engraffing is
one; Romans 11.17.19.23, 24. The soul is ingrafted into Christ. Now those who are
skilled in planting, know that according to the different nature of the plant,
the growth is faster or slower, more or less. Some plants grow much more freely
than others; a Cion of one sort of fruit, will shoot up as much in one year, as
a Cion of another species will shoot in two or three years. Truly it is so in
the Spiritual Plantation, Christ is the Stock, into which we are all ingrafted;
there is no fault there: but now the Cions that are ingrafted into Christ, are
not all of the same nature and temper. And although Grace makes a great change
and alteration, and does much correct a natural temper; yet it does not root
out Nature, nor work the change in a moment; nor in all the same proportion of
time. There are several tempers, which much hinder the appearance of growth in
grace. Some are naturally of vain, airy, light spirits; some of proud and high
spirits; some of froward, teachy, passionate, stubborn spirits. Others are
naturally of more solid, serious tempers; of more low and humble; of more meek
and pliable spirits: Now where it happens that there is a change wrought in
some persons of airy and light spirits, or such as are proud and high, or
froward, and passionate and stubborn, a progress and growth in habits and
exercises of grace, will not be so soon evident and apparent, as in those souls
that are of sweeter and more gentle and ductile spirits: Much grace will make
but a little show, where there is an ill natural temper and humor.

3. Thirdly, An ill neighborhood does make a great deal of difference in the
growth of grace. We see in Plants, an ill neighborhood of Plants does much
hinder growth. There is scarce any Plant will thrive much near an Ash; the like
might be observed of other Trees, which experience tells us are ill neighbors
to Plants. Rake up Fire in Ashes, if it keeps alive it is all. It is so with
Christians that are ill-yoaked, that live in ill Families or Neighbourhoods.
There is some Wood they call Quench-coal (Rotten Wood is mostly so.)

The truth is, the company of all carnal worldly men, is of that nature; they
are all Quench-coals to the life of Grace, and discourage that holy fire which
the Spirit of God has kindled in the souls of his people. If a Christian be
engaged in such society, whether necessarily, as in Conjugal relations, and
indeed in most Domestic relations, or voluntarily: if such a Christian keeps
his sincerity, it will be well, it can hardly be expected that the profiting of
such Christians should appear unto all; or indeed that they should grow in
proportion unto other Christians, who are engaged in a better converse; and are
under the daily Instructions, Exhortations, Reproofs and Admonitions of others;
who as Brethren take themselves concerned to consider them, and to provoke them
unto love and good works. Yet it is observable that such Christians do grow by
a kind of spiritual Antiperistasis, as they say the fire is hottest in the
coldest weather; so we often see, that there is a great warmth and zeal against
sin and for God, nourished in those souls, which have been most smothered and
choked with ill relations and company; which discovers it self, as soon as
those persons are freed from those intanglements and encumbrances; but while
they are troubled with them, this growth is not so evident, nor do we
constantly find Grace thriving under such ill shadows; so prone are our corrupt
natures to receive contrary impressions: and nothing so much as converse
exposing us to the reception of them. So that this is like an ill air to the
Body, which often hinders the growth of it.

4. Fourthly, As the growth of the Body is hindered by some diseases, the growth
of a plant by some canker, or some ill winds, or by the check which it may have
by the bitings of some beasts. So may the growth of Grace in the Soul be much
hindered: 1. By the prevailings of some particular corruptions. 2. Or by the
wounds which the Soul receives from some temptations. It is true, There are
some sicknesses in which persons shoot out, and by which they are rather
advantaged than hindered in their growth; but there are other habituated
distempers which hinder the growth of young persons. There is no prevailing
corruption but gives a check to a growth in Grace, though sometimes the
prevailing of it, does by accident, promote Grace in its exercise; as it was
with the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.11. But prevailing Lusts do wonderfully hinder
proficiency in Grace. To instance but in that one lust of Earthly mindedness,
Let but an earthly, covetous mind, prevail upon any, it is a wonderful thing to
observe how it checks all spirtual progress; it betrayeth a Christian to so
many practical errors, both of omission and commission, that his neighbor
standing by, and observing him, cannot but cry out in the words of the Apostle;
How dwells the love of God in this man? Though they see much in him which
disposes them to charitable thoughts, and makes them that they cannot but
conclude he is one that fears God, yet they know not how to reconcile the
actions of his life to what the Scripture speaks of the nature of grace. Yea,
and long and violent temptations, do also much hinder the souls growth. They
are like cold winds or the bitings of beasts to the plants, which discourage
the growth of them; though they be not internal causes, yet they are external
causes of the plants unthriftiness. So it is with long and violent temptations,
they indeed do not work as internal causes (I mean such temptations as are ab
host, from our grand adversary) to hinder a Christians growth; but they are
great external causes, discouraging the soul in almost all its exercises of
Communion with God, and applications of it self unto him.

5. Lastly, Any Desertions, or with-drawings of divine influences, are great
causes. There are few plants which grow much in the shade, ordinarily the
influences of heaven, both of the Sun and the Rain, are necessary to the growth
of the plants. I am sure the influences of the Sun of righteousness, are
necessary to the spiritual growth of a good Christian; and if they be
withdrawn, though the soul may live, yet during the with-holdings of them, it
will not much grow or thrive. The soul will live during the withdrawing of
them; for I have once and again told you, that the Lord never withdraws what
of his spiritual influence upon the soul is necessary to uphold and maintain
the spiritual union and life; but no soul flourishes and increases much under
such a dispensation: it stands in the shadow, and wants those beams, which
are necessary to its bearing and bringing forth much fruit. These now are the
great causes of that variety which we discern in Christians Growth; other
causes might be assigned, but this is sufficient, supposing God to have
appointed the use of means, in order to a spiritual growth, and ordinarily to
concur with the use of those means, to justify Divine Providence, in not
equally making every Soul to grow.

There is yet one Question more, which indeed does not properly concern this
place, in which I am to discourse concerning the Reasonableness of Divine
Providence, in the inequal distributions of special distinguishing Grace; yet I
shall speak something too, viz.

6th. Quest. Whence it is that good People have such different Apprehensions of
the Truth of God?

1. That which makes the difficulty in the Apprehension of this, is: 1. Partly,
Because there is but one Truth, one Faith, as well as one God, one Baptism,
etc. Two contradictory Propositions cannot be true, nor can both proceed from
the God of Truth; for the same Fountain does not send forth bitter Water and
sweet. One and the same God cannot speak different things; God is Truth, and
every Truth is from God; no lie, no falsehood, cannot possibly be from God.

2. Partly, Because all the People of God have the same Spirit of God, which is
called the Spirit of Truth dwelling in them, and are under the same Promise of
this Holy Spirit, leading them into all truth, and the Annointings, teaching
them all things.

3. Again, They have all the same word of truth to guide them, and to examine
and measure Propositions by; they have the Law and the Testimony, and that is
the Standard in the Market of Truth; the Touchstone by which every Proposition
is to be tried, the Scale in which every Proposition is to be weighed.

Yet notwithstanding this, There is nothing more obvious than that, even such
who (if we may judge any thing) do truly fear God, have strangely different
apprehensions concerning Divine Truth, concerning the Sacraments, the use of
the Law, the extent of the Death of Christ, the power of man's Will, the true
notion of Faith, etc.

Now the question is, Whence this variety is, why God permits it, and how
the motions of Divine Providence, in these things, may appear just and
reasonable? I shut out of this Discourse, the different Apprehensions of
Carnal, wicked, and ungodly men, whose Creed is commonly dictated by their
lust; and their whole art and study is, because they cannot allow the
conforming of their hearts to Divine Truth, to endeavor to interpret the Word
of God into a fense consistent with their lusts; as also all such as the
Apostle speaks of, whom because they received not the truth in the love of
it, God gives up to strong delusions to believe a lie; that they may be damned
because they have had pleasure in unrighteousness: 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. or
because as the Astle speaks, Romans 1. They have detained the truth of God in
unrighteousness. I say, for all these I shall shut them out of my Discourse,
and only inquire whence such as truly love and fear God, have such different
Apprehensions; and wherein the motions of Divine Providence, in permitting of
them, seem just and reasonable.

1. It first must be laid down for a Principle, That the providence of God
never does nor can suffer any elect Soul to embrace and die in any belief of
any Proposition, by the belief of which its Salvation may be endangered. The
Apostle tells you of some that bring in damnable Heresies. Every Deviation
from any Doctrine of Truth is an Error; but an Error is one thing, a damnable
Error is another thing. There has been a great deal of stir about
Fundamentals, what Truths and Errors are Fundamental; I shall not engage my
self in that Dispute, but shall determine those Fundamental Truths, the belief
of, or assent and agreement unto which, is necessary, in order to such
exercises of Faith and Holiness, without the exercise of which no man can be
saved: And those are Fundamental Errors, which a man cannot hold, and in the
mean time exercise that Faith and Holiness, without the exercise of which no
man can be saved. As now, supposing that Faith in Jesus Christ is necessary to
Salvation; A denial of the Godhead of Christ must needs be a fundamental
Error: for Cursed is he that trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his Arm: The
true and living God alone can be the object of our Faith. Now I do not say but
a Child of God may fall in with, and for a time embrace such Errors. The
Providence of God may permit him thus to fall, but it cannot, it does not,
suffer any of the Elect of God, to hold on and perish in the faith of any
Propositions of this nature; for then the elect of God might be deceived, which
our Savior has determined impossible; then a Soul ordained to Life, given to
Christ, might perish eternally; which is not consistent with the certainty of
Divine Purposes, and infallibility of Divine Decrees. Although therefore an
elect Vessel may receive some such corrupt Liquor, yet it shall not, it cannot
abide in it, though it may be for a time taken in such a snare of the Devil;
yet the snare shall be broken, and it shall be delivered before it comes to
leave the Body. The question only must be concerning a mis belief of other
Propositions, a mis-belief of which is sinful, but not damnable.

And for those Promises of the Spirit leading the People of God into all Truth,
and of the Anointing, teaching them all things, they must be interpreted of
such Propositions as are necessary to be believed in order to the Salvation of
the Soul; else ignorance of other Propositions, as well as Error relating to
them, would argue men and women to be destitute of the Spirit of God, and not
to have the Holy Spirit dwelling in them.

2. Secondly, As to Propositions of Truth, that are not in this sense
fundamental, the reason of the difference is very obvious, and that both upon a
Natural, and a Moral, and Spiritual account, Upon, 1. A spiritual account,
Diverse Propositions of Truth of this nature, are not so clearly written in
Scripture, that he who runs may read them. It was I think Augustines saying
of the Holy Scriptures, That there were diverse parts of them, in which a Lamb
might wade, others wherein an Elephant may swim. It is the great mercy of God
to us, that those Propositions of Truth, which are necessary to be agreed to,
in order to the exercises of our Faith and Holiness; are left in Scripture so
plain, and so often repeated, that if a man will not shut his eyes and suffer
his lust to give law to his understanding, he must agree to them; but now
diverse other Propositions are not so, but so delivered, as that the truth of
them is justly the subject of dispute; and they are fit for a ventilation, and
possibly must be concluded from consequences. 2. Upon a natural account. Every
one has not the same quickness of Apprehension, the same strength for
ratiocination, and ability for rational and logical deductions. 3. Nor Thirdly
(which is that which I meant by a moral account) Has every one the same helps
and means, or capacity to use helps and means to discern Truth from Error, and
find out what indeed is the Truth, as to a Proposition laid before him; so that
although they have all the same Spirit of Truth dwelling in them, and the same
Word of Truth to weigh and measure Propositions by, yet the Holy Spirit being
no more engaged to keep them from every error of the understanding, than from
every error of practice; and they not having the same faculty to apprehend
Truth, nor the same means and advantages to understand the Mind and Will of
God; it is not at all to be wondered if they have not all the same Apprehension
of every Proposition of Truth: nor is it to be expected that all Christians
should have so, more than that they should have all the same Faces. For
Example, Take but the Propositions concerning Infant Baptism, I doubt not, no
more I think do you that hear me, but that Infants are to be baptized; But how
do we gather it? We have no express Scripture for that more than for Women's
receiving the Lords Supper; but we conclude it from the identity of the
Covenant of Grace under the Old and New Testament, from the Precept for
Circumcision, from the right of Infants to the Kingdom of God; and many other
such like Topics. But every one has not the same ability of Reasoning, nor
the same Apprehensions of the force of Conclusions; and therefore different
Apprehensions in that and such like Propositions, is not at all to be wondered
at, nor are any to be condemned as not belonging to God for their different
Apprehensions concerning them.

3. Thirdly, As to the Act of Providence, permitting these different
apprehensions, it cannot be denied to be an Act exceeding reasonable, and the
product of a Depth of Divine Wisdom. 1. Reasonable, That man may act freely
according to his nature in the choice, or refusal of Propositions. 2. The
Product of great Wisdom. 1. For the further confirmation of the Souls of his
People in the truth. It is an usual saying, That there are no Propositions,
which we more firmly believe, than those about which we have sometimes doubted.
Nihil magis certum, quam quod ex dubio certumest. Truth receives a great
confirmation, by the shakings of some Velitations and Disputes about it. It was
the saying of an eminent person of our own Church, That the itch of disputing
was the scab of the Church; and truly it has proved so, but it has been by
accident: men coming to dispute, bringing as Augustine said of his own coming,
sometimes to read the Scriptures, Discutiendi acumen, not Discendi pietatem; a
sharpness of wit to discuss Points, not an humble pious defire to learn;
arguing indeed for masteries, not for truth; to get themselves, not to get the
truth and glory of God the Victory: but where Disputes are humbly and meekly
managed, there is nothing imaginable of greater advantage to settle and ground
the Soul in truth. For after them the Soul gives assent to Propositions, not as
Dictates of others, and Traditions of men, but because it sees certain and
unmovable grounds, upon which they are bottomed: and hears those things made
to appear of no value, which are objected and can be said to the contrary; and
so becomes rooted and grounded in the faith (as the Apostle speaks.) Truth
yet never lost in the end by any shaking, but has come out of every field a
Conqueror. Magna est veritas, and praevalebit. It is great and it will prevail
at last. Different Apprehensions of Propositions, especially when they have
been amongst such as truly feared God, have ordinarily caused great searchings
of the Scripture, ventilation of Arguments, and tended much to the furtherance
of the Faith; although at present they have made but ill founds and noises in
the Church of God.

2. The Wisdom of God is much seen in permitting these Diversities, To convince
us that The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost: For he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God and approveable to Men; Romans 14.17, 18. It is a great vanity
in men to entail Religion, yea and the Kingdom of Heaven too, to a particular
opinion; yet we are so vain, as we should most certainly do it, if God by his
Providence did not so order it that we should see many, of whom we cannot say
but that they fear God, and walk closely with him; yea, that they are more
righteous than our selves, of different opinions and judgments from us in some
particular things: you cannot but observe in the world, how fond and zealous,
some persons are for a particular opinion, more than for the great things of
Righteousness and Holiness, which are certainly the far more weighty things of
the Divine Law; and how warm and zealous, and bitter, men are, more against
their Brethren, for their differences from them in some matters of opinion;
wherein if they sin, yet their sins proceed from mere infirmity; and the
weakness of their understandings must be sins of the least magnitude (for it is
not in the power of man to believe what he will) than against those that are
open and notorious transgressors of the Law of God, in things as to which,
every man is condemned by his own Conscience.

3. Thirdly, The Wisdom of God is much seen in the permission of these
different apprehensions in the Souls of his own People, In his thus directing
us to the exercise of charity. We use to say, That Precepts lead us to Duty,
but Examples draw us. There is no duty more pressed upon us in Scripture, than
the duty of Charity and Brotherly Love; nor any to which our hearts, prejudiced
by Pride, Envy, and Lust, are more awke: the heart of man naturally seeks some
higher ground, on which he may stand and triumph over his Neighbor, and be
able to say in this or that thing I am better; and God! I thank thee, I am not
as others are; amongst other things it sometimes finds an Opinion, which it
Christens with the name of Orthodox Catholic Truth; and this shall distinguish
him: all that dissents from him shall be Heretics, or Schismatics, or
Ignorant Persons; he and his party only shall make up the Catholic Church:
others know not the Law (if you will believe him) and are accursed. Now though
this may prevail very far with men of Carnal Principles and Designs, yet when
Gods People see, that those who differ in some particular opinions from them,
yet walk so as they dare not but say, God has loved and accepted them: this
overcomes their hearts into their duty. Should not (say they) we love those
whom our Heavenly Father loves? Who are Sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus
Christ, as well as we; Justified by the Grace of God, and Sanctified through
the Holy Spirit, even as we? It were an easy thing to assign many other
things, wherein the Wisdom of God is apparent in this permission of different
Apprehensions of Truth in the Souls of his own People; as to show us our
weakness, and the imperfection of our state, and what need we have to be daily
flying to him to teach us and to guide us, etc. But this is sufficient, both to
have given you a reasonable account of the thing it self, and also of the
motion of Divine Providence, in the permission and allowance of it. I shall now
shut up this whole Discourse with a few words more for the practical
Application of my whole Discourse upon these five last Questions; which to
shorten my Discourse I have handled together.

The sum of my whole Discourse is this, That God according to his infinite
Wisdom never did, nor yet does, unto the Souls of his own People, dispense out
equal measures of Grace. 1. Strengthening them to Spiritual Duty. Nor 2.
Quickening them in the performance of it. 3. Nor Comforting and refreshing
their Souls with the sensible consolations of his spirit, 4. Nor causing them
all alike to grow, nor giving them equal degrees of light to discern the truth
of Propositions of Truth; and then that these motions of Divine Providence are
exceeding reasonable, and God in them is infinitely wise and just; the
evidencing of this has been all my Work: Which I have done from several
Topics. My whole Application shall be reduced to two Heads, showing you how
useful this Discourse may be for the promoting of, 1. Charity toward men. 2.
Of Piety toward God. The later is indeed first in excellency. I have put it in
the last place, because I intend my largest Discourse upon it; and with it to
shut up this whole Discourse concerning Actual Providence.

'This whole Discourse must certainly teach us Charity toward men; and that
particularly toward such as we discern, Weak unto their spiritual duty. 2. More
dull and heavy in the performance of it. 3. Sad and dejected. 4. Not growing so
fast in the ways of God as others. 5. That dissent from our selves in some
matters, opinions, that are not fundamental. Toward all these, we had need of
an Exhortation to Charity. Censoriousness and Judging, are things that are too
natural to us; and to which we are too prone. We judge others, and in the mean
time forget to judge our selves. All this is indeed rooted in a Natural Pride.
We would fain find something in which we excel others, for that only will be
matter of boasting and glory to us; but this Discourse may learn us Charity.
The general argument arising from this Discourse is the same which the Apostle
makes use of in Romans 14. v. 3. v. 1. He commands us to receive those that
are weak in the faith, though with prudence and caution, not to doubtful
disputations. His argument is in the latter part of the third verse; For God
has received him. Certainly a very cogent argument. Those whom God has
received into his favor, into a fellowship and communion with him, no
Christians ought to judge, despise, or reject; but God receives such as are
weak in the faith. It is very absurd to think that a person should be fit for
the favor of God, and for fellowship with God, and should not be worthy of,
nor fit for fellowship with those who are the children and servants of God. The
same argument holds and constrains in all these Cases which I have been
opening to you.

1. See thou therefore one, Who is weak unto his spiritual duty, and is often
halting and complaining of his weakness, he is not able to resist his
temptations, nor to get a Victory over his corruptions; the sons of Zerviah are
too hard for him. He cries out with David, Iniquities prevail against me. He
complains he cannot so fix his thoughts upon God, so keep up his Faith and Hope
in God, as he desires to do. Do not despise, do not judge or condemn such a
Christian; pity him, pray for him, help him what thou can, but do not judge
him; God may have received him, yea and has received him, if his heart be but
right and sincere with God: if the bent, scope, and design of his heart be for
God, and his endeavor be a pressing hard after God; though he has not yet
attained. God must in his Family have Babes as well as grown Persons. In his
Fold he must have Lambs as well as Sheep; the Providence of God has so ordered
it in infinite wisdom. He accepts none according to their degrees in grace,
but according to their truth in grace and sincerity. Remember, that thou also
were sometimes weak, and it is by grace if yet thou be more strong; nay thou
that art strong, may again be made weak. What art thou if God with-draweth
his holy spirit from thee? If God lets loose Satan against thee? Thus the
Apostle, Gal. 6.1. endeavors to persuade Christians to a charitable
endeavor to restore such as are fallen, in the spirit of meekness; considering
(says he) thy self, lest thou also be tempted. See what the Apostle says upon
this head, Romans 15.1. We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of
the weak; and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his
neighbor for his good to edification; for even Christ pleased not himself.

2. Secondly, See thou one that is under a divine desertion, as to the
quickening influences of the spirit of God. He walks in the ways of God, but
he does not move to them, nor in them, with that alacrity of mind, with that
cheerfulness and liveliness of spirit, that another does; he complains that
his chariot wheels drive heavily: He comes to duty, rather as a burden and
task, than with any spiritual pleasure and delight. As I said in the other
case, so I say in this, if thou can add any oil unto his wheels, do, but do
not clog them more with thy rash censures and uncharitable judgment; thou
do not know what his soul suffers, how he already groaneth under this
burden, and is discouraged under this distemper; and therefore far be it from
thee, to add affliction to his affliction. God has received this man's soul, if
he be sincere, if he be pressing after God under this burden of affliction.
God is not only just in these dispensations of Providence, but he is wise
also. Just he is, as he by them punishes his peoples sins. (And art thou free
from sin, for the demerit of which thou may also fall under the like
providence?) but he is wise also: Thereby humbling and proving his people, that
he may do them good in the latter end; thereby quickening them to stir up
themselves to follow hard after God, and thereby also offering to thee
opportunities for thy charity and brotherly help; a spiritual friend and
brother being made for a day of trouble.

3. Thirdly, See thou a soul walk heavily all the day long, crying out as
David, Lord wherewith will thou comfort me? He neither lives in the bright and
clear Vision of God, nor yet in the perfect view of his own sincerity; he is
smitten of God and afflicted, and his soul refuses to be comforted. Here again
is another object of thy charity, and possibly the greatest object which the
whole world affords; for there is no sorrow like the sorrow of that soul that
walks heavily all the day long, crying out, Where is my God become? I shall not
be large in persuading pity and charity for such poor souls, for he must not
have the heart of a man, but of a beast, that does not pity souls which are
thus afflicted. You have heard, that there are many such souls whom yet God
has received. God does not equally distribute his dispensations of consolitary
grace, to all that truly love and fear him; no not to the same souls. Judge not
another truth of grace by thy own joy and peace, if thy joy and peace be truly
consequent to thy believing, and the effect of faith in thy soul, and what
Christ left to his Disciples, it will not be constant, it has not been always
the same; thou have also had thy sad hours: if there be a difference in
degrees, this concludes nothing against thy brother. If therefore thou can
speak a word in season, if thou can comfort another with the same comfort
wherewith thy own soul has been comforted heretofore of God, do it; but judge
charitably of thy afflicted brother, upon whom the hand of God under these
dispensations, lies very heavily.

4. Fourthly, See thou another, whose soul is not grown and thriven in grace
to that degree that thine is; his habits are not yet so confirmed, his joints
not so well knit; exercise again thy charity, if thou do but see him hold on
his way, though thou do not see he grows stronger and stronger. God has
promised that he shall grow, he has not promised that his growth shall be
visible unto thee: Remember you must give allowance both for the time he has
stood in the Lords Garden, and also for the means which God has afforded him
while he has stood there. I observe that God judges of men with allowance for
their temptations. Behold (says the Apostle) the Patience of Job. The patience
of Job? Job indeed did sometimes show much patience, but withal he discovered
eminent impatience: Witness his third Chapter, where you find him cursing the
day of his birth; and other parts of his Book, where he wishes for death, and
complains severely of Gods dealing with him; yet (says God) Behold the
patience of Job. God measured Job 's grace with his temptations. If indeed Job
had brake out into those great errors and extravagancies of passion, not being
under high and great temptations, he had showed himself very impatient; but the
Lord considers what temptations were upon his servant, and considering them, he
pronounces holy Job a very patient man. We must learn to judge as God judges,
and particularly as to this point of growth in grace; we must judge of it
according to the means and helps of grace which the person has had,
considering the natural temper of the person; as also his temptations and
afflictions which he has had to put him back, we must so judge of his growth
and thrift. Possibly his circumstances have been such, as have necessitated
him, in order to getting bread, to live in a Town, in a Family, where he has
scarce ever heard a good Sermon, nor has had any means of Instruction; no good
examples to go before him, and quicken him in the ways of God. Possibly he has
walked in the dark and seen no light, his life has been a life of many
afflictions, great temptations; thou have lived where thou have had a great
plenty of spiritual food, all imaginable means to promote the work of God in
thy soul. In such cases as these, thy brother is the object of thy pity and
prayers, and all the charitable assistance thou can give him; but by no means
of thy censure.

5. Lastly, This Discourse does highly solicit your charity, for those who
differ in their apprehensions of some Principles of Religion from you. And here
(if any where) I had need plead with you for charity; for although it be
evident, that it is not in the power of a man to believe what he would, but the
assent of the mind to a Proposition, must necessarily be according to the
evidence of the truth of the thing which his understanding has; yet it is
matter of amazement to consider, what Feuds, what Alienations in Affection, are
the products of Differences in Opinion: As if Heaven were entailed to
Understandings of one Complexion. There always were in the Church of God, and
there always will be, different apprehensions in some matters of Truth; and
generally they have brought forth disorders (great disorders) in men's practice;
each one hugging his particular opinion, as if he judged himself, and none but
himself, infallible: And even Protestants, declaiming against an Infallible
Head upon the Earth, will yet arrogate an Infallibility of Judgment unto
themselves. When as nothing is more demonstrable, than that my brother has as
much reason to quarrel with me for differing from him, as I have to quarrel
with him for his differing from me; unless he will say, I cannot be deceived,
but you may; which would give a just foundation for the renewing of that old
question of the false prophet, Which way went the spirit of God from me to
thee? Does any one say I have Scripture for my Opinion? So says the other.
Does he say, I think I am verily persuaded of it by the spirit of God? So says
the other. Does he say, But I have diverse learned and good men of my mind?
Truly there are not very many differences of any moment, but his brother may
say the same. Will he say, But the Church wherein I live is of my mind. Be it
so, this indeed should much regulate sober Christians, as to the publishing and
divulging of their opinions, to the disturbance of others; but it ought neither
to rule Faith, nor to guide private Practice. If it does, the particular
Church, which all confess fallible, is made the Rule of Faith, or the Supreme
Judge of it; neither of which it can be. What mean therefore these heats? The
Question is still about a Judge in the case, Whether a man's particular
conscience must not be the proximate rule of his actions? If it must not, what
must? We have lost the very Basis of the Protestant Religion, and shall whether
we will or no be sorced to Rome to find an Infallible Judge; and when we have
done that, we have but cheated our own souls; for he is not to be found there:
though one may indeed be found that arrogates that Title, and to whom credulous
Proselytes give it. How much better is it to stay at home, and act according to
that excellent Canon of Saint Paul, Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded; and if in any thing you be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal this unto you. The confessed Golden Rule, Whatsoever you would that
others should do unto you, the same do you unto them again; if it were well
studied by Christians, would put an end to all their little bickerings upon
this score; to all their prejudices one against another; all their uncharitable
Judgings and Cenfurings of one another; all their eagerness against and
persecutions one of another. One thinks the Government of the Church should be
by Prelates, another by Presbyters, a third by Common Suffrage. Suppose all
these agreed in this, that without faith and holiness no man shall see God. Let
every one walk in this way, they will at last meet in the Kingdom of God. One
thinks Children should be baptized, another thinks, that none ought to be
baptized, till he be capable of instruction, and making an open profession of
faith and holiness. Yet may both these truly receive, embrace, and rest upon
Jesus Christ, as their alone Savior; their failing is but in a single point of
obedience (there indeed one of them must fail, if they practice according to
their principle) but who lives and sins not against God? Who judges every
sin in event damnable? especially where the error too is in matter of judgment,
which a man has no power to over rule his own Faith and Persuasion in; and to
practice contrary to what he is persuaded to be his Duty, were but to play the
Hypocrite, to sin against the light of his Conscience, and interpretatively
against the Mind of God, and that wilfully.

Mistake not, the Kingdom of Heaven is not intailed to Parties, but as in every
Nation, so amongst all Parties, who so believes in Christ, fears God, and
works righteousness, is accepted of God. Take heed of embracing Propositions
which are inconsistent with that Faith and Holiness, without which none can be
saved. There is also another uncomfortable sort of Propositions; viz. Such as
who so holds and practices up to them, will be obliged to break Communion
with all or most Churches. And here I must lament the unhappiness of them that
are fallen into the mistake of the Seventh-day Sabbath, I have known some of
them, whom I could not but think persons truly fearing God; but certainly next
to Errors in Fundamentals, which will divide a soul from the Head Christ Jesus,
such as divide from the Body, are of most dangerous consequence. For the
Christian Sabbath, I make a doubt whether there be any thing (which is not
plain in Scripture) which comes to us by an universal tradition of the Church;
but that alone, no considerable number of people in any Age of the World ever
disputed it; whence as also from the Scriptural proof (though raised by
consequence for it) there is not this day a very considerable number of
Christians in the World, but do observe it, as the Lords Sabbath, the seventh
part of our time, which the Fourth Commandment has consecrated: so as those
under a different persuasion in this thing, are under a necessity of breaking
Communion in solemn acts of Worship with all Churches; and this is very sad and
uncomfortable. Study to be rooted and grounded in every Truth, though every
Proposition of Truth be not of that value, as to break Unity and Peace for, yet
there is not any but is worth searching and inquiring after: but if after all
you cannot be reconciled to your Brethrens Opinions, nor yet reconcile them to
yours; learn, according to the Apostles Precept, (...), to speak, to contend
for, to hold the Truth in love, and to be charitable to those whom you may
discern of different persuasions and apprehensions from you. God (as I have
showed you) does in great wisdom permit these different apprehensions in his
people. God may have received those that so differ, do you receive them because
God has received them. Thus I have showed you, how my foregoing Discourse may
be useful to you for the improvement of your charity.

It may also be useful to you for the improvement of your piety, and that
diverse ways: 1. teach you to adore the divine wisdom in these different
dispensations of his providence. You cannot understand why God suffers some
of his people to be weak, weak in faith, weak as to their spiritual habits and
exercises, you think God might have more glory if they were stronger, and their
habits were more confirmed; which is certainly true, as to the actings of those
particular persons; the more strong any one is in faith, the more confirmed he
is in the habits of holiness; the more undoubtedly that single person would
glorify God: but the Government, as of particular souls, so of the whole
Church, is upon Christ's Shoulders. And in the government of his providence he
so administreth the affairs of particular souls, as he may have the most glory
from the whole. Besides, God ordinarily governs his people, not by miraculous
operations, but by ordinary reasonable means. Which two things being supposed,
Gods infinite wisdom appears, in the different sizes and statures of his
people, in their different states and complexions. Every one has that measure
of grace and knowledge, which best suiteth the good of the whole Body of his
Church; which as the body natural has different members, and those of
different uses; and must be so disposed, as shall render them most serviceable
one to another, and the whole most serviceable to the great design of Gods
glory. Let us not therefore trouble our selves, in disputing the equity and
reasonableness of Divine Providence, in its motions; for though we cannot by
searching, find out the Almighty unto Perfection: yet you see there is no such
variety in Gods Dispensations of this nature, but a reasonable account may be
given of it. And as to these Dispensations, it will appear at the last, that
those who have least shares of this hidden manna, will have no lack of enough
to bring them to Heaven; and those who have the greatest portions of it, will
find they have nothing over.

2. But in the second place, This Discourse affords a great argument to promote
holiness in all our souls. The subject of my Discourse has been not the
dispensations of the first grace, but Gods further manifestations unto the
souls of his people. And you have heard it given, as one reason of Gods variety
in the Dispensations of them; That some souls walk more closely with God, are
more afraid to offend him, and more careful to please him than others are. For
though the soul, as to the Reception of the first grace, be merely passive; yet
as to the receiving of these manifestations in the several degrees of them, it
is many ways Active. All therefore that I have to do, is to call upon you to
perfect Holiness, and to show you what force there is in this Argument, to
engage you to it. Holiness is a great General, comprehending whatsoever is the
Duty of Man pursuant to the Will of God: All Duties both to God and Man, fall
under the Motion of it, as well Acts of Righteousness toward Men, as Acts of
Devotion toward God; yea, and not Acts only, but even secret Thoughts, and
those powers and habits of the Soul, which are the Principles of such Acts.
When I therefore upon this account, call upon you to perfect Holiness, my
meaning is, that you should study that perfection of Spirituality and Heavenly
Duty, which God requires of you; but for the sake of those that are weaker, and
because there are some pieces of Holiness, which do more properly and
immediately trend toward the reception of these gradual manifestations, and
the omission of which may in a more peculiar and special manner, hinder the
reception of them, and provoke God to deny them; let me open this general in
some few particulars.

1. First, Take heed of all wilful sinning, for if we consider, the
with-drawings of these Divine Influences, as punishments of sin, as undoubtedly
sometimes they are, it is hard to say what wilful sinning God may not thus
punish. David's sins of Murder and Adultery were acts of unright ousness
toward men, yet God punished them in this manner, as we may gather from his
penitential Psalms; there is no sort of sin that I know but may for a time
separate betwixt God and the Soul, and make him to hide his Face from it. That
Christian therefore, that would have these manifestations of God unto him,
these abidings of the Holy Spirit with him, must be Holy in all manner of
Conversation, having a respect to all Gods Commandments, as well those of the
second Table as those of the first. Conscience may check and reflect sourly
upon the soul for any of them, and where that does so reflect and check, there
will be little Peace and Comfort, little Life and Vigor unto duty, little
Growth and Progress in the Ways of God: Herein therefore exercise your selves,
to keep a Conscience void of offense, both toward God and toward men; to keep
your selves from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit.

2. Secondly, In a more particular manner, take heed of all earthy mindedness;
1 John 2.15. Love not the World nor the things of the World; if any man love
the World the love of the Father is not in him: v. 16. For all that is in the
World, the lust of the Eyes, the lust of the Flesh, and the pride of Life, is
not of the Father, but is of the World. Pleasure, Profit, Honor, is all that
the World can afford any man. A man given up to the pursuit of pleasure, or of
worldly profits and advantages, or worldly honors and preferments, scarce can
have any true love for God; and the promise of manifestation, is made to him
that loves God and keeps his Commandments. The Apostle tells us, That to be
carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. A
carnal mind does not only bring a Soul to eternal death, in the last issue of
it, but it puts a great death upon his Life and Peace, I mean his Spiritual
Life and Peace. It is impossible that the Soul that is entangled in the
businesses of the World, in a more than ordinary manner, should find his Soul
either so free for, or so strong in the performances of spiritual duty, as that
Soul who has less of the cares and business or concerns of the world upon it.
The Soul of a Man is not infinite in its powers, and cannot be with equal
degrees of intention, employed upon two different, much less contrary things.
While we are in the world, we must be conversing with the men of the world, and
handling the things of the world; we must else (as the Apostle speaks in the
case of converse with sinners) Go out of the world: but the less the Soul is
engaged in them, the less the Heart is set upon them, and its intention, and
affections taken up with them; therefore it will be more free as to its
spiritual business, and stronger in the performance of it. Let every one
therefore learn that excellent lesson of the Apostle; 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. Let
those that have Wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep as though
they wept not; and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not; and they that
buy as they that possessed not; and they that use this world as not abusing it.

3. Thirdly, Be diligent in waiting upon God in the institutions of his public
worship, and conscientious in such attendance. The Preaching of the Word of God
is the great Ordinance of God for perfecting the Saints, both as to their
number, by the work of Conversion, and as to their graces; by giving out
further measures and manifestations of himself to his peoples Souls; he
creates the fruit of the Lips peace. Christians therefore, who wait for these
influences, are concerned to wait upon the Lord in his own way. It was Gods
ancient promise, That wheresoever he recorded his name to dwell, there be would
meet his people and bless them: And considering that although the blessing of
Grace does not depend upon the Instrument; let Paul plant, and Apollos Water,
God must give the increase; and he that planteth is nothing, nor he that
waters any thing; yet God dealing with reasonable Souls, uses to deal with
them in reasonable ways. I do not think it enough for Christians to go to
Church and hear Discourses out of Pulpits, but to wait upon God under such
Preaching of his Word, as may appear and approve it self to them, as having a
rational tendency, to the improvements of their Soul in Grace. There are kinds
of Preaching, under which a Christian may sit long enough before he find his
Soul quickened or strengthened, or improved by them. You may remember I gave
you that as one reason, why some receive more gradual manifestations of Divine
Love than others, because they have better means than others have, or make a
better use of means than others do. I take a conscientious use of the more
external means, to lie much in three things: 1. In a good election of them. 2.
In a sincere and diligent attendance upon them. 3. In an after repetition of
them to our selves, and a more private application of them to our own hearts.

1. I say first in a good election of them. Though Preaching of the Word be the
general means, yet the Preacher and way of Preaching, makes a vast difference
in this means; and the concurrence of God to all the purposes of Grace is upon
experience found to be evidently more; where the means appear in the eye of
reason more proper. If the Preacher ordinarily preaches not to the
understanding and capacity of the hearer, or not to the conscience and hearts
of hearers, but fills up his time with other things, impertinent to the Souls
Spiritual Duty; or wraps up his Duty in such Parables and Mysteries of Phraise
and Abstruseness of Notions, that the hearer can make nothing of it; he can
have little hope to profit by it, and he will show little conscience in
attendance upon them. Our Savior, you know, gives this account, why he spoke
to the Scribes and Pharisees and ordinary Jews in Parables; but to his
Disciples opened those Parables and spoke more plainly and intelligibly. Mat.
13.13, 14. Therefore speak I to them in Parables; because they in seeing see
not, and in hearing bear not, neither do they understand; and in them is
fulfilled the Prophecy of the Prophet Isaias, etc. but v. 16. Blessed are your
Eyes, for they see; and your Ears, for they hear.

2. Secondly, In a sincere and diligent attendance upon them. That Soul which
will meet God in his Ordinances, must in hearing hear; he must go out with a
design to meet God, and he must hoc agere, while he is waiting upon God. Our
Savior asks his Disciples, when they had been hearing John the Baptist, What
they went out for to to see? It is a question we should all propound to our
selves, when we go to wait upon God in his Ordinances: Now what does my Soul go
out for to do; what is its end in this motion? God ordinarily meets his
People, according to the sincerity of their designs; which indeed makes their
attendances upon God, seekings, or not seekings of Gods Face.

3. It lies in a practical application and whetting the Word hard upon our
hearts and consciences. This is the digesting of the Word; this now is a piece
of Holiness of great import, to those that seek after the further
manifestations of God, and higher measures of Grace; any growing, whether it be
in Faith or Love. Nor is the Reading andPreaching of the Word only to be
attended, but the Holy Sacraments also; Baptism (which we have generally
received in our Infancy) to be improved: And the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
to be conscienciously attended. There is a great improvement to be made of
Baptism, in order to our Spiritual Strength and Vigor: I have handled that in
a particular Discourse in some of your hearing, and must not now enlarge upon
it: it is our great error that we make no more use of our Baptism than we do.
The Apostle Romans 6. draws great arguments from it to strengthen us unto
Holiness. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is called (by the Apostle) The
Communion of the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ. The meaning of that I
do not understand, if it does not signify, That it is an Ordinance, wherein
(if it be duly and conscienciously attended upon) Christ does communicate the
virtue of his death. Now I am sure all Christ's manifestations to the Souls of
his People, are a part of that purchase. It is true, it does not necessarily
work these effects, nor is God bound necessarily in this manner, to concur
with it; he is a free agent in all his effluxes of Divine Grace, but yet these
are Holy Institutions, upon which he has recorded his name, and we are bound
in order to our receptions of his Grace, to lie at these Pools.

4. Be much, fourthly, in Prayer, especially in secret Prayer; there it is that
the Soul can be freest with God, both in the confession of its sins, and in the
spreading of its particular case before the Lord, and wrestlings with him. All
that is to be obtained of God, either with reference to the first Grace, or the
further manifestations of God unto the Soul, is in one place or other of Holy
Scripture promised unto Prayer.

5. Lastly, Let not Meditation and Holy Conference be neglected. Meditation is
the souls Soliloquy with God, a piece of piety often commanded and practiced
with great success. Holy converse and conference, is our conversation with
Saints, who are to meet often together, to consider, and to provoke one another
to love and to good works. Converted souls, Luke 22.32. have an obligation upon
them to strengthen their brethren. Men of knowledge do not only themselves
increase in strength for their own use, but they increase strength in others;
as Gods instruments, for the principal efficiency of spiritual strength is from
the Lord. Converse also with the people of God is of great use to increase
spiritual life and vigor, as one coal kindles another; and oft-times God
makes use of his more private servants, to speak a word in season to the weary
in short for all the purposes of special grace. I shall add no more, for the
promise of divine manifestations, and the abode of the spirit of God with the
soul, being limited to those who love Christ, and evidence that love by a
keeping of his commandments; it must necessarily follow, that the keeping the
commandments of Christ in all things, must be an adequate means; and indeed
all that lies upon our hand to do, in order to the obtaining of these
manifestations. Now what greater argument to press holiness can there be than
this? He that has my commandments, and keeps them (says our blessed Lord,
John 14.21.) he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be loved of
my Father; and I will love him, and manifest my self unto him. And again, v.
23. If a man love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him; and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Who is there that
understands not the difference betwixt a strong and a weak Christian, weak in
the resistance of sin and temptation, weak in the performance of all holy and
spiritual duties: betwixt a Christian who feels himself in a free lively temper
for the service of God, ready to run the way of Gods Commandments, and a dull,
heavy, uncheerly temper for duty; while in the mean time the conscience is
pressed with a necessity of doing of it, betwixt a sad, dejected, disquieted,
troubled spirit, and a soul full of that joy and peace that is consequent to
believing? betwixt a soul flourishing and daily shooting forth, in more perfect
acts of grace, and a soul that seems to stand still, and not to thrive in the
ways of holiness? If therefore there be any advantage from further degrees of
spiritual strength, if any goodness in a spiritual liveliness, freedom, and
alacrity, if any consolation in Christ, or sweetness arising from those
consolations, if any comfort in the love, the spiritual love of God? O study
Holiness, some gradual neglects of it are the greatest causes of all that
weakness, dullness, sadness, unthriftiness, under which your souls labor. God
sometimes acts by Prerogative, showing these mercies where he will, and
because he will, and withholding them for the probation and trial of his
People; but generally it is in justice to punish his Peoples omissions of their
duty, or commissions of something which is contrary to their duty. And here now
I shall put an end to my Discourses, in which I have been exercised so long,
relating to the Providence of God. I shall conclude with that of Job, Chap.
26.14. Lo these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of
him. To which you may add that, Job. 11.7. Can thou by searching find out
God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto Perfection? v. 8. It is as high as
Heaven; What can thou do? Deeper than Hell, What can thou know? v. 9. The
measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
FINIS.
An Alphabetical TABLE, Containing the principal Matters contained in this Book.
Note. In some places, through the mistake of the Printer in figuring the
pages, thou art directed to the Contents by the Sermon; Ser. 44. Ser. 55. etc.

A.
ACtual Providence, vide Providence. Acts of Grace elicited by the motion of
Divine Providence in its timings the destruction of Gods enemies, and the
salvation of his people, 210, 211, 212. Actions good rewarded when the
intention by God is disallowed, 362, 363. The reasonableness of it, 364, 365.
It is only with limited and temporal rewards, 366, 367. Actions of piety how
elicited by Providence, 208, 209, 210, 211. Adam, why he first had salvation
offered him upon a Covenant of works, 453, 454, 455, 456, 457. Adoration of God
in the unsearchable things of Providence our duty, 171. Affairs in the world
ordinarily subordinated to the designs God has upon his Church, 258, 258, 260,
261. The reasonableness of it, 263, What use to be made of it, 265, 266, 267.
Afflictions of this life may be punishments of past and pardoned sins, 398,
399. How this is just, and reasonable, 404. What use to be made of it, 405. God
the Author of them, this consists with his holiness and goodness, 404, 405,
406. The Portion of Gods people, not of all, 588, 589. They are not truly Evils
proved, 589, 590, 591, 592, 593, 594. Aids and Assistances of Grace, whether
given to all; if not, how God is just in condemning such as have them not, 650,
651, 652, 653, 654, 655, Anger, what, Sermon. 45. How not to be used in the
prosperity of sinners, Sermon. 45. Arguments to persuade the restraint of it,
Ibid. Application of God, in what it lies, 103. necessary to render God the
object of our delight, 603, 604. Application of the whole discourse about
varieties of further Grace, 692. The variety of Christians growth, etc. 727,
728, 729, 730, 731. Apprehensions of truth, how different, 721, 722. Whence the
difference is, 723. The reason of it, 724, 725. What improvement is to be made
of it, 727, 728, 729, 730, 731, etc. Attributes of God, what, how glorified by
the timings of Providence, 208, 209, 210. and by the permission of sin, 480,
481, 482.
B.
Blessings, sensible, most upon those who live most exactly up to the Divine
rule, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442.
C.
Casual, nothing to God, p. 113, 114. Calling to faith and repentance how
universal, 466. Why, if all have not a power to believe and obey, 467, 468. How
the sincerity of God in an indefinite call is to be vindicated, 470, 471. Why
to be bearkened to and obeyed, 474, 475, 476. Call to a relation necessary to
be discerned, 428, 429. how it may be discerned, 429, 430. Children, how
punished by God justly, 533, 534. The reasonableness of Divine Providence in
the afflicting and punishing Children, 534, 535, 536. What is to be made of it;
what may relieve us troubled under such a Providence, 537, 538, 539, 540, 541,
542, 543, 544, 545. Church, How it is under special Providence, 132, 133, 134.
Circulation of Providence observed, 337, 338. the reasonableness of it, ibid.
Circumstances, not often, but sometimes part of the Promise, 232. when not so.
Providence as to them rarely satisfies our expectations, 233. why God does not
so satisfy us, 234, 235. Circumstances of the world ordinarily suited to the
designs God has upon his Church, 244, 245, 246. Comforts, How arising from the
notion of Providence, 51. The Government of it, 118, 119, 120, 121. What upon
death of Children, 537, 538. Why dispensed to some more than to others, 710,
711, 712. Conclusions, either too sweet or too bitter, not to be raised from
the motions of Providence in dispensing outward things, 345, 346, 369, 361.
Conformity to the Divine rule the nearest way to blessings even of this life,
438, 439, 440, v. pl. Blessings. Converting grace. Varieties of Providence
observable in Gods dispensation of it, 665, 666, 667, 668, 669, 670. Why
dispensed in several periods of life, and by several means, ibid. What use to
make of it, 673, 674, 675. Correlates, vide Relates. Covenant of works with
Adam, necessary to be first made and exhibited, why, 454, 455, 456, 457. Of
Grace, when made and how, ibid. Indefinite exhibition of it, why, 465, 466. How
consistent with Gods truth and sincerity, ibid. Creation of the worlds by the
Word of God. What word, p. 20. How this is understood by faith, by reason, by
faith beyond reason, 24, 25. Vanity of Philosophers about it, 29. The
usefulness of understanding by faith, that the Worlds were made by God, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32. Curiosity, The nature of it, checked, and dissuaded from the
evils of it, 168, 169.
D.
Days, of small things what, 220. not to be despised, 221. How they may be
despised, 223, 224, 225. Damnation of sinners just, though Providence affords
not aids and assistances sufficient to salvation, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654.
Delighting in God what, what is necessary to it, 601, 602, 603. Our duty when
we cannot delight our selves in worldly enjoyments, whence, 604, 605. The
reasonableness of it, 606, 607. The duty pressed, ibid. Departing from evil,
and doing good, Saints duty in an evil day, 607, 608. Opened in particulars,
610. Arguments to enforce it, 611, 612. Difficult questions relating to the
motions of actual Providence resolved, 450, 451, to the end of the book.
Difference in dispensations of special grace, 664, etc. to the end of the book.
As to the first grace, 664, 665, 666, 667. As to further grace, 682 683, etc.
The reasonableness of Providence in it, ibid. The use we should make of it,
ibid. as to growth in grace, whence, 717. How reasonable, 718. as to
apprehensions concerning truth, 723. Disappointments of our expectations from
Providence, what use to be made of them, 238, 239. Dispensations of Grace. God
in them acts freely, but unaccountably, 619, 620, 621. proved in several
dispensations of that nature, 622, as to this God is not unrighteous, proved,
applied, 626, 627, 628. In penal dispensations God acts not upon Prerogative,
but according to creatures demerits, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, etc.
Destruction what, and how from our selves, proved, argued reasonable, 636, 637,
638, 639. Duty inferred, with relation to Providence, 159, 160, 161. To the
unsearchable things of Providence, 171, 172. Directed, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187.
To Providence moving obliquely, or seemingly contrary, 198. Toward God, 199.
with reference to the promises, 200. To Providence opened in several things,
202, 203, 204. under the prospering of Sinners, and oppression of the
Righteous, 586, 587, 588, 589, 600, 601, etc. In the day of small things, 225,
226. with reference to promises made to the Church, but not as yet fulfilled,
239. with reference to Gods taking away Children, 536, 537, 538, etc. Duty
resulting from distinguishing grace, 631, 632. whence some have more strength
to spiritual duty than others, 701, 702, 703.
E.
Enquiries after knowledge how sinful, 168, 169, 170. Envy, what, how to be
avoided in a time of sinners prosperity, Ser. 44, 45. Events; products of Gods
infinite wisdom, and love, 13, 14. What may satisfy Gods people under all
Events, 15, 16. Everlasting destruction, of sinners, how consonant to Divine
Justice it is and reasonable, 564, 565, etc. and 580. Evils of ungrounded
Expectations what, 241, 242. Evil of Sin not from God, of punishment from him,
503, 504. This consistent with the holiness and goodness of God, 506, 507, 508.
Evil things sensible, why measured out to the best: how not true Evils, 588,
589, to p. 595. Exhortations from the consideration of the Government of
Providence, to Faith, Prayer, Praise, Patience, Love, free submission to God,
with arguments to press them, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126. Expectations, of Gods
people, as to the substance of the Promises, never frustrated, 232, as to
circumstances seldom satisfied, 233. The reasonableness of it, 234, 235.
Experience, How advantaged by observation of Providence, 176, 177, 178, 179.
Eying of God in Evils of punishment of what advantage, how it is reasonable,
512, 513, 514.
F
Faculties in living Creatures upheld by Providence, what, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74.
Faith, How it shows us that the worlds were made by God, 24.25, 26, 27. Its
necessity, usefulness, excellency, 30. Its opposition to fear, to too great
solicitude, 52, 53. how to be exercised in the use of means, 54. How it works
in the day of small things, 227. In what cases to be so exercised, 228, 229.
Considerations to encourage such exercise of it, 230, 231, 232. How the life of
Faith is to be managed in the day of Sinners Prosperity, Ser. 45. In what it
lies, Ser. 45. What promises are its objects at such a time, Ser. 45. It is
pressed by many arguments, Ser. 45. Commended, Ser. 45. Directed, Sermon. 45.
Fate fourfold, 115. How the Christian Fate differs from that which was
Stoical, is Physical, or Mathematical, 115, 116. Fittedness, To work in what it
lies, 424, 425. Foreknowledge of God proves his purpose, 5, 6, 7. Fretting,
What it is, Sermon. 44. How to be avoided in the day of Sinners Prosperity, Sermon.
44.
G
God. His purpose has passed upon all things, 2, 3, 4, 5. His immensity,
activity, condescension, patience; Argued from the preservation of his
Providence, 79, 80. and from the Government of Providence, 117, 118. Of what
evils alone, he is the Author, 504, 505. Not of any thing truly evil, 505. but
of Punishments, ibid. He is holy in punishing his own People, 516, 517. and
such as he knows will be made worse by punishments, 519. The reasonableness of
such punishments, 522, 523. What use we should make of it, 524, 525, 526, 527,
etc. God is just and holy in punishing Children. v. Children. In punishing
Relates in their Correlates. v. Relates. In the punishment of Sin with Sin,
549, 550, 551. Gods holiness, and justice in this cleared, 554, 555. Grace.
Varieties in the dispensation of the first Grace, 663. ad p. 681. Of further
Grace, what, 681. Strengthening Grace, 694, 695. Varieties in the dispensation
of it, 696, 697. In what, 697, 698. How reasonable, 698, 699. Quickening Grace,
605. Varieties in it, 705. Whence, 706. How reasonable Varieties as to it are,
706, 707. Consolatory Grace. v. Comforts. Growth in Grace, what it is, 713. How
different from improvements in gifts, 714. Mistakes about it, 714. Reasons of
different sizes in Christians, 715, 716, 717.
H
Happiness of a Soul in what it truly lies, 591, 592. Hearkening to the Gospel
Call persuaded, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476.
I
Intentions good often rewarded, where the action is not allowed, 362, 363.
Indefinite proposal of the Gospel why, 465, 466, 467. Justice of God, in the
punishment of Children, v. Children. In the punishment of Relates in their
Correlates, v. Relates. In the punishment of his own people, v. Afflictions. In
the punishment of incorrigible Sinners, 519, 520, 521. In punishing Sin with
Sin, 549.550, 551. In punishing sinners with everlasting Destruction, 561, 562,
to p. 581. Improvement of means, and habits of common Grace persuaded, 474,
475, 476. Of Afflictions, how, 514, 515.
K
Knowledge, How it is or may be improved by the observation of the Motions of
Actual Providence, 167, 168. 177.
L
The Law, How it makes Sin to abound, 478, Limiting God, What, how Sinful,
240. Lusts of men made use of, to serve the good designs of Gods Providence
relating to his Church, 324, 325. Several Lusts instanced in, and the proof of
the use God made of them, 273, 274, 275, 276. The reasonableness of it, 280,
281. The use we should make of it, 332, 333,
M
Magistrates, Their relation to God as his Ordinance, his Creatures, his
Vicegerents, their usefulness to men, 287, 288, 289. How under Special
Providence, 285, 286. Means, How little considerable in the effects of
Providence, 212, 213, 214. Means of Grace-how sufficient, how not. v.
Sufficient. Measures of sinful acts how to be taken, 570, 571, 572. Methods of
Providence, when God intends his Churches tranquillity or trouble, 266, 267,
268. Ministers faithful, under special Providence how, 312, 313. Proved, 314,
315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320. Applied, 321, 322. Miscarriages in a good cause,
in two cases, what, 253. Motions of Providence, to be observed, 173. Always in
pursuance of some word of promise, or threatening, 188. Not always direct,
sometimes oblique, 189, 190. Sometimes (in appearance) contrary to the word of
promise or threatening, to the fulfilling of which they are levelled, 191, 192,
193, 194. A reasonable account of such motions, 194, 195, 196, 197.
O
Observation of Providence our duty, 174. In what it lies, 175. The advantages
of it, 175. Men exhorted to it, 183. Some rules to direct it, 183, 184. Twenty
observations upon the motions of Providence, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194,
195, 196, 197, 198, etc. The ordering of our lives, advantaged by observation
of Providence, 175, 176, 177. Oblique motions of Providence, why, 193.
Obedience, How inferred our duty from Creation, 30, 31, 32.
P
Passive patience, How our duty, upon the acknowledgment of an Actual
Providence, 57, 58. Permission, Of sin, why, 478, 479. What attributes of God
are by it Glorified, 481, 482, 483, 484. What exercises of Grace are occasioned
by it, 485, 486. How holiness is advantaged by it, 487. Why so many sinners,
488, 489, 490. Why so much Sin is permitted, 493, 494, 495. It ought to be no
encouragement to Sin, Why, 496, 497, 498. What use to be made of it, 499, 500.
What God does in Permission of Sin, 479, 480. Philosophers, Vain in their
Notions of the Worlds Original, 29. Praise Given to God from inanimate, brute
Creatures, much more due from all reasonable beings, 30. Otherwise they are the
most ungrateful, and self-condemned Creatures, 31, 32. Preservation Of the
World, how wonderful, 62, 63. The Nature of it, 63, 64, 65. By what particular
acts, 66, 67, 68, 69, etc. Preservantion of men in political capacities, opened
in 7 particulars, 87, 88, Preservation of Saints in their Spiritual capacities,
by 5 acts, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100. Polities, How preserved by God, 87, 88. Powers
In living creatures wholly by Providence, v. Faculties. Power In lapsed man to
repent, and believe, whether rightly concluded from Gods universal call to
both, 486. Why else God calls, 487, 488, 489, 490, etc. Proportions of
Punishment, what the due measure of them is, 570, 571, 572. Prosperity of
Sinners, v. Anger, Envy, etc. Piety promoved, from the Observation of
Providence how, 176, 177, 178. Piety and Policy of moral virtue, and keeping
close to God in his worship, 269, 270. Promises conducive to waiting, 616, 617.
Predetermination of all things according to the Counsel of Gods will, p. 3.
Proved from foreknowledge, 5. and the certainty of existence of things
necessary to such prescience, 6. Vorstius lost in fixing a cause of such
certain existence out of the Divine will, acknowledges it best to fix it
there, p. 7. Proved from actual Providence, ib. It lays no necessity upon the
Act but the Event, 11. Its usefulness to quiet Souls under ungrateful
contingencies, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Yet we ought to be piously affected at sad
Providence and for sin, 15, 16. Prayer and Praise, Both ordinary, and more
solemn, urged from the Consideration of the influence of Providence, 59, 60.
Providence works all things according to the Counsel of the Divine will: this
proves such a Counsel, p. 9. It is not uncertain in its effects, 9. Whence the
term Providence is derived, 34, 35. What actual Providence is, 35. That there
is an actual Providence, 36, 37. From the work of Creation, 37, 38. The nature
of God, 39, 40, 41. From events, and effects in the world, 42, 43. From the
acknowledgment of wiser Pagans, 44, 45. The objects, and extent of it, 45, 46,
47. Denied Atheistically, unreasonably, 49. It necessitates not motions of
rational agents, 50. It supercedeth no indeavouers, why, 50, 51. Faith,
Patience, Prayer, Praise, inferred from the Doctrine of Providence, 53, 54, 55,
56. It preserves the worlds, 61. How it works in the preservation of all
beings, 63, 64, 65, 66. Animate beings, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72. The several
faculties, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, etc, In persecuting men in political
capacities, Opened in 7 things, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91. In preserving the Saints in
their Spiritual capacity, 96, 97, 98. Our duty from thence, 99, 100. Providence
Governs all things, 103, 104. The objects, and acts of its Government. Seven
particulars instanced in, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109. Faith, Prayer, Praise, Love,
Patience under evils, Universal obedience, Duties inferred from the Governments
of Providence, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118. Providence has its specialties,
128, 129. The objects of special Providence, 130, 131. By what acts, as to the
Church, it is showed, 132, 133, 134. By what acts special Providence is
exerted, as to the Church opened in 9 particulars, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138,
139. The reasonableness of special Providence, as to these objects, 140, 141,
142, 143, 144. What use those that are the objects of special Providence ought
to make of its special workings for them, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, etc.
Providence, in what things unsearchable, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163,
164. etc. The use we are to make of it, 167, 168. Providence to be observed in
its motions. v. Observation. Twenty observations made upon the motions of
Providence, 188, 189. to p. 450. It seldom moves toward the fulfilling of the
word of promise, or threatening directly, often obliquely, and in a seeming
contrariety, yet is all this while fulfilling the word opened, proved, showed
to be reasonable; applied, 188, 189. to p. 203. It ordinarily fulfills promises
to Gods people, when they are at the lowest; Threatenings to Gods Enemies when
they are at the Highest; proved, showed reasonable, applied, 205, 206, 207,
etc. It does its greatest works in the day of man's smallest things, opened,
proved, showed reasonable, applied, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225. It never fails
Gods people as to the substance of the things promised; as to circumstances it
seldom answers people expectations; Proved, Showed reasonable, applied, 232,
233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240. It fitteth the circumstances of the
world, or particular persons in it to the work it intends, 244, 245, 246.
Proved, Showed reasonable, Applied, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 253. It
subordinateth the Civil affairs of the world, to the Religious concerns of the
Church, Proved, Showed reasonable, Applied, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264,
265, 266. Four things which it ordinarily brings to pass when God intends his
peoples tranquillity, 265, 266, 267. It often enforces men meaning not so to do
Gods work, 272, 273, 274. Several lusts of men, which Divine Providence has
taken advantage of, for the Service of the Church, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278,
279. The reasonableness of it, the use of it, 282, 283, 284. It is remarkably
seen in punishing sins, which eminently disturb humane society what sins those
are, Proved, Applied, 285, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, etc. It
ordinarily in this life retaliateth acts of Charity, and Cruelty, Proved; the
reasonableness of this motion showed; The application of this motion, 300, 301,
302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308. It is eminently seen in the Protection and
preservation of Godly Ministers and other bold adventurers for God, keeping
within the latitude of Duty, Proved; Showed reasonable, Applied, 312, 313, 314,
315. It ordinarily makes a spotless use of peoples sins, Proved; the
reasonableness of it Showed, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328. In the distribution
of sensible good things it moves circularly, though often to the seeming
advantage of the worst men; Opened, Proved, showed a reasonable motion,
applied, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, etc. It rewards Righteous men, and
punishes others certainly, and constantly, but not sensibly, and uniformly;
Opened, Showed reasonable, Applied, 351, 352, 353, 354, 355, etc. It often
rewards good intentions, where God disalloweth the action, and good actions
where God disallowes the intention; Proved, Showed reasonable, Applied, 362,
363, 364, 365, 366, 367, etc. It distributeth punishments and rewards most
plentifully when as to them it moves most slowly, Proved, Showed to be
reasonable, Applied, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, etc. It is very quick in its
distributions of rewards and punishments as to some sins, and some good
actions, 387, in what cases, 388, 389. The reasonableness of it, 393, 394.
Applied, 395, 396. It punishes the past and pardoned sins of Gods people with
sensible punishments: this Justified, Showed reasonable and reconcilable to
Divine Justice, and goodness; Applied, 398, 399. It ordinarily punishes
Relates in their Correlates Proved, Showed; reasonable, Applied, 409, 410. to
422. It suteth the Spirits of persons to their relations and work, proved,
applied, 423, 424, 425. ad 428. It commands sensible blessings upon such as
live most exactly to the Divine Rule, 438, 439, 440, 441. Proved, applied. 441,
442, 443, 444, etc. How it could propound Salvation to Adam upon a Covenant of
works, when God from Eternity had established man's Salvation upon a Covenant of
Grace, 452, 453. The reasonableness of it, 453, 454, 455, 456. Applied, 458,
459, etc. How it orders the offer of Salvation to all upon terms of believing,
Supposing a particular election, a particular Covenant of Grace, and no power
in lapsed man to repent or believe, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468, 469. How it
permits sin, v. Permission. Punishments of sinners, certain and constant, but
not sensible and uniforme, 352, 353, 354; 355, 356, 357. Punishments not all
for amendment of the person punished, 520, 521. How consistent with Gods
goodness, though he knows the person punished will not be amended, 528, 529.
Punishments of sinners, How from Justice, upon demerits of sinners, not from
Prerogative, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637, 638, 639, 640, 641.
Q
Quickness of Providence in some rewards and punishments, in what; The
reasonableness of it, 388, 389, 390, 391. Quickening grace, Variety in its
dispensations, what, how reasonable.
R
Rejoicing in the destruction of sinners how our duty, 525, 526, 527.
Relations, often punished, and rewarded in their correlates; The Vindication of
divine Justice in it, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 516. applied, 417,
etc. Retaliation in what causes commanded, allowed, or used by God, 298, 299,
300. 301. Used by Providence ordinarily as to acts of Charity and cruelty, or
other sins opposed to charity, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309,
310, 311. Rewards Various, 352, 353. Rewards of good men, certain and constant,
not always sensible and uniform, 350, 351. Of actions materially good of which
the intention is evil, 362, 363. Of what nature such rewards are, 366. Rewards
most plentiful, when coming most slow, 376, 377. The reasonableness of it, 378.
S
Saints, How under spiritual Providence in 9 particulars, 134, 135, 136, 137,
138, 139. Salvation, Why notwithstanding a particular election of some to life,
a particular Covenant, and Redemption, it is preached to all, 467, 468, 469,
470, 471. Sense of sad events, what, how far our duty, 15, 16. Sensible, v.
Blessings. Sin defamed by providence, 82, 83, 84. Sinners most ungrateful,
unnatural, most self-condemned, 32, 33. They can never be secure, 213. Sin
disturbing humane society, what, how, and why eminently punished, 285, 286,
287, 288, 290, 291, 292, 295. What to be learned from it, 295, 296. Sins in
Saints, past and pardoned, yet reasonably punished in afflictions of this life,
401, 402, 403. Sin how by reason of the Law, it more abounds, 478, 479, 480.
Sin, Sinners, so much sin, so many sinners, why permitted, 480, 481, 482. What
use of it, 494, 495, 496. How God is Just, and Holy in punishing Sin with Sin,
what Sinnings so punished, 547. to 561. Sins ordinarily, but spotlesly used by
Providence, 329, 330. Sinners not encouraged by it, why, 333, 334. Sins, What,
speedily punished, 388, 389, 390, 391, 392. Silence how various, what our duty,
what not, 613, 614. Slow motions of Providence to rewards, and punishments,
most plentiful in the products, 377. The reasonableness of such slowness, 377,
378, 379, 380, 381. Small things of man, what, 221. Specialties of Providence,
v. Providence. Special duty from whom due, in consideration of Special
Providence to them, in what it lies, 128, 129, 130. to 156. Strengthening Grace
against Temptations and sin, 687, 688. unto duty, what, how variously
dispensed, 689. How reasonably, 690. The application of it, 691, 692, 693, etc.
Sutableness to a work, or Relation, in what it lies, 424. Whence it is, some
are in relations not suited to them, 425, 426, 427. Soul- happiness in 3 things,
591. Sufficient means of Grace, in what sense all have it, 650, 651, 652. In
what sense they have it not, 652, 653. Proved that all have it not, 653, 654,
655. Applied, 660.
T
Temptations of what sorts, 684. Some more tempted than others, 687. Whence it
is, 688. Why God suffers those to be tempted who he knows will fall in the hour
of temptation, 687. Means to be used in order to abating the force of the
temptation, 693, Arguments for Spiritual resistance, 696, 697, 698.
Thanksgiving, Constant, Solemn, how evinced to be our duty from the
Consideration of the influences of Providence, 60. Threatenings ordinarily
Justified when Gods Enemies are highest, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210. Things
good or evil, what, why good things are measured out by Providence to evil men,
and evil things to good men, 582, 583, 584. to 595.
V
Varieties of Providence in the dispensation of the first Grace, viz.
Conversion, 664. What varieties, 665, 666, 667. a reasonable account of Variety
in that as to time, 668, 669, 670. As to means, 673. As to manner, 675, 676.
Use of it, 678, 679, 680. Varieties in dispensations of further Grace, 681.
What Grace, 681. In what the Varieties lie, or do not lie, 682, 683. Virtues
upheld in creatures by which they serve others, p. 72, 73. Unsearchableness of
Providence in its ways, 158, 159, etc. To Search, and behold them, our duty,
160, 161, 162. How they are unsearchable, 163. In the compass of them, in the
tendency, track, indications of them, 164, 165, 166. Use of that, 167.
W
Waiting for God patiently what it implies, 613, 614, 615, 616. Several things
recommended in order to it, 616, 617, 618. Pressed by Arguments, 618, 619. How
a duty resulting from a Consideration of Divine Providence, 56, 57. Ways of
God misjudged, from what causes, 517, 518. Widows poor and fatherless, obliged
to praise the Lord, 296, 297. Wisdom Spiritual, how to be learned from Gods
Providential dispensations, 175, 176, 177, 178. Wisdom to sobriety cammended,
167, 168. Will of God the alone cause of Grace, 620, 621, 622, 623. Wicked men
why suffered to devour such as are more righteous than they, 596, 597, etc. It
is just with God and reasonable, 597, 598, 599. What use we are to make of it,
ibid. Et seque
To the Reader.
WHat the Poet says of men, None lives without some errors, He is best that
has fewest, it is true concerning Printed books. Whosoever considers how much
intension is required to the writing, composure for the Press, and correcting
of so many Words, and Letters, as a Book of this bulk has, will easily
conclude it a matter of no easy achievement, for any but tolerably to acquit
themselves, and must be very uncharitable, if he will not give some allowances,
for the want of some letter in a word, or the transposing of a letter, or the
mistake of a Point, the want of a little particle, or needless doubling of it,
being but common infirmities of a quick Pen, or Press. But there are some
others of which I must give thee some account. The Author who intended no more
than the general Title to run through the leaves of the whole Book, must not be
charged, if the Title of any leaf be not so properly set, as he would have done
(who best knows the matter:) that business was done by another hand, not
knowing the Authors mind, and finding the top of the pages without titles. 2.
Two Presses being employed for expedition, the Printer not casting the sheets
punctually that he turned off to another, thou will find a disorder in the
figures of the pages from 594 to 601. The number of Sermons also miscounted,
next 45 follows 48 Sermon: but that is supplied in the matter of the Sermons
preceding 45. 2 of them making 4, but not distinguished by the Printer. The
Errataes troubling the sense are very few, the greatest in p. 108. l. 21. These
following the Author desires thee to be charitable to him, and the Printer for

ERRATA.
PAge 56. l. 9. r. suspicious. 58. l. 7. r. but yet. 75. l. 17. blot out [he
hath] 66. l. 20. r. every tide. 68. l. 7. r. in it. l. 16. r. not God. 108. l.
21. r. Subdued so as the greater. 120. l. 6. r. una. 121. l. 5. r. and cannot.
126. l. 30. r. restraining. 192, l. 5. r. Scrabling. 200. l. 6. blot out
[think] 211. l. 23. r. men's bearts. 221. l. 31. r. of the land. 222. l. 20.
blot out [of] 226. l. 21. r. Asa. 243. l. 5. r. (...). 252. l. 21. r. Adapting.
328. l. 25. 26. r. rapacious. 340. l. 18. r. Jotham was. l. 29. r. tracked.
Grace is. 341. l. 13. r Dives had a right. 349. l. 3. r. despond. 355. l. 23.
r. as to find. 373. l. 28. r. he hindered. 416. l. 30. r. taking away. 451. l.
32. r. evil, thou may not eat. 488. l. 23. r. Stith. 512. l. 9. r. Paris.
530. l. 24. r. habits of Grace. 530. l. 29. r. Gods Command. 547. l. 22. blot
out [repeated] 563. l. 14. r. Sinnings. 568. l. 33. r. feigned such. 583. l.
26. r. it is. l. 31. blot out [to good men] l. 37. r. justify God in. 586. l.
48. r. infortunis. 587. l. 11. r. Nierem. 594. l. 11. r. is a temptation. 597.
l. 25. r. roil. 604. l. 25. r. roiling. l. 39. r. have. 605. l. 18. r. high:
nature. l. 13. r. heirs. l. 21. r. add to this. l. 37. r. roil his. 606. l. 7,
6. r. fourth term. 610. l. 28. r. Sense which is. 602. l. 32. r. hence it is.
606. l. 23. r. his Children. 607. l. 3. r. extent of. 620. l. 4. r. this
temptation. 619. l. 3. r. is that. 621. l. 1. r. was Ishmael. l. 37. r.
particular nation. 630. l, 6. r. of the Gospel. 634. l. 26. blot out aphonimy
of. 636. l. 36. r. Severely. 643. l. 18. r. not come. 644. l. 16. r. play. So
the man might. l. 21. r. improveth. 647. l. 24. blot out [about] 656. l. 6. r.
no need. 661. l. 3. r. Swasion. 673. l 9. r. by thee. 678. l. 27. r. wish any
to. 679. l. 38. r. make men. 682. l. 18. blot out [for] 683. l. 1. r. by God.
690. l. 9. r. delights. 693. l. 8. r. as sweet. 696. l. 19. r. by himself.
714. l. 18. r. presently apt.


