A Congratulatory POEM On King WILLIAM's Victories in Ireland, and his Happy
Return into England.
portrait of King William III (William of Orange) W R
GULIELMVS III. D. G. ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE and HIBERNIAE REX F. D.


WHen French like Locusts spread the Irish Coast,
And Teague could justly of his Numbers boast,
Sad was the Winter, heavy the Campagn,
Shockt with Distempers and Tempestuous Rain;
Tents were our Tombs, and Men lay dead unslain:
Not the great Schomberg could Resistance yield,
But Death reigned Conqueror and kept the Field.
WILLIAM alone could War and Fate command;
Victorious Caesar has subdued the Land.
Hence, Mighty Prince, --
I Will never scruple Transmigration true,
Since Alexander's Soul survives in you,
His Conduct, Courage and his Fortune too.
What Sobietzky at Vienna got,
All that Lorain with Toil and Time e're fought,
Admits no Balance (were it duly weighed)
With what King WILLIAM's daring Arms have made.
Their Cause was Intrest and the Papal See;
His, True Religion, Laws and Liberty.
Long and uncertain steps their Ends attained,
Whil*st nothing here, but Vidi, Vici, reigned.
At his approach the affrighted Rebels run,
Like flying Mists before the rising Sun.
Dublin rejoiced to quit her Copper Coin,
When Caesar forced the Passes of the Boyn:
Thunder and Lightning from his Cannon flew;
Not storms of Rain, but streams of Blood ensue:
Drogheda quitted on the first Alarm,
Duncannon, Waterford, pursue the Charm,
And all submit to his victorious Arm:
An Arm on which the Foe with wonder gazed,
An Arm at which the Battle stood amazed,
At which the Bullet trembled when it grazed.
Heavens bless the Victor! May his Triumphs rise
Till Angels guard him to his native Skies.
And now with grateful Hearts and willing Hands,
England receives him from the Irish Bands.
And though the Empire courts him, Holland more,
To act as General on a foreign Shore;
Unwillingly we wish his Grandeur shown,
Unless his Person still supplies the Throne.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for James Blackwell at Bernard's-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1690.


