The Dagonizing of Bartholomew Fair, caused through the Lord Majors Command,
for the battering down the vanities of the Gentiles, comprehended in Flag and
Pole, appertayning to Puppet play.
The 23. of August being the day before the Apostolic Fair.
ON August's four and twentieth Eve,
The Cities Sovereign and the Shrieve
To Smithfield came if you will believe to see the ungodly flagges.
The Livery men were sore put to it,
Though some wore shoe, and some wore boot,
They 'wre all constraind to trans on foot,
God save 'em.
Entering through Duck-lane at the Crown,
The sovereign Cit began to frown,
As if 't abated his renown, the paint did so o'retop him.
Down with these Dagons then, quoth he,
They outbrave my days Regality,
For's pride and partiality
Jove crop him.
I Will have no puppet-playes, quoth he,
The harmlesse-mirth displeases me,
Begun on August twenty three, it is full twelve hours too early.
A Yonker then began to laugh,
Against whom the Major advanced white staff,
And sent him to the Compter safe,
sans parley.
Another wight (in woeful wise)
Besought the Major, his pupetries,
That he would not Babell-onize, surely they were not whorish.
Oh do'nt my bratts Isabellize,
They never did Meretritialize
Betwixt your Lordships Ladies thighs,
peace Villain.
Another Mortal had a clout,
Which on a long pole did hang out,
At which the Major turned up his snout, for he was then advancing.
Mounted with him came both the Shrieves,
And Catchpoles with their hanging slieves,
They showed much like a den of theev's
though prauncing.
With that my Lord did silence break,
He opened his mouth and thus did speak,
It Is fittest quoth he that the weak unto the walls should go.
There was a Varlet (close at hand)
To execute (Gold chains) command
Pulled wight away straight, notwithstand
ing, foul it was.
He that showed wonders made of wax,
Spoke in behalf of his fine knacks,
Quoth he, we spit no fire of flax, nor such like puppet shows.
Besides we show his Excellence,
Quoth Major, that is a fair pretense,
Gods-nigs it is time that I were hence
s' away 'h goes.
On top of Booth sat pudding John,
(Lord would be loath to sit thereon,)
I Am sure he wished his Lordship gone, yet durst not tell him so.
But when his Lordship left the Fair,
John set up throat did rend the Air,
And glad he was, he loud did swear
he was gone.
So was Mr. FINIS.

