CUPIDS Kindness to Constant CORIDON, OR, ^air SILVIA VVoun^ed with a Dart.
^hen Beauties bright, Young men can sight,
and seek their overthrow,
Then Cupid's Darts must wound their hearts,
he will not leave them so.
Tune of Charon make have etc.
This may be Printed

R. P.

depiction of Cupid

depiction of a lady

^Ilvia the Fair by the side of a River,
where she sat combing her Golden hair,
^^pid he drew forth a Dart from his Quiver,
and without pity he smites her there;
^^w when she f^le her heart was wounded,
strait cried with voice both soft an shrill,
^h^t sudden change has my freedom confounded?
why must I love now against my Will.
Often in Valleys young Corridon courted me,
yet I looked on him with scornful Eyes;
But now strange Raptures of love has transported me,
which does my senses and soul surpri^e,
This very Minute, time, and Season,
sorrow and Grief my heart does fill,
Here I admire what should be the reason,
that I must love him against my Will.
lady

gentleman

I was resolved to live and dye single,
though I had Suitors always in store,
B^t every vein in my heart does now tingle
tho like I never did feel before,
I had to love a Dete^tation,
the which does now my comfort spill;
This is a sudden and strange Alter^tion,
that I must love him against my Will.
There was no Swain I could ever admire;
all my delight was to live alone;
Therefore I Will triumph over e ry desire,
in love I will not be overthrown:
Let Cupid seem to frown and lower,
nay use his best and chiefest skill,
I will endeavor to baffle his power,
why should I love him against my Will?
But still her Passion increased the stronger,
and her Sweet Beauty grew pale and wan
So that she could not endure any longer,
but crying out my sweet Corridon,
May every Blessing now betide thee,
d^n^t a fainting Lover Kill,
Although it is true, I have often denied thee,
now I must love thee against my will.
If I shall dye for the loss of my Jewel,
there is none but my self in blame,
Since to my Corridon I was too cruel,
when like a Captive to me he came
But for this Crime I have repented;
yet remain in sorrows still
With sighs and Tears I have often lamented,
now I must love him against my Will.
O that he heard but my sorrowful Ditty,
likewise would come my sweet Life to save
And with true Love and compassionate pity,
pardon the frowns which to him I gave;
He could no longer stand to hear her,
but did approach with right good will,
To his fair Silvia in order to cheer her
vowing he would be her true love still.
Thanks be to Cupid that gained me thy favor,
my drooping Spirits once more to raise,
Now do I promise to Love thee for ever,
and in these Valleys we will spend our days,
Can there be any greater blessing,
my wounded heart with joy to fill,
Then my fair Silvia, here to be possessing,
whom I do Love and admire still.
Printed for I. Back, ^t the Black Boy near the drawbridge on London Bridge.


