THese are to give notice to all His Majesty's Subjects, That Nicholas Culpeper
late deceased, being a Student in Astrology, a Person generally approved of to
be an Eminent Physician in his time, and by his indulgent Care performed many
excellent Cures, and for the singular Affection he owed to His said Majesty's
Subjects, in order to the preservation of their Healths and Lives under God,
has prepared, composed, and made an excellent Lozenge, and an Universal Pill;
which Lozenges and Pills were of that precious Worth and Virtue, that he
concealed the publishing thereof, until a little before his Death: And to the
end that his Labor might not be buried in Oblivion with him in the Crave, so
he thought fit as a Token of his Love to give unto Richard Culpeper his
Kinsman, living in the Parish of St. Andrews Holborn Gent. the said Receipts of
his Lozenges and Pills, to the end and purpose that he after his decease should
publish the same for his Accommodation, and the Benefit of His Majesty's
Subjects; which the said Richard, although he has made great Experience
thereof, to the Good and Satisfaction of several Persons of Quality within the
City of London, and elsewhere, does now in order to his Trust reposed in him,
publish and declare the said Receipts in manner following.

Directions how to take this Excellent Lozenge.
YOu must take the quantity of a small Hasel Nut when you go to Bed, or in the
Morning, or when you Cough, or any other time of the day as you please, so as
you may take a quarter of a Pound in five or six days, letting it dissolve in
your mouth.

The Cures are Consumptions, Ptissicks, Catarrhs, Impostumes, all sorts of
Colds, Hoarseness, Shortness of Breath, and Stuffing of the Stomach, or any
other Disease incident to the Head, Stomach, and Lungs; and does cleanse, heal,
and preserve the Lungs; it dries up a salt Rheum that does distill from the
Head to the Lungs, by which Rheum the Lungs are wasted, which this Lozenge by
Gods help does prevent, by drawing the Rheum into a body, and so you may spit
it up: By this means the Lungs are preserved, and the Stomach strengthened, and
expels Wind out of the Stomach: This has Cured many that have been very
much spent in a Consumption when they have been young, and has preserved them
in very good health to old Age. You must keep the Lozenges dry.

These Lozenges, as well for the accommodation of the poorer sort of people, as
for the Gentry, are to be sold as well in Papers of Twelve pence a piece, as
also in Papers of Two shillings six pence a piece, proportionably at the Rate
of Ten shillings in the Pound, and are sealed up with his own Coat of Arms.

The Virtue of the Pills.
It purges the Liver, the Spleen, and the Reins, and cleanses the Veins and
Kidneys from Gravel; it does immediately expel the Spleen, Wind out of the
Side, and it is good for any pain in the Bones, Sinews, Joints, or Nerves, and
to prevent the Scurvey from settling in the Muscles which is upon the Joints; it
also strengthens the Womb, and preserves the Child in the Mothers Womb.

Directions how to take the Pills.
You may give them to Men or Women, Old and Young, and Women with Child, and
to young Children of two or three years old: if occasion be, you may take three
of them going to Bed, or in the Morning early, whether your occasion serves;
you may drink a Cup of warm Ale within an hour after; they work very gently,
and never makes them sick at all: You may give a Child a little Pill, so that
you need not keep your Chamber, for there is no danger in them.

These PILLS are to be sold at Two shillings the Dozen ready put up in little
Boxes, by Mr. William Jacob Stationer, near Bernards-Inn in Holborn, Mr. Finsh
at the Half moon in the Rounds in Smithfield, Mr. Elcock at the Sign of the
Coffee-house in Broadstreet, Mr. Williams Stationer, in the Inner Temple, Henry
Eversden under the Crown Tavern in West-Smithfield, Bookseller; Tho.
Thorneycroft near Worcester-House in the Strand, Stationer; Rowland Reignolds
at the Sun and Bible in Post-street, near Moorgate; Josiah Robinson Stationer,
at Lincoln's Inn Gate; William Battersby at Davies-Inn Gate in Holborn; John
Starkey Bookseller at the Myter at Temple Bar; Tho. Guy Bookseller at the Sign
of the Golden Horseshooe in the New Cheapside in Moor-fields; Richard Thrale at
the Cross Keys and Dolphin in Aldersgate Street, over against the Half Moon
Tavern; Edw. Smith Engraver, entering in at the bottom of the steps into the Old
Exchange; Nath. Crouch at the Cross-Keys in Bishopsgate-street near
Leaden Hall; William Bradley at the Sign of the Goat in the Minories; Chr.
Hampton Grocer, at Cheyne-gate in Southwark, at the foot of the Bridge; Richard
Preston Bookseller, at the Rose and Crown in Great Turn-style Alley; and
William Wills over against Ax-yard at Westminster, and at no other place.

VIVAT REX.

