A SHARP ARROW Darted against THE Anabaptists, etc.

Being an Apology, or Defense of the Visible Church upon Earth.

And an Objection to all such Persons as do Rebaptize Men and Women.

And against being covered at the Divine Exercise of Preaching the Word of God
to the People.

As also against those that deny to say the Lords Prayer.

BY DAVID EDMONDS, Gent.

Prove all things: hold fast that which is good, 1. These. 5. 21. LONDON,
Printed by T. H. 1652.

To the Right Honorable, the Lady Anne Beauchamp, and to the Right Worshipful
William Lewis, Esquire.
Honorable Lady, and most Noble Esquire, He that had not a Lamb to bring to
the Altar, there was a Turtle Dove, or two young Pigeons, well accepted of:
though this weak and unworthy Labor of mine, be not worthy to be read by
your Honors, yet I shall entreat you to read it, and accept of my good will in
stead of perfect action: the Widows mite, was as well accepted in Gods
Treasury, as the superfluity of the Rich and Wealthy: and I shall entreat your
Honors the sooner to read it, in regard that it was penned in Prison, my
self, groaning under the Oppression of Cavaliers and Parliamentarians, and
that in a high nature: withal I would they would agree as well in all other
matters, though I should perish. Thus committing your Honors in these
tumultuous times, to the tuition of the Lord God of Hosts, who is that great
man of War, and his Name is Jehovah. I humbly take leave, craving pardon for
this great presumption, and rest

The humblest of your Servants, David Edmonds.

A sharp Arrow darted against Anabaptists, etc.
IN the first place King David, although he was a man after Gods own heart,
yet he should not build the Lords Temple, because he was a bloud-shedder; yet
the Lord permitted him to make a preparation to his son Solomon; so many
talents of gold, and so many talents of silver, to undergo the great work
commanded of God. The work being finished, you shall read Salomons Prayer: And
Solomon stood before the Altar of the Lord, in the presence of the Congregation
of Israel, and did spread out his hands toward heaven, and said; Lord God of
Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above nor in the earth beneath,
who keep covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thee, with
all their hearts; who have kept with thy servant David my father that thou
promisedst him; thou spakest it with thy mouth and have fulfilled with thy
hand, as it is to this day. I shall omit to write what follows in that
Chapter, in regard Solomon, and his son Rehoboam fell off from the command of
the Lord; for God did not promise the Kingdom unto David, but upon condition,
of the sanctity of his posterity; saying, If thy children will keep my
statutes, and observe my laws, that I shall learn them, their children also
shall sit upon thy seat for evermore. Will God dwell on earth? behold, heaven
and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him: how much less this house that I
have built, says Solomon, 1. King. 8. 22. yet have thou respect unto the
prayers and the supplications which thy servants shall make unto thee in this
place: and hearken thou unto the supplications of thy servants, and of thy
people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place, and hear thou in
heaven thy dwelling place, and when thou hear, forgive.

To prove that it is more commodious unto the sons and daughters of men, to
pray to the Lord in the full Congregation, then privately, to be by ones self,
or with a few company.

Suppose I were in the public Church, and have, as I have great need, to ask
forgiveness of my sins at the hands of my God, or to make my supplication to
his Majesty, for some necessaries, either spiritual graces, or temporal
benefits that I stand in great need of, it may be it will be Gods pleasure to
hear another for me, and I for him, and through that respect, God to
commiserate the present condition of us all.

For the answer of God to the last request of Abraham concerning Sodom and
Gomorrah, was, If there, says God, be ten righteous men within those two
Cities, I will not destroy it for ten sake: yet let no man conjecture, that I
by no means do debar private prayers, for why, the word of God says, pray
continually. And again says, and Phineas prayed, and so the plague ceased:
for prayer is the very Key that opens heaven gate: nay withal it is such a
dart, the more a man or a woman does use it, it further drives the Devil off
from them; so is preaching necessary withal, as we have an old Proverb in
the Welsh, Good is the staff with the crouch; they should like man and wife
go hand in hand together, rather then to be separated one from the other.

Now to prove the Church to be honored before any other private place,
according as the New Testament does describe it, I cannot find that our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, not in all the New Testament, that he did eat but
natural food, like other children, until he was twelve years of age; then his
father and his mother found him in the Temple, in the midst of the Doctors,
hearing them, and asking of them questions. Assuredly if the Church were not to
be honored before any other private place, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
would as well begun the good action or the great message of his Father in
private places, as soon as the Church: but it is evidently seen, he began it
in the Temple, saying unto his Mother; Knew ye not that I must go about my
Fathers business?

Some men of the world will tell me, that our Lord and Savior Preached upon
the Mount, and I do in no wise contradict them, for the word says so
likewise: but when did he preach upon the mountain, but the time that he
durst not come into the Temple? for a while before did the Jews hurl stones
at him, that his sacred person was driven to fly out of the Temple.

Again, to prove that the Church is to be honored before any other private
place; if our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ had come up street or down street,
and there to see folks sell away Doves, our Lord and Savior would have said
no kind of thing unto them, but let them attend their market in the name of
God; but as soon as he espied them to sell away Doves in the Temple, he scourged
them out, and told them, that his House was called the House of Prayer, and
that they had made it a den of thieves.

Then thirdly, to prove it to be more virtuous then private places* read but
1. Cor. 11. 22. there the Apostle says, have ye not houses to eat and to
drink in, why despise ye then the Church of God? will you have me to praise
you for this? I say unto you* I praise you not. And in the last of the
Colossians the same Apostle says, Let this Epistle be read in all the Churches
of the Laodiceans.

And to prove the Church to be honored before any private place, if a man can
believe historical writings; Titus Vespasian that great Emperor, forty years
after the crucifying of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, did race the Temple
at Jerusalem; and at the racing of it, when he came to one Room there, called
Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies, where none but the Priest once a year
did enter into, he fell flat upon his face, and said, This place could not
choose otherwise to be, then the place where the most high God did dwell.

If any other do think to make it appear unto me, that private places are as
virtuous, let them proceed: for that chosen vessel Saint Paul says, He that is
filthy, let him be filthy still: I know they cannot prove it by Scripture,
which is the glass of Gods will, and the very pathway to salvation, and the
direct way which the sons of men ought to teach, preach, and walk by. For
further satisfaction to tender consciences, I refer my self to the Learned to
describe it. Provided always, that such Learned men do detest Popery on the
one side, and shun Heresy on the other side: for there be abundance of people
in this age, did pretend to avoid Popery, and fell into the gulf of Heresy;
so that it may be well said of such people, with the words of the Poet, Incidit
in Sillam qui vult vitare Charybdim. I do not gainesay but that there is a
private Church withal to be allowed of: for S. Paul writes, Coloss. 4. 15.
Salute the Brethren which are in Laodicea, and to Nymphas and the Church which
is in his house. So that private serving of God is necessary, but not so
commodious as the public service in the Congregation; for in the time of that
divine exercise, we should all repair thither, to pray for our selves, and one
for another, and God for us all. For we read of that godly woman Sarah, that
she did wear all her best array, and did put on all her rich jewels, when she
did go to worship the Lord in the Tabernacle. Was it the pride of Sarah that
made her so to do? no, no it was to grace and beautify the Lords house: she
was pure within, and clean without: I would women in this age would imitate bu^
part of her ways and actions, if they could not perform the whole.

Now I will proceed to treat of the necessity of Baptizing of Infants, and the
unlawfulnes of Rebaptizing of men or women either. Some men in this Country I
hear there be, that say, that Baptism is not requisite at all. I answer such
men: That if our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ were to be obliged unto mortal
men, that he is more bound unto the very Turk, then to such persons as do
deny Baptism: for why the Turk himself does acknowledge that there was
failings in his Prophet Mahomet, his great head; and that there was no failings
in that Prophet Jesus Christ, as he terms him. If Baptism be not necessary,
there were failings in Christ: for why? because he suffered himself to be
Baptized of John in Jordan. That is not only to show the necessity of Baptism,
but the obedience of Baptism also.

But concerning the Rebaptizing of persons, I shall confute such men as hold it
necessary, in the self same Chapter as they themselves do ground it upon to be
needful or lawful, or else I will be sure to confute them with the words of
the same Apostle they ground it lawful on* the words out of the Apostle that
say, 19. of the Acts and the 2. verse: Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye
believed, and they said unto him* we have not heard so much whether there be
any H. Ghost or no: and he said unto them, unto what were ye then Baptized? and
they said, Unto John's Baptism: then said Paul, John verily Baptized with the
Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the People that they should believe on him
which should come after him, that is one Jesus Christ: when that they heard
this they were Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus: And when Paul had laid
his hands on them, the Holy Ghost descended on them, and they spoke with
Tongues, and Prophesied, and all their men were about twelve in number.

Let all true professed Christians but mark the false ground of Anabaptisme;
John's Baptism, was, but as it were a Type of the Baptism of Jesus Christ, for
mark the words of the Apostle, in the fourth verse of the same Chapter, that
John's Baptism was the Baptism of Repentance only, and that they should
believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Jesus Christ, in whom
is the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and the fullness of Gods Spirit, and
the fullness of Baptism through Gods Spirit, and the fullness of Grace, and
the fullness of all spiritual goodness whatsoever; so that the then Baptism
of John, which was the Baptism of Repentance, and no more, and the now
Baptism of Jesus Christ, was, or is like two ways upon a Hill, and at the
foot of the Hill meet into one: so that the then Baptism of John is as it
were dissolved, and now included into the Baptism of Jesus Christ, which is
altogether perfect and sufficient: And therefore not to be wrought upon the
Sons and Daughters of men, but at the very time, or few days after that
Children be borne into the World, as before the number that were Baptized of
Paul after they were formerly Baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, as the
Text says were about twelve in number.

And presently as soon as Paul had laid his hands on them the Holy Ghost
descended on them, and they spoke all manner of Languages, and withal
prophesied. I wonder whether these young Schismatic Gamesters at Lanhazan, or
elsewhere, in this Country, can do the like: I believe their Leaders, Mr.
DAVIS and Mr. MILES can scarce do it; it is great pity but that the Noble
Estates of the Land, to the intent that the souls of men and women should not
be ensnared and deluded in this kind any further, should be made acquainted of
so great an abuse to Church, State, and Commonwealth: For if the Estates did
allow of it, they would send a Command for all to do it in general, through
out the whole Land; therefore these abuses are acted unknown unto them.
Circumcision as a type of Baptism, S. Paul in the 7. Cor. verse 18. says, Is
any called being Circumcised, let him not become Uncircumcised: as much as if
the Apostle had said, Is any Baptized, let him not seek to be Rebaptised: for
if a man or woman do suffer themselves to be Rebaptised, they do deny the
Baptism which they formerly received, and the first principles of the true
Christian Religion.

Mark the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 20. Let every man, says he, abide
in the same calling wherein he was called; so that men or women being called
by their first Baptism, as they are to be Christians, and incorporated to be
members of Gods true Church they should so remayn, until their souls were
dissolved from their bodies, and their bodies from their souls, only by
virtue of the words of the Apostle in the said 20. verse as before, Let every
man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.

Unless the sons and daughters of men will altogether follow the false
doctrine of these young Seducers, and make frustrate the words of that chosen
vessel S. Paul, that wrote the very marrow of all the New Testament, the words
of our Savior only excepted.

The Anabaptists, it may be, will allege to me, that a Child ought not to
be Baptized until he be of age, and possessed with faith: Alas, poor men! I
answer them thus* That as soon as the Midwife does receive the Child into the
World, that very instant the Child has faith: what faith has he? the faith
that the father and mother that begat him* have or had.

Because I did write so much of Circumcision to be a type of Baptism, I know
some particular men will allege and urge unto me the 1. Cor. ^1. that
Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing but the keeping of the
Commandments: It Is true, every thing in the old Moral Law was abolished at
Christ's coming; but the Apostle does not say Baptising is nothing; but he
might well enough say* Rebaptising is nothing; though we were absolved from
the curse of the Law at the coming of Christ, yet we are still bound to the
obedience of the Law, and the Law stands still as a Schoolmaster to bring us
to Christ: for our Savior says in one place, I came not to destroy the Law or
the Prophets, I came rather to fulfill them.

Though other Ceremonies were abolished at the coming of Christ, yet
Circumcision was not quite abolished then: why? Christ himself was Circumcised
the eight day, it might be abolished after; for our Savior took no
Celestial Discipline upon him until he was twelve years of age, posing of the
Doctors in the Temple: yea then was Circumcision abolished, and Baptism to
stand in the stead of it ever after.

See in what a dangerous condition those people are, that leave their Children
Unbaptised until they be of age: let them read Exodus 4. 24. how that the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses because he left his Child so long
a time Uncircumcised: And it came to pass by the way, in the Inn, that the
Lord met him and sought to kill him, verse 24.

Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and did cut off the foreskin of her son,
and said, surely a bloody husband thou art unto me, v. 25.

And she said again, a bloody husband thou art to me, because of the
Circumcision, verse 26.

Concerning the performance of our first Baptism, we are in a dangerous
condition, unless God will look more upon the wounds of his dear son Jesus
Christ, then any merits of our own. For men and women at our Baptism have
entered into a Covenant to God for us, that we should be such and such, and we
for the most part of us, are such and such, clean contrary to this Covenant,
so that if we will seriously consider, we have enough to do to perform the
Covenant of our first Baptism, without provoking the Lord to anger to take
upon us the second Baptism, which is clean contrary to the word of God. But it
is nothing in this age, with the sons and daughters of men* to abridge
Covenants, seldom or never at all do they think upon them.

Concerning the breach of this Covenant, I have read in History, that
Vladislaus King of Hungaria, and Prince of Transylvania, how he waged war with
the Great Turk, and in process of time being weary on both sides waging of
war, both parties agreed to compose the differences betwixt them to a peace;
the King of Hungaria being a Christian, the Turk a Mohammedan: they both entered
into a solemn Oath and Covenant, to dissolve both Armies, and to observe a
League between them for so many years; the King of Hungaria took his Oath in
Christ his Name, the Turk in Mahemets: after that both Armies were dissolved,
and every man went home to his own house in peace. A while after, Julian the
Cardinal, an incendiary, (even as incendiaries have fomented these unnatu^all
wars in this Land) persuades the King of Hungaria to abridge this Covenant,
and again to rise up in Arms against the Turk, telling the King of Hungaria
that it was no sin against God to break that Covenant with the Turk, because
he was a Pagan; so he prevay^ed with the King of Hungaria that he rose up in
Arms presently: so the Turk in defense of his Territories and Kingdoms, rose
up in Arms withal; and in the Brunt and heat of the War, the Turk espying
the Crucifix in the Banner of the King of Hungaria, takes the Covenant out of
his Pocket, and throws it up toward Heaven, and says, O Christ, if thou
be the Living God, revenge not thy self upon me, for I never took any
Covenant in thy Name, for I did always deny thee to be an Eternal God; but
revenge thy self upon the King of Hungaria, that has taken a Covenant in thy
Name, and is not ashamed before thy face to break it.

Assuredly, our not performing of the Covenant of our first Baptism, Covenant
of our Marriages, and other ties that we have taken upon us in this Land, it is
to be feared that by reason we have so often times abridged them, that Turks,
Pagans, and Infidels, will rise up in judgment against us.

In part of this weak and unworthy Labor of mine, as far as God has given me
a talent, I shall declare unto the World the unlawfulness of being covered in
the Church, at the Divine exercise of Preaching the word of God to the people.

I will begin with the words of God himself Exodus 13. 5. Pluck off thy shoes
from of thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground: by virtue
of those words, the words of the most High God* I tell, O proud Belteshazzar,
pluck off thy Hat from of thy head, for the words thou hear are holy words.
I do not say but an old man may do it, or a sick man may be covered at that
Divine exercise, for it is a case of necessity; for King David did eat the
Shewbread, that was not lawful for any to eat, but the Priest alone: God
never sent any Prophet to reprehend him for it: why? because David was
necessitated so to do at that time; but as soon as he took the wife of Uriah,
the Lord presently sent the Prophet Nathan to attaint him of High Treason,
against the great God of Heaven and Earth, and to judge and condemn him in one
word, Thou art the man.

There were fifty thousand of the Bethshemites slain for looking unreverently
upon the Ark of the Covenant; and Uzzah was stricken dead by the hand of the
Lord, for but touching the Ark, as you may read Chron. 13. 9. 10. And when they
came to the threshing floor of Chidon, Uzzah put forth his hand to hold the
Arc, for the Oxen stumbled. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Uzzah, and he smote him because he put his hand to the Arc, and there he died
before God.

The Preacher is the Ark of the Covenant of the New Testament, and when he
preaches unto us of Gods judgments, we should then pray in our hearts to
divert those judgments from us; and when he treats and speaks of Gods mercies,
we should then pray in our hearts to participate of those mercies: you shall
find it in one place that S. Paul writes, that it is a shame for a woman to
be uncovered in the Church; as much as if the same Apostle had said, that it
is a shame for a man to be covered in the Church: therefore I beseech all those
that love God, and the true Reformation of the Church of God, to reform this
enormous abuse, lest we should any further be evil spoken of and derided by
Turks, Papists, Pagans, and Infidels, that are not enspired to make recognition
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; lest that their blind ways should at the
last day rise up in judgment against us; for assuredly unless that this and
other abuses that are now committed in the Church of God be amended, we shall
be in great danger to be those, (or like those) that the Apostle Peter writes
of, 1. Pet. 5. the two last verses, It had been better for you never to have
known the way of truth, then to know it and turn from it. For ye shall be
like a dog that turns again to his own vomit, or like a sow that is washed in
the River, and goes wallowing again in the mire.

I can in no wise bridle my tongue from speaking, nor withold my hand from
writing of the wrongs that are now done unto certain Clergy men, that taught
and preached the Gospel in precedent times; yet let no man conjecture that I by
no means do write of their sides in general; for I know, abundance of them
would not be contented to walk upon the Battlements of the Church, but did
mount themselves up to the turrets of civil policy that did nothing belong
unto them.

Some of them have been responsall for it before men already, and suffered, and
therefore I shall conclude of such persons with the old Proverb, which says,
de mortibus nil nisi bonum; of the dead nothing but good. I take God to Reco^d,
my Lord General CROMWELL, as his Excellency was going for Ireland, upon the
walls of Tenbigh, told the Gentlemen there about him, I cannot perceive (says
he) but this man is of the self same Religion as my self is of; meaning my
self.

For my own part, I shall sooth no man, be he ever so great; if his Excellency
do agree to extirpe out of the Vineyard all the Clergy in times past, his
Excellency is as wide from my tenants in Religion, as the East is from the
West, but methinks as many of them should be thrust out of the Vineyard, as had
evil will at Sion, and none of the rest: for to put them all out, we have no
such warant, neither out of the Old nor the New Testament; for in the Old
Testament we read, that in the last request of Abraham to God, for Sodom and
Gomorrah* if there (says God) be ten righteous persons in those two Cities, I
will not destroy it for the tens sake: But there was found there but one
righteous Lot, and for that one righteous man, God had provided a Zoar a City
of refuge, during the time that the Lords anger was kindled against those two
great Cities in destroying of them with fire and Brimstone from his Celestial
habitation: And now it should seem that in a small measure his Majesty is
offended with certain men that he called to be his Ministers and especial
Members of his Church; but it cannot be that all the Clergy in times past could
be culpable of adhering to Popery or the like, and in this fire from Heaven,
which is the Lords small anger, or his small deluge emerging the former Clergy
men; if there (I say) be but one amongst them, that can say and prove himself
not guilty, where is his Zoar, or any City of refuge.

Elias a great Prophet and a chosen of the Lord, desired of the Lord, that he
might be taken away from amongst the children of men, saying, they have killed
thy Prophets, etc. and I only am left, and they seek my life also: in answer
to Elias, God says, I have reserved, seven thousand chosen men in Israel,
that have not bended their knees to Baal.

It should seem by those words though Eliah had the inspiration of Gods spirit
in him, in a high nature, yet he did not know the mental reservations of all
men and women toward their God in Israel. And so according to moral reason,
that the noble Estates of the Land do not know of every particular wrong that
is now done to some of the former Clergy men; every vessel should stand upon
its own bottom: why? because there is so much Drunkenness, must there be no
wine nor strong drink? and because there is so much Leachery, must there be no
women? God forbid. Now I prove that those Clergy men heretofore, that had not
a hand to bring in Popery into the Church of God, neither did in no wise intend
to quench or put out the light of the Gospel, but behaved themselves
reverently, and prudently in their vocations, ought not to be put out of their
Benefices: nay if they had committed some faults, yet they ought not to be put
and thrust out of the Vineyard in this kind, for one particular fault: for why?
let some of the sons and daughters of men but think with themselves, that if
God in the dreadful day of judgment, should deal with us as we deal here
below one with another, what would become of us? assuredly we should go on
the left hand with the Goats* Go ye cursed etc.

Concerning the remission that many of the former Clergy men should have to
prove it. We read that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ when he came into the
Vineyard, and there found a Tree that bare no fruit, he bad the Vineyard
dresser cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? Nay says the Vineyard
dresser, I will entrench and dig about it one year more: we do not read that
our Savior did contradict the Vineyard dresser in that business

For one particular man a Clergy man* one Mr. FRANCIS DAVIES of Llangaine, in
the County of Glamorgane in Wales a man that would never hear of Marriage his
reason was, lest the care of a wife and children should in part take him off
from the service of his God, and the duty that he was to perform to the great
charge under him: then his second reason was, if he should mary, he could not
be a supporter to many of his friends, which he was to diverse of them: nay he
took more pains in his Calling to Preach the word of God in his two Parishes,
then any two Clergy men in the County of Glamorgan: and for this man to be
thrust out of his Benefices, and still to be kept from them, it is great pity
indeed: for the rest of the former Clergy of the County of Glamorgan, they be
of age, let them speak for themselves.

I should have made the fourth part of this weak and unworthy work which I
have already penned, that is, concerning the Lords Prayer, and against such
persons as do deny the saying of it: loath I was to make description of it, in
regard that it is, as it were, the master piece of Christ Jesus his own words,
lest that God should be so offended with me, as he did strike Uzzah for
touching the Ark of the Covenant. But upon a Sabbath day being the 19. of Sept.
1651. to hear one Mr. ELLIS make an Exposition on part of the Lords Prayer, in
the Church of Cardiffe, the words thus: Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom
come, thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: where he said, that people
did tempt God to say the Lords Prayer: why said he? because the Angels and
Saints in Heaven do pray and serve God perfect, and we unperfect: that is most
true: but I hold his and others coverture and debarment in it to be to think
it as it were a certain imbecility or weakness in our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, to command his Apostles to say it, and that we should not imitate them
to say it likewise. Does he or any other of the sons of men think that our
Savior Jesus Christ when he said, thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, did mean that mortal men, that are conceived and borne in sin* and
all their days live in sin, and altogether polluted with corruption and
uncleanness, can execute the good will of the Father as well as those
celestial Saints and Seraphins that do daily and hourly reap the fruition of
the heavenly Deity, and habitual society with Almighty God? no, no, the
meaning of our Savior Jesus Christ, was, that the sons and daughters of men
should do their best endeavor to execute his will and pleasure upon earth,
and that which they should be defective in, the rest should be supplied out of
his blessed merits; for Zacharias and Elizabeth were said to walk in all the
Commandments of the Lord; no question but they both one time or other had
abridged the Lords Commandments, but such lapses were not attributed unto
them: why? because they did their best endeavor to execute the will of their
God; for God requires no more at our hands, but to do our best to serve him in
uprightness of hearts and willingness of spirits, and the defects as be, are
to be supplied out of the blessed merits of Jesus Christ: and withal, I shall
conclude this sentence with the words of that sweet singer of Israel, David the
King; he knows whereof we are made, he remembers we are but dust.

It Is true, the both Evangelists do not concur or agree in the writing of the
Lords prayer; the one has it, when ye pray, pray ye thus, verbatim, word by
word: the other has it, when ye pray, pray ye as thus: and in these times
those that debar it, follow neither: for why? we should either say it word
by word, as the one has it, or else take it as a model, or as it were a Text
to pray by it; for assuredly, our Savior did not speak it vainly, but that
either of the both should be followed in it: nay, he much disdained the vain
babblings and long prayers of the Scribes and Pharisees, and comprehended the
prayers of his servants in this short prayer, Our Father, etc. and did compose
it to six Petitions; the first three for the glory of God, the other three for
the necessity of man; and the best Divine in this Land may preach a whole
twelvemonth, twice every Sabbath day, and perhaps not consumate or end all the
Doctrine of this good and godly Prayer.

I could have made this Book three times as long, but as far as I am called to
be a Christian, though a great sinner, I hope I have declared my self to God
and the world of and concerning the principles of my tenants in Religion, in
these four things, and whosoever will question me for it. for I shall think my
self happy to sacrifice my blood in the quarrel of my Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, that spared not his sacred hearts blood for my redemption from the
thraldom of Satan, that old enemy of mankind, that still goes about the
world like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Great bloudshedding
(the more the pity) has been in this Land, of, and concerning such
differences, as are now between Mr. ELLIS and my self: Counsel what we may,
fight about it as long as we please, we are all proclaimed in the word of God
to be unprofitable servants, the proudest of us all: and it will be one day
said unto us, give account of your Stewardships, you shall be no longer
Stewards; who shall end this controversy, between Mr. ELLIS and my self?
shall the Commissioners of Array end it? no, I challenge them, for they did
imprison me for nineteen weeks and four days in Cardiffes Goal for my
affection to the noble Parliament and the Army, and gave away my means, 100l.
per annum to one Major WINSOR, a rank Papist: shall the Gentlemen that bear
the rule, and the sway now in the County of Glamorgan end it? no, I challenge
some of them likewise: for they did me greater wrongs then the Commissioners of
Array have done me formerly: but for my own part, I shall rest my self
contented about such injuries, until my Redeemer comes in the air, in the
very Clouds themselves, to judge both quick and dead, and then if I shall not
obtain mercy at the sweet hands of my Savior, I shall be sure to have justice
administered to this my tired soul upon earth; I have had neither of them both
here below, I am sure of it.

Then there will be no Bishop favoring Popery, no Mechanicke Tradesman
preaching Heresy, no Lawyer pleading, nor no Attorney prating, for the
dissolution of the vast world, and all that is therein, will be like the
unrowling of an Exchequer Writ: when that it is fully opened it roules it self
up again, and the Judiciary Sentence is ready for us all. Come ye Blessed, and
go ye cursed; yea, and happy will that servant be, when that his Master
comes, he shall find to be watchful; for he shall receive that comfortable
Benediction, Euge bone serve, well done good and faithful servant, thou have
been faithful in a little, be thou ruler over much: enter thou into thy
Masters joy: To the which joy of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, make us all
to be partakers; To whom, as is most meet, be ascribed all Honor, Glory,
Might, Majesty, Dominion, and Thanksgiving, both now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

