A most Delightful HISTORY Of the Famous Clothier of England, CALLED, JACK of
NEWBERY, In the days of King Henry the Eighth; how he was beloved of his
Mistress above all her Wealthier Suitors: what great and valiant things he did
for England: and the great number of poor he daily cherished.

And how (when the King sent for him) he refused (with his company) to leave
the Hill of Ants to go to the King: and therefore the King went to him: which
he wittily excused: with many other very pleasant passages.

Written by W. ^. F. C.

Printed for W. Thackeray, at the Sign of the Angel in Duck-Lane.

THE MOST Delightful History OF Jack of Newberry.
IN the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, one John Winchcomb, being an Apprentice
to a rich Clothier in the town of Newberry in Barkshire, a pretty handsome
Youth, his Master dyed, and left his Mistress a Widow; who perceiving Jack to
be a faithful, careful, and trusty Servant, she put him in great trust in the
House; who as carefully performed the trust reposed in him.

His Mistress having many Suitors coming to her, could not fancy any: for her
Man John had stolen away her heart. The Parson of Spinhome-land wooed her, and
often solicited with her to make her his Wife, but could not obtain her love,
because he was a Clergyman; too much (she thought) devoted to his Study. A
rich Tanner was a second Wooer, but could not speed; for though he was rich,
yet was he too Old for he young and lusty desires. A Tailor was a third man,
who was almost confident of her love; but all in vain, for her man John, oh! he
was the man that had so wounded her heart that she could love no other man.

She seeing the backwardness of John, her man (after many occasions which she
gave him to woo her) came at last, and told him plainly that she loved him,
which secret she did earnestly desire him not to impart to any: but he very
modestly blushing with a Rosy color in his Cheeks, not knowing low to express
himself ^s he desired, being astonished hereat, answered: Sweet Mistress (quoth
he) I am but a Child to undertake so great a thing, it is a charge, the
discharge whereof methinks I fear to undertake: At which answer, she was
something di^couraged in her suit for the present, and kissing of him, brake
off discourse for that time; and night approaching, she went to Bed, but took
but little rest; but either slumbering (at the best) or Dreaming of her pretty
Man John. She was so troubled, as if she had been wounded in a Prison, and with
many Cogitations of her Beloved, fetched many deep sighs in that dolesom and
dark night: thinking it long e're morning came, rejoicing to see the light
appear; more to embrace her dear Servant, or rather her Master, John.

She going to see Bartholomew Fair, as Women use to do, to see and be seen,
took her man John with her; who whilst she was talking with a friend, espied
him saluting a pretty Maid, which made her own mouth water; and biting her
Lips, she left discoursing with her Neighbor to go to John, to prevent his
further familiarity with the Maid.

Afterward she met with the Tailor her Sweetheart, so neat as could be, in
the Fair; who desiring her to drink a Cup of Wine with him, was denied again
and again, but by importunity she was persuaded; and he espying the Tanner,
called him into the Tavern to them, to help to bear their Charges; little
imagining that he was a Suitor to the same Widow; and both of them espying the
Parson go by, called him in, expecti^g to make him their Solliciter; thus were
they all merely drawn into Cupid's Paradise: but when each had discovered their
intents to other, they were all exceedingly perplexed, not knowing how this
Division might be ended: At last, it was desired of the Widow which of them
she loved best: and she answered, that she loved them all; and gave them thanks
for their charges; but (quoth the Parson) can you find in your heart to Marry
me? It is your Office to Marry, quoth she, and not mine. Then (quoth the
Tanner) will you make me your Husband? Truly Neighbor, quoth she, methinks you
might better be my Father, you are of great Years to Marry such a young Widow
as I am. Then (quoth the Tailor) Widow, i^ is I that must enjoy you; shall you
and I be Married? Yes, I hope so (quoth the Widow) when we and our
sweet-hearts are agreed: So desi^ing to take her leave of them, giving them
t^anks for their costs they spent on her, she arose up to go away; but they
desiring a full answer from her, desired her to give them better satisfaction
to their Requests. If (quoth she) you will come to my Hou^e on Thursday, I will
give you full satisfaction: at which time they all came; and she told them all
then plainly, that she would marry none of them, for she had one nearer home,
whom she loved so well, that she could not marry any other man; so they went
all away very sad and discontented.

Night approaching, she talked privately with her Man John, wooing him to marry
her; which he still through bashfulness refused: And when night approached, she
caused a special bed to be made for her man John to lie in; which bed was only
for special strangers to lie in, or for her Husband when he was not well: and
she lay her self in the next Chamber to him, which she locked up, and kept the
Key thereof her self.

But when she had lain in Bed an hour or two, she began to think it very long
to lie alone; so she arose out of her bed, and went to her man John, shivering
and shaking, and lifting up his bed clothes, he started; Who is there, quoth
he? It is I my sweet John, quoth she, I am your Mistress; it is an extreme cold
Night, and I, lying alone, am almost starved in my Bed: Good John, afford me
the favor of one Nights lodging by thy side, my John, I pray thee. Alas poor
Mistress, quoth he, come, come lie close: Yea, yea, quoth she, O sweet and good
John; but here I leave them till the next morning.

She got up very early in the morning, and calling for John her man to go
abroad with her, she took him to the Church of Saint Bartholomews; and calling
for the Prsest of the place, she, with him, persuaded John that they might then
be married together; which with small entreaty he was persuaded to, and so they
returned home; and when they went to dinner, she made him to sit in her old
husbands Chair by her self at the end of the Table, at which his old fellow
servants began to smile; and before Dinner was ended, she took him about the
neck and kissed him, and told her Servants that he was her Husband, and
commanded them to give him the respects due to a Master.

He also spoke lovingly to them, and told them, that he would not forget that
he was once their Fellow Servants, but would deserve their respects to the
uttermost of his endeavor. Thus they spent the day in loving Toyings, only
some oversight of the Workmen withal, and at night they went to Bed.

This new married Bride was the next morning visited by diverse Gossips of her
acqu^intance, that heard of the Wedding, who spent each of them their verdict,
what the event of this her hasty Match would be; which Gossips did exceedingly
discourage her* Oh! but (quoth she) I w^ll take an Order for that, for I will
curb him at the first, that I will make sure that he shall never crow over me,
I warrant you.

And indeed she began to grow as great a Gossip as any was in Newberry, and
would sometimes come home very late at night; insomuch, that at last her
Husband John went to bed, and locked her out, and took the Key up into his own
Chamber; and when the good wife saw that she was shut out of doors, she knocked
very hard, till at last her Husband looked out at the window, and bad her to go
look her lodging at night, where she had been sitting all day: Such Gossips
(quoth he) as you, the Cage is the fittest Lodging for, go to the Constable,
and bespeak a bed of him.

Oh! dear Husband, quoth she, be not so angry, I pray you; give me leave to
come into my Bed, good sweet Husband, I pray you, and let me not stand thus in
the cold, lest I lose my life thereby: After many fine words wherewith she had
entreated her Husband to come down and open the door, he came down to her, and
let her in; to whom she dissemblingly pretended to have lost her Wedding-Ring
from off her hand, who lovingly going forth with the Candle in his hand (in his
shirt) looked up and down upon the goound for it: and she the mean time
stepping in, clapped to the door, and shut him out; whereat he was much
perplexed, and knocked a long time in the cold before she would answer, who at
last opening the Window, bad him go look a Lodging with him Constables Wife;
and asked him whether he thought it good to lie in the cold in the Street: Now
(quoth she) she who was even now at your mercy, has gotten you at hers. Oh
sweet Wife, quoth he, be not angry, but let me come in; I swear unto thee, that
I will never shut thee forth of doors again, but thou shall do what thou will
and I will never meddle no make with you whatsoever you do hereafter: whereupon
she came down and opened the door, and let him in; and there they made great
protestations each to other, never to affront or fall out one with the other
after; and with a good Sack-posset the Covenant was agreed between them.

Shortly after the King was to raise an Army of Soldiers against the Scots,
who was risen against the English; and Jack of Newberry raised at his own
charges an hundred and fifty men, and allowed white Coats red Caps, and yellow
Feathers; and led them himself: fifty of them were valiant Horsemen; fifty
Pikes, and fifty Musketeers; all brave Steeds, good Arms, and valiant men; who
marching by before the Queen, Queen Katherine, she called for him, and
understanding what he was, after she had put forth her hand for him to kiss,
she promised to acquaint the King's Majesty with his free and great service.

A Song used by Jack of Newberry and his Soldiers:
KIng Jamy of Scots had raised
an Army against England;
But let him come, we will thunder him back,
he cannot us withstand.
Jack of Newbery comes proud Scots take heed
with valiant Soldiers stout;
Who for brave England will fight with you,
and never will give out.
Our milk-white Coats, red Caps,
and yellow Feathers declare,
Our Resolution's stout and good,
there Scots will not spare.
Shortly after Jack of Newberry heard that the King was to ride by Newberry, so
he with his Servants went out into the field, and finding an Hill of Pismires,
drew his Sword and guarded it; and the King coming by, sent for him to know the
reason why he guarded that place with his Sword drawn, the King in person being
to pass by there? who returned answer, That he was busy, and could not speak
with him; and the King is on Horseback, and I am on Foot, therefore (quoth he)
he may the better come to me. Tell the King, that I stand here to guard the
laborious Ants from their Enemies: which Message being brought to the King, he
went to Jack of Newberry, expecting that it was done to make some jest for his
pleasure: and when the King came, Jack, with all his men, fell on their knees,
and cried, God save the King; your Sacred Majesty (quoth he) has vanquished
all mine Enemies. Now trust me, quoth the King, you are stout Soldiers to
fight against Butterflies, and withstand such mighty Giants.

My dread Sovereign, quoth Jack of Newberry, not long ago, in my conceit, I saw
the most provident Nation of the Ants, summoned their chief Peers to a
Parliament, which was held in the famous City of Drie-dustie, the one and
thirtieth day of September; whereas by their Wisdoms I was chosen their King;
at what time also many Bills of complaint were brought in against diverse ill
Members in the Commonwealth, amongst whom the Mole was attainted of
High Treason to their State, and therefore was banished for ever from their
quiet Kingdom; so was the Grasshopper and Catterpiller, because they were not
only idle, but also lived upon the labors of other Men: Amongst the rest, the
Butterfly was very much misliked, but few durst say any thing to him, because
of his Golden Apparel: who, through sufference, grew so ambitious and malapart,
that the poor Ant could no sooner get an Egg into her Nest, but he would have
it away, especially against Easter which at length was misliked.

This painted Ass took snuff in the nose, and assembled a great many other of
his own Coat, by windy Wars to root these painful people out of the Land, that
he himself might be above them. These were proud Butterflies, quoth the King.

Whereupon, I, with my men, quoth Jack, prepared our selves to withstand them,
till such time as your Majesty's Royal presence put them to flight.

The Song which Jack Sung with his Men before the KING.
I Have taken upon me a charge,
to govern these poor Ants,
That they may walk at large,
to gather in their wants.
That they may walk mo safe,
to bring home their relief,
And keep that which they have;
from every idle Thief.
But now my King is here,
I bow down low my knee,
For we that vaunted here,
are Subjects unto thee.
God bless thee Royal King,
and send thee long to Reign,
And joy in every thing,
and freedom from all pain.
I, and my men, and mine,
my Ants, and all we have;
Command us, we are thine,
and so the King God save,
Now to return again to Jack and his Wife, it fell out that she fell sick and
dyed; and being buried, Jack fell in love with one of his Maids: and sending
for her Father, to know what he would give with his Daughter: he came to
Newberry, and seeing the wealth of his Daughters Sweetheart, and Master, he
was astonished: for Jack had, viz. In one Room two hundred Loom all going. Two
hundred Boys making Quills. A hundred Women Carding. Two hundred Maids in
another Room Spinning. An hundred and fifty Boys picking of Wool. Fifty
Siermen. Eight Rowers. Forty Dyers in the Dye-house. Twenty men in a
Fulling-Mill. Ten fat Oxen he spent every week in his house, besides Butter,
Cheese, Fish, etc. A Butcher for his own house. A Baker for his own house. A
Brewer for his own house. Five Cooks. Six Scullion-Boys. Diverse Turn-spits, etc.


Sir, (quoth the old man) I wis the zee you be bominable Rich, and cham content
you shall have my Daughter, and God's Blessing and mine light on you both. I
vaith cham but a poor man, but I thong God cham of good exclamation among my
Neighbors, and they will as zoon take my vice for any thing as a richer man's:
thick I will bestow you shall have with a very good will, because che hear very
good commendation of you in every place: therefore thick give you twenty
Nobles, and a weaning Calf, and when I dye, and my Wife; you shall have the
Revelation of my Goods

But Jack made more reckoning of the Woman's modesty, and virtues, than of his
Fathers proffer; and he married her, and made a great Wedding; and instead of
receiving the old man's Dowry, he gave him twenty pounds in money; besides
other good gifts.

Oh my good Zon! quoth the old man, Christ's benizon be with thee evermore; For
to tell thee true, we had zold all our Kine to make money for my Daughters
marriage, and this zeven year we should not have been able to buy any more.
Notwithstanding we should have zold all that ever we had, before my poor wench
should have lost her marriage: I should have zold my Coat from my back, and my
Bed from under me, before my Daughter should have gone without you. I thank you
good Father and Mother (quoth the Bride) and I pray God long to keeep you in
health: then the Bride kneeling down, did her duty to her Parents; who weeping
for very joy, departed.

Now there was one Randal Pert, a Draper, dwelling in Watling-street, who owed
to Jack of Newberry five hundred pounds; and it happend that Jack came up to
London; and as he went to his Customers, he met in the street this Randal Pert
in a Frock, carring a Porter's Basket, and an old ragged Doublet, and a torn
pair of Breeches, with his Hose out at Heels, and a pair of old broken
slip-shooes on his feet, a Rope about his middle, and a greasy Cap on his
Head, and newly come out of Prison.

Now was his Wife, who before for daintiness would not foul her fingers, nor
turn her head aside for fear of rumpling her Nemkinger, yet now glad to go
about and wash Bucks at the Thames side, and to be a chare-woman; her soft hand
was now hardened with scouring, and instead of Gold Rings upon her Lilly white
fingers, her hands and fingers were now filled with chaps.

But when her husband espied Jack of Newberry his Creditor, he ran away as fast
as he could, for fear of being arrested: but he sent h s man after him; who
seeing one pursue him, he ran the faster; and in running, here he lost one of
his slip-shooes, and there another, ever looking behind him with great fear: At
last his Breeches being tied but with one point, that with the haste he made,
and the oldness thereof, brake, and his Breeches fell about his heels, and did
so shackle him, that he fell down all along in the Street which his Arse bare,
and an old ragged Shirt, he lay sweating and blowing, being quite worn out of
breath; to whom the fellow came, and brought him to his Master, who took him to
a Scrivener, to give him Bond for the payment of the money; and the time of the
payment of the money was to be paid when the said Pert was Sheriff of London, a
thing very unlikely.

Well, the Scrivener made the Bond, to be paid when Randal Pert was Sheriff of
London, and thereunto set his hand for a Witness, and twenty persons more that
stood by.

And Jack of Newberry sent for a new suit of Apparel for him out of
Birchen-Lane, and a new Shirt, and Band, Hat, Hose, Shoes, and all things
necessary, Merchant-like; then he took for him a Shop in Canwick-street, and
furnished the same Shop with a thousand pounds worth of Cloth, by which means,
and other favors which he did for him, he grew in good credit again, and
became very provident; and his Wife turned to be the best Housewife in the
Parish; and he soon got good custom, and was very provident, and increased in
wealth, so that in short time became one of the best men for wealth in the
Parish; and there was so much notice taken of him, that he was chosen Sheriff
of London, and paid the five hundred pounds every penny; and kept a brave House
in his Shrevalty, and afterward being an Alderman of London, dyed before he
came to be Lord Mayor, and left his Wife a great Estate.

Jack of Newberry, otherwise called Master John Winchcomb, being grown very
old, he fell sick, and after few days he dyed; and his Wife buried him in great
Pomp: and he left his Wife a great Estate, and many Legacies to Friends, and to
many poor people were left by him; and to his Burial come the greatest part of
the Country all thereabouts, to see the good old man laid in his Grave, where
we will leave him with this Epitaph.

EPITAPH.
OF Newberry here lies valiant Jack
shrouded in white, come to his end
By Death that now has broken his back,
who to his Country was a Friend;
An aid to those that labor loved,
an help to poor, both blind and lame,
Men, Women, Children, all have proved
the succor sweet that from him came.
Winchcomb adieu, God has thy Soul,
thy Body lies enclosed in earth,
Thy Works brave Histories do Enroul,
thy Life, thy Fame, even from thy birth.
FINIS.
These Books following are to be Sold by William Thackeray, at the Angel in
Duck-Lane, near West-Smithfield.
THe famous History of the Gentle Craft. The Book of Knowledge, of things
unknown: the old and best sort. The History of Thomas of Reading. The History
of the Golden Eagle. The History of the Jews, a small one. The Book of Merry
Riddles. Variety of Riddles and Songs. Corydons Complements. Robin the Cobbler.
With all sorts of Histor^es New or Old.

There is also to be had these Books of Divinity.

FEnner's Sermon of Repentance. A Sermon of Dives and Laz^rus. A Warning-piece
for the Slothful.
These three are not above Threepence a piece.

The Godly Man's Gain, and Wicked Man's Woe. Sinners Sobs. The Christians Guide.
These three last are but Twopence a piece.

There is also two Excellent Tables: One called, Ch istus Natus Est, of the
Birth Christ. The other, A Watch for a Wise Man's Observation: very good,
pretty, and delightful things.
FINIS.

