The Drunken Warrant.
depiction of topers
From the Office at Copper-nose-hall, near the Red-face in Small-brain-street.
Why should the Drunkard strive his Acts to smother?
Drink runs but from one Hogshead to another.
BY Virtue of a Warrant from the Right Worshipful Sir John Fox-Catcher, Knight
and Barronet; These are to Will and Require you (...) immediately on Sight
hereof, to pay one Groat, due for your last Default, in suffering your whole
Body, Head and Legs, to be so vehemently seduced by the false Doctrine of an
enchanting deluding Spirit, that had almost bereaved you of your Senses;
according to an ancient Order, instituted by the most Noble Guy, Earl of
Warwick. For the Receiving whereof, We do Constitute and Appoint, several of
our Trustees, in our Name to Claim, Demand, Levy and Receive the Penalty
aforesaid. In Case of Refusal, the Offender to be Excommunicated as a Baffler
out of all Society and Good-Fellowship, and not received again under two
Groats. The one, For his unadvised meddling with the Fox's Tail. The other, For
Conteming and Violating these our Orders; and to be proceeded against by
Pot-Law, at Timpling-Court, in Reeling-Street, before us Knights.
Sir Ralph Red-Nose, Sir Fardinando Fiery-Face,
Esquires.
Gabriel Giddy-Brains, Simon Suck-pot,



The Jovial Companion's Mirth and Pastime.
COme fill us Wine in plenty,
We Have Money enough to spend;
I hate to see the Pot empty,
a Man cannot drink to his Friend;
Then Drawer bring us more Wine,
and merrily let it pass;
We'll drink till our Faces do shine,
and he that will not may look like an Ass,
And we'll tell him so to his Face,
if he offers to baulk his Glass,
For we defy, all such dull Society.
It Is Drinking makes us merry,
and Mirth diverts our Care,
A Song of Hey down derry,
is better than heavy Air:
Make ready quickly, brave Boys,
and fill up your Glasses higher,
For we'll present with Huzzahs,
and merrily all give Fire,
Since Drinking's our Desire,
and Friendship we admire;
For here we'll stay, and never call what is to pay.
LONDON: Printed by W. O. and are to be sold by the Booksellers.


