DIVINE CONSOLATIONS FOR MOURNERS in SION: Being an EXTRACT of certain Choice
EPISTLES OF DYING MARTYRS To each other, and to their Fellow Prisoners for the
CAUSE OF CHRIST, In the Times of Cruel and Fiery Persecution.

Wherein is much Variety of suitable matter of Meditation for all such who are
burdened under the Pressure of their Sins and Sorrows in these EVIL TIMES.

Matthew. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

Psalm. 126.5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

Ver. 6. He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

Printed in the Year 1664.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Good Reader,
AMong all the sweet and precious fruits and graces of the Spirit of God held
forth unto us in the Holy Scriptures, how much are those of Faith and Love
commended unto us, as the principal and leading Graces unto all other the sweet
fruits of the Spirit wrought in the hearts of the Elect of God?

To instance two or three places speaking to this purpose: The Author to the
Hebrews, in his Catalogue of Saints, Hebr. 11.
how highly does he advance the actings of Faith in their hearts and lives,
beginning with Abel, that blessed Servant of the Lord, and Proto-Martyr of the
World, whom our blessed Lord and Savior honors with the same honor,
placing his Name in the Front of that blessed Company (by the Name of Righteous
Abel) who had laid down their lives in the Cause, Matthew. 23.35.
and for the Truths of God? And for the grace of Love, in that of 1 Cor. 8. the
beginning; whatever Instructions the Apostle had given them before, he does as
it were recall himself, and let them understand, that all would prove as
nothing, unless it proceed from Love or Charity. And further we are taught,
that although the grace of Faith be first in laying hold of the blessed object,
even our Lord Jesus, who came into the World to save sinners, yet this also of
Love is by the gracious working of the same good Spirit of God begotten in the
Soul, even at the same instant of time with that of Faith, and from their first
appearing come forth as blessed Twins never to part again, the same blessed
Spirit carrying on the work of Grace in the Soul, until perfected in Glory. To
this purpose Gal. 5.6. it is said to be Faith which works by Love. Also to
mention no more, 1 Timothy 1.14. The grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant,
with Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus. A Reverend Messenger of Christ
lately compared them to the two Arms that clasped Christ about, according to
that of the Spouse, Cant. 3.5. It was but a little that I passed from them, but
I found him whom my Soul loves; I held him, and would not let him go. Never do
these precious gifts of the Holy Ghost so affect the hearts of the people of
God, as when the Saints are drawn forth to cause this Light to shine forth in
their lives and actings, which usually appears in them most clearly in times of
greatest Sufferings. How much are we of these times bound unto our gracious
God, for the innumerable helps the Lord has this way granted us, especially
from the unwearied Labors of that man of God, of blessed memory, Mr. John Fox,
out of whose rich Volumes this little Treatise following is taken, being a
particular brief story of him whose Soul as much longed for the Crown of
Martyrdom, (although he passed through the Fire to it) as any we read of from
the time of the Primitive Martyrs. And notwithstanding the Lord of his Infinite
wisdom, denied him that which he so much thirsted for, reserving him
(although in Prison) yet to be an Instrument who from his great experiences
might Administer sweet Consolations unto others (the sweet Saints and Martyrs
of Jesus) as indeed he did, to the refreshing of many a good Soul, as by the
several excellently Spiritual Epistles of his does manifestly appear; and by
which it may undoubtedly be gathered, that himself was to be accounted among
the blessed number of those that in his Generation loved the Lord Jesus Christ
in Sincerity.

To those who have tasted how good the Lord is, these following Epistles may
through mercy prove unto them as that speaking of David did to Jonathan, 1 Samuel
18.1.
who no sooner heard him, but his Soul was knit with the Soul of David, and he
loved him as his own Soul. To this very end is this small thing drawn out of the
aforesaid Volume, that the sorrowful Souls of such as are affected with Gods
threatenings in this hour of darkness and temptation, may find some refreshing
and support; to which very end also they were first written by the Au^hor.

God is greatly threatening on every side, even us who have sat in peace
whilst our Breth^en lay bleeding; yea, were filled with plen y, w^^lest they
were stripped of their comforts, and even brought near to desolation: surely we
have n t improved our precious opportunities, but with Iesurun, being waxed
fat, have lifted up the heel; and now may justly fear, that our day of
visitation is hastening, wherein we are like to drink of the Cup of Gods
displeasure, of which the Nations have begun before us. Is not the Lord now
crying aloud, as sometimes to Jerusalem, Oh New England! Oh Boston! When will
thou be made clean? when will it once be? when shall thy Pride and Profaneness,
Licentiousness, Uncleanness and Unrighteousness, with so much cleaving to
Self-interest cease to lodge within thee? Blessed be the Lord, who has
affected the hearts of thy Rulers, so as to call for seeking God by Fasting and
Prayer, being the way and means of Gods appointment for the obtaining mercy in
the day of thy distress. The Lord hear thee in the day of thy seeking, Joel
2.13, 14.
and teach thee to Rent thy heart and not thy garments, and turn unto the Lord,
who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him.

Oh that God would give his People an heart to hearken to his voice, and to
turn unto him by unfeigned Repentance, for surely they that yet see it not, are
like shortly to see, Amos 5.13.14, 15.
that this time is a time for the Prudent to keep silence, for it is an evil
time, as the Prophet says; therefore let us seek good and not evil, and so the
Lord God of Hosts shall be with us: Let us hate evil and love good, and
establish Judgment in the Gate, it may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be
gracious to the remnant of Joseph.

A Table of the several Epistles and Letters contained in this Book.
THe effect of John Careless his Examination before Dr. Martin, Folio 1 A Letter
of Mr. Philpot to John Careless, profitable ^o be read of all them which mourn
in Repentance for their sins, 6 A Letter of John Careless, Answering to the
loving Epistle or Letter sent to him before by Mr. Philpot, 10 Mr. Bradfords
Letter to Careless, 14 Careless his Letter to Mr. Bradford, 15 His Letter to his
Wife, 18 His Letter to several faithful Brethren in Newgate, Condemned for the
Testimony of Gods Everlasting Truth, 21 His Letter to Mr. Green, Mr. Whittel,
and certain other Prisoners in Newgate, Condemned and ready to be burnt for the
Testimony of the Lord Jesus, 26 His Letter to W. Tyms Prisoner in Newgate, 29
His Letter to his dear Sister Mrs. Cotton, 33 His Letter to his dear Brother T.
V. 34 His Letter to his dear and faithful Brother Augustine Bernher, 38 His
Letter to his dear Brother Henry Aalington, Prisoner in the Lollard^ Tower, 42
His Letter to his dear and faithful Brother T V. 47 His Letter of Thanks to a
faithful Friend of his, by whom he had received much Comfort in his inward
Troubles, 51 His Letter to a certain godly faithful Sister, by the Name of E.
K. 52 His Letter to Mrs Agnes Glascock, 55 His brief Admonition to Mrs Agnes
Glascock, written in a book of hers when she came to the Prison to visit him,
57 His Letter to Mrs. A. G. to comfort her in her Repentance after she had been
at Mass; fruitful for all them to read, which are fallen, and are to be raised
up again, 58 His Letter to A. B. a frithful Minister of the Lord, containing
certain fruitful Precepts of Matrimony, 61 His Letter to Elizabeth, Wife of the
said A. B. containing likewise certain godly Precepts of Matrimony pertaining
to her duty, 64
A Letter of Mr John Bradfords, which he wrote to a faithful Woman in her
heaviness and trouble: most comfortable for all those to read that are
afflicted and broken hearted for their sins, 68 A worthy Answer of a constant
Martyr called Guy de Brez, Anno Dom. 1566. 75 The same Martyr in a Letter to
his Wife, acquaints her with Gods Gracious dealing with him in all his
Assaults, Ibid.
THE EFFECT OF JOHN CARELESS EXAMINATION before Doctor Martin briefly declared.
FIrst, The Effect of John Careless examination.
Doctor Martin calling John Careless to him in his Chamber, demanded what was
his Name. To whom when the other had answered, that his name was John Careless,
then began Doct. Martin to descant at his pleasure upon that name, saying, That
it would appear by his conditions by that time he had done with him, that he
would be a true Careless man indeed. And so after other by-talk there spent
about much needless matter, then he asked him where he was born?

Careless. Forsooth, says he, at Coventry.


Martin. At Coventry? what so far man? How came thou hither? who sent thee to
the Kings Bench to Prison?


Careless. I was brought thither by a Writ, I trow; How John Careless was brouht
to the Kings Bench
what he was I cannot tell. I think Mr. Marshall can tell you.


Marsh. In good faith I cannot tell what the matter is: but indeed my Lord
Chief Justice sent him from the Bar.


Mart. Well Careless, I would wish thou should play the wise man's part. Thou
art an handsome man; and it is pity but that thou should do well, and save
that which God has bought.


Careless. I thank your good Mastership most heartily: And I put you out of
doubt that I am most sure and certain of my salvation by Jesus Christ; so that
my soul is safe already, whatsoever pains my body suffer here for a little time.


Mart. Yea Marry, you say truth: for thou art so Predestinate to life, that
thou can not perish, in whatsoever Opinion thou do dye.


Careless. That GOD has Predestinate me to Eternal life in Jesus Christ, I am
most certain; John Careless examined upon Predestination.
and even so am I sure that his Holy Spirit (wherewith I am sealed will so
preserve me from all Heresies and evil Opinions, that I shall die in none at
all.


Mart. Go to, let me hear your Faith in Predestination: for that shall be
written also.


Carel. Your Mastership shall pardon me herein. For you said your self
ere-while, that you had no Commission to examine my Conscience. I will trouble
my self with answering no more matters then I needs must, until I come before
them that shall have more authority further to examine me.


Mart. Dr. Martin declares his Commission.
I tell thee then I have Commission; yea, and Commandment from the Council to
examine thee: for they delivered me thy Articles.


Carel. Yea, I think indeed that your Mastership is appointed to examine me of
my Articles which you have there in writing, and I have told you the truth. I
do confess them to be mine own fact and deed: but you do now examine me of
Predestination, whereof my Articles speaks nothing at all.


Mart. I tell thee yet again, that I must also examine thee of such things as
be in controversy between thee and thy fellows in the Kings Bench, whereof
Predestination is a part, as thy fellow N. has confessed, and thy self do
not deny it.


Carel. I do not deny it. But he that first told you that matter, might have
found himself much better occupied.


Mart. Why Dr. Martin would not examine him of the Sacrament.
Why? what if he had not told me? think thou I would not have known it? yes,
or else thou should have withstood my Commission. For I tell thee truth, I
may now examine thee of the blessed Sacrament, or any other thing that I list,
but that I would show thee favor, and not be too hasty with thee at the first.


Marsh. Yea indeed Careless, Master Doctor has Commission to examine you, or
any other of your fellow^


Mart. Yea marry have I, I tell the truth of it.


Careless. Then let your Scribe set his pen to the paper, and you shall have it
roundly even as the truth is. I believe that Almighty GOD, our most dear loving
Father, of his great mercy and goodness did Elect in Christ.


Mart. Tush, What need all that long circumstance? write, I believe that God
Elected; and make no more ado.


Careless. No not so Mr. Doctor: it is an high Mystery, and ought reverently to
be spoken of. And if my words may not be written as I do utter them, I will not
speak at all.


Mart. Go to, go to, wri^e what he will, (...) is more busines^ then needs.


Careless. I believe that Alm^ghty God our most dear loving Father, Careless
Opinion of Gods Election.
of his great mercy and infinite goodness (through Jesus Christ) did elect and
appoint in him before the foundation of the Earth was laid, a Church or
Congregation, which he does continually guide and govern by his Grace and holy
Spirit, so that not one of them shall ever finally perish. When this was
written, Mr. Doctor took it in his hand and read it, saying,


Mart. Why? who will deny this? D. Martin avowet^ Careless judgment of Gods
Election.



Careless. If your Mastership do allow it, and other learned men when they shall
see it, I have my hearts desire.


Mart. And do you hold none otherwise then is there written?


Careless. No verily, nor never did.


Mart. Write that he says otherwise he holds not. So that was written. It
was told me also that thou do affirm that Christ did not dye effectually for
all men.


Careless. Whatsoever has been told you, it is not much material unto me. Let
the tellers of such tales come before my f^ce, and I trust to make them answer.
For indeed I do b^lieve that Christ did effectually dye for all those that do
effectually repent and believe, and for none other. So that was written also.


Mart. Now sir what is Trewes faith of Predestination? he believes that all
men be Predestinate, and that none shall be Damned: does he not?


Careless. No forsooth, that he does not.


Mart. How then?


Careless Truly I think he does believe as your Mastership and the rest of the
Clergy do believe of Predestination, A wrong faith of Predestination, believing
to be elected in respect of Good works.
that we be Elected in respect of our good works, and so long elected as we do
them and no longer.


Mart. Write that he says, his fellow True believes of Predestination as the
Papists do believe.


Careless. Ah Mr. Doctor, did I so term you? seeing that this my Confession
shall come before the Council, I pray you place my terms as reverently as I
spoke them.


Mart. Well, well. Write that True is of the same Faith as the Catholics be.


Careless. I did not so call you neither, (...) wonder what you mean.


Marsh. You said the Clergy, ^^d (...) Careless?


Careless Yes forsooth did I So then it was written of the Clergy.


Mart. Now Sir What say you more?


Careless. Forsooth I have no further to say in this matter.


Mart. Dr. Martin pretends favor to Careless.
Well, Careless, I pray thee prove thy self a wise man, and do not cast away thy
self wilfully.


Careless. Now the Lord he knows, good Mr. Doctor, I would full gladly live,
so that I might do the same with a safe Conscience. And your Mastership shall
right well perceive that I will be no wilful man, but in all things that I
stand upon, I shall have a sure ground.


Mart. Now the Lord knows, good Careless, that I would gladly make some means
to preserve thy life; but thou speak so much of the Lord, the Lord: will thou be content to go with my Lord Fitzwater into Ireland? methinks thou art a
goodly tall fellow to do the Queen service there. How say thou?


Careless. Verily Mr. Doctor, whether I be in Ireland, France, or Spain, or any
place else, I am ready to do her Grace the best service I can, with Body, Goods
and Life, so long as it does last.


Mart. That is honestly said. I promise thee every man will not say so. How say
you Mr. Marshall, this man is meet for all manner of Service. Indeed thou art
worthy Careless to have the more favor.


Careless. Indeed Sir I hope to be meet and ready unto all things that
pertains unto a true Christian Subject to do. And if her Grace, or her
Officers under her, do require me to any thing contrary unto Christ's Religion,
I am ready also to do my service in Smithfield for not observing it, as my
bedfellow and other Brethren have done: praised be God for them.


Mart. By my troth thou art a pleasant fellow as ever I talked with of all the
Protestants, except it were Tomson. I am sorry that I must depart with thee so
soon: but I have such business now, that I can tarry with thee no longer. Well,
yet thou can not deny, but you are at jarre amongst your selves in the Kings
B^n^h, and it is so throughout all your Congregation, for you will not be a
Church.


Careless. No Mr. Doctor that is no^ so. More variety in ye Popes Church then is
amongst the Protestants.
There is a thousand times more variety in Opinions among your Doctors, which
you call of the Catholic Chu ch, ^ea and that in the Sacrament, for the which
there is so much bloodshed now adays: I mean of your latter Doctors, and new
Writers; as for the old, they agree wholly with us.


Mart. No Careless, that is not so: there thou art deceived.


Careless. Verily it is so, Mr. Doctor. I am not deceived therein any thing at
all, as it has been, and is evidently proved by such as God ^ath endued with
great Learning. Then he turned to the Marshal and whispered with him a while.


Mart. Turning unto me again, said, Farewell Careless, Dr. Martin takes his
leave gently of Careless.
for I can tarry no longer with thee now my busin^ss is suck.


Careless. God be with you good Mr. Doctor. The Lord give your Mastership health
of Body and Soul.


Martin. God have mercy, good Careless; and God keep thee from all Errors, and
give thee grace to do as well as I would w^sh my self.


Careless. I thank your good Mastership. I pray God I may do always that is
acceptable in his sight. Whereunto they all said Amen. And so I departed with a
glad heart: God only have the whole praise. Amen.

It appears by Examination of the foresaid John Careless, that he endured
Prisoner the space of two whole years having wife and Children. In the which
his captivity first being in Coventry Goal, he was there in such credit with
his Keeper, that upon his word he was let out to play in the Pageant about the
City with other his Companions. And that done, keeping touch with his Keeper,
he returned again into Prison at his hour appointed.

And after that being brought up to London, he was endued with such patience
and constant fortitude, John Careless dved in Prison and was buried in the
fields.
that he longed for nothing more earnestly, th^n to come to that promotion to
dye in the fire for the profession of his Faith: and yet it so pleased the Lord
to prevent him with death, that he came not to it, but dyed in the Prison, and
after was buried in the fields in a dunghill.

In the mean time while he was in Prison in the Kings Bench, it chanced he was
in great heaviness, and perturbation of mind and Conscience: whereupon he
wrote to M. Philpot being then in the Colehouse. Upon occasion hereof, M.
Philpot sent an Epistle Consolatory unto him, as follows.


A Letter of Mr. Philpot to John Careless, profitable to be read of all them
which mourn in Repentance for their Sins.
THe God of all comfort, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, send unto
thee my dear Brother Careless, the inward consolation of his holy Spirit, in all
the malicious assaults and troublous temptations of our common Adversary the
Devil. Amen.

That GOD gives you so contrite an heart for your sins, I cannot but rejoice
to behold the lively mark of the children of God, whose property is to think
^ore lowly and vilely of themselves then of any other, and oftentimes do set
their sins before them, that they might the more be stirred to bring forth the
fruits of Repentance, and learn to mourn in this world, that in another they
might be glad and rejoice. Such a broken Heart is a pleasant Sacrifice unto
God: Oh that I had the like contrite heart. God mollify my stony heart, which
lamenteth not in such wise my former detestable iniquities. Praised be God that
he has given you this sorrowful heart in respect of Righteousness; and I pray
you let me be partaker of these godly sorrows for sin, which be the testimony
of the presence of the holy Ghost. Did not the sword of sorrow pierce the heart
of the Elect and blessed Mother of our Lord? Did not Peter weep bitterly for
his sins, which was so beloved of Christ? Did not Mary Magdalen wash the feet
of our Savior with her tears, and received therewithal remission of her
sevenfold sins?

Be of good comfort therefore, Mine own dear heart, in this thy sorrow, for it
is the Earnest-peny of Eternal Consolation. In thy sorrow laugh, for the
Spirit of God is with thee. Bl^ssed be they (says Christ) that mourn, Matthew.
15.
for they shall be comforted. They went forth and wept, Psalm. 126.
says the Prophet; such shall come again, having their gripes full of
gladness. Psalm. 51. Luke 7. Sorrow in a Christian man ought to be moderate.
And al^hough a sorrowful heart in consideration of his sin, be an acceptable
Sacrifice before God, whereby we are stirred up to more thankefulness unto God,
knowing that much is fo^g^ven us, that we might love the more: yet the man of
God must keep a measure in the same, lest he be swallowed up by too much
sorrow. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
S Paul would not the Thessalonians to be sorry as other men which have no
hope. 2 Cor. 7.
Such a sorrow is not commendable, but works damnation, and is far from the
children of God, who are continually sorrowful in God, when they look upon
their own unworthiness, with hope of forgiveness. For God to this end by his
Spirit sets the sins of his Elect still before them, Romans 3.
that where they perceive Sin to abound, there they might be assured that Grace
shall superabound: and brings them down into Hell, that he might lift them up
with greater joy into Heaven. Wherefore, mine own Bowels in Christ, as long as
you are not void altogether of hope, be not dismayed through your pensive heart
for your sins, how huge soever they have been, for God is able to forgive more
then you are able to sin; yea, and he will forgive him which with hope is sorry
for his sins.

But know, Brother, that as often as we do go about, by the help of Gods Spirit,
to do that is good, Satan's practice to bring the godly repentance of a sinner
to desperation.
the evil spirit Satan lays hard wait to turn the good unto evil, and goes
about to mix the detestable D^rnell of Desperation, with the godly Sorrow of a
pure Penitent Heart. You be not ignorant of his malicious subtilty, and how
that continually he assaulteth that good which the grace of God planteth. I see
the battle betwixt you and him, but the victory is yours, yea and that daily:
For you have laid hold upon the Anchor of Salvation, which is hope in Christ,
he which will not suffer you to be made ashamed.

Be not discomforted that you have this Conflict: but be glad that God has
given you the same to try your Faith, and that you might appear daily worthy of
the Kingdom of God, for the which you strive. God beholds your striving
Faith against Satan, and is pleased with your mighty resistance. The Spirit
which is in you, is mightier then all the Adversaries power. Tempt he may, and
lying await at your heels, give you a fall unawares: but overcome he shall not;
yea he cannot, for you are sealed up already with a lively Faith to be the
child of God for ever: and whom God has once sealed for his own, him he never
utterly forsakes. Gods children fall. The Devils children lie still.
The just falls seven times, but he rises again. It is man's frailty to fall,
but it is the property of the Devils child to ly still.

This strife against sin is sufficient testimony that you are the child of
God, Luke 11.
for if you were not, you should feel no such malice as he now troubles you
withal. When this strong Goliath has the hold, all things be in peace which he
possesses; and because he has you not, he will not suffer you unassaulted.
But stand f^st, and hold out the Buckler of Faith, Strife against sin is a
token of Gods child.
and with the Sword of Gods Promises smite him on the scalp, that he may
receive a deadly wound, and never be able to stand against you any more. James
4.
S. James tells you that he is but a coward, saying, Resist the Devil, and he
will fly away. It is the will of God that he should thus long tempt you, and
not go away as yet, or else he had done with you long ere this. He knows
already that he shall receive the foil at your hands, and increase the Crown
of your Glory: for he that overcomes shall be crowned. Therefore g^ory in your
temptation, since they shall turn to your felicity. Be not afraid of your
continual ass^ults, which be occasions of your daily victory. The Word of G d
ab^^eth for ever. In what hour soever a sinner repents him of his sins they
be forgiven. Ezekiel. 33.
Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Do you not perceive the
manifest tokens of your Election? First your vocation to the Gospel, and after
your vocation, the manifest gifts of the Spirit of God given unto you above
many other of your condition, with godliness which believes and yields to
the authority of the Scriptures, and is zealous for the same? Seeing you are
Gods own dearling, who can hurt you? Be not of a deject mind for these
temptations, neither make your unfeigned friends to be more sorrowful for you,
then need does require.

Since God has willed you at your Baptism in Christ to be Careless, why do you
make your self Careful? Cast all your care on him* Set the Lord before your
eyes always, for he is on your right side that you shall not be moved. True
Christians how they ought to be c reless in their careful estate.
Behold the goodness of God toward me. I am careless, being fast closed in a
Pair of Stocks, which pinch me for very straitness; and will you be careful? I
will not have that unseemly addition to your Name. Be as your Name pretends,
for doubtless you have none other cause but so to be. Pray, I beseech you, that
I may be still careless in my careful estate, as you have cause to be careless
in your easier condition. Be thank^full, and put away all care, and then I
shall be joyful in my strait present care. Commend me to all our Brethren, and
desire them to pray for me that I may overcome my temptations; for the D^vil
rages against me. I am put in the Stocks in a place alone, because I would not
answer to such Articles as they would charge me withal in a corner at the
Bishops appointment, and because I did not come to Mass when the Bishop sent
for me. I w ll lie all the days of my life in the Stocks (by Gods grace)
rather then I will consent to the wicked generation. Praise God and be joyful
that it has pleased him to make us worthy to suffer somewhat for his Names
sake. The Devil must rage for ten days. Commend me to Mr. F. and thank him for
his Law Books; but Law, neither Equity will take any place among these blood
thirsty. I would for your sake their unjust dealing were noted unto the
Parliament-hous^, if it might avail. God shorten these evil days. I have
answered the Bishop meetly plain already, and I said to him, If he will call me
in open Judgment, I will answer him as plainly as he will require: otherwise I
have refused, because I fear me they will condemn me in hugger-mugger. The
peace of God be with you my dear Brother. I can write no more for lack of
light, and that I have written I cannot read my self, and God knows s is
written far uneasily. I pray God you may pick out some understanding of my
mind toward you. Written in a Colehouse of da^kness out of a Pair of painful
Stocks, by

Thine own in Christ, John Philpot.

A Letter of John Careless answering to the loving Epistle or Letter sent to him
before by Mr. Philpot.
A faithful friend is a strong defense, whosoever finds such an one, finds a
treasure.

A faithful friend has no peer, the weight of gold and silver is not to be
compared to the goodness of his Faith.

A faithful friend is a Medicine of life, and they that fear the Lord shall
find him. Ecclesiast. 6.

A lett^r of John Careless to Mr. Philpot.
THe Father of Mercy, and God of all Consolation, comfort you with his Eternal
Spirit (my most dear and faithful loving Friend good Mr. Philpot) as you have
comforted me by the mighty operation of the same: The everlasting God be
praised therefore for ever. Amen.

Ah my dear heart, and most loving Brother, if I should do nothing else day and
night, so long as the days of Heaven do endure, but kneel on my knees and
read Psalms, I can never be able to render unto God condign thanks for his
mercy, fatherly kindness, and most lov^ng compassion extended unto me most
vile, sinful, wicked and unworthy wretch. Oh that the Lord would open my mouth,
and give me a thankful heart, that from the bottom of the same might flow his
continual praise. Oh that my sinful flesh (which is the cause of my sorrow)
were clean separated from me, that I might sing Psalms of Thanksgiving unto the
Lords Name for ever: that with good Samuels Mother, I might continually record
this noble Verse following, the which by good experience I have found most
true, praised be my good God therefore.

1. Sam. 2. John Careless raised up by the Lord out of great heaviness.
The Lord (says that good woman) kills, and makes alive; he brings down
to hell, and fetches up again. Praised be that Lord for ever, yea, and praised
be his Name, for that he has given me true experience and lively feeling of
the same. Blessed be the Lord God, whose mercy endures for ever, which has
not dealt with me according to my deep deserts, nor destroyed me in his
displeasure when I had justly deserved it. Oh what reward shall I give again
unto the Lord for all the great benefits that he has done for my Soul! I will
gladly receive the Cup of Salvation at his hand, and will worship his Name with
Prayer and with Praise.

Ah my dear heart, yea most dear unto me in the Lord think not this sudden
change in me to be some fickle Fantasy of my foolish head (as indeed some
other would surely suspect it to be) for doubtless it is the mavelous doing
of the Lord, most merciful unto me his unworthy Creature God for his great
mercies sake give me grace to be more thankful unto him then I heretofore have
been, and keep me that I never fall forth of his favor again.

And now my dear Brother, and most blessed M^ssenger of the Lord whose
beautiful feet have brought much glad tidings unto my Soul, what shall I do or
say unto you, in the least part to recompense the fatherly affection and godly
care that you continually keep for me? Oh that God would give me the Spirit of
fervent Prayer, that I might yet that way supply some little part of my duty
toward you. Ah my true loving Friend, how soon did you lay aside all other
business, to make a sweet Plaster for my wounded Conscience, yea and that out
of a painful Pair of Stocks, which place must needs be uneasy to write in. But
God has brought you into a strait place, that you might set my Soul at
liberty. Out of your pinching and painful Seat, you have plentifully poured
upon me your precious Nard, the sweet savor whereof has greatly refreshed my
tired Soul. The Lord likewise refresh you both Body and Soul, by pouring the
oil of his gracious Spirit into your sweet heart.

Ah good Jeremy, has Pashur put thee in the Stocks? why, Jer. 20.
now thou have the right reward of a Prophet. Thy glory never began to appear
till now. I doubt not but shortly, Jer. 26.
in stead of Ahikam the the Son of Shaphan, Jesus the Son of the living God
will come, and deliver thee forth of the hands of all thine Enemies, and will
also make good against them and their Antichristian Synagogue, all the words
that thou have spoken in his Name. The Lord has made thee this day a strong
defenced Tower, an iron Pillar, Jer. 1.
and a brazen Wall against the whole Rabble of Antichrist: and though they
fight against thee never so fiercely, yet shall they not overcome thee, for the
Lord himself is with thee to help and deliver thee; Jer. 15.
and he will rid thee out of the hands of the wicked, and will deliver thee out
of the hands of the Tyrants. And in that you are not busy in casting Pearls
before Swine, Matthew. 7.
nor in giving the holy things unto Dogs, you are much to be commended in my
simple judgment. The circumspect behavior of Mr. Philpot.
And sure I am, that your circumspect and modest behavior hitherto has been
as much to Gods glory, and to the shame and confusion of your enemies, as any
man's doings that are gone before you.

John Careless his advice to him.
Wherefore mine advice and most earnest desire is, with all other of your loving
Friends, that you still keep that order with those Blood-thirsty Bite-sheeps,
Bishops I should say, that you have begun. For though in conclusion they will
surely have your blood, yet shall they come by it with shame enough, and to
their perpetual infamy whiles the world does endure. They would indeed condemn
you in hugger-mugger, to darken Gods glory, if it might be: but Satan's thoughts
are not unknown to you, and the depth of his subtilty is by you well foreseen.
Therefore let them do whatsoever God shall suffer them to do; for I know all
things shall tu^n to your best. Though you lie in the dark, slurried with the
Bishops black Cole-dust, yet shall you be shortly restored unto the heavenly
Light, and made as white as snow in Salmon, and as the wings of a Dove, Psalm.
68.
tha^ is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold. You know the
Vessel, before it be made bright, is soiled with Oil and other things, that it
may scour the better.

Oh happy be you, that you be now in the Scouring-house, for shortly you shall
be set upon the Cel^st^al shelf as bright as Angels. Therefore, my dear hear^,
I will now according to your loving request, cast away all care, and rejoice
with you, and praise God for you, and pray for you day and night,: yea, I will
now, with Gods grace, si^g Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving with you: for now
my Soul is turned to her old rest again, and has taken a sweet nap in Christ's
lap. I have cast my care upon the Lord, which cares for me, and will be
careless, according to my Name, in that respect which you would have me. I will
leave out my unseemly addition as long as I live; for it can take no place
where true faith and hope is resident. Gods gracious work through M Philpots
Letter.
So soon as I had read your most godly and comfortable Letter, my sorrows
vanished away as smoke in the wind, my Spirit revived, and comfort came again,
whereby I am sure the Spirit of God was Author of it.

Oh good Mr. Philpot, which art a principal Pot indeed, filled with most
precious Liquor, as it appears by the plenteous pouring forth of the same. Oh
Pot most happy, of the high Potter ordained to honor, which do contain such
heavenly treasure in the Earthen vessel! Oh Pot thrice happy, in whom Christ
has wrought a great Miracle, altering thy nature, and turning water into wine,
and that of the best, whereout the Master of the Feast has filled my cup so
full, John Careless drunken with joy of the spirit.
that I am become drunken in the joy of the Spirit through the same. When
Martyrdom shall break thee (O vessel of honor) I know the fragrant savor of
thy precious Nard will much rejoice the heavy hearts of Christ's true Members,
although the Judasses will grudge and murmr at the same; yea, and burst out
into words of slander, saying, It is but lost and waste.

Be not offended, dear heart, at my Metaphorical speech; for I am disposed to
be merry, 2 Kin. 6.
and with David to dance before the Ark of the Lord: and though you play upon a
pair of Organs not very comely or easy to the flesh, yet the sweet sound that
came from the same, causes me thus to do. O that I were with you in body, as
presently as I am in spirit, that I might sing all care away in Christ; for now
the time of comfort is come. I hope to be with you shortly, if all things
happen aright: Careless accused to the Council by certain back friends in
Coventry.
for my old friends of Coventry have put the Council in remembrance of me, not
six days ago, saying, That I am more worthy to be burned then any that was
burned yet. Gods blessing on their hearts for their good report. God make me
worthy of that dignity, and hasten the time, that I may set forth his Glory.

Pray for me, dear heart, I beseech you, and will all your company to do the
same, and I will pray God for you all so long as I live. And now farewell in
Christ, thou bl ssed of Gods own mouth, Note how comfortable the Lord works
in his prisoned Saints.
I will for a time take my leave, but not my last farewell. Blessed be the time
that ever I came into the Kings Bench, to be joined in love and fellowship with
such dear Ch^ldren of the Lord. My good Brother Bradford shall not be dead
whiles you be alive: for verily the spirit of him does rest on you in most
ample wise. Your Letters of comfort unto me in each point do agree, as though
the one were a copy of the other. He has planted in me, and you do water, the
Lord give good increase. My dear Brethren and fellow prisoners here, have them
humbly and heartily commended unto you, and your company, mourning for your
misery, but yet rejoicing for your plenteous Consolation and comfort in Christ.
We are all cheerful and merry under our Cross, and do lack no necessaries,
Praised be God for his Providence and great mercy toward us for evermore. Amen.

Mr. Bradfords Letter to Careless.
ALmighty God our dear Father, through and for the Merits of his dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ, be merciful unto us, pardon us our offenses, and under the
w^ngs of his Mercy protect us from all evil, from henceforth and for ever. Amen.

Dear Brother Careless, I heartily pray you to pray to God for me, for the
pardon of my manifold sins, and most grievous offenses, which need none other
demonstration unto you then this, namely, That I have behaved my self so
negligently in answering your godly triple Letters, which are three Witnesses
against me. God lay not them, nor none other thing to my charge to
Condemnation, though to Correction: Not my will, Practice of the Keys of the
Gospel.
but his will be done. Concerning your request of Absolution (my dearest
Brother) what shall I say, but even as truth is, That the Lord of all Mercy,
and Father of all Comfort, through the Merits and Mediation of his dear Son,
thy only Lord and Savior, has clearly remitted and pardoned all thy offenses
whatsoever they be, that ever hitherto thou have committed against his Majesty:
and therefore he has given to thee, as to his Child (dear Brother John
Careless) in token that thy sins are pardoned; He (I say) has given unto thee a
penitent and believing heart; that is, a heart which desires to repent and
believe: For such an one is taken of him (he accepting the will for the deed)
for a penitent and believing heart indeed.

Wherefore (my good Brother) be merry, glad, and of good cheer, for the Lord
has taken away thy sins; thou shall not dye. Go thy ways, the Lord has put
away thy sins. The East is not so far from the West, as the Lord now has put
thy sins from thee. Look how the Heavens be in comparison of ^he Earth, so
far has his Mercy prevailed toward thee his dear Child, John Careless,
through Christ the Beloved. Say therefore with David, Praise the Lord, O my
Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name: for he has forgiven thee
all thy sins, as truly he has. And hereof I desire to be a Witness. God make
me worthy to hear from you the like true Message for my self. Mine own dearly
Beloved, you have great cause to thank God most heartily, that has given you
such Repentance and Faith: The Lord increase the same in you, and me a most
miserable wretch, whose heart is harder then the Adamant stone, or else I could
not thus long have stayed from writing unto you. If I live, and may, I purpose
and promise you to make amends. Pray for me, my most dear Brother, I heartily
beseech you, and forgive me my long silence. God our Father be with us for
ever. Amen.

Yours in the Lord, John Bradford.

John Careless his Letter to Mr. Bradford.
THe Peace of God in Jesus Christ, A sweet Letter of John Careless to Mr.
Bradford, a little before his Martyrdom
the Eternal Comfort of his sweet Spirit, which has surely sealed you unto
Eternal Salvation, be with you, and strengthen you in your joyful journey
toward the Celestial Jerusalem (my dear Friend, and most faithful Brother Mr.
Bradford) to the setting forth of Gods glory, and to your eternal joy in
Christ. Amen.

Ever since that good Mr. Philpot showed me your last Letter (my dear heart in
the Lord) I have continued in great heaviness and perplexity; He mourns for
the loss and l^ck of Mr. Bradfor^. in the Church.
not for any hurt or discommodity that I can perceive coming toward you, unto
whom doubtless Death is made life and great felicity: but for the great loss
that Gods Church here in England shall sustain, by the taking away of so godly,
worthy, and necessary an instrument, as the Lord has made you to be. Oh that
my life, and a thousand such wretched lives more, might go for yours! Oh why
does God suffer me, and such other Catterpillers to live, that can do nothing
but consume the Alms of the Church, and take away you so worthy a Workman and
Labourer in the Lords Vineyard? But woe be to our sins and great unthanfulness,
which is the greatest cause of the taking away of such worthy instruments of
God, as should set forth his Glory, and instruct his People. If we had been
thankful unto God for the good Ministers of his Word, we had not been so soon
deprived both of it and them. The Lord forgive our great ingratitude and sins,
and give us true Repentance and Faith, and hold his hand of Mercy over us for
his dear Son Christ's sake. Take not away all thy true Preachers forth of this
Realm (O Lord) but leave us a Seed, lest Engl^nd be made like unto Sodom and
Gomorrah, when thy true Lo^^ be gone.

But what go I about to mingle your mirth with my mourning, and your just joy
with my deserved sorrow? If I loved you indeed, as I have pretended, I should
surely rejoice with you most heartily, and praise God on your b^half from the
very bottom of my heart: He rejoices for the honor of Mr. Bradfords
Martyrdom.
I should praise God day and night for your excellent Election in and through
his great Mercy and should give him most humble thanks for your Vocation by his
Gospel, and your true Knowledge in the same: I should earnestly praise him for
your sweet justification, whereof you are most certain by Gods Grace and
Spirit; and should instantly pray unto him for your Glorification, which shall
shortly ensue: I should rejoice and be glad to see you dignified by the Crown
of Martyrdom and to be appointed to that honor, to testify his Truth, and to
Seal it with your Blood: I should highly extol the Lord, who has given you a
glorious v^ctory over all your enemies, visible and inv si le, and has given
you Grace and Strength to finish the Tower that you have begun to build.
Finally, if I loved you, I should most heartily rejoice and be glad to see you
delivered from this body of sin, and vile person of the Flesh, and brought into
that heavenly Tabernacle, where you shall be safely kept, and never offend him
more.

This and much more should I do, if I had a good heart toward God, or you his
dear child. But (alas) I am an hypocrite, and do seek nothing but mine own
commodity. I would have Gods everlasting Providence give place to my peevish
will and purpose, although it were to the hindrance of his glory, and your
sweet commodity. God forgive me my horrible ingratitude, sins, and offenses
against him; and good Brother, do you forgive me my great negligence and
unthankfulness toward you, and henceforth I promise you I will put my will to
Gods will, and pray that the same may be fulfilled in you, so long as you be on
this earth: and when you are taken hence, I will most heartily praise the Lord
for you, so long as I have my being in this world. Ah my dear heart, now I must
take my leave of you, and as I think, John Careless takes his leave of M.
Bradford
my Vltimum Vale in this life, but in the life to come I am right well assured
we shall merrily meet together, and that shortly, I trust. And in taking of my
leave of you (my dear heart in the Lord) I shall desire you faithfully to
remember all the sweet messages that the Lord our good God, and most dear
loving Father has sent you by me his most unworthy Servant, which as they are
most true, so shall they be most truly accomplished upon you eternally: and for
the more assurance and certificate thereof to your godly Conscience, he has
commanded me to repeat the same unto you again in his own Name and Word.

Therefore now give ear, and faithful credence. Hearken, Testimony of Gods
Spirit.
O ye Heavens, and thou earth give ear, and bear me witness at the great Day,
that I do here faithfully and truly the Lords m^ss^ge unto his dear Servant,
John Careless does Gods message to M. Bradford.
his singularly beloved and el^ct Child ^^^n Bradford. John Bradford thou man
so specially beloved of God, I pronounce and testify unto thee in the Word and
Name of the Lord Jehovah, that all thy sins whatsoever they be, be they never
so many, so grievous, or so great, be fully and freely p^^doned, released and
forgiven thee, by the mercy of God in Jesus Christ thine only Lord and sweet
Savior, in whom thou do undoubtedly believe. Power and practice of the keys
of the Gospel.
Christ has cleansed thee with his Blood, and clothed thee with his
Righteousness, and has made ^hee in the sight of God his Father, without spot
or wrinckle: so that when the fi^e does his appointed office, thou shall be
received (as a sweet burnt Sacrifice) into Heaven, where thou shall joyfully
remain in Gods presence for ever, as the true inheriter of his everlasting
Kingdom, unto the which thou wast undoubtedly predestinate and ordained by the
Lords infallible purpose and decree, before the foundation of the World was
laid. And that is most true that I have said, I call the whole Trinity, the
Almighty and Eternal Majesty of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost to
my Record at this present: whom I humbly beseech to confirm and stablish in
thee the true and lively feeling of the same. Amen. Selah.

Now with a merry heart and a joyful spirit, something mixed with lawful
tears, I take my farewell of you, mine own dear Brother in the Lord: who send us
shortly a merry meeting in his Kingdom, that we may both sing praises together
unto him with his holy Angels and blessed Spirits for ever and ever. Farewell
thou blessed of the Lord, farewell in Christ: depart unto thy rest in the Lord;
and pray for me for Gods sake.

As I had made an end of this simple Letter, I heard some comfort both of good
Mr. Philpots Servant and yours, but (alas) I do scarcely believe them. Well, I
will hope in God, and pray all night that God would send me some comfort to
morrow; and if the Lord give you sparing to morrow, let me hear four words of
comfort from you, for Gods sake. The Blessing of God be with you now and for
ever. Amen.

Yours for ever in the Lord Jesus, John Careless living in Hope against Hope.

John Careless his Letter to his Wife.
AS by the great mercy of God, at the time of his good will and providence
appointed, (my dearly beloved Wife) you and I were joined together in the holy
and Christian state of godly Matrimony, as well to our great joy and comfort in
Christ, as also to the increase of his blessed Church and faithful
Congregation, by having lawful Children in and by the same, with the which God
of his mercy has blessed us, praised be his Name therefore: Even so now by his
merciful will and Divine Ordinance, the time is come (so far as I can
perceive) wherein he will, for his glory, and our eternal comfort, dissolve
the same, and separate us asunder again for a time. Wherefore I thought it
good, yea and my bounden duty, by this simple Letter to provoke, stir, and
admonish you to behave your self in all your doings, sayings and thoughts, most
thankefully unto our good God for the same. And therefore (my dear Wife) as you
have heartily rejoiced in the Lord, and oftentimes given God thanks for his
goodness, in bringing us together in his holy Ordinance: Even so now I desire
you, when this time of our separation shall come, to rejoice with me in the
Lord, and to give him most hearty thanks, that he has (to his glory, and our
endless commodity) separated us again for a little time, and has mercifully
taken me unto himself forth of this miserable world, into his Celestial
Kingdom; Here is a true mark of a faithful Christian, forsaking wife and
children for Christ's sake.
believing and hoping also assuredly, that God of his goodness, for his Son
Christ's sake, will shortly bring you and your dear children thither to me, that
we may most joyfully together sing Praises unto his glorious Name for ever. And
yet once again I desire you for the love of God, and as ever you loved me, to
rejoice with me, and to give God continual thanks for doing his most merciful
will upon me.

I hear say, that you do oftentimes use to repeat this godly saying, The Lords
will be fulfilled. True obedience of a faithful woman.
Doubtless it rejoices my poor heart to hear that report of you; and for the
Lords sake use that godly prayer continually, and teach your Children and
Family to say the same day and night: and not only say it with your tongues,
but also with your heart and mind, and joyfully to submit your will to Gods
will in very deed; knowing and believing assuredly, that nothing shall come to
you or any of yours, otherwise then it shall be his Almighty and Fatherly good
will and pleasure, and for your eternal comfort and commodity. Which thing to
be most true and certain, Christ testifies in his holy Gospel, saying, Are not
two little Sparrows sold for a farthing? Matthew. 10.
and yet not one of them shall perish without the will of your heavenly Father.
And he concludes, saying, Fear not ye therefore, for ye are better then many
Sparrows. As though he should have said, If God have such a respect and care
for a poor Sparrow, which is not worth one farthing, that it shall not be taken
in the Lime-twig, Net, or Pit-fall, unsill it be his good will and pleasure;
you may be well assured, that not one of you (whom he so dearly loves, that he
has given his only dear Son for y^u) shall perish, or depart forth of this
miserable life, without his Almighty good will and pleasure.

Therefore, dear Wife, put your trust and confidence wholly and only in him,
and ever pray that his will be fulfilled, and not yours, except it be agreeing
to his will: the which I pray God it may ever be. Amen. And as for worldly
things take you no care, Good counsel given to his wife
but be you well assured the Lord your dear God and Father will not see you nor
yours lack, if you continue in his love and childly fear, and keep a clear
Conscience from all kind of Idolatry, ^uperstition, and Wickedness, as my trust
is that you will do, although it be with the loss and danger of this temporal
life. And good Margaret, Fear not them that can but kill the body, (and yet can
they not do that, until God give them leave) but fear to d^splease him that
can kill both body and Soul, and cast them into hell fire. Let not the
remembrance of your Children keep you from God: The Lord himself will be a
Father and a Mother, Care of children to be cast upon Lord.
better then ever you or I could have been unto them. He himself will do all
things necessary for them, yea as much as rock the Cradle, if need be. He has
given his holy Angels charge over them, therefore commit them unto him. But if
you may live with a clear Conscience (for else I would not have you to live)
and see the bringing up of your Children your self, look that you nurture them
in the fear of God, and keep them far from Idolatry, Superstition, The
mothers duty in bringing up her children.
and all other kind of Wickedness: and for Gods sake help them to some
Learning, if it be possible, that they may increase in virtue and god^y
knowledge, which shall be a better Dowry to marry them withal, then any
worldly substance: and when they be come to age, provide them such Husbands as
fear God, and love his holy Word. I charge you take heed that you match them
with no Papists: and if you live and marry again your self, (which thing I
would wish you to do, if need require, or else not) good Wife take heed how you
bestow your self, that you and my poor Children be not compelled to wickedness.
But if you sh ll be able well to live Gods true Widow, I would counsel you so
to live still, for the more quietness of your self and your poor Children. Take
heed, Margaret, and play the wise woman's part: you have warning by other, if
you will take an example. And thus I commit you and my sweet Children unto Gods
most merciful defense. The Blessing of God be with you, and God send us a
merry meeting together in Heaven. Farewell in Christ: farewell mine own dear
hearts all. Pray, pray.

To my most dear and f^ithful Brethren in Newgate, Condemned to dye for the
Testimony of Gods everlasting Truth.
THe everlasting p^ace of G d in Jesus Christ, the continual joy, strength and
comfort of his most p^re, holy, and mighty Spirit, with the increase of Faith,
and l^vely feeling of his Eternal Mercy be with you, my most dear and faithful
lov ng B other Tyms, and with all the rest of my dear hearts in the Lord, your
faithful Fellow Soldiers, and most constant Companions in Bonds, yea, of men
condemned most cruelly for the sincere Testimony of Gods everlasting Truth, to
the full finishing of that good work, which he has so graciously begun in you
all, that the same may be to his glory, the commodity of his poor afflicted
Church, and to your everlasting comfort in him. Amen.

Ah my most sweet and loving Brethren, and dearest hearts in the Lord, what
shall I say, or how shall I write unto you in the least point or part, to utter
the great joy that my poor heart has received in God, through the most godly
example of your Christ^an Constancy, and sincere Confession of Christ's Verity?
truly my tongue cannot declare, Example of true love and charity among the
Martyrs.
nor my pen express the abundance of spiritual mirth and gladness, that my
mind and inward man has felt, ever since I heard of your hearty boldness, and
modest behavior before that bloody Butcher, in the time of all your crafty
Examinations, especially at your cruel Condemnation in their cursed Consistory
place. Bl^ssed be God the Father of all mercy, and praised be his Name, for
that he has so graciously performed upon you his dear darlings, his most sweet
and comfortable promises, in not only giving you the continual aid, strength
and comfort of his holy and mighty Spirit, to the faithful confession of his
Christ, for whose cause (O most happy men) ye are condemned to dye: but also in
giving you such a mouth and wisdom, as all your wicked Enemies were not able
to resist, The Enemies not able to withstand the w sedome of God in his Saints
but compelled to bid them hold their peace.
but were fain to cry, Peace, peace, and not suffer you to speak. As truly as
God lives (my dear Brethren) this is not only unto you a most evident
probation that God is on our side, and a sure certainty of your everlasting
Salvation in him; but also to your cruel Adversaries (or rather Gods cursed
Enemies) a plain demonstration of their just eternal woe and damnation, which
they shall be full sure shortly to feel, when ye shall full sweetly possess the
place of felicity and pleasure prepared for you from the beginning.

Therefore (my dearly beloved) cease not so long as ye be in this life, to
praise the Lord with a lusty courage, for that of his great mercy and infinite
goodness, he has vouched you worthy this great dignity, to suffer for his
sake, not only the loss of goods, Wife and Children, long imprisonment, and
cruel oppression, etc. but also the very deprivation of this mortal life, with
the dissolution of your bodies in the fire. The which in the greatest promotion
that God can bring you or any other unto in this vale of misery; yea, so great
an honor, as the highest Angel in Heaven is not permitted to have: and yet
has the Lord (for his dear Son Christ's sake) reputed you worthy of the same,
yea and that before me and many other which have both long looked and longed
for the same.

John Careless longs to dye a Martyr in the Gospels cause.
Ah my most dear Brother Tyms, whose time rests altogether in the hands of the
Lord, in a full happy time came thou into this troublesome world, but in a
much more blessed hou^ shall thou depart forth of the same: so that the sweet
saying of Solomon, or rather of the Holy Ghost, shall be full well verified
upon thee, yea and all thy faithful fellows; Better is the day of death (says
he) then the day of birth. Eccles. 7.
This saying cannot be verified upon every man, but upon thee my dear Brother,
and such as thou art, whose death is most precious before God, and full dear
shall your blood be in his sight. Blessed be God for thee, my dear Brother
Tyms, and blessed be God again that ever I knew thee, for in a most happy time
I came first into thy company. Pray for me, dear Brother, pray for me, that God
will once vouch me worthy of that great dignity whereunto he has now brought
you.

Ah my loving Brother Drake, whose Soul draws now nigh unto God, of whom you
have received the same,, full glad may you be that ever God gave you a life to
leave for his sake: full well will he restore it to you again in a thousand
fold more glorious wise. Praise God, good Brother, as you have great cause, and
pray for me, I beseech you, which am so much unworthy (so great are my sins) of
that great dignity whereunto the Lord has called you, and the rest of your
godly Brethren; whom I beseech you to comfort in the Lord, as you can full
well: praised be God for his gifts, which you have heartily applied to the
setting forth of his glory, and the commodity of his poor afflicted Church.
Which thing shall surely redound to your everlasting joy and comfort, as you
shall most effectually feel or ever it be long, though the wicked of the World
judge far otherwise.

Ah mine own Hearts, and most dearly beloved Brethren, Cavell, Ambrose, and
both the Spurges, Blessed be the Lord on your behalf, and praised be his Name,
which has given you such a glorious victory. Full valiant have you showed your
selves in the Lords fight, and full faithfully in your painful service. Faint
not, but go on forward as you have most godly begun, for great shall your
reward be at the end of this your travel. Ah my good faithful Brethren all,
what shall I say, or what shall I write unto you, but even the same that good
Elizabeth did say to her godly kinswoman Mary, the blessed Mother of Christ,
Luke 1.
Happy art thou (quoth that good woman) which have believed; for all things
which the Lord has spoken to thee shall be fulfilled. So I say to you (my dear
hearts in the Lord) happy are ye all, yea thrice happy shall ye be for
evermore, because ye have steadfastly believed the most sweet Promises which God
the Father has made unto you with his own mouth, in that he has promised you
(which are the faithful seed of the believing Abraham) that ye shall be blessed
ever world without end. The Promises of God your sweet Father, as ye do
believe, so do ye bear record that God is true. The testimony whereof ye have
worthily born to the world, and shortly will full surely Seal the same with
your Blood, yea even to morrow, I do understand. He encourages Gods Martyrs
unto their death
Oh constant Christians! Oh valiant Soldiers of the high Captain Jesus Christ,
who for your sake has conquered the Devil, Death, Sin and Hell, and has given
you full victory over them for evermore! Oh worthy Witnesses, and most glorious
Martyrs, whose invincible Faith has overcome that proud, sturdy, bragging
Prince of the World, and all his wicked Army: over whom ye shall shortly
triumph for evermore. Ah my sweet hearts, the everlasting treasures are full
surely laid up for you in Heaven. The immercessible and most glorious Crown of
Victory is already made and prepared for you, to be shortly clapped upon all your
happy heads. The holy Angels of your heavenly Father are already appointed to
conduct your sweet Souls into Abraham's bosom: All the heavenly Host rejoices
already, for that they shall shortly receive you with joy and felicity into
their blessed Fellowship. Selah.

Rejoice with double joy, and be glad my dear Brethren, for doubtless ye have
more cause then can be expressed. But (alas) I that for my sins am left
behind, may lie and lament with the holy Prophet, Psalm. 119.
saying, Woe is me, that the days of my joyful rest are prolonged. Ah cursed
Satan, which has caused me so sore to offend my most dear loving Father,
whereby my exile and banishment is so much prolonged! Oh Christ my Advocate,
pacify thy Fathers wrath, which I have justly deserved, that he may take me
home to him in his sweet mercy! Oh that I might now come home unto thee with my
blessed Brethren! Well, thy will (O Lord) be effectually fulfilled, for it is
only good, and turns all things to the best, for such as thou in thy mercies
have chosen.

And now farewell my dear Hearts, most happy in the Lord: I trust in my good
God yet shortly to see you in the Celestial City, whereof undoubtedly the Lord
has already made you free Citizens. Though ye be yet with us for a little
time, your very home is in Heaven, where your treasure does remain with your
sweet Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, whose calling you have heard with the
ears of your hearts, and therefore you shall never come into judgment, but
pass from death to life. Your sins shall never be remembered, be they never so
many, so grievous or so great; for your Savior has cast them all into the
bottom of the Sea: he has removed them from you as far as the East is from the
West; Psalm. 103.
and his mercy has much more prevailed over you, then is distance between
Heaven and Earth: and has given you for an everlasting possession of the same,
all his Holiness, Righteousness, and Justification, Triumph of Martyrs.
yea and the Holy Ghost into your hearts, wherewith ye are surely sealed unto
the day of Redemption, to certify you of your eternal Election, and that ye
are his true Adopted Sons, whereby ye may boldly cry unto God, Abba, dear
Father, for evermore: so that now no creature in Heaven, Earth nor Hell shall
be able to accuse you before the throne of the Heavenly King. Satan is now cast
out from you: he himself is judged, and has no part in you; he will once more
bite you by the heel, and then he has done, Genesis 3.
for at that time you shall squeeze his head through your own good Christ: and
so have you final victory for evermore. In joyful triumph whereof ye shall
sweetly ascend into the place of eternal rest, whether your eldest Brother
Christ is gone before you, to take possession for you, and to prepare your
place under the holy Altar, with Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Rogers, Hooper,
Saunders, Farrar, Tailor, Bradford, Philpot, with many other, who will be full
glad of your coming, to see six more of their appointed number, that their
blood may so much the sooner be revenged on them that dwell on the Earth.

Thus I make an end, committing you all to Gods most merciful defense, whose
quarrel ye have defended, whose cause ye have promoted, whose glory ye have set
forth, and whose name ye have constantly confessed. Farewell for a while, my
dear hearts in the Lord, I will make as much have after you as I may. All our
dear Brethren salute you. They Pray for you, and praise God for you
continually. Blessed be the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their
Labors, says the Holy Ghost, Apoc. 11.
and their works follow them.

Your own John Careless, a most unprofitable Servant of the Lord. Pray, pray,
pray.

To Mr. Green, Mr. Whittel, and certain other Prisoners in Newgate, Condemned
and ready to be burnt for the Testimony of the Lord Jesus.
Another Letter of John Careless wherein he does animate Green, Whittel, and the
rest of that company unto their Martyrdom.
THe everlasting peace in Jesus Christ, the continual comfort of his most pure
and holy Spirit, be with you my most dear and faithful Brethren and Sisters of
Newgate, the Lords appointed Sheep unto the slaughter, to the good performance
of the great and notable work of the Lord, which he has so graciously begun in
you all; that the same may redound to the setting forth of his Glory, and to
the commodity of his Church, and to your own everlasting comfort in him, So be
it.

Ah my dear hearts, and most faithful Brethren and sisters in the Lord, what
high lauds and praise, yea what humble and continual thanks am I bound to give
to God our Father for you and on your most happy behalf, who so mightily has
magnified himself in you thus far forth, in giving you his holy and mighty
Spirit, to the constant confessing of Christ's verity, even to the cruel
Condemnation, and I doubt not but he will do the same to the death. Oh happy
and blessed are you that ever you were born, that the Lord will vouch you
worthy of this great dignity, to dye for his sake. Doubtless it is the greatest
honor that God can give you in this life. Yea, Apoc. 11.
if they be so blessed of God that dye in the Lord, as the Holy Ghost says
they be; To dye in the Lord: and for the Lord.
how much more blessed and happy then are you, that dye not only in the Lord,
but also for the Lord? Oh that it were the good will of God, that the good hour
were now come, that I might go with you! ah that my sins made me not unworthy
of such an excellent dignity!

Be thankful dear hearts, be thankful, and rejoice in the Lord; for mighty is
his mercy toward you, and great is your reward in Heaven, the which you like
faithful persons have plucked to you with a godly violence of an invincible
Faith. Oh worthy warriers of the most high captain! Oh constant Confessors of
the everlasting verity! how glorious a Crown of victory shall you shortly
receive, which is prepared for all such as do continue to the end? Oh you sweet
Saints of the Lord, how precious shall your death be in his sight? Oh how dear
are your Souls to your Redeemer, in whose hands they shall most joyfully rest,
and the pains of death shall never touch you? Oh how blessed shall you be, when
Christ shall appear, at the which time you shall receive your bodies again full
of Immortality? Oh how joyful shall you be when Christ, according to his
promise shall knowledge you before his Father and his holy Angels, as you have
most constantly confessed him to be your Lord and only Savior before men?

Oh blessed Green, thou meek and loving Lamb of the Lord, how happy art thou to
be appointed to dye for his sake? A full dainty dish art thou for the Lords own
tooth, Fresh and Green shall thou be in the house of the Lord, and thy fruits
shall never wither nor decay. Although thou go here forth sowing thy good
fruits with Tears, the time shall come that thou shall reap with joy and
gladness the fruits of everlasting life, and that without ceasing. Be merry
therefore, and fear not, Luke 12.
for it is thy Fathers will to give thee a Kingdom, whereunto he has chosen
thee before the foundations of the World were laid.

Oh happy Minister, thou man of God, how glad may thou be of Gods gracious
favor, which has prevented thee in the day of thy trial? Oh happy Peter,
whose part thou have well played; therefore thy reward and portion shall be
like unto his. Now have thou good experience of man's infirmity, but much more
proof and taste, yea sense and feeling of Gods abundant bottomless mercy.
Although Satan desired to sift thee, yet Christ thy good Captain, prayed that
thy Faith should not fail. Luke ^^.
Gods strength is made perfect by thy weakness, and his grace is sufficient for
thee his dear Child. Thine Example did so encourage and strengthen thy poor
Brethren, that God is every way glorified by thee, and shortly will he glorify
thee with himself, with that glory which he has prepared for thee his Elect
darling before the World was made. Therefore rejoice and be glad, for thou have
good occasion, in finding such favor in his fight.

This is most true (oh my other Brethren, whom I do not know, neither have I
heard much of you) happy are you that ever you were born, and blessed be our
God which has given you such Victory over the bloody Beast. Shortly shall you
be clothed in large white garments, Apoc. 19.
and fine rayness of Righteousness, and so shall you follow the Lamb on Mount
Sion with new Songs of Mirth and Melody, for your delivery forth of Satan's
Power and tyranny. God for evermore be blessed for you, and strengthen you to
the end, as I doubt not but he will: for he never failed them that put their
trust in him.

Oh my dear and faithful sister Joane Warner, what shall I say to thee? Thy
trial has been great; thy Victory in Christ has been notable, thou have
overcome many a sharp shower and storm: shortly shall thou arrive at the Haven
of quiet rest, and receive a reward due to a constant Martyr. Thou shall go
home to thy Heavenly Father, and possess for ever the inheritance which Christ
has purchased for thee, where thy earthly Parents be, still looking for thee,
which have triumphed over Antichrist most victoriously. Oh blessed Parents of
happy Children, which have showed such an example, as the like has been
seldom seen. I salute thee dear Sister of like constant mind; whose constant
example is worthy of continual memory. Praised be God for you mine own sweet
sisters, Mat. 25.
which has made you to play such wise Virgins parts. He has plentifully
poured the oil of his Spirit into the Lamps of your Faith, so that the light
hereof shall never be extinct. You shall enter with your Bridegroom into
everlasting joy, whereunto you were chosen in him from the beginning.

Oh my dear Brethren and sisters, you blessed Saints of the Lord, how much and
how deeply am I bound to praise God for you both day and night? Pray, pray for
me (my dear hearts) for the tender mercy of God, that I may be made worthy to
follow your trace. Oh that I had run the race of my life as far as you have
done yours, John 5.
and were as nigh my journeys end as you be unto yours. But alas, I lie like
the lame man at the Pooles side by Solomon's Porch, and every man goes into the
place of health before me: But God will appoint me one, one day to put me in. I
trust my Lord of London's Colehouse is empty, and all his Officers idle:
therefore they must shortly fetch more sheep to the shambles; for he is the
common slaughter-slave of all England. B. Bonner called the slaughter slave of
England
But happy are you that are passed through the Pikes, and delivered out of his
hands, and from all the Angels of the Darkness of this World, which long
tempted you in the Wilderness of the same: but now shall the Angels of God come
and minister unto you, for they are your Servants to hold you up in their
hands, that you shall not hurt your foot, no nor one hair of your head shall
perish. They shall carry you up to heaven in a fiery Chariot, Psalm 60. 2 King 2.
though you leave your Mantle behind you for a time, till God restore the same
to you again in a more ample and glorious sort.

Thus in haste, (as it does appear,) I am constrained to make an end,
committing you all to Gods most merciful defense: who ever have you in his
blessed keeping; desiring you all to remember me in your godly and faithful
Prayers, as I will not forget you in mine, by Gods grace. The blessing of God
be with you all, my dear Brethren and sisters. All our Brethren and
fellow prisoners here have them most heartily commended unto you, and pray for
you without ceasing. God send us a merry meeting in his Kingdom. Amen.

By your Brother and unfeigned lover, John Careless Prisoner, abiding his most
merciful will and pleasure. Pray, pray, pray.

To my faithful and loving Brother, W. Tyms, Prisoner in Newgate.
THe Everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, with the continual joy, comfort
and strength of his sweet Spirit be multiplied, and daily more and more
increased in your good heart (my most faithful and dear Brother Tyms,) to the
full quieting of your Conscience, and beating back of all the fiery darts of
the wicked, that you may shortly receive the glorious Crown of Victory, and in
the same triumph over all your Enemies for evermore. Amen.

I cannot express the exceeding great joy and consolation of my poor heart,
considering the mavelous works of God most graciously wrought upon you not
only in proving you, and trying your Faith by his great and huge Crosses both
inwardly and outwardly, but also in giving you so great Consolation and
Constancy in the midst of the same. Faithful is God, and true of his Promises,
Gods Children never tempted above their strength.
who has said, That he will never suffer his chosen children to be tempted
above their strength, but in the midst of their temptation will make an
out-scape for them, by such means as may make to his glory and their
everlasting consolation. My dear heart, great cause have you to be of good
comfort, for I see in you as lively a token of Gods everlasting love and favor
in Jesus Christ, as ever I perceived in any man: in respect whereof I do even
with my heart love, honor and reverence you, beseeching God for his glorious
Name sake, in the Bowels and Blood of our Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ,
He confirms W. Tims being condemned to the day of his Martyrdom.
to finish his good work in you, as I doubt not but he will do, according to
his infallible Promises: yea, I am well assured thereof, forasmu^h as you have
so effectually received his holy Spirit into your heart, as a pledge and sure
Seal of your eternal Redemption, and a Testimony of your Adoption in Christ
Jesus. For which cause Satan so sore envieth you, that he has now bent all his
fierce Ordnance against you, thinking thereby utterly to destroy the invincible
Fort of your Faith, founded most firmly upon the unmovable Rock CHRIST,
against the which, the Devil, Sin, nor yet Hell gates shall never prevail.
Selah.

Therefore, mine own Bowels in the Lord, be not discomforted for this your
Conflict, which doubtless shall greatly increase your Crown of Glory, Triumph
and Victory: but take a good heart unto you, and buckle boldly with Satan, both
in himself and in his subtle Members. It is the nature of Gods Children to be
tempted.
It is the very divine Ordinance of God, that all his regenerate Children shall
be tempted, proved and tried: as we see by the Example of our Savior Christ,
who as soon as he was Baptized was straightwayes led of the Holy Ghost into the
Wilderness, there to be tempted of the Devil. But there got he such a glorious
victory over Satan, that he could never since finally prevail against any of
his poor Members, but in every assault that he makes either inwardly or
outwardly, he gets a foil, and takes shame: so that now he rages with all
the spite possible, specially because he knows his time is but short. James
4.
St. James testifies that he is but a very Coward, that will soon fly, if he
be faithfully resisted. And as for his tempting Tools, the Lord has made them
manifest unto us, so that he cannot deceive us, though he assault us; Satan's
tempting tools. 2 Cor. 2.
for as St. Paul says, his very thoughts are not unknown unto us, as it does
in you largely appear, praised be the Lords Name therefore.

You see, dear Brother, that now to molest you and such as you are, that be
even passing from this Vale of Misery, he has but two ways, or two pieces of
Ordnance to shoot at you, Two principal pellets of Satan whereby he ass^ulteth
Gods Servants. 1. Fear of sin and death, and Infidelity of Gods promises.
Remedy against Fear and Infidelity.
with the which he cannot hurt you, because you have two bulwarks to defend
you. The first of these terrible Guns that Satan has shot at you, is the very
same that he continually shoots at me, that is to say, Fear and Infidelity;
for the uglysomness of death, and horror of my sins, which be so many,
grievous and great: but this Pellet is easily put away with the surer shield of
Faith in the most precious death and bloodshedding of our dear Lord and only
Savior Jesus Christ, whom the Father has given unto us wholly to be ours for
evermore, and with him has given us all things, as Paul says: So that though
we be never so great sinners, yet Christ is made unto us Holiness,
Righteousness, and justification. He has clothed us with all his Merits,
Mercies and most sweet sufferings, and has taken unto him all our misery,
wretchedness, sin and infirmity. So that if any should now be condemned for the
same, it must needs be Jesus Christ, which has taken them upon him. But indeed
he has made satisfaction for them to the uttermost jot; so that for his sake
they shall never be imputed to us, if they were a Thousand times so many more as
they be. This do you most effectually feel and know, dear Brother, a great deal
better then I can tell you, blessed be God therefore.

And now Satan, seeing he cannot prevail with his boisterous Battery against
this Bulwark of Faith, which does so quench all his fiery darts, that they can
do you no harm, but rather do you good service, to cast you down under the
mighty hand of God, The second pellet of Satan is confidence and trust in our
own good works.
that he may take you up by his only grace and power, and so you may render
him all the glory by Jesus Christ (which thing the Enemy cannot abide in no
wise) therefore he shoots off his other Piece most pestilent, to provoke you
to put some part of your trust and confidence in your self, and in your own
holiness and righteousness, that you might that way rob God of his glory,
Christ of his honor and dignity of his death. Remedy against the second Pellet.
But blessed be the Lord God, you have also a full strong Bulwark to beat back
this pestiferous Pellet also, even the pure Law of God, which proves the best
of us all damnable sinners in the sight of God, if he would enter into
judgment with us according to the severity of the same, and that even our best
works are polluted and defiled in such sort, Isay. 64.
as the Prophet describes them. With which manner of speaking, our free will
Pharisees are much offended, for it felleth all man's Righteousness to the
ground, (I had like to have said, to the bottom of Hell) and extolleth only
the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is allowed before God, and is freely
given to all those that firmly believe, as blessed be God you do.

Ah my good brother Tyms, Satan has put his hand in a wrong box when he
begins to tempt you, either to Vainglory or mistrust: for you are an old
beaten soldier, and have had good experience of these manner of Temptations,
both by your self and other, whom you know well were the beloved of God. Satan
overcome in Gods Saints.
Be of good cheer therefore, dear heart, be of good cheer, for now Satan has
wrought all his malice: he has done all that he can, and has shot off all his
last Pieces, wherewith he had thought to have done most mischief; but now he
sees he cannot prevail, (the strong Tower of your Faith being so invincible)
he will pluck up all his Tents, and get him to some other place to practice the
like assaults: and then will the Angels of God come and minister unto you the
most sweet and heavenly Consolations of the holy Ghost. To him therefore who is
able to do exceeding abundantly above all that ever we can desire or think, I
do most heartily commit you, with all the rest of your Godly Prison-fellows,
who comfort, strengthen, and defend you with his grace, and mighty operation of
his holy Spirit, as he has hitherto done, that you having a most glorious
Victory over the subtle Serpent and all his wicked seed, may also receive the
Crown of Glory and Immortality, prepared for you before the foundations of the
World were laid, and is so surely kept for you in the hands of him who is
infallible, that the Devil, Sin, Death or Hell shall never be able to deprive
you of the same. The blessing of God be with you now and for evermore. Amen.
Pray, pray, pray for me.

Your own for ever, John Careless.

To my good Sister, Mrs. Cotton.
THe Peace of God in Jesus Christ, the eternal Comforts of his sweet Spirit,
be with you my dear and faithful Sister, to the full accomplishment of that
good work which he has most graciously begun in you, that the same may be
effectual to the setting forth of his glory, and to your everlasting
Consolation in him. Amen.

My loving and faithful Sister in the Lord, I thank you for all your loving
kindness showed unto me, but especially for your godly remembrance of me in
your fervent and faithful Prayers, and for your most godly and comfortable
Letter, whereby you do not only much increase my joy and comfort, but also put
me in remembrance of my duty toward you.

Blessed be the Lord our God, Gods great gift in women.
which of his great mercy has so beautified his Church in these days, that
even unto many godly women he has given most excellent gifts of knowledge and
understanding of his Truth, so that they are not only well able to inform
their own Consciences in all things necessary to Salvation, but also most
sweetly to comfort their sorrowful Brethren and Sisters that sustain any
trouble for the Testimony of Gods Truth; yea, and that which is more, even in
the midst of their great Conflicts of Conscience. Of which most happy number
of godly and virtuous women, my dear heart, you are one, and that of the
chiefest, being plentifully endued with the gifts of Gods most gracious Spirit,
as it does full well appear in your daily doings: God only have the praise
therefore.

Forasmuch then as God has given you the gift to write, Note how God sometime
gives comfort by weaker vessels.
I shall most heartily desire you to let me hear from you sometimes, be it
never so little, for truly I t^ke great Comfort and Courage thereby, specially
in my poor Conscience, which is sore assaulted of subtle Satan, and in a
manner oppressed of my sin. Pray, dear S ster, that God may give me true,
hearty, and earnest Repentance, and increase my Faith, for they are both the
good gifts of God only, and far pass the reach of my power, to take at my
pleasure.

Therefore, dear Sister, if you w ll help me to beg the same of our dear loving
Father, I am sure that he both can and will g^ve them me in his good time. And
as for the fear of Death, or terror of the Fire, I most heartily thank my good
God I feel it not: only it is mine own sins and unthankefulness which holds
hard battle, and wageth strong war against me, which only goes about to
separate me from my good Captain Christ, that I should not enjoy his glorious
victory; but God being on my side, (as I am sure he is) that cannot continually
prev^il against me. Though God for a time permit Satan to take his pleasure on
me, as he did upon Job, yet I doubt not but in the end all shall turn to my
profit, through the Merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, To whose most
merciful defense I commit you, dear Sister, with all the rest of the Lords
Elect. Farewell in Christ.

Your unfeignedly, John Careless. Pray, pray, pray, pray.

To my dear Brother, T. V.
THe everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, the continual Comforts of his
most pure and holy Spirit, be with you my most dear friend and faithful Brother
V. to the increase of your Faith, and comfort of your sorrowful Spirit, which
is to the Father a sweet Sacrifice through Christ: for whose sake he will never
despise your humble and contrite heart, but does favorably accept the same,
and will in most ample wise perform the desire thereof to his Glory, and your
eternal Comfort in him.

In the mids of my manifold Crosses and Troubles, wherein I am constrained to
flee unto God for refuge and succor by earnest and faithful Prayer, I cannot
forget you (my dear heart in the Lord) but esteeming your state for mine own, I
do pour forth my complaint for y^u, as I do for my self, and rather more, as I
think present need does require, desiring most heartily to hear of the good
success of the same in y^u. The Lord God for his mercy sake accomplish my desi
e as I doubt not but he will, when he sees it good, and most to his glory, and
to your comfort and commodity. O that I might once see you so merry in Christ,
Psalm. 57.
as you have just cause to be, that you might say with David, Awake my glory,
awake lute and harp, bring forth the psaltery with the merry song, that I might
sing a new song of praise and thanksgiving unto the Lord, for the light of his
favorable countenance, his help and deliverance. Oh! Psalm. 45.
that would refresh me as a most precious Oil, and gladden my poor heart,
which is assaulted with sorrow more ways then one. Comfort for a sick
Conscience.
I doubt not but the same shall by your means receive much comfort, though for
a time it does mourn with you, that we may be made both glad together, yea and
that with such gladness as shall continue for ever.

But in the mean space (I say) most happy are you, Mat. 9.
that so heartily mourn the absence of the Bridegroom. If you were not a
wedding-childe you could never do it. Only Christ's true Disciples do mourn for
his absence; therefore shall they doubtless rejoice at his presence, which will
be so much more joyful, by how much the absence is more sorrowful.

Therefore, my good Brother, take a good heart unto you, and be of good cheer:
Say with the Prophet David, O my Soul, Psalm. 42.
why art thou so heavy, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy
trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his loving
countenance, and because he is my God. Read the 41 and 42 Psalm for your
comfort, and consider that the holy King and Prophet, at the making and first
saying of them, was even in the same case that you are now in; but he still
comforted himself with the sweet promises of God: and so do you, my dear heart,
for to you they do as well pertain, as they did to him, and as surely shall
they be performed upon you, as they were upon him; for he is one God and dear
Father unto you both and for his Mercy, Truth and Promise sake, Gods love goes
not by our deservings, but by Faith in Jesus.
he must needs make good unto you all that he has said.

If his love toward you stood in respect of your own merit and worthiness, you
might well mourn, lament and complain; yea, you had good cause to doubt, fear
and mistrust: but seeing he loves you only for and in Jesus Christ, who is
your whole Holiness, Righteousness and Redemption, lay away all mourning,
lamenting, and complaining; banish from you all fear, mistrust and infidelity,
and know that as long as Christ does continue Gods Son, so long must the love
of the Father continue toward you immutable, and his good will unchangeable,
and cannot be altered through any of your infirmities. For this is most true,
that as long as the Cause of any thing does last, so long must the Effect
remain; but Christ^s the whole Cause why the Father loves you, and he also
continues for ever: Christ only is the cause why his Father loves us.
Then must I needs conclude, that the love of the Father continues toward you
for ever, and (as the Psalmist most joyfully so often sings) His mercy
endures for ever and ever.

This is most true, mine own dear heart, although the Lord for a time hide it
from your senses, that you might be the more earnest in Prayer to him for the
feeling of it, and also the more thankful for it when he does give the lively
taste of it, Why God sometime hides himself from us.
as doubtless he will do ere ever it be long; and then shall you be well able
to comfort other in the same state that you are now in, with the same comfort
wherewith you are and further shall be comforted of God.

Therefore lift up your hands that are now a little fallen down, and stretch
forth the weak knees of your troubled mind, Heb. 12.
which now mourns with a godly mourning, and therefore shall it be full well
comforted with that sweet peace of God which passes all understanding, and you
are sure already to enjoy the blessing that Christ gave unto the godly mourners
of Sion upon the mount, Eccles. 7.
at the first Sermon that he made. O happy V. in whose mourning company I had
rather be, then in the house of mirth and banqueting of such as see not what
cause they have to mourn and be sorry. Measure ought to be in mourning.
But yet my good Brother, use a measure in this your godly mourning, and make
not your faithful Friends too much sorry for you. Let the persuasions of such
godly lovers as you do daily company withal, or rather the persuasions of the
holy Ghost by them, move you to some godly mirth and rejoicing. Consider that
you are commanded by the mouth of Saint Paul Phil. 4.
thereto Rejoice in the Lord (says he) and I say again Rejoice. Mark how he
doubleth the Sentence, that we may perceive it is a most earnest and necessary
thing he requires. Obey the Commandment of God in this behalf: wherein as you
cannot but highly please him, so I assure you, Example of Christian Charity and
compassion toward his afflicted Brother
you shall very much rejoice my poor heart, and the hearts of other which pray
for you with mourning tears, and make that cruel enemy Satan, and all your
adversaries sorry, which will rejoice and laugh to see you mourn. Oh my good
Brother, let it manifestly appear that the Lord of his great mercy has hea^d
our faithful and hearry requests for you. Oh how would that rejoice me in the
mids of my troubles?

Therefore now to conclude, because the darkness constrains me to make an end
for this time, I say my dear and faithful Brother V. in respect of the great
cause you have of your own part through Christ, and for the glory and honor of
almighty God, the comfort, joy and rejoicing of your dear Brethren and Sisters
in Christ, also your own duty by the Commandment of God, and last of all to
vex, molest and grieve Satan withal, Rejoice in the Lord, and be most heartily
glad in him, who is wholly yours, and you are his, and shall be for evermore.
Selah.

Farewell mine own Bowels in the Lord, and praise God with joyful lips and a
merry heart, and pray for me his most unprofitable Servant, which have more
cause, concerning my self, to lament then any one man living: but my good
bridegroom is present, and bids me cast away my mourning garments, and
therefore I must needs be merry with him; and so he bids you to be by my
mouth, for he is present with you, although for sorrow you cannot know him, as
Magdalen could not in the garden, until he spoke unto her. The Lord God speak
these words of comfort in your heart, and open the eyes of your mind, that you
may perfectly perceive and feel his blessed presence, and so rejoice in the
same for evermore. Amen. Comfort your heart in Christ, and cast your care upon
him, for he cares for you.

Your Brother in the Lord, abiding his good pleasure, John Careless.

To my dear and faithful Brother, Augustine Bernher.
THe peace of God in Jesus Christ, the help, comfort and assistance of his
eternal Spirit, be with you my dear and faithful Brother Augustine, and with
all the rest of my good Brethren and Sisters of the houses of B^xterly and
Manceter, (which mourns for the misery of Gods People) to your everlasting
Consolation in him. Amen.

Right glad I am to hear my dear and faithful Brother Augustine) that God of
his great mercy and infinite goodness, has yet so graciously delivered and
preserved you out of your enemies hands, beseeching Almighty God also, from the
bottom of my heart, to be your continual defense unto the end as hitherto he
has most graciously been, that you may live and dye both to Gods Glory, the
commodity of his Church, and to the increase of your own everlasting joy and
comfort in him.

Know you dear Brother, that I have received your Letter, for the which, I
heartily thank you. Indeed I think it very short, although it seems something
sharply to rebuke me in the beginning for the breach of my promise, in not
writing to you of this long time. Well Brother, I am content to bear it with
patience, considering that you are troubled otherwise (the Lord comfort you and
all heavy hearts) neither will I spend Ink and Paper for my purgation in this
point. God be knows whether I be so mindless of my promise, as it appears
in your sight I am. Your request I will truly perform to the uttermost of my
power, as gladly as any poor wretch shall do in the World, and I thank God I
have done no less of long time. And as my poor Prayer shall be a handmaid to
wait upon you which way soever you ride or go; so I beseech you that my simple
counsel may take some place in you, in this time of your pilgrimage, which you
pass in no small peril: God keep and preserve you for his Names sake. He
counsels Augustine to be circumspect, and not rashly to thrust himself in
danger.
I do not disallow, but much praise and commend your hearty boldness in putting
your self in prease, when any one of Gods People needs your help in any
point. But yet I would not have you thrust your self in danger, when you can do
them no good, or at least wise when they may well enough spare that good you
would do them: for if you should then chance to be taken you shall not only be
no comfort unto them, but also a great discomfort, adding sorrow unto their
sorrow.

I do not persuade you to absent your self from any place ^here your presence
of necessity is required: for in all such places, I know, God will preserve
you, as he has hithe to wonderfully done, praised be his Name therefore: or if
it shall please him to permit you in any such place to be taken, I know he will
most sweetly comfort your Conscience with this consideration, That it is the
very Providence and Appointment of God, that you should there and then be taken
up for a Witness of his Truth unto the world: But I cannot allow, nor be
contented that you should rashly or negligently thrust your self into that
place where your wicked enemies do continually haunt, yea and lay wait for you,
when no necessity of your self, nor of any other of Gods people, does require
your company. If they need any of your godly counsel you may write unto them
that thing that you think good; which (I dare say) will be sufficient unto
them. For (continual thanks and praises be given unto the Everlasting God)
there is none of those that be cruelly condemn^d for Gods Truth, that now be
weaklings: for they have manfully pass^d through the Pikes, and they have
boldly abidden the brunt of the Battle, and therefore I reckon the worst is
past with them already: So that now and then a godly Letter from you to them
shall do as much good as your company shall do, and perchance more too; for
writing sticks longer in the memory then word do: yea, though your Letters
were as short to them, as your last was to me, so that the same be something
sweeter, and not all thing so sharp.

This (dear Brother) is the simple counsel which I would gladly have you
observe, partly for that I heartily pray for your preservation to the commodity
of Christ's Church, and partly for that I unfeignedly w^sh the peace, comfort
and tranquillity of your own Conscience, which I know will be quickly ready to
accuse you, A good Conscience is soon troubled.
if you do any thing wherein you have not the Word of God for your warrant. For
in a glass that is clear, a small mote will soon appear: even so the good
Conscience of Gods chosen children being more clear then Crystal, will quickly
accuse them at the least fault they do commit, whereas the wicked worldlings
have their Conscience so clogged and corrupted through the custom of sin, that
they cannot see nor perceive their own shameful deeds and wicked works, until
God set the same before them for their utter ^^struction, and then despair they
immediately. But seeing that God has given you a clear Conscience, and a pure,
sharp, quick, and lively sight in your Soul, I would wish you to beware that
you do nothing unadvisedly, Conscience of sin is sometimes taken where none is
committed.
but upon a good ground: for an accusing Conscience is a sore thing when death
does approach, and then Satan will not stick to tell you that you have too much
tempted God, when peradventure you have done nothing so at all For this cause
(I say) partly I have thought it good to admonish you (as I have done often) to
be circumspect, according to the counsel of Christ, which bids you to beware
of men. Matthew. 10.
Other things I have not to write, for I know this Bearer can certify you of
all things at large, better then I can declare it by writing.

I beseech you, good Augustine, help me forward by your hearty Prayers, for I
trust I have but a small time in this troublesome World: Dr. Story told our
Marshal, that we should all be dispatched so soon as he came from Oxford,
whither he and other bloody Butchers be gone to make slaughter of Christ's sheep
that lie there appointed to be slain. God for Christ's sake put them and such
like besides their cruel purpose, if it be his good w^ll and pleasure; Amen
good Lord. I pray you do my most hearty commendations to my good Sister and
faithful Friend, good Mris. Mary Glover: I beseech God be her comfort, as I
doubt not but he is. I am very glad to hear that she does so joyfully and so
patiently bear this great Cross that God has laid upon her. I pray God
strengthen her, and all other his dear Saints unto the end. Amen. Commend me
unto my dear and faithful Sister Elizabeth B. I thank her most heartily for her
Napkin, and so I do you dear Brother for my shirt. Truly that day that we were
appointed to come to our Answer before the Commissioners (which had sent word
the same morning, that they would come to the Kings Bench by eight of the
clock, and the house, and all things were trimmed and made ready for them) I
got that Shirt on my back and that Napkin in my hand, The Christian courage of
J^hn Careless.
and me thought that they did help to harness me and weapon me well, to go
fight against that Bloody Beast of Babylon. And trust me truly, if they had
come, I would have stricken three strokes the more for your two sakes, as well
as God would have abled me to have set them on, as by Gods grace I will not
fail to do at the next Skirmish that I come to: wherefore I pray you pray for
me, that I may be strong and hardy to lay on good load. Oh that I might so
strike him down, that he should never be able for to rise again. But that
stroke belongs only to the Lord, to st^ike at his coming, the which I trust
will be shortly? Oh hasten it good Lord, and shorten these sorrowful and sinful
days, for thy great mercies sake.

Farewell my dear and faithful loving Brother: The Lo^d defend, keep and
preserve you from the power of your Enemies v sible and invisible, and send us
a most joyful and merry meeting here or elsewhere, as it shall please his
goodness to appoint us. In the mean space I shall most earnest^y desire you to
pray for me, for I never had more need in my life: and doubtless you shall
never want my poor prayer, if it shall please God to accept the Prayer of so
sinful a wretch as I am The Lord impute not my sins to me, for Jesus Christ's
sake, unto whose most merciful defense, I do most heartily commit you. The
bl^ssing of God be with you now and ever. Amen. I pray you do my most hearty
commendations to Mr. John Glover: I do not forget him in my daily Prayers, and
I trust he does Remember me.

Your poor Brother, always mindful of you in my Prayer, John Careless,
Prisoner, abiding Gods pleasure.

To my dear Brother Henry Adlington, Prisoner in the Lollards Tower.
THe everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, the continual aid, strength, joy
and comfort of his most pure, holy and mighty Spirit with the increase of Faith
and lively feeling of his Mercies, be most eff^ctuously wrought in your heart,
my dear and faithful loving Brother A^ingto^, and in the hearts of all your
other godly Prison fellows, to the full finishing of that good work which the
Lord has most graciously begun in you, that the same may be to the setting
forth of his glory, the commodity of his poor afflicted Church, and to your own
eternal joy and comfort in him. Amen.

My most dear and faithful loving Brother in our Lord, I with all the rest of
my loving Brethren here with me, do most humbly and heartily commend us unto
you, with all faithful Remembrance of you in our daily prayers, giving God
earnest thanks on your most happy behalf, for that he has given you such
hearty boldness and Christian constancy in the faithful confession of his
everlasting Verity. Blessed be God for thee, my dearly beloved Brother, which
has vouched thee worthy of so great a dignity, as to suffer for his sake, and
the setting forth of his glory. Oh glad in heart may thou be, to whom it is
given, not only to believe in thy Lord and Christ most lively; but also to
suffer for his sake, as one of his silly sheep appointed to the slaughter. Be
of good comfort therefore my good Brother, for your Calling unto the Cross of
Christ, was after a mavelous sort: surely it was only the Lords appointment,
and therefore he will well perform his own work in and upon you to the great
magnifying of his glory, and comfort of your Brethren, whose hearts are
mightily refresh^d, to hear how heartily you have behaved your self hitherto.
This present day I received a letter from you, at the reading whereof my
Brethren and I were not a little comforted, to see your Conscience so quieted
in Christ, and your continuance so steadfast in him: which things be the special
gifts of God, not given unto every man, but to you his dear darling, Elect, and
chosen in Christ, and such as you be. And whereas you do require to know my
simple mind concerning your answer unto Dr. Story and the Chancellor: Truly I
say you did answer them very well; for there are but two Sacraments indeed,
that is to say, the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ, as you have full well answered them: Praised be God for his
good gifts, who chooses the weak, to confound the strong, and the foolish to
confound the worldly wise. If when you come before them again, they do ask you
what a Sacrament is; say you, That a Sacrament, being ministered according to
Christ's Institution, is a visible Sign of an invisible Grace, What a Sacrament
is.
and has the promise of Gods Mercy annexed unto it, available to all such as
do worthily receive it, and not unworthily worship it: as they would have us to
do, contrary to Gods Commandment. And these properties belonging to Christ's
true Sacraments, cannot be applied to any one of those five Sacraments which
they have invented of their own brain, since Antichrist began to reign, to
blind the people withal.

I perceive dear heart, that upon Friday they do intend to Condemn you, and to
give you your Judgment. Therefore I think they w^ll have no great reasoning
with you, but bid you answer them directly, either Yea, or Nay, to all such
things as they have to charge you withal, which they have gathered of you since
you came into their cruel hands. But if they will needs make many words with
you, because you are but a simple man, and therefore perchance they will be the
busier with you to trouble you with many questions, to cumber your knowledge,
and then seem to triumph over you, and that truth that you do hold: if (I say)
they do this (as perhaps for some evil purpose they will) then be you so plain
and short as you can, saying roundly unto them these or such like words, as
nigh as you can.

Be it known unto you, that I in all points do believe as it becomes a true
Christian, He instructs him how, and what to Answer to the adversaries.
and as I have been truly taught in the days of that good King Edward, of such
godly Preachers and Prophets sent of God, as have sealed their Doctrine with
their Blood; from whom I will dissent in no point: for I am a poor man without
learning, but am commanded of God to follow the counsel of his constant
Preachers, and so do I intend to do, God giving me grace and assistance
thereto. As for you, I know you to be none of Christ's Shepherds, but ravening
Wolves, which come to kill and scatter the Flock of Christ, as the Lord said
you should; and does will us to beware of you and your poisoned Doctrine,
bidding us to judge you according to your fruits, whereby all men may see and
know what you be, We are bound to follow ^ur true Preachers.
that will not be wilfully blind. But the good Shepherds have given their
lives for the defense of Christ's Flock; and I am commanded to follow their
faithful and godly example, and to confess with them one Truth, even to the
fire, if God shall see it good: and this as a true Christian I have hitherto
done, and henceforth by Gods grace intend for to do. And if for the same, God
shall suffer you to take away my life, as you have done theirs, I am contented
therewith: His will be done, God will require account of blood.
for that only is good. But of this be you sure, the Lord will shortly call
you to account for all the innocent blood that is shed within this Realm; which
you have brought into a most woeful case, and made many a heavy heart in the
same, and more I perceive you will make, so long as the Lord for our sins will
suffer you to prosper, and until the time that your own iniquity be full ripe.
But then be you sure the Lord will sit in Judgment upon you, as well as you do
now upon his Saints, and will reward you according to your deservings: To whom
with my whole heart I commit my cause, and he will make answer for me, when the
full time of my refreshing comes. In the mean space I will keep silence with
this that I have said, trusting that I have sufficiently discharged my
conscience in confessing my Faith and Religion to you, declaring of what Church
I am, even of the Catholic Church of Jesus Christ, which was well known to be
here in England in our late good Kings days, by two special tokens which
cannot deceive me, nor suffer me to be deceived; that is to say, The pure
Preaching of his holy Word, and the due administration of the holy Sacraments,
which is not to be seen in your Romish Church, and therefore cannot be called
the Church and Spouse of Christ. I believe in the holy Trinity, and all the
other Articles of the Christian Faith contained in the three Creeds, and
finally all the Canonical Scripture to be true in every sentence: and I detest
all Sects both of Arrians and Anabaptists, or any other that divide themselves
from the true Church of Christ, which is his Mystical Body, the Ground and
Pillar of Truth, and the very House of the living God. And if for these things
you take away my life, and make your selves guilty of my Blood, you may: for I
am in your hands, as the Sheep brought to the Shambles, abiding the grace of
the Butcher. And be you sure, your judgment sleeps not, but when you cry
Peace, peace, and all is safe, then shall your plagues begin like the sorrows
of a woman traveling with child, 1 These. 5.
according to Christ's infallible Po^mise.

This kind of answer, my dear heart, it shall be best for you to make, and by
Gods grace I do intend to take the same order my self in time to come, when the
Lord shall vouch me worthy of that great dignity, whereunto he has called you.
And if they shall laugh you to scorn, as I know they will, saying thou art a
Fool, and an unlearned Ass-head, and art able to make answer to nothing. etc.
care not you for it, but still commit your Cause unto God, who will make answer
for you; and tell them that they have bin answered again and again of diverse
godly and learned men: but all will not help, for you have one solution for all
manner of questions, even a fair Fire and Fagots: this will be the end of your
disputations. Therefore I pray you to trouble me no more, but do that which you
are appointed, when God shall permit the time. I am no better then Christ, his
Apostles, and other of my good Brethren that are gone before me.

This kind of answer will cut their combs most, and edify the people that
stand by, so that the same be done coldly with sobriety, meekness and patience;
as I heard say our sweet Brethren Thomas Harland and John Oswald did at Jews
in Sussex, to the great rejoicing of the children of God that were in those
parts: and I heard say, that they were dissolved from this earthly tabernacle
at Jews on Saturday last, and were condemned but the Wednesday before: so that
we may perceive the Papists have quick work in hand, 2 Chronicles. 2.
that they make such haste to have us home to our heavenly Father. Therefore
let us make our selves ready to ride in the fiery Chariot, leaving these sorry
Mantles and old Clokes behind us for a little time, which God shall restore
unto us again in a more glorious wise.

My good Brother Harry, you shall understand that bragging John T. has
beguiled his Keepers (who trusted him too well) and is run away from them, and
has brought the poor men into great danger by the same. The one of them is
cast by the Councils Commandment into the Gate House at Westminster; the other
is fled forth of the Country for fear. Thus you may see the fruits of our
Free Will men, that made so much boast of their own strength. But that house
which is not builded surely upon the unmovable Rock, will not long stand
against the boisterous winds and storms, that blow so strongly in these days
of Trouble.

But my dearly beloved Brother, blessed be God for you, and such as you be,
which have played the parts of wise Builders. You have dug down past the
sand of your own natural strength, and beneath the earth of your own worldly
wisdom, and are now come to the hard Stone and unmovable Rock Christ, who is
your only Keeper; and upon him alone you have builded your Faith most firmly,
without doubting mistrust or wavering Therefore neither the storms nor
tempests, winds nor weathers that Satan and all his wily workmen can bring
against you, with the very Gates of Hell to help them, shall ever be able once
to move your House, much less to overthrow it: for the Lord God himself, and no
man, is the Builder thereof, and has promised to preserve and keep the same
safe for ever. Unto his most merciful defense therefore, I do heartily commit
you and all your good company, desiring him for his sweet Son Jesus Christ's
sake, to confirm and strengthen you all, that you may be constant unto the very
end; that after the final victory is once gotten, you may receive the
immercessible Crown of Glory, of Gods free gift, through his great mercy in
Jesus Christ our alone Savior. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
all honor, glory praise, thanks, power, rule and dominion, for ever and
evermore. Amen. The Blessing of God be with you all.

John Careless.

To my most dear and faithful Brother T. V.
THe everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, the continual joy and comfort of
his most pure holy, and mighty Spirit, with the increase of Faith and lively
feel ng of his mercy, be with you my dear heart in the Lord, and faithful
lov^ng brother T. V. to the full accomplishing of that good work which ^e ^ath
so graciously begun in you, that the same, by all means may be to the setting
forth of his glory, to the commodity of his poor afflicted Congregation, and to
the sweet comfort and quietness of your Conscience in him now and evermore.
Amen.

With such due honor, love and reverence as it becomes me to bear unto the
sweet Saints, and dearly beloved children of God I have me most heartily
commended unto you, my dear Brother V. with all earnest and faithful
remembrance of you in my daily Prayers, thanking God right heartily that you do
likewise remember me in yours, assuring you that my poor heart does daily feel
great Consolation thereby, God only have the praise for the same, and all
other his Benefits. Ah my dear heart in the Lord, well is me that ever I was
born, that God of his great mercy and infinite goodness has used me most
miserable wretch at any time, as his instrument, to minister any thing unto
you, either by word or writing, that might be an occasion of your joy and
comfort in the Lord, and a provoking of you to praise and thanksgiv ng unto God
for the same, as your most loving and godly Letter seems to import. Oh happy
am I that the Lord has appointed me unto so good a ground to sow his seed
upon; but much more happy are you, whose heart the Lord has prepared and made
so meet to receive the same so effectuously, g^ving thereto the sweet showers
and heavenly dews of his grace and holy Spirit, that it may bring forth fruit
in due season accordingly; the increase whereof we shall shortly reap together,
with perfect joy and gladness, and that continually.

Therefore (my dear Brother) I say unto you, as good Elizabeth did to her
Cousin Mary, Happy are you, Luke 1.
and happy shall you be for evermore, because you have believed. The most sweet
and faithful Promises of your Redeemer Jesus Christ, you have surely laid up in
the treasury of your heart: his comfortable Callings you have faithfully heard:
his loving Admonitions you have humbly obeyed, and therefore you shall never
come into judgment: Remission of sins
your sins shall never be remembered, for your Savior has cast them all into
he bottom of the Sea: Micah 7.
he has removed them from you as far as the East is from the West, Psalm. 103.
and has given you for an everlasting possession his Justification and
Holiness: So that now no Creature, neither in heaven nor in earth, shall be
able to accuse you before the Throne of the heavenly King. Satan is now judged:
he is now cast out from you, he has no part in you: you are wholly given unto
Christ, which will not lose you: your steadfast Faith in him has overcome that
sturdy and bragging Prince of the World. Christ has given you the final
victory over him and all his Army, that they shall never hurt you. What would
you have more? Oh my dear heart, how great treasures are laid up in store for
you, and how glorious a Crown is already made and prepared for you?

And albeit the holy Ghost does bear witness of all these things in your heart,
Testimony of Gods Spirit.
and makes you more sure and certain thereof, then if you had all the outward
Oracles in the world; yet I being certainly persuaded, and fully assured by the
testimony of Gods Spirit in my Conscience, of your eternal and sure Salvation
in our sweet Savior Jesus Christ, have thought it good yea and my bounden
duty, not only at this time to write unto you, and to show my joyful heart in
that behalf; but also by the Word and Commandment of Christ, to pronounce and
affirm in the Name and Word of the heavenly King Jehovah, and in the behalf of
his sweet Son Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom all knees shall bow, whom all
creatures shall worship, and also by the impulsion of the holy Ghost by whose
power and strength all the faithful be regenerate: I do I say p onounce to thee
my dear B o her T. V. that thou art already a Cit zen of Heaven. The Lord thy
God, in whom thou do put all thy trust, for his dear Sons sake, in whom thou
do also undoubtedly believe, ^a h freely forgiven thee all thy sins, clearly
released all thine in qu^ties, and fully pardoned all thine offenses, be they
never so many, so grievous, or so great, and will never remember them any more
to Condemnation. As truly as he lives, he will not have thee dye the death,
but has verily determined, purposed, and eternally decreed, that thou shall
live with him for ever. Thy Sore shall be healed, and thy Wounds bound up even
of himself for his own Names sake. He does not, nor will not look upon thy sins
in thee, but he respects and beholds thee in Christ, in whom thou art
lively graffed by Faith in his blood, and in whom thou art most assuredly
elected and chosen to be a sweet vessel of his Mercy and Salvation, and wast
thereto predestinate in him before the foundation of the world was laid. In
testimony and earnest whereof, he has given thee his good and holy Spirit,
which works in thee Faith, Love, and unfeigned Repentance, with other godly
Virtues, contrary to the Corruption of thy Nature.

Also he has commanded me this day (although a most unworthy wretch) to be a
witness hereof by the Ministry of his holy Word, Experience of Christ working
in his Church.
grounded upon the truth of his most faithful Promises, the which thou
believing, shall live for ever. Believe thou this, my dear heart? I know well
thou do believe. The Lord increase thy Faith, and give thee a lively feeling
of all his mercies, whereof thou art warranted and assured by the testimony of
the holy Ghost, who confirm in thy Conscience (to the utter overthrowing of
Satan, and those his most hurtful dubitations, whereby he is accustomed to
molest and vex the true Children of God) all that I have said: and by Gods
grace I will, as a witness thereof, confirm and seal the same with my blood,
for a most certain truth.

Wherefore (my good Brother) praise the Lord with a joyful heart, and give him
thanks for this his exceeding great mercy, casting away all dubitation and
wavering, yea all sorrow of heart and pensiveness of mind; for this the Lord
your God, and most dear and loving Father, commands you to do by me, nay
rather by his own Mouth and Word pronounced by me. But now my dear Brother,
after that I have done my message, or rather the Lords message indeed, I could
find in my heart to write two or three sheets of paper, declaring the joy I
bear in my heart for you, mine own bowels in the Lord: yet the time being so
short (as you do well know) I am here constrained to make an end, desiring you
to pardon my slackness, and to forgive my great negligence toward you,
promising you still, that so long as my poor life does last, my prayer shall
supply that my pen does want; as knows the Almighty God, to whose most
merciful defense I do heartily commit you, and all other his dear children, as
well as though I had rehearsed them by Name, desiring them most heartily to
remember me in their hearty and daily Prayers as I know right well they do: for
I feel the daily comfort and commodity thereof and therefore I neither will nor
can forget them nor you, or any such like. The blessing of God be with you all.
Amen.

Yours for ever unfeignedly, John Careless.

A Letter of Thanks to a faithful Friend of his, by whom he had received much
comfort in his inward troubles.
BLessed be God the Father of all mercy, for the great comfort and Christian
consolation which he has so mercifully ministered unto my poor affl^cted heart
by your means, my most dear and faithful Brother. Truly me thinks your words,
or rather Gods words by you uttered, have a wonderful power and efficacy
working in my heart at the hearing or reading of them. Rejoice therefore, my
dear Brother, and be thankful unto God, for verily he both is and will be
mightily magnified in you, and that diverse and many ways, both to the
strengthening of them that stand in his Truth, and also to the raising up of
such as are fallen from the same. God make me thankful for you, and on your
behalf, for verily great is the goodness of God toward me, in giving me
acquaintance in faithful love and amity with you: Gods Name for ever be praised
therefore, and he perform all his merciful Promises upon you, as I doubt not
but he will, for his sake in whom you trust.

I thank my God most heartily, and also you my good Brother, for that you are
careful for me in your faithful Prayers, remembering my just deserved sorrows,
as though they were your own, and laboring so much to solace the same. Ah my
gracious good God, what am I, for whom thou and thy dear Children should be so
careful? Oh sweet Lord, forgive me my great ingratitude and sin, and grant that
I never abuse thy great benefits. Oh let the love of thine Elect, which love me
for thy sake, be a sure sign and token, yea a most firm testimony and a seal to
my sinful Conscience, of thine everlasting love and mercy toward me in Christ;
as verily it would and ought to be, if mine infidelity did not let it. Oh
circumcise therefore the foreskin of my heart, that I may with lively Faith
behold thy great love toward me in all thine Elect, that I may always be
thankful for the same, and love thee and them again most heartily and
unfeignedly.

Ah my dear heart, how sweetly and how truly, yea how godly and how comfortably
have you rehearsed the sweet saying of Solomon concerning prosperity with true
and godly friends? What a treasure a trusty friend is
I will join with it the Sentence which goes a little before, for doubtless it
may be well verified on you: A sure friend (says the Wiseman) will be unto
thee even as thine own Soul, and deal faithfully with thy household folk. If
thou suffer trouble and adversity, he is with thee, and hides not his face
from thee. A faithful friend is a strong defense, whose finds such an one,
finds a treasure. A faithful friend has no peer, the weight of gold is not
to be compared to the goodness of his faith. A faithful friend is a medicine
of life, and they that fear the Lord shall find him, etc. Lo (my dear heart in
the Lord) here is a lively image or description of you; for verily such an one
have I always found you unto me, not only sorrowing for my great sorrow, but
also oftentimes making me merry and joyful, with such joys as the world cannot
feel. There is no true friendship but amongst the godly.
Now let the world brag of his feigned friendship, but I will boast of this
true friendship in God, and esteem it a more treasure then all transitory
things. And as for my mourning, dear Brother, God has made you to turn it unto
mirth: for God has put you in the stead of them to be my Comfort, whom he has
in his great mercy taken away. I trust henceforth to leave the mourning for my
great loss, and to praise God for gaining unto himself so great glory by his
chosen children. God make me a true mourner of Sion, both for mine own sin and
wickedness, and also to see his honor defaced, that I may be made meet and apt
to hear the joyful and comfortable message that your beautiful feet shall bring
me. God bless thee my dear heart, and faithful loving Brother, and increase his
good gifts of grace in thee, as he has most happily begun, that you may daily
more effectually feel, and lively perceive the certainty of Gods grace wherein
you stand, and firmly to testify the same, to the Conversion or Confounding of
all gainsayers, and to the comfort and confirmation of all Gods dear children.
Amen. Farewell mine own sweet Brother: farewell as mine own heart.

Your own in Christ, John Careless.

Another Letter of John Careless to a certain godly faithful Sister, by the Name
of E. K.
THe grace and free mercy of God in Jesus Christ, the sweet Consolations of the
holy Ghost the guide of all Gods dear Children, be with you, strengthen and
comfort you, my dearly beloved sweet Sister, E. K. now and ever. Amen.

Albeit, my dearly beloved Sister in Christ, that as yet we did never see one
another personally to any knowledge, yet by the virtuous report that I have
heard of you, and also by the large loving Token that I have received from you,
methink that I do even presently see you, and behold your person, faithfully
walking in the fear and love of God, joying and rejoicing with you in the
Spirit, as though we were sweetly talking together of Christ's Verity. The Lord
God do I humbly beseech in the bowels and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, that he will strengthen us both with his holy and mighty Spirit, that
we may constantly continue in the confession of his Truth unto the end: that
like as we now see one another presently in Spirit, we may also see one another
personally in the glorious presence of God and his holy Angels, where
undoubtedly we shall know one another personage, to our great joy, felicity
and endless Comfort.

Preparation to the Cross.
And now therefore, dear Sister K. be strong in the Lord our God, for doubtless
the time of trial is at hand; a great persecution, with cruel Murdering of
Gods dear Saints, is like to be very shortly in this woeful wicked Realm of
England. Therefore dear Sister, for the love of God prepare you to the Cross
with all diligence, and make your self ready to dye with Christ, that you may
also live with him for ever. There is no remedy, if you will be Christ's
disciple, you must needs take up your Cross and follow him, for the Disciple
must not look to be above his Master, nor the Servant to be better entreated
then his Lord. If we were of the World (good Sister) no doubt the world would
love us: But forasmuch as Christ has chosen us out of the world, to serve God
in Spirit and Verity, let us be well assured the World will hate us and
persecute us, as it has done our Lord and Master Christ. But yet let us be of
good cheer, for Christ has overcome the World. The pain is but short that we
can feel here, but the pleasure is perpetual that we shall feel elsewhere.

Let us set before us the Example of Christ, which abode the Cross, and
despised the shame, Consolation under the Cross.
in respect of the joy that was set before him: even so let us consider for
whose sake we suffer, whose Cause we defend, and what glorious Reward we shall
have at the day of our victory, and then doubtless the consolation of these
things will make sweet all our sufferings, and soon swallow up all the sorrows
that we are sowled in for Gods sake. I could recite diverse Texts of the
Scriptures to confirm this point: but I need not, for I am well assured that
you do know them most perfectly already. The Lord give you strength, and assist
you with his holy Spirit, that you may continually walk in all points according
to your godly knowledge: And then shall you do not as the most part of your
Gospellers do now adays the more is the pity. There are a great many in
England that do perfectly know, that the Idolatrous Mass is abominable,
devilish, and detestable in the sight of God; and yet, alas they be not afraid
to pollute and defile their bodies, which ought to be the Temples of the holy
Ghost, with being present at it, so sinning against God and their own
Conscience.

But dear Sister K. do you fly from it both in body and Soul, as you would fly
from the very Devil himself; Drink not of the Whore of Babylons Cup by no
means, for it will infect the Body, and poison the Soul. Be not partakers of
her sins (says the Angel) lest you be partakers of the Plagues that shortly
shall be poured upon her. O what an array is this? that so many that know Gods
Truth, will now turn again and defile themselves in the filthy Puddle of
Antichrists stinking Religion! They go about to save their lives with their
double dissimulation; but doubtless they shall lose everlasting life by it, if
they do not Repent in time, and turn unto the Lord. But dear sister, my trust
is that you do utterly abhor the coming to any such thing. I hope that you
will not by any means turn back into Egypt now, but that you will boldly
venture through the Wilderness of Trouble and Persecution, that you may come
into the Land that flows with all kind of Heavenly pleasures and joyful
delectations, and possess the same for ever.

Let us consider, how that every one of us does owe unto God a death by nature,
and how soon the Lord will require it of us, we know not. Oh how happy are we
then, if God of his goodness appoint us to pay Natures debt with suffering for
his Truth and Gospel sake, and so making us his faithful Witnesses with the
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors, yea with his dearly beloved Son
Jesus Christ, to whom he does here begin to fashion us like in suffering, that
we might be like him also in glory.

Thus, my dearly beloved Sister, I have been bold to trouble you a little with
my rude and simple Letter, being made in haste as it does appear. Yet I desire
you to take it in good worth, as a token of my poor zeal unto you, and do
accept my good will: And if it please God to spare me life and liberty, I trust
hereafter to write unto you more largely. Fare ye well dear Sister E. K. the
Lord bless you and all yours, and pour upon you the heavenly dew of his Grace.
The Lord indue you with plentiful knowledge of his Verity, and fill you with
his holy and mighty Spirit, that you may continually rejoice in the Comforts of
the same now and ever. Amen. Pray, pray, pray with steadfast Faith.

Your daily Orator, John Careless, Prisoner of the Lord.

A Letter of John Careless to Mrs. Agnes Glascock.
THe everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, the continual aid, strength and
comforts of his most pure, holy and mighty Spirit, be with you my dear and
faithful Sister Glascock, to the good performance of that good work which God
has so graciously begun in you, to his glory, and the commodity of his poor
afflicted Church, and to your own eternal comfort in him. Amen.

In our Lord I have most humble and hearty commendations unto you, my dear
Sister, and most faithful Mother Glascock, with all remembrance of you in my
daily Prayers, giving God most hearty land, praise and thanks for you, and on
your behalf, in that he of his great mercy has hitherto so mightily
strengthened you, constantly to cleave unto your Captain Christ, notwithstanding
the great assaults and manifold temptations that you have had to the contrary.
Doubtless, dear heart, it cannot be expressed what joy and comfort it is unto
my very Soul, to see how mightily the Lord has magnified himself in you, and
other his dear elect darlings, whom he will shortly glorify with himself, as
he has done other of his sweet Saints that are gone before you. Rejoice
therefore and be glad, for verily you have good cause, if you diligently
consider the great dignity that God has called you unto even in your old age,
to be one of his worthy Witnesses unto the World, and I think you shall with me
and other your Brethren in Bonds, seal the Lords Verity with the Testimony of
your Blood. Surely, sweet Sister, What an high honor it is to suffer for
Christ.
this is the greatest promotion that God can bring you or any other unto in
this life, and an honor that the highest Angel in Heaven is not permitted to
have.

Therefore happy are you, Oh faithful daughter of Abraham, that the Lord will
now prefer you before many other, yea or any other of your age, that I do
know in England. Oh faithful and virtuous Matron, which wilt not be moved from
the sure Rock Christ, upon whom you have so firmly built your house, that
neither storms nor tempests, neither yet Hell gates, or any other temptations,
shall ever be able once to prevail against it. Full well does it appear by your
constant continuance, that you have played the part of a wise builder, in
counting the Cost aforehand belonging to the finishing of your Tower, and I
doubt not but (through Gods gift) you have sufficient to the performance
thereof, that the Hypocrites of their part shall have no just cause to triumph
against you, or to mock you, saying, Lo, this woman began to build, but is not
able to make an end. Therefore go on boldly, and fear not; for God is faithful
(as S. Paul says) which will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength,
but either will he give you grace and strength to stand unto the death, (which
is the gate and entrance into life) or else he will make such an out-scape for
you, as shall be to the setting forth of his glory; the which above all other
things, we that are his chosen children ought for to seek, yea even with the
loss of our own lives, being yet well assured that the same shall not be
shortened one minute of an hour before the time that God has appointed.

Cast therefore (dear Sister) all your care upon the Lord, which (as S. Peter
says) cares for you. Great is his Providence for you, and mighty is his love
and mercy toward you: with his grace he will defend you, and with his holy
Spirit he will evermore guide you, wherewith he has surely sealed you unto the
day of Redemption: He has also given you the same in earnest for the recovery
of the purchased Possession, which he has prepared for you before the
foundation of the world was laid. Be strong therefore, and take a good heart,
as I hear say you be. God for ever be blessed for you, which has graft his
love in your good heart, that nothing is able to separate you from the same,
but will rather choose to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a little season. Oh happy woman, that can find in
thine heart to esteem the rebukes of Christ to be greater riches then all the
treasures of the world, as good Moses did. Doubtless great is your reward in
Heaven, which you shall shortly receive of his free gift, and not of any
deserving.

Thus dear Mother Glascock, I have been bold to trouble you with my rude and
simple Letters, desiring you to take them in good worth, being done in great
haste, as it does appear; but yet proceeding from a poor heart, which flows
over in love toward you, as my daily prayers for you can testify, which I
trust shall supply that part of my duty toward you, that my Pen now wants. I
thank you, dear heart, for all your loving Tokens, and for the great kindness
you have hitherto showed unto my poor Brother Tyms, and his Wife and Children,
with all other of Gods people to whom you daily do good: the Lord recompense
the same sevenfold into your bosom, as I doubt not but he will, according to
his infallible Promises. I pray you have my hearty commendations unto your
Husband. I beseech the Lord strengthen him in the Confession of his Truth (as
my trust is that he will) that we may all joyfully rest with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob in the Kingdom of God; unto the which he bring us, that with his most
precious blood has bought us. The Blessing of God be with you now and ever.
Amen.

Your daily Orator and unfeigned Lover, John Careless, Prisoner of the Lord,
Pray, pray, pray.

A brief Admonition written by John Careless to Mrs. Agnes Glascock, in a Book
of hers when she came to the Prison to visit him.
THere is nothing that the holy Scripture throughout does so much commend unto
us, as true Faith, and steadfast trust in the Promises of Gods eternal mercies
toward us in Jesus Christ. For from the same, as forth of the chief Fountain
and Wellspring of life, do flow all kinds of virtues and godly fruits,
specially true love toward God, in the which we ought purely to serve him all
the days of our life: and also Christian Charity toward our Neighbors, as
well to help them at all needs, as also not to hurt them by any means.
Therefore pray earnestly for the increase of faith, and lively feeling of Gods
mercy: for all things are possible to him that can undoubtedly believe. The
effects of Faith.
Faith is that thing which assures us of Gods mercy, and whereby we vanquish
all the fiery darts of the Devil: Our victory that overcomes the world: The
knife that kills and mortifieth the flesh: and finally, that which sets us
at peace with God, and quieteth our Consciences always before him, and makes
us merry and joyful under the Cross, with many more things then I can now
express. Pray therefore for faith, in faith. And for the Lords sake, beware of
Popery, and Popish Idolatry, the Idol of the wicked Mass, and other Idolatrous
Service. Make not your body, which is a member of Christ, a member of
Antichrist. Remember that we shall receive of God according to that we do in
the body, be it good or evil. Therefore glorify God in your body, which is
dearly bought. Betray not the Truth, lest the Lord deny you. If God be God,
follow him. You cannot serve two Masters. I write not this as doubting you, but
by the way of Admonition. God keep you from all evil.

My Sister dear, God give you grace
With steadfast Faith in Christ his Name,
His Gospel still for to embrace,
And live according to the same.
To dye therefore, think it no shame,
But hope in God with faithful trust:
And he will give you praise with fame,
When you shall rise out of the dust.
For which most sweet and joyful day,
To God with faith your Prayer make;
And think on me I do you pray,
The which did write this for your sake.
And thus to God I you betake,
Who is your Castle and strong Rock:
He keep you whether you sleep or wake.
Farewell dear Mistress A. Glascock.
An other Letter of John Careless to Mrs. A. G. to comfort her in her
repentance, after she had been at Mass, fruitful for all them to be read, which
have fallen, and are to be raised up again.
THe peace of God in Jesus Christ, the eternal comforts of his sweet Spirit be
with you, and strengthen and comfort you my dear and fait^ful Sister. Amen.

Although the perilous days be come, whereof Christ prophesied, that if it
were possible the very elect should be deceived; yet let the true faithful
Christians rejoice and be glad, knowing that the Lord himself is their keeper,
who will not suffer one hair of their heads to perish without his almighty good
will and pleasure, neither will suffer them to be further tempte^ then he will
give them strength to bear: but will in the midst of their temptations make a
way for them to escape out. So good and gracious a God is he to all his chosen
Children. And though sometimes he do let his elect stumble and fall, yet (no
doubt) he will raise them up again to the further increase of their comfort,
and to the setting forth of his glory and praise. Which thing (my dear and
faithful loving Sister) I trust shall be well verified on you: for I do hear
say that by the manifold allurements, inticements, procurements, yea and
inforcements that you dear heart have had, your foot has chanced to slip forth
of the way, to the great discomfort of your Soul, and the heaviness of your
heart. But my good Sister, be of good cheer, for the Lord will not so leave
you, but he will raise you up again, and make you stronger then ever you were;
so that your fall shall turn to his glory and your profit. For if you had not
by this proved the experience of your own strength, or rather your own
weakness, you would have stood too much in your own Conceit, or perchance have
gloried in your self, and have despised and condemned other weak persons that
have committed the like offense. Therefore now you may see what the best of us
all can do, if God leave us to our selves. Which thing ought to move you to be
diligent to call earnestly upon God for his grace, and the strength of his Holy
Spirit (without the which we are not able to stand one hour) and to be most
thankful for the same when you have it, and then to be more circumspect in time
to come.

Therefore dear Sister, seeing that you have done otherwise then the word of
God and your own Conscience would allow, yet dear heart, do you not think that
God therefore will cast you clean away; but know, that he has mercy enough in
store for all them that truly repent and believe in him, although the sins of
them were as many in number as the sands in the Sea, and as great as the sins
of the whole world. It is a greater sin to mistrust the mercy and promises of
God, then to commit the greatest offense in the World. Therefore, (good Sister)
beware in any wise, To trust to Gods Promises.
that you do not once mistrust the promises of Gods mercy toward you; but know
for a very surety, that all your sins be utterly forgiven you for Christ's sake,
be they never so many, so gri^vous, or so great.

But now (dear heart) take ^eed and beware that you do not cloak that sin, and
increase the same daily, in communicating with the wicked in their Idolatry,
and devilish doings at their den of Thieves. Custom of sin a perilous matter.
Do not (I say) dear Sister, come at any of their Antichristian service, lest
by little and little you utterly lose a good Conscience, and at length esteem
it for none offense; as (alas) a great number does at this day, to the great
peril of their Souls. The Lord be merciful unto them, and give them grace to
repent in time, and turn to the Lord, and then they shall be sure to find
mercy at the Lords hand, as doubtless you have done, praised be his Name
therefore.

Ah my dear Sister, you may now see the words of Christ verified upon your
self, that a man's greatest foes shall be they of his own household: A. G.
entis^d by her husband to go to the Mass.
for your Husband has gotten you to do that, which all the tyrants in the
World could never have made you to do. Doubtless he may be sorry for it: God
give him grace to repent, or else, without doubt, it will be laid to his charge
one day, when he would not by his will hear it for all the goods of the World.
Well, I think my Brother Tyms will write him a letter shortly that shall touch
his Conscience, if he have any Conscience at all.

But now again to you dear Sister. The thing that is done cannot be undone, and
you are not the first that have offended, neither are you so good and so holy,
as has at a time slipped forth of the way. Therefore I would not have you to be
so much discomforted as I hear say you be, The raising up of a troubled
Conscience after his fall.
as though God were not as able to forgive you your offense as he was to
forgive his dear Saints that offended him in times past; or as though God were
not as merciful now as ever he was: whereas in very deed, there is with the
Lord as the Prophet says) mercy and plentiful redemption; and his mercy far
surmounteth all his works; God turns all things to the best to them that be
hi^.
and he never fails any that put their whole trust and confidence in him, how
great an offender, or how wicked a trespasser soever he be. No, he makes their
falls and backslidings many times to turn to their profit and commodity, and to
the setting forth of his glory: as doubtless dear Sister, yours shall do, if
you put your whole Faith, hope, and trust only in his infinite and eternal
sweet mercies.

Oh what a subtle, crafty, lying Serpent is that Satan our old Enemy, Satan
when he cannot bring a man to his serv^^o, he presses him with distrust of
Gods mercy.
that when he sees that he cannot make us to continue in our wickedness to do
him service, would then bring us into a doubting and mistrusting of the mercy
of God, which is the greatest offense that can be; yea, infidelity is the root
and original of all other sins. Therefore (my sweet Sister) give no place to
that cruel adversary of mankind, who has been a liar and a mutherer from the
beginning, but steadfastly believe the Lord, who has sent you word by me his
most unworthy Servant, that all your sins be pardoned, forgiven, and clean
released for Jesus Christ's sake our only Lord and Savior. To whom with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, praise, thanks, power, rule,
and dominion for ever and for ever. Amen. Farewell my dear Sister, and be of
good cheer. Believe in the Lord and you shall live for ever. The Lord increase
your Faith. Amen, Amen.

Your poor Brother and daily faithful Orator, John Careless, Prisoner of the
Lord. Pray for me.

Another Letter of John Careless to A. B. a faithful Minister of the Lord,
containing certain fruitful Precepts of Matrimony.
I Beseech the same everlasting Lord (my dear and faithful Brother) that
blessed young Tobias with his Wife Sarah, and brought them together in due time
with reverence and fear, preserve and bless you both, and your seed after you,
that they may increase the number of the faithful by thousands and thousands.
And as the Lord of his great mercy and fatherly Providence has been always
careful for you, and now has for your comfort accomplished his good work in
coupling you with a faithful Mate: so see that you be thankful for his
Providence toward you, that it may every way in you be an increase of love and
godliness, yea of Christian joy and gladness in these sorrowful days: but yet
so, that you mourn with the true mourners of Sion, and be sorry (yet in
measure) for the hurt of the same. Pray also in faith for her prosperity, that
the Lord may build up the walls of Jerusalem again.

Psalm. 146.
Oh that the Lord would turn Sions. Captivity as the river, into the South; then
should our hearts be made glad, and our mouths filled with laughter. Then
would the Heathen Hypocrites say, The Lord has done much for them. Oh, the
Lord has done great things for us already, whereof let us heartily rejoice,
and praise his Name therefore. For though we now sow with tears, yet shall we
be sure to reap with gladness: and as we now go forth weeping, bearing forth
good seed, so shall we come again with joy, The death of the Martyrs is the
life of the Gospel.
and bring our sheaves full of Corn. Yea, the death of the Martyrs (which is
most precious in his sight) shall be the life of the Gospel, spite of the
Papists hearts.

Pray for me (dear heart) that I may be counted worthy to sow some seed
amongst the sweet Saints of the Lord, that I may reap the same again without
ceasing, A sowing time is Christ's Church.
at the Harvest. It is now sowing time of the year, men say in the Country, and
I think I shall make an end of sowing before all March be past: for I hear say
that I shall prove how my Plough will enter into the stony ground of the hard
hearted Papists, within these four days. I hope to hold fast, and not to look
back, neither for fear nor flattery, until I have made an end of sowing, and
then will I set me down and rest me, and ask them all no leave, and look for
the lively fruit and increase thereof with joy and gladness.

My dear Brother, the time approaches near (I praise God therefore) that I
must put off this si^ful tabernacle and go home to my heavenly Father, where
diverse of my dear Brethren are already, looking and wishing for me. I beseech
you therefore that you will help me forward with your faithful Prayers, as I
know you do, for I do feel the comfort and commodity thereof.

That you have observed my simple Counsel, I am right glad, This counsel was
that he should marry, notwithstanding certain lets, whereby Satan sought to
hinder his Marriage.
and I trust in the Lord God, you shall find comfort in the same. And that you
may so do indeed, I have been so bold to write these few words unto you,
because I shall see you no more in this corruptible life: therefore mark them
well. First and above all things you must be very circumspect to keep the band
of love, and beware that there never spring up the root of bitterness between
you. If at any time there happen to rise any cause of unkindness between you
(as it is unpossible always to be free from it) see that you weed up the same
with all lenity, gentleness and patience, The root of bitterness to be weeded
out with the Spade of Patience.
and never suffer your self, nor your wife to sleep in displeasure.

If you have cause to speak sharply, and sometimes to reprove, How and when the
husband ought to reprove.
beware that you do not the same in the presence of other: but keep your words
until a convenient time (which is the point of a wise man, says Solomon) and
then utter them in the spirit of meekness, and the groaning spirit of perfect
love: which you must also let sometimes to cover faults, and wink at them if
they be not intolerable. Whatsoever loss and mischance shall happen unto you,
Faults sometime must be covered with love.
take it patiently, and bear it merrily: and though the same should come partly
through your wifes negligence, yet let it rather be a loving warning to take
heed in time to come, then a cause of sorrow for that which is past and cannot
be helped. I know by mine own experience that we are in this life subject to
many inconveniences, and that of nature we are prone to displeasure, Not to
take unkindness for every trifle.
and ready to think unkindeness for every little trifle, and specially with our
best friends, yea soonest with our loving wives, which be most lothest to
displease us.

But let us beware of this cankered corruption, and consider that wrought most
of all, in love to bear with them, according to Christ's example toward his
Congregation, for whom he gave himself to cleanse it, etc. I had thought to
have treated this matter at large, but even now I am interrupted and otherwise
let. I doubt not but you know your duty therein a great deal better then I
can declare it unto you; and as you know it, so will do it: but I love to be
bold with you. I intend also to write to your wife very shortly, and so take my
last farewell of you forever in this World And thus in great haste I am now
constrained to make an end. The blessing of God be always with you.

Your own forever, John Careless. Pray, pray, pray with Faith.

Another Letter of John Careless to Elizabeth, Wife of the said A. B. containing
likewise certain godly Precepts of Matrimony pertaining to her duty.
THe everlasting peace of God in Jesus Christ, the continual aid, strength and
comfort of his most holy and mighty Spirit, with increase of knowledge, faith,
and perfect feeling of Gods eternal mercy, be with you my dear and faithful
loving Sister, E. B. and with your godly loving husband, and my dear and
faithful Brother, to the full performance of that good which he has so
graciously begun in you, that in all things you may be mad^ rich and blessed in
him, and your seed after you, now and ever Amen.

As I have been long desirous to write unto you (my dear heart i^ the Lord) not
only being thereto bound of duty, but also often provoked of him, to whom I
owe my self, and all that I am able to do (I mean, even that blessed of the
Lords own mouth, whom God has joined with you in that holy and Christian state
of Matrimony) even so at the last I have obtained time and occasion, in some
part to perform that which I have long purposed. And forasmuch as the Lord of
his great mercy and fatherly Care and Providence over you his dear child, has
now graciously accomplished that good work among many other, which I (as a
friend of the Bridegroom) have full heartily wished, and often prayed for: I
think it good, yea and my bounden duty, to treat of such things as may be
profitable to preserve mutual love and faithful amity between you; Satan an
enemy to all godly affairs.
which I know Satan will chiefly labor to diminish, if he cannot altogether
destroy the same, lest by many joyful occasions you should be provoked
continually to praise God for his good g^ft, which that enemy has by all means
sought to hinder from you.

As for all other things, I know you are sufficiently instructed, and also have
a most godly learned Companion, who is well able further to teach you, if need
do require. But in this thing I know my Experience is more then his. Therefore,
my good Sister, first and before all things, see that you do diligently
consider, that as every good and perfect gift pertaining to Soul and Body, is
given from above, and comes from the Father of Light: Even so to whomsoever
the Lord deals any of his benefits, of them he does chiefly require always a
thankful heart for the same; for else he will either take away his good gifts
again, or turn the same to their great discommodity, and in the end to the
increase of their condemnation: So detestable in his sight is the Sin of
Ingratitude. The sin of ingratitude.
But to such as be thankful for his benefits, he does not only to the old,
ever add new, but also makes the commodity of his former gifts ever more and
more to increase, until by them they are fully persuaded, and thoroughly
certified of his everlasting love in Christ Jesus, which is eternal life it
self: so much does he of his great mercy delight in a thankful heart.

Therefore I do yet once again earnestly require you, that above all things you
be thankful to God for his benefits; God loves a thankful hoart.
not only for your Election, Creation, Redemption, and Preservation, but also
for his other temporal gifts wherewith he has endued you: amongst the which,
the chief and most excellent is (as testifies the holy Ghost) your good,
godly, and faithful loving Husband. For (as the Wiseman says) Goods and
possessions may come to a man by the death of his friends, but a good Wife is
the gift of God, A good wi^^t^e gift of Go^
which the Lord will give for a good portion to such as fear him.

And the like is of a good Husband, as the Lord has now given you, praised be
his Name therefore. He has not given you an ignorant, froward, churlish,
brawling, wastful, rioting, drunken Husband, wherewith he has plagued many
other (as he might also have done you) but he has given you a most godly,
lea^ned, gentle, loving, quiet, patient, thrifty, diligent, and sober Husband,
by whom he will nourish, cherish, keep and defend you, instruct and teach you,
yea care and provide for you and your Children (the which he will also by him
give you) such things as be necessary for you. He has not dealt so with every
body; and yet he has done this and much more for you my dear Sister, and will
thereto increase joy and love between you: God delights in the agreement
between Man and Wife.
for as he delights in the love and godly agreement of man and wife together,
so is it he only that makes them and all the whole household to be of one mind.
Unto the which his gracious work he requires your diligence, and will use you
as his instrument and mean, the more effectuously to accompl^sh the same. And
therefore I now require you to observe this my simple counsel, the which I have
here written as a testimonial of my good will toward you, because I think in
this life I shall never more see you.

Now, as I have showed you how you should be thankful unto God for his good
gifts: so I exhort you, and (as much as in me lies) charge you to be evermore
thankful unto your dear loving husband who has given himself unto you; which
is a more precious jewel in the Church of God, then perchance you are yet aware
of. The duty of Wives toward their Husbands.
Think your self unworthy to be matched with such an Instrument of God; and
also reverence evermore the gifts of God in him, and seek with true obedience
and love to serve him* in recompense of his true and painful heart toward you.
Be loath in any wise to offend him; yea, rather be careful and diligent to
please him, that his Soul may bless you. If at any time you shall chance to
anger him, or to do or speak any thing that shall grieve him, see that you
never rest until you have pacified him, and made him merry again.

If at any time he shall chance to blame you without a cause, or for that you
cannnot do therewith (which thing happens sometimes of the best men living)
see that you bear it patiently, and give him no uncomely or unkind word for
it; but ever more look upon him with a loving and cheerful countenance, and
rather take the fault upon you, then seem to be displeased.

A cheerful countenance.
Be always merry and cheerful in his company, but not with too much lightness.
Beware in any wise of swelling, powting, or lowering, for that is a token of a
cruel and unloving heart; except it be in respect of sin, or in the time of
sickness.

Be not sorrowful for any adversity that God sends: but beware that nothing
be spilt or go to waste through your negligence. In any wise see rhat you be
quick and cleanly about his meat and drink, and prepare him the same according
to his diet in due season. Temperance in apparel.
Go cleanly and well favouredly in your Apparel, but beware of of Pride in any
wise.

Finally, in word and deed show your self wise, humble, merry, and loving
toward him, and also toward such as he does love, and then shall you lead a
blessed life. I could speak of many other things, the which I have learned and
proved true by experience: but I know that you will do in all things much
better then I can teach you, because you have that anointing that teaches you
all things; who has also given you an heart to obey and serve him. Yet I trust
you will not be offended for this which I have written, but rather accept my
good will toward you, whom I love in the Lord, as well as I do my daughter
Judith.

Thus as mine own Soul, I commend you both to God, desiring him to bless you
with all manner of Spiritual blessings in heavenly things, and also with the
dew of Heaven, and fatness of the Earth, that in all things you may be made
rich in Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. The Lord increase and bless
the fruit of your bodies, that your Children may stand round about your Table,
thick, fresh, and lusty, like the Olive branches. God give you both a long
life, that you may see and bless your Childrens Children, unto the third and
fourth Generation, and teach them the true fear and love of God, and that Faith
for the which they shall be accepted in his sight.

God let you see the prosperity of Sion; for whose lying in the dust let your
hearts mourn. The Lord make perfect your love together in him, and always
increase the same, Note, that both these departed in quiet peace, the one 1565.
the other 1568.
and bring you both in peace to your graves, at a good age. And now I bid you
both most heartily farewell: and I think I shall now take my leave of you for
ever in this life. I beseech you both to aid me with your continual Prayers (as
I will not forget you in mine) that I may have a joyful victory through Jesus
Christ: To whose most merciful defense, I do most heartily for ever commend
you to be kept unblameable until his coming. The which I beseech him to hasten
for his Mercies sake.

Your own unfeignedly, John Careless, Prisoner of the Lord.

Here ends the Letters of John Careless.
A Letter of Mr. John Bradfords, which he wrote to a faithful Woman in her
heaviness and trouble: most comfortable for all those to read that are
afflicted and brokenhearted for their sins.
GOd our good Father for his mercies sake in Christ, with his Eternal
Consolation so comfort you, as I desire to be comforted of him in my most need:
yea, he will comfort you, my dear Sister; only cast your care upon him, and he
never can nor will forsake you For his calling and gifts be such, that he can
never repent him of them. Romans 11.
Whom he loves, he loves to the end: none of his chosen can perish. Of which
number I know you are, my dearly beloved Sister: God increase the faith thereof
daily more and more in you: he give unto you to hang wholly on him and on his
Providence and Protection. Gods Providence and Protection.
For who so dwells under that Secret thing, and help of the Lord, he shall be
cock-sure for evermore. He that dwells, Psalm. 31.90.
I say: for if we be flitters, and not dwellers, as was Lo^ a flitter from
Segor, Genesis 19.
where God promised him protection, if he had dwelled there still; we shall
remove to our loss, as he did into the Mountains.

Dwell therefore, that is, trust, and that finally unto the end, in the Lord my
dear Sister) and you shall be as Mount Sion. As Mountains compass Jerusalem, so
does the Lord all his people. How then can he forget you, which are as the
apple of his eye, for his dear Sons sake. Ah dear heart, that I were now but
one half hour with you, to be a Simon to help to carry your Cross with you. God
send you some good Simon to be with you, and help you.

You complain in your Letters of the blindness of your mind; and the troubles
you feel. My dearly beloved, God make you thankful for that which he has given
unto you: he open your eyes to see what and how great benefits you have
received, that you may be less covetous, or rather impatient, for so (I fear
me) it should be called, and more thankful. Have not you received at his hands,
sight to see your blindeness, and thereto a desirous and seeking heart to see
where he lies in the midday, as his dear Spouse speaks of her self in the
Canticles? Oh Joyce, my good Joyce, what a gift is this? Many have some sight,
but none this sobbing and sighing, none this seeking which you have I know, but
such as he has married unto him in his mercies. You are nor content to kiss
his feet with the Magdalen, but you would be k^ssed even with the kisses of his
mouth, Can^. 1. You would see his face, with Moses, forgetting how he bids
us seek his face, Psalm. 27. yea, and that for ever, Psalm. 10^. which signifies
no such si ht as you desire, to be in this present life, which would see God
now face to face, God cannot be se n, but covered under something. How faith
sees God, where flesh sees Hell.
whereas he cannot be seen but covered under something: yea sometime in that
which is (as you would say) clean contrary to God; as to see his Mercy in his
Anger. In bringing us to Hell, Faith sees him bring us to Heaven; in darkness,
it beholds brightness; in hiding his face from us, it beholds his merry
countenance. How did Job see God, but as you would say under Satan's cloak? for
who cast the fire from Heaven upon his goods? who overthrew his house, and
stirred up men to take away his Cattle, but Satan? And yet Job pierced through
all these, and saw Gods work, saying, The Lord has give, he Lord has taken
away, etc.

In reading of the Psalms, how often do you see that David in the shadow of
death, saw Gods sweet love? And so (my dearly beloved) I see that you in your
darkness and dimness, by Faith to see clarity and brightness: by Faith (I say)
because Faith is of things absent, of things hoped for, of things which I
appeal to your Conscience, whether you desire not. And can you desire any thing
which you know not? And is there of heavenly things any other true knowledge
then by Faith?

Therefore, my dear heart, be thankful, for (before God I write it) you have
great cause. Ah my Joyce, how happy is the state wherein you are? The state of
Gods Children described.
Verily you are even in the blessed state of Gods Children: for they mourn, and
do not you so? and that not for worldly weal, but for spiritual riches, Faith,
Hope, Charity, etc. Do you not hunger and thirst for righteousness? And I pray
you, says not Christ, Matthew. 5.
who cannot lie, that happy are such? How should God wipe away the tears from
your eyes in Heaven, if now on earth you shed no tears? How could Heaven be a
place of rest, if on Earth you did find it? How could you desire to be at
home, if in your journey you found no grief? How could you so often call upon
God, and talk with him, as I know you do, if your enemy should sleep all day
long? How should you elsewhere be made like unto Christ, I mean in joy, if in
sorrow you sobbed not with him? If you will have joy and felicity, you must
first needs feel sorrow and misery. The way to heaven is to go through hell.
If you will go to Heaven, you must sail by Hell. If you will embrace Christ
in his robes, you must not think scorn of him in his rags. If you will sit at
Christ's Table in his Kingdom, you must first abide with him in his
Temptations. If you will drink of his cup of glory, forsake not his cup of
Ignominy.

Can the head Cornerstone be rejected, and the other more base stone in Gods
building be in this World set by? you are one of his lively stones: be content
therefore to be hewn and snagged at, that you might be made the more meet to be
joined to your fellows which suffer with you Satan's snatches, the Worlds
wounds, contempt of Conscience, Frets of the flesh
and frets of the flesh, where-through they are enforced to cry: Oh wretches
that we are, who shall deliver us? Romans 6.
You are of Gods Corn, fear not therefore the Flayle, the Fan, Millstone, nor
Oven. You are one of Christ's Lambs, look therefore to be fleeced, hayled at,
and even slain.

If you were a Market sheep, you should go in more fat and grassy Pasture. Gods
sheep must feed on the bare Common, where the devils ctatel are st ^^^d.
If you were for the Fair, you should be stalfed, and want no weal: but because
you are for Gods own occupying, therefore you must pasture on the bare Common,
abiding the storms and tempests that will fall. Happy, and twice happy are you
(my dear Sister) that God now haileth you whither you would not, John 21.
that you might come whither you would. Suffer a little, and be still. Let
Satan rage against you, let the World cry out, let your Conscience accuse you,
let the Law load you and press you down; yet shall they not prevail for Christ
is Emanuel, that is, God with us. I^ God be with us, who can be against us?
Romans 8.
The Lord is with you; your Father cannot forget you; your Spouse loves you.
If the waves and surges arise, cry with Peter, Lord I perish, Matthew. 8.
and he will put out his hand and help you. Cast out your Anchor of Hope, and
it will not cease for all the stormy surges, till it take hold on the Rock of
Gods Truth and Mercy.

Think not that he which has given you so many things corporally, as
inductions of spiritual and heavenly Mercies, Philip. 1. Desire of spiritual
comfort, though it be lacking, is a great gift of God
and that without your deserts or desire, can deny you any spiritual comfort
desiring it. For if he give to desire, he will give you to have and enjoy the
thing desired. To desire to have, and the going about to ask, ought to certify
your Conscience, that they be his earnest of the thing which you asking he will
give you, yea before you ask, and whilst you are about to ask he will grant
the same (as Esaias says) to his glory, and your eternal consolation. He that
spared not his own Son for you, will not nor cannot think any thing too good
for you, my heartily beloved.

If he had not chosen you, (as most certainly he has) he would not have so
called you: he would never have justified you: Romans 8.
he would never have so glorified you with his gracious gifts, which I know,
praised be his Name therefore: he would never have so exercised your Faith with
temptations, as he has done and does, if (I say) he had not chosen you.
Exercise of tentations a great token of election
I have chosen you (as doubtless dear heart, he has done in Christ, for in you
I have seen his earnest, and before me, and to me you could not deny it, I know
both where and when) if I say, he has chosen you, then neither can you, nor
ever shall you perish. For if you fall, he puts under his hand; you shall
not lie still: so careful is Christ your keeper over you. Never was Mother so
mindful over her child, as he is over you. And has not he always been so?

Speak woman when did he finally forget you? And will he now, trow you, in your
most need do otherwise, you calling upon him, and desiring to please him? Ah my
Joyce, think you God to be mutable? Romans 11.
Is he a changeling? Does not he love to the end, them whom he loves? Are not
his gifts and calling such, that he cannot repent him of them? for else were he
no God. If you should perish, then wanted he power: for I am certain his will
toward you is not to be doubted of. Has not the Spirit, which is the Spirit
of truth, Every lying spirit not to be hearkened unto Satan seeks to bring
tender consciences to doubting: but Gods promise in Christ stands sure for
ever.
told you so? And will you now hearken, with Eve, to the lying spirit, which
would have you not to despair (no, he goes more craftily to work, howbeit to
that end, if you should give ear unto it, which God forbid) but to doubt and
stand in a mammering, and so should you never truly love God, but serve him of
a servile fear, lest he should cast you off for your unworthiness and
unthankfulness; as though your thankfulness or worthiness were any causes with
God, why he has chosen you, or will finally keep you.

Ah mine own dear heart, Christ only, Christ only, and his mercy and truth.
All our election is in and for Christ only.
In him is the cause of your election. This Christ, this Mercy, this Truth of
God remains for ever, is certain for ever, and so is your Election certain
for ever, for ever, for ever; I say for ever. If an Angel of heaven should tell
you contrary, accursed be he, accursed be he. Your thankfulness and worthiness
are fruits and effects of your election, they are no causes. These fruits and
effects shall be so much more fruitful and effectual, by how much you waver not.

Therefore (my dearly beloved) arise, and remember from whence you are fallen.
Psalm. 120.
You have a Shepherd which neither slumbereth nor sleeps. No man nor devil
can pull you out of his hands. Night and day he commands his Angels to keep
you. Have you forgotten what I read to you out of the Psalm, The Lord is my
Shepherd, Psalm. 25.
I can want nothing? Do you not know that God sparred Noah in the Ark on the
outside, so that he could not get out? So has he done to you, my good Sister,
so has he done to you. Ten thousand shall fall on your right hand, Psalm 90.
and twenty thousand on your left hand, yet no evil shall touch you. Say boldly
therefore, Psalm. 125.
Many a time from my youth up they have fought against me, but they have not
prevailed: no, nor never shall prevail, for the Lord is round about his people.
And who are the people of God, but such as hope in him? Happy are they that
hope in the Lord: and you are one of those, my dear heart, for I am assured you
have hoped in the Lord: I have your words to show most manifestly, and I know
they were written unfeignedly. I need not to say, that even before God you have
simply confessed to me, and that oftentimes, no less. And once if you had this
hope, Though feeling fail, yet let hope hold fast.
as you doubtless had it, though now you feel it not, yet shall you feel it
again: for the anger of the Lord lasts but a moment, but his mercy lasts
for ever. Tell me, my dear heart, who has so weakened you? Surely not a
persuasion which came from him that called you. For why should you waver? Why
should you waver, The eye of faith must look upon nothing else but only Christ
crucified.
and be so heavy hearted? Whom look you on? On your self? on your worthiness?
on your thankfulness? on that which God requires of you, as faith, hope, love,
fear, joy, etc. Then can you not but waver indeed: for what have you as God
requires? Believe you, hope you, love you, etc. as much as you should do? No,
no, nor never can in this life. Ah my dearly beloved, have you so soon
forgotten that which ever should be had in memory? namely, that when you would
and should be certain and quiet in Conscience, then should your Faith burst
throughout all things, not only that you have in you, or else are in heaven,
earth or hell, until it come to Christ crucified, and the eternal sweet
mercies and goodness of God in Christ? Here, here is the resting place, here is
your Spouses bed: creep into it, and in your arms of Faith embrace him: bewail
your weakness, your unworthiness, your diffidence, etc. and you shall see he
will turn to you. What said I, You shall see? Nay, I should have said, You
shall feel he will turn to you. You know that Moses, when he went into the
Mount to talk with God, he entered into a dark Cloud; and Elias had his face
covered when God passed by. Both these dear friends of God, heard God, but they
saw him not: but you would be preferred before them. See now, my dear heart,
how covetous you are. Ah be thankful, be thankful. But God be praised that your
covetousness is Moses covetousness. Well, with him you shall be satisfied. But
when? Forsooth when he shall appear. Here is not the time of seeing, Psalm. 16.
but as it were in a glass. Isaac was deceived, because he was not content with
hearing only.

Therefore to make an end of these many words, wherewith I fear me I do but
trouble you from better exercises: inasmuch as you are indeed the child of
God, elect in Christ before the beginning of all times: inasmuch as you are
given to the custody of Christ, as one of Gods most precious jewels: inasmuch
as Christ is faithful, and hitherto has all power, so that you shall never
perish no, one hair of your head shall not be lost. I beseech you, Learn here
to put away doubting, all tender hearts that seek after Christ.
I pray you, I desire you I crave at you^ hands with all my very heart, I ask
of you with hand, pen, tongue, and mind, in Christ, through Christ, for
Christ, for his Name, Blood, Mercies, Power, and Truths sake (my most entirely
beloved Sister) that you admit no doubting of Gods final Mercies toward you,
howsoever you feel your self: but complain to God, and crave of him as of your
tender and dear Father, all things; and in that time which shall be most
opportune, you shall find and feel far above that your heart, or the heart of
any creature can conceive, to your eternal joy. Amen, Amen, Amen.

The good Spirit of God always keep us as his dear children: he comfort you,
as I desire to be comforted (my dearly beloved) for evermore. Amen.

This 8. of August, by him that in the Lord desires to you as well and as much
felicity, as to his own heart. John Bradford.

A worthy Answer of a constant Martyr called Guy de Brez, Anno Dom. 1566.
GVy de BreZ, a minister of the Gospel, being committed Prisoner into the
Castle of Tournay, was visited by many Ladies and Gentlewomen, only out of a
desire to see him, in regard he was a man so highly esteemed. Some at the first
view scoffed; others railed on him; but others were moved to take pity and
compassion on him. Amongst the rest, the Countess of Ren, accompanied with
certain Gentlewomen, coming into the Prison, and at her first entrance
beholding the Iron chain to which was fastened; Mr. Guy, said she, I wonder how
you can either eat, drink, or sleep in quiet, for were I in your case, the very
terror thereof would go nigh to kill me?

O Madam, said he, the good cause for which I suffer, and that inward peace of
Conscience with which God has endued me, makes me eat and drink with greater
contentment then my enemies can which seek my life: yea so far off is it that
my bonds or chain do any way terrify me, or break off my sleep, that on the
contrary I glory and take delight therein, esteeming them at a higher rate then
chains and rings of Gold, or any other Jewels of price whatsoever; for they
yield me much more profit. Yea when I hear the rattling of my chains, me thinks
I hear as it were some sweet instrument of music sounding in mine ears: not
that such an effect comes merely from my chains, but in regard I am bound
therewith for maintaining the truth of the Gospel.

The same Martyr in a letter to his wife, acquaints her with Gods graci^us
dealing with him in all his assaults.
SPeaking of his apprehension, he shows how carnal reason began to play its
part against the Providence of God; for says he, these thoughts came thronging
into my head; what meant we to go so many in company together as we did? had it
not been for such and such we had never been discovered or taken. Under such
like cogitations I lay for a while, says he, even in a manner overwhelmed,
till by the assistance of Gods holy Spirit my mind was raised up to meditate
on Gods Providence. After which my heart began to feel wonderful rest and
contentment; saying thus in my self, O my God, the day and hour of my birth was
before ordained by thee, and ever since thou have preserved and kept me in
great perils and dangers, and hitherto delivered me out of them all. And if now
the hour be come wherein I must pass out of this life into thy kingdom, thy
holy will be done; I cannot escape out of t^y hands; yea, though I could, yet
Lord thou know I would not, seeing all my felicity depends upon conforming
my Will unto thine.

From these considerations I received no small consolation, and therefore, dear
wife, rejoice with me, I pray you, and bless our good God for these his
mercies toward me; for he does nothing but that which is equal and right. You
have been privy to, and acquainted with all the travels, crosses and
persecutions which have befallen me, yea, and have your self been partaker with
me therein, when you accompanied me in my voyages during the time of my exile:
and now after all these you see, my welbeloved in the Lord, how he holds
forth to me his hand of Providence, to drive me home to himself into his
blessed Kingdom. I now lead you the way, and when his will is you shall follow
me thither. Our separation shall not be for ever: it will not be long ere we be
gathered under one head Jesus Christ. This World is not the place of our rest:
no, Heaven is our home, this is but the place of our banishment. Let us
therefore aspire after our true Country, namely Heaven, and long to be received
into the mansions of our heavenly Father, where we shall see our Head and
Brother, our Husband and Savior Jesus Christ, with the noble triumphant
assemblies of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and so many millions of
Martyrs, to whom I hope shortly to be gathered, having finished the course of
that administration which I have received of the Lord Jesus. Wherefore dear
wife, be you comforted in the meditation of these things. Take into
consideration the honor the Lord does you, in giving you a Husband who is not
only called to be a Minister of Christ's Gospel, but also so highly advanced of
God, as to be accounted worthy to partake of the Crown of Martyrdom. It is an
honor which the Angels in Heaven are not capable of. Angels not capable of
M^rtyrdome.
I now rejoice in my sufferings, my heart leapeth within me; in my Afflictions
I find nothing wanting unto me; I am filled with the abundant riches of my
God; yea so far am I comforted therewith, that I have sufficient store not
only for my self, but to impart thereof also to as many as I have opportunity
to speak unto: which bounty and favor I beseech my eternal Lord God to
continue unto me his poor Prisoner: yea, Gods goodness to his afflicted
children is often above and beyond their expectation.
I am persuaded that he will perform it unto the end; For by good expeience I
feel, that be never forsakes them that trust in him. I could never have
imagined that God would have been so gracious as he has been to me his poor
creature.

I now taste of the fidelity and bounty of Christ my Savior: I am here taught
to practice what I have preached unto others. Yea, let me not be ashamed to
confess, that when I heretofore preached I spoke but as a Parrat, in regard of
that which I have now better learned by proof and experience. Prisons prove
Gods Schoolhouses to the faithful.
I have profited more in the Schoolhouse of this prison, then ever I did in all
my life before: for I have the Holy Ghost, who is my constant instr^cter and
Schoolmaster, teaching me how to handle my weapons in this fight of
afflictions. Satan on the other side, who is the sworn enemy of all Gods Elect,
compasses me about on every side as a roaring Lion thinking to devour me. But
he who has said, Fear not, John 16.33.
I have overcome the World, puts as it were new courage into me; and then I see
the Lord bruising Satan under my feet; Romans 16.20.
feeling the power of God perfected in my weakness: 2 Cor. 12.9.
and that the Lord causes me one while to feel my infirmity and weakness, It
is profitable for the godly so c^i^es to feel their infirmities.
that so I may take knowledge how I am but a poor earthen vessel (even weakness
it self,) to humble me, that God may have all the glory; and then by and by he
fortifies and comforts me, (I may truly say) incredibly above all I could ask
or think.

For I would not change my condition with theirs who persecute me. I take my
rest, eat and drink with more hearts case then they. I am indeed lodged in the
strongest and vilest Prison they have, dark and obscure, which for the darkness
thereof is called Bruna^^; Brunain a Prison of the Valencians.
where I have no air to breathe at, but a little stinking hole, where they lay
all their rubbish and where the drunkards commonly vent their Urine. I am laden
with Irons both on my hands and feet, By reason whereof he complains he wrote
with ^uch difficulty, and therefore could not write as otherwise he would have
done
which are a continual torment unto me; the irons eating through the flesh,
even to the bare bones. The Provost-Marshal comes to view my Fetters twice or
thrice (...) day, fearing lest I should make an escape: for preventing whereof,
he has placed three Guards of Forty men before the Prison door, etc.

And thus having given to his Wife his Advice, how to behave her self during
her Widowhood, and how to train up her Children, with his loving Salutations
remembered to her self, and other his special Friends, he closes up his Letter.

FINIS.

