To all PERSONS that have any Sense of the Reality of VIRTUE, In the pursuit of
my Design to demonstrate, that the People called QVAKERS, Deserve more Favor
from the Church of England, Than any other sort of Dissenters.
I shall here Recite some Passages in the Book of Common Prayer, to which they
Acknowledge, that it is their Duty, and that In CHRIST they have a Power, to
Conform themselves in the whole Course of ^^eir Lives.
By EDMUND ELYS.
Common Prayer in the General Confession. GRant, O Most Merciful Father -- That
we may hereafter live a Godly, Righteous, and Sober Life, to the Glory of thy
Holy Name. Amen.

On which words John And. has this Reflection: By the Grace of GOD that
brings Salvation, which has appeared unto all Men, are we taught and enabled
to deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously, and
Godly in this present World.

Why should any Mock God to Pray so to live, and yet live quite contrary, and
reject the Grace of God?



Com. Pr. in the Absolution. Wherefore we Beseech him to grant us true
Repentance, and his Holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do
at this present, and that the rest of our Life hereafter may be pure, and holy,
so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Com. Pr. Te Deum Laudamus. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to Keep us this Day without Sin.

Com. Pr. 2 Collect. O God, who art the Author of Peace, and Lover of Concord
-- whose Service is Perfect Freedom.

Com. Pr. 3. Collect. Lighten our Darkness we Beseech thee, O LORD.

Com. Pr. in the Litany. From all Evil, and Mischief, from the Crafts and
Assaults of the Devil, from all Blindness of Heart, from Pride, Vain Glory, and
Hypocrisy, from Envy, Hatred, and Malice, and all Uncharitableness: From
Fornication, and all other Deadly Sin, and from all the Deceits of the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, Good Lord De^^^er us.

Com. Pr. in the Litany. That it may please thee to bring into the Way of Truth
all such as have Erred.

Com. Pr. in the Litany. That it may please thee, O LORD, to endue us with thy
Holy Spirit to Amend our Lives.

Com. Pr. First Sunday in Advent. Almighty GOD, give us Grace, That we may cast
away the Works of Darkness, and put upon us the Armor of Light, now in the
Time of this Mortal Life.

Com. Pr. Collect on St. Stephen's Day. Grant, O Lord, that in all our
Sufferings here upon Earth for the Testimony of thy Truth, we may steadfastly
look up to Heaven, and by Faith behold the Glory that shall be revealed, and
being filled with the Holy Ghost, may learn to Love, and Bless our Persecutors
by the Ensample of this first Martyr St. Stephen, who prayed for his Murderers.

Com. Pr. Collect on Innocent's Day. Mortify, and Kill all Vices in us, and so
strengthen us by thy Grace, that by the Innocence of our Lives, etc. we may
Glorify thy Holy Name.

Com. Pr. Collect on Circumcision Day. Grant us the true Circumcision of the
Spirit, that our Hearts, and all our Members being Mortified from all Worldly,
and Carnal Lusts, we may in all things Obey thy blessed Will.

Com. Pr. Collect on the First Day of Lent, commonly called Ashwednesday.
Create and make in us new and contrite Hearts.

Com. Pr. Collect on the 5th Sunday after Easter. Lord Grant that by thy Holy
Inspiration we may think those things that be good, and by thy merciful guiding
may perform the same.

Com. Pr. Collect on the Sunday after Ascension Day. Send to us thy Holy GHOST
to Comfort us.

Com. Pr. Collect on Whit sunday. GOD, which did Teach the Hearts of thy
faithful People, by sending them the Light of the Holy Ghost, Grant us by the
same Spirit to have a Right Judgment in All things.

Here (says J. A.) the Light is the Teacher, which we Own, and bear Witness to.

Com. Pr. Collect on St. Andrew's Day. Almighty GOD, Grant unto us all, that we
being called by thy Holy WORD, may forthwith give up our selves Obediently to
fulfill thy Holy Commandments.

Com. Pr. Collect on St. John Baptist's Day. Almighty GOD, make us constantly
speak the Truth, boldly rebuke Vice, and patiently suffer for the Truth's sake.

I Desire it may be Known to all Persons that Know Me, or shall ever Hear of
Me, that the People called QUAKERS Concur with Me in these Sentiments of
CHRISTIAN Purity, which ATHENAGORAS Testifies to have been the Sentiments of
the Primitive CHRISTIANS.

Athenag. In Legatione pro Christianis. (...), etc. Summa Cautione
communicandum est Osculum, ut non aliter quam Pia Salutatio, vel potius
Adoratio quaedam habeatur: Quaesi vel parum impura Cogitatione inquinata
fuerit, a Vita Aeterna nos alienet.

We Ought to have the greatest Care, and Circumspection, how we impart a Kiss
to any one, that it may be no other than a Pious Salutation, or an Act of
Religion. If it excites our Thoughts to the least Impurity, it excludes us from
Eternal Life.

COME LORD JESUS.
FINIS.

