THE Deplorable CASE Of great Numbers of Suffering Subjects, concerned in the
Ships and Vessels employed in Their Majesty's Transport-Service: Humbly
Offerred to the High COURT of PARLIAMENT Now Assembled.
IN the beginning of the Year 1689. many Ships and Vessels were hired into
their Majesty's Service, to carry their Majesty's Landforces, with Arms,
Ammunition, Stores and Provisions for Ireland, in order to the reducing
thereof; none departing the said Service, until discharged by their Majesty's
Officers, or lost in the Service, and others of them are still continued in the
same to this very day.

Several of the Masters and Mariners of these Ships have died in this Service,
through the Hardships which they have undergone therein.

It has been the Unhappiness of the Masters, Owners and Proprietors, That after
their Ships were hired they were called by the Name of TRANSPORT-SHIPS,
(although several of them taken up by the Navy and Ordnance) whereby they have
been denied the Benefit of any Money hitherto given for Payment of the Navy and
Army; whereunto they were justly entitled (as they are advised.) So that the
Owners and Proprietors of most of the Ships which are discharged the Service,
have received very little of the Money due unto them for the same, more than a
small matter called Impressed Money; paid to some few for one Month, to others
for a Fortnight, but to many nothing at all.

Those Ships also that are still continued in the Service have likewise
received only some small Impressed Money, with a very little more, toward
Subsistence, and most of that in Tallies upon the Fond of the double Ninepences
Excise payable after Nine Hundred and Sixty Thousand Pounds; which, through the
pressing Necessities of the Masters and Owners, they have been constrained to
receive and turn into ready Money at a very great Loss.

These unhappy and unexpected Disappointments have proved very fatal to most of
the Owners and Proprietors, therein concerned; in that they have not only
expended their ready Money, but contracted very many great Debts, in
victualling their Ships, and paying their Seamens Wages, as far as they could.
Several of them having been arrested and imprisoned for the Debts contracted in
this Service; and their Wives and Children thereby reduced to very great
Necessities, and some to a begging Condition. Several of the Ships have also
been arrested and condemned by the Seamen for Wages due, and others lying in a
perishing Condition, for want of Money to repair them, to the utter disabling
of them in the way of their Trades. And this is the more deplorable, that in a
greater or lesser degree, it is the Case of all the Seaports of this Kingdom,
even from Whitehaven to Berwick upon Tweed. The Sum total yet due, upon
account of this Service, by the nearest Computation, being betwixt Three and
Four Hundred Thousand Pounds.

And whereas it has been suggested, That his Majesty has been abused in the
Tonnage or Burden of the Ships and Vessels employed in this Service; the
Owners have submitted their Ships to an Admeasurement, in obedience to his
Majesty's Patent granted to Mr John Bowls for that purpose; whereby it
appears, that as there are several of their Ships that do under-measure, so
there are many that do over-measure considerably. Moreover, many of those their
Ships, as well English as Foreign built, that have under-measured, do really
carry the Tonnage for which the Masters hired them into this Service; as it
appears by the Custom-House Books, that they have all along paid the King's
Customs for so much Tonnage as they are let for, if not more.


