Earl of Montague and others Appellants. Earl of Bathe and others
Respondents.

THIS Cause having been heard and debated de Die in Diem, from the first to the
17th of Feb. 1693. It was then Resolved, and entered in the Book of this
Honorable House, as-follows, viz. Die Sabbathi 17 die Feb. 1693. After long
Debate, this Question was put. Whether the Dismission of the Court of Chancery
shall be Reversed?

It was Resolved in the NEGATIVE.

Ordered, That the Petition of Appeal shall be Dismissed, and the Dismission of
the Court of Chancery shall be Affirmed, And that what the House has done in
this Case, shall be without Prejudice to any Claim or Interest of Mr. Pride.

Upon which Dismission the Respondents were absolutely discharged from the said
Appeal, as all other Respondents have always been after a Dismission.

But on the 20th of Feb. the Appellants, by their Petition, set forth, That
they had in their Appeal, wholly depended upon Matter of Equity: And therefore,
in regard their Lordships did not think fit to Relieve them on the Matters of
Equity, they prayed their Lordships, that in such Order as should pass touching
the said Matters, such Directions might be given, as not to prejudice or
prelude any Trial of the Validity of the Deeds, under which the Respondents
make Title. And that whenever such Trial, or Trials should be brought, the
Respondents might be ordered to produce all such Writings, and Exhibits, as
have been by them proved and Exhibited in the Court of Chancery, or before
their Lordships; and that they may not thereat give in Evidence, any Lease or
Encumbrance, whereby to obstruct the Trial of the Validity of the said Deeds.

VVhereupon, It was then Ordered, That the Clearks do search the Books for
Presidents. If at any time, after a Cause Dismissed in this House; This House
has ordered the Exhibits made use of here, to be made use of at a Trial at
Law, without directing that Trial. That the Clerks report what they find, to
the House in this Case, on Friday next at Eleven of the Clock, and all the
Lords, Summoned then to Attend.

Which Petition as the Respondents are Avised is in its Nature an ORIGINAL
CAUSE, it importing no manner of Complaint, or Appeal from any Judgment of any
Inferior Court; and the Appeal which stands Dismissed, was not to have a new
Trial, it not having been demanded, or denied in Chancery.

But the Appeal was only against the Judgment of the Court of Chancery, for
dismissing the Appellant's Bill in Equity.

That before the Appeal, there was a Verdict for the Respondent's Title, by a
special Jury of Substantial and Indifferent Jurors, at a Trial at the
King's-Bench-Bar, of about twelve Hours, against which the Appellants never
Complained, but at the Bar of this House admitted the Law to be against them.

That what is desired by the Appellants by this their New Petition, is in
effect to Impeach the Verdict, and undermine the Judgment not only of the Court
of Chancery, but of this honorable House, and should such Order be granted, as
desired, it would retain the Cause after Dismissed. which would be a
Contradiction in Terminis, and a Dishonor to the Wisdom and Justice of this
House, and would disparage the Respondent's Title, by giving it a mark of the
Dissatisfaction of this House.

The Dismission of the Bill, and Appeal puts the Parties out of Court, and as
at Law a Plaintiff Non-Suite can pray nothing; so neither Regularly can a
Plaintiff in Equity after a Dismission.

But if the Appellants think fit to have any other Trials, they may without the
Countenance of this House, Try as often as they please, the Law being open.

Interest Reipublicae ut sit finis Litium.

