A SERIOUS EXHORTATION TO THE Necessary Duties of Family and Personal
Instruction.

Made (formerly) to the Inhabitants of the Parish of Tredington in the County
of Worcester, and now upon request, published for their use.

By William Durham B. D. Minister of the Gospel there.

(...). Train up a Child in the way that he should go; and when he is old he
will. not depart from it. Prove. 22.6. London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, dwelling
in Thames Street over against Baynards Castle. 1659.

TO The truly Religious, and my much honored, the Lady Vachel of Coly near
Reding.
Madam!
IT is no mean privilege to be born of godly Parents, and such who are
steadfast in the faith; for although Grace be no more (ex traduce) by traduction
from our Ancestors then our souls, but both immediately from God, yet (besides
the benefit of their prayers) their Godly examples, and their Religious care in
the education of their children, have (by Gods blessing) a wonderful influence
in moulding their hearts toward Godliness. The fairest Gem in Solomon's Crown
was the special care which his Parents had to teach him to know God and his
Law. It was Timothies great advantage that his Mother and Grandmother were so
famous for Religion. In this great Privilege few persons of your rank are
greater sharers then your self; Sir Francis Knollys Knight of the Garter,
Treasurer of the household and Councellor to Q. Eliz.
Your Grandfather, an Exile (with his Family) for Religion in those bloody days
of Queen Mary, and an eminent Instrument in that happy Reformation in the time
of Queen Elizabeth, whose name is yet eminent in Forain parts, and no less
precious at home for his many good services done to the Church of God. Sir
Francis Knollys.
After him your late dear Father, of whom I may say as the Epistol. lib. 2.
Learned Zanchy says of William Lantgrave of Hessen, that he was (Optimi
parentis, Optimus filius) the most Religious Son of a most Religious Father,
who was the greatest Countenancer of Religion, and cherisher of Religious men
in those parts all his time; whose pains and purse were never spared sor their
encouragement and defense, even in the worst of times, as is yet very well
remembered with thankful hearts by many who bless his memory. The pious labors
of diverse eminent Ministers of Christ, Dr. Twist Dr Tho. Tailor.
whom he cherished under his wing, give the world a taste how much it owes to
his memory. How great his care was to instruct his children in the Faith, may
be seen by their carriage in the Church of God, when they were grown up to
riper years. Witness him who whilst he lived, Sir Francis Knollys your brother.
was [deliciae humani generis] for his candor, sweetness, courtesy and love to
goodness, the delight and love of all that had the happiness to know him. I
heartily desire that there may be the like Religious care taken for the
education of that Infant upon whom that Estate is descended, that he may tread
in the steps of his worthy Ancestors, and inherit their virtues as well as
their possessions! Your Ladyship might be my next great instance, who have so
well improved those Principles of Religion instilled in your education, that
your Piety, Charity, and Religious Government of your Family (I may call it in
the Apostles Language, The Church in your house) may be a pattern to Posterity,
which will not readily be taken out. I must not take in all that might be
spoken, but consider what your Ladyship will be willing to hear: Who in this,
as in your whole course, have proposed your Savior for your example, who when
he had done any great work commanded them not to publish it. It is much more
delightful to your Ladyship to do good, then to hear of it when you have done
it. What the benefits and advantages of instructing Families are, I have
endeavored to manifest in this following Exhortation, and being importuned to
communicate it to mine own charge, I have taken the humble confidence to put it
under your Ladyships name; for which attempt I the rather hope to gain your
pardon, because all that is said here, is but a transcript of your own practice
in your Family. You will find it plain, (so are the people for whom it is
mainly intended) but I hope honest, and suitable to the mind of God. So God may
have glory, his people committed to my trust advantage, and this small
testimony of my thankfulness for the many real expressions of your favors may
find acceptance at your hands, he has his ends, who is

Madam, Your Ladyships much obliged Nephew, and most humble servant William
Durham.
From my study in Tredington this 7 of December 1658.
TO My well beloved Friends and Neighbors the Inhabitants of the Parish of
Tredington. Grace and Peace in Jesus Christ.
BELOVED!
THat which was the hearts desire of the Apostle, Romans 10.1.
and prayer to God for Israel, is really mine for you, that you may be saved.
That wise God, who in his Providence has set me over you in things pertaining
to your souls, has (through Grace) made me in some measure sensible of the
weight of mine employment, and the excellency of those souls committed to my
trust. Were your souls like those of inferior creatures, only as salt to
preserve your bodies from putrefaction, and did they die together with you, it
were more excusable, if you were less curious in the cultivating of them: but
since they are immortal, and must live, when these houses of clay are
dissolved, and that nothing is a proportionable price for them but that blood
of God, it concerns us highly to take care what will become of them when we go
hence, and shall be seen no more. The great part of a Christians portion lies
in reversion; that which we enjoy here (though full of inward comfort) is
nothing in comparison of what we expect. There Is an inheritance in Heaven, 1
Pet. 1.4.
which is incorruptible, undefiled, etc. whose worth the tongue of men and
Angels cannot express; for the obtainment of this glorious inheritance I
(daily) bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ on your behalf;
and that he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, Ephesians. 3.14.
to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward man, that Christ may
dwell in your hearts by faith, that you may know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge; that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God; Joh. 17.3.
and (in a word) that your souls may prosper through the knowledge of the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, because this is life eternal.
This is the main end and aim, as of all that pains I have otherwise taken among
you, so of this following exhortation which was formerly made to you in
public: That your hearts which seemed much warmed thereby to a ready
compliance with your duty, may not grow chill and cold again, I have been
induced by the persuasion of some of your selves and others, to suffer this
Exhortation to be made public for your benefit; that every one of you may
have something by you that may help to quicken him to the getting the knowledge
of the Principles of Religion; which I have the rather inclined to, because (as
you know) since this was delivered to you, God has shaken me by the shoulder
once and again, 2 Cor. 1.9.
and showed me that my bones are not brass, nor my sinews iron, so far that I
even despaired of life, and seemed to have the sentence of death passed against
me. How long God may please to reprieve me to be further serviceable to your
faith, is known to him alone. I would willingly leave something as a pledge of
my tender affections to you in Christ Jesus; that when this tabernacle of my
flesh shall be taken down, you may have a faithful Remembrancer with you, to
mind you of that which is your greatest concernment. The hearts of the
Galatians were once so inflamed toward the Apostle that they would even have
pulled out their eyes to have done him good: I shall not impose any such rigid
task upon you, but only desire that the eyes of your understanding may be
enlightened, that ye may know God, your selves, and your duty. If I had required
some difficult or costly matter at your hand, it would be more excusable,
should you scruple my request: but since the motion which I have to make is no
extraordinary task, and tends so directly to the saving of your precious souls,
I cannot but promise my self the more ready acceptance. That which I am to
persuade you to, is the making of your selves and families acquainted with God
in Christ, and that you would make it your business to set up the knowledge of
God in your respective families. There Is none of you who would be thought
careless of the good of your household in things that appertain to this life;
how much more ought ye to be solicitous for them in things pertaining to a
better life? The instructing of them in the Principles of Religion is of that
absolute necessity that without it there can be no salvation. There Is no
salvation but by Christ; no benefit by Christ without faith; no faith in him
without knowledge; no knowledge but by instruction. And that I may proceed more
distinctly and more effectually in this so weighty a work, I shall 1. Propose
such Motives as may quicken Parents and Masters in this duty, viz. in
instructing their children and servants themselves as far as they are able, and
in causing them to come and yield to this work in public by the Minister. 2.
I shall bring some Motives to the younger sort which may persuade them to submit
themselves both to public and private Catechizing and Instruction. 3. I shall
bring such arguments as may prevail with all sorts of people of what age or
degree, what rank or quality soever to a cheerful submission to this necessary
work of Instruction in the Fundamentals of Religion.

1. Branch of Exhortation.
I begin with those whom God has made Parents and Masters of Families, to whom
I shall propose these following considerations, why they ought both to instruct
their Families themselves, and to bring them also to public Instruction.

Sect. 1.
Every Father and Master is in his own house a King, Motives for Parents and
Masters.
a Priest, and a Prophet. house a King, a Priest, and a Prophet. He is a King
to govern them, a Priest to pray with them, and for them, a Prophet to instruct
and teach them. If you will take upon you to rule and govern your Families, you
must instruct them too; you would not be justled out of your command in your
own houses, you must not thrust your selves out of it by neglecting your
instructing office. We read of Nymphas, Col. 4.15
that he had a Church in his house; his house is styled a Church, not only
because the faithful came thither to be instructed in the Faith, and to hold
communion in those times of persecution, but also because he did carefully
instruct those of his own Family in the knowledge of Christ, and trained them
up in spiritual and holy Dutys. Familiam suam privatam fecit ecclesiam, eam
pietate and religione exernans. So Theodoret.

Sect. 2.
God commands that we should instruct our Children and Family in the knowledge
of God, Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 11.19, 20. Psalm. 78.6. Ephesians. 6.8.
and the matters of Religion, where we may observe. 1. That they were to teach
them; it was not a matter Arbitrary left at pleasure, but a Duty. 2. What they
should teach them, the knowledge of God, of his ways and Commandments, not
frivolous discourses, Songs, Tales, Romances, but Gods Statutes. 3. How they
should teach them, diligently and constantly, they must whet it often upon
their memories, and never leave them, till they have made them understand. 4.
The great advantage that they should gain hereby, both they and their children
they should live long in the Land which God gave them. If those were good
motives to them, how much stronger have we? Was the Law which discovered their
sin, but could not cure it, so diligently to be learned, and shall not the
Gospel which discovers a remedy for our sin, be worth our knowledge? should the
Inheritance of an earthly possession quicken them to gain the knowledge of Gods
law, and shall not the enjoyment, of a perpetual rest, quicken us to get
acquaintance with Jesus Christ in the Gospel?

Sect. 3.
God commands children to learn of their Parents, and to hearken to their
Instruction, which implies the Parents duty to teach them. Prove. 6.20, 21.
My son keep the Commandment of thy Father, and forsake not the law of thy
Mother. Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck.
Mercer.
The Commandments of Parents that fear the Lord, are the very Commandments of
God himself, and therefore carefully to be kept. Deuteronomy 6.8.11-18.
Bind them continually] a phrase frequent in Scripture, importing, that they
should never forget them, but that they should be always in our eye, Exodus
12.26. Exodus 13.14.
in our heart as our greatest ornament. Nay, it is not only their duty to learn
when they are taught, but also to be enquiring, that they may learn, which is
plainly hinted in those texts. If children had any sense of true Religion, they
would be enquiring into the nature, ground, and end of those services which
were done to God; for true Religion is the exercise of mind enlightened by Faith
and Knowledge, and not a piece of blind and ignorant devotion. Josh 4.6. Deuteronomy.
32.7.
A man should be able to give some account of every thing that he does in Gods
service, and why and upon what account he does it; when they ask, you ought to
teach them.

Sect. 4.
Gods children have always made this their great care. Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
I know Abraham, that he will teach his children, etc. I know him, he is a
godly Man, he will not neglect so necessary and important a duty as this.
Abraham were not the man I took him for, indeed Abraham were not Abraham if he
would not make a conscience of teaching his children and his household after
him, that they might walk in Gods ways. Josh. 24.15.
Joshua is resolved upon the point, that whatever others did, he for his part
would worship the true God, and that none should nest under his roof, who would
not do so too. We see what care David had of his Family, Psalm. 101.6, 7.
when he professes that he who would not submit to Gods ways, to know and do
his will, should not tarry in his sight: Prove. 31.1.
Solomon's Mother was not wanting on her part, she taught him a good Lesson, if
he had had the grace to have followed it. What my Son! Prove. 4.3. Vide
Cartwright
and what the son of my womb! and what the son of my vows! Give not thy
strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which dectroyeth Kings; so did David.

Timothy was born of godly Parents, 2 Timothy 1.5. and 3.15.
as you may see, he had a good Mother, and a good Grandmother, and these
taught him the Scriptures from his youth.

The Elect Lady's care was, 2 John 4.
that her children might be found walking in the truth.

Sect. 5.
Parents and Masters are answerable for those miscarriages of their children,
into which they run for want of due instruction or correction. If the
Commandment be given to the Parents for their instruction, government, and
putting them upon pious duties, then at their hands will God exact an account
for that ignorance and misbehavior which is found in them. Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. Exodus
20
But we find God commanding them to instruct their Families, and to keep them
to his service; Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, thou, thy Son and
thy Daughter, thy Manservant and Maidservant, etc. The Command is given to the
Parent and Master, who are presumed to have authority enough to see their
Commands obeyed; and though the untaught and ungoverned Family should perish in
their sin, yet God will require their blood at their Parents and Masters hands.
Instances of Gods dealing with Parents for their neglect of this duty we have
in Eli, 1 Samuel 3.13. 1 Kings 1.5. Chrysostom. hom. de educat. lib.
and in David too.

Sect. 6.
This business in hand is a matter of the greatest concernment to them,
whatsoever be neglected, this should not; this is that unum necessarium,
without which they cannot be happy, as they may without other things. For,
first their souls are much more precious then their bodies; these are but the
caskets, those the Jewels; these are of the earth earthy, those are of heaven
heavenly; one of their souls weighs more then all the world; Many would, cannot
purchase it, there is no worldly things can be found sufficient for its exchange;
it cost more then so to redeem a soul. You are careful for their bodies, that
they want not food nor raiment, nor lodging, nor any thing that is needful: If
a bone be broken, how sollicitous are you to have it set? if a wound given, how
careful to have it cured? If a disease be growing on, how industrious are you
to prevent or remove it? and will you be so careful for their bodies, and do
nothing for their souls; will you have no regard, how blind, how lame, how
diseased, how naked and void of all good their souls are?

Secondly, Their future estate is more to be regarded then their present, this
is but for a moment, that to eternity; the miseries which they are subject to
here, are but such as are common to man, through measure tolerable; those
which in some your neglect, they may be subject to hereafter, will be
intolerable. The greatest happiness that you can procure for them here is but
transitory, and it is mixed with much sorrow: that whereof you deprive them by
want of instruction, is permanent, a full and perfect happiness without any
mixture of evil in it. It is an argument of the greatest love to provide best
for their better part. When Solomon would tell us how his Father instructed
him, he tells us also what the reason was that he was so careful of him; I was
my Fathers son, Prove. 4.3.
and the only beloved in the sight of my mother; true love, makes Parents
instruct their children in true Piety; the more they instruct them, the better
they love them. Its a foolish cockering love that makes us loath to trouble
their heads with the knowledge and practice of their duty: thus David loved
Adonijah, to his own and his Sons cost. David had more sons by Bathsheba, but
we read not that he took that pains to teach them, as he did Solomon; this was
his Darling, and the better he loved him, the more careful he was to teach him
in Gods ways.

But thirdly, if men be so careful to provide for their childrens welfare in
this world, now much more careful should they be to provide for their eternal
condition; you take much pains that they may live like men when you are dead,
and will you take no care nor pains that they may like like Saints, when they
are dead? You would have them live like men here, will you be content that they
should live like Devils hereafter! You provide for them riches which the rust
and moth does corrupt, and will you not provide for them more durable riches?
Aristippus was wont to advise Parents, that since our passage thorough this
world was like a voyage by Sea, they should provide something for their
children, that they might carry to the shore with them, in case they suffered
shipwracks; Cic. Paradox. 6. calc.
by which he meant knowledge and virtue; all other things may be lost in wrack,
but this cannot be lost; these will stick by us, when all other things forsake
us. When Demetrius besieged and sacked Megara, he asked Stilpon, whether he had
lost any thing? No, (says he) thy soldiers cannot plunder me of my virtue, and
for other things, I count the parting with them no loss. when Socrates was
asked his opinion what he thought of such a mighty Prince, whether he were not
the happiest man living? I do not know (says he) what stock of wisdom or
virtue he has. He that best instructs and brings up his children in their
youth, makes the best provision for them against their age.

Hence the Poet calls the institution of youth, Miserisque viatica canis, the
best provision for gray hairs. Pers. 5. Satyr. v. 65.
You must not neglect those fair advantages which God puts into your hand for
their outward estate: but your chief and greatest care should be for their
souls good. -- (...). Epict. Enchirid. c. 63.

What if thy child come not to be great nor rich in this world, yet he may be
an honest, gracious man, and rich toward God: but if thou suffer him to live
in ignorance of Religion, whatever thou providest for him else, in the end he
will be most miserable. Poor Lazarus would not change skins, though it were
full of sores, with rich Dives. Verily, our extraordinary diligence in making
temporal provision for our children, will rise in judgment against us for our
utter neglect of their eternal welfare.

Sect. 7.
This is the fittest season to instill knowledge into them, before their hearts
be corrupted with the pleasures, or ensnared with the profits of this world. If
you suffer those things to preingage them, it will be a harder matter to make
them unlearn evil, then it would have been to have made them learn that which
was good before. While they are young, their memories are best, their appetites
are strongest, their affections keen and eager; they are now apter to learn and
to take any impression you shall set upon them, now they must be followed
close. Pers. Sat. 3. v. Casaub. Plato 2. de legibus.
[Vdum and molle lutum es -- Nunc, nunc properand. etc. -- ] As age grows on,
they will be more hard to learn. They are now of an active disposition, they
find themselves employed in something. If you employ them not in what is good,
they will employ themselves in what is bad. Good things are as easily learnt as
bad, (were they but as diligently taught); a Catechize as easily learned as a
Ballad, or a tale of Robin Hood. Whatsoever you would have your children
excellent in, teach it them betimes. Heyl. Geog. in Russia.
In Russia they train up their children to shooting in their minority, and give
them nothing to eat till they can hit a white that is set before them. The
Baleant give them no meat, Flor. hist. l. 3. c. 8.
but what they can kill with their sling, [Cibum puer a Matre non accipit, nisi
quem ipsa monstrante percussit. -- ] time and use makes them Masters of their
Art. Much may be done with children ere we think fit to trouble them with such
things. They can learn to swear, and to profane the Sabbath, why might they
not as well be taught to read, to be catechized, to learn some choice
Scriptures by heart? I have heard of that Noble Lady, the now Lady Packington,
daughter of the Lord Keeper Coventry, that in her minority she was tied by the
strictness of her education to learn daily such a proportion of Scripture by
heart, before she should eat a bit of bread; by which custom and assiduity she
became in a short time so perfect in the Scripture, that she had a great part
of the Old Testament, and all the New so perfectly by heart, that she could
repeat any chapter backward or forward, tell you any particular verse or words,
where they were, what went before, and what followed after. Indeed she was a
living Concordance, the very Prodigy of Memory, whose excellencies in these
seize are almost beyond the belief of any, but of those who have seen or
heard her examined. Husbandmen know that they must not expect a good crop,
unless they sow in a right season. Youth is the time to have the seeds of grace
and godliness sown, else there is little hope of a good and a holy life.

Sect. 8.
Children are the seed-plot of the Church and Commonwealth; those who are now
children, will soon grow up to be men of action both in things concerning God
and their country. Such as they are when they cease to be children, such they
will be when they begin to be men. Those who spend their youth in ignorance,
idleness, naughtiness, what can you expect from them when they become men, but
to grow from bad to worse? As youth leaves them, manhood finds them; good, if
good; if bad, stark naught. What impressions are put upon wax when it is
melted, you shall find upon it when it is hardened. What you write upon white
paper, sticks there. What savor your vessels have when they are new, they
retain when they are old. What good you infuse into youth, it will relish on,
when it is ripened into age. The wise man gives counsel like himself, Train up,
(or catechize) a child in the way that he should go, Prove. 22.6.
and in his age he will no^ depart from it. It should be something to us to
consider what posterity we are like to leave behind us; and that we may labor
to make the generation to come happier then this, by giving our children better
instruction then (perhaps) we have had. Pythagoras was wont to say, Lilius
Gyrald. ^ymb. Pythanum propter opes.
that the main end of our begetting and bringing forth children should be^ that
we might leave those behind us who may serve God in their generation. When we
consider the trouble and miseries which our eyes have seen, we are ready to
wish and hope that our children may see better times. Good men will make good
times: Time is in it self nor good nor evil, but as the persons are who live in
them. Do your duty, and you may much promote your own desires: Labor to make
them more knowing men, and more obedient to God, and that will make better men,
and better men will make better times.

Sect. 9.
This will enable them to profit by the Sermons which they hear: And the want
of this is one main ground of that strange non-proficiency amongst men, that
live even under powerful Ministers. God has been exceedingly gracious in
giving his word a free passage, which is by many men set on with a great deal
of power and life; yet many even of such complain in the bitterness of their
souls, and say, Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed? In many such places, there is but little good done; and this
I conceive amongst others is not the smallest cause, that they who come to hear
the Word Preached, are in no measure prepared thereunto, by understanding the
Principles of Religion. If they understood beforehand what Justification,
Sanctification, Adoption, etc. were what the covenant of works, and the
covenant of grace were, then, they would be able to go along with us in what we
say: But being so arrantly ignorant of Fundamental necessary truths, we only
speak into the air, they give us the hearing, and they depart no wiser then
they came. A man would wonder else what shift many men could make to remain so
ignorant: who are like the Ectones, Heyl. Geo. in Lyvon.
the original inhabitants of Poland, who are diligent frequenters of the
Churches, but so extremely ignorant, that hardly one in a Village can say his
Pater Noster.

Should any of you hear a man make a learned Discourse concerning any point in
Geometry, Arithmetic, etc. you might admire what you did not understand: but
if you were beforehand instructed in the Principles of that Science, you would
then see the reason of what was spoken, your understandings would close with
the things delivered, and you would reap profit by that Discourse. So in this
case, were men better insighted into the Principles of Religion, we should soon
see better fruits of all our labors.

Sect. 10.
The want of this is the unhappy ground of that unstableness in the faith,
which to the reproach of our Religion, discovers it self so visibly amongst us
at this day. Ephesians. 4.14.
That of the Apostle is too apparently manifested amongst us, that many of us
are like children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive, which hinders their growing up into him in all things, who is
the head, even Christ. I find in story mention made of one Philetas Cous, Syms.
Chron. part 5. page 44.
an excellent Grammarian and Poet, [Master ^o Ptolomeus Philadelphus, that
great lover and promoter of Learning] but of so small and thin a body, that he
was fain to wear soles of lead upon his shoes, Non dubitamus, cur tot hereses
and nova dogmata locum passim inveniunt, causam vel maximam esse
catechizationis neglectum, etc. Act. Syn. od. sess. 15. Judic. Theol. Palate.
or else every blast of wind would overturn and blow him down. The reason why
so many are so easily tossed aside by every wind of Doctrine, is, because they
are not well bottomed, nor kept steady by the Principles of Religion. This is
the true ground why every new Doctrine finds so many sollowers, because they
were never established in the truth. We have seen many who have made fair show
for a time, readily embrace and admire any new Discoveries which have been
offered to them, under the specious vizor of Newlight. They have run thorough
all those new Modes of Religion which the Father of lies has presented them
withal, 1 John 2.19.
always liking that best which was newest, not finding where to rest their
feet, having once forsaken that good old way of Gospel Truth, wherein (indeed)
they were never thoroughly instructed. If they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us; but they went out that it might be made manifest
that they were not at all of us. This is the cause of those many sad breaches
grown in families to their utter ruin, while they run into several ways with
such eagerness and animosity, contending to maintain their several parties,
when it may be few of them have any competent knowledge of the Fundamentals of
Religion, and fewer have any true sense of the power of godliness upon their
hearts. When the ship wants ballast every gust of wind will overset it. When
the mind is void of serious knowledge, no wonder that errors creep into the
judgment, and looseness into the conversation. Col. 2.7, 8.
Those who are not rooted and grounded in Christ, will be easily spoiled
through Philosophy and vain deceit.

Sect. 11.
The eternal welfare of your families depends upon it. Joh. 17.3
This is life eternal to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. O that
you would give your thoughts liberty to expatiate in this wide field! That you
would seriously lay to heart what Heaven and Hell are, Vbi nec operosa actio,
nec requies desidiosa, laus erit sine fastidio, sine defectu, Aug.
how full of glory the one, how full of horror and amazedness the other!
Heaven, it is the throne of God, the purchase of Christ, the habitation of
Angels, the expectation of men, the envy of Devils. There Is the vision of God,
communion with all Saints, and an uninterrupted enjoyment of eternal rest.
There Is pure pleasure without pain, a continual day without night, perfect
holiness without sin. The good things which God has provided there for them
that know and love him, are so many, they cannot be numbered; so great, they
cannot be measured; so precious, they cannot be valued. They are as far beyond
our apprehension, as expression. 2 Cor. 12.4.
Who can declare that which Gods Spirit tells us is ineffable? Who can tell me
how much sweetness, Bern. in 11. of Cant. Omnes deliciae L^eus erit. Aust. ib
how much happiness is wrapped up in those few words, God shall be all in all;
your faith most make out what your reason cannot compass, and what the tongue
of men and Angels cannot express. [ -- (...). Nilus in sentent. Tom 1.
Orthodoxog. p. 181] And for Hell, the very name and notion of it is enough to
make a man's heart ache, and his sinews tremble* Esa. 66. ult.
There Is the worm that never dies, and the fire that never goes out; the worm
that never dies, is the gnawing and twinging, the horror and amazedness of the
conscience, which shall then reproach us for our neglect of knowledge and the
means of grace. When conscience remembers how many fair advantages we have
slipped of making our calling and election sure, how many invitations we have
slighted, and how much means we have neglected, then it will lay about it, and
torment the soul. Conscience may be dull and senseless here, and go sleeping to
Hell; but it comes no sooner there, but it is awakened to its cost. It
reproaches and reviles the sinner, and makes his condition so much the worse,
because he was the occasion of his own sufferings. [There's the fire that never
goes out] O dismal, dreadful fire! Fire without light, for there is utter
darkness in the midst of it; fire mixed with cold, for while the tongue burns,
the teeth chatter; fire without comfort, mixed with stifling choking brimstone.
Fire that will never want fuel to maintain it, there is much wood, and the
breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone kindling it. Esa. 30.33.
Who can endure to hold his finger in the fire but for a moment? How do we roar
and cry when we are but a little singed, scorched, burned? And if our material
fire be so irksome and intolerable, what will that keener and more subtle fire
be which will work upon the soul as well as upon the body! What will it be to
have fire accompanied with cold, and darkness, and brimstone?

What will it be to have our childrens beds made in the midst of this fire?
What will it be to have them lie for ever in these everlasting burnings? Vbi
nec tortores deficiunt, nec torti moriuntur, quibus sine fine more est, non
posse in cruciatibus mori. Aug. id.
where they shall be ever burning, and yet never consumed, always dying, and
yet never dead. To be without ease, and without hope, and all this in the
company, and under the power of so many hideous ugly fiends, Ad solatium
malevolentissimu^ damnationis suae, etc. Id.
whose only refreshment under their own torments will be to execute their wrath
and malice upon poor beguiled souls. O now you that have the bowels of Parents,
tell me, whether it be not a matter of concernment, to teach your children to
know God and Jesus Christ? Whether the joys of Heaven are not worth the having?
And the torments of Hell so inconsiderable, that it is not worth while to avoid
them? O do, do not betray your own flesh and blood, and those precious souls
which lodge in houses of clay, by your negligence, into those eternal flames,
nor bereave them of those eternal joys!

Sect. 12.
Their souls will bless you when they come to Heaven for all your care and
pains in sowing the seeds of Religion in their minds by a godly education. If
the Saints in Heaven shall know their former relations, (as it is probable) how
will your children then bless God for your conscientiousness in the discharge
of your duty, whereby they had the happiness of coming to the saving knowledge
of that God, whom now they shall enjoy to all eternity. On the other hand
consider how they will revile and curse you, if they meet you in Hell, whither
they are condemned (with you) through the neglect of your duties. Methinks I
see such a miserable soul casting balls of Hell fire into his fathers face, and
yelling out such hideous words, Cursed be the hour wherein I was conceived, and
the day wherein I was born thy child. Had thou done thy duty in instructing
me in the fear of God, and in the knowledge of his ways, I might have been a
glorious Saint in Heaven; whereas now, through thy neglect, I am become a
miserable firebrand in Hell. I had indeed from thee a temporary life (which I
had better never have enjoyed) but thou have betrayed me to an eternal death. I
am undone, undone for ever by thy perfidiousness, and thou who wast the father
of my body, have been the murderer of my soul. [ Perdidit nos aliena perfidia,
Parents sensimus parricidas, Austin. Ep. 23 ad Bonif. out of Cyprian in Epist.
de Lapsis] With what face can thou behold me frying upon these coals, to
which I am betrayed by thy unfatherly carelessness? Had I been thy slave, nay,
thy horse, thy dog, thou would have provided what had been fit for me, but
being thy child, thou have neglected me in that which most concerned me, my
soul. When Quintilius Varius had by his rashness and indiscretion lost three
Legions of his Masters the Emperor Augustus, in Germany; the Emperor was
observed to be long after very pensive, sometimes pulling off the hair from his
beard, sometimes beating his head in a frantic manner against the posts, and
to cry out. [Redde mihi Legiones Quintili Vari] Restore me my Legions which
thou have lost. How much more bitterly shall these undone creatures cry out to
their Parents in Hell, Reddite nobis animas, Restore us our souls which you
have lost. I have heard at many executions the dying Malefactors make sad
complaints against their Parents negligence in this kind, charging their blood
upon the not performance of their Parents duty. What may be expected from such
persons in the flames of Hell, where all manner of respect and love is banished?
I am apt to think that it will be a great part of the damneds Parents misery in
Hell, to hear the reproaches and revilings of their children, whom their
neglect of doing their duty has betrayed unto that place of torment.

Sect. 13.
You may then expect a blessing in them, and what they undertake, when they are
taught to obey for conscience sake. All other both natural and civil ties are
too weak to keep children to their duties, 2 Samuel 15
but this will do it. Absalom, though an own son, lifted up his hand against
David, a man after Gods heart, to destroy him: 1 Samuel 24.5, 6.
David durst not do so to Saul, a father in law, and a wicked tyrant, who
sought his life. What is the reason of the great disobedience and undutifulness
of children to their Parents, but that Parents are so careless of teaching them
to know God, and have not imprinted their duties upon their consciences, to
restrain them from such courses? I do not say, that all that are so taught are
obedient, and a comfort to their Parents; no, Grace is not (ex traduce) by
generation, no more then their souls. The Spirit blows where it lists; many
a gracious man has to his grief a graceless and stubborn child. But this I am
sure of, that they who neglect the performance of this duty toward their
children which God requires, cannot with any good confidence expect that duty
which their children owe to them; they only may expect it, who conscionably
make use of the means which God has appointed them.

Sect. 14.
You will much help forward the Minister in his public work, who shall but
labor in the fire, and take much pains to small purpose, if you assist not in
private. The children are yours, and you must not cast all the work upon the
Ministers backs, and you your selves not touch it with one of your fingers. It
is not one days instruction in a week, that will carry on the work; you must
take all occasions to put them on in private. There is no time wherein you may
not take some advantage to do them good; when thou sit in thine house,
Deuteronomy. 6.7.
when thou walk in the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.
This will advance them much; and you your selves shall find the profit on it.
Docendo discetis, (as one of the Fathers acknowledges of himself) While you
teach them, and hear them learn, you will learn with them, and imprint what you
have learned more lastingly in your memories.

Sect 15.
The very Heathens will rise up in judgment against you, Plato de legibus,
Plutar. de Ed. lib. Epict. Enchir. Pythag. Aurea carm. they had their (...) and
(...). Arrian, apud Epict. lib. 1. cap. 27.
and condemn you for your neglect of this duty. How exceeding careful the wiser
sort of them were in this particular, he that has but cast an eye into their
Writings, will easily perceive. They had their Manuals and Compendiums of their
doctrine to teach them their duty both to God and man; they had reduced their
doctrine to some few short heads, which their Scholars were to have perfectly
by heart. What a Pithy downright Catechism is that of the Poets.

[ -- Disciteque o miseri, etc. Pers. Sat. 3. v. 66. Vid. Casaub.
--
Quid sumus! quidnam victuri gignimur? Ordo
Quis datus, etc. -- ]
That every man should be able to give an account, What we are? What was the
end of our Creation? What is the brevity and unconstancy of life, and he
certainty of death? What, and how admirable Gods Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness, and Providence shines in the governing and ordering of the world?
What bounds we should put to our desires of earthly things? To what end and
purpose they are serviceable, and much more. Of what, many who profess
Christianity, can give but a slender account.

Philip of Macedon, Quintus Curtius Supplem. 1. cap.
having found the benefit of good education himself, was careful to provide the
best tutors for Alexander his son, especially Aristotle, by whose care and
industry he was so well improved, that it grew into question, whether Alexander
owed more to Philip who begat him, or to Aristotle who taught him?

The Persians were exceeding exact in teaching their children betimes, Xenoph.
de inst. Cyr. in princip.
they labored to prepossess their minds with good things before they were
poisoned with evil, as being rather desirous to see them do what was good, then
to punish them for doing amiss.

Nay, the very Turks themselves are exceeding careful of training up their
youth, Grand Signor. Seraglio, pub. by Mr. J. Greaves, p. 70, 71.
those especially that are to be for the more immediate service of the grand
Seigneur. The course that is taken with them so soon as they come into the
Seraglio, is admirable, and nothing resembling the barbarism of Turks, but
beseeming men of singular virtue and discipline; for they are exceeding well
tutored, and daily taught as well good fashion, and comely behavior, as they
are instructed in the rites and ceremonies of the Mohammedan Law, and whatsoever
else may tend to the enriching of their minds. What will such Christians be
able to answer for themselves at the day of Judgment, for their neglect of
this duty, wherein they see themselves outdone by the purblind Heathen?

I come now to the second Branch of the Exhortation, which is to children and
servants, to submit themselves to discipline, and to be willing to learn that
which conduces to their souls health. And that they may more cheerfully yield
up themselves to public and private instruction, I beseech them by the mercies
of God to consider.

Sect. 1.
Your eternal salvation depends upon your knowledge of, and faith in Christ;
what ways God has for those who dye in their infancy, we shall not be curious
to inquire, much less confident to determine: But for such as are come to the
use of reason, and to years of discretion, he saves none but such as can and do
act faith in Christ. Hos. 4.6.
How can you believe on him whom you do not know? Want of knowledge is
destructive to young as well as to old. If you reject knowledge, he will also
reject you. Either you have Parents that put you forward, or they do not; if
they do, you are bound to obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is good and
right. Ephesians. 6.1.
Disobedience to Parents in things which they command, agreeable to the mind of
God, is direct disobedience to God himself. If they be backward in their duty,
be not you backward in yours. Your souls are your own, and you must give an
account to God for them. God will require your blood (if you dye for want of
instruction) at your Parents hands, but you shall perish in your sins. Hell
torments will not be a jot the easier to you, because you come into them
through your Parents fault. If they be careless of your eternal welfare, you
had need to double your diligence, to make your calling and election sure. You
are put to your shifts to provide for your selves in your greatest concernment,
you must take the more pains. Are you so inconsiderable that your souls are not
worth the saving? why, of such is the kingdom of God.

Sect 2.
You were engaged hereunto by Baptism; your Baptismal Covenant engages you to
learn all things belonging to your souls health. You were baptized into the
name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and will you always be
ignorant, who, and what that Father, Son and holy Ghost are? And what each of
them does toward the promoting of your eternal welfare? Will you grow old in
the ignorance of that ordinance which you received so young, and render it
fruitless? You then renounced the world, the flesh, and the devil, Repete quid
interrogatus sis, recognosce quid responderis. tenetur vox tua in libro
viventium, presentibus Angelis locutus es. Amb. de initiand. c. 2.
and were dedicated unto Christ. What, will you live and dye in the ignorance
of him, into whose warfare you have engaged your selves! Remember what was asked
you, remember what you promised, what stipulation and covenant was made that
day between God and your souls. Your words were spoken in the presence of
Angels, and they are recorded in Heaven. If the children of Israel would be
asking their Parents what was the meaning of Circumcision and the Paschal Lamb,
those Sacraments under the Law; is it commendable for you to spend all your
days, and never inquire what is the end, use, nature of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, the Sacraments under the Gospel? I beseech you consider the vows of God
are upon you.

Sect. 3.
You have no assurance of your lives, but may be quickly taken away, and have
no long time to learn. What will become of you if you are called to an account
before you have learned what to plead for your Justification? I have heard of a
young man who being desirous to be instructed in Moral Philosophy, which is the
Doctrine of living well, was dissuaded from it; he was told he was too young,
in the flower and prime of his youth, to which such harsh rules were no way
suitable; he might apply himself to that hereafter. O! but (says he) what if I
dye before I be elder, what will become of me then? Think seriously on this,
the Charnel house has as many little Skuls as great ones in it: there are as
many young as old carried out to burying. We often see (as the Proverb is) the
old Camel carry the young Camels skin to market; Parents doing that office for
their Children, which in the course of Nature might be expected from the
Children to their Parents. If you were sure of long life, yet it were no wisdom
to put off this work to old age; you will be then harder to learn, your
avocations more, your hindrances greater: Besides, you must not put off sowing
your seed until it be time to reap. Since your time is uncertain, work while it
is to day; neglect not your season.

Sect. 4.
You have much to do in a little time: Ars longa, vita brevis; our life is but
short, but our lesson is long and difficult: A Christians task is never at an
end; so long as he lives he will have something to learn, or to learn better:
There be many things necessary to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto every good work. The sum of Christian Religion, though it may be
drawn into a short Catechism, yet it is of large extent: Every Article requires
an age to know it thoroughly. As there are many things to be known, so many of
them are very difficult, 1 Timothy 3.16.
the whole knowledge of the Gospel is a mystery, a great mystery, yea, beyond
all controversy, it is a great mystery. 2 Pet. 3.16.
There be many ((...)) things hard to be understood: And alas! our
apprehensions are but dull at spiritual, heavenly things. You are like vessels
that have but little mouths, which receive whatsoever is put into them
dropmeal Such vessels will be long in filling, there must be the greater
diligence, and continuance at the work.

Sect. 5.
You ought not to be admitted to the Lords Supper, until you have attained a
competent measure of knowledge; when you are grown up, you will take it ill to
be kept back from that spiritual banquet, but to admit you without knowledge,
is but to admit you to your own destruction, to invite you to poison instead of
meat, to admit you to eat and drink your own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. But of
this again hereafter. [ Nemo ex juvenibus ad Coenae communionem admittitur nisi
prius examinetur, an Mysterium hoc sacrum probe intelligat. Judic. Theol.
Helvet. Syn. Dodr. S. 15.]

Sect. 6.
You are free from some of those unjust prejudices which keep others from this
necessary work. It Is usual with some of riper years, when they are called upon
to be instructed, to break out, What do you make us children still? we are too
old to be catechized: What an irrational retortion and answer this is, we shall
consider in its proper place; but you, with whom we have now to do, have no
pretense to this plea. You are young, and none of us brought knowledge into the
world with him, but we must get it. It is not so much a shame to be ignorant,
as to continue so, when we have means and opportunities to learn. It cannot be
expected that any should know the things of God, till they be taught, and youth
is the fittest time to learn. You take it no disparagement to learn a Trade or
Mystery when you are young, why should you think it any to learn the great
Mystery of Godliness.

Sect. 7.
You are subject to stronger affections, passions, lusts, in your youth, and
therefore should more carefully lay in provisions against them. It Is a great
matter to abstain from the sin of youth, Magnum est a vitiis juventutis
abstinere. Amb. in obitu Valentin. to. 5. p. 107.

Grave est juveni cujus aetas est florulentior. Id.


and to renounce the vanity and folly of it in our very entrance into the
world. There is a great emphasis in the word, Wherewithal shall a Young man
cleanse his way, Psalm. 119.9. A Young Man, who is in the heat of blood, fullness
of strength, height of affections, and many times under the greatest lusts.
It Is a hard task for such a one to submit his ear to discipline, and to
conquer these corruptions, he had need to be more careful to fetch in strength,
Fretum adolescentiae. Florus. l. 1. c. 26.
and to arm himself against it. The Historian calls Youth [fretum] a troubled
and tempestuous Sea, when as a riper age, is but [Otium maris] a quiet and calm
Bay, a safer Harbor; in a quiet Sea, it is no such hard matter to steer and
govern the ship aright, Cum sit aetas lubrica fraenari ac regi debet. Lact.
but in a tempestuous and working Sea, it requires more care and diligence.
Youth is a slippery and unsteady age, and had need of much caution and
circumspection to restrain, and guide, and fix it. Upon this consideration St.
Ambrose thus read that place, Lubricae ac perplexae sunt viae juventutis, non
solum fragilitate lubricae aetatis prolabitur, sedet ignorantia mandatorum.
Amb. ibid.
Prove. 30.18* There be three things which be too wonderful, yea, four which I
know not, the way of an Eagle in the air, of a Serpent upon a rock, the way of
a Ship in the midst of the sea, and the ways of a Man in his Youth. Therefore
David was fervent in this prayer, Remember not the sins of my Youth, Ps. 25.7.
What through the giddiness and headiness of that age and what through that
ignorance which most commonly attends it, it is exceedingly apt to run into
error. What is the best means for a young man to cleanse and direct his ways?
why, by taking heed unto thy word. In the strength of this it was, that Joseph
repulsed the downright temptations of his lewd Mistress; How shall I do this
wickedness and sin against God. Genesis 39.9. It is this that gives the young man
knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1.4.

Sect. 8.
Knowledge when you have attained to it, puts an extraordinary luster and honor
upon you, and of all knowledge, this divine and saving knowledge most. All
other knowledge is but blindness and ignorance in comparison of knowing Jesus
Christ and him crucified. Other knowledge puffs up but the knowledge of the
things of God, edifieth. In those places before mentioned, where God commanded
them to teach their children his statutes and his ways, he tells them that this
shall be as front lets and bracelets, it shall be their greatest ornament. This
made David wiser then his Teachers, Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100.
then his Enemies, then his Ancients, because Gods Testimonies were his
continual study and meditation. What a sweet savor did Josiah leave behind him,
who at eight years old knew the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his
Father, 2 Kings 22, 23, chap.
entered into covenant with God, reformed Religion, destroyed Idolatry, and
turned not aside, either to the right hand or to the left. 2 Timothy 3.14.
What an honor it was to Timothy that he was instructed in the Scriptures from
a very child? 1 Kin. 18.12. Am 1. ubi supra.
To Obadiah, That he seared the Lord from his youth? to Valentinian the
Emperor, that he was so good, at such an age? How precious are the memories of
Edward the Sixth, Vid. their lives.
and the young Lord Harrington upon this account? as wickedness in gray hairs
is double iniquity, so piety in young men is double gilt; its like apples of
gold in pictures of silver.

Sect. 9.
Lastly, You are growing up toward the having of children and families your
selves how will you be able to teach them their duties then, if you be ignorant
of your own now? And here let me add to all that has been said before, that it
is a sad thing to see young people thrusting themselves into the world, and
taking upon them the government of Children and Families, who never yet had any
acquaintance with God, nor know any thing of the Principles of Religion! who
are usually very sollicitous what Portion they shall have, what Jointure they
shall have, but never enquire what abilities they have to discharge the Duties
of those Family-relations which they are engaging to; these things never come
into their thoughts. It was said of Herod, that it was better being his Hog
then his Child, which may be truly said of such persons; They know how to feed
their Hogs but not to breed their Children. Many men deal worse with their
Children then they do with their Beasts; they will be at any charge to have a
Horse managed, a Dog or a Hawk well trained but not to have their Children
taught. They would have a good Carter, a good Shepherd, a good Bailiff, what
wages soever they gave them; but any Schoolmaster is good enough, if he be but
cheap enough. Any drunken vicious Sot, shall sooner have their Children, and
their good will, then the sobrest man and the best Scholar in the world, if he
will teach, that is, undo them, but three pence cheaper.

Diogenes was wont to say, That it was better be some man's sheep then his Son:
He will provide a good Shepherd for his sheep, but cares not to whom he
commits the tutelage of his Child. One told Hyperides, an Orator of Greece
that he had sent his Son to travel, and had sent one of his Slaves along with
him to be his Governor and Tutor in his travels; Its well done said he, for now
instead of one Slave thou shall receive twain. Such another wise Wiggin,
brought his Son to Aristippus, and demanded of him what he should give him to
read Philosophy to his Son: Why, says he, you shall give me a hundred Crowns:
O! says the other, that will buy me a Slave; yes, answered Aristippus, so it
may, and then thou may have two Slaves, one whom thou have bought for thy
Hundred Crowns, and another of thy Son, whom thou will not be at charge to have
taught. To conclude, take heed, lest by rushing into a married condition
without any ability or inclination to teach those whom God has given you, you
bring out children for the destroyer. In some Protestant Churches there are
none permitted to be married, Judic. Theol. Helvet. in in Dor.
till they have first given their Minister an account of their knowledge of,
and proficiency in the Doctrine of the Christian Faith. Sponsi non
copulabuntur, nisi privatim pastoribus, suos in Religione profectus satis
comprobaverint. Act Syn. Not. Dordrect. sess. 15. Sent. Theol. Hassior. juxta
finem] this want of instruction makes many Parents deal with their Children, as
the great Duke of Muscovy deals with his Subjects, who will not suffer any of
them to be instructed, Heyl. Geog. in Russia.
least they should be wiser then himself* who are by this means bred up in such
lamentable ignorance, that when they are asked any serious question, satisfy
themselves in saying, God and our Great Duke can tell.

But as Solomon says, Eccles. 11.4.
He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds
shall not reap. Prove. 26.13.
And the sluggard cries there is a Lion in the way. He that has no mind to
any work, will never want frivolous pretenses and excuses, to take him off. So
in this case, some are apt to plead

This is a new way,

1. name and thing, Catechizing, frequently mentioned and pressed upon us in
Scripture. Pro. 22.6
Train up a child in his youth, (...) Imbuere, docere, prima documenta dare
paulatim and paulatim, ut ferri possit. Rab. Dav. in lib. Rad. Hence (...),
with them, signifies, Chatechesis, chatechismus, rudimenta, initiatio. Mercer
in Pagnin.
and in his age he shall not depart from it. Train up the word is Catechize, as
the margin of our Bibles renders it. Teach a child, according to his way, or
in such a way and manner as he is capable to bear, that is, by little and
little.

A word very usual also in the New Testament, (...). Steph. in verb. (...).
Luke 1.4. That thou might know the certainty of those things wherein thou
have been instructed, or catechized. Act. 18.25. This man (Apollos) was
instructed in the way of the Lord. 1 Cor. 14.19. That I may iustruct others.
And many other Texts too tedious to recite; in all which places it peculiarly
signifies to teach the Principles and fundamentals of Christian Religion (by
word of mouth) and therefore this is no new thing. It was a constant practice
in the primitive times, who had their Chatechists, and their Chatechumens;
those whose office it was to instruct them who were newly converted, and but
raw in the Faith. (...). Magist. Hier. de script. Eccles.
Clemens Alexandrinus (to pass by others) who lived near to the Apostles, was a
Chatechist in the Church of Alexandria, and upon this occasion wrote his
Poedagogus: Their peculiar office was to instruct young Christians in the
Articles of the Christian Faith, and grounds of Religion, until they were fit
to partake of those heavenly mysteries in the Lords Supper. The Liturgy of our
Church enjoined that all should be instructed in the Faith, and able to give an
account of it before they were admitted to the Lords Table.

2 And for your Forefathers; what if they lived and died in ignorance, does
that make ignorance the more excusable or commendable? If they were saved, I
dare boldly say, that it was not their ignorance that saved them; if they
perished through ignorance, have you such an opinion of, and love to them and
their example, that you are willing to go to hell with them for company? This
were to do, as I read, that Roboald, once a King in West-Freezland did, Heyl.
Geog. East-freizl. in Germ.
who being overcome by Charles the Great, was persuaded by him to receive the
Christian Faith, and the Sacrament of Baptism; But being told that his Friends
and Kinsfolks were in Hell, because they were no Christians; neither will I
(said he) be of that profession, for I love to be among my Kindred. How wisely
he resolved, I leave you to judge.

Object. 2. But I am ignorant, and cannot answer.

Answ. You had the more need to learn; the most learned was ignorant, until he
were taught: Ignorance is the high road to ruin; and to refuse instruction is
not the way to cure your ignorance, but to continue and increase it.

Object. 3. I am ashamed.

Answ. You should never be ashamed of doing that which God requires; you should
be ashamed of nothing but sin; are you ashamed to be good? are you not ashamed
to be called a Christian, and will you be ashamed to learn what Christ is, and
what he has done for your soul? Are you ashamed to follow the examples of all
Christians of all ages? will you be ashamed to go to heaven? Matt. ^^ 38.
remember what it is to be ashamed of Christ and his ways; are you not ashamed
of your filthy ignorance, and will you be ashamed to use the means to cure it.
But yet where there is an unconquerable bashfulness (which yet in this case
should be labored against) there may be means found to instruct such in a less
public way.

Object 4. But Catechizing is for children; we are grown up to be of men's and
women's estate

Answ. If you have not yet learned, it is more then time to begin now. Your age
is no presciption against a duty that God requires: You should rather bemoan
your misspent youth, and redeem your lost time, then plead it in Bar against
your future knowledge; do you ever intend to learn or no? if not, you will
unavoidably perish in your ignorance; if you do, then begin while you have time
and opportunities and means offered you. There be children in understanding as
well as children in age, and those need instruction as well, Muscul. in Ps.
19.7.
or rather more then these. Of old, not young children only, but those of
riper years, if ignorant, were to be catechized. In those places before
instanced, they that were able to ask a reason of every piece of Gods service,
were to be instructed, and these were past children. The (Chatechumens) or
persons to be catechized, mentioned above, were all such as were converted to
the faith, whether young or old, in which form they continued till they were
fully instructed in Christian Religion, and fitted for the highest Ordinances.

Object. But what is this but to teach children by roat (like Parots) what they
do not understand.

Answ. It is not the bare saying of a Catechism by heart, but the understanding
it, that we mainly drive at; we shall labor to make them understand it as far
as they are capable; though some may not be able to understand it, others are^
2. Though they, who are very young, can but say it, yet as age and discretion
come on, they will increase in knowledge. He that now only learned, may come in
a little time to understand the meaning on it: But he will never understand, who
never learned. There he some terms of Art, in all Sciences, which the learner
must get, though he understand them not; when he comes to make use of them,
then he will understand them.

Object 6. What is this, but to take Gods work out of his hand, whose work it
is to teach, and who has promised that in Gospel times, we shall be all taught
of God.

Answ. God in this, as usually in other things, works by means; he teaches us
by the Ministry of men. This reason is as much against Preaching as
Catechizing. We might expect such an Objection from super-Ordinance men, and to
them we would suit another Answer: But not from them who acknowledge Gods
Ordinances; those who are taught by Gods Ministers, according to Gods Commands,
Rules, and Directions, those God teaches. We take not Gods work out of his
hand, but (like his Ushers) we teach under him and or him. By this time (I
hope) you that are Parents and Masters, see the convenience, excellency, and
necessity, of instructing your Families; and Children, and Servants see that it
is their duty, and for their great advantage to learn.

I come now to the last stage of my intended journey upon this subject, Branch
of Exhortation.
which is to press all sorts of people, of what age or degree soever, to a
cheerful submission to this necessary work of instruction in the fundamentals
of Religion. Not that I intend the bringing of the aged to public Catechizing
(though I shall show you anon what the Reformed Churches think fit in this
case) but that they would submit to private personal instruction in the points
which be necessarily to be known for their salvation. I easily foresee the
difficulty of the work which I have in hand, against which flesh and blood will
undoubtedly make head.

For first, there is naturally a willingness in men's hearts to conceal their
miserable ignorance, whereof they would not be thought guilty: We desire to
hide our spiritual defects as well as our natural ones. The ignorant as well as
the profane, hates the light that he may not be discovered.

Secondly, We shall meet with the horrid pride (which too often accompanies
such black ignorance) of those who think themselves too wise to learn; of whom
I may say, as it was said of others in the like case; they might have attained
to a good stock of knowledge, if they had not thought themselves wise enough
too soon. There is no greater enemy to knowledge, then presuming ignorance;
Multi ad sapientiae vestigium pervenissent, nisi se jam pervenisse putassent.
Plin.
Pride and self conceit bar the door against instruction: Those who think
themselves rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing, when they
are poor, and naked, and miserable, are hardliest convinced of their sad
condition, Rev. 3.17. Isa. 47.10. Prove. 12.1.

Thirdly, The Devil will never be wanting with all hi^ skill, malice and
interest, to divert or binder a work so directly tending to the overthrow of
his Kingdom. We have an essay of his good will to works of this nature, Acts 19
^8, 20, 21. when the word of God began to be manifested, and to prevail with
some to bring them out of his power, he surs up Demetrius, who put the people
in an uproar against Paul; where, had not providence diverted their fury, he
might have been torn to pieces amongst them. What between these several
oppositions, which we easily forecast, and others which we cannot so readily
see, we may say as Paul did, that we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against Principalities, etc. But be the opposition what it will, Gods mind must
not be concealed, nor our duties undiscovered, for fear of displeasing the
Devil and his Partisans. If it appear not to be Gods mind, we leave you to your
liberty: but if it be, then whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear,
we must lay it before you. And I hope that God will so effectually convince you
of your duties in this particular, that none shall be able to open his mouth
against it, nor refuse it, unless it be such as apprehend not the benefit of
it, or wilfully shut their eyes against the clear light of Scripture.

To such I shall only propose these ensuing considerations, which by Gods
grace, may serve to quicken them to their Duty.

Sect. 1.
Ignorance is a damning sin in all the mind without knowledge is not good it
darkens the understanding, Prove. 19.2. Ephesians. 4.18. Isa. 5.13. Hos. 4.1. Job
21.14.
and alienates from the life of God; this is one main ground of Gods
controversy against a Land, when they have no knowledge. It is a character of
the worst of men, not to desire the knowledge of his ways: But it is much worse
in aged persons, who have had more time and opportunities to learn. Job 32.7, 9.
Days should speak* and the multitude of years should teach wisdom; and it is a
reproach when the aged do not understand. Deuteronomy. 32.7. 1 Cor. 14.20.
At your mouths the younger sort should enquire for instruction, and if you be
ignorant what do they but enquire of an Idol that has a mouth and speaks not?
St. 1 Epist. 2.13.
John presumes that those who are of riper years understand the mysteries of
Religion; I have written to you Fathers, because ye have knewn him that was
from the beginning. You look for reverence because of your age, Prove. 16.31.
but gray hairs are an honor only in the way of righteousness, otherwise they
are a reproach to you; Eccles. 4.13.
for a poor and wise child is better then an old and foolish King that will not
be admonished. The Son of Syrach has an excellent saying to this purpose;
though the Book be Apocriphal, Eccles. 25.4, 5, 6.
the words are Canonical, If thou have gathered nothing in thy youth, how can
thou find any thing in thine age. Oh! how comely a thing is judgment for gray
hairs, and for ancient men to know counsel? Oh! how comely is the wisdom of old
men, and understanding and counsel to men of honor? Much experience is the
crown of old men, and the fear of God is their glory. What a shame is it for
men to have spent the greatest part of their time, and not know the end for
which they were made, nor (but by roat) who made them? What an incongruous
thing it is, to profess an expectation of salvation by Christ at your
approaching death, when you can give no account who that Christ is, or what he
has done for you more then any other has done? To profess your selves
Christians, and resolved to die in the Christian Faith, and yet to live and die
in an utter ignorance of him, and of the saving benefits of his death? What a
shame would it be to see your selves outdone by your children, who in a little
time will be able (through Gods blessing) to give a better account of their
Faith and Hope then you can, unless you (who are yet ignorant) will be willing
to be taught. Wisdom cries after you, and upbraids you with your aged
ignorance, Prove. 1.21.
How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in
their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?

Sect. 2.
You have reason to expect but little time more before you are called to your
great account; you have but a little time more to learn in. Young men may die,
old men must. You have one foot in the grave already; much of your sand is run,
your day is far spent, your sun draws low, and is near to setting. You must not
expect your shadow to go back; 2 Kings 20.11.
as once it did on the Dial of Ahaz; nor your sun to stand still, as that in
the firmament did in the days of Joshua. Josh. 10.12, 13.
He who has trifled out the morning, had need to mend his pace in the
afternoon, if he would compass his journey with security and comfort. Walk
apace while your light lasts; work hard while you have day, Joh. 19.4.
Eccles. 9.10.
for the night comes when no man can work. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do,
do it with all thy might, for there is no work, nor knowledge, nor aevice in
the grave whether thou art going. Now is the season of getting the oil of
saving knowledge into thy vessel, if thou would have thy lamp shine, when the
Bridegroom comes. Mat. 25. Job 36.12 v. Merc. in loc.
He that opens his ears to discipline shall spend his years in prosperity,
but he that will not hear (and obey) shall fall by the sword ( i.e. miserably)
and shall dye without knowledge: Those who affect ignorance, ignorance shall be
their ruin. It Is a heavy curse when God gives up them who refuse instruction,
to dye without knowledge. Above all take heed of putting off this business to a
further time; Parce tempori. Stoicorum praecept.
Gods time is the present time. To day if you will hear my voice Its good doing
Gods work in Gods time. Procrastination and putting off our duties to another
day, Procrastinatio semper luctatur cum damnis.
is the great bane of souls. Many resolve to learn what is needful for
salvation, and to do what is needful to be done, but hereafter: at present they
have some other small occasions, to morrow is a new day, Cras hoc fiet, Idem
cras fiet; jam cras hesternum heu! confumpsimus; ecce aliud cras, egerit hos
annos. Persius.
they have time enough before them. O but deceive not thy soul, with a false
account; to day is thine, to morrow is not. Will thou mispend that time which
thou have, and dispose of that which thou may never live to see? Thou may
be dead before to morrow, or if thou live, yet thou will be putting off the
work till to morrow still: to morrow has no end; every day has a morrow
behind it, whither, when we have caught the trick on it, we shall cast all our
business. He that puts off his business till to morrow, will ever come a day
behind his work: Frustra sectabere canthum.

Cum rota superior curras and inane secundo. id. at. 5.


as the hinder wheel of the Coach, though it moves as fast as the former, yet
it never catches him, it is behind still: There is no greater impediment to a
good life, then neglecting the present seasons, to resolve what we will do to
morrow. Delays do not only lose time, but render us more unfit every day then
other for our work. If to morrow be a convenient time, how much more to day,
that thou may go on to morrow, and not while it off to the third day. [(...),
etc. Arrian. Epict. l. 4 c. 1.2. in fine]

Sect. 3.
The best Christians are capable of improvement. I am well assured that there
are diverse amongst you who are (in your proportions) well instructed to the
Kingdom of heaven, who are grown men in Christ, and able to render a good
account of the hope that is in you, yet such ought not to withdraw themselves
from this necessary work.

1. Because your withdrawing would be a pretense for those to refuse, who have
most need of instruction. Others will pretend to that knowledge which they have
not, when they see that your knowledge is an excuse for not submitting your
selves to Gods ways

2. Of all men you have least reason to refuse it; of all Scholars they should
be ready to stand forth to trial, who are best able to give an account of the
spending of their time. It is the Banckrupt only who is afraid of having his
estate looked into.

3. He that has most knowledge, has yet many things to learn. There is a
growth, 2 Pet. 3.18.
as in Grace, so in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy
3.15. 1 Timothy 4.15.
Though Timothy was instructed in the Scriptures from his very youth, yet he
was to give attendance to reading and meditation, and to continue in so doing,
that his profiting might appear to all. In the Scriptures, a Lamb may wade, and
an Elephant may swim. Heb. 5.12.
There is meat for strong men, as well as milk for Babes. There be some easier
truths for the less learned, and some harder to exercise the understanding of
more knowing men. Ephesians. 2.22. Heb. 6.1.
Our Christian Faith is a spiritual building, where it is not enough to lay a
good foundation, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
but to go on to perfection. The says of the Thessalonians was such, that it
was a great support to Paul in his afflictions; but yet there was something
lacking in their faith, which he desired to supply by personal instruction.

But suppose your knowledge to be more then it is, yet you may want quickening
and liveliness to the exercise of your knowledge; Iron sharpens iron, Prove.
27.17.
and the countenance of a man his friend; as by whetting one iron against
another, that which was dull gets a better edge: So by familiar and friendly
conference (especially with those whose knowledge is greater) your parts grow
more vigorous and active. The learnedest men may gain much by discourse and
imparting themselves, one to another, if they could not add to one another
knowledge, yet they may warm one another hearts. Holy conference is a great
improvement both of parts and piety: Every Christians experience may (I
presume) seal this truth, we often meet with good old Christians, whom, though
we be able to teach, yet we have from them some such savory ex ressions as much
affect our hearts, and quicken us to our Duties. There be many advantages which
an humble Christian may gain by his frequent and familiar discourses with his
faithful Pastor, besides the increase of his knowledge, which yet is no small
nor contemptible benefit. Act. 18.24, 26.
Apollos himself, though mighty in the Scriptures learnt much by conference
with Aquila and Priscida.

Sect. 4.
There be very many duties which God require of you in your particular
standings and relations, which you are altogether unable to discharge, till you
be thoroughly instructed in the business of Religion. Your several Relations
into which God has cast you, have their several Duties to which you are
obliged.

In your Families you are Husbands, Wives Parents, Masters and to the discharge
of every one of these Relations aright, there is need of much holy skill.
Profane persons never heed it, ignorant persons cannot perform it; they can
neither pray with them, nor for them, nor instruct, nor correct them according
to the mind of God, which they are ignorant of.

As you are members of civil Societies you have Duties to perform, which you
can never do aright, till you do them upon Scripture grounds, To. 13 5.
and have learned to obey for conscience sake.

As you are members of a Church, and are in Brotherly communion with others;
Mat. 18.15.
there be duties too of admonition, instruction, exhortation, etc. which will
seem uncouth, and be unfeasable till your mind be enlightened, and your hearts
warmed with this heavenly knowledge. Men may make a great noise and flourish in
the world, who have really little or no worth in them. But the true trial of a
Christians excellency consists much in the faithful discharge of the duties of
his particular Calling and Relations.

Sect. 5.
Christians are bound to this mutual and reciprocal act of teaching and
exhorting one another, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11: Heb. 3.13 Heb. 10.25.
of building up one another in the faith of the Gospel; as you are bound to
instruct and exhort others so to submit to the instruction and admonition of
others (though private Christians) how much more should you be ready to learn
of those who are set over you in things appertaining to your souls, and
admonish you, whom you ought highly to prize for their works sake The Apostle
urges this argument in that 1 Thessalonians. 5 12, 13.

Sect. 6.
You are bound to render a reason of the hope that is in you, 1 Pet. 3.15.
to every one that asks it; Not that it is expected that every Christian be
able to give an exact account of every article of Faith, and of all the
subtilties that are about it: or that he is bound at all times, in all places,
in all companies, upon all occasions to give an account of his faith and hope
to every captious Questionist; But when he is fairly called thereunto, and the
glory of God, and the good (and confirmation) of his Brethren requires it. In
such cases, Luke 12.8, 9.
he ought boldly to make profession of his Faith, and to defend it by all the
arguments he can, though it should bring him into trouble. How much more ready
should you be to do it, Act. 19.8
to those who enquire into your faith, not to betray, nor persecute you, but to
instruct, establish, confirm you, and to supply what is lacking in your Faith.

Sect. 7.
The want of this is the reason why we have so many titular Christians, who
enjoy the name of Christians; but are utterly ignorant of the mystery of
godliness, it is an unseemly and unworthy thing, Indignissimum est si ejus
nesciamus leges and placita cujus tamen nomine and professione censemur.
Bulling. in 1 Pet. 3.5
that we should be ignorant of his Laws and Ordinances whose Disciples we would
be reckoned. I shall give you my meaning in the words of a late learned
Minister of our own, now with God; who having admired Gods goodness in giving
(...) the glorious Gospel, (...). 48. to 55.
which has now so long shone so clearly amongst us, goes on to bewail, that
after such rich enjoyments of the means of knowledge, there should be so many
thousands amongst us, who being asked a reason of the hope that is in them,
cannot speak tolerable sense, why they are Christians rather then professed
Infidels: That there should be whole Parishes who cannot afford one wise word
toward the defense of our most holy Profession; that many who will take it very
ill if they be not accounted as good Christians as the best, should think no
otherways of Christ then some do of St. Patrick, and S. David, and other of the
Saints of their own Countries. He goes on to bemoan that dismal fog of Popery,
which does yet darken this Island; Popery which few men think of, viz. that
blind, absurd, implicit Faith of believing as the Church believes. There is
not (says he) a pin to choose between him that believes in gross what the
Church of England beleives; and him that beleives as the Synagogue of Satan,
the Church of Rome believes, if neither know any thing explicitly what either
Church believes. And concludes to our present purpose, I see no hope but the
Colliers Faith will have the greatest number of Professors, whilst accurate
Catechizing of all sorts of people, which did so much good in the Cognitio and
scientia Christi and Evangelii olim Christiano populo multo perspectior fuit
quam hodie. Id. ut supra.
Primitive times is so generally neglected.

Sect. 8.
You cannot with any color of reason expect to be made partakers of the
sealing Ordinances without knowledge; this is one main thing wherein the trial
of your fitness is to be made, whether or no you discern the Lords body. If you
eat and drink without knowledge, you eat it undiscerningly (...) if you eat
undiscerningly, you eat unworthily; and if you eat unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.
you eat and drink your own damnation. In the Synod of Dort it was thought fit,
that all that brought their children to baptism, Non admittitur testis
Baptismi, etc.
should give an account of their faith and knowledge, before their children were
baptized, and that none should be a witness at the baptizing of an Infant, who
were not first examined concerning the nature of that Sacrament, and the Office
and Duty of a Witness. And for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they judge
that none should be admitted to it, but those who first make a public
profession of their Faith before the whole Congregation. [ Ad coenae Dominicae
usum, nemo admittetur, nisi qui Doctrinam Chatecheticam probe teneat* and fidei
suae rationem coram tota Eccl^sia public reddat. Judic: Hassio. Theol:] Our
Liturgy enjoined, not only Parents and Masters to cause their Children,
Servants and Apprentices, to attend d^ligently and obediently upon public
Catechizing, until they had learned the Catechism appointed; Rubric for
Confirm.
but also strictly forbids to admit any to the Commu^ion, until such time as
they could say the Catechism, and were confirmed. Ignorance as well as scandal
was ever reckoned a bar sufficient to keep from the Sacrament.

Sect. 9.
Ministers are to take care of all the flock, Act. 20.28.
over which God has made them overseers; Elder people are either members of
the several flocks or no; if not, then these are as sheep without a shepherd;
if so, then they are not to exempt themselves from that care which we are
obliged to take of the whole flock. The sheep which withdraw themselves from
their shepherds care, are manifestly exposed to the worrying of the ravening
Wolf.

Sect. 10
Ministers are to give an account to God for their people; Heb. 13.27.
which when I seriously consider, I profess my sinews are loosened, and my
joints tremble, to think what an account we have to make to God. I have
sometimes wondered at the self-denying modesty of those times, when Gregory^
Naziene^ Ambrose, In their Lives printed before their Works.
and others, being called to be Bishops, hid themselves, and fled away from
such high employment. But when I sadly consider the weight of the Ministerial
employment, and the account that must be given to God for the flock, I wonder
that more do not fly from it. And if they must give an account to God for you,
it is but reasonable that they take an account of you. God has made us
Stewards in his house, it is a great honor, but withal a great trust. If a
Noble man will exact an account of all the business of his family at his
Stewards hands, it must be necessarily implied, that others shall give up their
account to him, else how shall he be accountable to his Lord? If we must be
called to an account for your proficiency, we may justly call you to an account
about it. O that you would help us to give up our account, that we may do it
with joy and not with grief, for that will be unprofitable for you. 1 Thessalonians.
2.19.
A thriving people are (here) a Ministers crown and joy, and will be much more
so, when he is to give up his account in the day of Jesus Christ. What a
comfort will it be when God calls a Minister to reckoning for his employment,
if he can bring with him many precious souls, which he has by his Ministry
converted, strengthened, confirmed; and can say in the language of the great
Shepherd of our fouls, Behold, here am I, Isa. 8.18.
and the children which the Lord has given me. When God shall ask him as Esau
did Jacob, Genesis 33.5.
Who are these with thee? he can cheerfully answer as Jacob did, These are the
children that God has graciously given to thy servant in the exercise of his
Ministry.

On the other hand, what a grief will it be to a Minister when God shall call
him to an account of his employment, that in the bitterness of his spirit he
must return such an answer as this; Lord, I have preached in vain, I have
labored in vain, I have stretched out my hands all my life long to a rebellious
people: I have spoken to them the great things of thy Law, but they have
accounted them a vain thing: I would have healed them and they would not be
healed, I would have gathered them, and they would not be gathered: I have
piped to them and they have not danced; I have mourned for them, but they have
not wept. I have laid thy Law before them, but they have not trembled: I have
preached the Gospel to them, but they have not believed. Lord! thou know how
I have daily bended my knees to thee in prayer for them, I have spent my
strength and time in preaching to them: I have watched for them when they
slept, and labored night and day to bring them to the knowledge of Jesus
Christ: I would have instructed them; but they would not learn, but they have
continued proud and peevish, and stubborn, and ignorant, and refuse
instruction. Good friends, take heed and be well advised, such an account,
would neither be to a Ministers comfort, nor to a peoples profit.

Sect. 11.
The concurrent consent of all Protestant Divines, Synod. of Dort. ses. 15.
not only singly considered and dispersed (which would be too tedious to
recite) but as united into one body, in the most considerable Assembly that
has been of the Protestants since the Reformation. Where, though some thought
it would be a difficult work to bring ancient people to be publicly
catechized, especially in the first setting this unusual work on foot, unless
they would voluntarily submit themselves thereunto; yet they all agree in this,
that Parents and Masters ought to be constantly present at the public
Catechizing their Children and Families, that so they may the better take
notice of their proficiency, and know how either to encourage or reprehend them
accordingly, and be hereby the better enabled to teach them themselves in
private. And further, that they ought to submit themselves to trial; if not
public (as some noble persons had done, to the great advantage of the Church
of God) yet that they would be content to learn in private (which is all that
we now press, and) which they all consent, we may exact when they come to have
their children baptized, or to be made partakers of the Lords Supper.

Sect. 12.
It was the practice of the Minister of the Church of Empden, Ibid.
once a year to visit every house, and to exhort Parents, Children and all the
Household to their Duties, and chiefly that they continued in the duty of
catechizing. St. In Vit. Aug. c. 7.
Austin was wont to teach publicly in the Church, and privately, in particular
private houses, as he could meet with occasion to instruct his people. [Docebat
ac praedicabat public and privatim, in domo, and in ecclesia, verbum Dei.]
Act. 2.46. and 5.42. and 20.20.
It Is a frequent expression of the Apostles that he taught them in the
mysteries of the Gospel, not only publicly, but from house to house; he
taught them not only in the Temple, at their general meetings, but from house
to house, in private too, as opportunity was offered him: Private, domestical,
personal instruction is necessary and exceeding useful, whilst it is done in
subordination and subserviency, not in opposition to the work of public
teaching. But by the way, those words [from house to house] may bear another
sense. The Church of God at Jerusalem, was now so great, and the members of it
so many, Beza in Act. 2.46. (...).
that they could not meet in one place for the service of God, and the
participation of Ordinances: That Mother Church sent out (as it were) Colonies;
they divided themselves into more Congregations, which met at several places,
houses, and so the Apostles preaching from house to house, might be but his
taking care of, and instructing these several new planted Churches in the
doctrine of the Gospel. But I pass that.

Sect. 13.
How many have made sad complaints against their former Ministers that they
were ignorant, and unable, or lazy, careless and negligent in instructing them
in the ways that tend to life? If now they may have help and means that way, by
such as beseech them to accept of their help; if now, I say, they refuse
neglect, and contemn that motion, it will be more then suspicious, that it was
not out of conscience and desire to be better instructed that they sought their
removal, but for the revenging of some old grudge, or for the obtaining of some
base carnal, sordid, temporal advantage of their own. Where such rotten
principles set men on work it is no wonder that they remain as bad as ever. It
is just with God to render that Ministry unsuccesful to them, who never sought
it for the subduing, but for the gratifying of their lusts.

Sect. 14.
The saving knowledge of Jesus Christ will enable you to undervalue all these
sublunary things, and makes abundant recompense for the want of them. The
former of these is clear from the Apostles judgment and practice, 1 Cor. 2.2.
who contented himself with the knowledge of Jesus Christ as with the richest
treasure; yea, he counted all things but loss and dung for the excellency of
the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord. Phil. 3.8.
The latter is as manifest as the former, in this, that when others comfort
themselves in their corn, and wine, and oil; when they glory in their Houses,
Lands, Friends, Revenews, Rents; he whose soul is enlightened from above, can
glory in the Lord, and in the knowledge of his Name; which overweighs them all.
When the King of Spains Herald (its a known story) had proclaimed all his
Masters swelling titles, King of Spain, and Arragon, King of Naples and
Jerusalem, etc. The King of France his Herald answers him, by proclaiming his
Master as often King of France, King of France; intimating that that one
Kingdom of France, was worth all the Dominions of the proud Spaniard. When
carnal men have cracked of all their earthly Privileges, prerogatives and
enjoyments, they all fall short of this inestimable treasure of knowing God,
(...). Arrian. Epict. l. 4. c. 9.
and him whom he has sent, his Son Jesus Christ. The Philosopher could
encourage his Scholar against the vaunts of wicked men in their worldly
enjoyments by bidding him put his Philosophy in the scales against them all; if
thou had nothing (says he) to lay against their enjoyments, thou art
miserable indeed, but if thou have the knowledge of Philosophy, thou have that
which is more worth then all their enjoyments: How much rather may we say so,
of the saving knowledge of God in Christ; if thou have that, thou have that to
which all earthly things bear no proportion.

Sect. 15.
It will be a leading example, and a great encouragement to those under your
charge to submit themselves to learn; when they see their Parents and Masters
not disdain to be instructed. Inferiors live more by the Eye then by the Ear;
they rather observe what you do your selves, then what you command them to do.
If the examples which you set before them be speckled and ring streaked. their
practices will be such too; it will little avail any of you, to command your
families to be sober, when they see you frequently reeling and drunken; to
command them not to swear, while they hear you daily swearing and blaspheming;
to command them to observe the Sabbath, whilst you profane it; (...). Xenep.
de inst. Cyr. in princ.
to be catechized, whilst you your selves hate instruction. Lynus, yet a child,
when he compared the strictness or the education of the Persian youth, with the
drunkenness of the old Courtiers, could tell his Grandfather Astiages, That
they commanded the Youth one thing, but did the quite contrary themselves; We
have severe Lectures of Sobriety read us, when as (says he) your stammering
tongues, and stumbling feet proclaim your Drunkenness. Judge: 12.5.
The best way to make them good who are under your charge is to give them good
example: If there be any thing worse then other in your behavior, they are
aptest to pick out that for their imitation; Genesis 12. Genesis 20.
Abraham was an eminent servant of God, both for his faith and obedience; the
greatest failure we find in him was in his dissembling (to say no worse) when
he denied Sarah to be his Wife. And yet we find Isaak, who was a good man,
Genesis 26.
culling out this sin for his imitation, and sinning after the similitude of
Abraham's transgression; so apt are we to follow the evil that is set before us.
It concerns you much to take he^d what examples you give seeing your children
are so apt to write after the copies which you set them: when you your selves
engage in that which is good, and then say to your families as Gideon did to
his Soldiers, as you see me do, so do ye, then there is some hope of an
effectual reformation. Inferiors suffer themselves easily to be bound by those
laws, which they see observed by those that made them: thou shall have them
readily obedient to thy commands, when they see thee practizing what thou
enjoynest them. It was the reproach of Appius, Appius, Lucretiae Regum, juris
quod ipse composuerat oblitus. Flor. lib. 1. c. 24. In commune jubes, si quid
censesve tenendum, Primus ipse subi. Claud. Prius disce, qui doces. Lanct.
that he forgot the Law of his own making, and that he who had expelled Tarquin
for a rape, himself committed one. Pompey was famous for giving good rules, but
as infamous for breaking them first himself.

When a Father or a Master of a Family does truly fear God, Suarum legum Author
and Eversor. Tacitus. Vid. Muscul. Psa. 7.7.
he will both by his Precepts and Example endeavor to bring his whole household
to the knowledge and obedience of God too: but if he be a wicked person himself
(whatsoever commands he may lay upon them) his corrupt practice will hazard and
endanger the ruin of them all. Mind that place in Joshua well. Josh. 24.15.
I and my house will serve the Lord; it is not I, without my house; a good man
would willingly bring all, especially those of his Family, to heaven with him;
nor is it my house without me; I am contented that they shall know and serve
him, but I will not. This is all one, as if one should say, I am willing that
my Family should go to heaven, but for my self, I am resolved to go to hell:
But it is I and my house; I will enjoin them no more then I will do my self: I
shall walk before them by mine own example, but I will not leave them to their
own choice whether they will serve God or no. It Is a pernicious liberty which
suffers men to be either of no Religion, or of a false one. You must provoke
them to this good work, by doing it before them, or else they will be apt to
think, that it is only a device to keep children in awe, but not a duty
necessary to salvation.

Thus have I according to the grace of God given me, Conclusion.
endeavored to persuade you to lay the foundation, whereon the Fabric of your
salvation is to be raised. Other foundation can no man lay; let every man take
heed how he builds thereuponi; fanyman build upon this foundation, 2 Cor. 3.10,
11, 12 etc.
wood, hay, stubble, his work shall be burnt with fire, but if any man build
gold, silver, precious stones, his work shall abide, and he shall receive a
reward. You have seen the sad inconveniences which attend the neglect of this
work, and the great advantages that accrue to those who exercise themselves in
it. Profit is a spur to Piety: Moses his eying the recompense of the reward,
quickened him in his Duty. The Lord give you understanding in all things, that
you may know where your interest and greatest concernment lies! And now
(Brethren) I beseech you by the tender mercies of God, by the precious merits
of Jesus Christ, by all that is dear and precious to you, that you suffer this
word of Exhortation to prevail with you, to the performance of your respective
Duties! God will have much glory, and your poor Souls will one day find the
comfort on it. And as for me, it will be an abundant recompense of this and all
other pains which I have taken amongst you, if I may find your hearts more and
more inflamed after the saving knowledge of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, as
he is revealed in the Gospel.

Finally, what remains, Act. 20.32.
but that I commend you to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified.
Humbly beseeching the God of peace, Heb. 13.20.
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of
the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, that he would make
you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is
well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

READER,
THere remaining some spare room, and meeting with this short Catechism, used
heretofore, to the benefit of many Christians, by that eminent and faithful
servant of Christ, Mr. Robert Lilly late Minister of Campden, I thought fit to
annex it here, as out of a desire to promote thy spiritual good, so to testify
that reverend respect which I bear to the memory of that worthy Person now with
God.

Twelve Questions and Answers, fit to be learned and understood by all those
who desire worthily to communicate at the Lords Table.
Quest. 1.

WHat is the Ground of your coming to receive the Lords Supper?

Answ. Because it is an Ordinance which Jesus Christ has appointed in his
Church, for the spiritual good of every true Member of it.

Q 2. What is that spiritual good Christ has appointed it for?

A. He has appointed it, as for a holy remembrance of himself, so for a
special means to confirm the faith of every true Believer in him.

Q. 3. What need you or any man believe in Christ?

A. Yes, I, and all men are sinful both by Original and Actual sin, and must
die eternally, if the Lord Jesus Christ do not save us, which he will not do
unless we believe on him.

Q. 4. How can you conceive that the receiving of Bread and Wine, should be a
means to confirm Faith?

A. Yes, Because as they are a sign of Christ's Body and Blood, so they are a
seal to confirm a special part of the Covenant between God and a Believer, and
to give him an interest in it.

Q. 5. What is the special part of the Covenant, which it both confirms and
conveys to a Believer?

A. That by Faith, as he shall have his sin pardoned, and Gods favor recovered,
which is signed and sealed in Baptism; so in feeding on him by Faith, he shall
be nourished and preserved in that estate unto Everlasting life.

Q. 6. Has every one that receives, this confirmed and conveyed to him?

A. Yes, every one that has Faith, if he come not unworthily, for so he may
hinder his own spiritual good.

Q. 7. May a Believer come unworthily?

A. Yes, in some sort, if he do not carefully perform his Duty as he should,
both before he receive, in receiving, and after receiving, sanctifying them all
by prayer.

Q. 8. What is the Duty that a Christian must do before he receive?

A. He must duly examine himself, whether he have Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,
Obedience, Love, and carefully renew them all so often as he comes to receive.

Q. 9. How may he know by his examination whether he has these Graces yea or
no?

A. By this Rule, every one of them, if he can truly say, that his Performance
is some, his Endeavors are more, his Desire is infinite.

Q. 10. How is a Believer to renew these Graces?

A. In laboring to see the imperfections of them, in seeing them to bewail
them, confess them, crave pardon for them with a holy resolution to redress
them.

Q. 11. What is the Duty which a Believer must do in receiving?

A. In beholding the Bread and Wine, thankfully to discern the Lords Body, and
by faith to receive them as the seal of God; that by his faith he shall be
preserved in Gods love, and that they as instruments of God exhibit it to him.

Q 12. What is the Duty that a Believer must do after receiving?

A. As to remember the Covenant made in receiving, and continually to make use
of it; so to remember himself, whether he have received that spiritual comfort
to be had in it; if he have, to be thankful and make use of it; if not, to
search out the cause and be humble for it.

FINIS.
READER,
BE pleased to correct these Errata's ere you read the Book; because many of
them mar the sense; the literal slips, especially in the Margin, are less
considerable, you may mend them as you read.

Page 12. Line 3. for would, r. worlds, line 24, 25. the words are misplaced in
the beginning of each line, in the 24. for thorough r. in some measure, in the
25. for in some measure, r. thorough. p. 14. l. 17. r. in a wrack. p. 16. l.
19. r. they will find. p. 17. l. 5. for Baleans, r. Baleares, p. 21. l. 11. for
Estones, r. Estones, l. 25. for vari, r. vare, p. 33. l. 22. for what, r.
which. p. 53. l. 6. for be, r. he, l. 7. for he, r. be, p. 71. r. Greg.
Nazianzene. l. 22. for Eynus, r. Cyrus.


