A DECLARATION OF THE Scottish Army, CONCERNING Their present Design, against
the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, the Army under the Command of
his Excellency, the Lord General; and their Resolution, to preserve and defend
the KINGS MAJESTY, and to gain his liberty from the Isl^ of Wight.

And the proceedings of 7000. Scots. 5000. of Major Genesis Monro's Forces,
touching the present Design against the Kingdom of ENGLAND.

With a Declaration from the Royalists of the City of Norwich, concerning their
Declaring for God and KING CHALRES.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for I. I. MDCXLVIII.

A Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland and Jreland, concerning the
proceedings of this Kingdom.
SIR,
OUr condition is still very deplorable, but I know you are not ignorant of our
many distractions and troubles, therefore I will not trouble you with any large
relation, our perplexities and fears are many, which makes us doubt what the
success of things may be and something amazes us for the present, but the hopes
of supplies from England, quickens and revives our startling spirits, so that
now we daily expect the provisions from England, which we here the Parliament
has ordered for our relief, and which by the blessing and assistance of the
Almighty, we hope to receive in convenient time.

The traitorous deeds of the Lord Inchiquin, did greatly startle us, and all
the Protestant party in Jreland, so that they were in a muse, and much
discomforted for the present; but the supplies from England being timely sent,
will do very much good, and greatly encourage the Protestant Army. Col. Jones
and Col. Munkes; with the rest of the Protestant Commanders, are very diligent,
and use their utmost endeavors to encourage their Soldiers, defend
themselves, and offend their enemies, and if by any means, with the conjunction
of their forces, they can make any thing a considerable party, they intend to
give the Rebels battle, to hinder the uniting of their forces, who are
assembling, as it is thought, against them, by which means they shall be the
better able to help furnish themselves with such necessaries, as otherwise
they would extremely want.

Vice Admiral Crowther is very dilligent, and faithful in his service, and
with great care attends the Ports of Cork and Kingsate, and other the Havens
thereabouts, and carries a weary eye over all suspicious persons, and so very
watchful, that nothing be carried out of this Kingdom for the service of
Malignants, or any in Arms against the Protestant party, and not any supplies
be brought into the Kingdom for the relief or assistance of the Papists, and
blood thirsty barbarous Rebels here.

The Irish Rebels have promised and assured the Lord Inchiquin to be true and
faithful unto him, and that they will to the utmost of their power assist him
with their lives and estates, and for the assurance of this performance, they
have entered into a Covenant with him, and for a witness and Testimony that
they which make good their proffers, and perform their Covenant: The Rebels
have delivered up into Inchiquins hands, many holds and places of strength, as
Galloway, Linerick, and others, which they say he shall keep as a pledge and
assurance, that they will not relinquish the promise and conditions contained
in their Covenant; but what is further intended by Inchiquin, and the Rebels is
not yet known, for they keep their resolutions very private.

Letters from Jews in Sussex.
SIR,
I Shall acquaint you with a sad accident which happened at Lewis the County
town in Sussex, on Sunday April 16. occasioned by means of some who had not
been careful to see that their Children and Apprentices, repaired to the
Churches to hear Gods word taught, as it was fit they should; but left them
idle to their own wills, who in their Masters and Parents absence, got together
to p^ay in a house, where were left at home but such as were fit for their
company, they assembled, and after sundry pastimes, they in sport threw fire
one at the other, and having thus pleased their foolish fancy, they departed
thence, not minding where the fire lighted, or the Colebrands fell, they hasted
away to some other vanity, with which they intended to end the day, but in
their absence, the fire suddenly kindled, and set the house wholly on fire,
where they had been sporting, and the people being some at Church, and some at
play, the fire was not perceived, till the house was all in a flame, which
suddenly fired others, and greatly endangered the whole Town, and before it
would be quenched, it consumed almost a whole street of houses, and those
houses that were burnt, were observed to be the most prophain in all the Town,
and it was observed that one house escaped which was so near, that the flame
sometimes touched (it being a house very famous for Religion) and others that
were three or four houses distance, were burned to the ground: this may be a
fair, and a very good warning for all profane and licentious livers, to take
heed how they profane the Lords day, and observe what vengeance many is
powered upon the wilful abuses of this sacred day; and if they be not very
obdurate, it may cause them to consider well of the fact, and repent of what
they have done, and take heed that they offend not for the future.

Jews April 25. 1618. W. H.

The Copy of a Letter from Scotland
SIR,
Several Acts which passed in the Parl. there, some are very desirous to have
an Army raised here, and some preparations are making for that purpose, and
many Soldiers listing; but I knew none of quality in command as yet.

The Parl. of Scotland were preparing to send demands to the Parl. of Eng^and,
and Sir James Lochart was appointed to bring them; but some of the Scots Parl.
like not all the particulars, by which means it is not possitively concluded
they shall be sent, nor who shall certainly bring them, it is not yet known.

The Parl. of Scotland are upon a Declaration, wherein are the reasons which
they say is the cause why they put the Kingdom into a posture of defense, which
endeavors to satisfy the Kingdom; for so doing, this Declaration is already
committed to several bodies of the states, and will be speedily published.

From Ireland came a Messenger to the Parl. of Scotland from the Irish forces,
and brought a proffer of their service, and gave in assurance that they would
join with them, with the Messenger the Sco^ch Parl. treated, and passed on to
this effect, viz. that they shall have a letter of thanks returned them and
that a fortningts pay be forth advanced for them.

By this you may suppose, that the Scots are certainly resolved for a war,
and if their proposalls take notice, they intend to send to the Parl. of
England, they will appear in their proper Colors, and their raising of an
Array would be facilitated, if they could agree about Officers in chief, but
as yet they cannot, only there is much dispute, who shall be General, some
would have on, some another; but who shall be General, it is not yet
concluded, many of the Officers in the former Army, perceiving how things are
like to be carried, refuse to take part with them, and so have quitted their
places, and rendered up their Commissions. As for Captain Wogan, and other
Englishmen in Scotland, which were demanded by the English Commissioners, ^re
not delivered up as was exp^cted; but a full denial is given the Comm ssioners
concerning them.

There are as it is reported 7000 Scots quartered between Edinburgh and
Barwick, there are as it is reported near 5000. English in Scotland, in a
readiness to help forward their design, and 8000. are expected from Munroe,
the Scots Genesis in Ireland: likewise there are 11. Regiments upon their march,
out of the North of Scotland, under this pretense, that the Northern Army shall
come and be disbanded upon the borders, it is confidently reported by men of
credit, that Prince Charles shall speedily be landed in Scot^and; but for my
part, I cannot credit it, and whether it be true or false I cannot aver.

Edinburgh April. 19. 1648.
From York April. 22. SIR,
THe Malignants have a great desire to be meddling, but cannot as yet for want
of opportunity; but yet their hopes are great, there are some that would be in
Scotland willingly, but that they fear that those which are there already, are
extremely put to their shift for provision and sustenance: therefore they
intend to stay till the Scots come into England, and then join with them, by
which you may see they have hopes of such a day as I hope they never shall,
never see it. It is said, the Scots Armies pretense is to release His Maj. from
the ^sl^ of Wight, and to reinstate him in his Royal Throane at Westminster.
Captain Wogans men increase, and are amounted to the number of seven score,
here are many Lords and Gentlemen in Scotland, would fain see the conclusion,
because the English Soldiers are maintained by them, till such time as it is
known, whether they result for Peace or War.

York April 22. 1648.
The Copy of a Letter from Norwich.
SIR,
OF late here has happenned a sad acci^ent, which was occasioned thus. The
Mayor was sent for to attend the Parl. to answer for something done; but the
Malignants opposed his coming up, and the well-affected endeavored to further
it; but this began to grow into such a quarrel, that the Malignants began to
repair to, and armed themselves at the County Magazine, which was within this
City; but the matter was so handled, that the Magazine was blown up, and much
hurt done to Churches, and many houses, what were near were spoilded, and one
hundred people were killed, and mortally wounded; but for all this, those which
were left, still continued their quarrel, and would not desist, but declared
for God and King Charles, till at last there came in 3. Troops of Col.
Fleetewoods borse, which after a little skirmishing, quickly quieted the City.
It is said, that most of the Committee Men were blown up by this sad accident.

Norwich April. 23. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbott.

FJNJS.

