THe enclosing of Jarrowslike and making Ballast-shores on it, will greatly
advantage the River Tyne and all Ships Trading to that Port, and be no real
Damage to any, unless it be so, to some Particular Ballast-Wharfs already made
on the River in places not so fit for that Use as this will be when it is done:
The Preservation of the River, or what may any way damage the Trade of
Newcastle in general, being intended to be provided for in the Bill.

The Reports and Reasons of the Trinity-House, etc.
ACCording to Your Majesty's Order in Council, bearing date August the 5th. We
have considered of the Allegations of Sir Charles Adderly Knight, and John
Crook Esquire, concerning the erecting of a Ballast-shoar at Jarrowes-Slake
near South-Sheild in the county o^ Duresme; And do Humbly make our Report that
we are of opinion, That a Ballast-Wharf at South-Sheilds will be of great use
and benefit to all ships Trading in the River Tine ^or coals, for these Reasons.

First, That it will prevent the loss of ships in their coming for
Tinmouth-bar, for that they have, and do at this day, cast out great part of
their ballast before they come to the bar, so to avoid the great charge after
they are in the River of carrying up their ballast in Keels to Newcastle, after
which meeting with foul Weather, they have many times been cast away by reason
of their Lightness.

2ly, It will be a means to secure great ships from the casualties which befall
them, by their coming a Ground many have been Lost going up or coming down the
River; at Least, it will prevent the wronging of them when they lie on hard
Ground or Rocks, going to, or coming from Newcastle, whereby the ships will
last the longer; and it will also give them a much quicker dispatch in their
Voyages.

3ly, It will be an Encouragement for Men to build great ships for that Trade,
such as may be useful for defense of the Kingdom in time of War, and much more
proper for that Trade than small Vessels.

4ly, That the Price of taking out the ballast at Sheilds being moderately set,
It will be a great Encouragement to Navigation, for that the price of taking it
out by the Town of Newcastle is very high.

5ly, That by means hereof Masters of ships may make two or three Voyages more
in a year, the charge of taking out their ballast being lessned, and the time
of going up the River being saved and their ships hereby the better preserved,
and being great Ships most proper for that Trade, they may sell Coals much
cheaper to the benefit of the Public, and get more money to their Owners than
now they do, and all this with less hazard; All which we Humbly submit to Your
Sacred Majesty's most prudent Consideration.

Thomas Middleton William Wilecy Edward Crispe Deputy Mr. Henry Shears D.
Warden, Henry Teddiman Wardens.
John Cox Edward Seaman



depiction of a section of the Tyne River The River of Tyne

ye Way from Tinmouth bar

Part of South Sheeles

the New Shore

East Dock

Iarro buoy

West Dock

^thill ^oint

Flatworthnes point

Hay hole

Here you may see the River is narrower both above and below then it is at ye
New-shore

Iarro Point

ye Way to Newcastle

Iarro Slike surveyed An^o Dni^ 1668/9 Cont': 299A: ^: 23: of Statut measure
and is every Tide Covered with water and lies dry when the Tide is out

This Ground to ye Low water mark does by an undoubted title belong to ye Deane
and Chapter of Durham* And it is prayed that ye Owners may not be unjustly
Hindered from walling it in and making wharfs of it. On which Ships may throw
out there Ballast to fit them ye better for taking in Coals* to which it is
not desired they should be any ways Oblidged but by their owe convenience

depiction of a compass rose

Dean and Chapter West Leas

East Dean bridge

Dean and Chapter West Middle Deanes

Dean and Chapter Duddon house

Dean and Chapter West Symond sides

Dean and Chapter Salt Meadow

Iarro

A Scale of Furlongs and Chaine^*



For making the River of Tyne nav^gable


