A particular CHARGE OR IMPEACHMENT, in the name of His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, AND The Army under his Command.

AGAINST Denzill HollisEsq; Sir Philip Stapleton. Sir William Lewis. Sir John
Clotworthy. Sir William Waller. Sir John Maynard, Knights. Major Genesis Massey.
John GlynnEsq; Recorder of London. Walter LongEsq; Col. Edward Harley. And
Anthony NicollEsq;


Members of the House of Commons.

BY the appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War.

Signed, JOHN RUSHVVORTH. Secr.

Imprinted at London, for George Whittington at the Blew Anchor in Cornehill
near the Royal Exchange. 1647.

July 8. 1647.
THe Charge was presented to the House of Commons Tuesday the 6. of June by
Col. Scroope, Col. Okey, Col. Hewson, Col. Pride, Lieutenant Col. Bowen,
Lieutenant Col. Goffe, Major Rainsborow, Capt Berry, Capt. Clerk, Captain
Carter, Capt. Rolph, Mr. Saxby, and Mr. Gethings, who attending at the
Parliament Door, were sent for in, and standing at the Bar Col. Scroope spoke
to this effect: That they were appointed by the General and the Army under his
command to present to this Honorable House a particular Charge or Impeachment
against several Members thereof, viz. Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir
William Lewis. Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard,
Knights, Major General Massey, John Glynn Recorder of London, Walter Long
Esquire, Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicoll Esquire; and that in the name
of his Excellency and the Army they did here impeach the said Members of high
Crimes and Misdemeanors; humbly tendering the same to this Honorable House.

Which being done, the Speaker sent for the Charge by the Clerk of the House;
the Officers being desired to withdraw, the Members impeached were sent for,
and the Charge read in the House, but the debate thereupon was deferred till
Thursday, at which time the Officers attended and sent in, and acquainted Mr.
Speaker that they were at the door for an answer, that so they might give an
account to the Army; But other weighty matters taking up the day, the House
sent to inform the Officers that they resolved the debate upon the Charge on
Friday July 9. at whiah time they are again to attend the House.

A particular Charge or Impeachment, in the name o^ His Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX, and the Army under his Command: Against Denzill Holles, Esquire; Sir
Philip Stapleton, Sir Will. Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir Will. Waller, Sir
John Maynard, Knights Maj. Genesis Massey, John GlynEsq; Recorder of London,
Walter Long Esquire; Col. Edw. Harley, and Anthony Nicholl, Esquire; Members of the
House of Commons.
WHereas on the 15. day of June last, the heads of a Charge were delivered in
the name of the said Army, unto the Courts of Parliament, to be sent up to the
Parliament against the persons above named. Now in prosecution and maintenance
thereof, and according to the power thereby reserved, it is in the name of the
said Army more particularly charged against the said persons as follows:

I. That the said Master Denzill Holles, during the late War, in prosecution
of the evil designs expressed in the general Heads or Articles formerly
exhibited, contrary to the trust reposed in him, contrary to his Oath taken in
June, 1643. and contrary to the Ordinance of Parliament dated in October, 1643.
has assisted the King in the late unnatural War, and held correspondence
and intelligence with the Enemy against the Parliament, in manner following.
viz, He the said Master Holles, being one of the special Commissioners for the
Parliament, to present Propositions of both Houses to the King at Oxford; did
privately, and contrary to his Instructions, at several times, make his
addresses unto the Kings Party, there then in Arms against the Parliament
namely, unto the Earl of Lindsey, the Earl of Southampton, the Lord Savill,
and others; and did secretly plot and advise them against the Parliament; and
did intimate unto them, or one of them, That the said Propositions then sent
unto His Majesty by the Parliament were unreasonable: And the said Master
Holles being demanded what answer he would advise the King to make to the said
Propositions; he the said Master Holles did advise that the King should demand
a Treaty however, and then declare how unreasonable the Propositions were and
that yet, for the peace of the Kingdom, His Majesty would treat upon them; but
withal wished the said Treaty might be in London, whither the King himself
should come upon security. And he the said Master Holles, adding that there was
nothing in the world that the violent party (meaning the well-affected party to
the Parliament against the Enemy, did so much fear as his Majesty's coming to
London, which would be a certain dissolution of their Authority and Power: And
the said Master Holles bad those said persons, or one of them, assure the King
that if His Majesty knew as much as he (the said Master Holles) knew, His
Majesty would take his Horse and be at London the next day, or words to that
effect. And it being again demanded whether (if the King should be willing to
come) it would be accepted of? he the said Mr. Holles thereto answered, that
certainly it would be much opposed, but yet he the said Mr Holles was
confident, that he and his Party (meaning some of the Members abovenamed, and
others) should carry it, and wished the King to put it upon that trial. And
the said Mr. Holles was desired by the said Earl of Lindsey, Earl of
Southhampton and Lord Savill, or one of them, that he would be pleased to draw
such an answer in writing to the said Propositions, as he desired the King
should send; and the said Earl of Southampton, who was that night to lie in
the Kings Bedchamber, would persuade the King to condescend unto it; and
thereupon the said Master Hol^es withdrew, and either the same day, or the next
day following the said Master Holles accordingly carried in his hand unto the
said Lords, or one of them, a paper ready written, which (as he said) was such
an answer to the said Propositions, as he had drawn for the King to send to
the Parliament; which was taken by the said Lords, or one of them, and carried
to the King to be considered of; and so much thereof as advised the Kings
coming to London was laid by, the King fearing to adventure himself, but the
rest of the said Paper the Lord Digby (who writ the Kings Answer to the
Propositions) made use of, in the same words as the said Master Holles had set
down And the said Master Holles to ingratiate himself with the Kings Party,
did about the same time revile the well-affected Members of the House of
Commons, declaring unto the said Kings Party at Oxford, or some of them, that
those well-affected Members (which, to render them the more odious as he
conceived, he named the violent Independent party) had ill intentions and great
averseness to peace; and that nothing would be more pleasing to them then for
the King to refuse the Propositions how unreasonable soever the same were; And
he also then said, That the Commissioners of Scotland were very weary of that
violent party, and that they being desperate to establish their Presbytery here
as in Scotland, made their addresses to him, the said Master Holles and his
Party All which tended to the protracting of the said late Wa^re and to the
hinderance of an happy peace

And the said Mr. Holles did also after that receive from the said E^rle of
Lindsey at Oxford a Letter written in white Ink, concerning some secret
design, and kept it from the knowledge of the House from February till about
July after, when it was discovered by him that brought it, but the Letter it
self was by the said Mr. Holles (after he had read it) burnt; and the said
Earl of Lindsey moved the King for a Pass for the said Mr. Holles to go to
Oxford, but the King refused to grant it, saying, That Holles did him better
service in the Parliament then he could do him at Oxford.

II. That the said Mr. Holles, and Sir Philip Stapleton, during the said late
Wars, when the Earl of Lindsey went from the Tower of London to Oxford, sent
several Messages of intelligence to the Earl of Dorset, and Lord Digby,
thereby assuring them, that they, the said Mr. Holles, and Sir Philip Stapleton
did better service for the King here in Parliament then they could do him if
they were at Oxford; and the said Sir Philip Stapleton desired, that the said
Earl of Dorset would preserve him the said Sir Philip Stapleton, and his
friends in the good opinion of the Party at Oxford (which was then the Kings
Garrison) and he, the said Sir Philip would do as much for his Lordship, and
his friends here with the Parliament. And the said Mr. Holles, and Sir Philip
Stapleton, the more to ingratiate themselves into the favor of the Enemy, did
of their own accord without any direction of the Parliament, draw up other
Propositions then those mentioned in the preceding Articles, which they
affirmed were in their judgments fit for the King to grant, and for the
Parliament to desire; and being so drawn up, sent them privately to his
Majesty, without any Authority of Parliament to warrant the same.

III. That the said Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir
John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Major General Massy,
Mr. Glyn, Mr. Long, Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholl, in the months of
March, April, May and June last past, and at other times in prosecution of the
evil designs in the several general Heads mentioned, have frequently
assembled, and met together at the Lady Carliles Lodgings in White Hall, and in
other places, with diverse other Persons disaffected to the State (without any
Authority of Parliament) for holding correspondency with the Queen of England
now in France, and her participants, with an intent by such secret and
clandestine treaties amongst themselves to put conditions upon the Parliament,
and to bring in the King upon their own terms and having a great power upon
the Treasure of this Kingdom, have therewith maintained, and encouraged by
Pensions and otherwise the Queens Party in Fran e, thereby to beget a second
and more bloody War in this Kingdom; and they* or some, or one of them assured
the Queen 40000. l. per annum, if she would assist them in their Design, and
that they would do more for the King then the Army would do, and that they
would find out some means to destroy the Army and their friends.

IIII. That in further pursuance of the same evil Designs they, the said Mr.
Holles, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
William Waller, and Major General Massy by the combination aforesaid within
the space of three months last past, without any Authority of Parliament
invited the Scots, and other Foreign Forces to come into this Kingdom in a
Hostile manner, to abet and assist them in the persecuting and effecting of
their said designs. And the said Mr. Holles very lately sent to the said
Queen of England, then and still in France, advising her amongst other things
speedily to send the Prince into Scotland, to march into this Kingdom in the
head of an Army, and did send a special Messenger to her for such ends and
purposes. And the said Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis,
Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Mr. Glyn, Major
General Massy, Mr. Long, Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholl, have under
hand of their own accord, without Authority of Parliament listed, or caused,
or procured to be listed diverse Commanders and Soldiers, endeavoring thereby
to leavy and raise a new War in this Kingdom, to protect themselves in their
unjust Oppressions, and factious Designs, and have at several times within
the space of two months last past invited, encouraged, abetted, and counseled
multitudes of Reformado Officers and Soldiers, and other rude persons,
tumultuously and violently to gather together at Westminster, to affright and
assault the Members of Parliament in their passage to and from the House, to
offer violence to the House it self, by locking the door thereof upon them,
and so imprisoning them; and by such violences, outrages, and threats, to awe
and enforce the Parliament.

V. That the said Master Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Mr Glyn, have be^n
and are obstructers and prejudgers of several Petitions to the Parliament, for
redress of public grievances; and the said Master Holles, and Sir Philip
Stapleton, in the month of May last past, did abuse and affront diverse
Petitioners; who in a peaceable manner then attended the Committee, whereof
Colonel Lee was Chaireman; not only reviling and reproaching them, but
violently haleing, and boysterously assaulting them, and offered to draw their
swords upon Major Tuleday, and others of the said Petitioners; and without any
authority or power committed Nicholas Tew, one of the Petitioners; and soon
afterward, by the procurement of the said Master Holles and Sir Philip
Stapleton, and upon their misinformation to the House, the said Major Tuleday,
and Nicholas Tewe, were imprisoned, not being permitted to speak for
themselves; and the said Master Glyn about three months since, caused the said
Nicholas Tewe to be imprisoned in Newgate, and to be deteyned a long time
there, for no other cause, but for having a Petition about him which was to be
presented to the House.

VI. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, and Ma or
General Massey, have lately in prosecution of the said designs in the said
general heads mentioned, against the known Laws of this Realm, and Rules
and Articles of War made by Parliament, by an Arbitrary power imprisoned some
Members of the Army without any authority, particularly Ensign Nichols, whose
Pockets they without authority caused to be searched, and several papers to be
taken from him, contrary to the liberty of every Subject, and caused him to be
sent a Prisoner from the head Quarters to London, without the authority or
privity of the General, or the chief Officers of the Army commanding in his
absence.

VII. That in or about the month of March last, (there being a Petition
intended from the Officers and Soldiers of the Army to their General (for
such things only as were justly due unto them, and concerning them merely as
Soldiers) The said Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, and Colonel
Edward Harley, a Member of the Army, (having gotten into their hands a Copy of
the said Petition) by combination with the other Members above mentioned, with
an intent to abuse the Parliament into prejudices and jealousies against the
proceedings of the Army, concerning the said Petition (they well knowing that
the said Army stood in their way, and hinders them from bringing to pass the
designs in the said general Charge expressed) did falsely and maliciously
inform the House, That the said Petition was contrived and promoted to debauch
and dis-oblige the Army from the Parliament; And that it was managed and
carried on by diverse principal Officers in the Army; That Orders were given
out for the reading of it in the head of every Regiment, and whosoever would
not subscribe it, should be put out of the Musters, and cashiered the Army: And
by those and other aggravations, did represent it to the House as a design
against the Parliament: Further adding, That some Regiments which were remote,
were sent for, to join with the rest of the Army for that purpose; by which
mis-informations they the said Members did the same day procure a peremptory
Order to the General, to suppress the said Petition.

VIII. That some few days after, Colonel Edward Harley, by the combination
aforesaid, and in pursuance of the same designs, did produce to the House a
Letter, supposed to be written from within the Quarters of the Army, to him the
said Colonel Harley, by a person not named, whereby it was informed that
Colonel Harleys Lieutenant Colonel had drawn his Regiment to a rendezvouze,
and had caused the said Petition to be read at the head of it, and that he
threatened to cashiere and put out of the Musters all that would not subscribe
it; And that the design of the Army therein, was to inslave the Parliament and
Kingdom (if the Parliament proceeded not to some high resolution) or to that
effect, as by the said Letter (relation thereunto being had) may appear; And
although the substance of the said Letter was most untrue, and no author
thereof appeared, nor could be produced, although a Committee was appointed for
examination thereof, and it was much pressed the author should be discovered;
yet the said Colonel Harley, Sir John Clotworthy, and Sir William Waller,
did so avow the reality of the said Letter, and that the contents thereof would
be made good: As that thereby, and by other false suggestions of theirs against
the Army, they procured the House (upon a long debate which held till about 8.
of the clock at night) to Order, That a Committee of five Members (whereof the
said Master Holles was one) should prepare a Declaration to be brought in to
the House the next morning, signifying the Houses dislike of the proceedings of
the Army upon that Petition, as by the said Order dated (...) day of (...)
last, may appear.

Upon which settling of the said business, for that night most of the Members
departed, as conceiving nothing would be done thereupon till the next day, and
that then they might have a free debate concerning the same; But the House
still continuing to sit (upon the dispach of some Letters formerly ordered) the
said Master Holles by the same combination, and in further prosecution of the
said evil designs, having of himself (without the Committee) prepared a
Declaration against the Petition it self, contrary to the intention and
direction of the said Order, and contrary to the rules of Justice, and usual
course of Parliament, did the same night about ten of the clock, on purpose to
surprise the House, present the same Declaration to the House, whereby the said
Petitioners were (without being heard) declared Enemies to the State, and
obstructers of the relief of Ireland, if they persisted therein, (as by the
same Declaration, relation being thereunto had, may appear) and did procure it
to be then passed accordingly, to the great dishonor of the Parliament and
their proceedings, to the insufferable injury, the just provocations,
discouragement, and discontent of the Army, to the trouble and danger of the
whole Kingdom, to the hindering of the relief of Ireland, and other the evil
consequences in the said general Charges expressed.

IX. That by the same and the like false informations and suggestions the said
Colonel Harley (then a Member of the Army) Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William
Waller, and the said other persons did shortly after the said Declaration so
made as aforesaid, procure diverse eminent and faithful Officers of the Army,
namely, Lieutenant General Hamond, Colonel Hamond, Colonel Lilburne,
Lieunenant Colonel Pride and others, to be all sent for from their charges in
the Army to appear at the Bar of the House to make answer in relation to the
said Petition, against whom when they came thither they could charge or prove
nothing at all in so much as the House thought fit immediately to discharge
them. And whereas there was a Committee appointed to examine and consider of
the truth or falsehood of them and the said members informing were appointed to
produce their proofs and evidence to the same before the Committee, though they
have since then been often urged, called upon* and demanded to produce their
proofs and evidenes thereto (if they had any) and have been plainly told,
that if they did not proceed effectually to do it, they should be accounted
the Authors and devisers of the said falsehoods, and reparation would
accordingly be demanded against them: Yet they have not to this day produced
any proofs or evidence to any of the said informations or suggestions, whereby
the Parliament and the Army were so much abused as before is declared: nor
could they, or any of them be hitherto persuaded to give in to the said
Committee any charge against the said Officers of the Army, which they have
then or since procured to be sent for as aforesaid, but have held diverse of
them in a long and chargeable attendance upon the House, without any thing laid
to their charge, until the House was pleased to discharge them.

X. That the said Master Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir
William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy and Major General Massy, in further
pursuance of the designs mentioned in the general heads charged against them,
have been great instruments in the obstructing of the relief of Ireland; and
within the space of two months last past, did falsely inform the House, that
by their procurement there were fifty Companies of Foot, and ten Troops of
Horse of this Army engaged for Ireland, upon the terms, and under the conduct
then by the Parliament propounded; and the more to delude the Parliament
herein, they, or some of them by the combination aforesaid, did procure diverse
Officers then in this Army, namely, Colonel Butler, Lieutenant Colonel
Iackson, Major Gooday, and others, to give in their names, as listing
themselves for Ireland (on the said terms, and conduct propounded) when as
those Officers did at the same time declare themselves unwilling thereunto, and
resolved not to go serve in Ireland on any terms whatsoever; they the said
Members underhand assuring them, that though they made use of their names, yet
they should not go for that service: They have likewise untruly informed the
House and given in the names of many, considerable Officers of the Army namely,
Captain Pennifather, and Captain Burges, of Colonel Butlers Regiment; Captain
Clarke, and four or more commission Officers of Sir Hardresse Wallers
Regiment, and others, as having been subscribed for Ireland who did not so
engage or subscribe, nor give any consent thereto, but did then, and have ever
since utterly disavowed and denied the same.

And about the same time they also reported to the House the name and offer of
Lieutenant Colonel Farington, as being then a Lieutenant Coll. of this Army
and engaging for himself and his Regiment for Ireland whereas the said
Farrington had been cashiered the Army a year and an half before. By which
and other their untrue informations and reports of that nature. The Parliament
was abused and misled into a conceit and confidence of a strength out of the
Army, then supposed to be engaged and ready for Jreland on their own terms
when as in truth the same was but a mere delusion, and which was so contrived
on purpose to occasion a slighting and neglecting of the Army, as supposing no
further use for them.

XI. Whereas part of three Regiments of foot ( viz. Colonel Herberts,
Colonel Kemps and Colonel Grayes) were by order of the House advanced toward
the relief of Ireland as far as Bromesgrave in the County of Worcester. The
said Sir Philip Stapleton, Master Hollis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William
Lewis, Major General Massy, Sir William Waller, and Master Glyn, by
combination aforesaid, did of their own accord without the knowledge or
direction of the House, on the sixth day of June last, (being Sabbath day and
without summoning a Committee) command those forces back again as far as
Reading, with an evil intent to draw forces together to beget a new War in
England.

XII. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, in prosecution of the designs in the
said general charge expressed, has in the years. 1642. 1643. 1644. and
since, converted several great sums of money (which by several orders of
Parliament and of the Irish Committee were designed for the relief of Ireland)
to his own particular use; namely the sum of two hundred and eighty pounds,
which by Order of both Houses dated the eleventh of February 1642. was to be
paid for twenty butts of sack for Jreland, seven hundred pound which the same
day was also ordered for two thousand swords, three hundred pounds which by
order of the said Irish Committee dated the fifth of April 1643. was designed
for one hundred and twenty pair of pistolls, and diverse other sums of money
upon several other orders which he the said Sir John Clotworthy from time to
time received for the use and relief of Ireland, but were not employed to the
uses, by the said orders intended and directed, but to his the said Sir John
Clotworthyes own private use as aforesaid, And that he has within two years
last past received several fummes of monyes, arms, and other provisions for a
troop of horse, which he pretended he had raised in Ireland, whereas he had
not, nor did raise or furnish any such troop as he pretended, And that he the
said Sir John Clotworthy for money and other rewards has preferred John Davis,
and William Summers and others to be entrusted with the Irish affairs who have
kept correspondency with the enemy, and have defrauded the State of other great
sums of money, and he has been privy to and a sharer in such their actions.

XIII. That about November last past the said Sir John Clotworthy being by the
Parliament sent a Commissioner with others into Ireland, who all had a joint
power or authority to treat with the Earl of Ormond for the space of four
days and no more, he the said Sir John Clotworthy contrary to the special
trust reposed in him, held secret intelligence with the said Earl of Ormond, by
cipher or character without the consent or knowledge of those others in
Commission with him, and many weeks after the time so limited was expired, and
about the same time he the said Sir Joh. Colworthy held the like secret
intelligence with the L. George Digby then in Ireland beyond the time prefixed
and without the consent of the said other Commissioners, and in order thereunto
the Lord Ormond and Digby, lately employed one Slingsby who pretends a design
about the Prince to come into this Kingdom.

XIIII. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, Master Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton
by combination with the rest of the Members before named (in furher prosecution
of the designs mentioned in the (...) late president of Ireland was both
faithful and vigilant while he was (...) the fame Kingdom, and bad now this
last spring made provisions ready to march into the field, and that the Lord
Baron of Brohill General of the Parliaments horse in Munster, and Col. Sir
Arthur Loftus persons of honor and reputation and of great fortunes in the
said Kingdom, lately came purposely into this Kingdom to exhibit and did
exhibit many articles of high treason against the Lord Inchequin for betraying
the Parliaments Army to the enemy (as formerly he had done) yet by the great
power and violent interposition of the said Sir John Clotworthy, Master Hollis
Sir Philip Stapleton, by the practice and combination aforesaid, the said
Articles have been obstructed, and the business not suffered to come to a
hearing, and the said Lord Lisle hastily called out of Ireland, and the power
and command of the Parliament forces in that Kingdom committed to the said
Lord of Inchequin to the loss of this Summers service and the expense of much
treasure to make new preparations of war: and whereas the said Lord Lisle
being so suddenly called from thence as aforesaid did design and depute Sir
Hardres Waller Knight Major General of the forces there, a man of known
integrity and courage both for his service in England and in Ireland, and of
considerable fortunes, there to take care of the said Lord Lisles forces till
the pleasure of the Parliament might be further known. The said Lord of
Inchequin upon the receipt of a Letter from the said Sir John Clotworthy,
Master Hollis, and Sir Philip Stapleton or one of them, or from some other
person by their or one of their direction, privity, procurement did express
that he had order or direction from London that no man that favored the
Independents (under which name the said Lord of Inchequin has comprehended all
men that have showed themselves opposite to tyranny and arbitrary government)
should have any trust or warrant there, nay though they were of another
judgment yet if they would not prosecute the Independents, they should not be
employed there, or words to that effect; and under color thereof the said Sir
Hardres Waller, and all others that formerly had had their Commissions from the
said L. Lisle while he commanded, were displaced; to the discouragement of
those other faithful persons, and to the Parl. and to the great disservice and
danger of the loss of the Kingdom.

XV. That whereas a Committee of the House of Commons has been lately
appointed by the Parliament to consider of Propositions for the settling and
preservation of Wales, whereof the said Sir William Lewis, and Master Glyn were
and are Members, and to report the same to the House; They the said Sir William
Lewis and Master Glyn, with others of the said Committee, did on the 30. day of
April now last past, without any authority of Parliament before any report made
to the House of their own accord (in stead of settling and preserving Wales)
order that all Committees for Sequestrations should forbear all proceedings of
Sequestration against all, or any of the Inhabitants of Wales; and although
some few persons were upon general heads excepted, Yet by virtue of that (...)
peace and Commissioners of Association, (...) were as active in raising money,
and pressing men to serve against the Parliament as any others, all the
Commissioners of array, that did or should at any time come in, and submit to
the Parliament or their Commanders in chief, without any limitation of time,
all that had born Arms against the Parliament, unless they were Governors
and other Officers of war, that held out some Town, Castle, or Fort against
the Parliament; All disaffected, and scandalous Ministers (though in their
Sermons they usually reviled and scandalized the Parliament, and their
proceedings calling them Rebels and Traitors, and not only incensing the people
aginst the Parliament, but usually taking up Arms, and leading their
Parishioners in arms upon any alarm against the Parliament, and many other
desperate Delinquents have been, and still are taken off and freed from
sequestration, and the said order was sent to every Committee in Wales, in
several Letters contrary to several Orders and Ordinances of Parliament, and
contrary to the rules of Justice and equity, which should impartially be
administered as well in Wales as in other places of this Kingdom, whereby the
ill-affected Gentry and Ministry of that Country are grown so high and
insolent, that honest men dare scarce live amongst them; so as that which was
intended by the Parliament, to settle and preserve Wales, is (by the practice
of the said Sir William Lewis, and Master Glyn) perverted to the danger and
destruction of it.

XVI. That the said Sir William Lewis, and Master Glyn, have further
ingratiated themselves with the Delinquents of Wales, and prepared them for
their said Designs in manner following, viz. he the said Sir William Lewis
has within two years last past, countenanced and protected many of the most
notorious and dangerous Delinquent within the several Counties of South-
Wales, namely the Lord of Carberry, and others in Carnarvon-shire, Master Carue
and others in Glamo^gan-shire, Master Morgan, late Knight of the shire, Master
John Herbert and others in Brecnock-shire, Master Gwyn, Master Lewis, and
diverse others in Radnor-shire, by freeing some of them altogether from
compositions, though Sequestered; by laboring diverse Members of the House and
of Committees to be favorable in compounding with others, and to admit of such
to their Compositions as were incapable thereof; And the said Sir William Lewis
has animated, and encouraged some of the said persons to continue their
fidelity to the Kings cause, promising them, that if they would engage their
friends with the King for him, he and his would be their friends in the
Parliament, insomuch as his friends (the Delinquents in those parts) have
lately looked upon him as a rising man when the King shall come to London,
which has lately been their constant boasting. And the said Sir William Lewis
has within two years last past, caused diverse that had been Commissioners for
the King, and had pressed men, and raised money to promote the late war
against the Parliament, namely his brother Master Thomas Lewis, Master Gwyn,
Master Charles Walbiffe, Master Meredith Lewis Master Edward Williams, and many
others, to be Commissioners of the Peace, and Committee men for the said County
of Brecknock; insomuch as those that have been most active and faithful to the
Parliament, have bin, and still are outvoted in those places, and can do no
considerable service for the Parliament, and the rather for that the said Sir
William Lewis has also procured one Edward Williams (his own Kinsman, and one
much disaffeected to the Parliament) to be Solicitor of Sequestrations in the
said County, who is and has been very remiss and corrupt therein. And the
said Sir William Lewis has by the means aforesaid lately procured Master
Edmond Lewis his Son (though unfit for that employment) to be chosen and
returned Burges for Brecknock; which that he might the better effect he kept
the writ for election of the said Burges above eight months, in his own custody
before it was delivered to the Sheriff of the said County. And likewise that
the said Mr. John Glyn within two years last past has procured several
persons that have lately been Commissioners of Array and in Arms against the
Parliament in Northwales viz. (...) and ^t^ers, to be named in the Commissions
of the peace for the Countyes of Denbigh and Carnarvon, and other Counties
there, and to be put in other great place; of trust and command there. And
amongst others Colonel Glyn his brother, who was lately a Colonel in the
Kings Army is by the said Master John Glyns procurement become Governor of the
Town and Castle of Carnarvon and Admiral or Viceadmirall of the Irish Seas, to
the endangering of those Counties lying upon the Coasts toward Ireland and to
the fear and discouragement of the well affected Inhabitants of those places.

XVII. That the said Sir William Lewis, being heretofore (during these
troubles) Governor of Portsmouth, a Garrison for the Parliament, in which time
he received much of the public Treasure, for which he has not yet given an
Account, did while he was Governor there frequently hold correspondencie and
intelligence with the Kings Party about the delivery up of the said Garrison;
insomuch as although Sir William Waller, and diverse others in that Garrison
were proclaimed Trait^rs to the King yet he by the Kings special Command was
spared, the King affirming That the said Sir William Lewis was his Friend and
that he was confident he would do him good service, or to that effect. And
although he then was a Parliament Man and Governor of Portsmouth as aforesaid,
and his estate in the said County of Brecknock, being of the value of above
600. pounds per Annum, was three years in the Kings Quarters, yet the same was
never Seqeustred: And since the Parliament has prevailed, Colonel Herbert
Price, Esquire, having been Governor of Brecknoc for the King against the
Parliament, being sequestered, the said Sir William Lewis by his solicitations
to the Committee, procured the personal Estate of the said Colonel Price,
which the Committee of the County had found out, and caused to be brought to
Morgan Aubrayes house in Brecknoc, to be restored unto him, without any
satisfaction to the State, and has procured his the said Col. Price's lands in
the said County of Brecknoc, being worth about 300 pounds per Annum, to be let
to a friend of the said Col. Prices, to his wives use, at fifty pounds per
Annum contrary to the directions of the several Ordinances of Parliament made
in that behalf.

XVIII. That the said M. John Glyn, or some other person or persons, by his
direction, consent, or privity, or to his use, has (during his being a Member
of the House of Commons, taken rewards of several persons for service done
them in the House, as namely amongst others, diverse Drovers from Wales, who by
his means and procurement had an allowance by Order of the House for three
thousand pounds, in satisfaction of losses they had sustained by the Enemy, did
pay unto the wife of the said M. Glyn, the sum of an hundred pounds, as a
reward for his said service.

XIX. That the said M. John Glyn, as he has been most active to bring into the
Commission of Peace, and into other places of Authority, diverse notorious
Delinquents in North Wales, as aforesaid, so has been as active, as much as in
him lies, to put out, and keep out of the Militia, and Common Council of
London and out of the Commission of Peace for Middlesex, many eminent and
faithful men, that have laid out their estates, and adventured their lives for
defense of the Parliament and City, in the time of their greatest necessity;
namely, Alderman Pennington, Colonel Tichborne, M. Estwick, Mr. Moyer, and
others, contrary to the Declaration of both Kingdoms, which has assured all
lawful favor and encouragement to those that have been faithful, and shall
so continue to the Parliament: which doings must needs tend to the giving a
fresh occasion and power to the Enemy against the Parliaments best friends, to
the dishonor of the Parliament, and the indangering of the Kingdom.

XX. That the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis, have
by their power and countenance, as Members of the House of Commons, both
jointly and severally, used means to obstruct the course of Justice, and have
interposed themselves in several Causes, and by word of mouth moved and
persuaded Judges and other Officers, on the behalf of such as they conceive to
be their friends: Amongst others, whereas a great Cause was lately depending in
the House of Lords, between Alderman Langham and Captain Lymery, and Counsel
was met for the pleading thereof, the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and
Sir William Lewis, did repair to the Earl of Rutland about the same; and the
said Sir Philip Stapleton told the said Earl, that they (meaning himself, and
the said M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis) were fully satisfied concerning the
Justice of Langhams Cause; and therefore as the said Earl did respect them the
said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis or expected from
them, he the said Earl of Rutland should give his Vote for Langham; or used
words to that effect; which also was seconded by the said M. Hollis in words,
and agrreed unto by the said Sir William Lewis, as appeared by his presence
and gesture. And the said Sir William Lewis did exercise the same power in a
Cause of John Gunters, or others.

XXI. That the said M. Anthony Nichols although about four years since he was
by the Committee of Privileges voted, that he was not a Member fit to sit in
the House, by reason his election was void, yet he the said M. Nichols does not
only sit and Vote there as a Member, but by his power and threats in the
West-Countries, and by his solicitations, and indirected practices, has
brought in or procured to be brought in, about twenty eight Members more out
of Cornwall, on purpose to carry on the designs and practices before
mentioned, and to make a faction in the said House: and notwithstanding the
selfe-denying Ordinance, he the said M. Nichols does still hold a place in the
Tower formerly conferred upon him by the House, and receives the profits
thereof to his own use.

XXII. That the said M. Nicholls, has since his sitting in the House as
aforesaid taken rewards for service done there, namely, whereas Sir William
Vuedall Knight, for deserting the Parliament and going to York with the King
was suspended the House, he the said M. Nicholls for the sum of one hundred
pounds or one hundred fifty pounds paid unto him, or to his use, by the said
Sir William Vuedall or some for him, did by mis-informations to the House
procure the said Sir William Vuedall to be readmitted a Member of the said
House, and the said M. Nicholls while he was a Member of the Committee for
safety, he and others of the said Co^mittee having issued forth a warrant for
searching Greenwich-house, he the said M. Nicholls did underhand acquaint one
of the Queens officers therewith, and thereby prevented the design of the said
Committee, to the great disservice of the Parliament and Kingdom.

XXIII. That the said M. Long at the beginning of the late wars not having
courage sufficient to perform his duty in military affairs, did out of
covetousness or other unworthiness procure a command of a troop of horse
under his Excellency the L. Genesis the late E. of Essex, but when ever his said
troop came upon any service, he the said M. Long out of fear or treachery
unworthily absented himself and never was seen or known to charge the enemy in
person, though his troop often engaged, namely, at the battle at Edgehill,
when he saw there was like to be blows, he the said M. Long left the field,
and never charged before his Troop, and at the battle or fight at Brainford,
though his Troop was there, yet he staid at London till the danger was past,
and fighting done; and when his Troop was sent into the West, he took no other
notice of it but to receive his pay, and in the mean while he repaired into the
County of Essex, and procured a commission to be a Collonell of Horse, and in
stead of fighting against the Parliaments enemies he betook himself to plunder,
and oppress the Parliaments friends there, and contrary to order, and without
any authority or exigencies of War, compelling him thereto, enforced great
sums of money, and many Horses, and other provisions from the Country, namely
from M. Tho. Manwood, a man well affected, who had the Generals protection,
(whose horses were taken from his plough) and others, to the great losses and
oppression of the people, and to the great dishonor of the Parliament, whose
service he nevertheless neglected, and has not hitherto given an account of
the great sums of money and other things he so exacted from the Country as
aforesaid.

XXIV. That the said M. Long afterward (upon pretense of some losses sustained
by the enemy, and some great service he had done for the State) did procure of
the House a great office in the Coancery, namely to be the chief Register of
that Court, wherein his skill was little, and whereof he was and is still
altother incapable; and although for a time upon the self denying Ordinance, he
was displaced; yet upon the motion, or by the power and means of the said M.
Hollis he has obtained the same office, to the great prejudice of skillful
Clerks, that have been bred up in the same Court, and to the disservice of the
Commonwealth, and the dishonor of the House.

XXV. That the said M. Long on purpose to drive on the designs in the said
general Charges expressed, has for the space of two years last past, usually
pressed and urged several Members to give their Votes such ways as he
pleased, and to that end and purpose does constantly plac himself near the
door of the House, that when any debate is concerning any design wherein his
party is engaged, he the said M. Long has used much tampering and violence to
such of his own party as wou^d go out of the House, and has persuaded them to
continue there for their Votes, and he the said M. Long in case any such have
gone out of the House, has been very inquisitive where they may be found, that
so he may go for them, when the business in debate comes near to be put to the
vote and when they come not according to his expectation does ordinarily run
out of the House himself to call them, and drive them in again, that he has
been commonly called (by those that are without the House, and have taken
notice of his actions) the Parliament-driver, whereby the freedom of the
Members is taken from them, the manner of the Parliaments proceedings much
scandalized and many times evil and dangerous designs drove on in a faction
by Votes, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth.

All which matters and things the said Army shall and will be ready (in
convenient time) to make good by proof upon Oath, as his Honorable House shall
direct. And for that by reasn of the straightness of time, and other more
weighty Affairs of the Army, they could not so fully finish and accomplish the
said Articles; therefore the said Army do still reserve further liberty to add
other Articles against the said Members, or any of them, at any time before
their Trial as occasion ssiall serve.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. and his Council of
War.

Signed John Rushworth Secretary.


