A Full and True ACCOUNT Both of the LIFE: And also the Manner and Method of
carrying on the Delusions, Blasphemies, and Notorious Cheats of Susan Fowls. As
the same was Contrived, Plotted, Invented, and Managed by wicked Popish Priests
and other Papists, with a Design to scandalize our Church and Ministers, by
insinuating that the Virtue of Casting forth Devils, and Easing Persons
Possessed was only in the Power of their Church.

As also, Of her TRIAL and Sentence at the Old* Baily, the 7th of this instant
May, for Blaspheming JESUS CHRIST, and Cursing the LORD's PRAYER.

LONDON, Printed for J. Read in Fleet Street, 1608.

A full and True Account of the First Beginning, and the manner and method of
Carrying on the Delusions, Blaphemies, and notorious Cheats of Susannah Fowls,
etc.
Though by a wonderful Providence, God in his infinite Kindness to this our
Nation has freed us from the Yoke and Tyranny of Popery, yet such are the
restless endeavors of the busy Agents and Incendaries of Rome, that they still
privately lurk about like Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, seeking whom they may
devour, of these it was of whom the Apostle says, they creep into Houses, and
lead captive silly women laden with Sins, etc. The designs of the Jesuits are
to bring a Scandal upon our Church and Churchmen, that so by disgracing and
lessening them they may the more commodiously extol and magnify themselves, as
evidently appears by their wicked tampering with one Susannah Fowls a poor
ignorant Woman, Wife to an honest Labourer in Hammersmith, whom they persuaded,
for filthy Gain, to counterfeit her self Possessed; that so it might happen when
the ^ndeavours of our Protestant Divines failed, they of the Popish Communion,
might seem to have the virtue, power, and efficacy to Cast out Devils: But to
be methodical.

One Jordan a Papist, seems to be the principal Promoter of this Blasphemous
Delusion, which, for some time past, has made a great Rumor both in Town and
Country. The pretenses of this Fowle's Accomplices were, That upon some
Discontent she had wished several unlawful Wishes, such as, That the Devil
might fetch her. Cursed her self, if she would live such a Life, etc. And she
upon being visited said, She saw an Apparition in the shape of a Man, and
afterward seemed to be P^ssess'd with a Devil, and had seemingly dreadful
Fits, indeed very artificially counterseited; and made a great noi^e at
Prayers, sometimes she said the Devil appeared in one shape, and then in
^n^ther, and at the end of her Fits would commonly make two or three dismal
Squeeks and say, Now he is gone.

Nay, to such a hight was her Blasphemy grown, that on the 1s. of January last,
upon one of the Visiters repeating the Words Lord save us, she said, I Will save
you; and frequently upon reading the Lords Prayer, to her, she said, Curse it,
Dami it, Sink it; and upon repeating the Words, I believe in God the Father
Allmighty, she said, that is me; and at repeating the Words, And in Jesus Christ
his only Son, she said that is my Son. At another time when the Words Lord save
us, were again repeated to her, she said, I Will save you, I came to save you
all, for which I shed my Blood. And always at the Naming of Jesus she would
say, Curse him, Curse him.

Yet for all this our Protestant Divines were too knowing to be imposed on by
such feigned delusions, they first observed she never changed her Countenance
during the time of her Fits, which together with diverse Methods which were used
to make her believe they were at Prayers, when they were not, increased the
Belief she was a Cheat.

She said, that she had a Needle and P^per in writing given her by the Devil;
and that she had a Spell given her to put about her Neck by one Jordan a
Papist, some of which Profession she said had sent to her several times, and
told her she would never be cured till the Men with hair Coats and bare Legs
came from the Portugal Embassador's: Which some of the Ministers, who were
Visiters and Evidence against the Prisoner, declared, increased their belief
that it was a trick of the Papists to obtain the Credit of having done that
which Protestants could not, viz. to cast out the Devil. It was also observed
that at repeating the Lords Prayer in Latin, she did not fall into her Fits as
usual when 'twas said in English, which was a further Confirmation of the Cheat,

To prove which more fully, one of her Visiters heated an Iron; and when the
Minister was at Prayer, and she in her Fits as usual, even when she pretended
to be insensible, he put it to her Hand, which she drew away from it as soon as
it touched her; and filling a Pipe of Tobacco, he blew the Smoke of it into her
Face, which was like to have stifled her: And afterward disguising himself in
an ugly dress, entered the Room where she was alone; upon which she immediately
run out, saying it was the Devil, and was much frightened; which was a further
demonstration she was a Cheat. After which the Evidence threatening to knock her
on the head if she would not confess the Cheat, she did it freely, and said
'twas purely to get money, which she also owned to some others of the Evidence,

After all this, being had before a Justice, her Mittimus was made, and she
sent to Newgate: and on Saturday the 7th of May School. she was Indicted at the
Sessions House in the Old Bailey, for uttering Blasphemous Words against Jesus
Christ, and Cursing and Damning the Lords Prayer.

The prisoner in her Defense said, that great Troubles had occasioned her to
fall into a dist^acted condition, and that she knew not what she did; that she
did verily believe she was either troubled with a Devil, or bewitchd; that
Jordan the papist had given her things both inwardly and outwardly; and that
what she had confessed, was only to avoid being carried to prison. But all this
being looked upon as frivolous and evasion, and the Evidence being very full
and clear, the Jury brought her in Guilty.

She was sentenced by the Court to pay a Fine of 100 Marks, and to lie in
Prison till it be paid; to stand three times on the Pillory, viz. at the
Maypole in the Strand, at Charingcross, and at Hammersmith; and so to find
Surety for her good Behavior fro a Twelvemonth.

As to what remains further to be spoken, though the forementioned Account will
make the greatest part in History, He^ pa^ents were good sober, and honest
Livers, but too negligent of seasoning her tender years with the sound
principles of our excellent Faith, which gave her Enemies too easy a Victory
over her and I have reason to believe, he Marriage-state was too unadvizedly
rushed in to, without a due consideration how it would entangl^ her in the
World, which was the occasion of her making some horrid Wishes and
Imprecations. To conclude, I heartily advize, all parents to give their
Children Christian Education, and all persons o^ what station soever, not to
moc^ or profane the Almighty, for Hi^ Vengeance will certainly, sooner o^
later severely over-take them.

FINIS.

