A further Testimony to Truth; or, some Earnest Groans for a Righteous
Settlement, in this hour of distraction, agreeable to the late Essay, so
suitably offered by some Friends and Brethren, to this purpose: By some
Baptized Congregations, and other Cordial Lovers and Assertors of the Public
Good Old Cause, in the Counties of Leicester, Nottingham, Rutland, Lincoln,
Stafford, Darby, and Shropshire.
To all that bear good will to Zion, and love the Lord Jesus, that have either
power, opportunity, or hearts to appear for Him, and his Righteous Cause, in
this Day.
THat in sense of the late eminent and wonderful appearance of the Lord, who
has pleased not only thereby to work out so miraculous a salvation and
deliverance for a poor scattered and divided handful of his unworthy people,
from the rage and malice of a potent, united, and enraged enemy, that like Bees
on every side rose up against them.

But more especially, and that which is more worth then thousands of our Lives
and Liberties, has he given such good hopes (by his still continued Revolutions
and Over-turnings) of reviving his blessed Cause again in the midst of us,
after so many years death upon it; viz. The Exaltation of the Kingdom and
Interest of Jesus Christ, the glorious King of Saints and Nations, in the
promised ruin and downfall of the Tyrannous, Beastly, and Antichristian
Interest, which for so many hundred years has so bloudily domineered in the
earth.

We therefore having our hearts somewhat warmed and affected herewith, seeing
as yet so little improvement of the opportunity once more offered, do take our
selves concerned, with others of our dear Brethren that have gone before us
herein, to be pleading and crying out for those things which the Lords late
Voice seems loudly to call for at our hands.

And first; we desire in sense of his great goodness, (and as we would be
serviceable to the Lord in his great designs on foot) earnestly to stir up our
selves, and all the Lords people that are any way touched with his late gracious
Appearance, to a speedy, thorough, and serious search, how far any have had
heart or hand in the late Dreadful Revolt and turning aside from the Lord in
that fearful Apostasy, by setting up, standing by, or flatteringly addressing
to either of those two persons, or others, that in opposition to the Work and
Cause of God, has in chief been set over us, occasioning so much Atheism,
Reproach, and Blasphemy: And that as any may be justly chargeable herewith,
that there be accordingly a hearty return to the Lord, by a suitable
repentance, taking the shame, and giving God the glory.

Secondly, that since the Lord has been pleased once again, by his
distinguishing Providence, upon the late decision, to make a visible separation
betwixt friends and enemies; (and so far to unravel the Apostasy, whose chief
work it was to twist all Interests together, as though Christ and Antichrist
were to be united) that in order to common preservation and protection, and the
securing our beings, all speedy and lawful ways may be taken for the
incorporating, uniting, and impowering all known friends; the discountenancing,
weakening, and outing all known enemies.

And thirdly, we do, as in conscience bound, cry out for some speedy exemplary
Justice and punishment upon the heads of all sorts that had their hands in the
late Treason and Rebellion, that occasioned the expense of that Blood and
Treasure, and gave such general disturbance throughout these three Nations.

And fourthly, in order to our well-being, and carrying on a thorough
Reformation so long groaned after, and bled for, we loudly call out for that
holy, equal, brief, and plain Law given by God in the Scriptures, to be the
declared Law of these Nations, in opposition to the heathenish, tyrannous, and
Popish Laws yet in force amongst us: And that men that are best read, and
practiced, and most answering the qualifications of Magistrates, according to
Scripture-Rule, viz. men of courage, fearing God, and hating covetousness, may
be only employed (as near as possible) to dispense and execute under Christ
this righteous Rule, in opposition to the ignorant, profane, and scandalous;
that so also some speedy course may be taken to suppress that dilatory,
vexatious, and oppressive way, that has so long been exercised by the
mercenary, cruel, and covetous Lawyers, the shame of our Nation, and so utterly
(in their corrupt course of practice) inconsistent to a Commonwealth.

Fifthly, that as the most effectual way to suppress and remove the
Antichristian Ministry, (who have been such Ringleaders in this late
Rebellion;) and so consequently to promote and propagate the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and the New-Testament-Ministration thereof: First, we claim, that the
imposition of that Jewish and Antichristian yoke of Tithes be removed: And the
rather;

First, Because we find neither Law of God, nor by his Providence any from man,
at this day, to enforce the same.

Secondly, Because of late there has been that light, that strength of Reason
and Argument offered to public view, both from the Laws of God and Man, that
none has been able to stand before, or rationally to reply unto: See Milton,
Pierson, Osburn, etc.

And secondly, that as an intolerable burden, inconsistent with the Liberty of
Conscience unto all, the Rulers forbear for ever to impose any National or
Parochial Ministry, so as to enforce any form of Worship suited to their
interest, or compel men of one persuasion, to maintain any man of another in
the Ministry, or to lay a stumbling block in the way of unbelievers, to the
derogation of Christ, by compelling them to maintain his Ministers.

And lastly, the better to make all this practicable, and to remove all lets
out of the way, we do most earnestly beg and cry aloud for a speedy and
effectual applying the Rule laid down by the late Rulers, so agreeable to the
Word of God, to all Officers in Public Trust, both Civil and Military,
throughout the Nation, which we herewith insert, wishing it may be writ in
Letters of Gold, for every one to take notice of, that he that runs may read;
viz. That Declaration of the ninth of May, 1659. That all such as shall be in
any place of Trust and Power within this Commonwealth, be able for the
discharge of such Trust, and that they be persons fearing God, that have given
testimony of their true love to all the people of God, and of their
faithfulness to the Cause of this Commonwealth. And that all such as answer not
this wholesome Rule, (thus by Gods Providence owned, laid down, and asserted,
as the qualification to Magistracy and Trust) be speedily removed all places of
Authority and Trust, and others be forthwith still called, answering the same;
that our enemies be not our Judges, nor rule over us: And that there may be a
Public Liberty to charge; and that it may be penal for any to continue, that
are found unanswerable thereto.

Attested and subscribed in the Name, and by the appointment of the respective
Congregations underwritten, viz. LEICESTER AND NOTTINGHAMSHIRES.
Leicester.
William Inge Robert Coltman Edmond Perkinson Thom. Pharren George Hopkins
Rich. Hardy
Markfield.
George Moore Nicholas Ward Peter Sykes Thom. Bunney William Sykes Jo. Moore
Quarndon.
Ed. Smith Rob. Stevenson Fr. Harris Edw. Thornton William Hull George
Shittlewood Tho. Heford
Knighten.
William Wells, Sen. William Wells, Jun. Thom. Carthright Ri. Carthright Rob
Coltman Ed. Heggs Ed. Brooks
Loughborough.
William Parker William Sadler Thom. Berington George Tomlinson Jo. Quinton
Rob. Peale
Langton.
Hen. Hartshorn Thom. Grewcock Barthol. Cox Dennis Wright William Charton Thom.
Iminges
Winswould.
Edw. Blount Thom. Feaks Thom. H^ll Jo. Blum Edw. Thomson Gabriel Leake
Waltham.
Tobias Watson Jo. Darker Thom. Bishell Hen. Redgate Ed. Templeman Pet. Smith
Twiford.
Jo. Louth William Mobery William Pocklinton Ri. Hill
Nottingham.
Charles Jarman George Tacey Thom. Gerey Rob. Shering William Bush Matthew. White
Jo. Rick
Ratby.
Ri. Booth Daniel Cox Jo. Garner Steven White Peter Symkin William Cox
Thornton.
Ri. Fletcher Ri. Man Thom. Grant Steven Bunney William Newbould Ed. Sketchley

Rutland, Lincolnshire, Staffordshire, Derbyshire, and Shropshire.
Burleigh.
Thom. Smyth Ri. Wale
Westby.
William Pridgen Thom. Worth
Burton.
Luke Budworth John Blundill
Darbyshire-Peak.
Robert Daken Thurstone Wright
Thorpe.
Jo. Osburn James Tiptaft
Burn.
William Bell Jo. Skyrrit
Halmer-end.
Tho. Sillito Tho. Beech
Narborough.
Jo. Bishell Jo. Measure
Witham.
William Hidson William Bell
Shrewsbury.
Rich, Newton Will. Highway
Th^^lbye.
Jo. Wilkinson Rob. Perk
Stafford.
William Elives Rich. VVistons
Ludlow.
David Jones Will. Haiton
Sweaton
Rob. Towers Jo. Foster
Berrey-Hill.
Henry Haggar Tho. Ginder
Darliston and Elsmeer.
Arthur Atkin George Chathcock
Easton.
Jo. Allin Sim. Ingram
Litchfield.
Lawrence Spooner John Cupper
Bridgenorth.
Walter Gaferis Tho. Law


An Assent also hereunto has been given by the Warwickshire Churches, whose
subscriptions, through some miscarriage, came not timely to hand.
THis Testimony was intended before the late Change, though not unseasonable
(as we judge) to be now published; trusting these great and astonishing
Revolutions will but make the more way (...) the accomplishment of our just
desires herein. Hoping the chief Instruments hereof, will now be the more
engaged heartily to return to the Lord, and to prosecute their former Resolu^
(...) ^ngagements to Christ herein (in the day of their straights: if not, we
shall again inminde them of that seasonable Word, so lately laid before them,
Number. 32. 23. And that if at this (...) silent, (...) ^gement and ^iver^ ^ise
some otherway, etc. Est. 4. 14. (...)

(...) for Livew^ (...) at the (...) ^n Popes-head-alley* 1659.


