VOTES OF THE House of Commons, Perused and Signed to be Printed According to
the Order of the House of Commons.

BY ME WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Speaker.

Reprinted Anno Dom. 1680.

VOTES Of the House of COMMONS, Jovis 21, Octobris 1680.
THe House being met, a Message was delivered from the King by Sir Edward
Cartarett Usher of the Black Rod, viz,

Gentlemen of the House of Commons,

The King Commands this Honorable House to attend Him immediately in the House
of Peers.

And accordingly the House went up to Attend his Majesty, who was pleased,
after having made a Speech, to Command the Commons to return to their House,
and proceed to the Choice of their Speaker.

And the House being returned, and a Motion being made, That William Williams
Esquire; be Chosen Speaker for this House, It was Resolved in the Affirmative,
Nemine contradicente.

And Mr. Williams having in a Speech to this effect, disabled himself for this
Service;

Gentlemen,
I Need not reckon my Infirmities to this House, It is enough to mention them;
they are better known to many of the Members than to my self: they have often
appeared within these Walls in Two Parliaments: Therefore I trust your own
Knowledge and Experience of my Failings will easily divert your Inclinations to
name me your Speaker. And as you have had Experience of my Unfitness for such
Service, so have you had sufficient Proof, I may say Demonstration, of the
Aptness of many worthy Members now present for your Service; Men of bulk great
enough to fill your Chair; Men of Art, skilful enough to guide and collect your
Debates; Men of Science in the Laws and Methods of Parliament, wise enough to
steer and conduct your Counsels. Your Choice of a Speaker this day is the
Effect of much Ti^e and long Consideration. It will be no Excuse for the
Commons now in Parliament to say, They had not time for Deliberation in this
great Matter, as was usual in other Parliaments, when Speakers were Elected
upon their first Meeting in Parliament: Therefore a more deliberate Election
will he expected from you after this time for Contemplation. And add the
prospect of what is like to be the subject Matter of this Parliament, The
Security of the Protestant Religion; The safety of the King and Kingdom; The
Preservation of the Justice of the Land; Matters highly arduous and urgent at
this time. These must prevail with you to depart from your first Intentions of
the Honor you proposed for me this day. ^our first step toward it I
acknowledge to be sufficient Honor for me; therefore I pray let me ask it from
you, not only for my own sake, but for your own Honor, and for the Interest of
the Public, That you please to proceed to the Choice of another Person, more
proper for the Bulk of your Chair, and Weight of your Work, and leave me in
this Place, where my Country seated me for your Service.

His Ex use being rejected by the House, Mr. Wil^i^ms was conducted to the
Chair by two Members of the House, and in the Chair made a speech to this
effect to the House.

Gentlemen,
I Tremble when I reflect under what Difficulties Learned, Experienced, and
wise Men have labored in this Chair: Yet I am not afraid of their President
who impaired their Estates and Health, no not of them who lost their Lives in
this Service. These are a Sacrifice I owe my Country. But when I suffer my self
to think that some Gentlemen have maimed their Reputation in this Trust, these
thoughts are dreadful to me, they wound me, and must yet strike deeper with me,
Unless you that called me hither shall please to stand by me, cherish, and
support me in all the Difficulties of this Place. I have it by your Courtesy,
and shall hold it at your Pleasure. And I have this to secure me, If I fall, I
fall into the hands of Gentlemen, that made me what I am in your Service.

I doubt not but you will remember, I am your own Minister, your own only,
your own entirely, placed in this Service without seeking, without
recommending: I expect no Boon, but by your Grace and Favor to depart as I
came, when you shall please to Command me, without repenting.

The House being informed that his Majesty had appointed to morrow at! hree of
the clock in the Afternoon, for the House to present their Speaker.

Veneris 22. Octobris 1680. Post Meridiem.
THe House being met, and Mr. Speaker having taken the Chair.

A Message was delivered from the King by Sir Edward Cartarett Usher of the
Black Rod.

Gentlemen of the House of Commons.

The King Commands this Honorable House to Attend him in the House of eers.

And accordingly Mr. Speaker, with the House, went up to Attend His Majesty,
and humbly represented to His Majesty, That the House of Commons had chosen him
their Speaker. And he made Claim by Humble Petition, in the Name of the Commons
of England in Parliament Assembled, of the Ancient Rights of the Commons, for
them and their servants, in their Persons and Estates, to be free from Arrests
and other Disturbances: In all their Debates to have Freedom and Liberty of
speech: And as occasion shall require, to have Access to His Majesty's Person.
Which was allowed by the King.

The House being returned, and Mr. Speaker having taken the Chair, and made
Report thereof to the House,

The House Adjourned.

Lunae 25. die Octobris 1680.
A Message from the Lords by the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, and the Lord Chief
Justice North, to the Commons.

Mr. Speaker,

The Lords have Commanded us to acquaint you, that they have made an Address to
his Majesty, and have received his Majesty's answer thereunto, which they have
thought fit to Communicate to this House.

The Address.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Lords with white Staves do Attend his Majesty, humbly to desire Him from this
House, That whereas there has been a Discovery of an horrid Plot and
Conspiracy by the Papists against His Majesty's Person and Government, which
still continues, His Majesty will be Graciously pleased to issue out his Royal
Proclamation, thereby Declaring, That if any person or persons shall within the
space of two months after the date of such Proclamation, come in and give
Evidence of any Treason or Conspiracy against His Majesty's Royal Person and
Government, That then his Majesty will Graciously Pardon such person or persons
all Treasons and Misprision of Treasons, and all Offenses in concealment of the
same, to the time limited by the said Proclamation.

Jo, Brown Cleric. Parliamentor.

His Majesty's Answer to the Address.
HIs Majesty has considered of the Address made by the house, and is so
willing to encourage all persons who know any thing of any Treasons and
Conspiracies against his Person and Government, that He will cause his Royal
Proclamation to issue, Declaring that He will fully pardon and secure all
persons who shall make such Discovery, not only during the space of Two months,
as is desired, but at any time after, whenever such Discovery shall be made,

Martis 26. die October. 1680.
Ordered,

THat a Bill or Bills be brought in upon the Debate of the House, for
Regulating the Election of Members to serve in Parliament.

A Committee appointed to draw up the same, and to take care to bring in a
Clause to declare the Law, that an Action of the Case may be brought and
maintained, for any Damages sustained by undue Returns.

The House taking into Consideration the Message sent from the Lords,

Ordered,

That an humble Address be prepared to be presented to his Majesty, for the
Pardon of such persons who shall within a limited time make satisfactory
discovery to this House, of the horrid Popish Plot.

The House being informed that Mr. Dangerfield was in the Speakers Chamber, and
desired he might acquaint the House with some matters of: importance relating
to the Popish Plot.

Ordered,

That Mr. Dangerfield be called to the Bar of this House, to give an account to
the House, what he knows relating to the Popish Plot.

And Mr. Dangerfield being accordingly called to the Bar of the House, related
his evidence; and being withdrawn.

The House taking notice of Mr. Dangerfields having in his information
mentioned Sir Robert Peyton, a Member of this House,

Ordered,

That it be referred to the Consideration of a Committee, to Examine the
Matters touching Sir Robert Peyton, and to report the same to the House.

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

That it is the Opinion of this House to proceed effectually to suppress
Popery, and prevent a Popish Successor.

Mercurii 27. die Octobris 1680.
MR. Treby reports from the Committee appointed to prepare and draw up an
Address to be presented to his Majesty.

May it please your Majesty,

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, being highly Zealous for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, Your Majesty's Sacred Person and Government, and resolving to pursue
with a strict and impartial Enquiry, the Execrable Popish Plot, which was
detected in the two last Parliaments, and has been supported and carried on by
potent and restless practices and machinations, especially during the late
Recesses of Parliament, whereby several persons have been terrified and
discouraged from declaring their knowledge thereof; most humbly beseech Your
Majesty, that for the security of such persons who shall be willing to give
evidence, or make further satisfactory Discovery concerning the same to this
House, Your Majesty would be pleased to issue Your Royal Proclamation, assuring
all the said persons of Your Gracious Pardon, if they shall give such Evidence,
or make such Discovery within two months after the Date of such Proclamation.

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

That it is, and ever has been the undoubted Right of the Subjects of England,
to Petition the King for the Calling and Sitting of Parliaments, and Redressing
of Grievances.

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

That to traduce such Petitioning as a violation of Duty, and to represent it
to his Majesty as Tumultuous and Seditious, is to betray the Liberty of the
Subject, and contributes to the Design of Subverting the ancient legal
constitution of this Kingdom, and introducing Arbitrary Power.

Ordered,

That a Committee be appointed to enquire of all such persons as have offended
against these Rights of the Subject.

The House being informed that Sir Francis Wythens, a Member of this House, had
offended against the said Rights of the Subject,

Ordered,

That Sir Francis Wythens, a member of this House, have notice given him by the
Sergeant, to attend his place tomorrow morning.

Resolved,

That an Address be made to his Majesty, declaring the Resolution of this
House, to Preserve and support the Kings Person and Government, and the
Protestant Religion at home and Abroad.

Jovis 28. die October. 1680.
SIR Francis Wythens appearing in his Place according to the Order of the House
yesterday made,

Ordered,

That the Clerk of the Peace for Westminster do attend this House tomorrow
morning at Ten of the Clock, with the Roll of the Orders for last Easter
Sessions for the City of Westminster.

An Information being given the House against Sir Robert Yeamans of Bristol,
and against Sir Robert Cann, a Member of this House, That they did in October
1679. publicly declare, that there was no Popish plot, but a Presbyterian plot;

And Mr. Row, Sword Bearer of Bristol, being called in to the Bar, and
attesting the same, all which being likewise attested by Sir John Knight, a
Member of this House.

And Sir Robert Cann being called upon by the House to make his Defense
therein: who standing up in his Place, did in defense utter several
reproachful and reflecting words against the said Sir John Knight.

Ordered, That Sir Robert Cann, be brought to the Bar of this House, and do
receive a reprehension from Mr. Speaker, upon his knees; which was done
accordingly.

And Sir Robert Cann being again withdrawn, the House Proceeded in the further
Consideration of the Matters charged against him, and after long Debate.

Resolved, etc.

That it does appear by the Evidence this day given to this Housethat Sir
Robert Cann is guilty of publicly declaring in the City of Bristol in October
1679, that there was no Popish plot, but a Presbyterian Plot.

Ordered, That Sir, Robert Cann, a Member of this house, be Committed to the
prison of the Tower.

Ordered, That Sir Robert Cann be Expelled this House.

And then he was brought to the Bar of the House, and upon his knees received
from Mr. Speaker the Judgment of the House for his Expulsion from this House,
and Commitment to the Tower.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker do issue out his Warrant to the Sergeant at Arms,
for conveying the Body of Sir Robert Cann to the prison of the Tower.

Ordered, That Sir Robert Teamans be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant
attending this House, to answer for publicly declaring in the City of Bristol
in October, 1679, That there was no Popish Plot, but a Presbyterian Plot.

Ordered, That Doctor Dove be desired to preach before this House on the Fifth
day of Novem. next, at St. Margarets Westminster; and Mr. Speaker is desired by
the House to give him notice thereof.

Veneris 29. die October. 1680.
Ordered,

THat Sir George Downing have leave to bring in a Bill for Wearing of the
Woollen Manufactures of England.

Ordered,

That Doctor Tongue be humbly recommended by this House to his Majesty, for
the first considerable Church preferment that shall happen to become void in
this Kingdom, and that such members of this House as are of his Majesty's Privy
Council, do represent the same to his Majesty.

Mr. Speaker acquaints the House, That having attended his Majesty yesterday
in the Afternoon, with the Address for a Pardon for such persons as shall make
a satisfactory Discovery to this House, of the Horrid Popish plot; His Majesty
was pleased to return his Gracious Answer, to this effect, viz.

THat He did intend to Direct, such a Proclamation, and was Resolved not only
to prosecute the plot but Popery also, and to take care of the Protestant
Religion Established by Law; And if We join, and this House go on calm^y in
their Debates, without heats, He did not doubt but to beat down popery, and all
that belongs to it.

Mr. Harbord Reports from the Committee to whom it was referred, to prepare and
draw up an Address, Declaring the Resolution of this House to preserve and
Support the Kings person and Government, and the Protestant Religion both at
Home and Abroad.

The Address Agreed unto by the House.
May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most dutiful and obedient Subjects the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, do with most thankful hearts acknowledge not
only your Majesty's many former Royal Declarations of your adherence to the
Protestant Religion, in the Preservation and Protection thereof, but your
further Manifestation of the same in your Gracious Speech to both Houses at the
Opening of this present Parliament, in which your Majesty is pleased to Command
us strictly and impartially to prosecute the Horrid Popish Plot, without which
we do fully assent to your Majesty's great Judgment, That neither your Person
nor Government can be safe, nor your Protestant Subjects, it being part of the
very Religion of Popery, where it can obtain, to extirpate all Protestants,
both Prince and People; which has caused in the times of your Royal Ancestors
since the Reformation, that great care to oblige the Subjects against their
return to the Papal Yoke, in the very same Oaths wherein they swear Allegiance
to their Prince. And as now the Eyes of all the Protestant Kingdoms and States
Abroad are upon Us, and looking upon your Majesty as the Royal Head of so many
Protestant Countries, cannot but hope, upon a happy and solid Security in our
Religion at home, That your Majesty will be the greatest Protection to them,
from whom we may expect a Mutual Assistance, as being involved in the same
Common Danger: So we do humbly assure your Majesty, That We shall be always
ready to Preserve your Majesty's Person and Government, and to Support the
Protestant Religion both at Home and Abroad: And do humbly beseech your Majesty
to Esteem all Persons whatsoever who shall otherwise represent Us to your
Majesty, as those who design to divide between the King and his People; and to
defeat the Meeting and Siting of Parliaments, That those Popish Designs may
succeed, which they well know cannot otherwise prosper. And this they have made
more undeniably evident in the interval of Parliaments, by Contriving, with
unparalled Insolence, a most damnable and wicked Design, to transfer their
own Crimes upon so many of your Majesty's Loyal Protestant Nobility and Gentry,
hoping thereby to destroy those who with the greatest Zeal and Integrity
endeavor to Prosecute them.

The house then proceeded to the consideration of the Matter relating to Sir
Francis Wythens, a Member of this house, and several Witnesses being called in
and examined at the Bar of this house in that Matter: And,

It appearing to the house, upon the Confession of the said Sir Francis Wythens
in his place, and upon the Evidence given at the Bar of the house against him,
that he had presented an Address to his Majesty expressing an abhorrency to
petition His Majesty for the Calling and sitting of Parliaments.

Resolved, That Sir Francis Wythens, by promoting and presenting to his Majesty
an Address expressing an Abhorrency to Petition his Majesty for the Calling and
sitting of Parliaments, has betrayed the undoubted Rights of the Subjects of
England.

Ordered, That Sir Francis Wythens be Expelled this House for this high Crime.

Ordered, That Sir Francis Wythins do receive his Sentence at the Bar of this
House upon his Knees from Mr. Speaker. Which he received accordingly.

Sabbati 30. die Octobris 1680.
MR. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That His Majesty having been
Attended by such of the Members of this House as are of the Privy Council, to
know His Pleasure when this House should Wait upon His Majesty with their
Address, Declaring their Resolution to preserve His Majesty's Person, etc. He
was pleased to appoint Three of the Clock this afternoon for this House to
Attend Him in the Banqueting House.

He further acquainted the House, That His Majesty being Attended by such
Members of this House as are of His Privy Council, with the Address relating to
Dr. Tongue, His Majesty was pleased to return answer, That he had already taken
some care of Dr. Tongue, and that he would take him into further Consideration.

Resolved, That the Votes of this House be Printed, being first Perused and
Signed by Mr. Speaker, and that Mr. Speaker nominate and appoint the persons to
Print the same.

Seignior Francisco Ferria, being called in, delivered his Evidence at the Bar
of this House, relating to the Popish Plot.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That this House will forthwith proceed to the
full Examination of the Popish Plot, in order to bring the Offenders to Justice.

Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to Inspect the Journals of the Two
last Parliaments, and make a Report to the House of their proceedings relating
to the Popish Plot: And it is referred to etc. or any three of them, and they
are to meet this afternoon at three of the Clock in the Speakers Chamber, and
are to Sit de die in diem.

Ordered, That an humble Address be made to His Majesty by such of the Members
of this House as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, That all
the Letters, Papers and Evidences which have been delivered into the Privy
Council, relating to the horrid Popish plot, may be delivered into this house.

Lunae 1. die Novembris 1680
MR. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, that according to the Order of this
House made on Saturday last for an humble address to be made to His Majesty by
such of the Members of this House as are of His Majesty's Privy Council, that
all such papers, Letters and Evidences. relating to the horrid Popish plot, as
have been delivered in to the Privy Council, might be transmitted to this
House, His Majesty had been attended in this matter, who was pleased to answer,
That the House of Lords having at their first fitting appointed a Committee for
Examination of the Popish plot, His Majesty had been pleased on the 24th. day
of the last month, to Order all Examinations, papers and Writings relating to
the Popish plot, and in the Custody of the Clerks of the Council, to be sent to
that Committee, and that on the 27th. day of October last, they were all sent
accordingly.

A Bill for the better Encouragement of the Woollen Manufacture of England, by
the general wearing thereof, was Read the first time.

Resolved, etc. That the said Bill be Read a Second time.

Mr. Speaker acquaints this House, that the House attended His Majesty on
Saturday last in the afternoon at the Banqueting House with their address,
declaring the Resolution of this House, to preserve and Support the Kings
person and Government, and the Protestant Religion both at home and abroad; and
that His Majesty returned His Gracious answer to this effect, viz.

Gentlemen I thank you very heartily for your Zeal for the Protestant Religion:
and I assure you there shall be nothing wanting on my part at home or abroad to
preserve it.

Sir Francis Winnington Chairman to the Committee appointed to inspect the
Journals of the Two last Parliaments, relating to the horrid Popish plot, made
a Report from the said Committee, of a general abstract of those proceedings
taken out of the said Journals, and he referring in the said Report to several
Entrys in the said Journals, which could not yet be Transcribed;

Ordered, That the said Report be perfected by the said Committee, and
afterward presented to the House, to be Entered in the Journals of this House.

Ordered, That the same Committee do inspect the Journals of the Lords House of
the Two last Parliaments, and make a Report of their Lordships proceedings,
relating to the horrid Popish plot, and that the said Committee do Sit de Die
in Diem.

Ordered, That Mr. Treby do give this House Information to morrow morning of
all the matters by him Reported in the last Parliament, relating to the horrid
Popish plot.

The House being Informed that one (...) Hardwich a Linen Draper at the Naked
Boy in Henrietta-street Covent Garden, did in breach of the Privileges of this
House commit certain misdemeanors against the said Seignior Francisco, being a
witness produced and examined at the Bar of this House touching the horrid
Popish plot:

Ordered, That the said Mr. Hardwich be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant
attending this House, to answer to this House for the same.

Ordered, That Mr. Dugdale do attend this House on Thursday morning next at Ten
of the Clock, to make his further Discovery of the horrid Popish plot.

Martis 2. November. 1680.
A Bill for prohibiting the Importation of Irish Cattle, etc. was read the
first time.

Resolved, That this Bill be read a second time.

Ordered, That Mr. Harnage be brought to the Bar of this House tomorrow morning
at Ten of the clock, to answer to the Misdemeanors by him committed against
Seignior Francisco Ferria, in breach of the Privileges of this House, and that
the said Seignior Francisco do then likewise attend this House.

Ordered, That an humble address be made to His Majesty by such Members of this
House as are of His Majesty's Privy Council, to desire His Majesty that he
would be pleased to grant His Gracious Pardon to Mr. Dangerfield; and that he
would take Mr. Dangerfield, Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Praunce, and Seignior Francisco
Ferria into his Royal Care and protection.

Sir Francis Winnington Chairman to the Committee appointed to inspect the
Journals of the House of Lords of the Two last Parliaments, and to make a
Report of their Lordships proceedings entered in the said Journals, relating to
the horrid Popish plot, acquaints the House that the Committee had perused the
said Journals, and taken an abstract thereout, which he reported to the House.

Ordered, That the said Committee do perfect their Report of the abstract taken
out of the Journals of the Lords House, and do present the same in Writing to
this House together with a perfect abstract of the Journals of the House of
Commons of the Two last Parliaments, relating to the said Popish plot.

Mr. Treby having according to the Order of the House made yesterday, given an
information to the House, of all the matters by him Reported in the last
Parliament, relating to the Horrid Popish plot.

Resolved Nemine Contradicente,

That the Duke of York's being a Papist, and the hopes of his coming such to
the Crown, has given the greatest Countenance and Encouragement to the present
Designs and Conspiracies against the King and Protestant Religion.

Resolved Nemine Contradicente,

That in Defense of the Kings Person and Government, and of the Protestant
Religion, this House does Declare, That they will stand by His Majesty with
their Lives and Fortunes; and that if His Majesty shall come by any violent
death (which God forbid) they will Revenge it to the utmost upon the Papists.

Resolved, That a Bill be brought in to disable the Duke of York to Inherit the
Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to prepare the Bill.

Mercurij 3. die Novembris 1680.
A Message from the Lords by Mr. Justice Wyndham, and Mr. Baron Atkins.

Mr. Speaker.

The Lords have commanded us to acquaint you, that they have passed a Bill,
Entitled, An Act for the better Regulating the Trials of the Peers of England,
to which they desire the Concurrence of this House.

An Engrossed Bill sent from the Lords, Entitled, an Act for the better
Regulating of the Trials of the Peers of England, was Read the first time.

Resolved, That the Bill be Read a second time on Monday morning next, after
Ten of the clock.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to prepare a Bill for Regulating
Elections of Members to Serve in Parliament, do present the said Bill to the
House tomorrow morning.

Mr. Harnage being brought to the Bar, and Seignor Francisco Ferria appearing,
and justifying his charge against him,

Ordered, That Mr. Harnage be continued in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, during the pleasure of the House, for his misdemeanor in
Breach of the privileges of this House.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to Inspect the Journals of the Two last
Parliaments, relating to the horrid Popish plot, do look into, and make Report
of the Impeachments Exhibited in the Two last Parliaments, against the Lords in
the Tower, and of the proceedings thereupon. And the said Committee is to
enquire into, and prepare Evidence against the said Lords.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente,

That a bill be brought in for the better Uniting of all His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects.

Ordered, That Sir Tho. Whitegrave, Mr. Birch of Stafford, Apothecary, and
Lieutenant Else, be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this
House, to answer to the Charge given against them at the Bar of this House by
Mr. Dugdale.

Ordered, That Herbert Herring be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, for his Notorious Breach of privilege, by him committed
against M. Colt, a member of this House.

Ordered, That Jeremiah Bubb be Summoned to appear at the Bar of this House
tomorrow morning at Ten of the clock, to answer for the Breach of privilege by
him committed against Mr. Colt, a Member of this House.

A Bill for prohibiting the Importation of Irish Cattle was Read a Second time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be committed, with Instructions to the Committee
to bring in a Clause to be added to the said Bill, declaring, That where any
Irish Cattle shall be found amongst English Cattle all the said Cattle, as well
English as Irish, shall be forfeited.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill for the Exportation of Leather.

Jovis 4. die Novembris 1680.
A Bill for Exportation of Leather, was Read the first time.

Resolved, That this Bill be Read a second time, after Ten of the Clock, in a
full House.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That His Majesty having been
attended with the Address of this House, relating to Mr. Dangerfield, Mr.
Dugdale, Mr. Praunce, and Seignior Francisco de Ferria, His Majesty was pleased
to return this Answer.

That for Mr. Dangerfields Pardon, He had given Order in Council to His
Attourney-general, to Draw up, and cause to pass a Pardon to Mr. Dangerfield,
for all Treasons, and Misprisions of Treason, in Concealing the same, till he
discovered the same to this House, according to the intent of His Majesty's
Royal Proclamation.

That as for an Allowance to mr. Dangerfield, His Majesty will, at the Request
of this House, consider of a Reasonable allowance for him for some time.

That as to an allowance to Mr. Dugdale, he has already some allowance made
him, which His Majesty will continue.

That as to Mr. Praunce, His Majesty will have some consideration of him.

And as to Seignior Francisco, he has an allowance already granted to him, at
the request of the House of Lords.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to inspect the Act Entitled, Trade
Encouraged, made in the Fiftenth year of His Majesty's Reign, and to bring in a
Bill for prohibiting of Scotch Cattle at certain Seasons.

A Bill for the further Enco uragement of the Woollen manufacture of England,
by the general wearing thereof, was Read a second time, and Committed.

Mr. Treby Reports from the Committee of Elections and privileges, That the
said Committee having taken into Consideration the matter to them referred,
touching the Election and Return of members to Serve in this present Parliament
for the Borough of New-Windsor in the County of Berks, had agreed upon Three
Resolves, to be Reported to the House; which he Read in his place, and
afterward delivered the same at the Clerks Table: and are as follows viz.

Resolved, That in the Borough of New Windsor, those Inhabitants only who pay
Scot and Lot, have right to give Voices in the Election of Burgesses to Serve
in Parliament for the said Borough.

Resolved, That Richard Winwood Esquire; is duly chosen a Burgess to Serve in this
present Parliament, for the Borough of New Windsor.

Resolved, That Samuel Starkey Esquire; is duly chosen a Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament, for the Borough of New Windsor.

The said Resolves being Read to the House, and the Question being severally
put, whether this House should agree with the said Committee in the said
several and respective Resolves:

It was Resolved in the affirmative.

Ordered, That the Clerk of the Crown do attend this House on Saturday morning
next, at Ten of the clock, with the Return for the Borough of New Windsor; and
that the Mayor for the same Borough do then likewise attend and amend the said
return, according to the Resolves of this House.

The House taking notice that a petition in the behalf of the City of
Rochester, touching the Election of a Citizen to Serve in this present
Parliament for the said City, was yesterday Read, and referred to the Committee
of Elections and Privileges; and that the House had before that time ordered
Mr. Speaker to Issue out his Warrant for a new Writ, for the Electing of a
member to serve for the said City, in the room of Sergeant Barrel deceased,
who was returned one of the Citizens to Serve for the same City in this present
Parliament; And Mr. Speaker acquainting the House that he had not as yet Issued
out his Warrant for the said Writ:

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker do forbear to Issue out his warrant for such writs,
until the matters contained in the said petition be determined.

A Bill to Disable James Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial Crown of England
and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, was Read the first time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be Read a second time on Saturday morning next at
Ten of the clock.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to Inspect the Laws that are in being
touching the maintenance of the poor; and to bring in a Bill or Bills for
Regulating and prevetning the increase of the poor in this Kingdom. Sabbati 6.
die Novembris 1680.

THe Clerk of the Crown, and the Mayor of New Windsor being called in, did
Amend the Return for the said Borough, by taking off the Indenture whereby John
Carry and John Powney Esquires were Returned.

Ordered, That the Thanks of this House be given Dr. Dove, for his Sermon
yesterday Preached before this House at St. Margarets, and that he be desired
to Print the same: And Mr. Speaker is desired to acquaint him with the Desire
of the House to Print his Sermon.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to Inspect the Law concerning the
Anniversary Reading of the Narrative of the Gunpowder Plot, in Churches, on
every Fifth day of November, and to Report the same to this House.

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

That it is the Opinion of this House, That the Acts of Parliament made in the
Reigns of Queen Elisabeth and King James, against Popish Recusants, ought not
to be extended against Protestant Dissenters.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to prepare and bring in a Bill for
Repeal of all or any part of the Act of Parliament made in the Thirty fifth
Year of the Reign of Queen Elisabeth, chapter the first Printed in the Statute
Book of Pulton.

A Bill for Exporting of Cloth and other Woollen Manufactures into Turkey, was
Read the first time.

Resolved, That this Bill be Read a second time.

Ordered, That the Report of the Bill for Prohibiting the Importation of Irish
Cattle, be made on Monday morning next.

Mr. Jennison being called in, gave his Information at the Bar, relating to the
horrid Popish plot.

Ordered, That Mr. Jennison do put his Information in Writing, and present the
same to the House on Monday morning next.

A Bill to disable James Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial Crown of England
and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, was Read the Second time

Resolved,

That the Bill be committed to a Committee of the whole House.

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

That it be an Instruction to the said Committee, That the Exclusion in the
said Bill, do extend to the person of the Duke of York only.

Resolved,

That this House do resolve into a Committee of the whole House on Monday
morning next at Ten of the Clock, to proceed to the Consideration of the said
Bill.

Lunae 8. die Novembris 1680.
A Petition of the Turkey Company was Read.

Ordered, That the Petition be referred, upon the Debate of the House, to the
Committee to whom the Bill for the better Encouragement of the Woollen
manufacture, by the general Wearing thereof, is referred, to Examine the matter
of the said petition, and to Report the same, with their Opinions therein, to
this House: and the said Committee is empowered to send for persons, papers and
Records.

A Petition of the Bailiffs and Burgesses of the Borough of Poole in the County
of Montgomery, touching the Election of a Burgess to serve in this present
Parliament, for the Shire-town of Montgomery was Read.

And a debate arising in the House, whether the said petition be Exhibited
within the time prefixed by the Orders of this House?

The Question being put, whether the said Petition shall be referred to the
consideration of the Committee of Elections and privileges? it passed in the
Negative.

Sir John Trevor Reports from the Committee to whom the Bill for prohibiting
the Importation of Irish Cattle was committed, several amendments and Clauses
agreed by the said Committee, to be made and added to the said Bill; which he
Read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the clerks Table
where the same being twice read, they were with some amendments made at the
Clerks Table, upon the Question, severally agreed to.

Resolved, etc. That the Bill, with the amendments and clauses agreed to, be
Engrossed.

Ordered, That Mr. Joseph Paget, be sent for in custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, to answer for notorious misdemeanors by him committed
against the Privilege of this House.

A Message from the Lords, by Mr. Baron Atkins, and Mr Baron Gregory.

Mr. Speaker,

The Lords have commanded Us to acquaint you, That they desire a present
Conference with this House in the Painted Chamber, to impart to this House
several Examinations, relating to the Popish plot in Ireland.

The Messengers being withdrawn,

Resolved, That this House does agree to meet the Lords at a present conference
in the Painted Chamber, as is desired.

The Messengers being called in,

Mr. Speaker acquaints them, That the House had agreed to meet the Lords at a
present Conference, as desired.

Managers appointed to manage the said conference.

Mr. Hambden Reports from the said conference, That the same was managed by the
Lord Privy Seal; and that his Lordship did then deliver to them several
Examinations in Writing, relating to the Popish plot in Ireland, contained in
Seven several parcels of paper, which he delivered in at the Clerks Table, And
further reported that his Lordship acquainted them, that all other papers in
the Custody of the Clerk, belonging to their House relating to the Popish plot,
should be delivered to the Clerk of this House, he giving acquittances for the
same.

Ordered, That the several papers now delivered in at the Clerks Table, be Read
tomorrow morning, at ten of the clock.

Ordered, That Mr. Hethrington do attend this House tomorrow morning, at Ten of
the Clock, to give in his Information, relating to the horrid Popish plot.

A Petition of Sir Robert Cann, Knight and Baronet, now Prisoner in the Tower,
was Read, whereby he acknowledged his Offense, and begs the Pardon of the
House, and to be released from his Imprisonment.

Ordered, That Sir Robert Cann be discharged from his Imprisonment, and that
Mr. Speaker do Issue out his Warrant for the doing thereof.

The House then Resolved into a Committee of the whole House, to proceed in the
Consideration of the Bill to disable James Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial
Crown of England and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

Sir Willam Pulteney took the Chair of the Committee.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Sir William Pulteney humbly moved from the said Committee of the whole House,
That the House would be pleased to Order the Sergeant at Arms, to go into the
hall, and the Court of Requests, and to require the immediate attendance of
such Members of the house a are of the long Robe, and all others the Members of
the house. And that the house would then Resolve again into a Committee of the
whole house, to proceed further in the Consideration of the said Bill.

Ordered, That the Sergeant at Arms do go into the hall, and the Court of
Requsts, and to Require all the Members of the long Robe and all other the
Members of the house, to give their immediate at tendance on the Service of
this house.

Resolved, That this house do now Resolve into a Committee o^ the whole house,
to proceed further in the Consideration of the said Bill.

Then Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

Sir William Pulteney took the Chair of the Committee.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Sir. William Pulteney Reports from the Committee of the whol^ house, That the
said Committeee had taken into Consideration the said Bill, and other the
matters to them referred, and had agreed up on an amendment to be made, and a
Clause to be added to the sai^ Bill; which he Read in his place, and afterward
delivered the sam^ in at the Clerks Table, where the same were twice Read.

And upon the Question, severally agreed to.

An amendment being proposed to be made at the Table, in the sai^ Bill, by
filling up the Blanks in the 11th line of the 3d page of the said Bill, the
first with the word, Fifth, the second with the word November in the Year of
our Lord God. 1680. was upon the Question agreed to.

A Clause being tendered to be added to the said Bill, and Read to to the
house, and several amendments being made therein.

Resolved, That the said Clause so amended, be added to the said Bill.

Resolved, That the said Bill, with the said several Clauses and amendments, be
Engrossed.

Ordered, That Mr. Jennison do attend this house tomorrow morning at Ten of the
Clock, with his Evidence in Writing.

Martis 9. die Novembris 1680.
Ordered

THat all Committees that are discontinued, be revived, and do meet at Three of
the Clock this Afternoon, in the respective places formerly appointed.

A Petition of the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of Silk
Thorsters London, was Read.

Ordered, That this petition be referred to the consideration of the Committee
to whom the Bill for the Encouragement of the Woollen Manufacture, by the
general Wearing thereof, is committed, to Examine the matter thereof, and
Report the same, with their Oppnions therein to this Hose.

A petition of the Bailiffs, Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of
Silk-Weavers London, was Read;

And the Question being put, whether the said petition should be referred to
the consideration of the Committee to whom the Bill for the better
Encouragement of the Woollen-manufacture, by the general Wearing thereof,
stands committed?

It passed, after a long Debate, in the Negative.

Resolved, That the said petition be referred to the consideration of the Grand
committee for Trade; And they are to proceed upon the same in the first place.
And they are then likewise to consider of the present state of the East India
company, and to Report the same with their Opinions therein, to the house.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the house, that he had a message to deliver
from his Majesty to this house; And the same being by him delivered in Writing
to Mr. Speaker, was Read to the house by Mr. Speaker, and is as follows.

CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty desires this House, as well for the satisfaction of his people, as
of himself, to Expedite such matters as are depending before them, relating to
Popery, and the Plot; and would have them rest assured, That all Remedies they
can tender to his Majesty, conducing to those Ends, shall be very acceptable to
him; Provided they be such as may consist with Preserving the Succession of the
Crown in its due and legal Course of Descent.

Mr. Hambden acquaints the house, That in the Entry made in the Journal of this
house, of the Report by him yesterday made from the conference had with the
Lords, it appears, that in part of his Report which relates to the delivery of
such papers relating to the Plot, to the clerk of this house, there is an
omission of these words, (Received from the Clerks of the Council.

Ordered, That the said words be added in the Entry of the said Report in the
Journal.

Ordered, That Mr. Richard Janeway be sent for in custody of the Sergeant at
Arms attending this house, to Answer at the Bar of this house, for the Breach
of privilege by him committed against Sir Edward Deering. a member of this
house.

Mr. Turbervill being called in, gave Information at the Bar of this house, of
the Horrid Popish plot, and delivered the same in writing.

Mr. Jennison being called in, delivered his Information formerly given at the
Bar of this house in writing.

Mr. Dangerfield being called in, acquainted the House, that he was advised,
That the Pardon now granted to him by His Majesty, is in some particulars
defective. And humbly desired this House to represent the same to His Majesty.

Ordered, That an humble application be made to His Majesty from this House, by
such of the members of this House as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, desiring His Majesty to grant to Mr. Dangerfield a full and general
pardon of all Treasons, misprisions of Treason, Felonies, and other crimes and
misdemeanors, and particular crimes to be specified, by him committed, to the
time of his last Discovery made to this house, of the Popish plot.

And that His Majesty would in like manner be Graciously pleased to grant to
Mr. Edw: Turbervill, who has this day given in Evidence at the Bar of this
house, relating to the horrid Popish plot, a full and General pardon; And that
His Majesty would be pleased to take him into His Royal protection and care,
and grant him some allowanee for his subsistence.

Ordered, That all the Informations already given in at the Bar of this House
in writing, relating to the Popish plot, be Entered upon the Journal of this
House. And that all the said Informations be printed, being first perused and
Signed by Mr. Speaker; and that Mr. Speaker Nominate and appoint the persons to
Print the same. And that Mr. Dangerfield have the Benefit of the Printing of
his said Information.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to consider of means to preserve the
Evidence of Mr. Bedlow, and others, that have, or shall give Evidence relating
to the Popish plot.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to Inspect the Journals of the two last
Parliaments, and to make a Report of their proceedings, as well relating to the
Popish plot, as of the Impeachment against the Lords in the Tower, do present
their reports to the House on Thursday morning next, in writing.

Ordered, That Mr. Treby do on Thursday morning next present to the House in
writing, the Information by him lately given to this House, of the matters by
him reported in the last Parliament, relating to the horrid Popish plot.

Ordered, That Joseph Thompson Clerk, be sent for in custody of the Sergeant at
Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar of this House, for his high
Misdemeanour against the privilege of this House.

The Information of Mr. Murphy, relating to the Popish plot in Ireland, being
Read.

Ordered, That Mr. Hethrington do attend his House tomorrow morning at ten of
the Clock, to give his Evidence relating to the said plot.

Ordered, That the rest of the Papers relating to the Popish plot in Ireland,
now in the hands of the clerk of this House, be Read to morrow morning.

Mercurij 10. die Novembris 1680.
A Bill for Regulating the Elections of members to serve in the Commons House
of Parliament, was Read the first time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be Read a second time.

An Engrossed Bill for Prohibiting the Importation of Cattle from Ireland, was
Read a third time.

Resolved, That the said Bill do pass; and that the Title be, An Act
Prohibiting the Importation of Cattle from Ireland.

Ordered, That Sir John Trevor do carry up the said Bill to the Lords, for
their concurrence.

And the same Bill was carried up to the Lords accordingly.

A message from the Lords, by the Lord Chief Baron Mountague, and Mr. Baron
Atkins.

M. Speaker,

THe Lords have commanded us to acquaint you, That they have passed an Act for
Freeing the City of London, and His Majesty's Court, and parts adjacent from
Popish Inhabitants, and providing against other Dangers which may arise from
Papists. To which their Lordships desire the concurrence of this House.

The House taking into consideration His Majesty's Gracious Message now Read to
the House, and a Debate arising thereupon.

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

That a Committee be appointed to Draw up an Humble address to His Majesty,
upon the Debate of the House, in answer to His Majesty's Gracious Message.

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

That this House will proceed in the prosecution of the Lords in the Tower, and
will forthwith begin with William Viscount Stafford.

Ordered, That Sir William Jones be added to the Committee appointed to Inspect
the Journals to the two last Parliaments, relating to the Popish plot, and the
Impeachments of the Lords in the Tower. And the said Committee is to sit de die
in diem.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That according to the Order of the
House, Yesterday made, His Majesty had been attended in Council with the
address of this House: And that His Majesty was pleased to return this answer:
That as to the Pardon for Mr. Dangerfield, it should be not only for all
Treasons, and misprisions of Treason, but also for all Felonies, Outlawries,
and misdemeanors whatsoever. And that He would grant the like Pardon to Mr.
Turbervill, and would consider of an allowance for his maintenance.

Jovis 11. die Novemberis 1680.
Ordered,

THat Mr. Speaker do Issue out his (...) the Clerk of the Crown, for a new Writ
for the Electi^^ (...) to serve in this present Parliament for the Borough of
Cricklade in the County of Wilts, in the room of Hungerford Dunch Esquire; deceased.

A Petition of Mr. Richard Harnage was Read.

Ordered,

That Mr. Harnage be Discharged from the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, paying his fees.

A Bill to prevent the Offenses of Bribery, and Debauchery in the Election of
Members to serve in the Commons House of Parliament, was Read the first time.

Resolved,

That this Bill be read a second time on Monday morning next; And that the Bill
for Regulating Elections of members to serve in the Commons House of
Parliament, be read at the same time.

Mr. Treby Reports from the Committee of Elections and privileges, That the
said Committee having taken into consideration the matter of Election and
return for the Borough of Haslemere in the County of Surrey, that the Committee
had agreed upon three Resolves to be reported to the House, which he read in
his place, and are as follows, viz.

Resolved,

That Sir William Moore Baronet, is not duly chosen a Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament, for the Borough of Haslemere in the County of Surrey.

Resolved,

That Denzil Onslow Esquire; is duly chosen for the same.

Resolved,

That Francis Dorrington Esquire; is duly chosen for the same.

Which report being delivered in at the Clerks Table, the House did agree with
the Committee in the said several and respective Resolves.

Ordered,

That the Clerk of the Crown, and the Bailiff of the said Borough of Haslemere
do attend the House tomorrow Morning, at Ten of the Clock, to amend the said
return.

Ordered,

That William Rapley, Bailiff of the said Borough of Haslemere, be sent for in
custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar of
this House for the misdemeanors by him committed in the Election and return of
Members to serve in this present Parliament, for the Borough of Haslemere.

Ordered,

That Mr. Turbervill and Mr. Jennison have the leave of this House to Print
their several Informations relating to the horrid Popish Plot.

Ordered,

That an humble address be made to his Majesty, by such Members of this House
as are of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, for a full Pardon to Mr.
Jennison of all Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, and other Misdemeanors by
him committed, to the time of the Discovery made by him to this House, of the
horrid Popish Plot.

Mr. Hethrington, Mr. Murphey, M. John Fitzgerald, and Mr. Daniel Fitzgerald,
being called in, made a discovery at the Bar, of the Popish plot in Ireland.

Ordered,

That all the Witnesses, touching the Popish plot in Ireland, do attend this
House tomorrow morning, at ten of the clock.

Sir William Jones Reports from the Committee appointed to draw up an address
to his Majesty, upon the Debate of the House, in Answer to his Majesty's
Gracious Message: An Address agreed upon by the Committee, which he Read in his
place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table; where the same
being read was upon the Question, Agreed to by the House.

Ordered,

That such members of this House as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, be desired to know His Majesty's pleasure when this house-shall attend
him with the said Address.

An Engrossed Bill to disable James Duke of York to inherit the Imperial Crown
of England and Ireland, with the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging
was Read a third time.

Resolved,

That this Bill do pass. And that the Title be, An Act for Securing of the
Protestant Religion, by Disabling James Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial
Crown of England and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging.

Ordered,

That the Lord Russel do carry up this Bill to the Lords for their Concurrence.

Veneris 12. die Novembris 1680.
A Petition of Sir Robert Yeamans, in custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending
this House, was read.

Ordered,

That the said Sir Robert Yeamans be brought to the Bar of this House tomorrow
morning at ten of the clock.

A Petition of Richard Janeway, in custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending
this House, was read.

Ordered,

That the said Richard Janeway be brought to the Bar of this House tomorrow
morning at ten of the clock.

An engrossed Bill sent from the Lords, entitled, An Act for Freeing the City
of London, and His Majesty's Courts, and parts adjacent, from Popish
Inhabitants, and Providing against other Dangers which may arise from Papists,
was read the first time.

Resolved,

That the said Bill be read a second time, after ten of the clock, in a full
House.

The Clerk of the Crown; and the Bailiff of the Borough of Haslemere in the
County of Surrey, being called in, amended the Return of the said Borough, by
taking off the Indenture, whereby Sir William Moore Baronet, and James Gresham
Esquire; were Returned, and by razing out the Name of Sir William Moore, and
inserting the Name of Francis Dorington Esquire; in the other Indenture.

Mr. Hobart Bourk, Mr. Thomas Sampson, Mr. John Macnamarra, and Eustace Coning,
being severally called in, gave an Account of some Proceedings relating to the
Popish Plot in Ireland.

Ordered,

That an humble Address be made to His Majesty by such Members of this House as
are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to desire His Majesty to
grant a full and effectual Pardon to Edmond Murphy, Hobart Bourke, Thomas
Sampson, John Macnamarra, John Fitzgerald, and Eustace Coning, who have made a
considerable Discovery to this House, of the Popish Plot in Ireland, for all
Treasons, Misprisions of Treason, Crimes and Offenses by them committed, to the
time of their making their respective Discoveries to this House. And that His
Majesty would likewise be pleased to take them into His Royal Protection and
Care.

Mr. David Fitzgerald being called in, gave in a further Information to the
House, relating to the Popish Plot in Ireland.

Resolved,

That a Message be sent to the Lords to acquaint them with the Resolution of
this House, to proceed to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower, and forthwith to
begin with William Viscount Stafford, and to desire their Lordships to appoint
a convenient Day for the Trial of the said William Viscount Stafford; And
likewise to desire their Lordships, That the Lords in the Tower may be confined
and kept from holding Correspondence with one another, as persons impeached and
committed for High Treason by Law ought to be. And, That Sir William Jones do
go up with this Message to the Lords,

Sir Francis Winnington reported, and delivered in at the Table, the Abstracts
of the Proceedings of the Two last Parliaments, as well relating to the Popish
Plot, as to the Impeachments against the Lords in the Tower.

Sir William Jones acquaints the House, That he had, according to the Order of
the House, attended the Lords with the Message, and that their Lordships were
pleased to return Answer by him to this effect, viz.

That as to that part of the Message relating to the Confinement of the Lords,
and their Correspondence, they had already given Order therein, as desired, by
this House. That as to the other part of the Message, relating to the
appointing of a Day for the Trial of William Viscount Stafford, their Lordships
have appointed Tuesday come fortnight for the said Trial.

Ordered,

That a further Address be made to His Majesty, by such Members of this House
as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, humbly to desire His
Majesty, That all Papers, Letters, Examinations, Writings, and other Evidences
relating to the Horrid Popish Plot, which have been delivered in to the Clerks
of the Council, or the Secretaries of State, since the Dissolution of the last
Parliament, may be transmitted to this House.

Ordered,

That Mr. Sergeant Maynard, Mr. George Pelham, and Mr. Paul Foley be added to
the Committee appointed to prepare Evidence against the Lords in the Tower.

Ordered,

That an humble Address be made to his Majesty, by such Members of this House
as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to desire His Majesty to
give Orders for the issuing out a Sum of money, for defraying the Charges of
Summoning the Witnesses. and other Expenses incident to the Prosecution and
Trials of the Lords in the Tower.

Ordered,

That such Moneys as His Majesty shall be pleased to direct to be issued for
the Uses aforesaid, be deposited in the hands of Mr. Charles Clare.

Sabbati 13 die Novembris 1680.
A Petition of Richard Whitehead Esquire; touching the Election for the Borough of
Linnington in the County of Southampton, was Read.

Ordered, That the said Petition be Refered to the Committee of Elections and
Privileges, to Examine the Matter thereof, and to Report the same, with their
Opinions therein, to the House.

Richard Janeway in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, being called in,
acquainted the House, That the Pamphlet by him published, for which he stands
Committed, was Printed by (...) Everingham, (...) Bradwell, and Thomas James
Samuel Lee, and Thomas Simons, Stationers, and that the Copy by which the same
was Printed was delivered by Mr. Andrew Tarington.

Ordered, That the said Mr. Yarington, Mr. James, Mr. Everingham, Mr. Bradwell,
Mr. Simons and Mr. Lee, be summoned to Attend at the Bar of this House on
Monday Morning next at ten of the Clock, to Answer the said Charge to the
House, concerning the Printing and publishing of the said phamphlet.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That such Members thereof as are of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, had attended His Majesty, pursuant
to Five several Orders of Address from this House to His Majesty, and that His
Majesty's Answer to the several Addresses, was to this effect.

That as to the First Address, whereby the House desired to know His Majesty's
Pleasure, when this House should attend him: His Majesty was pleased to Appoint
three of the clock this afternoon, for the House to attend Him in the
Banqueting House.

That as to the second Address: whereby this House did make humble Application
to His Majesty for the pardon of Mr. Jenison:

His Majesty was pleased to Answer, That He will Grant Him a pardon for all
Treasons, misprisions of Treason, Felonies, and Outlawries for Felonies.

That as to the third Address, relating to money to defray the Incident charges
in the profecution of the Lords in the Tower:

His Majesty was pleased to Answer, That he had Directed 100 l. to be Issued
out to such persons as is or shall be Appointed by this House for that purpose

That as to the Fourth Address, Desirng that all such papers, Letters,
Examinations, Writings, and other Evidences relating to the Popish plot, as
were delivered in to the Clerks of the Council, since the Dissolution of the
last Parliament, might be Transmitted to this House: his Majesty was pleased to
return this answer, That upon the first sitting of the Committee of
Examinations of the House of Lords, upon the Plot, his Majesty had Directed,
That all such papers, Letters, Examinations, Writings, and other Evidences
relating to the Plot, as were delivered in to the Clerks of the Council since
the Dissolution of the last Parliament, to be Transmited to the said Committee
of Lords, where they now still remain.

That as to the last Address, desiring a pardon for Edmond Murphy Thomas
Sampson, John Macnamarra: Hobart Bourke, John Fiz-Gearld, and Eustace Coning,
his Majesty was pleased to Answer, That he would Grant a pardon to all the said
several persons, for all Treasons, misprisions of Treason, Felonies, and
Outlawries for Felonies.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to Inspect the Laws concerning paving
and Repairing of the Streets, and Regulating of Hackney Coaches, and to inquire
into the proceedings of the Two last Parliaments, relating to Hackney Coaches,
and to report the same, with their Opinions therein, to the House, and to
prepare and bring in a Bill for Regulating of hackney coaches, repairing,
paving, and cleansing of streets, and opening of passages in and about the
Cities of London and Westminster.

Sir Robert Yeamans being, according to the Order Yesterday made, brought to
the Bar of this House, did acknowledge the Offense by him committed, and humbly
begged the pardon of the House. And being withdrawn,

Ordered, That Sir Robert Yeamans be again brought to the Bar of this House,
and do receive the Censure of this House upon his knees, from Mr. Speaker, and
be then discharged from the Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, paying his Fees.

And Sir Robert Yeamans being accordingly brought to the Bar, and there
kneeling; Mr. Speaker, after having given him the Censure of the House,
acquainted him that he was discharged, paying his Fees.

Mr. Norris being called in, gave an Information in Writing, relating to the
Popish plot, which was Read at the Clerks Table.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to receive Informations concerning the
Popish plot, and to inquire into the same, and to Report the same to the House
as often as they shall see occasion. And the Committee is Empowered to send for
persons, papers, and Records:

And that the Information this day given at the Bar by Mr. Norris, be referred
to the consideration of the said Committee, who are to Examine the matter
thereof, and to report the same, with their Opinions there in, to the House.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwyn and Sir John Hoskins.

Mr. Speaker,

THe Lords have commanded us to acquaint you, that they have agreed to the Bill
sent from this House Entitled, An Act Prohibiting the Importation of Cattle
from Ireland, without any Amendment.

Ordered, That the report made and delivered Yesterday by Sir Francis
Winnington, be read to the house on Monday morning next, at Nine of the clock.

Mr. Trenchard Reports from the Committee, to whom the Petition of diverse
Citizens of London against Sir George Jeffereys, Recorder of the said City, was
referred, That the said Committee had taken the same into consideration, and
had heard the Evidence of the petitioners, and of the said Sir George
Jeffereys, and had agreed upon a Vote to be reported to the House, which he
read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table,
and is as follows:

Resolved, That this Committee is of Opinion, That by the Evidence, given to
this Committee, it does appear, that Sir George Jeffereys Recorder of the City
of London, by traducing and obstructing Petitioning for the Sitting of this
Parliament, has betrayed the Rights of the Subject.

Resolved, That this House does agree with the Committee, that Sir George
Jeffereys, by traducing and obstructing Petitioning for the Sitting of this
Parliament, has betrayed the Rights of the Subject.

Ordered, That an humble Address be made to his Majesty, to remove Sir George
Jeffereys out of all public Offices; And a Committee is appointed to draw up
the same.

Ordered, That the Members of this House that Serve for the City of London, do
communicate this Vote, and Resolution of this House, relating to Sir George
Jeffereys; to the Court of Aldermen for the City of London.

Ordered, That the Committee last mentioned, do enquire into all such persons
as have been advising or promoting of the late Proclamation, styled, A
Proclamation against Tumultuous Petitioning; and they are Empowered to send for
Persons, Papers, and Records.

Lunae 15 die Novembris 1680.
A Bill against the Importation of Cattle from Scotland, was Read the First
time.

Resolved, That the Bill be Read asecond time, on Saturday morning next, at ten
of the Clock.

Mr. Treby Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges, That the
Committee had taken the matter, touching the Election and Return of Members to
Serve in this present Parliament, for the City of Westminster, and had agreed
upon Four Resolves, which he Read in his place, and afterward delivered them
in at the Clerks Table, and are as follows:

Resolved, That the King's menial Servants, not having proper Houses of their
own within the City of Westminster, have not Right to give Voices in the
Elction of Citizens to serve in Parliament, for the said City.

Resolved, That Sir William Pulteney is duly chosen a Citizen to serve in this
present Parliament, for the City of Westminster.

Resolved, That Sir Francis Withins was not duly chosen a Citizen to serve in
this Parliament, for the City of Westminister.

Resolved, That Sir William Waller is duly chosen a Citizen to servein this
Parliament for the City of Westminster.

The House agreed upon several Questions with the Committee, in the said
several and respective resolves.

Ordered, That the Clerk of the Crown, and the Bailiff of Westminster, do
attend this House tomorrow morning, at Ten of the clock, to amend the Return,
according to the Resolution of the House.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That His Majesty had sent a Message
to the House in writting, which he delivered at the Clerks Tabie; and being
Read by Mr. Speaker, is as follows.

CHARLES REX.

HIs Majesty did in His Speech, at the opening of this Session, desire the
Advice and Assistance of His Parliament, in relation to Tangier: the condition
and Importance of the place obliges His Majesty to put this House in mind
again. That He relies upon them for the suport of it, without which it cannot
be much longer preserved. His Majesty does therefore very earnestly recommend
Tangier again to the due and speedy consideration and care of this House.

Resolved That this House will proceed in the consideration of His Majesty's
Message on Wednesday morning next, at Ten of the clock.

An Engrossed Bill sent down from the Lords, Entitled An Act, for the better
Regulating the Trials of the Peers of England, was read a second time.

Resolved, That this Bill be committed, upon the Debate of the House.

A Petition of William Rapley late Bailiff of Haslemere, in the County of
Surrey, now in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, was Read.

Ordered, That the said William Rapley be brought to the Bar of this House
tomorrow morning at Ten of the clock.

Ordered, That the two last Bills concerning the Regulating of Elections of
Members to Serve in the Commons House of Parliment, be Read a second time
tomorrow morning.

Mr. Dugdale being called in, gave his further Information at the Bar Relating
to the Popish Plot, in writing.

A Petition of Sir Tho: Whitegrave, Francis Eld, and Sampson Birch, was Read.

Ordered, That the consideration of this Petition be Referred to the Committee
appointed to receive Informations concerning the Popish Plot, and to Enquire
into the same: And they are to Report the same, with their Opinions therein, to
this House.

Ordered, That Mr. Dudgale have Liberty to Print his own Narative given to this
House, relating to the Popish Plot.

Mr. Bourke, Mr. Macnamarre, and Eustace Coning, being called in, presented
their several Informations formerly given at the Bar of this House, relating to
the Popish Hot in Ireland, in Writing.

Mr. Yarrington. Mr. Simonds, Mr. Lee, Mr. Janeway, Mr. Everingham Mr. James,
and Mr. Bradwell being called in, and severally Examined touching a Pamphlet
lately printed, wherein are several reflections upon Sir Edward Deering, a
Member of this House. And thesaid Mr. Yarrington acquainting the House, That
all the Animadversions contained in the said Pamphlet, were Penned by Dr.
Tongue, and that he received the Abstract of the several Lettets therein
mentioned, from a Scrivener in Essex Court in the Temple: And a Debate arising
in the House upon the whole matter,

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

That all the reflective parts of the said Pamphlet upon Sir Edward Deering a
Member of this House, are False, Scandalous, and Libellous.

Ordered, That Dr. Tongue Have notice to attend this House tomorrow Morning at
Ten of the Clock.

Ordered, That Mr. Yarrington, Mr. Simonds, Mr. Lee, Mr. Everingham, Mr. James,
Mr. Bradwell, and Robert Groom Scriverner, be Committed to the Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms attending this House for their Breach of Privilege by them
committed against Sir Edward Deering a Member of this House.

Ordered That Richard Janeway be discharged from the Custody of the Sergeant at
Arms Paying his Fees, and that he receive the Censure of the House upon his
knees from Mr. Speaker; which was done accordingly,

Martis 16. die Novembris 1680.
THe Clerk of the Crown and the Bailiff of Westminster being called in, Amended
the Return of members to serve in this present Parlialiament, for the said City
of Westminster, by razing out the name of Sir Francis Withins,, and inserting
the name of Sir William Waller.

And then the house Adjourned to 8 of the clock tomorrow morning.

Mercurij 17. die Novembris 1680.
THe House, according to the Order of Monday last, taking into consideration
his Majesty's message relating to Tangier,

Resolved Nemine contradicente.

That a Committee be appointed to draw up an address to be presented to his
Majesty, upon the Debate of the house. humbly representing to his Majesty, the
dangerous State and condition of the Kingdom, in anser to his Majesty's said
message.

Ordered, That Mr. Treby do make his report in Writing on saturday morning next.

A Debate arising in the house, That an address be made to his Majesty, humbly
to desire his Majesty, to remove George Earl of Hallifax, from his Majesty's
presence and Councils for ever:

Resolved, That an address be made to his Majesty, humbly to desire his
Majesty, to remove George Earl of Hallifax from his Majesty's Presence and
Councils for ever.

Ordered, That Mr. Dugdale do attend this house tomorrow morning at ten of the
clock.

Jovis 18. die Novembris 1680.
SIr Franeis Winnington's report, consisting of several Abstracts taken out of
the Journa's of this House, and of the Lords House of the proceedings of the
two last Parliaments, relating to the Popish plot, and Impeachments of the
Lords in the Tower, was read.

Ordered, That a message be sent to the Lords, to desire their Lordships to
communicate to this house, all such papers, Writings, and Evidences relating to
the Popish plot, as have been received from the Clerks of the Privy Council. as
also all such Examinations and Informations touching the said Plot, as have
been taken by their Lordships at their secret, or any other Committee, in this
or the two last Parliaments, and that Mr, Treby do go up with this message to
the Lords.

The Lord Russel being Elected, and returned to serve both for the Counties of
Bedford and Southampton, in this present Parliament, Declared his choice to
serve for the County of Bedford.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker do Issue out his Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown,
to make out a new Writ for the Electing of a Knight to serve in this present
Parliament, for the County of Southampton.

Ordered; That Edward Brett of Dimsdon near Newcastle, in the County of
Stafford, be sent for in custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this house,
to answer at the Bar, fot a notorious Breach of Privilege by him committed
against this house.

Mr. Lewis, being called in, gave an Information at the Bar of this house,
relating to the Popish plot.

Ordered, That an humble address be made to his Majesty, by such members of
this house as are of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to desire his
Majesty to grant to Mr. Lewis a Full and General pardon, and to take him into
his Royal protection and care, and to grant him some allowance. And that in the
several pardons already granted, upon the addresses of this house, to all such
persons as have given Evidence to this House relating to the Popish plot, his
Majesty's Grace and pardon may be extended to all crimes and misdemeanors
whatsoever by them committed, and that to this time.

Ordered, That Mr. Lewis have the leave of this house to print his Information
this day given in at the Bar of this house.

Mr. Treby acquaints the house, That he had attended the Lords with the message
of this house; and that their Lordships had returned answer, That they will
cause to be delivered to this House the several Papers, Writings, Evidences,
Examinations, and Informations desired by this House.

A Petition of Mr. Lee, Mr. Simonds, Mr. Everingham, Mr. James, and Mr.
Bradwell, in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, being Read.

Ordered,

That all the said persons be called in, and do receive the Censure of this
House at the Bar, upon their knees, from Mr. Speaker, and be then discharged,
paying their Fees; which was done accordingly.

Ordered.

That a Committee be appointed to Search into, and Examine the papers of Mr.
Gilbert Crough of Staple-Inn, and do Report the same to this House.

Ordered,

That Mr. Crouch and his Son attend at the Bar of this House tomorrow Morning
at Ten of the Clock.

Veneris 19. Novembris 1680.
SIr George Downing Reports from the Committee, to whom the additional Bill
touching persons buried in Woollen was referred, some amendments agreed on by
the said Committee to be made to the same, which he read in his place, and
afterward delivered them in at the clerks table where the same being twice
read, were upon the Question Agreed.

Ordered, That the Bill* with the Amendments agreed to, be engrossed.

Ordered, That Seignior Francisco de Ferria have leave to Print the Information
by him given at the Bar of this House.

A Petition of Benjamin Harris, a Prisoner in Execution at the Kings Suit for a
Fine of 500 l. upon a Misdemeanor by him committed, was read.

Resolved, That an humble Application be made to His Majesty from this House,
by such Members of the House as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, to desire His Majesty to pardon and remit the said Fine.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to prepare and draw up a Bill for
Ascertaining of Fines upon Misdemeanors.

Robert Groom being called in, and having given an Account at the Bar
concerning the late Pamphlet, Entitled, A Damnable Popish Plot, etc.

Ordered, That the said Robert Groom be discharged from the Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms attending this House, without paying any Fees.

Resolved, That an humble Address be presented to His Majesty, to desire His
Majesty to appoint a Day for a Solemn Fast and Humiliation to be kept
throughout the Kingdom, upon the Debate of the House.

Mr. Sergeant Rigby Reports from the Committee appointed to enquire after all
such Persons as have offended against the Right of the Subject, to Petition His
Majesty for the Siting of the Parliament. That the Committee had directed him
to make a Special Report of the Presentiments of the Grand Jury for the County
of Somerset, for the last Lent Assizes, and of the Grand Jury for the County of
Devon for the last Summer Assizes; which Presentiments he delivered in at the
Clerks Table: And further, Reported, That Captain William Castle being Summoned
to attend the said Committee, did, in contempt of the said Order, neglect to
attend the Committee: And that the Committee desired the Directions of the
House therein.

Ordered, That Sir Giles Philips, and William Coleman, being the Foremen of the
said Grand Juries, be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending
this House, to answer at the Bar of this House, for the Breach of Privilege by
them committed against this House.

Ordered, That the said Captain William Castle be sent for in Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar of this House; for
the breach of Privilege by him committed against this House.

Ordered, That Mr. John Hutchinson, and Mr. Henry Walrond, being of the said
Grand Juries, be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this
House, to answer at the Bar of this House, for the breach of Privilege by them
committed against this House.

Ordered, That the Clerk of the Assizes for the Western Circuit, and the
respective Clerks of the Peace and Under-Sheriffs of the said Counties of Devon
and Somerset, be Summoned by the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to
attend at the Bar of the House.

Ordered, That Mr. Thomas War, and Mr. Edward Strode, be summoned by the
Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to Attend at the Bar of the House on
Monday morning next, at Ten of the Clock.

Resolved, That the Committee appointed to receive Informations relating to the
Popish Plot, have Power likewise to receive Informations relating to the Popish
Plot in Ireland.

Sir Robert Clayton Reports from the Committee appointed to prepare and draw up
the Address concerning Sir George Jeffreys, An Address agreed upon by the
Committee, which he Read in his Place, and afterward delivered the same in at
the Clerks Table, where the same being Read, was upon the Question, Agreed to.

Mr. Zeile being called in, delivered his Information in Writing, relating to
the Popish Plot.

Ordered, That Edward Seymour Esquire; a Member of this House, attend the Service
of this House, in his Place, tomorrow morning, at Ten of the clock.

Ordered, That an humble Application be made from this House to His Majesty, by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to
desire His Majesty to grant to Mr. Zeile a full and General Pardon to this
time; and Grant him some Allowance for his Subsistence.

Ordered, That an humble Application be made from this House te His Majesty, by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
Representing the Condition and Circumstances of Mr. Hethrington, and other the
Witnesses, touching the Popish Plot in Ireland; And to desire His Majesty to
grant them some Allowance for their Support.

Ordered, That an humble Application be made to His Majesty from this House, by
such of the Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, to desire His Majesty to confer upon Mr. Smith (who has made a
considerable Discovery of the Popish Plot) some Ecclesiastical Preferment.

Sabbati die 20. Novembris 1680.
INformation being given to the House, That Mr. William Stawell was Foreman of
the Grand Jury for the County of Devon, the last Summer Assizes, and that by a
mistake, Mr. Colman was ordered to be sent for in Custody, in stead of the said
Mr. Stawell.

Ordered, That Mr. Colman's Name be struck out of the Warrant directed to the
Sergeant at Arms attending this House; And that Mr. Stawell's Name be inserted
instead thereof.

A Complaint being made of a Breach of privilege committed against Mr.
Ayloffe, a Member of this House, by John Dandridge, in arresting and Detaining
in Custody James Newman, Menial servant of the said Mr. Ayloffe, at the Suit of
Richard Rawlins:

Ordered, That the said John Dandridge and Richard Rawlins be sent for in
Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar of
this House, for the said Breach of Privilege.

The Question being put, That the Bill against the Importation of Cattle from
Scotland be now Read a Second time.

It was Resolved in the Affirmative.

The Bill being Read.

Resolved, That the Bill be Committed.

Information being given to the House, That George Eylles had committed a
Breach of privilege against Sir Patience Ward, a Member of this House:

Ordered, That the said George Eyles be sent for in Custody of the Serjeanr at
Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar of this House for the said
Breach of Privilege.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That in pursuance of the Orders of
this House, His Majesty had been attended by such Members thereof as are of His
Majesty's Privy Council, with several addrsses from this House, That as to the
address relating to Sir George Jeffreys, after the same, together with the
Orders and Resolves of the House were Read to His Majesty, His Majesty was
pleased to Return answer, That He would consider of it.

That His Majesty, upon presenting the address for some allowance to Mr. Lewis,
and for a general Pardon to him and all the rest of the Persons that have given
Information relating to the Popish plot, for all Crimes and Misdemeanors
whatsoever, His Majesty was pleased to answer, That His Majesty's Pardon should
extend to all Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever by them committed, to this
time, Perjury only excepted.

That His Majesty was further pleased to answer, That Consideration should be
had of Mr. Lewis, for some reasenable allowance to him.

That as to the address, relating to Mr. Smith, for some Ecclesiastical
Preferment, His Majsty would have him in Consideration.

That as to the address concerning Mr. Hethrington and the rest of the
Witnesses, touching the Popish plot in Ireland, His Majesty, in regard that the
Number and Circumstances of those Persons are not yet well known, had referred
the Consideration thereof to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.

Resolved, That a further address be made to His Majesty from this House, by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to
desire His Majesty, That the Pardons granted to the several persons for whom
application has been already made to His Majesty by this House, may extend to
all Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever by them committed, to the last time of
their respective Discoveries respectively.

Mr. Trenchard Reports from the Committee, to whom is referred to Enquire after
such persons as have offended against the Rights of the Subjects, to Petition
His Majesty for the Sitting the Parliament, That the Committee had ordered him
to make the following Report: viz.

That Information being given to the said Committee, That Examinations were
taken upon Oath in the County of Monmouth by five Justices of the Peace of the
said County, viz. James Herbert, Henry Baker, William Herbert, William Jones,
and Robert Gunter, Esquires, against John Arnold, Esquire, for procuring
Subscriptions to a certain Petition to be presented to His Majesty for the
Sitting of the Parliament: Which said Examination was sent up to the Council
Table by the said Justices, and there Exhibited in Charge, as an Article
against the said Mr. Arnold, and was Subscribed by one Thomas Herbert, Esquire,
who undertook to prosecute the same:

And that the Committee desired the Directions of the House therein:

And further Reported, That the Committee had agreed upon two Resolves, which
are as so lows:

Resolved, That this Committee is of Opinion, That Mr. Thomas Staples, by
obstructing Petitoning to His Majesty for the siting of this Parliament, and
declaring his dislike, and abhorence of such Petitioning, has betrayed the
Rights of the Subject.

Resolved, That this Committee is of Opinion, That Sir Thomas Holt Sergeant at
Law, by obstructing Petitioning to His Majesty for the Sitting of this
Parliament, and declaring his dislike and obhorrence of such Petitioning, has
betrayed the Rights of the Subject.

Which Report he Read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the
Clerks Table: where the same being Read,

The House taking into Consideration the Matters specially Reported.

Ordered, That Mr. Thomas Herbert be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at
Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar of this House for the
Misdemeanors by him committed against the privilege of this House.

The First of the said Resolves being Read a Second time to the House:

Resolved, That this House does agree with the said Committee, That the said
Mr. Thomas Staples, by obstructing Petitioning to His Majesty for the Sitting
of this Parliament, and declaring his dislike ad abhorrence of such
Petitioning, has betrayed the Rights of the Subject.

The Second of the said Resolves being read a second time to the House:

Resolved, That this House does agree with the said Committee, That Sir Thomas
Holt, by obstructing Petitioning to His Majesty for the Sitting of this
Parliament, and declaring his dislike and abhorrence of such Petitioning, has
betrayed the Rights of the Subject.

Ordered, That Mr. Thomas Staples and Sir Thomas Holt be sent for in custody of
the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar of this House
for the Misdemeanors by them committed against the Privilege of this House.

Mr. Treby acquaints the House, that, pursuant to the Order of the House, he
had prepared an Abstract in Writing, of the several Letters and Papers in his
custody, relating to the Popish Plot.

Ordered, That the said Letters and Papers be Printed, and it is recommended to
Mr. Treby to take care therein.

Sir Gilbert Gerard acquaints the House, that he had Articles of Impeachment of
high Crimes, Misdemeanors and Offenses against Edward Seymour Esquire; a Member of
this House, which he delivered in at the Clerks Table.

Ordered, That Mr. Seymour have a Copy of the said Articles, and that he do
make his Answer thereunto on Thursday morning next.

Colonel Birch Reports from the Committee to whom the Petition of Sir Thomas
Whitgrave, Francis Eld, and Sampson. Birch was referred, That the Committee had
agreed upon a Report, which he read in his place, and afterward delivered the
same in at the Clerks Table; where the same being read, is as follows.

That the Committee, upon the Examination of the Information against Francis
Eld Lieutenant of some of the Trained Bands in Stafjordshire, touching his
neglecting to make a full Search in Taxal House upon the Discovery of the late
Plot; and upon hearing of the said Elds Defense to the said Information, the
said Eld did confess the Information given by Mr. Dugdale to be true; but says
that his Warrant given him under the Deputy Lieutenants hands, was only to
Search for Offensive Arms of War: And that he was to take to his Assistance a
Constable, or other Civil Officer; which Warrant he produced: And accordingly
he taking a Constable with him; when he brought his Men into the Lord Astons
Hall at Taxall, the Constable slipped away, and he could by no means meet with
him again: So that the said Eld conceived himself incapacitated to make such a
Search as he desired. Which the Committee considering of, and sinding him the
said Eld to be a Sober Protestant, and that this neglect was not done purposely
with favor to the Papists; but that the said Eld is an Enemy to the Popish
Faction: Are humbly of Opinion that the said Francis Eld be Discharged from his
Restraint.

Resolved, That the said Francis Eld be Discharged from the custody of the
Sergeant at Arms.

Lunae 22. November. 1680.
A Bill for Regulating Elections of Members to serve in the Commons House of
Parliament was read a second time.

Resolved, That the Bill be committed upon the Debate of the House.

A Bill to prevent the Offenses of Bribery and Debauchery in the Election of
Members to serve in the Commons House of Parliament was read a second time.

Resolved, That this Bill be referred upon the Debate of the House to the same
Committee.

And the said Committee is to reduce the said Bills into one Bill, or to put
the same into more Bills as they shall see occasion.

Mr. Treby reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges that the
Committee having taken into their Consideration the Matter of the Election and
Return of Members to serve in this present Parliament for the Borough of
Stockbridge in the County of Southampton, had agreed upon the following
Resolves, viz.

Resolved, That Henry Whitehead Esquire; is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Stockbridge in the County of
Southampton, to which the House,

Ordered, That the Chairman of the Committee of Elections and Privileges do
make Report to this House touching the Election of Members to serve in this
present Parliament for Agmondishham in the County of Bucks, tomorrow morning at
ten of the clock.

Resolved, That leave be given to bring in a Bill for the Repairing of the
Highways.

The Clerk of the Crown and Bailiff of Stockbridge being called in, amended the
Return for Stockbridge, by taking off the Indenture whereby William Strode Esquire;
was returned to serve for the said Borough, and Razing out the Name of Oliver
St. John's Esquire; and incerting the Name of the said Hen. Whitehead in the other
Indenture.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That His Majesty having been
attended by such Members of this House as are of the Privy Council, according
to two several Orders of address from this House to His Majesty, the one for a
General Pardon and some allowance to Mr. Zei^e, the other for a full and
further General Pardon of all Crimes and Misdemeanors to the several Persons in
whose behalf the House had formerly addressed. His Majesty was pleased to
answer, That he would grant a Pardon and some allowance to Mr. Zeile.

That Pardons shall be passed to the several Persons addressed for by the House
of Commons for all Treasons, Misprisions of Treason Felonies, and Outlawries
after Treason or Felony, and His Majesty will give Order, that a Noli prosequi
be Entered to stop all prosecutions against the said persons for all Crimes or
Misdemeanors whatsoever.

That His Majesty apprehends there may be some Inconveniency in granting a
Pardon so general as is now desired, but if any Instances shall be given
wherein the Trials may be hindered or prejudiced, His Majesty will give such
further Order as shall be agreeable to Justice.

Mr. Trenchard reports from the Committee, to whom it was referred to prepare
an address to His Majesty to remove George Earl of Hallifax from His Majesty's
presence and Councils for ever. An address agreed upon by the Committee, which
he Read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table,
where the same being Read,

Resolved, That the House does agree to the said Address with some Amendments.

Ordered, That such Members of this House as are of his Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council do know his Majesty's pleasure when this House may
attend him with this Address.

Ordered, That all Committees that were discontinued be revived and do sit in
the places formerly appointed.

Martis 23. die Nouemb. 1680.
A Petition of Sir Thomas Holt Sergeant at Law, in Custody of the Sergeant at
Arms Attending this House, was Read.

Ordered, That Sir Thomas Holt be called in and do receive the Censure of the
House upon his knees at the Bar from Mr. Speaker, and be then discharged,
paying his Fees, which was done accordingly.

Ordered, That William Rapley, Bailiff of Haslemere, in the County of Surrey,
now in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, be brought to the
Bar to Morrow Morning at Ten of the Clock, to receive the Censure of the House.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill for continuing of two Acts,
One to prevent the Planting of Tobacco in England, and Regulating the
Plantation Trade, The Other for Exporting of Beer, Ale and Mum.

A Bill to the same purpose being presented to the House, was Read the First
time.

Resolved; That the Bill be Read a Second time.

Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to prepare a further Address to His
Majesty, upon the Debate of the House, humbly to desire His Majesty to Pardon
and Remit the Fine set upon Benjamin Harris; for which he continues in Prison.

Mr. Sachaverel Reports from the Committee to whom it was referred, to prepare
and bring in a Bill for the Repeal of One Act made in the 35th Year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth. chapter 1. A Bill agreed upon by the Committee, which he
delivered in at the Clerks Table.

The Bill being Read the First time,

Resolved, That the Bill be Read a Second time to Morrow morning.

Sir Francis Russel Reports from the Committee Appointed to draw up an humble
Address to his Majesty, to desire his Majesty to appoint a day for a Solemn
Fast and Humiliation, to be kept throughout the Kingdom, An Address agreed on
by the Committee, which he read in his place: And afterward delivered the same
in at the Clerks Table, where the same being Read was upon the Question agreed
to.

Resolved, That the Lords Concurrence be desired to the said Address. And that
Sir Francis Russed do attend the Lords with the same, and desire their
concurrence.

A Petition of Ann Bedlow Widow and Relict of Captain William Bedlow Deceased,
was Read.

Resolved, That an Humble Application be made to His Majesty from this House by
such Members thereof, as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to
desire His Majesty to take into His consideration, the condition of the said
Mrs. Bedlow; and to grant her some Allowance for her Subsistence,

Sir Francis Russel acquaints the House, That in pursuance of the Order of the
House, he had attend the Lords with the Address; and that their Lordships
returned Answer.

That they had taken the said Address into their Consideration, and had agreed
to it according to the desire of this House.

Ordered, That Mr. Attorney General be desired to attend this House to Morrow
Morning to give the House an Account touching the Proclamation, Styled A
Proclamation against Tumultuous Petitioning.

Several Persons that served upon the Grand Jury for the County of Middlesex,
in Trinity Term last, being called in, gave an Account to the House of the
manner of the Proceedings of the Court of King's Bench, in Discharging the said
Grand Jury.

Several Persons being called in, gave an Account at the Bar of the House,
touching the charge given by Mr. Baron Weston, at the last Summer Asslizes held
at Kingston upon Thames, for the County of Surrey, and a Debate arising in the
House upon the whole matter.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente.

That the Discharging of a Grand Jury by any Judge before the end of the Term,
Assizes or Sessions, whilst matters are under their consideration and not
presented is Arbitrary, Illegal, Destructive to Public Justice, a manifest
Violation of his Oath, and is a means to Subvert the Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente,

That a Committee be appointed to Examine the Proceedings of the Judges in
Westminster Hall, and Report the same with their Opinions therein to this House.

Sir Edward Deering Acquaints the House, That His Majesty having referred the
Condition and Circumstances of the several Witnesses relating to the Popish
Plot in Ireland, to the consideration of the Lords Commissioners of the
Treasury, and that the Commissioners were not as yet informed of the Names,
Number and Conditions of the said several Persons, desired the Direction of the
House therein.

Ordered, That Mr. Hethrington do Attend Mr. Speaker, and do communicate to him
the Names and Condition of the said Witnesses.

The Address of the Commons in Parliament to His Majesty, to Remove Sir George
Geffreys Out of all Public Offices.
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, having received a Complaint against Sir George Jeflreys Knight, your
Majesty's Chief Justice of Chester, and heard the Evidence concerning the same,
and also what he did allege and prove in his Defense. And being thereupon
fully satisfied that the said Sir George Jeffreys well knowing that many of
your Loyal Protestant Subjects, and particularly those of your Great and Famous
City of London, out of Zeal for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion,
your Majesty's Royal Person and Government, and in hopes to bring the Popish
Conspirators to speedy Justice, were about to Petition to your Majesty in an
Humble, Dutiful and Legal way, for the sitting of this Parliament, the said Sir
George Jeffreys not regarding his Duty to your Majesty, or the welfare of your
People did on purpose to serve his own private Ends, and to create a
Misunderstanding between your Majesty and your Good Subjects, though disguised
with pretense of service to your Majesty, maliciously declared such
petitioning, sometimes to be Tumultuous, Seditious and Illegal, and at other
times did presume publicly to insinuate and assert, as if your Majesty would
deprive your Citizens of London of their Charters, and diverse other
Privileges, Immunities and Advantages, and also of your Royal Favor in case
they should so petition, and also did publicly declare that in case they
should so petition, there should not be any Meeting or Sitting of Parliament,
thereby traducing your Majesty, as if you would not pursue your Gracious
Intentions, the rather because they were grateful to your good Subjects, do, in
most humble manner beseech your Majesty to remove the said Sir George Jeffreys
out of the said Place of Chief Justice of Chester, and out of all other Public
Offices and Employments under your Majesty.

His Majesty by Mr. Secretary Jenkins was pleased to return Answer to this
Address, That he would consider of it.

Mercurii 24. die November. 1680.
Ordered,

THat George Bell of Carlisle in the County of Cumberland, Attorney at Law, be
sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to answer at
the Bar of the House for a breach of Privilege by him committed against Sir
Richard Grahme, a Member of this House.

Ordered, That Arthur Yeomans of Cardisse in the County of Glamorgan, be sent
for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House to answer at the
Bar of this House for a Notorious Breach of Privilege by him committed against
this House.

Ordered, That William Jordan of Gloucester, be sent for in Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms to answer at the Bar of this House for a Notorious Breach of
Privilege by him Committed against this House

Ordered, That John Laws be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, to
answer at the Bar for a Breach of Privilege by him Committed against this
House.

Ordered, That Mr. Henry Alnett be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at
Arms, to answer at the Bar for a high Breach of Privilege by him Committed
aganst this House.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House that His Majesty having been
attended by such Members of this House as are of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, to know His Majesty's pleasure, When this House should attend
Him with an address, His Majesty has appointed three of the Clock this
afternoon for the House to attend him in the Banqueting House at White Hall.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill to Supply the Laws against
Bankrupcy.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill to take away the Court held
before the Lord President and Council in the Marches of Wales.

A Bill for Repeal of an Act made in the 35. Year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth cap. 1. was Read a Second time, And no Exceptions being made to the
same,

Ordered, That the said Bill be Engrossed.

Resolved, That an Humble Address be made to His Majesty, from this House by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to
desire His Majesty to give Orders that all Protestant Dissenters, who are
Prosecuted upon any penal Laws made against Popish Recusants in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth and King James, may be admitted to a Composition in the
Exchequer without paying any Fees.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill, declaring that the Acts of
Parliament made in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James, against Popish
Recusants shall not be extended against Protestant Dissenters.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to prepare, and Bring in a Bill for the
better Uniting of all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects; have (...) bring in
One, or more Bill or Bills for that purpose.

Mr. Attorney General being called in and Examined touching the manner of
Issuing forth the Proclamation Styled, A Proclamation against Tumultuous
Petitions, and giving an account to the House, that Sir Fran. North, Chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas was advising and assisting in the drawing
up and passing of the said Proclamation; And a Debate arising in the House
thereupon,

Resolved Nemine Contradicente,

That the Evidence this day given to this House against Sir Fran: North, Chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, is a sufficient Ground for this House to
proceed upon to an Impeachment against him for high Crimes and misdemeanors.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee appointed to examine the
proceedings of the Judges in Westminster Hall, to prepare Heads of an
Impeachment against the said Sir Francis North, and to present the same to the
House.

And the said Committee is to sit de die in diem.

Ordered, That William Rapley Bailiff of Haslemere in the County of Surrey
being in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, be brought to
the Bar of this House tomorrow Morning at Ten of the Clock to receive the
Censure of the House.

Jovis 25. die Novem. 1680.
Ordered,

THat a Message be sent to the Lords desiring their Lordships to appoint a
Committee, to join with a Committee of this House, for the Adjusting the
Methods and Circumstances relating to the Trials of the Lords in the Tower, and
that Mr. Treby do go up to the Lords with the said Message.

A Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of Norfolk, against Samuel Verdon,
Undersheriff of the said County, for several Crimes and Misdemeanors by him
Committed was Head.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to Examine the Matters contained in the
said Petition; and to Report the same with their Opinion therein to the House,
and it is Referred to a Committee; and the same Committee is likewise Empowered
to Examine the Abuses, Miscarragies and Misdemeanors Committed by all
Under-Sheriffs throughout the Kingdom.

Ordered, That the said Samuel Verdon be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at
Arms attending this House, to Answer at the Bar of the House, for a Notorious
Breach of Privilidge by him Committed against this House.

A Petition of Mr. Thomas Staples being in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, was Read.

Ordered, That Mr. Staples be called in, and do receive the Censure of the
House at the Bar upon his Knees from Mr. Speaker, and that he be then
Discharged paying his Fees, which was done accordingly.

A Message from the Lords by Sir John Coell and Sir Timothy Baldwyn.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have commanded us to acquaint this House, that His
Majesty having been Desired to appoint a Time when both Houses should attend
Him with an Address for a Fast His Majesty was pleased to return answer: That
it is His Majesty's Pleasure, that both Houses do attend Him at Three of the
Clock this Afternoon in the Banqueting House

The Articles of Impeachments against Edward Seymour Esquire; a member of the
House, being Read.

Resolved, That the Articles be Read, One by one, and that Mr. Seymour do make
his answer to each respective Article in his place: which being accordingly
done, and Mr. Seymour withdrawn:

The first of the said Articles being Read to the House and a Debate arising in
the House thereupon.

Resolved, That the Debate be Adjourned to Ten of the Clock to Morrow Morning.

The Addresses Humbly presented to His MAJESTY From Both Houses of Parliament
for a Day of HUMILIATION. with His MAJESTY'S Gracious Answer.
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, being deeply
sensible of the sad and calamitous condition of this your Majesty's Kingdom,
occasioned chiefly by the impious and horrid Conspiracies of a Popish Party,
who have not only Plotted and Intended the destruction of Your Majesty's Royal
Person; but the Total Subversion of the Government and true Religion
established amongst us; and finding the same detestable Machinations still
obstinately prosecuted by them, as well by somenting divisions amongst your
Majesty's Loyal Protestant Subjects, as all other the most wicked Contrivances,
notwithstanding the many discoveries thereof by Gods great mercy and wonderful
providence lately brought to light; all which dreadful Judgments are now
impending over us most deservedly for our many and grievous sins, and cannot
otherwise in humane reason be prevented but by the particular blessing of God
upon the Consultations and Endeavors of your great Council now Assembled in
Parliament; Do in all humility beseech your Majesty, that by your Royal
Proclamation a Day may be solemnly set apart, wherein both our selves and all
your Majesty's Loyal Subjects may by Fasting and prayers endeavor a
Reconciliation with Almighty God, and with humble and penitent hearts implore
him by his power and goodness to divert those Judgments, and defeat the wicked
counsels and deivces of our Enemies, to Unite the hearts of your loyal
Protestant Subjects, and to continue his mercy and the light of his Gospel to
us and our Posterities, and more especially to bestow his abundant blessings on
your Sacred Majesty and this present Parliament, that our Consultations and
Endeavors may produce Honor, Safety and prosperity to your Majesty and your
People.

His Majesty's Gracious Answer to this Address.
That His Majesty will give Order for a Day of Humiliation as is desired.

Veneris 26 die November. 1680.
MR. Speaker acquaints the House, that both Houses having attended his Majesty
in the Banqueting house yesterday in the afternoon, with the Address for a day
of Humiliation: His Majesty was pleased graciously to answer, That his Majesty
will give order for a day of Humiliation, as is desired.

Ordered, That the Cause concerning the Election of Members to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Taunton be heard at the Bar of this
House tomorrow morning at Ten of the Clock.

A Petition of the Master, Wardens, Assistance and Company of Felt-makers, was
Read.

Ordered, That the Consideration of the said Petition be referred to the
Committee to whom the Bill for encouragement of the Woolen manufacture, by the
general wearing thereof is committed.

A Petition of Thomas Dare of Taunton a prisoner in execution, for a Fine of
500 l. set upon him, was Read.

Ordered, That an humble Application be made to His Majesty from this House by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council to
desire His Majesty to Pardon and remit the said Fine.

A Message from the Lords.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have commanded us to acquaint you, That the Lords out
of their great care to expedite the Trial of the Lord Viscount Stafford on
Tuesday next, having agreed upon some Rules and directions to be observed at
the said Trial, which they thought fit to communicate to this House: and
delivered in a Paper containing the said Rules.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That His Majesty had been attended
by such Members of this House as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council with an address concerning the Protestant Dissenters, and that His
Majesty's answer is, That they shall be discharged, and without Fees as far as
may be done according to Law, and that they shall be recommended to the Judges.

Mr. Treby acquaints the House, That he had attended the Lords with a Message,
desiring their Lordships to appoint a Committee to join with a Committee of
this House, for adjusting the matters and circumstances relating to the Trials
of the Lords in the Tower: That they would send an answer to this House by
Messengers of their own.

Sir William Poultney reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges,
that the said Committee having taken into consideration the matter touching the
election and return of Members to serve in this present Parliament for the
Borough of Monmouth in the County of Monmouth, had agreed upon Four several
Resolves, which he read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at
the Clerks Table, where the same being read, are as follows,

Resolved, That the Election of a Burgess to serve in Parliament for the
Borough of Monmouth, does not belong to the Burgesses; Inhabitants of the
Borrough of Monmouth only.

Resolved, That the Burgesses Inhabitants of the Borough of Newport and Vske
in the County of Monmouth have a Right by Vote in the Election of a Burgess to
serve in Parliament for the said Borough of Monmouth

Resolved, That Charles Lord Herbert is not duly Elected Burgess to serve in
this present Parliament for the said Borough of Monmouth.

Resolved, That John Arnold Esquire; is duly Elected Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the said Borough of Monmouth.

To all which Resolves the House agreed,

Sir John Trevor Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges, that
the Committee having taken into Consideration the matter touching the Election
and Return for Westbury in the County of Wilts, had agreed upon Four several
Resolves, which he read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at
the Clerks Table, where the same being read, are as follows,

Resolved, That Henry Bertie Esquire; is not duly elected Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Westbury in the County of Wilts.

Resolved, That Richard Lewis Esquire; is not duly elected Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Westbury in the County of Wilts.

Resolved, That Richard Lewis Esquire; is not duly elected Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Westbury in the County of Wilts.

Resolved, That Will: Trenchard Esquire; is duly elected Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Westbury in the County of Wilts.

Resolved, That Edward Norton Esquire; is duly elected Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Westbury in the County of Wilts.

To all which Resolves the House agreed.

Ordered, That the Clerk of the Crown do attend tomorrow morning at Ten of the
Clock, to amend the Return for the said Borough of Westbury.

The House being informed from the Chairman of the said Committee, of several
Miscariages and Misdemeanors committed by Samuel Gibbs, late Mayor of the said
Borough of Westbury in the said election.

Ordered, That the said Samuel Gibbs be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at
Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar of this House, for the great
Misdemeanors by him Committed in the said Election.

Ordered, That Mr. Treby do make his Reports touching the Elections for the
Borough of Agmondesham in the County of Bucks, and for the Borough of
Malborough in the County of Wilts on Monday morning next.

The Clerk of the Crown being called in Amended the Return for the Borough of
Monmouth, by razing out the Name of Charles Lord Herbert, and inserting the
Name of John Arnold Esquire; instead thereof.

An Engrossed Bill for the Repeal of an Act made in the 35th year of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth was Read the third time.

Resolved, That the Bill do pass, and that the Title be an Act for the Repeal
of a Statute made in the 35th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and that
Sir Eliab Harvey do carry up the Bill to the Lords for their Concurrence.

William Rapley late Bailiff of the Borough of Haslemere in the County of
Surrey, being brought to the Bar, and there kneeling, received the Censure of
this House from Mr. Speaker, and was discharged from the Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms, paying his Fees.

Ordered, That Leave be given to bring in a Bill for the better discovery of
Settlements of Estates for Superstitious uses.

The House then resumed the adjourned debate relating to the Impeachment
against Edward Seymour Esquire; a member of this House.

The Question being put, That the Consideration of the Articles of Impeachment
against Mr. Seymour be referred to a Committee.

It passed in the Negative.

Resolved, Upon several Questions, That there is matter sufficient in the four
Articles to Impeach Mr. Seymour.

Resolved, That Mr. Seymour be Impeached upon these Articles.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to prepare the said Impeachments.

Ordered, That it be referred to the same Committee, to consider of Precedents
concerning the Committing of a Member to Custody when Impeached in Parliament,
and to Report the same to the House.

The Humble ADDRESS of the COMMONS in Parliament presented to His MAJESTY, to
Remove George Earl of Hallifax From His presence and Counsels. With His
MAJESTY'S Answer.
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, being deeply sensible of the manifold dangers and
mischiefs, which have been occasioned to this Your Kingdom by the Dissolution
of the last Parliament, and by the frequent Prorogations of this present
Parliament, whereby the Papists have been greatly encouraged to carry on their
hellish and damnable Conspiracies against Your Royal Person and Government, and
the Protestant Religion now established amongst us, and have had many
opportunities to contrive false and malicious Plots against the Lives and
Honors of several of Your loyal Protestant Subjects; And having just reason to
believe that the said Dissolution was Promoted by the evil and pernicious
counsels of George Earl of Hallifax; Do therefore most humbly pray Your
Majesty, for the taking away of occasions of distrust and jealousy between
Your Majesty and Your Loyal Commons, and that we may with greater cheerfulness
proceed to perfect those matters now before us, which tend to the safety and
honor of Your Sacred Person and Government, and to the preservation of the
true Protestant Religion both to our Selves and our Posterity, That You would
be graciously pleased to remove the said George Earl of Hallifax from your
Presence and Counsels for ever.

His Majesty's Answer to the Address.
CHARLES R.

HIs Majesty having received the Address of this House relating to the Earl of
Hallifax, has thought fit to return this Answer.

That He conceives the said Address to be liable to several Exceptions, but
having a great desire to preserve all possible good understanding with this
House, He chooses to decline to enter into particulars, to avoid all occasions
of dispute.

He therefore thinks fit to tell them, that He does not find the grounds in the
Address of this House to be sufficient to induce Him to remove the Earl of
Hallifax; But He assures them at the same time, that whenever this House shall
in a due and regular course prove any Crime either against the said Earl of
Hallifax, or any other Person, who either now is, or shall hereafter be in his
Councels, He will leave him or them to their own legal defense without
interposing to protect them.

ARTICLES of Impeachment against Edward Seymour Esquire; With the Vote of the
COMMONS in Parliament Upon the said Articles.
Articles of Impeachment of High Crimes, Misdemeanors and Offenses against
Edward Seymour Esquire; one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
Treasurer of His Majesty's Navy, and one of the Members of the House of COMNONS
now in Parliament Assembled.
Imprimis,
THat, Whereas the Sum of Five hundred eighty four thousand nine hundred
seventy Eight Pounds, Two shillings, Two Pence, was raised by an Act of
Parliament for the speedy Building of Thirty Ships of War, and thereby
appropriated to the said Use; By which Act it was particularly directed, That
the Treasurer of the Navy should keep all moneys paid to him by virtue of the
said Act distinct and appart from all other moneys, and should Issue and pay
the same by Warrant of the Principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy or
any three or more of them; and mentioning and expressing that it is for the
Building, for the Guns, Rigging and other Furnishing of the said Thirty Ships
of War, and to no other Use, intent or purpose whatsoever, He the said Edward
Seymour on or about the year One thousand six hundred seventy seven, being then
Treasurer of the Navy, did, contrary to the said Act, and contrary to the Duty
of his said Office, lend the Sum of Ninty thousand Pound (at Eight pound per
Cent.) parcel of the said Sum raised by the said Act (being then in his hands)
for and toward the support and continuance of the Army then Raised; after such
time as by an Act of Parliament the said Army ought to have been Disbanded,
whereby the said two several Acts were Eluded, and the said Army was continued
and kept on foot to the great Disturbance, Hazard and Danger of the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdom; And the Nation was afterward put to a new Charge of
raising and paying the sum of Two hundred thousand pound for the Disbanding of
the said Army.

Secondly, That whereas an Act of Parliament had passed for Raising of money by
a Poll, for Enabling His Majesty to enter into an actual War against the French
King, and the Money raised by Virtue of the said Act, was thereby appropriated
to the said Use, and to the Re-payment of such Persons as should furnish His
Majesty with any Sums of money, or any Stores necessary for the said Service.

And whereas certain East-land Merchants were desired by His Majesty's Officers
to furnish and supply great quantities of Stores for the Navy, and as an
Encouragement thereunto, were assured, that the Sum of Forty thousand pound,
parcel of the moneys raised by the said Act, was at that time actually in the
hands of the said Edward Seymour (which he did acknowledge so to be) and did
promise the said Sum should be paid to the said Merchants in part of
Satisfaction for the said Stores, which they did furnish upon the credit of the
said Affirmation and undertaking. He the said Edward Seymour did on or about
the year One thousand six hundred seventy eight, issue out and pay the said Sum
to the Victuallers of the Navy by way of advance, and for provisions not then
brought in, contrary to the true intent and meaning of the said Act; Whereas
the same by the provision of the said Act, ought to have been paid to the
East-land Merchants, who had furnished His Majesty with Flax, Hemp, and other
Necessaries for the said Service; Of which said Deceit and Injustice the said
Merchants did complain in the last Parliament.

Thirdly, That the said Edward Seymour being Treasurer of the Navy, and then
and still having a Salary of 3000 l. per Annum clear for the same, did, during
the time that he was Speaker of the late long Parliament, receive out of the
moneys appointed for secret Service, the Yearly Sum of 3000 l. over and above
his said Salary which was constantly paid to him, as well during the Intervals
as the Sessions of Parliament; and particularly, during the Prorogation of
Fifteen months.

Fourthly, That on or about the Eighteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, and
during a War with the States General of the United Netherlands; He the said
Edward Seymour, being then one of the Commissioners for Prize Goods, did,
Fradulently, Unlawfully, and in Deceit of His Majesty, Unlade a certain Prize
Ship, taken from the Subjects of the said States, without any Order or
Authority for the same, and did House the Lading and Goods of the said Ship,
and Lock up the same without the presence of any Store-keeper, and did
afterward sell the same, pretending the same to be only Muscarado Sugars, and
did account with His Majesty for the same as such; Whereas in Truth, the said
Ship was Laden with Cochineal and Indico, Rich Merchandises of a very great
Value.

Veneris 26 Nov. 1680.
Resolved,

THat there is sufficient Matter in these Articles for Impeachment of Edward
Seymour Esquire; a Member of this House; And that he be Impeached upon these
Articles.

Sabbati 27 die November. 1680.
PEter Elers and John Bode did this day take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy at the Clerks Table in order to their Naturalization.

A Bill for the taking away of the Court holden before the President and
Council in the Marches of Wales, was read the first time.

Resolved,

That the Bill be read a Second time on Wednesday Morning next, at Ten of the
Clock.

The Clerk of the Crown being called in, amended the Return for Westbury in the
County of Wilts by Razing out the Names of Richard Lewis and Henry Bertie
Esquires, and inserting the Names of Edward Norton and William Trenchard
Esquires, instead thereof.

Mr. Treby Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges That the
Committee having taken into their Consideration the Matter touching the
Election for the Borough of Wells, had agreed upon two Resolves to be Reported
to the House, which he read in his Place, and afterward delivered the same in
at the Clerks Table, where the same being read, are as follows.

Resolved,

That Edward Berkley Esquire; is not duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament, for the Borough of Wells in the County of Somerset.

Resolved,

That John Hall Esquire; is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present
Parliament, for the said Borough of Wells.

The First Resolve being Read a second time.

Resolved,

That this House does agree with the Committee, that Edward Berkley Esquire; is not
duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament for the Borough of
Wells in the County of Somerset

The second Resolve being Read a second time.

Resolved,

That this House does agree with the Committee, That John Hall Esquire; is duly
Elected a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament for the said Borough of
Wells.

The Clerk of the Crown being called in, amended the Return for the said
Borough of Wells by razing out the Name of Edward Berkley Esquire; and inserting
the Name of John Hall Esquire; instead thereof.

Ordered,

That Sir William Waller be added to the Committee appointed to prepare
Evidence against the Lords in the Tower.

Ordered, That an Humble Application be made to his Majesty from this House by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most ^onourable Privy Council, to
desire his Majesty to grant a full and general Pardon to Mr. Bernard Davis.

Colonel Birch reports from the Committee to whom the considerations of the
Petition of Sir Thomas Whitegrave, Francis Eld, and Sampson Birch was referred,
That the Committee having Examined the matter relating to Sampson Birch, had
Ordered him to make the sollowing Report.

Resolved, That Mr. Sampson Birch is Guilty of the Information charged against
him.

That the said Birch, Keeper of the Prison at Stafford his suffering Bromage a
Popish Priest committed to his Custody and Condemned, to walk abroad is
contrary to Law.

To which Resolves the House agreed.

Mr. Hampden Reports from the Committee appointed, to prepare an Address to his
Majesty upon the debate of the House, Humbly Representing the Dangerous State
and Condition of this Kingdom, in Answer to His Majesty's Message relating to
Tangier; an Address agreed upon by the Committee, which he read in his Place,
and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table, where the same being
read, was, upon the Question agreed to, by the House.

A Message from the Lords, by Sir Tymothy Baldwyn and Sir Samuel Clark. Mr.
Speaker

The Lords have appointed a Committee of five Lords, to meet with a Committee
of this House to adjust the methods and circumstances in the Trial of the Lord
Viscount Stafford and have Appointed the Five Lords to meet this Afternoon at
three of the Clock, in the Inner Court of Wards.

Resolved,

That a Committee be appointed of Ten Members of this House, to meet the
Committee of Lords, to adjust the Methods and Circumstances in the Trial of the
Lord Viscount Stafford.

Ordered,

That such Members of this House as are of His Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council, be desired to know his Majesty's pleasure when this House may
attend His Majesty with the last mentioned Address.

Ordered,

That the Matter touching the Election for Taunton, in the County of Somerset,
be heard at the Bar of the House, on Wednesday Morning next.

Lunae 29. die November. 1680.
A Bill for ascertaining Fines upon Convictions for Misdeameanors, was Read the
first time.

Resolved,

That the Bill be read a second time.

Ordered,

That a Committee be appointed to prepare and bring in a Bill for the Repeal of
part of the Law already made for regulating the Fishing in the River Severne.

Ordered,

That the Executors of Sir Matthew Hale, late Chief Justice of the Court of
Kings Bench be desired to print his Manuscripts relating to the Crown Law. And
a Committee is appointed to take care of the true Printing thereof.

Ordered,

That the said Edward Brett of Staffordshire be discharged from his further
Imprisonment by Order of this House.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That he having according to the
Orders of the House attended His Majesty to know his Majesty's Pleasure when
this House should attend him with the Address; His Majesty was pleased to
appoint this House to attend him at three of the Clock this afternoon in the
Banqueting House.

And further acquaints the House, that His Majesty being humbly moved
according to the Order of the House, for a Pardon for Bernard Dennis, was
graciously pleased to grant the same; and though neither the said Bernard
Dennis, nor any other by his appointment, did carry on the said Pardon to the
Seal; yet the same, together with the Pardon granted to Mr. Turbervil were now
ready under the Great Seal; And the directions of the House were desired, into
what hands to put the same.

Ordered,

That the said Pardon be lodged in Mr. Treyby's hands for the service of the
House, and benefit of the said Persons.

Ordered,

That the Clerk of this House do de die in diem attend the Committee appointed
to examine Precedents touching the Committing of Members of this House to the
Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, when Impeached in Parliament.

A Petition of Mr. Thomas Dangerfield was read.

Ordered,

That a Committee be appointed forthwith to insect Mr. Dangerfield's Pardon as
to the Validity thereof; and likewise to examine what Allowances now are, or
formerly have been made to Mr. Dangerfield from His Majesty, and to consider
the Alterations and other Circumstances of his Allowances and to report the
same to the House.

Ordered,

That the Members of this House do Sit together without mingling with other
persons, in the place prepared for them at the Trial of the Lord Viscount
Stafford, and Mr. Howard Captain of the Yeomen of the Guards, is desired to
take care thereof.

HIS MAJESTY'S Message to the COMMONS in PARLIAMENT.
CHARLES REX.

HIS Majesty did in His Speech, at the opening of this Session, desire the
Advice and Assistance of His Parliament, in relation to Tangier: The Condition
and Importance of the Place obliges His Majesty to put this House in mind
again, That He relies upon them for the Support of it, without which it cannot
be much longer Preserved. His Majesty does therefore very earnestly Recommend
Tangier again to the due and speedy Consideration and Care of this House.

The Humble ADDRESS of the COMMONS In Parliament Assembled, Presented to His
Majesty. Monday the 29th. day of November. 1680.
May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most obedient and Loyal Subjects The Commons in Parliament
Assembled, having with all Duty and Regard taken into our Serious Consideration
Your Majesty's late Message relating to Tangier, cannot but account the present
Condition of it, as Your Majesty is pleased to Represent it in Your said
Message, (after so vast a Treasure expended to make it Useful) not only as one
infelicity more added to the afflicted Estate of your Majesty's faithful and
Loyal Subjects But as one result also of the same Counsels and Designs which
have brought Your Majesty's Person; Crown and Kingdoms into those great and
imminent Dangers, with which at this day they are surrounded; And we are the
less surprised to hear of the Exigencies of Tangier, when we remember that
since it became part of Your Majesty's Dominions, it has several times been
under the Command of popish Governors, (particularly under Command of a Lord
Impeached, and now Prisoner in the Tower for the Execrable and Horrid Popi^h
Plot) That the Supplies sent thither have been in great part made up of Popish
Officers and Soldiers and that the Irish Papists among the So^diers of that
Garrison, have been the Persons most Countenanced and Encouraged.

To that part of your Majesty's Message which expresses a reliance upon this
House for the support of Tangier, and a recommendation of ^t to our speedy
care, We do with all humility and reverence give this Answer, That although in
due Time and Order, We shall omit nothing incumbent on Us for the preservation
of every part of your Majesty's Dominions and advancing the prosperity and
slourishing Estate of this your Kingdom; yet at this time, when a Clo^d which
has long threatened this Land, ^s ^eady to break upon our heads in a storm of
Ruin and Confusion, to enter into any further consideration of this matter;
especially to come to any Resolutions in it, before We are effectually secured
from the imminent and apparent Dangers arising from the Power of Popish Persons
and Councils, We humbly conceive will not consist either with Our Duty to Your
Majesty, or the Trust reposed in Us by those We represent.

It is not unknown to your Majesty how restless the Endeavors, and how bold
the Attempts of the Popish Party, for many years last past, have been, not only
within this but other your Majesty's Kingdoms, to introduce the Romish, and
utter^y to extirpate the true Protestant Religion. The several Approaches they
have made toward the compassing this their Design (assisted by the Treachery
of perfid^ous Protestants,) have been so strangely successful, that it is matter
of Admiration to Us, and which we can only ascribe to an Overruling
Providence, that your Majesty's Reign is still continued over Us, and that We
are yet assembled to consult the means of our preservation; This bloody and
restless Party not content with the great Liberty they had a long time enjoyed
to exercise their own Religion privately amongst themselves, to partake of an
equal Freedom of their persons and Estates with your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, and of an Advantage above them, in being excused from chargeable
Offices and Employments has so far prevailed, as to find countenance for an
open and avowed practice of their Superstition and Idolatry, without control,
in several parts of this Kingdom, Great swarms of Priests and Jesuits have
resorted hither, and have here exercised their Jurisdiction, and been daily
tampering to pervert the Consciences of your Majesty's Subjects. Their Opposers
they have found means to disgrace, and if they were Judges, Justices of the
Peace, or other Magistrates, to have them turned out of Commission; and in
contempt of the known Laws of the Land they have practiced upon people of all
^anks and qualities, and gained over diverse to their Religion; some openly to
profess it, others secretly to espouse it, as most conduced to the service
thereof.

After sometime they became able to influence matters of State and Government,
and thereby to destroy those they cannot corrupt. The continuance or
Prorogation of Parliaments has been accommodated to serve the purposes of that
Party. Money raised upon the People to supply your Majesty's extraordinary
Occasions, was by the preva^ence of Popish Councils employed to make War upon a
Protestant State, and to advance and augment the dreadful Power of the French
King though to the apparent hazard of this, and all other Protestant Countries.
Great numbers of your Majesty's Subjects were sent into, and continued in the
service of that King, notwithstanding the apparent Interest of your Majesty's
Kingdoms, the Addresses of the Parliament, and your Majesty's gracious
Proclamations to the contrary. Nor can We forbear to mention, how that at the
beginning of the same War, even the Ministers of England were made Instruments
to press upon that State, the acceptance of one demand, among others, from the
French King for procuring their peace with him, that they should admit the
public exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion in the United Provinces, the
Churches there to be divided, and the Romish Priests maintained out of the
public Revenue.

At home, if Your Majesty did at any time by the Advice of Your Privy Council,
or of Your two Houses of Parliament, Command the Laws to be put in Execution
against Papists, even from thence they gained advantage to their Party, while
the edge of those Laws was turned against Protestant Dissenters, and the
Papists escaped in a manner untoucht. The Act of Parliament, enjoining a Test
to be taken by all Persons admitted into any Public Office and intended for a
security against Papists comeing into Employment, had so little effect, that
either by Dispensation, obtained from Rome, they submitted to those Tests, and
held their Offices themselves, or those put in their places, were so favorable
to the same Interests, that Popery it self has rather gained than lost ground
since that Act.

But that their business in hand might yet more speedily and strongly proceed,
at length a Popish Secretary (since Executed for his Treasons) takes upon him
to set a foot and maintain correspondereies at Rome (particularly with a Native
Subject of Your Majesty's, promoted to be a Cardinal) and in the Courts of
other Foreign Princes (to use their own form of Speech) for the subduing that
Pesti^ent Heresy, which has so long domineered over this Northern World; that
is, to root the Protestant Religion out of England, and thereby to make way the
more easily to do the same in other Protestant Countries.

Toward the doing this great Work, (as Mr. Colman was pleased to called it)
Jesuits (the most dangerous of all Popish Orders to the Lives and Estates of
Princes) were distributed to their several Precincts within this Kingdom, and
held joint Councils with those of the same Order in all Neighbor Popish
Countries: Out of these Councils and correspondencies was hatched that damnable
and hellish Plot, by the good Providence of Almighty God brought to light above
two Years since, but still threatening us; wherein the Traitors impatient of
longer delay, reckoning the prolonging of Your Sacred Majesty's Life (which God
long Preserve) as the Great Obstacle in the way to the Consummation of their
hopes, and having in their prospect a Proselyted Prince immediately to succeed
in the Throne of these Kingdoms, resolved to begin their Work with the
Assassination of Your Majesty, to carry it on with Armed Force, to destroy Your
Protestant Subjects in England, to Execute a second Massacre in Ireland, and so
with ease to arrive at the Suppression of our Religion, and the Subversion of
the Government.

When this Accursed Conspiracy began to be discovered, they began the
smothering it with the Barbarous Murder of a Justice of the Peace, within one
of Your Majesty's own Palaces, who had taken some Examinations concerning it.

Amidst these distractions and fears, Popish Officers, for the Command of
Forces were allowed upon the Musters by special Orders (surreptitiously
obtained from Your Majesty) but Counter-Signed by a Secretary of State without
ever passing under the Tests perscribed by the aforementioned Act of
Parliament. In like manner above fifty new Commissions were granted about the
same time to known Papists, besides a great number of desperate Popish
Officers, though out of Command, yet entertained at half pay. When in the next
Parliament the House of Commons were prepared to bring to a legal Trial the
principal Conspirators in this Plot, that Parliament was first Prorogued, and
then Dissolved. The Interval between the Calling and Sitting of this Parliament
was so long, that now they conceive hopes of Covering all their past Crimes and
gained a seasonable time and advantages of practicing them more effectually.

Witnesses are attempted to be corrupted, and not only promises of Reward, but
of the Favor of Your Majesty's Brother, made the Motives to their Compliance.
Diverse of the most considerable of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects have
Crimes of the highest nature forged against them, the Charge to be supported by
Subornation and Perjury, that they may be destroyed by Forms of Law and Justice.

A Presentment being prepared for a Grand Jury of Middlesex, against Your
Majesty's said Brother the Duke of York, (under whose Countenance all the rest
shelter themselves) the Grand Jury were in an unheard of, and unpresidented,
and illegal manner discharged; and that with so much haste, and fear lest they
should finish that Presentment, that they were prevented from delivering many
other Indictments by them at that time found against other Popish Recusants.
Because a Pamphlet came forth Weekly, called, The Weekly Packet of Advice from
Rome, which exposes Popery (as it deserves) as ridiculous to the people, a new
and arbitrary Rule of Court was made in Your Majesty's Court of Kings Bench
(rather like a Star Chamber, than a Court of Law) That the same should not for
the future be Printed by any person whatsoever.

We acknowledge Your Majesty's Grace and Care in issuing forth diverse
Proclamations since the Discovery of the Plot, for the Banishing Papists from
about this Great City, and Residence of Your Majesty's Court, and the
Parliament; but with trouble of mind We do humbly inform Your Majesty, That
notwithstanding all these prohibitions, great Numbers of them, and of the most
dangerous sort, to the Terror of Your Majesty's Ptotestant Subjects, do daily
resort hither, and abide here. Under these and other sad Effects and Evidences
of the prevalency of Popery, and its Adherents, We Your Majesty's faithful
Commons found this Your Majesty's Distressed Kingdom, and other parts of Your
Dominions laboring, when We assembled.

And therefore from our Allegiance to Your Majesty, our Zeal to our Religion,
our Faithfulness to our Country, and our Care of Posterity, We have lately,
upon mature de^^^eration, proposed One Remedy of these Great Evils, without
which (in our Judgments) a^l others will prove vain and fruitless, and (like
all deceitful Securities against certain Dangers) will rather expose Your
Majesty's person to the greatest hazard, and the people, together with all
that is valuable to them as Men or Christians, to utter Ruin and Destruction. We
have taken this Occasion of an Access to Your Majesty's Royal presence, humbly
to lay before Your Majesty's great Judgment and Gracious Consideration this
most dreadful Design of Introducing popery, and, as necessary Consequences of
it, all other Calamities, into Your Majesty's Kingdom. And if after all this,
the private Suggestions of the subtle Accomplices of that party and design
should yet prevail, either to Elude or Totally Obstruct the faithful Endeavors
of Us Your Commons for an Happy Settlement of this Kingdom, We shall have this
Remaining comfort, That We have freed our selves from the Guilt of that Blood
and Desolation which is like to ensue. But our only Hope, next under God, is in
Your Sacred Majesty, That by Your Great Wisdom and Goodness, We may be
effectually secured from Popery, and all the Evils that attend it, and that
none but persons of known Fidelity to Your Majesty, and Sincere Affections to
the Protestant Religion, may be put into any Employment, Civil or Military;
that whilst We shall give a Supply to Tangier, We may be assured, We do not
Augment the Strength of our Popish Adversaries, nor increase our own Dangers.
Which Desires of Your faithful Commons, if Your Majesty shall graciously
vouchsafe to grant, We shall not only be ready to assist Your Majesty in
Defense of Tangier, but do whatsoever else shall be in our power to enable Your
Majesty to protect the Protestant Religion and Interest, at Home and Abroad,
and to Resist and Repel the Attempts of Your Majesty's and the Kingdoms Enemies.

Martis 30 die November. 1680.
Ordered,

THat the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, do go with his Mace and Summon
all the Members of this House that are in or about Westminster Hall, immediately
to attend the Service of the House.

Ordered,

That the Committee to whom the Consideration of Mr. Dangerfields Pardon and
Allowances from His Majesty is Referred be Revived, and have Power to send for
Persons, Papers and Records.

Then Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

And a Committee of the Commons managed the Impeachment against William
Viscount Stafford, in the Name of all the Commons of England, before the Lords
in Parliament.

And the Managers this day insisted upon the general Evidence, to prove the
Popish Plot against the King's person, the Protestant Religion and Government.

Post Meridiem.
The Committee of the Commons returning to the House,

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Then the House Adjourned to Eight of the Clock to Morrow Morning.

Mercurii 1 die December. 1680.
A Message from the Lords, by Sir Timothy Baldwin and Sir Samuel Clark.

Mr. Speaker.

The Lords have sent Us to acquaint this House, that they intend to proceed to
the Trial of William Viscount Stafford at Ten of the Clock this morning in
Weflminster-Hall.

A Petition of Samuel Gibbs, Mayor of Westbury in the County of Wilts, being in
custody of the Sergeant at Arms, attending this House, being presented to the
House,

Ordered,

That the said Petition do lie upon the Clerks Table, in order to the Reading
thereof in a full House.

Ordered,

That the matter touching the election for Taunton in the County of Somerset be
heard at the Bar of this House on Saturday morning next.

Ordered,

That the Bill for taking away the Court holden before the President and
Council in the Marches of Wales, be read a Second time on Friday morning next.

Ordered,

That the Bill for the better securing the payment of an Annuity or Rent Charge
of 130 l. per annum, out of the Manors and Farms of Bex-hill and Cowding in
the County of Sussex, to the use of the poor of several Parishes in the County
of Surry, be Read on Friday morning next.

Ordered,

That Mr. John Farington a member of this House have leave to go into the
Country for Recover ie of his Health.

Then Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

The managers appointed by the Commors proceeded to the particular evidence
against the Lord Viscount Stafford before the Lords in Parliament, and having
produced and Examined several Witnesses to prove the Impeachment against him.
At the desire of the Lord Stafford he had time to make his further defense
tomorrow Morning.

Post Meridiem.
The Committee of the Commons return to the House.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwin and Sir Samuel Clark.

Mr. Speaker,

The Lords have sent Us to acquaint this House that they have ordered the
Prisoner William Viscount Stafford, to be brought to the Bar in
Westminster Hall tomorrow morning at Ten of the Clock.

Ordered,

That all Committees be adjourned.

And then the House Adjourned to eight of the clock tomorrow morning.

Jovis 2. die December. 1680.
I Ohn van Hattem and William Henry Cornelissen this day took the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy in order to their Naturalization.

A Bill for the Naturalization of Peter Elers and others, was Read the First
time.

Resolved,

That the Bill be Read a Second time.

Ordered,

That Edward Kynaston Esquire; a Member of this House have leave to go into the
Country for Recovery of his Health.

A Petition of John Dandridge, being in Custody of the Searjeant at Arms
attending this House, was Read.

Ordered,

That the said John Damdridge be discharged from his Confinment

Complaint being made to the House of a Breach of Privilege committed by Mr.
Kne vet Hastings, in Striking and Wounding the Servant of Hender Roberts Esquire; a
member of this House,

Ordered.

That the said Knevet Hastings be sent for in custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, to answer for the said Breach of Privilege by him
Committed.

Ordered,

That nothing that has been, or shall be said by any Member of this House, or
by any Person that shall be produced as a witness in behalf of the Commons of
England in the Trial of William Viscount Stafford, be Printed or Published,
without the leave of this House.

A Petition of Griffith Jones Esquire; touching the Election for the Town of New
Radnor in the County of Radnor, was Read.

Ordered,

That the said Petition be Referred to the Consideration of the Committee of
Elections and Privileges, who are to Examine the Matter thereof, and to report
the same with their Opinions therein, to the House.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

And the Committee of the Commons Proceeded in the management of the Evidence,
upon the Impeachment of William Viscount Stafford.

Post Meridiem.
The Committee of the Commons, return to the House.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

A Message from the Lords, by Sir Timothy Baldwin and Sir Samuel Clark.

Mr. Speaker.

The Lords have sent Us to acquaint this house, That they have Ordered the
Prisoner William Viscount Stafford, to be brought again to his Trial at the Bar
in Westminster Hall to Morrow morning at Ten of the Clock.

Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquaints the House, That his Majesty had Commanded him
to Communicate to the House a Letter written by Dr. Lamphire, Principal of
Hart-Hall in Oxford, directed to Mr. Secretary, giving an account, That one
William Pickering a Tailor at Wheatly in the County of Oxon and Brother to
Pickering that was Executed for the Horrid Popish Plot, had spoken these Words,
viz. That if the King should Try the Lords, he should not live half a year
after; and that the said Pickering was Committed to Oxford Goal by the said
Doctor Lamphire.

Which Letter was Read to the House.

Ordered,

That the Thanks of this House be humbly presented to his Majesty, by such
members thereof as are of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, for this
His Majesty's Gracious Communication.

Ordered,

That the said William Pickering be forthwith brought up to the Bar of this
House, to Answer this high Charge.

Ordered.

That the further Consideration of this Matter be Adjeurned to, tomorrow
morning.

Veneris 3 die December. 1680.
A Petition of Richard Rawlins, in custody of the Sergeant at Arms attended
this House.

Ordered,

That the said Rich Rawlins be discharged from his Imprisonment.

A Bill for taking away the Court holden before the President and Council in
the Marches of Wales was read a Second time.

Ordered,

That the adjourned debate touching the information yesterday communicated to
this House from his Majesty, be resumed this afternoon, when the Committee of
this House returns from the Trial of William Viscount Stafford, and that the
Sergeant at Arms attending this House, do give the Members of this House
notice thereof in the mean time.

A Petition of John Hutchinson Esquire; in custody of the Sergeant at Arms was
read.

Ordered,

That the said Mr. Hutchinson be brought to the Bar of this House tomorrow
morning at Ten of the Clock.

Ordered,

That Edward Vaughan Esquire; be added to the Committee appointed to prepare
Evidence against the Lords in the Tower.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair,

And the Committee of the Commons did proceed in the Management of the
Impeachment against William Viscount Stafford, before the Lords in Parliament.

Post Meridiem.
The Committee of the Commons returned to the House.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Ordered,

That Colonel Stawell a member of this House have leave to go into the
Country for recovery of his health.

A message from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwin and Sir Samuel Clark.

Mr. Speaker,

The Lords have sent Us to acquaint this House, that they have ordered William
Viscount Stafford to be brought again to his Trial at the Bar in
Westminster Hall tomorrow morning at Ten of the Clock.

Ordered,

That the Adjourned Debate relating to the Information Yesterday Communicated
to this House from his Majesty; be further Adjoured to Monday morning next at
Ten of the Clock.

Die Veneris 3o. Decembris 1680.
Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled that all
Persons, as well Peers as others, that are Papists, and now in or about the
Cities of London or Westminster, be, and are hereby Required forthwith to
Depart from the same, at their Peril of undergoing the utmost Punishment as can
be by Law Inflicted upon them for their Disobedience herein.

And further, That this Order be forthwith Printed and Published, to the end
all Persons concerned may take notice thereof.

Jo: Brown. Cleric: Parliament.

Sabati 4. Die December. 1680
Ordered,

THat Mr. Sanderson a Member of this House have leave to go into the Country,
for recovery of his health.

Ordered,

That Mr. Secretary Jenkins be added to the Committee, to whom the Bill for
taking away the Court holden before the President and Council, in the Marches
of Wales, is committed.

Ordered,

That the Matter touching the Election for the Town of Taunton in the County of
Somerset (which was appointed for this day) be heard at the Bar of this House,
on Tuesday morning next.

A Bill for the better securing the payment of an annuity or Rentcharge of 130
l. per annum. out of the Manors and Farms of Bexhill and Cowding in the County
of Sussex, to the Use of the Poor of several Parishes in the County of Surrey,
was Read the first time.

Resolved,

That the said Bill be Read a second time.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

And the Committee of the Commons Proceeded in the Management of the
Impeachment against William Viscount Stafford, before the Lords in Parliament.

Post Meridiem.
The Committee of the Commons returned to the House.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

The House being Informed, That Mr. William Stawell, in Custody of the Sergeant
at Arms Attending this House, is sick and not able to Appear before this House.

Ordered,

That Mr. Stawell have a Months time given him for such his appearance.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwyn and Sr. Samuel Clarke,

Mr Speaker.

The Lords have sent us to acquaint this House, That they have Ordered- William
Viscount Stafford to be brought again to the Bar in Westminster Hall, on Monday
Morning next, at Ten of the Clock.

Lunae 6. die December. 1680.
JOhn Loos did this day take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, in order to
his Naturalization.

Ordered,

That Mr. Edward Nosworthy, the Younger, and Mr. Sergeant Rigby Members of this
House, have leave to go into the Country.

A Petition of Knyvet Hastyngs Esquire; in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
Attending this House was Read.

Ordered

That the said Mr. Hastings be discharged from any further Confinement.

A Petition of Richard Thompson Clerk, in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
Attending this House, being presented to the House,

Ordered,

That the said Petition do lie upon the Clerks Table.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

And the Committee of the Commons did Proceed in the Management of the
Impeachment against William Viscount Stafford, before the Lords in Parliament,

Post Meridiem.
The Committee of the Commons returned to the House.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Ordered,

That the Name of John Loos, who this day took the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, be inserted in the Bill of Naturalization.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwyn and Sir Samuel Clarke.

Mr. Speaker,

The Lords have Commanded us to acquaint this House, that they have Appointed
William Viscount Stafford to be brought to the Bar in Westminster Hall,
tomorrow morning an Ten of the Clock, to hear Judgment.

Resolved Nemine Contradicente,

That this House will go tomorrow morning with their Speaker, to the Bar of the
House of Lords, and Demand Judgment upon the Impeachment of the Commons of
England, against William Viscount Stafford.

Ordered,

That no Member of this House do go into the Court in Westminster Hall tomorrow
morning, before this House shall have demanded Judgment at the Bar of the
Lords, upon the Impeachment of the Commons of England, against William Viscount
Stafford, and that Mr. Howard have notice hereof.

Martis 7 die December. 1680.
William Leonardson Robolt did this day take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supre
macy, in Order to his Naturalization.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

The Committee of the Commons Appointed for the Mangement of the Impeachment
against William Viscount Stafford, were present at the Court in
Westminster Hall, when the Lords found William Viscount Stafford guilty of the
High Treason whereof he stands Impeached.

The Committee of the Commons returned to the House.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

The House then with Mr. Speaker went up to the Bar of the Lords House and by
Mr. Speaker demanded Judgment of High Treason against William Viscount
Stafford, upon the Impeachment of the Commons of England in Parliament, in the
Name of the Commons in Parliament, and of all the Commons of England.

The House being returned,

Ordered, That Doctor Burnett be desired to Preach before this House at St.
Margarets Westminster, upon the Fast day, Appointed by His Majesty's
Proclamation; and Colonel Titus is desired to acquaint him therewith.

Ordered, That Doctor Spratt be likewise desired to Preach before this House on
the same day; and Sir John Trevor is desired to Acquaint him therewith.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwyn and Sir Samuel Clark.

Mr. Speaker, We are commanded by the Lords to acquaint this House, that their
Lordships are going presently into Westminster Hall to give Judgment against
William Viscount Stafford.

Mr. Speaker, left the Chair.

The Committee of the Commons appointed for the management of the Impeachment
against William Viscount Stafford, were present at the Court in
Westminster Hall, when the Lords gave Judgment of High Treason against William
Viscount Stafford, upon the Impeachment of the Commons.

The Committee of the Commons returned to the House.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Ordered, That the Name of William Leonardson Robolt, who this day took the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, be inserted in the Bill of Naturalization.

Mercurii. 8 die December. 1680.
JOhn Woder and John Oort did this day take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy at the Clerks Table, in order to their Naturalization

Ordered, That the Names of the said John Woder and John Oort be inserted in
the Bill of Naturalization.

The House being informed that Sir John Cutler, who is returned as one of the
Burgesses to Serve in this Parliament for the Burtough of Taunton in the County
of Somerset is satisfied that he is not duly Elected a Burgess to Serve for the
said Borough, and that his Council was Attending at the Door, ready to
acknowledge the same.

The Council for the said Sir John Cutler, as likewise the Council for Edmund
Prideaux Esquire; and the Council for the said Borough being called in, and the
Council for the said Sir John Cutler admitting that Edmund Prideaux Esquire; is
duly Elected a Burgess to Serve for the said Borough.

Resolved, etc. That Sir John Cutler is not duly Elected a Burgess to Serve in
this present Parliament, for the said Borough of Taunton.

Resolved, etc. That Edmund Prideaux Esquire; is duly Elected a Burgess to Serve in
this present Parliament, for the said Borough of Taunton.

The Clerk of the Crown being called in, Amended the Return for Taunton, by
razing out the Name of Sir John Cutler, and inserting the Name of Edmond
Prideaux Esquire; in the room thereof, in the Indenture.

Ordered, That Mr. Bridstock Hartford and Mr. John Booth Members of this House,
have leave to Repair in to the Country.

Resolved, etc. That this House be called over the First Tuesday in January
next, and that such Members as shall then make default in Attending the Service
of the House be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker be desired to send his Letters to the several
Sheriffs of the respective Counties and to the several Mayors, Bailiffs and
other Proper Officers of the several Cities, Buroughs, Corporations and Cinque
Ports of this Kingdom, requiring them to give notice to all such Members of
this House that serve for such Respective Places, as have Absented themselves
from the Service of this House without Leave, to attend the House within Ten
days from this day.

Ordered, That the Chairman of the Committee of Elections and Privileges do
Report the Matter touching the Election for the Borough of Agmondisham in the
County of Bucks to Morrow Morning.

A Petition of Sampson Birch in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this
House was Read.

Ordered, That the said Sampson Birch be brought to the Bar, and and do receive
the Censure of this House upon his knees from Mr. Speaker, and be then
discharged, paying his Fees, which was done accordingly.

Sir Richard Corbet Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges, to
whom the Matter touching the Election and Return for the Borough of Eye in the
County of Suffolk, was Referred, that the Committee, having taken the same into
consideration, had agreed upon certain Resolves which he Read in his Place, and
afterward Delivered the same in at the Clerks Table, where the same being Read
are as follows, viz.

Resolved, etc. That Charles Fox Esquire. is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in
this present Parliament for the said Borough of Eye.

Resolved, etc. That George Walsh Esquire: is duly elected a Burgess to serve in
this present Parliament for the said Borough of Eye. In which Resolves the
House agreed with the Committee.

Ordered, That the Clerk of the Crown do attend tomorrow morning, to amend the
Return for the said Borough.

The House taking Notice of several abuses and Misdemeanors committed in the
said election.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to examine the said abuses and
Misdemeanors, and to Report the same with their Opinions therein, to the House.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker do Issue out his Warrant to the clerk of the Crown
to make out a New Writ for the election of a Burgess to serve in this present
Parliament, for the Borough of Ipswich, in the County of Suffolk, in the room
of Gilbert Lindfield Esquire; deceased.

A Petition of Sir Thomas Whitgrave, in custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, was Read.

Ordered, That the said Sir Thomas Whitgrave, be brought to the Bar, and do
receive the censure of the House upon his Knees from Mr. Speaker, and be then
discharged of his confinement, paying his Fees, which was done accordingly.

A Petition of John Hutchinson Esquire; in custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, was Read.

Ordered, That the said John Hutchinson be brought to the Bar: and do receive
the censure of this House upon his Knees from Mr. Speaker, and be then
discharged of his confinement, paying his Fees; which was done accordingly.

A Petition of Henry Walrond, in custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending the
House, was Read.

Ordered, That the said Mr. Wallrond, have time to appear at the Bar of this
House, to the 3d day of January next.

A Petition of Samuel Gibs late Mayor of Westbury in the County of Wilts, in
the custody of the Sergeant at Arms was Read,

Ordered, That this Petition be taken into Consideration on Saturday Morning
next at Ten of the Clock.

Ordered, That William Tyler Esquire; be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at
Arms attending this House, to answer at the Bar for a breach of Privilege by
him committed against this House.

A Petition of Richard Thompson Clerk. in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, was
Read.

Ordered, the the Consideration of this Petition, as also of the Matter of the
Complaint for which the said Richard Thompson stands Committed, be referred to
a Committee to Report the same with their Opinions therein, to the House.

A Petition of William Jordan, in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, was Read.

Ordered, That the said William Jordan be brought to the Bar, and do receive
the Censure of this House upon his Knees from Mr. Speaker, and be then
discharged of his Confinement; which was accordingly done.

Ordered, That Mr. Earl a Member of this House, have leave to go in to the
Country for Recovery of his health.

Jovis 9 die December. 1680.
Ordered.

THat a Commitee be Appointed to Inspect the Act made for the Erecting and
Establishing the Post Office, and to bring in a Bill or or Bills for Regulating
the Post Office.

Ordered.

That Mr. John Gray and Mr. Nicholas Herle Members of this House, have leave to
go into the Country.

Ordered.

That a Committee be Appointed to prepare and bring in a Bill for Regulating
the Coynage, and for continuance of the Law made concerning Coynage.

Ordered.

That Mr. Woolrich a Member of this House, have leave to repair into the
Country for his health.

Sir Richard Corbet Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges, to
whom the matter of the Election for the Borough of Rygate in the County of
Surrey was committed, that the Committee having taken the same into their
Consideration, had agreed upon the following Resolves;

Resolved etc.

That Ralph Freeman Esquire; is not duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present
Parliament, for the Borough of Rygate in the County of Surrey.

Resolved.

That Dean Goodwin Esquire; is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present
Parliament, for the Borough of Rygate in the County of Surrey.

To which Resolves the House agreed.

A Motion being made to the House, that Sir William Spring a Member of this
House, have leave to go into the Country;

It was Resolved upon a Question, in the Affirmative.

A Bill for Exporting Leather was Read a Second time and committed.

The Clerk of the Crown being called in, Amended the Return for the Borough of
Eye in the County of Suffolk, by taking off the Indenture whereby Sir Charles
Gaudy and Sir Robert Reeve were Returned.

Ordered, That the Clerk of the Crown do Attend tomorrow morning, to Amend the
Return for Rygate in the County of Surrey.

Colonel Birch Reports from the Committee Appointed to Examine the matter of
the Information given to this House by Mr. Peter Norris That the Committee
having taken the same into their Consideration, had not thought fit to come to
any Resolution therein, but had Ordered him to Report the matter specialy;
which was Reported accordingly.

Ordered, That Mr. Sherridon and Mr. Day be forthwith brought in Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms, to the Bar of this House.

Ordered, That a Committee be Appointed forthwith to search the Papers of the
said Mr. Sherridon and Mr. Day, and to Report the same to the House.

A Motion being made to the House, That the Matter touching the Election for
the City of Gloucester, be appointed to be heard before the Committee of
Elections and Privileges, on the Third day of January next.

Ordered,

That the Consideration of this Motion be referred to the Committee of
Elections and Privileges.

Ordered,

That the Matter of the Complaint made against Mr. Tyler, be referred to the
Committee of Privileges to Examine the same; And they are to proceed therein
in the first place, and make Report thereof, to the House.

Ordered,

That the further Consideration of the whole Matter upon the said Special
Report, be Adjourned to Ten of the Clock tomorrow morning.

Ordered,

That Mr Sherridon and Mr. Day, do severally continue in Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms, during the pleasure of this House, and that no Person be
Admitted to come to them, but such as shall have occasion to bring them
necessaries.

Veneris 10. die December. 1680.
A Bill for Naturalization of Peter Elers and others, was Read a Second time;

Resolved,

That the said Bill be Committed.

Ordered,

That Mr. Heming and Sir William York Members of this House have leave to go
into the Country.

Ordered,

That the Order of this House made on Wednesday last, for Summoning such
Members as have absented themselves without the leave of the House, to attend
within Ten Days, That the time be extended to Ten Days from Saturday next.

The Clerk of the Crown being called in, Amended the Return for the Borough of
Rygate in the County of Surry, by razing out the Name of Ralph Freeman Esquire; and
inserting the Name of Dean Godwin Esquire; in the Indenture.

Mr. Trenchard Reports from the Committee appointed to enquire after all such
Persons, as have offended against the Right of the Subject to Petition His
Majesty for the Sitting of Parliaments; That the Committee had agreed upon the
following Resolve which he Read in his Place, and afterward delivered it in at
the Clerks Table, where the same being Read, is as follows, viz.

Resolved, etc.

That Captain Castle, by Obstructing Petitioning to his Majesty for the Sitting
of this Parliament, has offended against the Rights of the Subject.

Resolved, etc.

That this House does agree with the Committee, That Captain Castle, by
Obstructing Petitioning to His Majesty for the Sitting of this Parliament has
offended against the Rights of the Subjects.

Ordered,

That the Committee Appointed to Examine the Proceedings of the Judges in
Westminster Hall, and to prepare an Impeachment against Sir Francis North Chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, for High Crimes and Misdemeanors, do make
Report to the House of the Matters to them Referred, on Monday Morning next.

Ordered,

That the Chairman of the Committee appointed to examine the Matter of the
Information against Sir Robert Peyton a Member of this House, do make Report
thereof to Morrow Morning and that Sir Robert Peyton do Attend in his Place at
the same time

Ordered,

That the Chairman of the Committee of Elections and Privileges, do make
Report of the Matter touching the Election for the Borrough of Agmondesham in
the County of Bucks, to Morrow morning at Nine of the Clock; and the same is to
be the first business to be entered upon.

The House then resumed the Adjourned Debate, concerning the Matter of the
Information, formerly given to the House, by Mr. Peter Norris.

The Matter being Debated in the House; and Mr. Secretary Jenkins having given
an Account to the House of his proceedings therein; And being withdrawn.

Resolved,

That the late Imprisonment of Peter Norris, at Dover was illegal and that the
Proceedings of Sir Leoline Jenkins Knight, one of the Principle Secrataries of
State, by discribing the Person of the said Peter Norris, and directing such
his Imprisonment, was Illegal and Arbitrary, and an Obstruction to the
Evidence, for the Discovery of the Horrid Popish Plot.

Ordered,

That the further Consideration of this Debate, be Adjourned to Monday Morning
next,

Sabbati 11 die December.
JAmes Raillard did this day take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy at the
Clerks Table, in Order to his Naturalization.

Ordered, That the Name of the said James Raillard, be inserted in the Bill of
Naturalization.

A Bill for Sale of the Manor of Billingford, and other Lands in the County of
Norfolk for Payment of the Debts of Sir Edward Chisenhale, was Read the First
time.

Resolved, etc.

That the said Bill be Read a Second time, in a Full House, after Ten of the
Clock.

Ordered,

That Mr. Austin a Member of this House, have leave to go into the Country, for
Recovery of his Health.

Ordered,

That the Bill for Supplying the Laws, made against Bankrupts, be Read on
Tuesday Morning next, after Ten of the Clock, in a Full House.

Ordered,

That Sir Bryan Stapleton, a Member of this House, have leave to go into the
Country.

A Petition of Captain William Castle, being presented to the House,

Orderd,

That the said Petition do lie upon the Clerks Table.

Ordered,

That Michael Ball, in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms, be Discharged, without
paying any Fees.

Mr. Treby Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges, to whom the
Matter touching the Election for Agmondesham in the County of Bucks was
referred, that the Committee having taken the same into their Consideration,
had agreed upon several Resolves which he read in his Place, and afterward
delivered them in at the Clerks Table, where the same being Read are as
follows, uiz.

Resolved, etc.

That in the Borough of Agmondesham alias Amersham in the County of Bucks,
those Inhabitants who only pay Scott and Lot have right to give Voices in the
Election of Burgesses to serve in Parliament for the said Borough.

Resolled, etc.

That Algernoon Sidney Esquire; is not duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the said Borough of Agmondesham.

Resolved, etc.

That Sir William Drake Baronet, is not duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament, for the said Borough of Agmondesham; And that the said
Election is void.

To which Resolves the House agreed.

Ordered,

That Mr. Speaker do Issue out his Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown to make
out a new Writ, for the Electing of a Burgess to ferve in this present
Parliament for the said Borough of Agmondesham.

Ordered,

That the Chairman of the Committee of Elections and Privileges do make Report
of the Matter, touching the Election for the Borough of Marlow, in the County
of Bucks, on Tuesday Morning next,

Ordered,

That the Mr, Wilson, be taken in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms Attending
this House, for a breach of Privilege, by him Committed, against this House,

Ordered,

That Mr. Day, being in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms Attending this House,
be Discharged from his further Confinment.

Ordered,

That the Chairman of the Committee Appointed to Examine the Matter of the
Information against Sir Robert Peyton, do Report the same on Tuesday Morning
next.

Lunae 13 Die December. 1680
DIrck Vander-Stegen, and Mathias Cole, did this day, take the Oaths of
Allegianee and Supremacy, at the Clerks Table, in order to their Naturalization.

Ordered.

That the Names of the said Dirck-Vander Stegen, and Mathias Cole, be inserted
in the Bills of Naturalization.

A Bill for Exportation of Cloth and other Woollen Manufactures into Turkey, was
read a second time, and a debate arising thereupon.

Ordered, That this Bill do lie on the Clerks Table.

Ordered,

That Mr. Francis Lutterell and Sir Thomas Whitmore, Members of this House,
have leave to go into the Country.

Ordered,

That the Committee appointed to look into, and prepare Evidence against the
Lords in the Tower, do examine the evidence against all Persons concerned in the
Popish Plot; and they are to report the names of such persons together with
their opinions therein, to the House upon the Debate.

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente.

That this House will, on Wednesday morning next at Ten of the Clock, resolve
it self into a Committee of the whole House, to consider of ways and means to
secure the Kingdom against Popery, and Arbitrary Power.

Ordered.

That leave be given to bring in a Bill, for banishing of all Papists and
suspected Papists, from the Cities of London and Westminster, and 20 Miles of
the same, with clauses therein, for disarming of all Papists, and for pains and
penalty against all such Papists or suspected Papists, as shall either ride, go
or be armed.

Ordered.

That the Knights of the respective Shires, Citizens of the respective Cities,
Burgesses of the several Buroughs and Barons, of the Cinque Ports within this
Kingdom, do with all convenient speed, bring in Lists of all Papists, and
reputed Papists within the said several Counties, Cities, Buroughs and
Cinque Ports.

Ordered.

That the Lord Annesly a Member of this House, have liberty to repair to Mr.
Sheridon.

A Petition of Captain William Castle was read.

Ordered,

That the said Captain Castle be brought to the Bar tomorrow morning, and do
receive the Censure of the House upon his knees from Mr. Speaker.

Ordered,

That Mr. Lucy be added to the Committee, appointed to examine the proceedings
of the Judges in Westminster Hall And to prepare an Impeachment against Sir
Francis North? Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas.

Martis 14. die December: 1680.
A Bill for rectifying several Errors and mistakes in certain Deeds of
Settlement made upon the Marriage of Sir Charles Hoghton, Barronet, with Mary,
the Daughter of John Lord Viscount Massareen, was read the first time.

Resolved, etc. That the Bill be read a second time on Thursday morning next.

Mr. England reports from the Commitee appointed to examine the matter of the
complaint made by the Inhabitants of the County of Norfolk against Samuel
Verdon, Undersheriff of the said County, That the Committee having taken the
same into their Consideration, had directed him to make a special Report to the
House, which he read in his Place, and afterward delivered the same in at the
Clerks Table, where the same being read,

Ordered, That the said Committee do proceed to examine all Matters of complaint
against the said Samuel Verdon, without further Summons.

Ordered, That Mr. Baispole be sent for in custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, to answer at the Bar for a Breach of Privilege by him
committed against this House.

A Petition of Mr: Jerimiah Bubb being read,

Ordered, That the said Mr. Bubb be discharged from any further Attendance.

Ordered, That Mr. William Tyler be discharged from any further confinement
without paying Fees.

Information being given to the House that Herbert Herring some weeks since
ordered to be taken in custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to
answer for a breach of Privilege by him committed against Mr. Colt a Member of
this Honse, has, and still does abscond himself to avoid the Execution of the
said Order.

Resolved, etc. That if the said Herbert Herring do not render himself to the
said Sergeant at Arms before Saturday next, this House will proceed against him
by a Bill in Parliament for endeavoring by his Absconding to avoid the Justice
of this House.

Ordered, That the Chairman of the Committee to whom the Bill for the better
Regulating the Trials of Peers is Committed, do make Report thereof on Thursday
Morning next.

A Petition of Roderick Mansell, Esquire; was Read.

Mr. Mansell being called gave an account to the House of the Matter relating
to Sir Robert Peyton.

Sir William Roberts Reports from the Committee appointed to examine the matter
relating to Sir Robert Peyton, that the Committee having taken the same into
their Consideration had agreed upon a Report which he read in his place, and
afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table, where the same being read,

Sir Robert Peyton having made his Defense in his Place and being withdrawn,

And the matter being debated in the House, the House made the following Vote.

It appearing to this House by the Report made at the Bar and by the Confession
of Sir Robert Peyton in his Place, that Sir Robert Peyton had secret
negotiation with the Duke of Tork by the means of the Earl of Peterborow, Mrs.
Cellier and Mr. Gadbury, at such time when they were turning the Popish Plot
upon the Protestants.

Ordered, That Sir Robert Peyton be expelled this House.

And that Sir Robert Peyton be brought to the Bar and do receive the Censure of
the House upon his knees from Mr. Speaker.

The Sergeant at Arms aquainting the House, that Sir Robert Peyton had absented
himself so that he could not be then found.

Ordered,

That the said Sir Robert Peyton be taken into Custody of the said Sergeant at
Arms.

Mercurii 15 Die December. 1680.
ORdered, That Samuel Gibbs, late Mayor of the Borough of Westbury in the
County of Wilts, in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, be
brought to the Bar; and do receive the Censure of the House upon his knees from
Mr. Speaker, and be then discharged, paying his fees; which was done
accordingly.

Ordered, That Sir Thomas Exton, a Member of this House, have leave to repair
into the Country.

A Petition of George Bell, in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this
House, was read.

Ordered, That the said George Bell, be brought to the Bar, and do receive the
censure of the House upon his knees, from Mr. Speaker, and be then discharged,
paying his Fees; which was done accordingly:

A Bill for supplying the Laws made against Bankrupts, was read the first time.

A Message from His Majesty by Sr. Edward Cartarett, Usher of the Black Rod.

Mr. Speaker, The King commands this Honorable House to attend him immediately
in the House of Peers; and accordingly Mr. Speaker with the House, went up to
attend His Majesty.

The House being returned, Mr. Speaker acquainted the House with the Effect of
His Majesty's Speech.

Ordered, That Sir. Robert Peyton, being in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, be brought to the Bar, and do receive the Censure of this
House upon his knees from Mr. Speaker. and that he be then discharged from
further Confinement, paying his Fees; which was accordingly done.

Resolved, That this House will on Saturday morning next take into
consideration, His Majesty's Gracious Speech, this day made to both Houses of
Parliament.

The House then according to their Order, Resolved into a Committee of the
whole House, to consider of ways and means, to secure this Kingdom against
Popery and Arbitrary Power.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

Mr. Powle took the Chair of the Committee.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Mr. Powle acquaints the House, that the Committee receiving Intimation, that
there was a Message at the door from the Lords, had ordered him to leave the
Chair, and moved from the said Committee, that the House would be pleased, as
soon as such Message should be received: to resolve again into a Committee of
the whole House.

A Message from the Lords by Sr. John Hoskins and Sr. Addam Dateley.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have commanded us to acquaint this House; that they
have agreed to the Bill sent from this House, entitled An-Act for the repeal
of a Statute made in the 35th. Tear of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. with some
Amendments; to which they desire the concurrence of this House.

The House again resolved Itself into a Committee of the whole House,

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

Mr. Powle took the Chair of the Committee.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Mr. Powle reports from the Committee of the whole House, That the Committee
having taken the matters to them referred, into consideration, had agreed upon
certain Resolves, which he read in his place and afterward delivered them in
at the Clerks Table, where the same being read are as follows, viz.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Committee, that one means for the
suppressing Popery is, that the House be moved that a Bill be brought in to
banish immediately all the considerable Papists out of the Kings Dominions.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Committee, that as long as the
Papists have any hopes of the Duke of York's succeeding the King in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, the
King's person, the Protestant Religion, and the lives, liberties and properties
of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, are in apparent danger of being
destroyed.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Committee, that the House be moved,
that a Bill be brought in, for an association of all His Majesty's Protest ant
Subjects, for the safety of His Majesty's Person, the Defense of the Protestant
Religion, and the preservation of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, against
all Invasions and Oppositions whatsoever; and for the preventing the Duke of
York, or any Papist from succeeding to the Crown.

The first of the said Resolves being read a second time,

And a Motion being made for the adding the words (of England) aftor the word
(Papists) in the said Resolve; which being agreed to by the House, and the same
being inserted at the Clerks Table,

Resolved Nemine contradicente, That this House does agree with the Committee,
that one means for the suppressing Popery, is, that a Bill be brought in to
banish immediately, all the considerable Papists of England out of the Kings
Dominions.

The second of the said Resolves being read a second time,

Resolved Nemine Contradicente, That this House does agree with the Committee,
that so long as the Papists have any hopes of the Duke of York's succeeding the
King in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, the King's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the lives, liberties
and properties of all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, are in apparent danger
of being destroyed.

The Third of the said Resolves being read a second Time,

Resolved Nemine contradicente, That this House does agree with the Committee,
that a Bill be brought in for an association of all His Majesty's Protestant
Subjects, for the safety of His Majesty's Person, the Desence of the Protestant
Religion, and the preservation of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, against
all Invasions and Oppositions whatsoever; and for preventing the Duke of York,
or any Papist from succeeding to the Crown.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to prepare and bring in a Bill pursuant
to the first of the said Resolves.

Mr. Powle moving the House from the Committee of the whole House, that the
House would be pleased, again to resolve it self into a Committee of the whole
House, to Morrow morning at Ten of the Clock, upon the Matter of this days
Debate.

Resolved, That this House will, to Morrow morning at Ten of the Clock, resolve
it self into a Committee of the who'e House; further to consider of ways and
means, to secure the Kingdom against Popery and Arbitrary Power.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker do issue out his Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown,
to make out a new Writ for the Election of a Knight to serve in this present
Parliament, for the County of Middlesex, in the room of Sir Robert Peyton
expelled this House.

Jovis 16. die December. 1680.
MArtin May and Cornelius Steler did this day take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy at the Clerks Table in order to their Naturalization.

Ordered, That Mr. Samuel Sandys the younger and Mr. Stokes have leave to go
into the Country.

A Bill for rectifying several Errors and Mistakes in certain Deeds of
settlement made upon the marriage of Sir Charles Hoghton, Baronet, with Mary
the daughter of John Lord Viscount Massareen was read a second time.

A Petition of diverse Inhabitants in the County of Surrey complaining of the
proceedings in an Ecclesiastical Court against them was read.

Ordered. That the consideration of this petition be referred to a Committee.

The same Committee is empowered to send for Persons, Papers and Records, and
to receive all other Complaints against the proceedings of Ecclesiastical
Courts and to bring in a Bill or Bills for regulating the proceedings of such
Courts.

A Petition of Joshua Brook and other Merchants against the African Company was
read.

Ordered, That the Consideration of this petition be referred to a Committee to
examine the matter thereof and to report the same with their opinions therein
to the House.

Mr. Booth reports from the Committee to whom the Bill for the. better
regulating the Trials of the Peers of England was Committed. That the Committee
having taken the same into consideration had agreed to an Amendment to be made
and a clause to be added to the same which he read in his Place and afterward
delivered them in at the Clerks Table where the same wereread. And a Motion
being made to the House that a Clause be added for repeal of the Laws De
Scandalis Magnatum.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed immediately to withdraw and prepare
such a Clause.

A Bill for Uniting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects to the Church of England,
was read the first time:

Resolved, That the said Bill be read a second time on Monday morning next
after ten of the clock in a full House.

A Bill for the Exempting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects discenting from the
Church of England from the penalties of Certain Laws was read the first time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be read a second time on monday morning next
after ten of the clock in a full House.

Ordered, That the Chairman of the Committee appointed to consider of
presidents concerning the Imprisoning of Members of this House upon an
impeachment in Parliament do make report thereof tomorrow morning after ten a
clock in a full House.

The Amendments sent from the Lords to the Bill for Repeal of the Statute made
in the five and thirtieth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth were twice read
and upon the Question severally put were agreed to.

Ordered, That the Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges
touching the Elections for the Boroughs of Marlborough in the County of Wilts,
St, Edmonds-bury in the County of Suffolk, and great Marlow in the County of
Bucks, be made on Tuesday morning next.

Refolved, That this House will tomorrow morning resolve it self into a
Committee of the whole House, further to consider of ways and means to secure
the Kingdom against Popery and Arbitrary Power.

Mr. Trenchard reports from the Committee appointed to prepare a Clause for
repeal of the Laws made De Scandalis Magnatum, that the Committee had agreed
upon a Clause, which he Read in his Place and afterward Delivered the same in
at the Clerks Table.

The House resuming the consideration of the Amendments this day reported to be
made to the Bill sent down from the Lords for the better regulating the Trials
of Peers, and the Amendments being read a second time were upon the Question
agreed to,

The Clause last reported being twice read and upon the Question agreed to.

Resolved, That the said Clause be added to the said Bill.

And the Bill with the Amendments and Clauses being read a third time.

Resolved, That the Bill thus amended do pass.

A Bill for restraining Papists from coming or residing within the Cities of
London and Westminster, or within twenty Miles distance from the same, and from
wearing and having Arms, was read the first time.

Resolved, That the Bill be read a second time to Morrow morning, and that it
be the first business.

Veneris Die 17 December. 1680.
ORdered, That the Names of Martin May and Cornelius Steler, who Yesterday took
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy at the Clerks Table, in Order to their
Naturalization, be inserted in the Bill of Naturalization.

A Petition of John Gold and Henry Palmer was Read.

Ordered, That the Consideration of the said Petition be referred to the
Commitee, appointed to examine the proceedings of the Judges in
Westminster Hall; who are to examine the matter thereof, and to report the same
with their Opinions therein to the House.

A Petition of Mr. J. Emarton was Read.

Ordered, That the Consideration of this Petition be referred to the Committee,
appointed to receive Complaints against the Proceedings of the Ecclesiastical
Courts, to examine the Matter thereof, and Report the same, with their Opinions
therein, to the House.

A Petition of Charles Cottington Esquire; was Read.

Ordered, That the Consideration of this Petition, be referred to the Committee
last mentioned, to examine the Matter thereof, and to Report the same, with
their opinions therein, to the House.

A Petition of the Grand Jury of the County of Middlesex. referred to a
Committee; which Committee is empowered to Bring in a Bill or Bills, for
Erecting a Court of Conicience to be held within the Jurisdiction of the said
Country of Middlesex, upon the Debate of the House.

Ordered, That Major Bremen have leave to go into the Country.

Ordered, That Captain Castle being in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, be brought to the Bar, and do receive the Censures of the
House upon his knees, from Mr. Speaker, and be discharged paying his Fees;
which was done accordingly.

A Petition of Richard Hains, desiring leave, that a Bill be brought in for
restraining Vagrants and promoting woollen Manufacture was Read.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill for that purpose, and it is
referred to a Committee, to prepare the same.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill, for the more easy collecting
His Majesty's Revenue arising by. Hearth money.

Ordered, That Sr. Nicholast; Pelham and Sr. Thomas Milbraham have leave to go
into the Country.

An Engrossed Bill, touching persons buried in Woollen, was Read.

Resolved, That the Bill do pass, and that the Title be An additional Act for
burying in Woollen.

Ordered, That Sr. Goorge Downing do carry the said Bill to the Lords, and
desire their Lordships Concurrence therein.

A Bill for continuance of Two Acts; the one entitled An Act for preventing
the planting of Tobacco in England, and regulating the Plantation Trade: The
other, An Act for exporting Beer, Ale and Mum, was read the second time, and
committed.

Mr. Sergeant Seyes reports from the Committee, to whom the Bill for taking
away the Court, holden before the President and Council in the Marches of
Wales, was committed.

Ordered, That the said Bill be engrossed.

Sir William Poultney reports from the Committee, to whom it was referred to
prepare, the Impeachment against Edward Seymour Esquire; a Member of this House,
and to search Presidents touching Imprisoning Members of this House, when
impeached in Parliament: That the Committee had directed him to make a special
Report thereof, which he read in his place, and afterward delivered the same
in at the Clerks Table.

Ordered, That the Articles of Impeachment against Mr. Seymor, agreed upon, be
engrossed.

And that Mr. Seymour be taken in custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending
this House, for securing of his forthcoming, to answer to the Impeachment of
this House against him, until he shall have given sufficient security to this
Housc, to answer to the said Impeachment.

Ordered, That the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, be empowered to
receive security for the forth coming of the said Mr. Seymour, to answer to the
Impeachment of this House.

Sir William Poultney reports from the Committee, appointed to put the Articles
against Mr. Seymour into the form of an Impeachment, that the said Committee
had agreed upon a form which he read in his place, and afterward delivered the
same in at the Clerks Table.

A Bill for restraining Papists from coming or residing within the Cities of
London and Westminster, or within Twenty Miles distant from the same. And from
wearing and having Arms, was read a second Time.

Resolved, That the Bill be committed upon the Debate of the House.

The House then, according to the Order for the day, resolved into a Committee
of the whole House.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair.

Mr. Powle took the Chair of the Committee.

Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Mr. Powle reports from the Committee of the whole House, that the Committee
having taken the Matters to them referred into consideration, had agreed upon
several Resolves, which he read in his place, and afterward delivered them in
at the Clerks Table, where the same being read, are as follows; viz.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that the House be moved,
that a Bill be brought in for the more effectual securing of the Meeting and
Sitting of frequent Parliaments.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that the House be moved,
that a Bill be brought in, that the Judges may hold their Places and Salaries
quamdiu se been gesserint.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, as one means to prevent
Arbitrary power, that the House be moved, that a Bill be brought in against
illegal exaction of Money upon the people; and to make it High Treason.

The first of the said Resolves being Read,

Resolved, That this House does agree with the Committee, that a Bill be
brought in for the more effectual securing of the Meeting and Sitting of the
frequent Parliaments, as one means to prevent Arbitrary power.

The second of the said Resolves being Read,

Resolved, That this House does agree with the Committee, that a Bill be
brought in, that the Judges hereafter to be made and appointed, may hold their
Places and Salaries quamdiu se been gesserint; and also to prevent the
Arbitrary proceedings of the Judges.

The last of the said Resolves being Read,

Resolved, That this House does agree with the Committee, that a Bill be
brought in against illegal exaction of Money upon the People and to make it
high Treason.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed, to prepare and bring in a Bill or
Bills pursuant to the said several Resolves, and it is referred to a Committee.

Sabbati 18. die December. 1680.
Ordered,

THat Sir Ralph Carr, a Member of this House, who serves for the County of
Montgomery, and Mr. Edward Vaughan in this House, have leave to go into the
Country.

A Bill to supply a Defective conveyance made by Mr. Roger Price of the Manor
of Westbury in the County of Bucks was read the first time.

Resolved, That this Bill be read a second time.

An Engrossed Bill for taking away the Court holden before the President and
Council in the Marches of Wales, was read a third time.

Resolved, That the Bill do pass, and that the Title be An Act for taking away
of the Court holden before the President and Council in the Marches of Wales.

Ordered, That Sir Trevor Williams do carry up the said Bill to the Lords for
their Concurrence, the same was carried up accordingly.

Mr. Hyde acquaints the House, That His Majesty had directed him to communicate
to the House a Letter from one Robards to Mr. Dugdale, touching William
Pickering, which Letter he delivered in at the Clerks Table, and the same being
there read;

Ordered, That the said Letter, together with the Letter lately sent from
Doctor Lamphire to Mr. Secretary Jenkins, be delivered by the Clerk of this
House to Mr. Attorney General in order to the prosecution of the said Pickering
at Law.

The House then according to their Order entered into the Consideration of His
Majesty's Gracious Speech made to both Houses of Parliament on Wednesday last.

Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to prepare an humble Address to His
Majesty upon the Debate of the House in answer to His Majesty's Speech: and a
Committee was named to draw up and prepare the same accordingly; and they are
to meet at three of the Clock this Afternoon in the Speaker's Chamber.

Lunae 20th. die December. 1680.
A Bill for Sale of the Estate of Joseph Cowden deceased, for the payment of
his Debts, and raising of Portions for his Daughters, was read the first time.

Resolved,

That the Bill be Read a second time.

Ordered,

That Samuel Cheaffin be Summoned, to answer at the Bar of this House, for a
Breach of privilege by him committed against Sir John Guise, a member of this
House.

Sir George Downing Reports from the Committee to whom the Bill for Prohibiting
the Importation of Cattle from Scotland, was committed, that the Committee
having taken the same into their consideration, had Agreed to some Amendments
to the same, to which Amendments the House Agreed.

Ordered,

That the Bill with these Amendments be Engrossed.

Ordered,

That leave be given to bring in a Bill to prevent Scotch Pedlars from coming
in to this Kingdom.

A Bill to Prohibit the Importation of foreign Guns, etc. was Read the first
time.

Resolved, etc.

That the Bill be Read a second time.

A Bill for the Sale of the Manor of Billingford, and Lands in the County of
Norfolk, for payment of the Debts of Sir Edward Chisenhale, was Read a second
time, and Committed.

Mr. Lionell Playter, is to have notice and time given him, to attend the
Committee; and the Committee is to inspect the several settlements and Mortages
mentioned in the Bill, and they are empowered to send for persons, papers, and
Records.

Ordered,

That a Committee be appointed, to receive and examine the accounts of the
commissioners appointed, by a late Act of Parliament to pay off and Disband the
Forces Raised since the 29th of September 1677. And make Report thereof to the
House.

A Bill for the better payment of an Annuity or Rentcharge of 130 l per Annum
out of the Manor of Bexhill in the County of Sussex, to the use of the poor of
several Parishes in the County of Surrey, was Read a second time, and was
Committed.

A Petition of Henry Aulnutt Esquire; was Read.

Ordered,

That the said Mr. Aulnutt be brought to the Bar, and do receive the Censure of
the House, upon his Knees, from Mr. Speaker and be then discharged, paying his
Fees, which was accordingly done.

A Petition of Thomas Herbert Esquire; was Read.

Ordered,

That the said Mr. Herbert be brought to the Bar, and do receive the censure of
this House upon his Knees, from Mr. Speaker, and be then discharged, paying his
Fees, which was done accordingly.

Mr. Treby Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges to whom the
matter of Election for the City of Bristol was referred, that the Committee
having taken the same into their consideration, had Agreed upon two Resolves,
which he read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks
Table where the same being Read are as follows, viz.

Resolved, etc.

That Sir Robert Cann was not duly Elected a Citizen to serve in this present
Parliament for the City of Bristol.

Resolved, etc.

That Robert Henley Merchant, is duly Elected a Citizen to serve in this
present Parliament for the City of Bristol.

The first of the said Resolves being Read a second time.

Resolved, etc.

Thath this House does agree with the Committee, that Sir Robert Cann was not
duly Elected a Citizen to serve in this present Parliament for the City of
Bristol.

The second of the said Resolves being Read a Second time, and the Question
being put that the House do Agree with the Committee in this Resolve.

It passed in the Negative.

Resolved, etc.

That the Election for the City of Bristol, as to Sir Robert Cann, and Mr.
Robert Henley, is void.

Mr. Treby further Reports to the House, that Sir John Lloyd late Mayor,
William Jackson, and William Clutterbucke, late Sheriffs of the said City of
Bristol did, at the time of the said Election, commit several Misdemeanors
relating to the said Election.

Ordered,

That the said Sir John Lloyd, William Jackson, and William Clutterbucke be
sent for in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this House, to answer at
the Bar of this House, for the Misdemeanors by them committed at the said
Election.

Ordered,

That Mr. Speaker do issue out his warrant to the Clerk of the Crown to make
out a new writ for the Electing of a Citizen to serve in this present
Parliament for the City of Bristol.

The Ingrost Articles of Impeachment against Mr. Seymour, a Member of this
House, being Read.

Resolved,

That the said Articles be sent up to the Lords.

Ordered,

That Sir Gilbert Gerrard do carry up the same to the Lords.

Mr. Hamden, Reports from the Committee appointed to prepare an Humble Address
to His Majesty, upon the Debate of the House, in answer to his Majesty's
Speech, an Address agreed upon by the Committee, to which the House agreed.

Ordered,

That such Members of this House as are of his His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, be desired to know His Majesty's Pleasure, when this House may
attend his Majesty with the same Address.

Ordered,

That the Chairman of the Committee appointed to examine the proceedings of the
Judges in Westminster Hall, do make report of the matters to them referred
tomorrow morning.

Ordered,

That the two Bills for the ease of Protestant Dissenters, be Read tomorrow
Morning.

Ordered,

That Sir Francis Winnington do, on Thursday morning next, bring in a Bill for
Banishing all the Considerable Papists of England out of His Majesty's
Dominions.

Ordered,

That the Knights of the respective Shires, Citizens of Cities, Burgesses of
Buroughs, and Barons of the Cinque Ports, do, in the mean time, bring in Lists
of all the considerable Papists within the said several Counties, Cities,
Buroughs, and Cinque Ports.

A Petition of Algernon Sidney Esquire; being presented to the House,

Ordered,

That the said Petition be read tomorrow Morning.

Martis 21 die December. 1680.
THomas Verigny did this day take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy at the
Clerks Table in Order to his Naturalization.

A Bill to enable John Jenner Gent. to make leases of some part of his Estate
for the payment of his Debts, and for the making provision for his younger
Children was read the first time.

Resolved, That the Bill be read a second time.

Mr. Papillon reports from the Committee to whom the Bill for Naturalization of
Peter Elers and others was committed, that the Committee having taken the same
into their consideration, had agreed to some amendments to be made to the same,
which he read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks
Table, where the same being read, were upon the question agreed to.

Ordered, That the name of Thomas Verigny who this day took the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, in order to his Naturalization, and whose Certificate
of his having received the Sacrament was delivered in, be inserted in the said
Bill.

Ordered, That the Bill with these amendments be engrossed.

Ordered, That Mr. George Savage a Member of this House have leave to go into
the Country for recovery of his health.

Sir John Otway reports from the Committee to whom the Bill for rectifying
several errors and mistakes in certain Deeds and Settlements made upon the
Marriage of Sir Charles Hoghton Baronet, with Mary the Daughter of John Lord
Viscount Massareen was committed. That the Committee having taken the same into
their consideration, had agreed upon some amendments to be made to the same,
which he read in his place, and afterward delivered them in at the Clerks
Table, where the same being read were upon the Question agreed to.

Ordered, That the Bill with these Amendments be engrossed:

Mr. Duboys reports from the Committee appointed to prepare an humble Address
to His Majesty for the remitting a Fine of 500 l. set upon Benjamin Harris. An
Address agreed upon by the Committee which he read in his place, and afterward
delivered the same in at the Clerks Table, where the same being read was upon
the Question agreed to.

Ordered, That this Address be presented to His Majesty by such Members of this
House as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Information being given to the House, that Henry Carew a Friar of the Order of
St. Malo's, in France, has for several years last past executed the Office of
Surveyor of the Customs in the Port of Bristol.

Ordered, That it be referred to the consideration of the Committee appointed
to receive Informations touching the Popish Plot, to examine the Matter of this
Information, and to report the same, with their Opinions therein, to the House.

Sir William Poultney reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges
to whom the Matter touching the Election for Great Marlow in the County of
Bucks was referred, that the Committee having taken the same into their
consideration had agreed upon several Resolves which he read in his place, and
afterward delivered them in at the Clerks Table, where the same being read are
as follows, viz.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that in the Borough of
Great Marlow in the County of Bucks, those Inhabitants only who pay Scot and
Lot have right to give Voices in the Election of Burgesses to serve in
Parliament for the said Borough.

Resolved.

That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that Sir Humphrey Winch Baronet is
not duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament for the said
Borough of Great Marlow.

Resolved.

That it is the opinion of this Committee, that Thomas Hobby, Esquire; is not duly
Elected a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament for the said Borough.

Resolved.

That it is the opinion of this Committee, that the Election for Great Marlow,
as to the said Sir Humphry Winch and Thomas Hobby is void.

The first of the said Resolves being Read a second time.

Resolved,

That this House does agree with the Committee, that in the Borough of Great
Marlow in the County of Bucks, those Inhabitants only who pay Scot and Lot
have right to give voices in the Election of Burgesses to serve in Parliament
for the sai^ Borou^^.

The second of the said Resolves being Read a second time.

Resolved.

That this House does agree with the Committee, that Sir Humphry Winch Baronet
is not duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament for the
Borough of Great Marlow.

The Third of the said Resolves being Read a second time.

Resolved,

That this House does agree with the Committee, That Thomas Hobby Esquire; is not
duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament for the said Borough.

The Fourth and last of the said Resolves being Read a second time.

Resolved,

That this House does agree with the Committee, That the Election for Great
Marlow as to the said Sir Humphry Winch and Thomas Hobby is void.

Mr. Hyde acquaints the House that his Majesty according to the order of the
House, having been waited on by such Members of the House as are of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to know his Majesty's pleasure when
this House might attend him with an Address. His Majesty was pleased to appoint
3 of the Clock this afternoon for the House to attend him in the
Banqueting House.

Ordered.

That Mr. Speaker do issue out his warrant to the Clerk of the Crown to make
out a new writ for the Electing a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament
for the Borough of Great Marlow in the County of Bucks.

A Petition of Mr. Baldwin Leighton was Read,

Ordered,

That the Consideration of the said Petition be referred to the Committee of
Grievances to examine the matter thereof, and report the same with their
opinions therein to the House, and that the Committee do sit on Thursday next
in the afternoon.

A Bill for uniting His Majesty's Protestant Subjects to the Church of England
was read a second time.

Resolved That the said Bill be Committed upon the Debate of the House.

Ordered,

That the Bill for exempting His Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from
the Church of England, from the penalties of certain Laws be read on Thursday
morning next.

Ordered,

That the Report from the Committee of Elections and Privileges touching the
Election for St. Edmundsbury in the County of Suffolk be made on Thursday
morning next.

Ordered,

That leave be given to bring in one or more Bill or Bills for inspecting and
Correcting Pluralities and Non-residences relating to Ecclesiastical Benefices,

Ordered,

That Mr. Sidney's Petition be Read on Thursday morning next.

Ordered,

That Mr. Lucy a member of this House have leave to go into the Country.

The Report of the Committee for Receiving INFORMATIONS Concerning the POPISH
PLOT, upon the Complaint of Mr. Peter Norris, presented to the House of COMMONS
upon Thursday December the 9th, 1680.
UPON consideration of the information given at the Bar by Mr. Peter Norris and
Referred to this Committee,

Resolved,

By this Committee, that the Examination of this matter be Reported Specially.

This Committee in the first place, after hearing of the said Norris his
Complaint, that several Papers were taken from him, sent for the said Papers
which were informed then to be in a Chest in the Council Chamber, which Papers
were brought to this Committee by an Inventory which the said Norris then
acknowledged to be all, and they still remain with this Committee.

In the next place, they proceeded to examine upon what occasion the said
Norris was sent beyond Sea, which not only by the said Papers, but also by a
Certificate delivered to the Chairman of this Committee from the Earl of Essex,
and diverse other Informations as well as the said Norris his Instructions given
by Dr. Tongue, was to fetch over one Dowdall an Irish Priest, who had been
conversant with the Priests in France and Flanders, who managed the Plot both
in England and Ireland, and mixing himself among them, was privy to the whole
Plot, which the said Dowdall by several Letters had made known to Dr. Tongue,
which Letters were perused by the Earl of Essex, and also satisfaction was
given by a known Merchant in London, that the said Dowdall was an honest man,
of good understanding, and might be credited.

Then the Committee proceeded to inquire, who at any time had knowledge of the
sending over for the said Dowdall, and found by an Order of Council, bearing
date the eighteenth day of July 1679. that the said Dowdall by the name of
Edward Dowdall, was permitted to come from Dover and stay for a Month, but in
that Order there is no mention of Dowdall's being a Priest. And it likewise
appears to this Committee, that not long after the said Order for his coming
over, Dowdall dyed, and not without suspicion that it was a violent Death: But
it does not appear to this Committee, that the Death of Dowdall was known in
England till after the return of Norris, who was sent to fetch the said Dowdall
over, which was about Ten months after the Date of the said Order of Council.

Upon which, this Committee proceeded to Examine, how it came to pass, that the
said Norris was in such danger beyond Sea; and particularly at his coming
aboard the Pacquett-Boat at Calais, and likewise his Imprisonment at Dover in
the common Prison, and his being brought from Dover by a Messenger, and they
found the Cause of it to be a Description given of Peter Norris to Secretary
Jenkins the Twenty Ninth of May 1680. in these words, Peter Norris, some call
him Morris a Scotch-man, handsome, neat Face, sanguine Complexion, short Nose,
bald-pated, white Wigg, slender Body, little Stature, Civil and Smooth in
Discourse, speaking French, aged Thirty four Years more or less, Tailor by
Trade: and under this Description, written with another Hand and Ink these
words (viz.) Went into France on Wednesday was three weeks to bring with him a
Priest. Thereupon this Committee proceeded to Examine, who brought this
Description to the said Secretary, and were and by whom it was drawn, with all
the Circumstances that they could find about it. And first they found, that
Thomas Sheridon a Gentleman, who affirmed himself a Protestant born in Ireland,
heretofore employed in Collecting the Revenues there, and lately with the Duke
at his Court at Brussells, and came over with him in the same Yacht, confessed
upon his Examination, that he carried the said Description to the said
Secretary; but it being showed him, he denied the writing any part of it save
the last Line; but confessed that it was written and brought to him by one
Anthony Day Doctor of Physic to the late Army in Flanders. Whereupon the said
Sheridon was commanded to produce the said Day, and with him to attend.

Dr. Day and Mr. Sheridon both appearing were examined severally.

And first the said Day, who confessed himself a Papist, and pretended very
little knowledge of Mr. Sheridon, but that coming to give him a visit, which he
had not done of six weeks before, Mr. Sheridon began to discourse of News, and
particularly of the Plot; to which the said Doctor replied, that now the whole
Plot would be discovered and laid open; for he heard there was one gone beyond
Sea to fetch overa Priest that knew of the whole Plot: and does not remember
any thing more at that time but common discourse. But some few days after
meeting with Mr. Sheridon, the said Mr. Sheridon desired him to describe the
person that was so sent over; the said Dr. Day replied, that he knew not the
person that was gone, nor the Priest he was to fetch: But that John Butler,
keeper of a Brandy-shop near the French Ambassadors upon discourse had told
him so; to whom Mr. Sheridon desired him to go and get the description, which
he did accordingly. And the description being showed him, confessed he writ it
from his mouth, save the last line: But says, that person is now dead who gave
him the said Description, but his wife is living.

Mr. Sheridon being then called in and examined, said, He had no great
acquaintance with the said Doctor, and seldom saw him but upon a visit, which
happily might be once a week or the like; Confesses, That the said Doctor told
him as News, the Plot would now be laid open, for there was one sent over into
France to fetch a Priest that knew of the whole Plot: and further says, That
he that went over knew as much of the Plot as any man in England. Whereupon the
said Sheridon Confesses, That he went shortly after, but remembers not how
long, to Secretary Jenkins, and told him that there was one gone over into
France that knew as much of the Plot as any man, and that he went over to fetch
a Priest that also knew the whole Plot, which he the said Sheridon supposed was
to be a witness: Upon which the said Secretary commanded him the said Sheridon
to give him a description of the person so sent over: But remembers no other
discourse at that time; but that some short time after, but remembers not how
long, he met with Mr. Day, who gave him the description in the presence of Mr.
John Wilson of the Middle Temple, which he shortly after delivered to the
Secretary, and used as he remembers, only these words, Sir, here is the
description of the person I mentioned to you.

After this Description so delivered to the Secretary, a Letter was written by
Mr. Cook, (which Mr. Secretary declared at the Committee he would take upon
himself) in these words following.

Whitehall, May 31. 1680. SIR,
THE Right Honorable Sir Leoline Jenkins, one of his Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, being hastily called this day to wait upon his Majesty at
Windsor, has commanded me to send you the enclosed description of a person,
Who, if he shall happen to come from France and land at your Port, Mr.
Secretary says, you will do the King and Kingdom a great service if you will
keep a strict Eye upon him and the company that shall arrive with him till they
be all brought before Mr. Mayor, or other chief Magistrate of your Town, whom
Mr. Secretary desires to offer the said persons the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy: and in case of their or any of their refusal of the same, to secure
them and deal with them according to Law, giving Mr. Secretary an account with
what speed may be, of all the proceedings in this affair. If such a person as
is here described should come and make no bones of taking the aforesaid Oaths,
yet in Case Mr. Mayor or other chief Magistrate before whom they are brought,
shall have reasonable ground to suspect that he is the man so described, and
that he has one or more in his company who may be reasonably suspected to be
Priests, some handsome course is to be taken to detain them till Mr. Secretary
can be acquainted with what is done, and send such further directions as shall
be thought necessary. Mr. Mayors Authority, with your Prudence and Zeal in this
matter, will I hope produce a good effect upon this Command. I am Sir, Your
very humble Servant,

John Cook. Pray favor me with a Line that this comes safe to your hands.
Vera Copia. John Pepper.


Upon which Norris was committed to the Common Prison, as is mentioned in his
Complaint. All which being of more than an ordinary nature, this Commit
thought not fit to give any opinion, but humbly referred it to the Wisdom of
this House.

Jovis die 23. December. 1680.
Ordered,

THat leave be given to Mr. Henry Goreing, a Member of the House, to go into
the Country.

Ordered,

That Mr. Speaker do issue out his Warrant to the Clerk of the Crown, to make
out a new Writ for the Electing of a Citizen, to serve in this present
Parliament for the City of Chichester in the room of Mr. Farrington deceased.

A Bill to enable John Jenner Gent. to make Leases of some part of his Estate
for the payment of his Debts, and for making provision for his younger
children, was read a second time, and committed.

A Bill for the more easy collecting the Duty of Hearth-money was read the
first time, and ordered a second reading.

An Engrossed Bill for rectifying several errors and mistakes in certain Deeds
and Settlements, made upon the Marriage of Sir Charles Hoghton Baronet, was
read the third time, and passed.

Ordered,

That Sir John Otway do carry up the said Bill to the Lords.

Ordered,

That the Thanks of this House be given to Dr. Burnett for his Sermon yesterday
preached before this House, and likewise for his Book relating to the History
of the Reformation of the Church of England, and that he be desired to print
his said Sermon, and that Colonel Titus do acquaint him therewith.

Ordered,

That leave be given to bring in a Bill or Bills to correct and punish Atheism,
Blasphemy, Swearing and Debauchery, and for the better observation of the
Lord's Day.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Miles Cook and Sir John Francklin.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have commanded us to acquaint this House, that they
have agreed to a Bill sent from this House, entitled An Additional Act for
burying in Woollen, without any Amendment.

A Message from the Lords by Mr. Baron Weston and Mr. Justice Charleton.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have commanded us to acquaint this House, that at their
rising this day they do intend to adjourn till the next Monday Sevenight.

A Bill for banishing Papists out of the King's Dominions was read the first
time; and Ordered a second reading to Morrow morning.

Resolved, etc.

That this House is content, that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex do
execute William late Viscount Stafford, by severing his Head from his Body only.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Miles Cook and Sir John Francklin.

Mr. Speaker,

The Lords have commanded us to present this House with a Copy of Mr.
Seymour's Answer to the Articles of Impeachment exhibited against him.

Resolved, etc.

That it is the Opinion of this House, that Mr. Joseph Broom ought to be
restored to (...) the Offices and Places which were taken from him, by occasion
of a Judgment given against him in the Court of King's Bench in Trinity Term
29. Caroli Secundi, upon an Information for publishing an unlicensed Book,
called The Long Parliament dissolved

Ordered,

That the Bill for exempting His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, dissenting from
the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws, be read a second
time to Morrow morning, The first business.

Colonel Birch reports from the Committee, to whom the Examination of the
Complaint against Richard Thompson Clerk, was referred, That the Committee
having taken the same into their consideration, had directed him to make a
special Report thereof to the House, which he read in his place, and afterward
delivered the same in at the Clerks Table.

Ordered,

That the said Report be read at the Table to Morrow morning.

Ordered,

That the Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges touching the
Election of St. Edmnndsbury in the County of Suffolk and Marleborough in the
County of Wilts, be made to Morrow morning.

Ordered,

That Mr. Sydney's Petition be read to Morrow morning.

Number 16. HIS MAJESTY'S Most GRACIOUS Speech to both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT. On
Wednesday the 15th of December, 1680.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
AT the opening of this Parliament I did acquaint You with the Alliances I had
made with Spain and Holland, as the best measures that could be taken for the
safety of England, and the Repose of Christendom.

But I told you withal, That if Our Friendship became unsafe to trust to, it
would not be wondered at, if Our Neighbors should begin to take new
Resolutions, and perhaps such as might be fatal to Us.

I must now tell you, That Our Allies cannot but see how little has been done
sine this Meeting, to encourage their dependence upon Us: And I find by them,
that unless We can be so united at home, as to make Our Alliance valuable to
them, it will not be possible to hinder them from seeking some other Refuge,
and making such new Friendships, as will not be consistent with Our safety.
Consider that a neglect of this opertunity is never to be repaired.

I did likewise lay the matter plainly before you touching the Estate and
condition of Tangier, I must now tell you again, That if that place be thought
worth the keeping, you must take such consideration of it, that it may be
speedily supplied; it being impossible for Me to preserve it at an Expense so
far above My power.

I did promise you to the fullest satisfaction your hearts could wish, for the
Security of the Protestant Religion, and to concur with you in any Remedies,
which might consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in its Due and
Legal course of Descent: I do again, with the same Reservations, renew the same
Promise to you.

And being thus ready on my part to do all that can reasonably be expected from
Me, I should be glad to know from you, as soon as may be, how far I shall be
assisted by you and what it is you desire from Me.

The Humble Address of the House of Commons Presented to his Majesty upon
Tuesday the 21 day of December, 1680. in Answer to his Majesty's Gracious
SPEECH to both Houses of Parliament, Upon the 15th. day of the same December.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, have taken into our serious Consideration Your Majesty's
Gracious Speech to both Your Houses of Parliament, on the 15th of this instant
December; and do with all the grateful Sense of Faithful Subjects, and sincere
Protestants, acknowledge Your Majesty's great Goodness to us, in renewing the
Assurances You have been pleased to give us of Your readiness to concur with us
in any means for the Security of the Protestant Religion, and Your Gracious
Invitation of us to make our desires known to Your Majesty.

But with grief of Heart we cannot but observe, that to these Princely Offers,
Your Majesty has been Advised (by what secret Enemies to Your Majesty and Your
People we know not) to annex a Reservation, which if insisted on, in the
instance to which alone it is applicable, will render all Your Majesty's other
Gracious Inclinations of no effect or advantage to us. Your Majesty is pleased
thus to limit Your promise of concurrence in the Remedies which shall be
proposed, that they may consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in
its due and legal course of Descent. And we do Humbly inform Your Majesty, that
no Interruption of that Descent has been endeavored by us, except only the
Descent upon the Person of the Duke of York, who by the wicked Instruments of
the Church of Rome, has been manifestly perverted to their Religion. And we do
Humbly represent to Your Majesty, as the Issue of our most deliberate Thoughts
and Consultations, that for the Papists to have their hopes continued that a
Prince of that Religion shall succeed in the Throne of these Kingdoms, is
utterly inconsistent with the Safety of Your Majesty's Person, the Preservation
of the Protestant Religion, and the Prosperity, Peace and Welfare of Your
Protestant Subjects.

That Your Majesty's Sacred Life is in continual danger, under the prospect of
a Popish Successor, is evident, not only from the pinciples of those devoted
to the Church of Rome, which allow that an Heretical Prince (and such they term
all Protestant Princes) Excommunicated and Deposed by the Pope, may be
destroyed and murdered; but also from the Testimonies given in the prosecution
of the Horrid Popish Plot, against diverse Traitors Attainted for designing to
put those accursed principles into practice against Your Majesty.

From the expectation of this Succession, has the number of Papists in Your
Majesty's Dominions so much increased within these few years, and so many been
prevailed with to desert the true Protestant Religion, that they might be
prepared for the Favors of a Popist-Prince; as soon as he should come to the
possession of the Crown: And while the same Expectation lasts, many more will
be in the same danger of being perverted.

This it is that has hardened the Papists of this Kingdom, animated and
confederated by their Priests and Jesuits, to make a Common purse, provide
Arms, make application to Foreign Princes, and solicit their Aid, for
imposing Popery upon us; And all this even during your Majesty's Reign, and
while your Majesty's Government, and the Laws were our protection.

It is Your Majesty's Glory and true Interest, to be the Head and Protector of
all Protestants, as well abroad as at home: But if these hopes remain, what
Alliances can be made for the advantage of the Protestant Religion and
Interest, which shall give confidence to your Majesty's Allies, to join so
vigorously with Your Majesty, as the State of that Interest in the world now
requires, while they see this Protestant Kingdom in so much danger of a Popish
Successor; by whom at the present, all their Councils and Actions may be
eluded, as hitherto they have been, and by whom (if he should succeed) they are
sure to be destroyed?

We have this humbly laid before yout Majesty, some of those great Dangers and
mischiefs which evidently accompany the expectation of a Popish Successor. The
certain and unspeakable Evils which will come upon your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects and their Posterity, if such a Prince should inherit, are more
alsothan we can well ^n^merate.

Our Religion, which is now so dangerously shaken, will then be totally
overthrown; Nothing will beleft, or can be found to protect or defend it.

The execution of old Laws must cease, and it will be vain to expect new ones.
The most sacred Obligations of Contracts and promises (if any should be given)
that shall be judged to be against the Interest of the Romish Religion, will be
violated; as is undeniable, not only from Argument and experience elsewhere,
but from the sad Experience this Nation once had on the like occasion.

In the Reign of such a Prince, the Pope will be acknowledged Supreme (though
the Subjects of this Kingdom have sworn the contrary) and all Causes, either as
Spiritual, or in order to Spiritual Things, will be brought under his
Jurisdiction.

The Lives, Liberties, and Estates of all such Protestants, as value their
Souls and their Religion more than their secular Concernments, will be adjudged
forfeited,

T^ ^o this we might add: That it appears in the discovery of the Plot, that
Foreign Princes, were invited to assist in securing the Crown to the Duke of
York; with arguments from his great Zeal to establish Popery, and to extirpate
Protestants (whom they call Heretics) out of his Dominions; and such will
expect performance accordingly.

We further humbly beseech your Majesty, in your great wisdom to consider,
whether in case the Imperial Crown of this Protestant Kingdom, should descend
to the Duke of York; the opposition which may possibly be made to his
possessing it, may not only endanger the farther descent in the Royal Line, but
even Monarchy it self.

For these Reasons: we are most humble Petitioners to your most Sacred Majesty,
That in tender commiseration of your poor Protestant people, your Majesty will
be graciously pleased to depart from the reservation in your said Speech; and
when a Bill shall be tendered to your Majesty, in a Parliamentary way, to
disable the Duke of York from inheriting the Crown, your Majesty will give your
Royal Assent thereto; and as necessary to fortify and defend the same, that
your Majesty will likewise be graciously pleased to Assent to an Act whereby
your Majesty's Protestant Subjects may be enabled to Associate themselves for
the defense of your Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Security
of your Kingdoms.

These Requests we are Constrained Humbly to make to your Majesty as of
Absolute Necessity, for the safe and peaceable enjoyment of our Religion.

Without these things the Allyances of England will not be valuable, nor the
People encouraged to Contribute to your Majesty's service.

As some farther means for the preservation both of our Religion and Propriety;
We are humble suitors to your Majesty, that from henceforth such persons only
may be Judges within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, as are men
of ability, Integrity, and known affection to the Protestant Religion. And that
they may hold both their Offices and Sallaries, quam diu se been gesserint:
That (several Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace, fitly qualified for
those Employments, having been of late displaced, and others put in their room,
who are men of Arbitrary Principles, and Counterencers of Papists and Popery)
such only may bear the Office of a Lord Lieutenant as are persons of Integrity
and known Affection to the Protestant Religion. That Deputy Lieutenants and
Justices of the Peace may be also so qualified, and may be moreover Men of
ability, of Estates and Interest in their Country.

That none may be Employed as Military Officers, or Officers in your Majesty's
Fleet, but men of known Experience, Courage and Affection to the Protestant
Religion.

These our Humble Requests being obtained, we shall on our part be ready to
Assist your Majesty for the preservation of Tangier, and for putting your
Majesty's Fleet into such a Condition as it may preserve your Majesty's
Sovereignty of the Seas, and be for the Defense of the Nation.

If Your Majesty has or shall make any necessary Allyances for defense of the
Protestant Religion, and Interest and Security of this Kingdom; this House will
be ready to Assist and Stand by Your Majesty in the support of the same.

After this our Humble Answer to Your Majesty's Gracious Speech, we hope no
evil Instruments whatsoever shall be able to lessen Your Majesty's Esteem of
that Fidelity and Affection we bear to Your Majesty's Service; but that Your
Majesty will always retain in Your Royal Breast, that Favorable Opinion of us
Your Loyal Commons, that those other Good Bills which we have now under
Consideration, Conducing to the Great Ends we have before mentioned; as also
all Laws for the Benefit and Comfort of Your People, which shall from time to
time be tendered for Your Majesty's Royal Assent, shall find acceptance with
Your Majesty.

Veneris 24 die December. 1680.
A Bill for Sale of the Estate of Jos: Cowden deceased, for the payment of his
Debts and raising of Portions for his Daughters, was read a second time and
committed.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill to repeal the Law made for
regulating of Corporations.

Sir Rich: Corbet reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges to
whom the Matter touching the Election for the Borough of St. Edmundsbury, in
the County of Suffolk, was referred, that the Committee having taken the same
into their consideration had agreed upon two Resolves, which he read in his
place, and afterward delivered them in at the Clerks Table, where the same
being read are as follow, viz.

Resolved, etc. That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that Sir Tho: Harvey,
Knight: is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament for the
Borough of St. Edmundsbury in the County of Suffolk.

Resolved, etc. That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that Tho: Germin,
Esquire; is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this present Parliament for the
Borough of St. Edmundsbury in the County of Suffolk.

To which Resolves the House agreed.

Mr. Treby reports to the House from the Committee of Elections and Privileges
to whom the Matter of the Election for the Borough of Barnstaple, in the County
of Devon, was referred, that the Committee having taken the same into their
consideration had agreed upon two Resolves which he read in his place, and
afterward delivered them in at the Clerks Table, where the same being read,
are as follow viz.

Resolved, etc. That Arthur Acland, Esquire; is not duly Elected a Burgess to serve
in this present Parliament for the Borough of Barnstaple in the County of Devon.

Resolved, etc. That Rich: Lee, Esquire; is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Barnstaple.

To which Resolves the House agreed.

Mr. Treby farther acquaints the House with several Misdemeanors committed by
John Fairchild, late Mayor of the said Borough, at the said Election.

Ordered, That the said John Fairchild be sent for in custody of the Sergeant
at Arms attending this House to answer at the Bar of this House for the
Misdemeanors by him committed at the said Election.

Mr. Treby reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges to whom the
Matter of the Election for the Borough of Marlborough, in the County of Wilts,
was referred, That the Committee having taken the same into their consideration
had agreed upon two Resolves, which he read in his place, and afterward
delivered them in at the Clerks Table, where the fame being read, are as
follow, viz.

Resolved, etc. That Tho: Lord Bruce is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Marlborough in the County of Wilts.

Resolved, etc. That Tho: Bennett, Esquire. is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in
this present Parliament for the said Borough of Marlborough.

To which Resolves the House agreed.

The Report from the Committee appointed to examine the Matters of complaint
against Rich: Thompson, Clerk, being read at the Clerks Table, and the Matters
being debated in the House.

Resolved, Nemine contradicente, That Richard Thompson, Clerk, has publicly
defamed His Sacred Majesty, preached Sedition, villified the Reformation,
promoted Popery, by asserting Popish Principles, decrying the Popish Plot, and
turning the same upon the Protestants; and endeavored to subvert the Liberty
and Property of the Subject, and the Rights and Privileges of Parliament; and
that he is a scandal and reproach to his Function.

Resolved, etc. That the said Rich: Thompson be impeached upon the said Report
and Resolution.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to prepare the said Impeachment.

Ordered, That the said Report and Resolution of this House thereupon be
forthwith printed.

A Bill for exempting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the
Church of England from the Penalties of certain Laws was read a second time.

Resolved, etc. That the said Bill be committed upon the Debate of the House to
the Committee to whom the Bill for Uniting of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects
is committed upon the Debate of the House.

A Bill for Banishing Papists out of the King's Dominions was read a second
time.

Resolved, etc. That the Bill be committed upon the Debate of the House.

Then the House adjourned to Thursday the 30 of this instant December.

Jovis 30 die December: 1680.
THE Clerk of the Crown being called in, amended the Return for Barnstaple in
the County of Devon, by razing out the Name of Arthur Ackland, and inferting
the Name of Rich: Lee, Esquire; in the Indenture.

Ordered, That Mr. Thistlethwayte, a Member of this House, have leave to go
into the Country.

A Petition of William Townsend was read.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee appointed to receive complaints
against the Proceedings of Ecclesiastical Courts, to Examine the Matter of the
said Petition, and to report the same, with their Opinions therein, to the
House.

Sir George Downing reports from the Committee to whom the Bill for the better
Encouragement of the Woollen Manufacture of England, by the general wearing
thereof, was committed; That they had agreed to several Amendments to be made
to the Bill, which he read in his place, and afterward delivered them in at
the Clerks Table, where the same being read, were, upon the Question, severally
agreed to by the House.

The Question being proposed, that the said Bill and Amendments be Engrossed,

And a Debate arising in the House thereupon,

Resolved, etc. That the Debate be Adjourned to this Day Fortnight.

Ordered, That the Grand Committee of Trade do sit on next Saturday seven-night.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to prepare Evidence against the Lords in
the Tower, do look into the Evidence against the Four Popish Lords in the
Tower, and do report their Opinions to the House, in order to the further
directions and proceedings of the House against them.

Ordered, That an humble application be made to His Majesty from this House, by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to
desire His Majesty to give Orders, That the Information and Evidence given by
Mr. Sergeant and others, before His Majesty in Council, in the Case of John
Gavan, Executed for High Treason; And also all other Evidences, Informations,
Writings, Letters and Papers delivered in to the Council relating to the Popish
Plot, may be communicated to this House.

Resolved, That the several Writings, Papers and Proceedings relating to such
Members of the late Long Parliament, who received allowances out of the Moneys
appointed for secret Service, be produced to this House.

Resolved Nemine contradicente, That no Member of this House shall accept of
any Office or place of Profit from the Crown, without the Leave of this House;
or any promise of any such Office or place of Profit, during such time as he
shall continue Member of this House.

Resolved, That all Offenders herein, shall be Expelled this House.

Ordered, That the Bill for the better Discovery of Settlements of Estates for
superstitious Uses, be read to Morrow morning the first Business.

The Resolutions of the House of Commons, for the Impeachment of Sir William
Scroggs Knt. Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench; Sir Thomas Jones
Knight, one of the Justices of the same Court.
Sir Richard Weston Knight, one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer.
Upon the report of the Committee of the Commons Appointed to Examine the
Proceedings of the Judges in Westminster Hall, and to Report the same, with
their opinions therein to the House; and also upon the RESOLVES and VOTES of
the Commons in Parliament, upon that Report relating to the Arbitrary and
Illegal proceedings of the said Judges.
Thursday 23d. of December. 1680.
THis Committee being informed, that in Trinity-Term last, the Court of
King's Bench discharged the Grand Jury, that served for the Hundred of Ossulston
in the County of Middlesex, in a very unusual manner; proceeded to enquire into
the same, and found by the Information of Charles Vmfrevill, Esquire; Foreman of
the said Jury, Edward Proby, Henry Gerard, and John Smith, Gentlemen, also of
the said Jury, That on the 21th. of June last, the Constables attending the
said Jury, were found defective, in not presenting the Papists as they ought,
and thereupon were Ordered by the said Jury to make further Presentiments of
them on the 26th following, on which Day the Jury met for that purpose; when
several Peers of this Realm, and other Persons of Honor and Quality, brought
them a Bill against James Duke of York, for not coming to Church: But some
Exceptions being taken to that Bill, in that it did not set forth the said Duke
to be a Papist, some of the Jury attended the said persons of Quality to
receive satisfaction therein. In the mean time, and about an Hour after they
had received the said Bill, some of the Jury attended the Court of King's Bench
with a Petition, which they desired the Court to present in their Name unto His
Majesty for the Sitting of this Parliament. Upon which the Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs raised many Scruples, and on pretense that they were not all in Cour^
(tho twenty of the Jury had subscribed the Petition) sent for them saying, he
would dispatch them presently. The Jury being come, and their Names called
over, they renewed their desire that the Cour^ would present their petition:
But the Chief Justice asked, if they had any Bills? they answered, They had,
but the Clerks were drawing the^ into Form: Upon which the Chief Justice said,
They would not mak^ two Works of one Business: and the Petition being Read, he
said, Thi^ was no Article of their Charge, nor was there any Act of Parliamen
that required the Court to deliver the Grand Juries Petitions: Tha^ there was a
a Proclamation about them; And that it was not reasonable the Court should be
obliged to run on their Errands: And he though^ it much, that they should come
with a Petition to alter the King^ Mind declared in the News Book. The Jury
said, They did it not t^ Impose on the Court, but (as other Juries had done)
with all Submission they desired it: But the Court refused, bidding the Crier
return them their Petitions: And Mr. Justice Jones told them, they ha^ meddled
with matters of State, not given them in Charge, but presen^ed no Bills of the
Matters given in Charge. They answered as before they had many before them,
that would be ready in due time. Notwithstanding which, the said Justice Jones
told them, They were discharged from further Service. But Philip Ward (the
Clerk that attended the said Jury) cried out, No, No, they have many Bills
before them; for which the Court understanding (as it seems to this Committee)
a secret reason, which the Clerk did not, reproved him, Asking if he or they
were to give the Rule there? The Crier then told the Court, they would not
receive their Petition; the Chief Justice bid him let it alone; so it was left
there, and the Jury returned to the Courthouse, and there found several
Constables with presentiments of Papists and other offenders, as the Jury had
directed them on the 21th before, but could not now receive the said
Presentiments, being discharged. Whereby much business was obstructed, though
none of the said Informants ever knew the said Jury discharged before the last
Day of the Term, which was not till Four days after. And it further appears
to the Committee, by the evidences of Samuel Astrey, Jasper Waterhouse, and
Philip Ward, Clerks that have long served in the said Court, That they were
much surprised at the said discharging of the Jury, in that it was never done
in their Memory before; and the rather, because the said Waterhouse, as
Secondary, constantly erters on that Grand Juries paper, that the last day of
the Term is given them to return their Verdict on, as the last day but one is
given to the other Two Grand Juries of that County, which entry is as follows.

Trinit 32. Car. 2d.
Juratores habent diem ad Veredictum suum redderdum usque Middles. Ossulston
Hundred
diem Mercurij proxime post tres Septimanas, sancte Trinitatis Being the last
day of the Term, and so in all the other Terms the last day is given; which
makes it appear to this Committee, That they were not in truth Discharged for
not having their Presentiments ready, since the Court had given them a longer
day, but only to obstruct their further Proceedings: And it appears by the
Evidence aforesaid to this Committee, That the four Judges of that Court were
present at the Discharging of the said Jury, and it did not appear that any of
them did Dissent therein; upon Consideration whereof, the Committee came to
this Resolution.

Resolved,

That it is the opinion of this Committee, that the Discharging of the Grand
Jury of the Hundred of Ossulston in the County of Middlesex by the Court of
Kings Bench in Trinity. Term last, before the last day of the Term, and before
they had finished their Presentiments, was Illegal, Arbitrary, and an high
Misdemeanour.

This Committee proceeded also to inquire into a Rule of the Court of
King's Bench, lately made against the publishing a Book called, The Weekly
Packet of Advice from Rome; or, The History of Popery: and Samuel Astrey Gent.
examined thereupon, informed this Committee, that the Author of the said Book
Henry Car, had been informed against for the same and had pleaded to the
Information: but before it was Tried, a Rule was made on a motion, as he
supposes, against the said Book: All the Judges of that Court (as he
remembers) being present, and none dissenting. The Copy of which Rule he gave
in to this Committee, and is as follows.

Dies Mercurij proxime post tres Septimanas, sancte Trinitatis. Anno 32 Car.
2d. Regis.
Ordinatum est quod liber intitulat, The Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome,
or, The History of Popery, non ulterius Imprimatur vel publicetur per aliquam
Personam quam cunque Per. Cur. And this Committee admiring that Protestant
Judges should take offense against a Book whose chief design was to expose the
Cheats and Foppery of Popery, enquired further into it, and found by the
Evidence of Jane Curtis, that the said Book had been Licensed for several
Months, that her Husband paid for the Copy, and entered it in the Hall-Book of
the Company: But for all this she could not prevail by these Reasons with the
Lord Chief Justice Scroggs to permit it any longer; who said, 'Twas a
Scandalous Libel, and against the King's Proclamation, and he would ruin her
if ever she printed it any more: And soon after she was served with the said
Rule, as the Author and other Printers were; and by the Author's Evidence it
appears, That he was taken and brought before the said Chief Justice by his
Warrant above a year since, and upon his owning he writ part of that Book, the
Chief Justice called him Rogue, and other ill names; saying he would fill all
the Goals in England with such Rogues, and pile them up as men do Faggots; and
so Committed him to prison, refusing sufficient Bayl, and saying, he would Goal
him to put him to Charges; and his Lordship observed his word punctually
therein, forcing him to his Habeas Corpus, and then taking the same Bayl he
refused before; upon which, this Committee came to this Resolution.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of the Committee, That the Rule made by the
Court of King's Bench in Trinity Term last, against printing a Book called, The
Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, is Alegal and Arbitrary.

And the Committee proceeded further, and upon Information that a very great
latitude had been taken of late by the Judges, in imposing Fines on the persons
found Guilty before them, caused a Transcript of all the Fines imposed by the
King's Bench since Easter-Term in the 28th. of His Majesty's Reign, to be
brought before them from the said Court by Samuel Astrey Gent: by perusal of
which, it appeared to this Committee, That the quality of the offense, and the
Ability of the person found Guilty, have not been the Measures that have
determined the quantity of many of these Fines, which being so very numerous,
the Committee refer themselves to those Records as to the general, instancing
in some particulars, as follows.

Upon Joseph Brown of London, Trint. 2. Car. 2.
Gent. on an Information for publishing a printed Book called The Long
Parliament Dissolved; in which is set forth these words: Nor let any man think
it strange, that we account it treason for you to sit and act contrary to our
Laws: for if in the first Parliament of Richard the second: Grimes and Weston
for lack of Courage only were adjudged guilty of High Treason for surrendering
the places committed to their trust; how much more you, if you turn Renegadoes
to the people that entrusted you, and as much as in you lie surrender not a
little pitiful Castle or two, but all the legal defense of the people of
England have for their Lives, Liberties, and Properties, at once. Neither let
the vain persuasion delude you, That no president can be found, that one
English Parliament has hanged up another; tho peradventure even that may be
proved a mistake: for an unpresidented Crime calls for an unpresidented
punishment; and if you shall be so wicked to do the one, or rather endeavor to
do (for now you are no longer a Parliament) what ground of confidence you can
have that none will be found so worthy to do the other, we cannot understand:
and do faithfully promise, if your unworthiness provoke us to it, that we will
use our honest and utmost endeavors (whenever a new Parliament shall be
called) to choose such as may convince you of your mistake: the old and
infallible Observation, That Parliaments are the pulse of the people, shall
lose its esteem: or you will find that this your presumption was over-found,
however it argues but a bad mind, to sin, because it is believed it shall not be
punished. The Judgment was, That he be fined 1000. Marks, be bound to the good
behavior for seven years, and his name struck out of the Roll of the
Attorneys, without any offense alleged in his said Vocation. And the
publishing this Libel consisted only in superscribing a Packet, with this
enclosed, to the East Indies. Which Fine he not being able to pay (living only
upon his Practice) he lay in prison for three years, till His Majesty
graciously pardoned him, and recommended him to be restored to his Place again
of Attorney, by His Warrant dated the 15. of December. 1679. Notwithstanding
which, he has not yet obtained the said Restoration from the Court of Kings
Bench.

Upon John Harrington of London, Gent. for speaking these words laid in Latin
thus: Hill. 29 and Car. 2.
Quod nostra Gubernatio de tribus statibus consistibat, and si Rebellio
eveniret in regno; and non accideret contra omnes tres status, non est
Rebellio. A Fine of 1000 l. Sureties for the good behavior for seven years,
and to recant the words in open Court; which Fine he was in no capacity of ever
paying.

Upon Benjamin Harris of London Stationer, 31 and 32.2.
on an Information for printing a Book called An appeal from the Country to
the City, setting forth these words: We in the Country have done our parts, in
choosing for the generality good Members to serve in Parliament: but if (as our
two Last Parliaments were) they must be dissolved or prorogued whenever they
come to redress the grievances of the subject, we may be pitied, not blamed, if
the Plot takes effect; and in all probability it will. Our Parliaments are not
then to be condemned, for that their not being suffered to sit, occasioned it.
Judgment to pay 500 l. Fine, stand on the Pillory an hour, and give Sureties
for the good behavior for three years. And the said Benj: Harris informed this
Committee, That the Lord Chief Just: Scroggs pressed the Court then to add to
this Judgment his being publicly whipped; but Mr. Justice Pemberton holding up
his hands in admiration at their severity therein, Mr. Justice Jones pronounced
the Judgment aforesaid; and he remains yet in prison, unable to pay the said
Fine.

Notwithstanding which severity in the Cases forementioned, this Committee has
observed the said Court has not wanted in other cases an extraordinary
compassion and mercy, though there appeared no public reason judicially in the
Trial; as in particular:

Upon Thomas Knox principal, Eod: 31, and 32. Car: 2
on an Indictment of subornation and conspiracy against the testimony and life
of Dr. Oats for Sodomy; and also against the testimony of William Bedloe; a
Fine of 200 Marks, a years Imprisonment, and to find Sureties for the good
behavior for three years.

Upon John Lane, for the same offense, a Fine of 100 Marks, Eod: Ter:
to stand in the Pillory for an hour, and to be imprisoned for one year.

Upon John Tasborough Gent: on an Indictment for subornation of Stephen
Dugdale, Eod: 32. Car: 2.
tending to overthrow the whole Discovery of the Plot: The said Tasborough
being affirmed to be a person of good quality, a Fine of 100 l.

Upon Ann Price for the same offense, Eod: Ter:
200 l.

Upon Nathaniel Thompson and William Badcock, on an Information for Printing
and Publishing weekly a Libel, Trin: 32. Ca: 2.
called The true Domestic Intelligence: or News both from City and Country;
and known to be Popishly affected, a Fine of 3, 6, 8, one each of them.

Upon Matthew Turner, Eod: Ter.
Stationer, on an Information for vending and publishing a Book called The
Compendium, where in the Justice of the Nation in the late Trials of the Popish
Conspirators, even by some of these Judges themselves, is highly Arraigned; and
all the Witnesses for the King horribly asperst: and this being the Common
Notorious Popish Bookseller of the Town, Judgment to pay a Fine of 100 Marks,
and is said to be out of Prison already,

Upon Loveland, on an Indictment for a Notorious Conspiracy and Subornation
against the Life and Honor of the Duke of Buckingham, Trin. 32. C 2.
for Sodomy, a Fine of 5 l. and to stand an hour in the Pillory.

Upon Edward Christian, Esquire; for the same offense, a Fine of 100 Marks, Mich.
32. C 2.
and to stand an hour in the Pillory. And upon Arthur Obrian, for the same
offense, a Fine of 20 Marks, and to stand an hour in the Pillory.

Upon Consideration whereof, this Committee came to this Resolution:

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That the Court of
King's Bench (in the Imposition of Fines on Offenders of late years) has acted
Arbitrarily, Illegally and Partially, favoring Papists, and persons Popishly
affected, and excessively oppressing His Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

And this Committee being informed, That several of His Majesty's Subjects had
been committed for crimes baylable by Law, although they then tendered
sufficient sureties, which were refused, only to put them to vexation and
charge, proceeded to enquire into the same, and found that not only the
forementioned Henry Carr had been so refused the common Right of a Subject, as
is abovesaid; but that George Broom being a Constable last year in London, and
Committing some of the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs Servants for great disorders,
according to his Duty, he was in few days arrested by a Tipstaff, without any
London Constable, and carried before the said Chief Justice by His Warrant, to
answer for the committing of those persons abovesaid; but being there, was
accused of having spoken irreverently of the said Chief Justice; and an
Affidavit read to him to that purpose, which was falsely (as the said George
Broom affirms Sworn against him by two persons that use to be Common Bayl in
that Court, and of very ill reputation. Upon which he was committed to the
Kings Bench, though he then tendered two able Citizens and Common Council men of
London to be his Bail: and he was forced to bring his Habeas Corpus to his
great charge before he came out; when the Marshall, Mr. Cooling, exacted 5 l.
of him; of which he complained to the Chief Justice, but had no other Answer,
but he might take his Remedy at Law. But the said Marshall fearing he should be
questioned, restored him two Guineys of it.

And further this Committee was informed by Francis Smith, Bookseller, That
about Michaelmas was Twelvemonth he was brought before the said Chief Justice
by his Warrant, and charged by the Messenger, Robert Stephens, That he had seen
some parcels of a Pamphlet, called Observations on Sir George Wakeman 's Trial,
in his Shop: Upon which the Chief Justice told him, he would make him an
Example; use him like a Boar in France, and pile him and all the Booksellers
and Printers up in Prison, like Faggots; and so Committed him to the
King's Bench: Swearing and Cursing at him in great fury. And when he tendered
three sufficient Citizens of London for his Bail, alleging Imprisonment in his
Circumstances would be his utter ruin, the Chief Justice replied, the Citizens
looked like sufficent persons, but he would take no bail; and so he was forced
to come out by Habeas Corpus, and was afterward informed against for the same
matter, to his great charge and vexation. And a while after Francis (the Son of
the said Francis Smith) was committed by the said Chief Justice, and bail
refused, for selling a Pamphlet called, A New years gift for the said Chief
Justice, to a Coffee-house; and he declared to them he would take no bail, for
he would ruin them all.

And further it appeared to this Committee, that the said Chief Justice (about
October was twelve month) committed in like manner Jane Curtis, she having a
husband and children, for selling a Book called A Satyr against injustice,
which his Lordship called a Libel against him; and her friends tendering
sufficient Bail, and desiring to have mercy on her poverty, and condition; he
swore by the name of God she should go to prison; and he would show no more
mercy than they could expect from a Wolf that came to devour them; and she
might bring her Habeas Corpus and come out so: Which she was forced to do; and
after informed against and prosecuted to her utter ruin, four or five Terms
after.

In like manner it appeared to this Committee, that about that time also,
Edward Berry (Stationer of Grays Inn) was committed by the said Chief Justice,
being accused of selling The Observations on Sir George Wakeman's Trial; and
though he tendered 1000 l. Bail, yet the Chief Justice said, he would take no
Bail, he should go to Prison, and come out according to Law. And after he with
much trouble and Charge got out by Habeas Corpus, he was forced by himself, or
His Attorney, to attend five Terms before he could be discharged, though no
information was exhibited against him in all that time. In consideration
whereof, and of others of the like Nature, (too tedious here to relate) this
Committee came to this Resolution.

Resolved.

That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That the refusing sufficient Bail in
these Cases, wherein the persons Committed were Bailable by Law; was Illegal,
and a High Breach of the Liberty of the Subject.

And this Committee being Informed of an extraordinary kind of a Charge, given
at the last Assizes at Kingston (in the County of Surrey) by Mr. Baron Weston,
and proceeding to examine several persons then and there present; It was made
appear to this Committee, by the Testimony of John Cole, Richard Mayo, and John
Pierce, Gentlemen, and others (some of whom put down the said Barons words in
writing immediately) that part of the said Charge was to this effect: He
inveighed very much against Farel, Luther, Calvin, and Zuinglius, condemning
them as Authors of the Reformation: which was against their Princes minds, and
then adding to this purpose, Zuinglius set up his Fanaticisme, and Calvin built
on that blessed Foundation: And to speak truth, all his Disciples are seasoned
with such a sharpness of spirit, that it much concerns Magistrates to keep a
strait hand over them: And now they are restless, amusing us with fears, and
nothing will serve them but a Parliament: For my part, I know no Representative
of the Nation but the King; all power Centers in him: It Is true, he does
entrust it with his Ministers. but he is the sole Representative; and I faith,
he has wisdom enough to entrust it no more in these men, who have given us such
late Examples of their wisdom and Faithfulness. And this Committee taking the
said matter into their Consideration, came to this Resolution.

Resolved,

That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that the said Expressions in the
Charge given by the said Baron Weston, were a Scandal to the Reformation, in
Derogation of the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and tending to raise
Discord between his Majesty and his Subjects.

And this Committee being Informed by several Printers and Booksellers, of
great Trouble and Vexation given them unjustly by one Robert Stephens, (called
a Messenger of the Press) the said Stephens being Examined by this Committee,
by what Authority he had proceeded in that manner, Produced two Warrants under
the hand and Seal of the Chief Justice Scroggs, which were, In hac verba:

WHereas There are diverse ill disposed persons who do daily Print and Publish
many Seditious and Treasonable Books and Pamphlets, Angl. ss.
endeavoring thereby to dispose the minds of his Majesty's Subjects to
Sedition and Rebellion. And also infamous Libels reflecting upon particular
persons, to the great scandal of his Majesty's Gevernment. For suppressing
whereof, his Majesty has lately issued out his Royal Proclamation. And for
the more speedy suppressing the said Seditious Books, Libels and Pamphlets, and
to the end that the Authors and Publishers thereof may be brought to their
punishment.

These are to will and require you, and in His Majesty's Name to charge and
command you, and every of you, upon sight hereof, to be Aiding and Assisting
unto Robert Stephens, Messenger of the Press in the seizing on all such Books
and Pamphlets as aforesaid, as he shall be informed of in any Booksellers or
Printers Shops or VVarehouses, or elsewhere whatsoever, to the end they may be
disposed as to Law shall appertain; Also if you shall be informed of the
Authors, Printers, or Publishers of such Books or Pamphlets as are
abovementioned, you are to apprehend them, and have them before one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, to be proceeded against according to Law.
Dated this 29th. day of November, 1679.

To Robert Stephens Messenger of the Press, and To all Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Officers and Ministers whom these may
concern. WILLIAM SCROGGS.

WHereas The Kings Majesty has lately Issued out His Proclamation for
suppressing the Printing and Publishing Unlicensed News-Books, Angl. ss.
and Pamphlets of News: Notwithstanding which, there are diverse Persons who do
daily Print and Publish such unlicensed Books and Phamphlets.

These are therefore to Will and Require You, and in his Majesty's Name to
Charge and Command You, and every of you, from time to time, and at all times,
so often as you shall be thereunto required, to be Aiding and Assisting to
Robert Stephens, Messenger of the Press, in the Seizing all such Books and
Pamphlets as aforesaid, as he shall be informed of, in any Booksellers Shop,
or Printers, Shop or Warehouses, or elsewhere whatsoever, to the end they may
be disposed of as to Law shall appertain. Likewise, if you shall be informed of
the Authors, Printers or Publishers of such Books and Pamphlets, you are to
apprehend them, and have them before Me or one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace to be Proceeded against as to law shall appertain. Dated this 28th. Day
of May, Anno Dom. 1680.

To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Officers and
Ministers whom these may concern. To Robert Stephens, Messenger of the Press.
WILLIAM SROGGS.

Upon View whereof this Committee came to this Resolution.

Resolved, That it the Opinion of this Committee, That the said Warrants are
Arbitrary and Illegal.

And this Committee being informed of certain Scandalous Discourses, said to be
uttered in public places by the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, proceeded to
Examine Sir Robert Atkins, late one of the Justices of the Common Pleas,
concerning the same, by whom it appears, That at a Sessions dinner at the Old
Bailey (in the Majorality of Sir Robert Clayton) who was then present, The said
Chief Justice took Occasion to speak very much against Petitioning, Condemning
it as Resembling 41, as Factious and tending to Rebellion, or to that Effect to
which the said Sir Robert Atkins made no reply, suspecting he waited for some
Advantage over him: But the Chief Justice continuing and pressing him with the
said Discourse, he began to Justify Petitioning as the Right of the People,
especially for the Sitting of a Parliament, which the Law Requires, if it be
done with Modesty and Respect. Upon which the Chief Justice fell into a great
Passion; and there is some reason to believe, that soon after he made an ill
Representation of what the said Sir Robert had then spoke unto his Majesty.
And this Committee was further Informed, that the said Sir Robert Atkins being
in Cercuit with the said Chief Justice at Summer Assizes was I welve-month, at
Monmouth, (Mr. Arnold; Mr. Price and Mr. Bedlow being then in company) the
Chief Justice fell severely in public upon Mr. Bedlow, taking off the credit
of his Evidence, and a^ledging he had overshot himself in it, or to that
Effect; very much to the disparagement of his Testimony: And the said Sir
Robert defending Mr. Bedlow's Evidence and credit, he grew extreme angry and
loud, saying to this effect, That he verily believed Langhorn dyed innocently.
To which the said Sir Robert replied, he wondered how he could think so, who had
condemned him himself, and had not moved the King for a Reprieve for him. All
which Matters of discourse this Committee humbly submit to the wisdom and
consideration of this House, without taking upon them to give any Opinion
therein.

And this Committee proceeded further to inquire into some Passages that
happened at Lent Assizes last for the County of Somerset, at the Trial of
Thomas Dare Gent. there, upon an Indictment for saying falsely and seditiously,
That the Subjects had but two means to Redress their Grievances, One by
Petitioning, the Other by Rebellion: And found, that though by his other
discourse when he said so, that it appeared plainly he had no rebellious
intent, in that he said, Then God forbid there should be a Rebellion, he would
be the first man to draw his Sword against a Rebel; yet he was profecuted with
great violence: And having pleaded Not Guilty, he moved Mr. Justice Jones (who
then sat Judge there) that he might try it at the next Assizes, for that Mr.
Searle (who was by at the speaking of the words, and a material Witness for his
defense) was not then to be had, and an Affidavit to that purpose was made and
recieved. But the said Justice Jones told him, That was a favor of the Court
only, and he had not deserved any Favor, and so forced him to try it
presently. But the Jury, appearing to be an extraordinary one, provided on
purpose, being all of Persons that had highly opposed Petitioning for the
sitting of this Parliament, he was advised to withdraw his Plea; and the said
Justice Jones encouraging him so to do, he confessed the words, denying any evil
intention, and gave the said Justice an account in writing of the Truth of the
whole Matter, and made a submission in Court, as he was directed by the said
Justice, who promised to recommend him to His Majesty, but imposed a Fine of
500 l. on him, and to be bound to the good behavior for three years; Declaring
also, That he was turned out from being a Common Councellor of the Corporation
of Taunton in the said County, on pretense of a clause in their Charter, giving
such a power to a Judge of Assize. And the said Thomas Dare remains yet in
prison, for the said Fine; in which matter of the Trial aforesaid, this
Committee desires to refer it self to the Judgment of this House.

The Resolutions of the House of Commons upon the said Report.
1. THat it is the Opinion of this House, That the Discharging of the Grand
Jury of the Hundred of Oswaldston, in the County of Middelsex, by the Court of
Kings Bench in Trinity Term last, before the last day of the Term and before
they had finished their Presentiments, was Arbitrary and Illegal, destructive to
public Justice, a manifest violation of the Oaths of the Judges of that Court,
and a means to subvert the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and to Introduce
Popery.

2. THat it is the Opinion of this House, That the Rule made by the Court of
Kings Bench in Trinity Term last, against Printing of a Book, called The Weekly
Packet of Advice from Rome, is Illegal and Arbitrary, thereby usurping to
themselves Legislative Power, to the great discouragement of the Protestants,
and for the countenancing of Popery.

3. THat it is the Opinion of this House, That the Court of Kings Bench in the
Imposition of Fines on Offenders, of late years have acted Arbitrarily,
Illegally, and Partially, favoring Papists and persons Popishly affected, and
excessively oppressing His Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

4. THat it is the Opinion of this House, That the resusing sufficient Bail in
these Cases, wherein the persons committed were Bailable by Law, was Illegal,
and a high breach of the Liberties of the Subject.

5. THat it is the Opinion of this House, That the said expressions in the
Charge given by the said Baron Weston, were a Scandal to the Reformation, and
tending to raise discord between His Majesty and His Subjects, and to the
Subversion of the Ancient Constitution of Parliaments, and of the Government of
this Kingdom.

6. THat it is the Opinion of this House, That the said Warrants are Arbitrary
and Illegal.

The Resolutions of the Commons for the Impeachment of the said Judges.
Resolved,

THat Sir William Scroggs Knight Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, be
Impeached upon the said Report, and the Refolutions of the House thereupon.

Resolved, That Sir Thomas Jones, one of the Justices of the said Court of
King's Bench, be Impeached upon the said Report, and Resolutions of the House
thereupon.

Resolved That Sir Richard Weston, one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer,
be Impeached upon the said Report, and Resolutions of the House thereupon.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to prepare an Impeachment against Sir
Francis North, Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, do prepare
Impeachments against the said Sir William Scroggs, Sir Thomas Jones, and Sir
Richard Weston, upon the said Report and Resolutions.

Ordered, That the said Report, and several Resolutions of this House thereupon
be Printed; and that Mr. Speaker take care in the Printing thereof apart from
this days other Votes.

Veneris 31 die December. 1680.
A Bill prohibiting the Importation of foreign Guns was read a second time.

The Question being put that the Bill be committed.

It passed in the Negative.

Resolved, That the Bill be rejected.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill for regulating the Abuses in
making of Casks, Barrels, and other Vessels.

Ordered, That a Committee be appoinied to peruse the Laws relating to Weights
and Measures, and to report their opinions therein to the House, and to bring
in a Bill or Bills for the better regulating and ascertaining the same.

Ordered, That leave be given to bring in a Bill for a general Naturalization
of Alien Protestants, and allowing them liberty to exercise their Trades in all
Corporations.

A Bill for the Relief of the Subject against Arbitrary Fines was read a second
time.

Resolved, The the Bill be committed.

Mr. Hyde acquaints the House that His Majesty, according to the order of the
House, having been attended by such Members of this House as are of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, desiring His Majesty to give Orders
that such Evidence and Informations as were given in to the Council by Mr.
Sergeant and others in the Case of John Gavan executed for High Treason; and
for all other Evidences Papers, Writings, Letters and Informations, delivered
into the Council relating to the Popish Plot, might be communicated to this
House: His Majesty was pleased to declare his Commands that the same should be
delivered accordingly.

And further acquainted the House, That Sir John Nicholas one of the Clerks of
the Council had assured him that all the said Papers were already transmitted
to the House of Lords.

And then the House Adjourned to Monday Morning eight of the Clock.

The REPORT from the Committee of the Commons in Parliament, appointed by the
Honorable House of Commons, to consider the Petition of Richard Thompson of
Bristol, Clerk; and to Examine Complaints against him.
And the RESOLUTION of the Commons in Parliament upon this REPORT, for his
Impeachment of HIGH Crimes and Misdemeanors.
At the Committee appointed to take into Consideration the Petition of Rich.
Thompson, Clerk; and to examine the complaints against him.
Friday, December. 24. 1680.
In the first place,

THE Committee read unto the said Thomson, the Heads of Complaint against him;
Which (for the most part) he denying, desired to have his Accusers brought Face
to Face: Whereupon the Committee proceeded to the Examination of Witnesses to
prove the said Complaint.

The first Witness Examined, says,

That there being a great noise and rumor, that Mr. Thompson had prepared a
Sermon to be Preached on the Thirtieth of January, 1679. the said Witness went
to the said Sermon, and did hear Mr. Thompson publikly declare, That the
Presbyterians were such Persons, as the very Devil Blush't at them; and that
the Villain Hamden grudged, and made it more Scruple of Conscience, to give
Twenty Shillings to the King, for supplying his Necessities by Ship Money and
Loan, which was His Right by Law, than to raise Rebellion against Him: And that
the Presbyterians are worse (and far more Intolerable) than either Priests or
Jesuits.

The second says,

That hearing a great Talk and Noise spread of a Sermon to be Preached by Mr.
Thompson, on the 30th. of January 1679. was minded to hear the same, and
accordingly did; at which he writ some Notes; amongst which he says; That Mr.
Thompson openly Preached that the Devil Blush't at the Presbyterians; and that
the Villain Hamden grudged more to give the King 20 Shillings, which was His
just due by Law, (Ship Money and Loan) than to raise Rebellion against Him; and
that a Presbyterian-Brother, qua talis, was as great a Traitor by the Statute,
as any Priest or Jesuit whatsoever.

That he heard, that Mr. Thompson said; that he hoped the Presbyterians would
be pulled out of their Houses, and the Jayles fi^led with them: and wished
their Houses burnt.

The Third says,

That he was Cited to the Bishops Court, to receive the Sacrament last Easter;
but being out of Town at that time, did Receive it at a place called Purl in
Wilt-shire; and that a month after he came Home, was again Cited to the said
Court, and he did accordingly appear, and told the Court, That he hoped his
Absence and b^siness might be accepted for a lawful Excuse: Upon which Mr.
Thompson immediately said, That they would proceed to Excommunicate him. Upon
which this Informant produced his Certificate, of which the Chancellor
approved, and said, It was Lawful. Hereupon Mr. Thompson said, That his
Receiving the Sacrament from any other Minister, than the Minister of the
Parish wherein he dwelled, Was Damnation to his Soul; and that he would
maintain this Doctrine.

The fourth says,

That being at Bristol Fair, he heard a great talk and noise of a Satyr-Sermon
prepared, and designed to be preached by Mr. Thompson against the
Presbyterians, on the 30th of January, 1679; and that very many resorted to
hear him: In which Sermon, the said Mr. Thompson declared and said, That there
was a great talk of a Plot: but (says he) a Presbyterian is the man: And
further added, that the Villain Hamden, scrupled to give the King 20. s. upon
Ship Money and Loan, which was his due by law, but did not Scruple to raise
Rebellion against him.

The fifth says,

That Mr. Thompson in a Sermon Preached the 30 of January; 1679. did say that
the Presbyterians did seem to outvie Mariana, and that Calvin was the first
that Preached the King-Killing Doctrine; and that after he had quoted Calvin
often, said, if this be true then, a Presbyterians Brother qua talis, is as
great a Traytot as any Priest or Jesuit; And that then he condemned all the
Proceedings of Parliaments.

The sixth says,

That the said Mr. Thompson had uttered many scandalons words concerning the
Act for Burying in Woollen, affirming, That the makers of that Law, were a
company of Old Fools and Fanatics, and that he would bring a Schoolboy,
should make a better Act than that, and Construe it when he had done.

The seventh says,

That Mr. Thompson in a Sermon by him Preached (while Petitions for the sitting
of this Parliament were on foot) speaking of a second Rebellion by the Scoth,
who had framed a formidable Army, and came as far as Durham to deliver a
Petition forsooth; and that they seemed rather to Command, than Petition their
Sovereign to grant; And comparing that Petition with the then Petition on Foot,
greatly invey'd against it, and scoffed much at it.

The Eighth says,

That Mr. Thompson, (when the Petition was on Foot for the sitting of this
Parliament) used at the Funeral Sermon of one Mr. Wharton these words,
(pointing at the Dead said) That he was no schismatical Petitioning Rebel, and
that by his instigations, the Grand Jury of Bristol made a Presentment of their
Detestation against Petitioning for the sitting of the Parliament; that the
said Mr. Thompson had told him, that he was Governor to Mr. Narbor, when he
was beyond Sea; and said, That he had been very often (and above one hundred
times) at Mass, in the great Church at Paris, and usually gave half a Crown to
get a place to hear a certain Doctor of that Church, and that he was like to be
brought over to that Religion; and that when he went beyond Sea, did not know
but that he might be of that Religion before his return. That he is very
censorious, and frequently casts evil aspersions against several Divines at
Bristol of great Note, viz. Mr. Chetwind, Mr. Standfast, Mr. Crosman, Mr.
Palmer and others, saying, That such as went to their Lectures, were the Brats
of the Devil.

The Ninth says,

That Mr. Thompson in his Preaching inveyed bitterly against subscribing
Petitions for Sitting of this Parliament, saying, That it was the Seed of
Rebellion and like to Forty one; and that the Devil set them on work, and the
Devil would pay them their Wages; faying, That before he would set his hand to
such Petitions, he would cut it off, yea and cut them off.

The Tenth says,

That about 2 pears since, being in the Chancel of St. Thomas Church in Bristol
where Queen Elizabeth's Effigies is, Mr. Thompson pointing his Finger to it,
said, That she was the worst of Women, and a most lewd and infamous Woman: Upon
which this Informant replied, He never heard any speak ill of her; thereupon
Mr. Thompson said, She was no better than a Church-Robber, and that Henry the
8th begun it, and that she finished it.

The Eleventh Row says,

That in the year 1678, he waited on the Mayor to Church, and that Mr. Thompson
who was there, railed at Henry the Eighth, saying, He did more hurt in Robbing
the Abbey Lands, than he did good by the Reformation. That after Dinner Mr.
Thompson comes to this Informant, and claps his Hands on his shoulders, saying:
Hah Boy, had Queen Elizabeth been living you needed not to have been
Swordbearer of Bristol. The said Row asked him why? He replied, She loved such
a lusty Rogue (so well) as he was; and he would have been very fit for her
Drudgery at Whitehall.

The Twelfth says,

That he heard a great noise of a Sermon to be Preached by Mr, Thompson on the
30th of January, 1679. to the second part of the same Tune: And that he was
present at the same Sermon, in which Mr. Thompson said, There was a great noise
of a Popish Plot, but, says he, Here is nothing in it but a Presbyterian Plot;
for here they are going about to Petition for the Sitting of the Parliament,
but the end of it will be to bring the Kings Head to the Block, as they have
done his Father.

The Thirteenth says,

That in January last, or thereabouts, there was a Petition going about for the
Sitting of this Parliament, when Mr. Thompson, in Redcliff Church, in his
Sermon, said, It was a Seditious and Rebellious Petition, and rather than he
would sign it, his Hand should be cut off.

The Fourteenth says,

The Eighth day of April, he going to pay Mr. Thompson his Dues speaking
concerning the Meeters in private; Mr. Thompson said, He would hall them out
and fill the Goals with them, and hoped to see their houses a fire about their
Ears in a short time; and this he the said Thompson doubled again and again.

The fifteenth says,

That about December 1679, Mr. Thompson came to visit his Mother, being sick,
and discoursing of Religion, she said, Thompson said, If he were as well
satisfied of other things, as he was of Justification, Auricular Confession,
Penance, Extreme Unction and Crisme in Baptism, he would not have been so long
separated from the Catholic Church. And further affirmed, That the Church of
Rome was the True Catholic Church. He further endeavored to prove Extreme
Unction, and Auricular Confession, as well as he could, out of the Epistles.
Further, he has heard him say, The King was a Person of mean and soft Temper,
and could be led easily to any thing, but yet a Solomon in vices; but that the
Duke of York, was a Prince of a brave Spirit, would be faithful to his Friends,
and that it was our own Faults that he was a Roman Catholic, in that we forced
him to fly into France where he embraced that Religion: About the same time, he
the said Thompson, said the Church would be Militant, but greatly commended the
decency of Solemnizing the Mass in France; and that it was performed with much
more Reverence and Devotion then any other Religion does use. He further heard
him say in a Sermon, about the time of Petitioning, he would rather cut off his
hand then Sign it; and had many bad expressions of it that it was the Seed of
Rebellion and like 40 and 41. And further, the said Mr. Thompson at one
Sanford's Shop door in Bristol, speaking of Bedlow, said, That he was not to be
believed, because Bedlow had said he, meaning Mr. Thompson, was at St. Omers,
where Mr. Thompson said he was not; and that Bedlow was of a bad Life and in
many Plots, and not to be credited in any thing he said: And that in another
Discourse he commended the Romish Clergy for their single Life and is himself
so; and did at the same time Vilify and Rail at the English Clergy for
Marrying; saying it was better for a Clergy Man to be Guelt, then to Marry, and
that the Calvinists in France were Lecherous Fellows, and could scarce be two
years a Priest without a Wife. About the time, and after the Election of Sir
John Knight to this Parliament, Mr. Thompson said he was not fit to be
believed, and as bad as any Fanatic. He further said in the Pulpit at St.
Thomas's, that after Excommunication by the Bishop without Absolution from the
Spiritual Court, such a one was surely Damned; and he would Pawn his Soul for
the Truth of it.

Evidence ended, Mr. Thompson after the Evidence given by every particular
person Face to Face, was asked to every one, If he had any Questions to ask
before they called another? Who answered, he should not say any thing at
present. When the Witnesses beforementioned, were all Examined, Mr. Thompson
being desired to make his Defense, and declare whether he were Guilty of the
Matters laid to his charge; did for the greatest part confess words spoken to
that effect; and in other things endeavored to turn the words with more favor
toward himself; but the Witnesses being of great Credit, and many more being
ready to have made good the same things, the Committee looked upon the business
to be of a high Nature, therefore ordered the matter to be reported specially;
leaving it to the Wisdom of the House,

The Resolution of the House of Commons upon the said Report.
Resolved, Nemine contradicente,

THat Richard Thompson Clerk: Has publicly defamed his Sacred Majesty,
Preached Sedition, vilified the Reformation, Promoted Popery, by asserting
Popish Principles, decrying the Popish Plot, and turning the same upon the
Protestants; and endeavored to subvert the Liberty and property of the
Subject, and the Rights and Privileges of Parliament; and that he is a Scandal
and Reproach to his Function.

And that the said Richard Thompson, be Impeached upon the said Report and
Resolution of the House. And a Committee is appointed to prepare the said
Impeachment, and to receive further Instructions against him: and to send for
Persons, Papers, and Records.

Lunoe 3. Die Januarii. 1680.
AN Engrossed Bill for the Naturalization of Peter Elers and others was read a
third time.

Resolved, That the Bill do pass, and that the Title be, An Act for the
Naturalization of Peter Elers and others Aliens born,

Ordered, That Mr. Papillon do carry up the said Bill to the Lords for their
Concurrence.

An Engrossed Bill for the prohibiting the importation of Cattle from Scotland,
was Read a third time

Resolved, That the Bill do pass, and that the Title be, An Act limiting the
times of Importation of Cattle from Scotland.

Ordered, That Sir George Downing do carry up the Bill to the Lords for their
Concurrence.

A Bill for repealing an Act made in the 13th year of His now Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for the well Governing and Regulating of Corporations, was
read the first time.

Resolved, That the Bill be read a second time on Thursday morning next.

A Bill for the better Discovery of Settlements of Estates for superstitious
Uses, was read the first time.

Resolved, That the Bill be read a second time on Friday morning next after Ten
of the Clock in a full House.

Mr. Treby Reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges, to whom the
matter touching the Election for the Borough of Steyning in the County of
Sussex was referred, That the Committee having taken the same into their
Consideration, had agreed upon two Resolves, viz.

1. That John Tufton Esquire; was not duly elected a Burgess, to serve in this
present Parliament for the Borough of Steyning in the County of Sussex.

2. That Philip Gell Esquire; is duly Elected a Burgess, to serve in this present
Parliament, for the Borough of Steyning.

To both which Resolves the House agreed with the Committee.

Ordered, That the Clerk of the Crown do attend tomorrow morning, to amend the
Return for Steyning.

A Petition of John Fairchild in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this
House was read.

Ordered, That the said John Fairchild be brought to the Bar of this House
tomorrow morning.

A Message from the Lords by Sir John Coell and Sir Timothy Baldwin.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have sent this House a Bill, entitled, An Act for
distinguishing Protestant Dissenters from Popish Recusants, to which they
desire the Concurrence of this House.

Sir Edward Harley Reports from the Committee, to whom the bill to regulate
Elections of Members to serve in the Commons House of Parliament, and the Bill
to prevent the Offenses of Bribery and Debauchery in such Elections were
committed, That the Committee having taken the said Bills into their
Consideration, had reduced the same into one Bill, and had agreed upon several
amendments to be made, and Clauses to be added to the same, which he read in
his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table; which,
with some amendments made at the Table upon the question, were severally agreed
to by the House, the Clause to be inserted being Read.

Ordered, That the said Clause be recommitted to the said Committee upon the
Debate of the House.

A Message from the Lords by Sir John Coell and Sir Timothy Baldwin.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have sent us to put this House in mind of the Bill for
the better regulating the Trials of the Peers of England.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Miles Cook and Sir Adam Oteley.

Mr. Speaker, We are commanded to acquaint this house, That the Lords have
received a Petition from Mr. Seymour, wherein he desires a day may be appointed
for his speedy Trial; that their Lordships finding no Issue by replication of
the Commons, think fit to give this House notice thereof.

The Answer of Edward Seymour Esquire; to the Articles of Impeachment exhibited
against him, by the Commons assembled in Parliament, was read.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to prepare Evidence against Mr.
Seymour, and manage the same at his Trial.

Sir Richard Corbet Reports from the Committee, appointed to prepare an
Impeachment against Sir William Scroggs Knight, Chief Justice of the Court of
Kings Bench, upon the former Report of the said Committee, and the Resolutions
of the House thereupon, That the Committee having taken the matters to them
referred into Consideration, had agreed upon several Articles of Impeachment
against the said Sir William Scroggs, which he read in his place, and
afterward delivered them in at the Clerks Table, where the same were read.

The Question being proposed, that the said Articles be engrossed, Debate
ar^sing in the Housethereupon.

Resolved, That the Debate be adjourned till Wednesday morning next, after ten
of the Clock in a full House.

Martis 4. die Januarii, 1680.
THe Clerk of the Crown being called in amended the Return for the Borough of
Stayning in the County of Sussex by taking off the Indenture wherein John
Tufton Esquire; was returned, and by rasing out the name of the said John Tufton
and inserting the name of Philip Gell, Esquire; in the other Indenture.

A Petition of Algernoon Sydney, Esquire; touching the Election for the Borough of
Agmondesham in the County of Bucks was Read.

Ordered, That the Merits of the said Petitioner be heard at the Bar of this
House upon Wednesday the 12th of this Instant January.

Sir William Temple delivered in a Message from His Majesty to this House,
which being Read by Mr. Speaker, the House Resolved to take the said Message
into Consideration upon Friday next after ten of the Clock in a a full House.

A Message from the Lords by Sir Timothy Baldwin and Sir Miles Cook.

Mr. Speaker,

We are commanded to acquaint this House that the Lords have past a Vote, viz.

Die Martis 4: Januarii 1680.
Resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That
they do declare that they are fully satisfied that there now is, and for diverse
years last past there has been, a Horrid and Treasonable Plot and Conspiracy
contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion in Ireland, for
Massacring the English, and Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the ancient
established Government of that Kingdom, to which their Lordships desire the
concurrence of this House.

They have further commanded us to acquaint this House, That their Lordships
have agreed to the Bill sent from this House Entitled An Act for the
Rectifying several Errors and Mistakes in the Marriage Settlement of Sir
Charles Hoghton, Baronet, without any Amendments.

The House according to their Order, proceeded to the calling over the Members
thereof.

Ordered, That such Members of this House whose default of attendance was
entered this day, be sent for in custody of the Sergeant at Arms attending this
House, and that they be not admitted to sit in the House before they shall have
paid their Fees and have the leave of this House.

Resolved, Nemine contradicente.

That such Members of this House, who in this time of Imminent danger do absent
themselves without the leave of the House, are to be reputed Deserters of their
Trust and Neglectors of that Duty they owe to this House and their Country.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to receive Informations touching the
Popish Plot in Ireland do sit at four of the Clock this afternoon in the
Speaker's Chamber.

Mercurii 5. Die Januarii 1680.
A Bill to supply a defective Conveyance, made by Roger Price of the Manor of
Westbury in the County of Bucks, was Read a second time.

Resolved, That the Bill be committed.

Ordered, That such Members who were ordered to be sent for in Custody of the
Sergeant at Arms, for not attending the service of this House at the Call of
the same yesterday made, And who were in town last night, be admited to sit in
the House, without paying Fees.

Ordered, That Dr. Burnet be desired to proceed with, and complete that good
Work by him begun, in writing and Publishing the History of the Reformation of
the Church of England.

A Petition of Thomas Hobby Esquire; touching the Election for Great Marlow in the
County of Bucks, was Read.

Ordered, That the Merits of this Cause, be heard at the Bar of this House,
this day seven-night.

A Petition of Richard Thompson Clerk, in Custody of the Sergeant at Arms
attending this House, was Read,

Ordered, The said Sergeant at Arms be empowered to receive sufficient se^urity
for the forthcoming of the said Richard Thompson, to answer to the Impeachment
against him.

A petition of Samuel Nash and others, complaining against the African Company,
was Read.

Ordered, That the Consideration of the said Petition be referred to the
Committee to whom a former Petition of diverse Merchants against the African
Company, was referred, 'to examine the matter thereof, and Report the same,
with their opinions therein to the House.

The House then according to their Order, Resumed the adjourned Debate,
touching the Articles of Impeachment, delivered in to the House against Sir.
Willi: Scroggs Knight: Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench.

Upon the Debate thereof,

Resolved, That the said Sir William Scroggs be impeached upon the said
Respective Articles.

Resolved, That the said Articles be engrossed.

Ordered, That the Lord Cavendish do carry up the said Articles to the Lords.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to examine the Proceedings of the Judges
in Westminster Hall, and to prepare Impeachments against Sir Francis North
Chief Justice-of the Court of Common Pleas; Sir Thomas Jones one of the
Justices of the Court of Kings Bench, and Sir Richard Weston, one of the Barons
of the Court of Exchequer, do bring in such Impeachments with all convenient
speed.

Ordered, That Mr. Macnamara, Mr. Maurice Fitz Gerald, and Mr. Murtogh Downy do
attend this House tomorrow morning, 10 of the Clock.

The House being informed, that one Bowyer was upon Intimation given by the
Committee, appointed to prepare Evidence against the Popish Lords in Tower,
taken into custody.

Ordered, That the said Bowyer be delivered into the hands of the Sergeant at
Arms attending this House, and that he be brought to the Bar of this House to
Morrow morning at Ten of the Clock, in order to his Examination.

Ordered, That Richard Green and Woodhouse do attend to Morrow morning at Ten
of the clock.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to receive Informations, touching the
Popish Plot in Ireland, do sit this Afternoon in the Speakers Chamber, and that
the said Committee do make Report to the House of the Matters to them referred,
at Nine of the clock to Morrow morning.

Jovis 6 die Januarii, 1680.
A Bill for the more easy collecting the Duty of Hearth-mony was read a second
time.

Resolved, That the Bill be committed upon the Debate of the House.

A Bill for repealing an Act made in the 13th. year of his now Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An Act for the well governing of Corporations was Read the second
time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be committed upon the debate of the House.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker do suspend the issuing out of any Warrant for taking
into custody Sir Philip Skippon, who made default in attending the House at the
Call thereof on Tuesday last

Colonel Birch reports from the Committee appointed to receive Informations
relating to the Popish Plot in Ireland. That the Committee, having proceeded
upon the Matters to them referred, had taken several Examinations and received
the Answer of Sir John Davis, and had also perused several Informations
transmitted from the House of Lords relating to the said Plot, all which he
Read in his place, and afterward delivered the same in at the Clerks Table
where the same were again Read.

The House then taking into consideration the Message sent from the Lords on
Tuesday last, wherein they desire the concurrence of this House, the House
resolved, That this House does agree with the Lords in the said Vote with the
addition of these words, That the Duke of York being a Papist, and the
expectation of his coming to the Crown, has given the greatest Countenance and
Encouragement thereto as well as to the horrid Popish Piot in this Kingdom of
England.

Resolved, That that the said Vote be delivered to the Lords at a Conference.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to draw up reasons to be offered at the
said Conference.

Ordered, That the several Informations of John Macnamara, Maurice Fitz-Gerrald
and James Nash, this day Read to the House relating to the Irish Plot be
forthwith Printed.

Resolved, That Richard Pour Earl of Tyrone in the Kingdom of Ireland be
Impeached of high Treason.

Ordered, That the Lord Durseley do go up to the Bar of the Lords and Impeach
him of high Treason in the name of this House and of all the Commons of
England, and do pray that he may be committed to safe custody.

Ordered That the Committee appointed to prepare the Evidence against the
Popish Lords in the Tower do prepare the said Impeachment.

Ordered, That the further consideration of the said Report in relation to
Arthur Earl of Anglesey and Sir John Davis be adjourned to Saturday morning
next ten of the Clock in a full House.

Veneris 7. Die Januarii 1680.
THe Engrossed Articles of Impeachment of Sir William Scroggs Chief Justice of
the Court of King's Bench, of High Treason and other great Crimes and
Misdemeanors being Read, the same were carried up to the Lords by the Lord
Cavendish.

Ordered, That Mr. Lewknor and Colonel Strangewayes have leave to go into the
Country, for Recovery of their Health.

A Bill to prevent vexatious Actions was read a first time.

Resolved, That the Bill be read a second time.

A Bill to prevent Brewers to be Justices of the Peace in the place where they
exercise that Trade, was read the first time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be read a Second time.

A Bill to prevent the Simony of one person from prejudicing another, was read
the first time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be read a second time.

A Bill for the Bettter discovery of Settlements of Estates for superstitious
uses, was read a second time.

Resolved, That the Bill be Committed upon the Debate of the House.

The House being informed, that one John Fancourt had lately spoken certain
seditious and dangerous words, for which he has been Secured in the City of
Lincoln.

Ordered, That it be Referred to the Committee Appointed to receive
Informations touching the Popish Plot, to Examine the Matter of this
Information, and to report the same, with their Opinions therein to the House.

The House then according to their Order, entered into the Consideration of His
Majesty's Message sent to this House on Tuesday last.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this House, that there is no security or
safety for the Protestant Religion, the Kings Life, or the well Constituted and
Established Government of this Kingdom, without passing a Bill for disabling
James Duke of Tork to Inherit the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland, and
the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; and to rely upon any other
Means or Remedies, without such a Bill, is not only insufficient but dangerous.

Resolved, That His Majesty in His last message, having assured this House of
his Readiness to concur in all other means, for the preservation of the
Protestant Religion; this House does declare, that until a Bill be likewise
passed for excluding the Duke of Tork, this House cannot give any Supply to His
Majesty, without danger to his Majesty's Person, extreme hazard of the
Protestant Religion, and unfeithfulness to those by whom this House is
entrusted.

Resolved, That all persons who advised his Majesty in his last Message to
this House, to insist upon an opinion against the Bill for excluding the Duke
of York; have given pernicious Counsel to His Majesty, and are Promoters of
Popery, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this House, that George Earl of Hallifax
is one of the Persons who advised His Majesty in his last Message to this
House, to insist upon an opinion against the Bill for excluding the Duke of
York, and has therein given pernicious Counsel to his Majesty, and is a
promoter of Popery, and an Enemy to the King and Kingdom.

Resolved, That an humble Address be presented to His Majesty, to remove
Laurence Hide Esquire; from his Majesty's Council and presence, and from his Office
in the Treasury for ever.

Resolved, That an humble Address be presented to his Majesty, to remove Henry
Marquis of Worcester from his Presence and Council, and all the Offices and
Employments of Honor and profit for ever.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that Henry Marquis of
Worcester is one of the Persons who advised his Majesty in his last Message to
this House, to insist upon an opinion against the Bill for excluding the Duke
of York, and has therein given pernicious Counsel to his Majesty, and is a
promoter of Popery, and an Enemy to the King and Kingdom.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this House, That Henry Earl of Clarendon
is one of the persons who Advised his Majesty in His last Message to this House
to insist upon an Opinion against the Bill for excluding the Duke of York, has
therein given pernicious Council to his Majesty, and is a Promoter of Popery,
and an Enemy to the King and Kingdom.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that Lewis Earl of Feversham
is a promoter of Popery, and of the French Interest, and a dangerous Enemy to
the King and Kingdom.

Resolved, That an humble Address be made to his Majesty to remove Lewis Earl
of Feversham, from all Military Offices and Commands, and from all other
Public Offices and Employments, and from His Majesty's presence for ever.

A Motion being made for an Address to His Majesty to remove Edward Seymour
Esquire; from His Majesty's Council and Presence.

Ordered, That the Debate thereof be adjourned to Monday morning next.

Ordered, That the Committee Appointed to prepare an Address to His Majesty, in
Answer to his Majesty's Message relating to Tangier, do prepare an humble
Address to His Majesty upon the Resolutions and Debate of the House.

Resolved, That whosoever shall hereafter Lend, or cause to be lent by way of
Advance, any money upon the branches of the King's Revenue arising by Customs,
Excise, or Hearth Money, shall be adjudged to hinder the Sitting of
Parliaments, and shall be responsible for the same in Parliament.

Resolved, That whosoever shall Accept or B^y any Tally of Anticipation upon
any part of the Kings Revenue; or whosoever shall pay such Tally hereafter to
be struck, shall be adjudged to hinder the Sittings of Parliaments, and shall
be responsible therefore in Parliament.

Sabbati 8. die Januarii, 1680.
A Petition of several Clothiers and others concerned in the furnishing and
quartering of the Forces lately disbanded was Read.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee for receiving the Accounts of
the Commissioners Appointed to disband the said Army, to examine the matter of
the said Petition, and report the same with their Opinions therein to the House.

A Message from the Lords by Sir John Coell and Sir Timothy Baldwir.

Mr. Speaker, The Lords have sent us to give this House notice that their
Lordships have appointed this day seven night for hearing the Cause upon the
Impeachment of Mr. Seymour, and that this House may reply if they think fit.

Ordered, That Mr. Chaffin have leave to go into the Country.

Information being given to the House by the Sergeant at Arms, that Sir John
Lloyd, Sir Edward Phillips, Herbert Herring, Samuel Verdon, Miles Baspole (...)
Isles, and Arthur Yeomans, who for diverse great Misdemeaners, by them committed
against the Privilege of this House were Ordered to be taken in custody of the
said Sergeant do so abscond themselves, that the said order cannot be put in
Execution against them.

Ordered, That an humble application be made to His Majesty from this House by
such Members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
desiring His Majesty to issue out His Royal Proclamation for the apprehending
the said several persons, in case they shall not render themselves to the
Sergeant by a certain day therein to be limited.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to inquire and examine what Popish
Priests convict are in Newgate and other Gaols in this Kingdom, and to enquire
into their conditions and circumstances upon the Debate of the House.

Mr. Treby reports from the Committee of Elections and Privileges to whom the
matter touching the Election for the Borough of Queen-borough in the County of
Kent was referred. That the Committee having taken the same into their
consideration, had agreed upon two Resolves which he read in his place, and
afterward delivered them in at the Clerks Table, where the same being read are
as follow, viz.

Resolved, That James Herbert, Esquire; is not duly Elected a Burgess to serve in
this present Parliament for the Borough of Queenborough in the County of Kent.

Resolved, That William Glanvill, Esquire; is duly Elected a Burgess to serve in
this present Parliament for the said Borough of Queenborough.

To which Resolves the House agreed.

The Clerk of the Crown being called in amended the Return for the said
Borough, by rasing out the name of the said James Herbert, and inferting the
name of the said William Glanvill in the Indenture.

Ordered, That Mr. Dowly a Member of this House have leave to go into the
Country for recovery of his health.

Ordered, That the Chairman of the Committee of Grievances, to whom the
Petition of Mr. Baldwin Leighton was referred, do make Report thereof to the
House on Monday morning next.

Ordered, That the matter in question relating to Arthur Earl of Anglesey and
Sir John Davis, which was appointed for this day, be adjourned to Monday
morning next ten of the clock.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to inspect the Journals of this House
and of the House of Lords and Presidents to justify and maintain that the
Lords ought to commit Persons to safe custody when Impeached for High Treason
by the Commons in Parliament, and to make Report thereof to the House.

Lunae 10 Die Januarii 1680.
Resolved, That whosoever advised His Majesty to Prorogue this Parliament, to
any other Purpose than in Order to the passing of a Bill for the Exclusion of
James Duke of York, is a betrayer of the King, the Protestant Religion, and of
the Kingdom of England; a promoter of the French Interest, and a Pensioner to
France.

Resolved, That the thanks of this House be given to the City of London, for
their manifest Loyalty to the King, their Care, Charge and Vigilance for the
Preservation of His Majesty's Person, and of the Protestant Religion.

Ordered, That the members that serve for the City of London, do accordingly
give them the thanks of this House.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this House, that the City of London was
burnt in the year 1666 by the Papists, designing thereby to introduce Aribitary
Power and Popery into this Kingdom.

Resolved, That the Commissioners of the Customs, and other Officers of the
Custom-House, have wilfully broken the Law prohibiting the Importation of
French Wines, and other Commodities; And that if they shall hereafter Wilfully
or Negligently break that Law, they shall be questioned therefore in Parliament.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this House, That James Duke of Monmouth
has been Removed from his Offices and Commands, by the Influence of the Duke
of York.

Ordered, That an humble Application be made to His Majesty from this House, by
such members thereof as are of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to
desire his Majesty to restore the said James Duke of Monmouth, to his said
Offices and Commands.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this House, that the prosecution of
Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at this time Grievous to the
Subject, a weakening of the Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery, and
Dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

A Message from the King by Sir Edward Cartaret Usher of the Black Rod.

Mr. Speaker,

The King commands this Honorable House to attend Him immediately in the House
of Peers; and accordingly Mr. Speaker went up with the House to attend His
Majesty, who was pleased to Prorogue this present Parliament to next Thursday
seven-night, being the 20th: day of this instant January 1680.

His Majesty gave His Royal assent to the Act, Prohibiting the Importation of
Cattle from Ireland.

And to the Act, For Supplying the late Act for Burying in Woollen.

And to an Act, To Rectify Errors in Sir Charles Houghton's Settlement.


