An Elegy upon his honored friend Mr. James Herrewyn, unfortunately slain by a
fall from his Horse.
WHo can Epitomize with Curious Eye,
Man in his End-lesse travels? and deny,
That Pleasing madness mortals does affect?
Who grasping shadows, substance do neglect:
Some, only zealous riches to acquest,
And of a vast Estate to be possessed,
Consume in care their Precious, Hastening Days,
Esteeming wealth and gold sufficient Praise,
And guerdon of their labors: whilst they merit,
Not what themselves, but others do inherit:
Others pursue variety of Pleasures,
As only summa Bona, chiefest Treasures:
Yet could the proudest Ep cure never find,
To satiate in these, his rest-lesse mind.
Not few, (yet something nobler) spend their Time,
Aspiring Honors slippery mount to clime;
Vulgar applause affecting, courting glory,
Ambitious to survive in long lived story:
Thus they applaud themselves, and dote, whilst they,
Soon (as their frothy Titles) pass away.
Were Riches; Pleasures, Honors Blessed Estate,
Free from the Laws of all-controuling Fate,
Or were the Proud Possessors so sublime,
As'bove the Reach of all devouring Time:
Could we secure our selves in the fruition
Of these sub-lunar goods: were our Condition
Immutable, or we Immortal: then,
'T should be the task of my unworthy Pen,
To write encomium's on the state of man:
But since it is no such matter: oh! who can
Account them wise, or sound in wits, who deem,
Ought in this wretched world worth our esteem?
Can store of Gold, or Silver, bribe the Hand
Of unrelenting Mors, or Countermand
His fatal stroke? can Oceans of Pleasure,
Protract our days? or add ought to the measure
Of our Prefixed Hour? can Blooming age,
Or smooth-faced youth, entreat, persuade, engage
The Threefold sisters to prolong their twine?
Should Temperance with propitious Nature join
To save one wight, or sue a full Discharge,
From passing Lethe's lake in Charon's Barge,
'Twere vain: too sad an instance here we find,
Our Herrewyn's gone! in Him they all combined:
Wealth, virtues, youth, what not? nor can our grief
Revert his fate, or render us Relief.
A sad Catastrophe -- In natures Course,
Scarce Halfway run: yet forced to unhorse.
Injurious Fates! eclipse this rising light,
Before his noon, and far from thoughts of night:
Thrice Happy He: who died though few of years,
Fuller of virtues, then His friends of Tears.
James Godschalck. An Acrostich upon Mr. James Herewyn, Merchant.
Jnto this vale of Tears, this World, We have
An only Passage: to the silent grave,
More then ten thousand Paths, and differing Ways.
Examples too too many, these Worst days
Shower thick upon us: Some like fruits unripe
Harsh accidents (as Storms) from hence do gripe:
Excessive numbers gentler, lingering Pain
Reduces (whence at first) to Dust again.
Even the choice Sports, and Pleasures often do bring,
What there we least expect, a deadly Sting:
It is no Paradox: Lo Here! a Wight does lie
Now sleeping: Loved Horses, and by Horse did dye.
James Godschalck.

Upon the Unfortunate Death of Mr. James Herrewyn Merchant, by a fall from a
Horse.
I could lament thee, Merchant; but to grieve
Would do thy Friends no good, nor thee relieve
Out of the snares of death; but yet i will tell
The World how hard thy fate did with thee deal:
A Debt thou did him owe; it is very true;
But now to call for it, though 'twere always due,
Seems very hard; fifty years hence I should
Have thought good payment; I am sure, death could
Have had a little patience, and have staid,
Considering what large sums the sword has paid:
He might have sent him notice by his thin
Faced Sergeant, sickness, and have warned him in,
To put in Bail; but for to Hurry him hence
A Horseback; and basely throw him thence
Into a silent Prison; all this done,
In the non-change-time of his age, is the sum
Of Cruelty, and could not be past by,
With Patience; but that necessity
Compels. Well! seeing it is so, were all as I,
We Will call them fools, that fear, or love to dye.
John Sweeting.

We need no Spur, or mettl'd Horse,
Nature alone runs full Carreare,
Why such preposterous haste Dire Mors?
Too soon we are flying.
Too soon I say, 'cause Herwin's gone:
The had had some Pity left I Would swear
If Him thou had Repreiv'd alone,
So soon from Dying.
But since, alas! thou have bereft us
Of him, the Non such of His age,
Since He alas, alas! has left us,
Mors we Defy thee:
Thou Have but advanced him in His Way,
Where now He Rests above thy rage:
With Him t'associate, though to Day,
Oh who would fly thee?
Thy deadly spite can hurt no more,
Then He the wandering Wretch that brings,
T'a Land of Rest from Travells sore.
Can thou deny it?
We Are Pilgrims Here, we claim no right,
To these Terrestrial fading things:
We Will follow Herrewyn through thy Night,
T'a Morn of Quiet.
I.G.

To Mr. Herrewyns Friends.
Why do you look so sad? your friend, you say,
Is gone to Heaven: had H'gone the other way,
Or been sequestered 'twere cause of sorrow;
Besides to dye, may be your case to morrow.
I. S.


