EXCEPTIONS to Edward Mosley's BILL in Parliament.
THis is the third Bill (besides a Petition before any of them) which Edward
Mosley the Father has brought in Parliament for the same matter in effect as
this Bill was.

March last, as to Sir John Maynards Concernment, and yet was a juster Bill
then this; for that was to sell to pay all the Debts, (which amount to many
Thousand Pounds) to which Debts and Legacies the whole Estate is subject in
case of Redemption: and now by this Bill, the Creditours and Legatees shall be
for ever absolutely concluded.

It is against the Fundamental Rules of the House, after a Bill rejected, to
admit any to the same effect under any pretense of Alterations; the Alterations
here make this Bill worse then the (...)

(...) by the Marriage Agreement the Lands were to be to Sir John Maynard, as
reason is that every man's Security (...) be, this Bill is to put Sir John
Maynards Security in other men, contrary to, and in overthrow of the Agree^^^^
under Hand and Seal.

John Maynard has been many years in Chancery to have the Agreement performed,
and has at last a Decree.

There Exceptions were taken to Sir John Coels Report, That the Security was
too great; Council heard on both sides; the Exceptions referred to the Master,
and to be final; the Master first and last was attended above twenty times; the
Security adjudged and decreed to be equitable, and to be performed.

For Sir John Maynards Security is charged with 10000 l. Principal Money due to
Sir John Maynard. 1000 l. already due to Mrs. Mosley. 250 l. due to Sir Edmond
Sawyer. 400 l. due to Mrs. Maynard. 200 l. per annum to Mrs. Mosley for five
years to come. 80 l. and the 200 l. per annum to Mrs. Maynard for life. 60 l.
per annum to the Lady North for life. 20 l. per annum to Mr. Prestwich for
life. 50 l per annum to Sir Edmond Sawyer for five years to come. 100 l. per
annum more to Mrs. Mosley. 600 l. per annum Interest of the 10000 l. Principal
Money.
All which run on, and yearly increase on him till 1673. and in the mean time
he receives nothing.

The Master reports, and the Court satisfied, that there was no other way to
perform the Will of Sir Edward Mosley but this.

Yet Sir John Maynard is Decreed to join in Sal^ ^^^h Edward Mosley, of all or
any part, (...) to raise his Debt and Damag^^ which he submits to.

John Maynards Debt.

The Consequence is unreasonable and unjust.
1. To take away or alter any man's Security against his will without his fault,
contrary to Agreement under Seal and that so solemnly Decreed. 2. To re-examine
a Masters Report settled on proof, by Proceedings before a Committee. 3. To put
all those Creditors and Legatees to an uncertainty, and new Suits whose Debts
and Legacies are now charged on Sir John Maynard. 4. What if the new Trustees
will not Sell, or Sell this and another parcel of the Lands, and by that means
spoil the Security, Selling the good and not the bad, and when they have Sold,
not pay the Money, or take bad Security, or detain the Moneys?
In these Cases there is apparent mischief and no remedy, or at best, new Suits
and Troubles.

John Maynard is to lay out the Money (not to receive it to his own use) but as
a Trustee, to Purchase Lands for Mrs. Maynard for her life, etc. with Remainder
to her Son an Infant, etc.

It is hard enough on her already, that her Life (which could not well be
valued at above 7 years) and yet 6 years allotted for the Purchase thereof are
already elapsed, and two years yet to come for Redemption.

So that 8 years are already given to Purchase an Estate for her Life, and now
more desired.

Sir John Maynard being by her and her Brother appointed for her Trustee in the
Security, others without her consent shall be substituted.

This 8000 l. was conceived by the Court to be in lieu of 8000 l. and of 2000
l. due to her by Assurances made by (...) her, and 2000 l. more as
Administratrix to her Sister which on that account was set aside, because this
8000 l. (...), and those Moneys would have been justly raised before now.

(...) ^^^^ter-shire Lands, ^00 l. per annum, were given to Mrs. Maynards Male
Children by the Will, which Lands (...) ^^st without any Recompense: and though
Sir Edward Mosleys provision which he intented to his Nephews, (...) enough, in
recompense of the Wrongs he did in Se^ng her Mothers Lands of Inheritance,
which he had no (...) to in Equity, but belonged to his Sister in a clear
Equity, yet he Sold them away, being worth 8000 l.

Edward Mosley Junior, for a good Estate in Law and Equity may be made of the
Lands to any Purchasor, notwithstanding any pretense of his in the Bill; for in
Equity the Decree binds him, and in Law he has no Title, because the Estate in
Law is out of him by breach of the Condition; for the time of laying out the
7000 l. elapsed in October last, the Condition being that the Father should
purchase within Five years, and within Five and a half settle Lands: The not
purchasing within five years was a breach.


