A Full and True Relation of the ELEPHANT That is brought over into England
from the Indies, and Landed at London, August 3d. 1675.
Giving likewise a true Account of the wonderful Nature, Understanding,
Breeding, Taking, and Taming of Elephants.
And Likewise where this Elephant is to be seen.
depiction of an elephant and its mahouts

AMongst all the Wonderful and Prodigious Creatures that have been seen in this
Kingdom of England, since the Age of Man, none so strange, nor so great as an
Elephant, and which is more, it comes nearest in wit and capacity, to man, as
Pliny says; for they understand the Language of that Country wherein they are
bred: they do whatsoever they are commanded, they remember what duty they are
taught, and withal take delight both in love and glory: Nay, more then all
this, they embrace goodness, honesty, prudence, and equity, (rare qualities to
be found in men) and withal have in Religion, reverence, (with a kind of
Devotion) not only the Stars and planets, but the Sun and Moon they also
worship. And some writers report thus much of them, that when the New Moon
beg^neth to appear bright, they come down to a certain River named Amelus, in
the Deserts and Forests of Mauritania, where after they are washed, and dashed
themselves all over with the water, and have saluted and adored, after their
manner that planet, they return again into the woods, carrying before them
their young Calves, that be wearied and tired. Moreover* they are thought to
have a sense of Religion and Conscience in others; for when they are to pass
the Seas into another Country, they will not Embarque before they be induced
thereunto by an Oath of their Governors, that they shall return again; and
seeing there have been diverse of them, being infeebled by sickness (for as big
as they be, subject they are to grievous Malladies) to lie upon their backs,
casting and flinging Herbs up toward Heaven, as if they had procured and set
the Earth to pray for them. Now for their Docility and aptness to learn any
thing, the King they adore they kneel before him, and offer unto him Garlands
and Chaplets of Flowers, and green Herbs. The lesser sort of them, which they
call Bastards, serve the Indians in good stead to plow their Ground.

They breed in that part of Africa which lies beyond the Deserts of Syrtes:
also in Maurita^ia, they are found also amongst the Aethiopians and
Troglodites, but India brings forth the biggest: as also the Dragons that are
continually at variance with them, and evermore fighting, and those of such
greatness that they can easily clasp and wind round about the Elephants, and
withal, tie them fast with a Knot. In this Conflict they dye, both the one and
the other: the Elephant falls down dead as conquered, and with his heavy weight
crusheth and Squeeezeth the Dragon that is wound and wreathed about him.

In India, from whence this Elephant came, they take them in this manner: The
Governor drives one of them that are tame, into the Chase and Forests, and
when he can meet with one of them alone, or single him from the Herd, he
beats the wild beast till he has made him weary, and then he mounteth upon
him, and rules him as well as the other.

In Africa they catch them in great ditches, which they make for that purpose,
unto which if one of them chance to fall, and cannot get out; so soon as he is
seen by other Elephants, they imediately come to succor him, they bring all
the boughs they can get, and put them into the Ditch, then roll down blocks and
stones, and any thing that will serve to raise a banck, then strive all they
can to pluck him out.

The manner of taming (as furious and raging mad as they be sometimes] is with
hunger and stripes; but men must have the help of other Elephants that are tame
already, to restrain the unruly Beast with strong Chains, In the Indian and
African Wars they served to carry Castles with armed Men on their backs, to
enter the Squadrons and battalions of the Enemies, and for the most part, all
the service in the Wars of the East, was performed by them, they broke the
ranks, bore down armed men that were in their way, and stamped them under foot.
These terrible beasts [as outrageous as they seem) are frighted with the least
grunting of a Swine.

They breed but once in all their l^fe time, and go two years with young, yet
bring forth but one neither; also they Live commonly by course of Nature 200
years, some of them 300. Their youthful time and strength of age begins when
they be sixty years old, but this which is brought over into England is said to
be but seven.

The Truncks and bodies of Trees is the best meat they have, and therein take
most delight. They chew and eat their Meat with their mouth, but they breath,
drink, and smell with their Trunck, which is not improperly called their hand.
Of all other living creatures they cannot abide a Mouse or a Rat, and if they
perceive their provinder lying in the Manger taste or scent never so little of
them, they refuse it, and will not touch it. They are mightily tormented with
pain, if they chance in their Drinking to swallow down an Horse-Leech, for as
soon as the horse-Leech has settled fast in his Windpipe it puts him to
intolerable pains; their skin or their backs is most tough and hard, but the
flesh soft and tender, covered their skin is neither with hair nor brisle, no
not so much as in their tail, which might serve them in good stead to drive
away their troublesome flies. Their skin is full of cross wrinckles, and
besides that, the smell thereof is able to draw such vermin to it; and
therefore when they are laid stretched along, and perceive the flies settle in
swarms on their skins, suddenly they draw such cranies together close, and so
crush them all to Death: their teeth bear a very high price, and were reckoned
very commendable by the Heathens, to make the Stautes and Images of their Gods;
but the greatest use that we make of them here, is to make Combs, as we may see
here at most Comb-makers doors in London.

Now having given you an account of their understanding, how they breed, the
manner of taking and taming of them, I will now inform you of one lately
brought over into England, and give you a full Description of it, as thus: This
Elephant is of a Dun color, the body of it [though but young) is bigger then
the bodies of two horses, a strange, wonderful, and mighty large head, with a
Trunk or Nostril extending a yard downwards, Eyes but ordinary, Ears like a
Blood-Hound, hanging down, Legs as big or bigger than an ordinary man's body,
and feet proportionable, etc. But this being not above seven years old, is not
grown the sixth part to what it will be about sixty years hence, if it live so
long.

If any persons are desirous to see this wonder of Beasts, let them repair to
the Rising-Star in St. Johns-Court, near Clerkenwellgreen, where they may have
true information, where they may see it, it being kept near it.

Printed for William Sutten, in the Year, 1675.


