A FEW LINES MORE For thee O ENGLAND And for thy Lofty ones in thee, And for
all others of thine IN HABITANTS, wen forth and sent abroad into the world,
with two letters, for the comfort and consolation of the persecuted Church in
God, and for the tribulated Flock in Christ, and mourners amongst them,
wheresoever they be. (...) the end the Children of Light, and all they that
hunger and thirst, after righteousness, may be comforted, and refreshed (in God)
in the midst and depth, of all their persecutions, tribulations, sufferings,
and afflictions, that they may yet meet withal, from wicked, cruel and
unreasonable men, who take delight to crucify the Lord of life, light, and
Glory, a fresh, and put him to open shame in his people. Also a few lines for
the wicked People, and powers of the World, with some wholesome Council and good
advice, given unto me, from the Lord God Almighty, to give unto them,
(especially unto the people, and powers of England, Ireland, Scotland, Holland
and Germany, where the name of God has been and is so emenently professed, and
so great a reformation pretended) that so they may all hearken, unto hear, and
obey, the voice of God; and so live in love and peace (out of persecution) and
at last sit down in the Kingdom of glory, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

And therefore, and pray (that can) that ye enter not into temptations, for a
work of wonders, is the Lord my God farther a doing in, and upon the Earth.

And for all you Loftyons of the Earth that rebel against God, know that
except you repent, you shall likewise perrish, Luke 13. ver. 3. and 5.

And the Lord shall cut of all flattering lips (and) the tongue that speaks
proud things, Psalm. 12. ver. the 3. as he has hither to done. An Epistle to
the Reader.
LEt this serve as a warning and as an invitation of love, for all people
(great and small, high and lo, rich and poor, old and young, professors and
profane, to turn you all (that are not yet turned) unto the living God, for it
is brought forth (to public view) in its appointed season, and time, part
whereof, is already fullfilled; and the remainder, is fullfilling apace, ye in
our days, and age.

Watch therefore and pray (that can) that you enter not into temptation, for
the Lord God Almighty has not forgotten to be gracious, nor has his
compassions at any time, failed any of the sons and daughters of men, that
have turned unto him, and walked, and abode in his light, life and dostrine.

And because some of you (in England) etc. have misspent your precious time, in
making a mock of sin. And have made an ill use of your stewardships, in the
ill management of your affairs, so mercifully, friendly, and favorably put
into your hands, therefore, is this (most principally) directed unto you, to
let you know, that God is angry with you, and that he will (ere long) be
avenged on you, for you in England, has the Lord God began vvithall first: And
there will the Lord Jehovah make his name famous, and everlastingly Glorious;
also God has, and will work wonders there, as well as in other places, and
none shall let, or say what do thou.

Friends, be not angry, nor partial, who ever you be, that hear or read this;
And be not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6. ver. 7. But in the light of the
Lord Jesus Christ, see vvhither you have not almost sinned away your most
precious time, and trifled away the days of your visitation, in all manner of
excess: And for you that have not so spent your precious time, that Gods spirit
has not done striving in you, or with you (and you are not become as
Pharoahs.) then turn you unto the light, within you, and obey the voice of God
in you, for that is it, which will lead you into the living life, if you be
found faithful to God for that light in you, vvhither you know, or believe in
it, or no, is of God, and it is that in man, which shows man, good and
evil, and it will one day Judge you, and if you do but a little consider, it
will now show you what you are.

And what you have been, and then, if you, or any of you, that have been, and
are, abominable sinners, shall in the true light and sense of your conditions,
cleave unto God, and for sake your sins, and all your abominable doings, then
shall you soon know a curb to your lusts and wicked wills, and such of you, as
shall thus truly turn unto God, and follovv him, you shall quickly come to
know, feel, and see, a bridle to your Tongues, and what it is to be made
partakers of the glory of the Lord, in the Land of the living; for the living
be they, that shall praise thee o God, when the dead (though alive) and them
in the grave (though once never so mighty and great,) cannot, for the dead be
they that shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear, and obey
God, shall live forever and ever, world without End, Amen.

And now my Friends (every where) Arise from the dead; and come forth, and
sing, all ye that dwell in the dust, for God is Just, and the Avenger he is, of
the cause of the innocent, who has often times sealed the deliverance of his
people unto me; and I am sure that God is rode forth Conquerring, and to
Conquer, all the world over, and to make a short work in righteousness, upon
the Earth; And God it is, in Men, Women, and Children, (every where) that
calls them to a turning unto himself, and to repentance from dead works, and
to a seasing from sin, that so they may serve the living God in newness of
life, and vvalking uprightly before God, in true holiness, peace and
righteousness, all the days of their lives, which many have promised God so
to do, in the days of their distresses, but some of them, have forgotten
that, and so have sinned against light, as well now, as formerly, in running a
whoring after their own inventions, lusts, and immaginations etc. And thus they
have and do provoke the just and Jealous God, of Heaven and Earth, to wrath
against them, who is not slack in justice, and judgment.

And therefore I plainly, tell you, who ever you are, that your going on in
sin, have and will be your missery, and your not sea^sing from persecution,
superstition, sin, and Idolitry is that which have provoked the just and
jealous God, to wrath, judgment, and indignation against you, I say, God is
now, as well as of old, jealous of his name in the children of Men, and his
Glory. He will not give to graven immages, though many now adays so do, (mark
that.) For such do daily persecute and afflicting the children of the most high
God, (that God,) which hears and answers prayers, who has heard and
answered his people, and God the mighty Jehovah, has diverted, as well as
revealed many of your secret and bloody intents, and so he will do again, and
though you in England, and the potentates of the world, should yet make farther
confedracies, and decrees against the People and children of God (until Gods
decree, be accomplished) which you will do, yet know that God will, in spite,
of you, and all the powers, and Priests of the Earth: execute his judgments
written, which are herein declared.

And as for you the People and Powers in England etc. You have made strange
idols, and acted contrary to your oaths, vows, promises, protestations,
declarations. Letters, and proclamations, and thus have you hitherto daily
provoked God, by your neglecting to hear his voice, and in contemning the word
of God, which comes out of the mouths of his sons and daughters.

Now thus have many of you in England, already discovered your selves in making
Ship rack of faith, and of a good conscience, (which is a shame) for that will
not in the least help to save you, in the day of Gods vengance, nor will your
making havoc of the people, and flock of God, do you the least good in the
world, as to your preservation, and deliverance, when God shall make
inquisition for true, Royal, and innocent blood; Though many of you, may be
yet suffered to go on, in your Road, plotting, and designing, and others of you
persecuting, killing, and imlprisoning the children of light (a while longer)
yet know, that God is, and will be just, who will call every one to an account
for all his or their deeds done in the flesh, whither they be good or evil,
and for you that oppress the seed of God in your own particulars also in others
take heed of so doing, for in so doing, you have grieved persecuted, and
smitten the just one, for which, Gods controversy has been, and still is with
you (that so do) for such things have been, and are grievous in Gods sight. And
while you thus misuse your selves, and abuse others, you your selves defile the
Temples of God, within you; for which the Lord God Almighty (if you so
continue,) will you destroy, for it was written by the Prophets of old (as well
as now.) Them will God destroy that defiles the Temples of God.

Woe woe woe therefore will be unto such as so do, and now I am assured that
Heaven and earth shall pass away, before one Jot or tittle of Gods word, thus
revealed, and spoken in and to me shall fail, and as sure as the Lord lives,
there will that come upon many of you, in poor England etc. (of a sudden)
that repent not, and turn not unto the living God, that will amaze you, and
Astonish, and confound many elsewhere and do you all the world over, what you
can, deliverance must, and shall come, unto the remnant of Jacob; and this the
Eternal God, has sealed unto me, with much of the manner, way, and method
Thereof.

Therefore is this sent forth amongst you the sons and daughters of men, as
another invitation, and warning, Believing, and knowing, that some thing else
will (Ere long) follow, wherein the wickedness of the wicked in England. etc.
will be further discovered, and laid open, with a farther demonstration of the
mystery of things, and for what the judgments of God have been executed, and
are executing upon the inhabitants of the whole Earth. And in the mean time, be
still, all ye children of light, and mourners in Sion, for God sees, and
beholds your conditions, and will deliver you.

And now rejoice in God all you (that can) and in the Lord Jehovah, make melody
in your hearts, when you see this; I say again in the strength of the Lord
God, rejoice, for the Lord Jehovah is nigh at hand, to judgment, and for it, he
is worthy of all praise, glory, and honor, now hence forth and for evermore
Amen; let our conditions be what they will, out of sin.

Fear not therefore little flock: for it is our fathers good will and pleasure
to give unto us the Kingdom, that fades not away. That Kingdom, which cannot
be removed, its as mount Sion.

And as for the mockers, scorners, scoffers, persecuters, plotters, blood
suckers etc. a sad and lack day is come, and coming upon you, as well as a day
of redemption and deliverance (in God, for Gods poor despised and innocent
people) the fight whereof from God, has often times made me to rejoice, with
joy unspeakable, and full of glory. And to water my pillow (many a time) with
tears of joy, also the lamentation and mourning (from God) that I have been
made to take up, for thee, and for thine inhabitants (O poor England etc.) have
been more then I shall, at present perticulerly express, for some of your
destructions, will be little inferior unto that off Sodom. Gomoroah, and
Jerusalem.

Friends, you in England (not long ago,) were a field of blood since that, your
mercies have been great, ye as great, as ever any peoples, nations, Kings, or
Kingdoms was, and you in England may be said to be a people and land, flowing
with milk and honey; Though many of you, now there, have (viz) spent Gods
creatures, upon your lusts. etc.

O how evilly, and unjustly have you requited the Lord God for all his mercies,
to you wards, and how evilly have you (in England Ireland, and Scotland. (and
else where) entreated Gods poor and innocent people, let the God of heaven and
earth, and all sober people, (unto whom I do Appeal) be judge, yea and the
witness of God in your selves, and in the consciences of all men, yea in the
wickedest, and vildest men that are, for that, (if not seared), will speak. And
now take heed of lusting, revenge, lying, hardness of heart, and unbelief, for
that will carry you, the children of men, into confusion etc. and make you that
yield thereunto, to run, farther and farther, from the living God, into sin,
until you are seared, and wholly given over unto destruction, (Mark that,)

Again take heed all you professors, as well as profane, for there is ye a
great fault amongst you all: your ye, is not ye, nor is your nay, nay,
therefore is God angry with you, and displeased at your doings; ye at the evil
of your doings, and practices.

Friends, this is plain dealings with the Children of men, and Counsel for a
King, as well as for a Bagger, much of it, being from the Lord God, through a
poor Earthen vessel, and one that is a servant of Jehovah, who is Redeemed from
death, to life, by the power and Spirit of God, in the blood of Jesus: who
subscribes himself,

your Friend. Emmanuel Israelite. Which by Interpretation, is God with me, God
with us, in whom there is no guile.

1662. A letter of Comfort and consolation unto the whole flock of Christ,
wheresoever they be.
Dearly beloved:
A By de steadfast in mount Sion; for they that so do, shall never be removed,
for the Church in God, is the ground and pillar of truth: from whence I am
moved of the Lord God everlasting, to write a few lines unto you, And to the
whole Israel of God, and though I have a long time forborne it, and have as it
were strugled against it, yet my life and love is with you, and amongst you,
all the world over, and in the Eternal light and love of God, do I dearly
salute you all.

Friends, your lives in God, are a joy, and refreshing unto me, even in the
midest of all that unhumane, and unceasonable dealings, that you do, And we
may, yet farther meet with all, in this present evil earthly world, from
cruel, marciles, and unreasonable men, who have no mercy.

Therefore, O Lord God everlasting, keep us thy babes and lambs and preserve us
pure, that so our offerings unto thee (may be as they are, when thou call
for them) a continual svveet savor, for in thy life do we live, and in it, is
our unity.

O Lord our all is offered up unto thee. Thou art our Savior, Redeemer, and
deliverer, we are thy people and heritage, plead thou therefore (O Lord,)
thine own cause, which thou have engaged us in; we must die. And because
thou live, do we therefore live with and in thee, and so shall we do,
now and for ever and ever, world without end.

And now while we are here, and do carry about in us, a body of clay, let us
in the life, light, power, and strength of God, be ever doing our Fathers
will, and as much good on earth as we can; All flesh is as grass, and fades
away, our strength is to sit still; God is with us, and in us, of a truth,
and he will deliver us I am sure.

Look not out therefore any of you, O my dear friends, brethren, and sisters:
But sink down, sink down into the depth of the Lord God of life, and
therein stand steadfast, and plead in and with him, for as God has, so will
he asuredly here and answer (his people) and deliver us, and confound our
enemies, as he did of Old.

For the Prayers, Sighs, Groans, Suplications, Cries, Tears, and oppressions of
the poor, and innocent; have ofttengon up unto the Almighty, and they do daily
reach to heaven, and God is come, and coming down to deliver us, his people,
and to save us, in the midest of all our tribulations: God is risen to plead
our cause. Be therefore valiant in the Lord, strong, and of a good couradge; so
fare ye well

yours in truth: Emmanuel Israeliete.
Friends and Brethren, this enclosed have lain (some part of it) as a thing
lost, buried, and hid for some time (as you may see,) but it is now come to
lightagaine; And is sent unto you.

Therefore do with it, O Lord God of hosts, as seems good in thine own eyes,
thy seerets (O Lord of Hosts,) and God of Life, are with them that fear thee,
and thy wisdom is given unto thy chosen ones, to direct them; the Spirit of the
Almighty is free in his people, that walk and abide in his light; to counsel,
guide, lead, teach, and direct them, in all their ways and undertakings for
God, and as you find freedom in the Eternal Spirit; so let this be done with
all; Either to embrace it; or not, Friends, I Am and shall be (in the Lord) a
fellow feeler and sympathizer with you, in what so ever you do, and suffer, for
the Lord; for in God alone, is our victory, over all; in which victory, let us
stand, triumph and rejoice, and there in shall we trample on and tread under
foot, our greatest Enemies, ye Satan, the Father of them all.

And as it is written, so shall it be, the last enemy that shall be destroyed
is death, and when our work is done, we must go from hence, and we
shall be changed; (but not dye) and that in a moment and twinkling of an Eye.

And in the unchangable God, dearly beloved Brethren, do I dearly salute you,
and remain, your friend and Brother, in the unity of the eternal Spirit, and
life of God, where I shall for ever be and remain, your Friend, ye and a
Friend to publicans, and sinners.

poscript.

Friends Golden snares and bayts are laid, and laying for you to lift you up,
out of the deapth, Holiness, and wisdom, of the most high, even while the
flesh and the lusts therein, do fortify, and fit it self, for your bodily
destruction.

Abide still therefore in the dominion of God, and he will not only give you
to see, what is a doing on earth against you; but what he is also a doing in
heaven, for your preservation and deliverance, which is, and must be in God,
over all.

That being unto God a daily delight, and a joy, for God in us, is and will
be, (unto them that love us not) a burdensome stone that will fall upon our
enemies, and break them in pieces, and grind them to powder, without our
using of any Carnal weapons.

O live therefore the life that is everlasting, and abide in it, for therein
shall you Reign over all that is evil, for ever and ever.

And now let none make us afraid, for when any do let in fear, that brings
the righteous into snares.

Be therefore terrifyed in nothing, for you are Gods, and God is yours, to his
everlasting praise do I speak it, and rest.

Your Friend, Emmanuel Israelite.



A Letter for the persecuted Church in God, and for the tribulated flock of
Christ where soever they be, and for the mourners amongst them.
O Sons, and Daughters, of Sion, lift up your hearts, heads, and hands, unto
the holy Lord, God, Almighty, and in his pure and everlasting life, light,
power, and strength, cry aloud, day and night, unto the most high, for the
holy, and righteous God, is Jealous of his name in you, and blessed are all
they that are not offended in him, and are not at ease in Sion, while there are
any mourners therein.

And if it be so with any of you, as I know and believeit is, that many of you
are already, entered into your rest, as God is entered into his rest, then shall
your work, and Labor of love in the Lord not be in vain, but it will be
taken notice of, and accepted of by the Lord, and then shall you be more, and
oftener in the service of the living God, then ever, as I hope, and believe you
will be, and you (that can), for get not the Angel Gabriel, whose work and
service is not unknown; Oh watchmen, watchmen, what of the night, lets give
our God, no rest, until he has brought up all the mourners in Sion, unto a
continual rejoicing, in the one eternal, and everlasting unity, where there
is nothing but the unutterable Ioys of heaven, and that in the closest, hardest
and most dificult service (for the living God) that is, Oh my Friends, the
battle is ours all ready, only our Father is, will, and must be, supreme head
and Governor.

And therefore he will be sought unto (night and day) by the house of Israel,
and by every individual member therein, watch therefore in God, and in him,
let us always pray and ever more rejoice, and now take heed all ye my dear
Friends, Brethren, and Sisters, of negligence, and of slothfullnesse, in
business, and of drawing back from the service of the living God, into ways of
sin and perdition, for if any so do, the Lords soul will have no pleasure in
them; Therefore have a care my dear Friends and so run, that you may obtain,
for there is a victory (but it is in God) in which victory; there is a conquest
over sin, death, hell, and the grave, and a continual living in and an Abiding
with God, as in the beginning, ye and in a more unutterable, and glorious state
then Paradise, O my tongue cannot declare the glory, endlesness and
unutterablenesse thereof. The whole is the glory of God; and that through mercy
I have, and do enjoy a measure off, and had I the tongue of men, and Angels, I
were not able to declare the whole; its endless, and Fathomless, yea its past
finding out; But the babe of glory, (that's faithful) shall live in, and abide
in it, here, and for ever, world without end.

And in this life, is the glory, honor, and renown, that God will cloth his
withal and in time, he will make all his as the Lilly, which does neither
toil nor spin; but yet does grow up and Prosper; Oh what shall I say, my
tongue is not able to express the infinite glory that is in God for all them
that love, and fear, his holy and glorious name, and now the burden that I
have on me for the whole creations deliverance, is unknown for my bowels and
all that is within me, do earn after, ye after all them that do hunger and
thirst after the righteousness of the living God, that so they may all be
brought into the knowledge, and enjoyment of the one only true way, and into
that sheep fold (which is the light Christ) which leads into the life of
God, that's Eternal immortal, and everlasting, for God is the way, the truth,
and the life. also there is a care, in me that none be lost, and a sympathy
and fellow feeling in me of some, that through negligence etc. are apt to draw
back from the service of the living God, in the sense and feeling thereof, God
has inclined my heart, and moved me to write these Letters etc. and commanded
me to send them forth amongst you, the sons and daughters of men, that so
your rejoicing may be in the Lord, over all.

Friends, these are days of trials, and of Winnowings, and siftings, that so
the Temples of God may be made clean, and may no more be defiled, nor any
Monychangers suffered to dwell, or abide therein, for all that defiles the
Temples of God, must be whipped, and scourged out, for, that will God destroy,
yea all that lets must be taken out of the way, also all that works, or
makes a lie, for greedy gain, and filthy lucre; That so God may be (as he is)
all and in all, unto them that truly know, love, feel, and fear, his holy,
blessed, and glorious name.

Therefore my dear friends, Brethren, and Sisters, and all others that would
be accounted Christians, learn to know, and do the will of God, which is
Sanctification in the cross, unto all that is not of God.

And now let all such as profess themselves to be wisdoms children, walk in the
light, in all things, as he (to wit) Christ, is in the light, that so you may
all Justify wisdom, and thereby, manifest your selves to be the children of
the most high, in deed, and in truth, Christians indeed, like God, and Christ.

Then shall the mouth of iniquity be stopped, and you shall see, feel, and know
God, exalted, and exalting himself in you, over all that is humane, and setting
himself in you, upon the top of all mountains; And then shall you know, feel,
and see, God reigning, and ruling in, and over you, his temples (not made with
hands) for ever and ever, also you shall then know him to lead, guide, govern,
teach, and direct you, in every thing you do; distinct, from Satan, and then
Satan's works will be known unto you, as they are unto God; a Loathing, and an
Abomination.

And though as yet, some of you have not known, witnessed, nor felt God, so to
reign and rule etc. in and over you, yet God will, in patience posess your
souls; Therefore in the light of God, (say I, again) wait and be still, that
at all times you may know, and hear the voice of God in you, from Satan's; and
feel the power of God in you, that resists evil, and the Appearances, and
motiones, thereof, for that only, will make the evil one to fly; It Is God
Emmanuel, God with, and in us.

Then shall you be kept alive in God, and in perfect peace whose minds are
stayed on thee, O God of life light, strengh, power, and glory, ye in that
peace (and dominion over all deceit) that passes all understanding, which will
continually keep your hearts and minds alive, in the knowledge and love of
God, Amen. so fare ye well.

This Letter was written the latter end of the Sixth month 1662. and sent from
far; with the rest of these things into England. From him that's yours, in him
that's ever lasting, God blessed for ever and ever, world without end, Amen.
Emmanuel Israelite, The name of the Lord (is now, as well as of old) a strong
Tower, the Righteous fly into it, and are safe.

A Few Lines more for thee O England, and for thy lofty ones in thee, and for
all others, of thine inhabitants, also for the inhabitants of the whole Earth.
Friends.
THe Lord God Almighty, has in these latter days, raised up Prophets as of
Old, to tell you, and to foretell you, what have, and will befall you, as it
has befallen them, that went before you, yet many of you that are now alive,
(and in power) will not hear, nor believe them, no more then they would, that
went before you, nor will you obey the word of the living God, nor hearken
too, nor hear his voice, as you ought to do, but you will harden your hearts,
as they of Old did (in the wilderness,) when your Fathers tempted him.

But because many of you now in England, and Elsewhere, will not believe the
word of the Lord, out of the mouths; of his servants and Prophets; but are
Curious and unbelieving, what the Prophets and servants of the Lord, have
already said unto you, should come.

Therefore has the Lord God Almighty suffered signs, miracles, and wonders,
upon the Earth, and in the Air, both lying ones, and true, and all this is to
convince you, that are unbelievers, of the great Judgments of the Lord God,
that are nigh at hand, come, and coming, amongst, and upon you the Inhabitants
of the Earth.

And as Nebuchadnezzer, Belshazzer, and Darius, Kings of Babylon did, even so
have some great ones amongst you in England done (viz.) sent for Astrologers,
Southsayers, Socerers, and Magitians, Wisemen etc. to come unto you, commanding
them, to tell you the meaning of those strange, and wonderful Appearances, and
Apparitions that have been seen (by many), upon the Earth, and in the Air, in
England, and Wiles, and Elsewhere; But when the Magitians, Southsayers,
Socerers, and Astrologers, Wisemen, (so called) could not tell these Kings the
meaning of those wonderful things, that had then appeared, though they were
sent for, on purpose to tell them, the meaning, and interpretation of their
Visions and Dreams, also to read and interpret, the strange vvritting, that
had appeared, and to tell them the meaning thereof; But when those Wisemen
that the King sent for, could not Read the writting, nor tell King
Nebuchadnezzar the interpretation of his Visions and Dreams.

Then was the Prophet Daniel spoken of, after which, the King commanded the
Captain to fetch Daniel unto him, and when Daniel came before the King
Nebuchadnezzar, then said the King, thou art greatly beloved of God, tell me
therefore, (if thou can,) the meaning and interpretation of those Dreams and
Visions of the night, which haveappeared unto me, also read the writting, and
tell me the meaning thereof.

Now (mark) Daniel was not hasty to answer the King in these things; nor was
he, though a Prophet of God and filled with the Spirit of the holy God) swift
in speaking unto this great King, nor did the Prophet, when he did speak, tell
the King any thing, but the truth, and that which God gave him a perfect and
clear sight of, and then, with holy booldness (in no small authority) did
Daniel tell the King, the meaning and the interpretation of the whole matter.

Farther Daniel spoke of great and wonderful things that God had then given
him to behold and see; But neither the King, councellers, priests, not subjects
understood him, nor do very many unto this day;

This Prophet of God, was then had in great Esteem by the King, for that of God
which was manifested, by him, in so much that Darius highly promoted, and
greatly Esteemed him; and so did all save the evell and wicked Priests,
Counselors, and People, such wicked ones, as had before instigated King
Nebuchadnezzer, to throw Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, into the fiery
furnace, only for their speaking the truth unto all, (to wit) to the People,
Priests, Counselors, and Kings;

Now take notice and see; where any, of those sad things had ever come upon
those great Kings of Babylon; had they not suffered the Children of the most
high God, to have been so wickedly abused, as they were;

But God is just, and a recompeneer of every one according to his, or their
deeds done in the flesh; whither they be good or evil, for Kings or Emperors
must, not think to escape the just hand of God, though they may be above law,
and out of the reach of man.

And a just recompense of reward; ye an exemplary one, does God usually render
unto every man that turns not to him (in time) and such was Belshazzars
reward, for while he was Drinking wine in Booles, to the confusion of the God
of the children of light, his Kingdom was taken from him, (mark that) And
after him, succeeded King Darius, who had Daniel the Prophet in very great
Esteem, yet how wickedly did, Darius and his evil counselors Act, in making a
Law, that none should (for forty days pray, for any thing) save unto the King,
and unto this decree, did Darius unwisely sign, and when he had so
inconsidratly signed, that Law, and decree, (Mark and see) what followed, They
threvv Daniel the Prophet into the Lions Den, only for praying unto the God of
light.

And has not this been the wicked practices of the Kings, Counsels, priests,
and powers of the Earth, unto this day; Yes, yes. it has.

And no sooner at any time, when light has sprang up, and broke forth, and God
raised up Prophets and People unto himself, then the powers of the Earth, both
Kings Priests and Rulors, ye and soldiers too; have combyned together, and
taken counsel, of the evil one, and one of another, and thereupon they have
made decrees and laws, to throw in to holes, and dens, and to stone, kill,
burn, hang, frye, broile, banish, and to destroy the Prophets, ye the true
Prophets, children of light, who have not provesied, lies in the Name of Jesus
(but truth,) nor have they divined for money, nor preached for hire, nor for
filthy Luker and Gain, as persecutors, and bloodsuckers, belly-gods, and blind
guides, do use to do. Who do greedily seek at this very day and time, to
devour the flock of Christ; ye the true and lively flock and followers of God
and Christ.

Now is there not very great need, and necessity, that you the people, and
powers of the Earth, should be put in mind of these things;

Least you should post altogether into blood, misery, and confusion, and many
of you go headlong to Hell; for such Priest, such a -- and People.

Be therefore warned and entreated once more, you that Rule over men, to be
just, loving, tender, kind, and merciful; for the merciful, shall find mercy,
and they that rule over men, should, and ought to be just, and for the praise
of them that do well, and for the punishment of evil doers; least God smite
you with his severe rod, and judgments, before you are willing, or are
prepared for it.

And now you that rule for God, labor to feel the blessing, in well doing; and
to see how many have suffered before your faces, for evil doing, and you that
are in adversity, as well as they that are in prosperity, Consider. I beseech
you, what God requires at your hands; also what he is now doing upon the Earth.

O that it might not be laid any more to your charge (you mighty and powerful
men) the neglecting of your duties, when you have had power enough in your
hands to do good, that then you have not done it. (But evil,) and thus evilly
have yourequited God for all his kindness, love and mercies, goodness, and good
will, toward you.

Friends, have not some in these days bin beaten with many stripes, and how
can you your selves think to escape the hand, and just Judgments of the Lord
God; sure you cannot Escape them. for Gods hand is stretching out against you

Therefore all ye children of men, learn to know that God is good to Israel,
and unto them that are of a pure and upright heart, for a vvitness, ye a
svvife vvitness he is, and will be, against the evil ones Especially against
the lofty ones of the Earth, that work iniquity.

And now unto you, O People, Priests, Kings, and Rulers, that have been in
England within this 20 years last past, and are now there.

Query, Whither you have not found that to be true, which the Prophets have
spoken off, and foretold you, what would come.

And as sure as that is come, which is already past, so sure will the
remainder of this Prophesy, be fullfilled, and Heaven and Earth shall pass
away before one Jot or tittle of these things shall fail; for such has the
Lord God Almighty raised upin the midest of you, in these latter days, that
have told you, and fore told you (from God) what would come, and what is
coming amongst you, and upon you, and out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings, will God perfect his prays, for through such, has the Lord God
Almighty often spoken, to the former Powers, Priests, and People, of England,
etc. As well as unto you; And unto you the Powers, Priests, and People, of
Eng. (that now are) has God spoken these things, that are come, and coming,
upon you, and whilst Gods judgments are upon the earth, the inhabitants
thereof, should, and ought, to learn righteousness; for the Lord God has sent
you in this ages, as well as them in other ages, many warnings by his
servants the Prophets, though you the Priests, Powers, and People of the Earth,
have not heeded them as you ought to do (mark that) as well as what
follovveth.

For now the Father of faithfulness, (God) has made, and is making good his
word spoken by his Prophets of Old, (to wit) that old Men should dream
dreams, also that young men should see visions, and that God would in the
latter days, power forth his Spirit abundantly upon his Sons and
Daughters, and enable, both Sons and hand-Mayds, to Prophesic, speak, and
write, also that some in seeing, should not see, and in hearing, they should
not understand, and as God the Father of faithfullnes, has spoken, so has he
made good his word spoken in all ages, and as God did of old speak in and unto
his servants the Prophets, even so has, and did he speak, in and tome, (at
sundry places,) and at several times in this latter age (in these particulers)
to wit, in speaking to, and in foreshewing me, the dovvnfall of the old King of
England, Charles the First, and many great ones more, the Rice and Fall of the
Cromwels, the ruin of the Parliament and Army telling them how often God
would have gathered them to himself; even as a Henn gathers her chickings,
but they would not.

Now mark and see what follovved thereupon, nothing say I, but destruction.

And as the Highpriests, Seribes and Pharisees did, even so have some latly
done in England, I say they have given up the innocent People of God, into the
hands of Rulers, and rude People, to be hardly dealt with all.

Such were they that Crucified and killed Christ, as had joined them selves
unto idols, and were vvedded there unto, and resolved they were, to go on in
there idolletry and will worship, until God came down with his severe
judgments upon them.

And though the wicked may do wickedly for a while, in laboring to keep
the ignorant, and simple People in sin, superstition and idolletry, ye and in
blindness and darkness, etc. Yet know that God will not allvvays be so mocked.

Therefore friends take heed all you that drive on so Iehu-like, in persecuting
the People and Children of God: for it was once written from the Spirit of
the holy God, that the Rod of the wicked should not all vvayes rest upon the
back of the righteous, (mark that.)

For whosoever they be that have yet (in this latter age) gone about to Lord
it over Gods heritage, and thereupon, have persecuted and smitten the Babes,
Lambs, and little ones, Children of Light, and they that have thereby had
thoughts to weary out the Saints and children of the most High God, they have
hither to been broken, and have broken one another to pieces, and many of them
that so did, are already ground to powder.

O wicked Generation of vipers, that have in all ages thus risen up against
God, and his power, life, light, and truth, made manifest in Gods people, have
you not been often warned to fly from the wrath to come, (by the Prophets,)
and have you not been desired to decist from your bloody and cruel, intentions,
and from the evil of your vvays, in killing and Crucifiing the Lord of life,
light, and glory, a fresh, and of putting him to open shame, again, and again
in his People, and have you not been warned to fly from such abominations as
these; and to seek reconciliation with God, and Man, ye with God and good men,
while you have a day and time, and not to destroy such as fear the Lord; but
it seems you will not stay your hearts in God, nor restrain your hands from
blood; cruelty, perfecution and so forth: But you will fight against the
witness of God, in your selves, and others, and so forget the sure mercies of
David; until the judgments of the Lord God almighty overtake you, again.

Friends, have not you the Backsliders in heart, every where, been the greatest
persecutors, you that of old promised better things then these, and have not
you the Backsliders in heart been filled with your own ways; and have you not
often times been confused and (as it were) confounded, with the wicked devices
of your own hearts, in almost every thing, and have you in these last 20 years
Revolutions learned no more, no better things then these, have your
persecutions and sufferings taught yo^u no more good yet, what think you, will
become of you, while you are thus found fighters against God; and the mercies
that you have had; what vvil become of you that think to eat up Gods children
like Bread, and to scatter, and drive, his flock upon the Mountains by your
vvolfuish actions toward them, as if they were not creatures of Gods own
making, or your fellow creatures.

Give over your persecution in time I pray you, least (at last) you dig a pit,
and be buried therein your selves; And now O Lord pass by the innocent blood
that has been already spilt in poor Ireland, England, and Scotland, O how
did the bloody Papists at the first Rip up the poor Protestant Women great
with child, in many places in poor Ireland, and all from the instigation of
satan and the Blood-sucking Priests; who pretended for a moderate Episcopal
Clergy there, such were they that had a hand in that Bloody Massacre, at the
beginning of the late War in that place, and in Englands former, and latter
Martyrdoms.

Be now therefore convinced of your sins in time, and learn to know that God
(...) have the hearts of Kings as well as Rulers and People, in his own
hands. Therefore O Lord of Hosts turn the hearts of Kings as well Rulers and
People if it be thy will, that so they may in time, come and stoop unto they
Septer, for all the powers on Earth must come and bring their glory and honor
unto God, or else they will Perish. For ever and ever.

For now the hand of the Lord God Almighty is stretched forth over all, and
none can hinder God, from making good his own decree, revealed and sealed
unto me, (which in the General is) that he will break all the Kingdoms, and
People of the Earth in pieces, that will not have Christ to Rule in and over
them; the mouth of the Lord off Hosts has spoken it unto me.

O Remember, remember, therefore all ye Sons and Daughters of men, ye that
drink Wine in Boules; and go on in your forgetfullness of God and his mercies,
you that sport your selves in your own lusts, ye in the lust of your minds,
the lust of the Eye, and the pride of life, which is the flesh, the World and
the devil, I say remember that Tophat was prepared of old for such, ye for
the Rebellious and disobedient, though they were never so mighty and great; and
now learn to know that God the Lord of Hosts, is no respector of Persons, and
for Bishops, that are not as the Bishops, spoken off in the Scriptures of truth
(were) They are a loathing and an abomination unto God, for such God has
already spevved out of his mouth, and so will he do again.

And for all you that are now in prosperity, take heed, least that glory you
now have, be stained again, by your slaying more of Gods poor Babes, and
Lambs, and Sheep, of our Fathers pasture.

O that ever fullness of bread, and plenty, should cause great men so to forget
God; and that ever Gods goodness and mercy, should so puff up men; as it has
now in this generation done, many who not long ago, had scarce Bread to eat,
or Garments to put on.

Verily friends, whosoever you be, that will not turn to the light, and
living God, but will go on in your fins, 'and abide in your filthiness, both
of Flesh and Spirit, God will judge you, and at last destroy you.

Youridols, Temples, cannot, nor shall (...) you: the decree of God is gone
forth and sealed against such as worship idols, and will not turn unto him.

And for you that will, and do but truly turn from the evil of your vvays,
and come unto God, God will love and embrace you, in his everlasting arms of
kindness, and cover you as with a garment, and then you shall by little and
little, see the glory of God in the Land of the living, and perhaps you shall,
as others have done before you, see Gods wonders in the deep, for so did King
David, who after his great abominations, and turning unto God again, and so
have some others done after there return unto God their maker, insomuch that
their whole lives have been lives of hearty sorrow, and of everlasting praises.
And such can never sufficiently nor enough admire God; and as David says in
the 107. Psalm. so say I.

O That the Children of men would but admire God for his vvonderfull works,
done unto (and amongst) the Children of men. And in the conclusion of that
Psalm, the writer thereof says. Who so is wise, let them observe these
things, and they shall see the loving kindness of the Lord, And so say I;
though they be Kings. And when God shall raise up such a King to bear rule
amongst any people; let it be where it will, the Lord God of heaven and earth
will bless and prosper such a one, while he shall faithfully continue and abide
in God, and then all his works and undertakeings (for God on Earth) shall
prosper, and such a King shall be blessed for ever and ever.

And then none can nor shall make such a one afraid, for if he does well, who
then shall harm him, but if he does evil, (while he so does) sin will
continue, and lie at his door; ye at Kings doors, as well as at others.

For such as we sovve, such usually do we reap, ye some times double and what
measure men meet, it is usualy measured unto them again.

Therefore, leave off all your Idoll-Gods for shame, all ye Kings and pretended
Christians, leave of say I, all you High priests your superstitions,
Ceremonies, Surplisces, Pipes, singing-boyes, and sursingles, for they are all
a loathing, and an abomination unto God, plain down right Popery against which
the vvitness of God is gone forth.

And now take heed, I pray and beseech all you Kings, Priests and People of the
Earth (for the Lord sake,) of praying, or finging out of the Spirit of God; for
that is but a deceiving of your selves, and others; that is a mocking of God,
and whither you see it, or believe it, or no, it is so, and where you will hear
or forbear, it is all a case; for Gods word and witness is, true and it will
(in his own time) prove so; and you the powers of the Farth shall assuredly
know, and feel it, so to be.

And for you that scoff at the light, you Ignorantly, or knowingly, scoff at
that which; you live and move by, for by the light all men have their moving
living and being, even while they dvvell in darkness, and in the shadovv of
death, and do do the deceivers work, upon the Earth, for light has shined in
darkness but the darkness comprehends it not.

Take heed therefore and bevvare of Gods heavy judgments, all you that laugh
and scoff, at Gods people (that walk in God, and are turned to the light,)
and at their praying in the Spirit, or by the spirit, for such their have been,
and now are, that have been, and are, whole days in the Spirit, ye and
nights too, whom the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, has heard and ansvvered.
And though you the powers of the Earth, should combine altogether, and make
never so many decrees against such a praying People as Daniel the Prophet. etc.
was, yet they will (while they have life) pray; as Daniel did, and some
such, do certainly know, that God will at last break all your cords in
sunder, and in the mean time preserve them.

And now while you the powers of the Earth do make such laws and decrees
against Gods, praying Spirit, in man: the mouth of the Lord of Hosts will be
against you, I say in God, that God has determined that his People must, and
shall pray unto him in the Spirit, ye and worship him in the Spirit, and
honor him, and all men in the Spirit; for God himself is head over all, ye
over all principallities, and powers, and Spiritual wickedness in high
places, and thus God has, and will rebuke Kings for his own and Peoples
sake: the mouth of the Lord of Hosts, has spoken it.

And now the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our Father,
has required commanded, and in abled us, (...) to pray against Spiritual
wickedness in high places, and for all them that are in Authority over us,
that so (under them) we may live a godly and peaceable life, which we the
People of God do, and shall do.

Farther, I am sure that God has now made some of his People watchmen in
Israel, whom he has commanded, and required to give him no rest, until he
has made Jerusalem the praise of the whole Earth: And this the Lord our
righteousness, who is life, light, power, and glory: has raised up Prophets,
and children, unto himself to pray unto him in the spirit, more or less day
and night, for the accomplishment of these things, and for the fullfilling of
his word, and decrecrevealed, spoken and promised unto us, that so Kings might
become Nurssing Fathers, and Queens Nurssing Mothers, unto the Saints and
People of God, for sure I am, that such Kings and Rulers (while on Earth)
would be for the praise of them that do well, and for the punishment, of such
as do evil, I say, such as do inqiuity, and spend Gods good creatures in
drunkeness, and in all manner of excess of riot, God will punish, though they
be never so great, for usualy such do studdie on their Beds of down, and in
other places, how they may feed the delight of their eyes the lust of their
minds and pride of there lifs, even to the maintaining of the pride of life, in all manner of vvhordoms, both Spiritual, and carnal: the which (I am sure,)
God is highly displeased at, and greatly against, and for such doings
together, with the blood of the Saints.

(...) our God has yet a greater controversy with the sons, and daughters of
men, then ever, the dreadfullness and terribleness thereof, when (in God) I
have beheld it, has often times made me to tremble, ye and to fall down
before his holy presence, and to worship his holy name, and to implore, and
humbly to beg and beseech him, that he would pass such great iniquites by, if
it were his will. But I find no answer as yet from God, that he will so
do, but I see the hand and judgments of the great God, still stretched out, and
hasting over all the Inhabitants of the Earth.

And as for thee, O England, with thy great Cities and Towns likned have they
been unto me, to great and little Babylon.

I say unto you that have slain, misused, and often abused, and evilly (...)
many of Gods dear People, his servants, and Prophets, yea his true Prophets,
and children of the light, I say unto you, you have often times thrown many of
them into Prisons, Holes, and Dungeons where wicked persons have been, who
have misused the inocent, even unto Death, and many have been killed by reason
of such ill usage.

And have not you, or some of you the Highpriests, Kings, and Rulers of the
Earth, been the cause of all your own, and the people misseries in the sheding
of innocent blood, I do not mean that which you have sheed in the way you
call justice, and though you have already destroyed many in that way, and
thereby you have thought to have wearyed out the Saints of the most high, the
which you can never do, for God my God, has other ways decreed, and
determined it.

And though you in England in your great Cities, (to wit) in London, Exetor,
Sarum Alies Salisbury, Bristol, Worcester, Norwich, Rochester, Canterbury,
Linckolne, York, etc. And you in the rest of your great and little Towns, I
say, though you and the greatest part of your inhabitants, daily do despite
unto the Spirit of God in man, and thus grieve the Holy one of Israel, and
thereby plainly manifest whose servants you are, for whose servants you are,
him do you obey, and so you forget, that the wages of sin is Death; I say
though you forget God, yet God will not forget you, for he will revvard every
man according to his works.

O what then can you that are found in so great iniquity Expect (in this the
day of Gods visitation) I say what can you think of: or expect for a requital
other then the heavy and dreadful judgments of God, upon you verily I know
not.

And as for you in England with the greatest part of your Inhabitants: you are
poor and miserable, yea and great finners against light, for which the Lord
Jehovah, has yet a greater controversy with you, then ever.

Therefore consider and take this good counsel which follows, without goiing
unto, your Astrologers, Southsayers, Socerers, or Magitions ( Wisemen so
accounted.) I say in stead of going unto them, go unto God, who is light,
which makes all things, manifest, and then if you do but stand still a while
in Gods light; you shall see light, also you shall know, see and feel, that
this good counsel comes from Jehovah, through a poor servant of Gods, for
all your good, if evil be not all together predominate in you, and deceit
wholly become yo^ur Lord and Master, then that will make you run farther and
farther from God, until you perish (mark that) as well as what follows.

There will that come upon you in England of a sudden, you that cease not
spedily from sin; and turn not unto the living God; I say there will that come
amongst, and upon you (of a sudden) that will amaze terrify and confound many
of the great and mighty together with many others of the Inhabitants, a little
time more (in comparison) will manifest it.

Murmur not therefore ye sons and daughters of men, but comfort ye one another
in the Lord that can: for you in England, know not as yet how to avoid your
falling into great coufusion, persecution, Blood, and missery; O England thou
with thine Inhabitants, vvilt fall together by the ears, and then ye will
rend, tear, and devour one another, like so many beasts of prey: ye, like so
many vvild Bores of the Forest, will you stricke at one another.

And the harmless and innocent ones amongst you, you will cut from off the
Earth, if the Lord permit, at least as many of them as you judge, or think do
stand in your way, such will you bannish, hale to prison or otherwise
persecute, you thinking thereby, to weary them out that God has already
raised up to be Saints of the most high, who do now vvitness against such
abominations as comes from him that delights to make desolate the People of
God.

And as for thee, O King of England thou vvilt be hardly put to it, to escape,
for in the light of the Lord, I have seen them nigh thee several times, that
will be the cause of thy ruin, if not thy utter destruction, and the time
will come, that thou vvilt not know what to do, nor vvhither to go, also
thou shall in words repent, and say that it had been better for thee that thou
had never been born, (thy misseries will be such) then for thee to have
done, and suffered that to be done, which is already past.

And that which thou vvilt yet farther suffer, and may be accessory to the
doing off, will help forvvard thy missery and Calamnity, for many there are,
that will be by thy consent and permission, taken away from the evil to
come, by untimely Death, and all this vvil be for the fullfilling of Gods
decree, revealed, and made manifest, unto me,

But thy end in it O Man, is not good, the which is well known to the Almighty,
and unto some of his beloved ones, who have been commanded, and required from
God, to signify the substance of these things unto thee, and unto the
inhabitants of the whole Earth,

Friends, these things, have been wonderfully revealed and made manifest unto
me; from the Lord God Almighty, in so much, that I have (often times) been
made to tremble before the living God, in the seeing and beholding thereof.

And Verily true it is, the Lord God Almighty is just in bringing thee, O King
of England, with others in, over your enemies; it being according to his
revealed word in and unto me; long before it came to pass.

And as true it is, that God the Lord of Hoasts, is a rewarder of every man
according to his, or there works and deeds, done in the flesh, wheither they
be good or evell.

And wheither can thou O Man, O King, fly from the presence of the Lord God
Almighty, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings;

Verelie I know not vvheither thou can fly from the presence of the great
God, for fly whethersoever thou will; God will follovv thee with his
judgments, until the measure of thine iniquities are full; This have I seen,
and the mouth of the Lord has spoken it unto me.

Forther I have (in the light of God,) seen terrible and dreadful things that
shall come upon the Earth, some of which are not as yet lavvfull for me to
utter, but what is lavvfull and laid upon me to signify unto thee and unto
the children of men, I have and shall freely do it (mark therefore what
follows.) I have often times seen acertain number of men, nigh thee, O King
of England, I say, I have certainly seen a number of men (nigh thee O King)
several times in consultation, counselling thee, to do, the things that are
not good; neither in the sight of God, or man (viz) consulting together, how
they, (with thee) might rid thy Territories and Dominions (so called,) of an
innocent harmeles quiet peacable people, that hurt you not, nor will they harm
any body; Though the bloody minded of all sorrs, do go about to make thee (O
King) and others, believe, other ways of us.

But my God, will Ere long, revvard all such, with the evell of there own
doings;

For there will yet be greater tribulations upon the Earth, then ever.

Also I have (in the light of the Lord) seen great Lightnings and Thunders that
shall be; the tirribleness thereof, shall make both men and beasts afraid,
insomuch that they shall not know what to do, nor whither to go to hide
themselves from the presence of the Almighty.

I have also seen other dreadful and tirrible sights, which shall be seen upon
the Earth; such things when they come, as will amaze terrify and confound many
of them that believe not in the living God.

For Signs and Wonders there must be (for a while) that so the unbelievers may
believe, and know, that Gods Word is true, which he has spoken in these last
days, by his Servants and Prophets;

Now in this Book is part of Englands dome, (to come) Demonstrated.

Therefore do I once more according to the Requirings of God made manifest, in
and unto me; beseech you the Powers and People of that place, not to harden
your hearts any longer; least more of you become as Pharoahs.

And do not you blind guids of the Earth, Hirelings of any sort, go about any
longer, to make your Masters and People believe that there are no true Prophets
now upon the Earth, for in your vvillfullness, darkness blindness and
ignorance of God, and of his mysteries, (Christ being unto you a mystery) I
say in your ignorance and blind Zeal, you have hitherto gone about, to make both
the Powers and People of the Earth, believe a lie, and you have insenced both
the People and Powers of the Earth, against the Children of Light, Servants
and Prophets of God, whom God has, raised up; to bear testamony unto his name
and truth, as it was in the beginning, and it would have been better for you,
if you had not so done, sure I am if the Testamony of Jesus, be the spirit of
Prophecy, as I both know and believe it is: Then God has many true Prophets
now upon the Earth, who have and do in Gods Name, Authority Power and
Strength, Prophecy; yea, and they have foretold you, the People, Priests, and
Powers of England etc. what would come upon you, part whereof is already come
to pass, and the remainder is coming, and such dare not Preach Lies in the
Name of God and Christ, as the false Christians, blind Guides, and Hirelings of
the Earth do, who Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and so Ride both
Powers, and People, even to Death.

And now, had not the Lord God Almighty, given such his servants (...) of
things to come, they durst not have so spoken, and vvrote, as they have: Now
would the former King, Powers, Priests, and People of England, but have
believed, that which was said unto them from God, by his servants, who were
Enabled both to speak and write unto them: sure there had been no more Innocent
blood spilt, after the first War in England was ended, but they would not
believe, nor take council of God, by his Children, but in stead thereof, they
(to wit) the greatest and vvisest of them, would do as many Great Mighty,
Wise, and Noble, now do, laugh, jere, and scoff at them, which God had
enabled, and commanded to speak to them, who (from God) did positively
foretell them, of their ruin and destruction, as they do of yours now, if
you repent not, and turn not unto God.

For there will yet be greater trouble upon the Earth then ever was.

Also there will be Earthquakes in some places of the World, that will
swallow up many, if not whole Countries. Farther there will be a Nation
born in a day.

These things has the Almighty God given me, a perfect and clear fight off, as
if they were already past: with many more, which as yet I have no Authority
nor command from on High, to publish, but this my God and Father, has already
assured me, that whatsoever (of it) shall make for his Glory, and for his
Peoples good, he will (in his own time) give me power, and strength, to
declare it, and for that which does particularly concern some men, I shall in
Gods time, faithfully signify it unto them.

Now blessed are the Merciful, for they shall find Mercy, in the day (which
is nigh at hand) when God will pour forth the Vials of his wrath, judgment,
and Indignation, upon the disobedient, for Gods determination, is so to do,
also God is staining the Glory of all flesh, that so none may glory any more in
the flesh, but in the Lord aloan, who is Head over all.

Now judgment is not only begun at the House of Go^d, but it is gone and going
forth against Satan, and his Instruments, every where, and all such as are
found in Rebellion, and Disobedience against God, shall have no true comfort,
rebellion against God, being as the sin of witchcraft, say for all such as
shall be found in this iniquity of rebellion against God, and in truth and
peace-breaking, and in blood-guiltiness, persecution, sin superstion and
Idolitry, shall have but little quiet, for God has determined vvonderfull
things to be.

And these things herein (called Englands dome) has been from God often times
signified unto me, to be that, which will surely come upon Englands
Inhabitants, so sure will they come, as that which is already past: for none
shall hinder, the decree of God.

Now when the Lord God Almighty first began to open these things unto me,
great were his mercies, and infinite was his loving kindness in and unto me,
insomuch that if I had the tongue of men and Angels, I were not able to express
and declare it, I being but as a child, and one as with a stamering tongue,
has in the strength of my God (...) made manifest what God has (at present)
required at my hands, this being written from the requirings of God, the latter
end of the year, 1661. I say, this called Englands dome, was then written,
but the other things were written at other times.

Now the mighty vvonderfull and powerful appearances of the Lord God of
Wisdom, were such in and unto me, for days and nights that had not God in his
mercy and goodness toward me, borne up my Spirits, I had then laid down the
body, for when God thus opened and revealed these things in and unto me, and
gave me thus to behold and see his great and Glorious presence, I then had a
clear sight of all these things herein mentioned, and then, even then, I
beheld and savv dreadful and terible things that the wicked of the Earth,
should in a little time more be found doing of, against the Godly, further the
Bloodsheding, misery, Calamity and confusion, that in the light of God I then
savv coming, not only, in and upon poor England, but else where; would make
the stoutest Kings, Princes, Priests and People, of the Earth, there hearts to
tremble and quake, to behold and see it, as I have done; And this sound of the
Spirit of God, have often passed through me. O what would I do to save this
people.

So that through mercy I can truly say, and testify to the whole world, that
God is good to Israel, and unto them that obey him and are of a pure and
upright heart, also that this Gods wonderful dealings with me, is not for
naught, for in the midst and deapth of all our tribulations, sufferings, and
aflictions, that we the People of God, and sheep of our Fathers pasture, may
yet meet with all, I say from God, that in the hight of all our enemies fury
toward us, God the Lord of Host, will deliver us his poor innocent, and
oppressed ones that abide and trust in him, these things has my God opened and
perfectly shevven unto me, again and again, yea, and sealed them unto, and in
me, to the end, that I should publish them, unto the sons and daughters of men,
that so all the People of God, on earth, may be comforted, ye and be made to
abide steadfast and unmovable, allvvays abounding in the work, and service of
God in the midst of our greatest sufferings.

And now while the wicked do walk on every side, and the vildest of men
are exalted, let us the People of God, be ever more found doing our Fathers
will one Earth, as it is in Heaven, and as much good to our enemies, as we
can, for in our so doing, our God and Father will be well pleased with us,
and he will delight himself in us, to the perfecting of his praise for us and
by us.

And for all you Kings, Princes, Rulers, Priests, People, and Powers of the
Earth and of the Earthly mind, Flatter not your selves any longer, and suffer
not your selves to be deceived and flatred withal, and fauned upon, by your
high Priest and blind guids, for such do but sevv pillows of down under you,
which will deceive both you and them at last, I say deceive not your selves,
nor them that you have power and authority over. But turn you unto the light
of God, while you have a day and time, and ceace from sin, you little and
lofty ones of the Earth, and do good, and be ye all found in Moderation, and
in the works of holiness rightousnes peace and truth, for the Lords sake, other
vvayes it will go very hard with you all, I do assure you.

And now whosoever you be, that shall be found in the path of righteousness
peace and truth, and in well doing, also in moderation, it may then be truly
hoped, that such people do know that the Lord God Almighty is nigh at hand to
judgment for sin.

And for all you Kings, Rulers and people, that shallbe found in the exercise
of the things that are good, you shall have true comfort, therein, and the
trial of your faith and patience in your so doing, will be of much more
comfort unto you, then all your Earthly crowns, yea then al your gold and
honor that perishes, now that true honor which comes from above is first
pure and then peacable, it is also gentle and easy to be entreated, it is also
full of love, and good works, and what not, that is of good and of honest
report, and sure I am, that all they that live in this moderation, be they
Kings, or others, they must needs know good from evil, and avoid the one, and
love the other; And now friends did you but know who it was that came from
Bozero with his Garments rouled in blood; sure you would tremble, for he it is
that is come, and coming to judge the Earth: yea to judge both the quick and
dead; or did you but consider, as well as know, that some men for sheding of
innocent blood, have already paid dear; you would then seace from blood, and
never do iniquity more.

Now do you not know that blood is a crying sin, and that the cry thereof,
has often reached unto Heaven; And how God remembers it, and that he will
be avenged thereof.

Have you forgotten that God judges amongst the Gods, and do you not know,
for what God has cast down some, and raised up others, and how he gives
the Kingdoms of men unto vvhomsoever he pleases: and that he is no respector
of persons; and will you yet go on in your sins; sure you that Rule over men,
ought to be kind, loving, merciful, and just; I say unto you, whosoever you
be, that thus hunger and thirst after innocent blood, God will give you blood
to drink again, and at last bring you into confusion, vvoe, missery, torment,
and trouble: for there is innocence in many, who thirst not after blood, and
wrath in the Lamb of God (that takes away the sins of the world) on their
behalf; and God, my God, will in a little time more manifest it, and make it
apeare unto all thevvorld.

And then you that have seen this Testimony, will say, that this was a plain
and faithful warning, as well as a loving invitation, foresight and (...)
for the healing of the Nations, and People of the Earth, especially them of
England.

And now I tell you in England etc. make what confedracies you will with in
your selves, and with Death, and Hell, that tends to blood, the Lord God
(omnipotent, God over all) will reveal, and discover it and God in his own
time, will blast you, and it, that shall be found therein Also make what
conjunctions and confedracies you will, within your selves, and with other
Nations (who are infatuated, as well as you, it shall all be for the
fullfilling, and accomplishing of these things herein spoken off, and treated
on.

Friends now learn to know that God is he, which makes all things manifest.

Therefore wait patiently (in God) all ye children of light, and be still, and
think not much any of you, at your sufferings, for God beholds it, and takes
care of all you that trust in him, For through sufferings must redemption come.

Also know if any shall say, he or they has a Revelation or Prophecy, and
comes in the name of the Lord, and speaks falsely, the Lord God will reward
such, with the evil of their own doings, therefore let no man destroy such;
also if any man shall draw back, from the service, of the living God; my soul
says God (through me) shall have no pleasure in such, let no man therefore now
neglect to do the service, and requirings, of God.

Friends, I say again, wait patiently (in God) and see what a fevv years more
will bring forth, and be not impatient, but watch, and pray, (that can) and as
it is said before, so do.

And now take no care when you, or any of you, shall be had before Kings, and
Princes, for his name sake, or before other Rulers, for the Lord cares for
you; and remember, that it be the patient, and the meek, that do, and shall
iuherit the Kingdom, that cannot be removed, in which Kingdom is the
Crownimmortall, which fades not away, its Gods Kingdom.

And for thou O King of England let this following Counsel be acceptable unto
thee (amongst the rest) Break thou of thy sins by Righteousness, and thine
Iniquities, by showing mercy unto the poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy
tranquillity.

But if thou shall yet go on in the fullfilling of thy lust and in suffering
the truly Inocent peaceable people of God, to be worrowed, bruised, abused, and
beaten, a while Longer, as they have bin.

As heavey a hand from the Lord God Allmighty will fall upon thee and them that
cause such Greiuious and abominable things to be don, (as hither to has bin
don and Inflicted upon Gods pore babes Lambs, and little ons) As ever fell upon
King Nebuchadnezzar: Belshazzer or Darious: For Great Babelon, is still in
Remembrance before the Great God of heaven and Earth, whose reward is nigh, for
all There Creueltyes don unto the saints and people of God.

The End.

