ENGLAND's JOY, For the Taking off The Chimney-Money, OR, The NATIONS Hearty
Thanks for their MAJESTY'S Royal Clemency.
Tune of, Hey Boys up gh we.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.



depiction of a well-dressed male figure or gentleman facing left depiction of
a group of five female figures or women with a toasting fork, and a dust-beater
or bedpan

COme, England, make a joyful Day,
our Gracious King an Queen
Have took the Chimney-Tax away,
has so vexatious been:
Collectors now must all go down,
who were such frightful Evils,
That one would scare a Country-Town,
as much as twenty Devils.
The Good old Dames when ever they
the Chimney Man espied;
Unto their Nooks they would have away,
their Pots, and Pipkins hide:
But now those Bugbears are plucked down,
you hated thus to see;
You now may use what e're's your own,
from straining you are free.
depiction of a male figure or cleric or churchman holding a stick facing right
depiction of a male figure or peasant holding a long stick or staff

There is not one Old Dame in Ten,
and search the Nation through;
But when you talk of Chimney Men,
shall spare a Curse or two:
Let us unto our Gracious King,
our grateful thanks repay,
For doing such a generous thing,
as take this Tax away.
Now happy Times are coming on,
let us pray that they may last;
For now the Chimney Tax is gone,
our chiefest care is past:
We'll in our Country Cottage sing,
and push the Iugg about;
We'll drink an Health unto our King,
till all our Liquour's out.
No Nation e're could be more blessed,
or greater ease enjoy;
We of those Rights are repossest,
which Popery did destroy:
From cares and fears we are set free,
our King such Bounty gives;
Each Man enjoys his Liberty,
and like a Prince he lives.
The Chimney-Money, which oppressed
the people that are poor;
Such grievances are now redrest,
and will be felt no more:
How blessed and happy is our Land,
in such a Gracious King,
Whose Noble Heart and Giving Hand,
does all these Blessings bring?
The Country Wives now need not fear
to bring their Pewter forth;
Or let their shining shelves declare
their Cleanliness and Worth:
For Chimney Men no more will come
or take your Goods away;
You safely may enjoy your home,
there is no such Tax to pay.
Our loving Gracious King and Queen.
may Heaven ever bless;
God give them both a Prosperous Reign
and Crown their Happiness;
May they those Enemies destroy,
that against them do Conspire;
And may they here on Earth enjoy.
all Blessings they desire.
Printed for A. Milbourn, and sold by R. Hayhurst, in Little-Britain


