A Winding Sheet for the PRESBYTERIAN.

Or a Mite touching the Ordination of MINISTERS.

By ARISE EVANS.

printer's or publisher's device

Sold by the Author at Mr. Cadelth's in Black Friars. near the Kings Playhouse.

A Mite touching the Ordination of Ministers;
Courteous READERS
examine diligently the proofs of Scripture in this little Work, for it tends
to the Salvation of your souls, bodies and estate.

MEn and Brethren let me tell you in love: that if your Ministers were not
ordained to the ministry by Bishops, they have not the spirit of truth, and ye
ought not to hear them, they are not sent of God, their ordination is nothing,
and it will come to nothing, for I shall briefly show you by Scripture that
your Presbytery (falsely so called) have no power from God to ordain Ministers:
neither do they understand the word Presbytery, on which they ground their
power, 1 Timothy 4.14. which word is Prophets, or Elder Elders, or Eldership; for
so the Greek word (...) signifies, which word ye have no where else in
Scripture, but only in 1 Timothy 4.14. ye have (...), or (...), or (...): but not
(...) no where else save only 1 Timothy 4.14. and it means Prophets, as the words
going before does sufficiently manifest it: for says he 1 Timothy 4.14. neglect
not the gift that is in thee: which was given thee by Prophesy, with the laying
on of the hands of the Prophets: and St. Paul renders it (...), or in English
Elder Elders or Eldership, because the Prophets were of a more ancient order
then the Apostles, for Enoch was a Prophet Jude 14.15. yet they were now under
the Apostles or Bishops, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. and an Apostle and a Bishop
is all one, for Christ is called an Apostle Heb. 3.1. and a Bishop 1 Peter
2.25. and Judas before he fell was a Bishop Act. 1.20. an Apostle signifies a
planter, and a Bishop signifies a Steward or overseer, he that planteth a
Church and looks well to it, is an Apostle and a Bishop, but to wave that
discourse and come forward: there was in the Apostles time abundance of
Prophets, and they were not ordained of any man, neither did they ordain any,
for God raised them in a miraculous way, 1 Samuel 10.11.12. they had no power to
ordain Ministers, that was the work of the Apostles and Bishops; but the
Prophets did encourage the Ministers to go forth and preach, and told them
their best way, and what Countries and Cities was dangerous for them to go
into; and them Prophets always spoke in the name of the holy Ghost; saying
thus says the holy Ghost Act. 13.1, 2. Act. 16.6, 7. Act. 20.23. Act. 21.4.10,
11. and St. Paul and Barnabas was sent forth to preach by the holy Ghost, and
the Prophets laid their hand upon them Act. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. but it was done
above 17. years after St. Paul's conversion Act. 9.6. Galat. 1.17.18. Galat.
2.1. Act. 9.26.27, 28, 29, 30. Act. 11. from verse 22. to the end of the
Chapter, Act. 12.25. and if you compare these Scriptures above cited one with
another, for that is the way to find out the truth 1 Cor. 2.13. you shall find
it to be above 17. years after St. Paul began to preach at Damascus Act. 9.20,
21, 22. and surely St. Paul and Barnabas having been so often with the Apostles
sent forth to preach, and received into fellowship by them Galat. 2.7, 8, 9.
were ordained Ministers long before that time they came to Antioch Act. 13.1,
2, 3, 4. and that which the Prophets did to them then: It is not said that they
ordained them, but it is said that they Recommended them to the grace of God,
Act. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. Act. 14.26. and if ye would have that to be their
ordination then Ministers must be often ordained; for St. Paul was Recommended
again to the grace of God, by the same Prophets that abode at Antioch Act.
15.30.40. Act. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. and if you compare Act. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. with 1 Timothy 4.14. you shall find that the Prophets prophesied good things concerning
Timothy, that he should be a good Minister and do great matters in converting
the world, laying their hands upon him as they spoke, that was all, and to this
agrees St. Paul's charge to him to warfare according to the prophesies, which
went before on him, 1 Timothy 1.18. but Timothy was ordained a Minister by St.
Paul's own hands 2 Timothy 1.6. therefore St. Paul calls his own Son, 1 Timothy 1.2.
his dear beloved Son, 2 Timothy 1.2. because none other Minister had a hand in the
begetting or the ordaining of him to the Ministry, but of St. Paul himself,
which ordained Timothy as he ordained them twelve, Act. 19.6, 7. who were them
Ministers of Ephesus, St. Paul sent for to Miletus Act. 20.17. and if ye
compare 1 Timothy 4.14. with 2 Timothy 1.6. you shall find much difference between
the one Text and the other, for says he 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift of God,
which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands; but says he 1 Timothy 4.14.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophesy with the
laying on of the hands of the Prophets, or Elder Elders or Eldership: Mark the
first, he calls the gift of God, and bids Timothy to stir it up in him, the
second he calls a gift, he does not call it the gift of God, nor does he bid
Timothy stir it up in himself; but says he neglect not the gift, or despise
not prophesyings, 1 Thessal. 5.20. see here St. Paul presses upon Timothy the
gift of God in his ordaining of him to the ministry of Jesus Christ, but for
the sayings of the Prophets, he bids him not neglect them or despise
prophesyings, 1 Timothy 4.14.1. 1 Thessal. 5.20.21. but to fulfill them, 1 Timothy
1.18. as St. Paul and Barnabas had done, Act. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. Act. 14.26. and
thence they sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended to the
grace of God, for the work which they fulfilled: and again you may see by the
Scripture that to commend and to ordain are two several things, Act. 14.23. and
when they had ordained them Elders in every Church and had prayed with fasting,
they commended them to the Lord on whom they believed: and these Elders
ordination was thus, St. Paul laid his hands on some, and Barnabas on the
others, as ye see, Act. 19, 6, 7. for ordination of Ministers is a similitude
of the procreation of Priests under the Law, and as those priests were bastards
and sons of whores, that had three or four priests to beget them; so
spiritually are those Ministers bastards and sons of whores who had many
ministers hands on them in their ordination, therefore according to the
Scripture as ye have it in the Book of Ordination of Ministers, the Lord Bishop
himself alone lays his hands upon the Deacons head at his first ordination to
the ministry, and then he receives the gift of God, and is begotten 1 Timothy 1,
2. 2 Timothy 1.2.6. Philem. 10. Titus 1.4. and that which in after times is done
to him are but Ceremonies that must be used by the Lord Bishop and others, to
prefer him into higher degrees in the ministry, as there was Ceremonies used
to the sons of Aaron by the old Law, Exodus 40.12, 13, 14, 15. and as a Priest
by the old Law must needs be the seed of Aaron, else no Ceremony could make him
a Priest after the old Law; so I say now, if a Minister as abovesaid, have not
his being only from a Lord Bishop at first, he cannot be a Minister of God, by
no means else; now you see brethren that your Presbytery ordination is a false
thing, having not the least shadow of truth in it, for your Presbytery deny any
Prophets to be in our days: Therefore they have no right at all to shelter
themselves under their shadows; if there were any hopes that way as they would
persuade you, from 1 Timothy 4.14. but you may see by what I have spoken, how they
deceive themselves and you, and as their false Presbytery ordination came to
have an usurping visible power, and being for a time by the strength of
Apollyons Rebellious bloody sword of war: so it shall be utterly nulled and
made void by the righteous sword of the Prince of peace, and he that will
favor their way shall be destroyed for ever.

By ARISE EVANS.
FINIS.

