medallions featuring english royalty from william the conqueror to charles I
with medallions featuring the cromwells and parliament above a map of the
british isles

The faithful Analist: OR The EPITOME OF The ENGLISH History: GIVING A true
Account of the Affairs of this NATION, from the Building of the Tower of
LONDON, in the days of William the Conqueror, to the Throwing down the Gates
of the said City, by the command of the PARLIAMENT, which sat before the
Secluded Members were admitted, in the Year 1660.

IN WHICH All things Remarkable both by Sea and Land, from the Year 1069. to
this present Year of 1660. are truly and exactly represented.

Lipsius in Tacit. In Historia pressum and concisum dicendi Genus praestat
copioso.

LONDON, Print. for W. Gilbertson in Giltspurstreet.

TO THE Right Worshipful and Right Worthy MATTHEW GILLEY Esquire.
Honored Sir,
IT has been heretofore as much the Commendation as the Industry of the ablest
Wits, to contract much into little; by which they have been as Beneficial to
the Memory as the Apprehension; For in long Discourses or Sentences (be they
never so accute) the apprehension often fails and is lost, before it can arrive
to the period of them; and the Memory which can retain that which the
Understanding never fully apprehended, must be needs prodigious.

Sir, In this Book you shall find much in little; the History of almost a
thousand years contracted into a Manuel, and that which is profitable unto all
men, must needs be ungrateful unto none.

There is nothing memorable from the Conquest to these present Times, that is
here omitted, whether you look upon the magnificent of our ancient buildings,
or the gallant Exployts of this Nation, both by Sea Land, against domestic and
foreign Enemies; or rare Revolutions of State, or the sad labors of the
English Swords that were drawn of late for the purity of Reformation, which as
yet is more in the Idaea, then the Embryo, and is rather discovered, then
obtained.

Sir, should I insert more (as much more I might) I should but anticipate your
understanding, I shall only humbly desire you to grant this compendious
Chronicle your Protection, and if there be life in History, as no doubt there
is, you shall live with it, And it shall be Honor for me to be found to be

The humblest and most faithful of all that serve you. W. G.

A Table of the most remarkable passages, in the lives of all the Kings and
Queens of England, from William the Conqueror to the late Lord Richard the
Protector.
I. William the Conqueror.
SUch a dearth was in England, that men did eat horses, cats, dogs, and man's
flesh, Anno regni. 3.

The earth hard frozen from the midst of Novem. to the midst of Apr. an. reg.
11.

So great a flood (by immoderate rain, that hills were made soft, and in their
fall overwhelmed many villages that lay under them, to the great amazement of
all. an. reg. 20.

II. William Rufus.
BY a great tempest in London, the wind overturned six hundred, and six houses,
and the roof of Bow Church in Cheapside, an. reg. 4.

So great a famine and pestilence, that the quick were not able to bury the
dead, an. reg. 6.

All the Land belonging to Earl Goodwin, was covered with sands by an
inundation of the Sea, which place ever since is called Goodwin sands. an. reg.
11.

Blood sprang out of the earth, at Finchamsted in Berkshire. an. r. 12.

The King hunting in Newpark in Hampshire, was accidentally killed by the
glance of an Arrow, ann. reg. 13. wanting one month and some few days.

III. Henry the first, called Beauclark.
THere appeared about the Son four circles, and a Blazing Star, ann. reg. 5.

In March and December, exceeding great thunders, and lightnings, and the Moon
at both times seemed to be turned into blood. an. reg. 18.

So low an ebb, betwixt the Tower of London and the Bridge, that men, women,
and children, did wade over on foot, an. reg. 15.

A great fire beginning in the Westcheap, consumed a great part of London, all
along from thence to Algate, an. reg. 33.

The King dying in France, his body being powdered with salt, and wrapped in
bulls hides, was conveyed from thence, and buried a^ Redding in Berkshire, an.
reg. 35.

IV. King Stephen.
THe town of Bath, and Saint Peter's Church in it, were both consumed with fire,
an. reg. 3

Many Cities, and towns in several places of this Land, were either destroyed
or defaced with fire, in the time of this King and his Predecessor.

It is memorable in this King, that although during his whole reign, he had
continual wars, yet he never burdened the people with taxes.

V. King Henry the second.
LOndon Bridge was new builded of timber, by Peter a Priest of Cole-Church, an.
reg. 10.

So great an Earthquake in Ely, Norfolk, and Suffolk, that it overthrew them
that stood upon their feet, and caused the Bells to ring in the steeples, an.
reg. 12.

The City of Leicester burned by the Kings command, the walls, and Castle
razed, and the inhabitants dispersed into other cities for their disobedience
to their King, an. reg. 20.

A fish was taken near to Orford in Suffolk, which had the shape of a man, it
was kept in the Castle of Orford, for the space of six months for a wonder, it
would eat greedily all manner of meat, but could not speak a word; at the last
he stole away from his keeper and ran to the sea again, an. reg. 33.

VI. King Richard the first called Ceur de Lion.
IN the days of this King, were Robin Hood and little John, the lawless
subjects of so many Ballads. Robin Hood maintained a hundred tall men, and
Archers so expert, that four hundred have sled at the twang of their bow.

The Jews of Norwich, St. Edmonsbury, Lincoln, Stamford, and Lyn, were
plundered; at York, five hundred of them, besides women and children, did
betake themselves unto the Castle, to defend themselves, which the people
assaulting the Jews grew so desparate, that they cut the throats of their own
wives, and children, and did cast them over the walls on the Christians heads,
and having* committed this execrable murder, they burned both the house and
themselves, an. reg. 7.

VII. King John.
HAyl as big as the eggs of hens, an. reg. 4.

Many men and women were destroyed by thunder and lightning, an. reg. 8.

The Arches, and stone work of the London bridge were finished, an. re. 9.

Three thousand persons endeavoring to preserve themselves from the fire, not
far from London bridge, so indiscreetly did throng into the boats, (that were
ready to receive them) that they were devoured by the water, anno reg. 15.

VIII. Henry the third.
A Young man, who called himself Jesus, and desired to be crucified, and an
elderly woman who called her self Mary the mother of Christ, and who had
bewitched the young man to his madness, were both brought before the Archbishop
of Canterbury, who caused them both to be closed up between two walls of stone,
where most miserably they ended their wretched lives, an. reg. 5.

So terrible a thunderclap was heard, when Mass was saying in the Cathedral
Church of Paul's, that the Church did shake as if it would have fallen, and out
of a dark cloud there leaped such a flash of lightning, that all the Church
seemed to be on a fire, the people thinking they should have been burned, ran
all of them out of the Church, fell groavling on the ground void of
understanding, an. reg. 15.

The Jews at Norwich stole a boy, and circumcised him, an indirision of
Christian Religion, they had an intent to have crucified him at Easter, for
which fact, they justly suffered as they deserved, an. reg. 19.

A Scholar of Oxford endeavoring to kill the King in his chamber at
Woodstocst, was taken and pulled to pieces with horses, an. reg. 20.

The Jews were constrained to pay twenty thousand mark, or to be kept in
perpetual imprisonment; the walls of the Tower of London, were thrown down by an
Earthquake, as they were some years before, an. reg. 27.

The Thames overflowed the banks about Lambeth, and drowned houses and fields,
for the space of six miles all along. In the great Hall at Westminster, men did
ride on horseback, an. reg. 28.

The sea flowing twice without an Ebb, did make so horrible a noise, that it
was heard a great way into England, and did much amaze and affright the people;
and not long afterward, in a dark night, the sea seemed to be all on a fire,
and the waves to fight against one another, so that the Mariners were not able
to save their ships from shipwreck, an. reg. 34.

The steeple of Bow in Cheapside, fell down, and slew many men and women, an.
reg. 35.

IX. Edward the first called Long-shanks.
GReat Earthquakes, lightning, and thunders, with a blazing star, and a Comet
in the appearance of a great Dragon which made many men afraid, anno reg. 3.

An accusation was made, for clipping the Kings coin, for which offense, two
hundred sixty and seven Jews were executed, an. reg. 5.

So great a frost, that five arches of London Brige, and all Rochester Bridge
were born down, and carried away, anno regni, 9.

The Summer was so exceeding hot, that many died with the extremity thereof,
an. reg. 16.

The King banished the Jews out of England, giving them wherewith to bear their
charges till they were out of England, the number of the Jews expulsed were 15
M. and nine person, an. reg. 19.

Three men had their hands cut off, for rescuing a prisoner from an Officer of
the City of London, an. reg. 22.

The Monastery at Westminster, was much ruined by fire, an. reg. 27.

X. Edward the second.
Pierce Gauston being banished, and returned again into England, was taken by
the Barons of England, and beheadded at Warwick Castle, an. reg. 5.

The King caused Writts to be published, that no ox stalled, or corn-fed,
should be sold for more then four and twenty shillings; no gras-fed ox, for
more then sixteen shillings, a fat stalled cow at twelve shillings, another cow
at ten shillings. A Butt Motton, whose wool is well grown, at twenty pence, a
fat mutton shorn at fourteen-pence, a fat hogg of two years old, at three
shillings four pence, a fat goose at two pence half penny, in the City three
pence; a fat Capon at two pence, in the City two pence half penny, a fat hen at
one penny, in the City at three halfpence; four pigeons for one penny, twenty
four eggs for a penny, in the city twenty eggs a penny; I would they were so
still, an. reg. 6.

And yet for all this, there was a grievous famine and mortality, so that the
quick could hardly bury the dead; the cattle died by reason of the corruption
of the grass: the famine was so great, that some in holes and corners, did eat
the flesh of their own children. the thieves that were in prison, did pluck in
pieces those that were newly brought in amongst them, and greedily devoured
them half alive, an. reg. 11.

A great murraine of kine happened, insomuch, that dogs and ravens eating of
them were poisoned, an reg. 12.

II. King Edward the third.
KIng Edward the second, was cruelly murdered in the Castle of Berkley by the
practice of the Queen his wife, and the Lord Mortimer, an. reg. 2.

Roger Mortimer was taken and sent to London, where he was condemned and
hanged, an. reg. 3.

The sea brake in through all the banks of England, so that great store of
cattle were drowned, an. reg. 11.

In Oxfordshire, a serpent was found having two heads, and two faces, like
women, one face attired of the new fashion of women's attire, and the other face
like the old attire, and wings like a bat, an. reg. 20.

Many men and women, perished with thunder and lightning. Feinds and devils,
and strange apparitions were seen by men, and spoke to them as they traveled,
an. reg. 25.

A frost in England, from the midst of September, to the month of April, an
reg. 38.

XII. King Richard the second.
Jack Straw was beheaded for Rebellion against the King, anno regni 3.

Wat. Tiler being arrested by the Mayor of the City for high Treason was slain
in Smithfield, and all the rest of the crew pardoned by the King.

There was a general Earthquake, of the effects whereof, the waters did
partake, insomuch that it made the ships in the havens to totter, an. reg. 6.

The nobles rose against the King, and in Oxford the West and Southern
Scholars did assail the Northern, by reason whereof many murders were
committed, an. reg. 11.

XIII. King Henry the fourth.
John Holland late Duke of Excester, Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey, Edward Duke
of Aumarle, John Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, with several other persons,
having conspired privily to murder the King, were all put to death for their
treason, an. reg. 2.

King Richard died in Pontefrad Castle, he was buried at Langley, an. reg. 3.

A pestilence in London consumed above thirty thousand persons, and not long
afterward, there followed a hard frost which continued fifteen weeks, an. reg.
11.

XIV. King Henry the fifth.
RIchard Earl of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Gray, and others, were executed at
Southampton for a conspiracy against the King, an. reg. 2.

The King fought the memorable battle at Agin Court in France, and obtained a
mavelous victory, anno reg. 4.

Sir John Oldcastle having broke out of the Tower, was taken by the Lord Powis
and sent to London, where being convicted by the Parliament, he was carried to
St. Giles in the fields, where he was both hanged and consumed with fire, an.
reg. 6.

XV. King Henry the sixth.
THere was a great Earthquake which continued for the space of two hours, an.
reg. 5.

A Welchman murdered a Widow in White-Chappel, and stole away her goods, but
afterward coming by the place where he did the murder, the women of the
Parish with stones, and sheeps-hornes, and dirt off the dunghills made an end
of him, an. reg. 8.

The gate on London bridge, with the Tower next to Southwark fell down, and the
two farthest Arches of the said Bridge, and no man perished, anno reg. 15.

All the Lions in the Tower of London died, an. reg. 16.

The Postern of London, by East-Smithfield, against the Tower of London sunck
by night, and a great wind blew down almost one side of the street, called the
old change, an. reg. 18.

Eleaner Cobham, Duchess of Gloucester for sorcery, received sentence of
penance from the Archbishop of Canterbury, and on the seventeenth of
November, she came from Temple Bar to Paul's, with a Taper of wax in her hand,
which she offered at the Altar; on the Wednesday following, she went from
Gracious street to Leaden Hall, and so to Algate; and on the next Market day,
she went from Cheapside to St. Michaels in Conrnhil, in form aforesaid, an.
reg. 20.

The Commons of Kent did rise in great number, one Jack Cade being their
Captain; these Rebels did great mischief, but they submitted at last to the
Kings mercy, and Jack Cade was slain in the Wild of Sussex, an. reg. 30.

William Carton of London Mercer, brought over into England from Germany, the
science of Printing, which he practiced afterward at the Abbey of St. Peter's in
Westminster, an. reg. 38.

XVI. Edward the fourth.
MAny battails were fought betwixt King Edward, and the adherents to King Henry
the sixth, in which King Edward still prevailed, at the last King Henry was
taken and sent to the Tower where he was murdered, an. reg. 4.

Some riotus persons that fired the gates of the City of London, and would
force their entrance into the City, being apprehended. the King caused the rich
to hang by the purse, and the poor by the neck, an. reg. 12.

George Duke of Clarence was drowned in a butt of Malmssey, anno reg. 18.

XVII. King Richard the fourth.
EDward the fifth being deprived of his life by his unnatural Uncle Ri. having
reigned but two months and some few days, his Uncle commonly called, the
usurper was proclaimed King, and crowned at Westminster, presently afterward
insued the death of the Duke of Buckingham, who was beheaded at Salisbury for
treason, and on the year following was the battle at Bosworth field where
Richard was slain himself, and buried in the Gray Friars Church at Leicester.

XVIII. King Henry the seventh.
THe Sweating sickness began in the month of September, which in six weeks
time devoured a great number of people, an. reg. 1.

A commotion was made by the Commons in Cornwall, upon the discontent of some
subsedy which was granted to the King, they came as far as Black Heath, where
three hundred of them were slain, and fifteen hundred taken Prisoners; the Lord
Andely chief leader of them was beheaded on Tower hill, an. reg. 10.

Perkin Warbeck proclaimed himself King Richard the fourth, second son to King
Edward, was taken, being once pardoned before, and executed at Tiburn, an. reg.
11.

XIX. King Henry the eighth.
AN Insurrection of the Apprentises in London against Aliens, for which diverse
of them were hanged with their Captain John Lincorn a Broker, this being on the
first of May, it was called afterward the ill May day, anno regni 9.

Richard Rice a Cook was boiled in Smithfield for poisoning diverse persons at
the Bishop of Winchesters house, an. reg. 23.

Many great personages were beheaded in this Kings days, and some of his own
wives when he began to be weary of them.

XX. Edward the sixth.
THe Book of Common Prayers was read in English to the great contentment of the
people, an. reg. 2.

The Commons made great commotions, and rose against enclosures, the Rebels in
Norfolk and Suffolk were most formidable, but being subdued by the Earl of
Warwick, Rob. Kett was hanged in Chains on the top of Norwich Castle, and
William his Brother was hanged on the top of Windham Castle, an. reg. 3.

XXI. Queen Mary.
THe Popish Bishops were all restored, an. reg. 1.

Sir Thomas Wiatt having drawn forces together against the Queen and peace of
the kingdom was beheaded, anno reg. 3.

The French became Masters of Callice, an. reg. 4.

Many Protestants for their consciences did perish in the flames of Martyrdom
during the reign of this Queen.

XXII. Queen Elizabeth.
THe Book of Common Prayer was established and Mass clean suppressed, an. reg.
1.

The lofty spier of Paul's steeple, which was two hundred foot high from the top
of the Stone battlements, was set on fire by lightning, which fire ceased not
till it came down to the roof of the Church, and consumed all the bells and
lead, an. reg. 3.

Sir Thomas Gresham did build the Royal Exchange at his own proper costs, by
the advice and encouragement of Queen Elizabeth, an. reg. 8.

The ground opened, and certain rocks with a piece of ground removed, and went
forward for the space of four days, so that where pasture grounds was, there
was tillage, and where tillage ground was, there was pasture found in the place
of it; this was done near Marlech in the County of Hereford, an. reg. 13.

Strange and numerous apparitions of great flies in Winter, and terrible
Earthquakes, and a woman in London brought to bed of four children, an. reg.
18. the like afterward, an. reg. 22.

Mary Queen of the Scots was put to death, an. reg. 31. and in the year
following was the great victory against the Spanish Armado supposed to be
invincible.

The Earl of Essex was beheaded, the Earl of Southampton was also arraigned,
and found guilty of high treason, an. reg. 43.

XXIII. King James.
RObert Dove Merchant tailor, gave means for ever, for the toling of a Bell in
Sepulchers Church, to cause good people to pray for such prisoners as are to be
executed, an. reg. 2.

The wonderful deliverance from the horrible gunpowder treason, an. reg. 3.

The great hard frost when boothes were set up on the River of Thames, an, reg.
7.

Sir Thomas Overbury was committed to the Tower, where not long afterward he
was poisoned, an. reg. 10.

Prince Henry dyed on the sixth of October. 1611. and on the fourteenth of
February following, the Lady Elizabeth was married to the Palsgrave.

Sir Walter Raleigh that miracle of arms and arts was beheaded, anno reg. 16.

XXIV. King Charles.
KIng Charles was married to Henretta Maria, sister to the King of France then
living, an. reg. 1. In this year the pestilence raged in London, of which above
five thousand died in one week.

The Earl of Castle-Haven, being arraigned at the Kings Bench bar, and found
guilty of Rape and Sodomy, was executed on Tower hill, an. reg. 6.

Mr. Pryn, Doctor Bastwick, and Mr. Burton, were sentensed in the high
Commission Court, and ordered to be banished, an. reg. 11. Ship Money this year
was called upon to be paid which procured afterward great divisions.

The King marched against the scots, who would not endure any alteration in
their religion.

The Scots in the second expedition having the better, the King was enforced to
call a Parliament, an. reg. 15.

The King and Parliament not agreeing, the battle of Edge hill was fought, an.
reg. 17.

After many battles at Newbery, Marston Moore, Naseby, and other places the
King was quite worsted, and enforced to fly to the Scots, an. reg. 22.

The King being sold to the English by the Scots was brought from the Isle of
Wight, and being tried by a High Court of Justice was beheaded before the gates
of Whitehal, an. reg. 23.

XXV. Oliver Cromwell Protector.
AFter the death of King Charles, Oliver Cromwell having made himself famous by
many great achievements was chosen to be Generalissimo of the Commonwealth of
England in the place of the Lord Fairfax, and advancing into Ireland he took
Drogheda by storm, and pursuing his victories he became absolute master of that
Nation, anno 1649. and 1650.

The great battle at Dunbar was fought, where the Scots were totally
overthrown, two and twenty great guns taken, and arms for fifteen thousand men,
an. 1651.

The arms of the Crown of England, and statues of King Charles, were put down
by order of Parliament, 1651.

Mr. Love the Minister, and Mr. Gibbons, were beheaded both on Tower hill 1651.

The great battle at Worcester where the young King of Scotland was
overthrown, an. 1652.

Many great battails at sea betwixt English and Hollanders, 1652. and 1953.

The Lord General Cromwell was declared, and sworn Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, 1654.

The Hollanders obtained peace of the English, 1654.

A BRIEF ABSTRACT OF All the wonders and remarkable passages since William the
Conqueror till the Reign of King Charles.
Written for the benefit of posterity.
To the Reader.
REader, I have taken pains to abstract out of the Chronicle, all the
remarkable wonders and passages of concernment, from William the Conqueror to
the reign of King Charles, I hope thou art not so ignorant, but that thou will
find it, and grant it useful for us and our posterity hereafter, Vale.

Wonders and remarkable passages.
William Conqueror.
Gelricus Bishop of Durham, being accused of treason, was imprisoned at
Westminster.

England that men did eat horses, cats, dogs, and man's flesh.

William bereaved all the Monasteries and Abbeys of England, of their gold and
silver, sparing neither Challice nor Shrine.

Walter Bishop of Durham, bought of King William the Earldome of
Northumberland, wherein he used such cruelty, that the inhabitants slew him.

November to the amidst of April.

Palm Sunday about noon, appeared a blazing Star near unto the Sun.

William builded the Tower of London.

Thurstone Abbot of Glassenbury, in his Church, caused three monks to be slain,
and eighteen men to be wounded, that their blood ran down from the Altar to the
steps.

April.

Paul's Church burnt.
that hills were made soft and consumed, and with their fall overwhelmed many
villages, to the great amazement of all.

Wales called Rose, was found the Sepulcher of Gawen, upon the sea shore, who
was sisters son of Arthur the Great, king of Britain, being in length fourteen
foot. King William being at Roan in Normandy, went with a great Army into
France, spoiling all things as he passed, last of all he burned the city of
Meaux with our Lady Church and two Anchorits that were enclosed there, the king
cheared his men to feed the fire, and came himself so near, that with the heat
of his harness he got a disease: also the Kings horse leaping over a ditch, did
burst the inner parts of the King, with the pain whereof he was sore afflicted,
and returned to Roan, where shortly after he ended his life, the ninth day of
September, in the year of our Lord 1087. when he had reigned 20. years, eight
months, and sixteen days.

I would have the Reader understand, that I set down nothing but things that
are remarkable in this kings days, nor in any kings days else; and that is
the reason, that the date of years do not follow in order, for I skip a great
part of needless things, because I would not be too tedious, nor abuse thy
patience too much.

William Rufus.
Lukes day, especially in Winchcomb, where a great part of the Steeple was
overthrown, and in London the wind overturned 606. houses, and the roof of Bow
Church in Cheap Side, wherewith some persons were slain.



Goodwin, by breaking in of the sea was covered with sands, and is yet to this
day called Goodwin sands.

Finchamsted in Barkshire.

King William on the morrow after Lammas day, hunting in the new Forest, sir
William Tirrel, shooting at a dear, at unawares hit the King in the breast, that
he fell down dead, and never spoke word; his men, and especially that Knight
hid themselves: but some came back again, and laid his body upon a colliers
cart, which one poor lean beast did draw to the City of Winchester, where he
was buried, he reigned twelve years, eleven months, lacking eight days.

Henry Beauclark. Henry the first.
Winchester and Gloucester burnt.





Worcester was burnt, the tenth of October the River Medway by no small number
of miles, d^d so fail of water, that in the midst of the Channel, the smallest
vessels and boats could not pass; the self same day, the Thames did suffer the
like want of water, for between the Tower of London and the Bridge, not only
with horses, but also a great number of men and children did wade over on foot.

Chichester was burnt, many storms and a blazing starr.

March was exceeding lightning and in December thunder and hail, and the moon
at both times seemed to be turned into blood.

Henry having tamed the French men, and pacified Normandy, returned into
England, in which voyage William Duke of Normandy, and Richard his son, and
Mary his daughter, Richard Earl of Chester and his wife, with many noble men,
and to the number of 160. persons were drowned.

Gloucester burnt.

Rochester sore defaced with fire.

Gilbert Beckers house, in West Cheap, consumed a great part of London from
thence to Allgate.

Worcester was sore defaced with fire.

Henry remaining in Normandy, deceased the first day of December, Anno 1135.
when he had reigned 35. years four months: his bowels, brains and eyes were
buried at Roan, the rest of his body being powdered with salt, and wrapped in
bulls hides was buried at Reading.

King Stephen.
KIng Stephen was a man of noble parts, and hardy; passing comely of favor and
personage, he excelled in martial policy, gentleness and liberality toward all
men: and although he had continual war, yet he did never burden the Commons
with taxes.

London stone consumed eastward to Algate, and westward to St. Paul's Church.

Rochester was burnt, with all the city.

York, Saint Martins Church without the walls, and the hospital with thirty
nine Churches were burnt.

Saint Peter's Church at Bath, and all the city was burnt.

Robert Earl of Gloucester with a great power, invaded the town of Nottingham,
and spoiled it, the townsmen were taken, slain, or burnt in the Churches
whereunto they fled.

England was full of trouble and war, set forth to fire and rapine, through the
discord betwixt the king and certain Lords, which took part with Henry
Plantagenet.

Henry Plantagenet, only he had his honor gran^ed him so long as he lived: King
Stephen dyed the twenty fifth of October when he had reigned eighteen years,
ten months, and odd days.

Henry the second.
LOndon Bridge was new made of timber, by Peter a Priest of Cole-Church.

Ely, Norfolk and Suffolk, so that it overthrew them that stood upon their
feet, and caused the bells to ring in the Steeples.

Leicester burnt by the kings command, the walls and castle rased, and the
inhabitants dispersed into other cities for disobedience toward the king: the
king of Scots taken prisoner led into Normandy, and compounded for his ransom
Christ's Church in Canterbury burnt.

York was burned, the Church of St. Andrews in Rochester was consumed with fire.

Abbey of Glassenbury burned

Lincoln. was rent in pieces, Chichester city likewise was burnt.

Orford in Suffolk, certain fishers took in their nets, a fish ^^^1.
having the shape of a man; which fish was kept by Bartholomew de Glanvile,
custos of the castle of Orford in the same castle for the space of six months,
and more for a wonder, he spoke not a word, all manner of meat he would gladly
eat; but most greedy was he after raw flesh, or fish: at length he stole away
from his keeper and ran to the sea again.

Beverly with the Church of St. John there, was burnt.

King Henry departed this life, the sixth day of July in the year of our Lord,
1189. when he had reigned twenty four years, seven months, lacking eleven
days, and was buried at Fonteverald in the Monastery of Nunns, by him founded.

Richard Coeur de lion.
Robin Hood and little John remained in the woods dispoyling and robbing the
rich of their goods; the said Robert maintained an hundred tall men, and good
Archers, with such spoils as he got, upon whom four hundred men were they
never so strong, durst not give the onset, poor men's goods he spared,
abundantly relieving them with that which he got from Abbeys and houses of rich
Earls.

Norwich, Saint Edmonsbury, Lincoln, Stamford and Lyn, were robbed, and at York
to the number of five hundred, besides women and children entered a tower of the
castle, which the people assayling, the Jews cut the throats of their wives and
children, and cast them over the walls on the Christians, heads, the residue
they locked up, and burnt both the house and themselves.

Richard the first.
Richard turned his arms against the Barons of Poicton that rebelled against
him; he set their Cities and Towns on fire, spoiled their country, and killed
many of his adversaries: at last came to the Dukedom of Aquit^^e, and besieged
the Castle of Chalne, whereon Bertrane de Gordani, smote him with a venomed
dart; and although the King won the Castle, yet he lost his life, for of this
wound he died the sixth day of April, in the year of our Lord 1199. when he had
reigned 9 years 7 months, and was buried at Founteverard, his heart was buried
at Roan, and his bowels at Chalne.

King John.


January began a frost which continued till the 22 of March, so that the ground
could not be tilled, whereof it came to pass, that in Summer following, a
quarter of wheat was sold for a Mark, which in the days of Henry the seventh,
was sold for twelve pence.

down with hailstones as big as Goose-eggs.

Thames at London, was this year finished, by Serle Mercer and William Alman,
then procurators, or ^a^e^s of the bridge works.

July at night, the City of London upon the south side of the River of Thames,
with the Church of our Lady, of the Cannons in Southwark being a fire, an
exceeding great multitude of people passing the b^idge, suddenly the
north-part, by blowing of the south wind, was also set on fire, and the people
which were even now passing the bridge perceiving the same, would have
returned, but were stopped by the fire, and it came to pass, that as they
protracted time, the south end was fired, so that people thronged between the
two fires; there came to aid them many ships and vessels, into the which the
multitude so undiscreetly pressed, that the ships being drowned, it was said
there were destroyed about three thousand persons.

Edmonsbury consumed with fire.

It was reported that King John was poisoned by a Monck, but certain it is he
dyed in the Castle of Newarck on the 19 of October. 1216. where the Captain of
the Castle caused him to be imboweled, and was conveyed to Worcester and
there honorably buried, when he had reigned seventeen years and five months,
lacking eight days.

Henry of Winchester.
Canterbury who willed himself to be crucified, and to be called Jesus, and an
old woman that had bewitched the young man to such madness, procured her self
to be called Mary the mother of Christ, they were both closed up between two
walls of stone where they ended their lives in misery.

The Citizens of London falling out with the Bailiffe of Westminster and the
men of the Suburbs at a game of wrestling, made a great tumult against the
Abbot of Westminster, for the which their Captain Constantine, with some
others, were hanged, the rest had their feet and their hands cut off.

Henry the third.


Paul, when Roger Niger Bishop of London was at Mass in the Cathedral Church
of S. Paul, suddenly the weather waxed dark, and a horrible thunder-clapp
lighted on the Church, the same was shaken as if it would have fallen, and out
of a dark cloud came such a flash of lightning, that all the Church seemed to
be on fire, all the people thought they should have been burned, and ran all
out of the church; and being astonished, fell upon the ground void of all
understanding, none of all the multitude tarried in the Church save the Bishop
and one Deacon, which stood still at the high Al ^^^.

April there appeared as it were four suns besides the natural sun, of a red
color, and a great circle of Crystal color.

Martins day began thunders very horrible which lasted fifteen days.



Norwich stole a boy, and circumcised him, and had an intent to have crucified
him at Easter, for which fact they were convicted.

Westm^nster men did row with Wherries in the midst of the Hall.

Ottobon a Cardinal came into England as a Legate from the Pope, this year
passed stormy and troublesome weather and very unhealthful.

Ottobon being lodged in the Abbey of Osney; the Scholars of Oxford slew his
Master-cook, and the Legate for fear got him into the Steeple of the Church,
where he stayed, till the Kings Officers coming from Abingdon, conveied him to
Wallingford where he accused the misdoers, Otho de Killeney a Standard bearer
to the Scholars, was taken and put into prison, with twelve others; who not
long after, went from Saint Paul's Church to the Legates house, bare footed and
bare headed, where they asked him forgiveness.

A Scholar of Oxford enterprised to kill the king in his chamber, at Woodstock
was taken and pulled to pieces with horses.

London, was shaken by a tempest and an Earthquake together that it fell down:
but the King commanded that the same should be builded again, many strange
fishes came to shore, whereof forty were Sea Bulls and one of a huge bigness
passed through the Bridge of London unhurt, till he came to the Kings house at
Mortlack and there he was killed.

pay 20000 marks or else to be kept in perpetual imprisonment. The walls and
bull-works that were newly builded about the Tower of London, were again thrown
down by an Earthquake.

Lambeth, and drowned houses and fields the space of six miles, and in the
great Hall at Westminster, men took their horses backs.

Mildred in Canterbury; and a great part of the City was burnt.

A great plague was in England.

New Castle upon Tine was burned, Bridge and all.



October, the Sea flowing twice without ebb, did make such a horrible noise,
that it was heard into England a great way; besides this, in a dark night, the
Sea seemed to be on a light fire, and the waves to fight one against another,
so that the Mariners were not able to save their ships: and at Winchelsea,
besides cottages for salt, and fither-mens houses, bridges and mills, above
three hundred houses, with certain Churches, through the violent rising of the
Sea were drowned.

Westminster, which were accused for crucifying a child at Lincoln, eighteen of
them were hanged, the rest remained long prisoners.

A Jew at Tewksbury fell into a Privy upon the Saturday, and would not be
helped out because it was his Sabbath; wherefore Richard of Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, kept him there while Monday, at which ^ime he was dead.

Richard the Emperor, there was a Blazing-star seen three months; at this
time there was a Schism among the Princes Electors in Germany.

London to the number of 700. their wares spoiled, and their Synagogues
defaced, a multitude more of them, because one Jew would have forced a
Christian man, to have paid more then two pence for the usury of twenty
shillings the week.

London, causing great mischief to be done, and many men slain, for which Riot,
twelve of the chief Captains were hanged.

Andrews tide to Candlemas, that men and beasts passed over from Lambeth to
Westminster, the Merchandise was carried from Sandwich, and other Havens, to
London by Land.

Bow in Cheap, fell down, and slew many people, men and women.

June began a great riot in Norwich, through the which the Monastery of the
Trinity was burned: whereupon the King rode down, and making enquiry for the
chief doets thereof, caused thirty of them to be condemned, hanged, drawn and
quartered, and their Quarters to be burned.

King Henry died on the sixteenth of November, in the year of our Lord 1272.
when he had reigned 56 years, and 28 days, and was buried at Westminster; he
built a great part of the Church.

King Edward, sir-named Long-shanks.
Oxford, between the Northern men and Irish men, wherein many of the Irish men
were slain.

Nicholas day even, were great Earthquakes, Lightnings, and Thunder, with a
great Dragon, and a Blazing-star, which made many men afraid.

Michael of the Mount without Glassenbury, fell to the ground.

Michael Tony was hanged, drawn and quartered for Treason.

Michaelmas Term was kept at Shrewsbury. Reformation was made for clipping the
Kings coin; for which offense 267 Jews were executed.

Edward the First.
London Bridge, and all Rochester-Bridge was borne down, and carried away, with
many Bridges more.

Yarmouth, Dunwich, and Ipswich, but also in diverse other parts of England.

London for three shillings four pence the Quarter, and such cheapness of Beans
and Pease, as the like has not been heard of.

England, and after ensued great rain, that the year following Wheat was raised
from five pence the bushel, to sixteen pence, and so increased yearly, till it
was lastly sold for twenty shillings the Quarter.

England, giving them to bear their charges till they were out of the Realm;
the number of Jews then expulsed, were 15. M. 9. persons.

London.

Thames overflowing the banks, made a breach at Rother-Hith beside London. The
low ground about Bermondsey and Tothil, was over-flowed.

Westminster, the flame thereof being driven by wind, fired the building of
the Monastery next adjoining, which with the Palace were both consumed.

William Wallace, which had often times set Scotland in great trouble, was
taken and brought to London, where he was hanged, headed, and quartered.

July at Burgh upon the Sands, in the year of our Lord, 1307. when he had
reigned thirty four years, seven months, and odd days, his body was buried at
Westminster.

Edward Carnarvan.
EDward Carnarvan, so called, being born at Carnarvan, began his Reign the
seventh of July, in the year 1307. he was fair of body, but unstedfast in
manners, not regarding to govern the Commonwealth by discretion and Justice,
which caused great variance between him and his Lords.

Edward the Second.
Pierce of Gavestone, Earl of Cornwall, a stranger born, banished him the Land.

Pierce of Gavestone out of Ireland, and gave him the Earl of Glocesters Sister
in marriage, which caused him again to rise in pride, scorning the Nobles of
the Realm; the Barons therefore declared to the King; that except he would
dispel the said Pierce from his company, they would rise against him, as
against a perjured Prince: whereupon once again he caused Pierce to abjure.

Pierce of Gaveston returned into England, and came to the Kings presence, who
forgetting all oaths and promises made to his Barons, received him as a
heavenly gift.

Middleton in Dorsetshire was consumed with lightning, the Monks being at
Mattins.

England being confederated against Pierce of Gaveston, besieged him at the
Castle of Scarborough, where they took him, and brought him to Warwick Castle,
and caused his head to be stricken off.

shillings; a fat stalled cow at twelve shillings; an other cow at ten
shillings; a fat mutton corn-fed, or whose wool is well grown, at twenty
pence; another fat mutton shorn, at fourteen pence; a fat hogg of two years
old, at three shillings four pence; a fat goose at two pence half penny, in the
City three pence; a fat capon at two pence, in the city two pence half penny; a
fat hen at one penny, in the City one penny half penny; four Pigeons for one
penny; twenty four eggs a penny; in the City twenty eggs a penny.

Exeter named himself the Son of Edward the First, for the which he was hanged
at Northampton.

died; horseflesh was counted great delicates; the poor stole fat dogs to eat;
some in holes and corners eat the flesh of their own children; the thieves that
were in prison, did pluck in pieces those that were newly brought in amongst
them, and greedily devoured them half alive.



The King doting so much on the two Spencers, as he did on Pierce of Gaveston,
maintaining wars against his Barons, and his Barons against him, was at last
overthrown, and taken prisoner, the two Spencers hanged, drawn, and quartered,
as Traitors to the Commonwealth of England. The King, after he had reigned
nineteen years, six months, and odd days, was deposed by consent of
Parliament, who elected Edward his eldest Son.

Edward the Third.
EDward the Third, about the age of fourteen years, began his reign the 25 of
January, in the year of our Lord, 1326. in feats of arms he was very expert, at
the beginning of his reign he was chiefly ordered by his Mother Isabell.

Bury besieged the Abbey, burnt the gates, wounded the Monks, bare out all the
gold and silver ornaments, books, Charters, the assay to their coin, stamps,
and all other things appertaining to their coin.

September, at night, King Edward the second was cruelly murdered in the castle
of Barkley, by the practice of the Queen his wife, and the Lord Mortimer, and
the Bishop of Hereford; he was buried at Gloucester.

Roger Mortimer, and Edmond of Woodstock, Earl of Kent, the Kings Uncle was
beheaded at Winchester.

Roger Mortimor was taken by William Mountacute, and sent to London, where he
was condemned, and hanged.

England, but specially in the Thames, so that all the cattle and beasts near
thereunto were drowned.

New Castle upon Tine, bare down part of the Town wall, where an hundred and
twenty men and women were drowned.

Oxfordshire, near Chippingnorton, was found a Serpent, having two heads, and
two faces, like women; one face attired of the new fashion of women's attire,
and the other face like the old attire, and wings like a B^tt.



England, in which died Henry Duke of Lancaster, who was buried at Leicester.

England overturned houses and Church-steeples.

An. reg. 37.
A Frost in England lasted from the midst of September, to the month of April.

Edward ended his life at his Manor of Shene, the 21 day of June, in the year
of our Lord, 1377. when he had reigned fifty years, four months, and odd
days; he was buried at Westminster.

King Richard of Bourdeaux.
RIchard the Second, the Son of Prince Edward, being but eleven years old,
began his Reign the 21 of June, in the year of our Lord, 1377. in bounty and
liberality he far passed all his Progenitors; but for that he was young, was
most ruled by young counsel, and regarded nothing the counsel of the sage and
wise men of the Realm: This thing turned the Land to great trouble, and himself
to great misery.

Jack Straw was beheaded for Rebellion against the King; Wat Tyler arrested by
the Mayor of the City of High Treason, was slain in Smithfield, and all the
rest of the crew pardoned by the King.

May, and a water-shaking, which made the ships in the Haven to totter.

John Bale brought to Saint Albans, was hanged, drawn and quartered.

John Raw, Captain of the Rebels in Suffolk, was hanged and quartered.

July was an Earthquake.



In Oxford, the Welsh and Southern Scholars assailed the Northern, whereby many
murders were committed.

Cock in Cheap a Brewer, at the little Conduit, was murdered in the night by a
Thief, who came in at the gutter window, as it was known long after by the same
thief, when he was condemned for felony.

His wife was burned in Smithfield, and his three men hanged wrongfully.

Arundel, with many more, were put to death, for that they rebuked the King in
matters of State something liberally.

Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, was banished the Realm.

John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, deceased, and was honorably buried in Saint
Paul's Church.

Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick; wherefore he went about to induce
the Lords, both spiritual and temporal, to make a submission by writing,
acknowledging themselves to be Traitors to the King, though they never offended
him. -- Moreover, he compelled them to set their hands to blanks, to the end,
that so often as it pleased him, he might oppre^^ them.

him, but all against him, for within a while after, he was sent to the Tower,
till the next Parliament, which was begun the morrow after Michaelmas-day, at
which time he resigned all his power and Knightly title to the Crown of England
and France, to Henry Duke of Hereford, and Lancaster, when he had reigned
twenty two years, three months, and odd days.

Henry the Fourth: Henry of Bollengbrook.
HEnry the Fourth, son to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, was made King of
England, more by force, then by lawful succession, or election: He began his
Reign the 29 of September, in the year 1399.

Richard.

John Holland, late Duke of Exeter; Thomas Holland, Duke of Surrey, Edward Duke
of Awmarl, John Mountecute, Earl of Salisbury; Thomas Spencer, Sir Ralph
Lumley, Sir Thomas Blunt, Sir Benedict Cely, Knights, with others, conspired
against King Henry, and appointed privily to murder him, but their Treason was
found out, and they were all put to death.

King Richard being in Pomfret-Castle, died the fourteenth day of February, his
body was brought to London, and so through the City of London to St. Paul's
Church, barefaced three days for all beholders; from thence he was carried to
Langley, and there buried.

Richard was alive, for the which a Priest was taken at Warwick, who was drawn,
hanged, and quartered. Walter Waldock, Prior of Lawd, was likewise hanged and
headed, and eight gray Friars hanged and headed at London, of the which, one
Richard Fresby, Doctor of Divinity, was drawn, and hanged. -- Sir Roger
Claringdon Knight, a Esquire, and a Yeoman, were beheaded at London, and diverse
gray Friars hanged and beheaded, and two at Leicester, all these had published
King Richard to be alive.

London consumed above thirty thousand.



Henry Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolph, came into England with a
great company, pretending by Proclamation to deliver the people from the great
oppression that they were burdened with; but by Sir Thomas Rokebey, Sheriff of
Yorkshire, he was encountered at Bramhammoor, and there slain; the Lord
Bardolph was likewise wounded to death.

Henry, being delivered of all civil division, he was taken with sickness, and
yielded to God his spirit, the 20 of March, 1412. when he had reigned thirteen
years, six months, and odd days: he was buried at Canterbury.

Henry of Monmouth.
HEnry the Fifth began his Reign the 20 of March, in the year 1412. This Prince
exceeded the mean stature of men; he was beauteous of visage, his neck long,
body slender and lean, his bones small, nevertheless he was of mavelous great
strength, and passing swift in running.

John Old-Castle, for diverse points touching the Sacrament, before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, Winchester, and others, was
convicted and committed to the Tower of London, out of the which he brake, and
fled.

John Old-Castle, assembled them in Thickets field near London, but the King
being warned, took the field before them, and so took of them such numbers,
that all the prisons in London were full of them, diverse of them were executed.

Southampton, where was discovered a great conspiracy against him by Richard
Earl of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Gray, and Henry Scrope, and others, who were
executed at Southampton.

Normandy: He laid siege to Hartslue, which was yielded to him; he fo^ght the
battle at Agent-Court, where he had a mavelous victory.

Dunstones, in the East of London, a great fray happened, where many people were
fore wounded, and Thomas Pettwarden Fishmong, slain. The beginners of the fray
was the Lord Strange, and Sir John Russel, Knight, through the quarrel of their
two wives, were brought to the Counter in the Poultry, and excommunicated at
Pauls-Cross.

John Old-Castle being taken after he had broke out of the Tower, was sent to
London by the Lord Powes out of Wales; which Sir John was convict by
Parliament, and sent to Saint Giles in the fields, and was there hanged, and
consumed with fire.

VVrotham in Norfolk, which had haunted Newmarket-hith, and there robbed and
spoiled many, was with his Concubine brought to Newgate at London, and there
died.

England in France, as their own Chronicles testify, that in the Court of
Chancery in Paris, all things were sealed with the Seal of King Henry of
England, and the Great Seal of England was there new made and used, wherein was
the Arms of France and England, and as the King sat in chair of State, he held
two Scepters in his hands; in his right hand was a Scepter smooth and plain,
only the proportion of the French coin, commonly called the French crown; and
in his left hand he held a Scepter full of curious arts, carved and wrought
with the Arms of England, as is used in the English money, and on the top
thereof a Cross; the French were much vexed thereat, but knevv not how to help
themselves.

Henry being at Boys at Vincent, waxed ^^ck, and died the last day of August,
in the year 1422. when he had reigned nine years, five months, and odd days,
he was buried at Westminster.

Henry of Windsor.
HEnry the Sixth, being an Infant of eight months old, began his Reign the
last of August, in the year 1422. the governing of the Realm was committed to
the Duke of Gloucester, and the guard of his person to the Duke of Exeter, and
to the Duke of Bedford, was given the Regency of France.

Simon and Iudes day, the Mayor caused a great watch to be kept, with most part
of the Citizens in armor to stand by the Duke of Gloucester against the Bishop
of Winchester, who lay in Southwark with a great power of Lancashire and
Cheshire men, but the matter was appeased by the Archbishop of Canterbury.

September was an earthquake, which continued the space of two hours.

April unto Hallow-tide, was such abundance of rain, that not only hay, but
corn also was destroyed.

Norfolk passing through London Bridge, his Barge overwhelmed, so that thirty
persons were drowned, and the Duke, with others that escaped, were drawn up
with ropes.

So under God the people stood their friend,
And saved them by a Rope; that is some men's end.
VVhite-Chappel Parish, without Algate, and bare away her goods, but being
pursued, he took succor in the Church of Saint George in Southwark, from
whence he was taken, and forswore the Land; but as he came by the place where
he did the murder, the women of the Parish with stones, and sheeps-horns, and
dirt off the dung-hills, made an end of him.

Abbington began an Insurrection of certain lewd persons that intended to have
wrought much mischief, but the chief Author being Bailiff of the Town, named
William Mundevile, a Weaver, with some others, were put to death.

England crowned in Paris; but within a while after lost all his Father got in
France.

Calice beheaded, and a hundred and ten banished; and before that time was
banished one hundred and twenty.

Thames was frozen, that the Merchants which came to the Thames mouth, were
carried to London by land.

London Bridge, with the Tower next to Southwark fell down, and the two
furthest arches of the said Bridge, and no man perished.

London died.

A great wind in London blevv down almost one side of the street, called the
Old-Change.

Richard Which, Vicar of Hermetsworth in Essex, was burnt on Tower Hill the 17
of June.

July, the Postern of London by East-Smith-field, against the Tower of London,
sunk by night.

A stack of wood at Bernards-Castle fell down, and killed three men, by the
fall of a stair at Beford, where the shire day was kept, eighteen persons were
slain.

Eleanor Cobham, Duchess of Gloucester, was cited to appear before Henry
Chichely archbishop of Canterbury, to answer certain matters of Necromancy,
Witchcraft, Sorcery, Heresy, and Treason; where, when she appeared, the
aforesaid Roger was brought forth to witness against her, and said, that she
was the cause, and first stirred him to labor in that art; then she was
committed to the ward of Sir John Stuard Knight; then was taken also Margery
Gurdmain, a Witch of Ely, whose Sorcery and Witchcraft the said Eleanor had a
long time used; wherefore the said Witch was burned in Smith-field.

The ninth of November, Dame Eleanor appeared before the archbishop, and
others, and received sentence of Penance, which she performed; on the 17 of
November she came from Temple Bar with a taper of wax in her hand, from
Fleet Street to Paul's, where she offered her taper to the altar; on Wednesday
next she went through Bridg-street, Grace Church Street to Leaden Hall, and so
to Christ-Church by Algate; on Friday she went through Cheap, to Saint
Michaels in Cornhill, in form aforesaid.

The eighteenth of November, Roger Bolinbroke was arraigned, drawn from the
Tower to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered.

England, were heard terrible thunders, with lightning, whereby the Church of
Baldock in Hartfordshire, the Church of Walden in Essex, and diverse others,
were sore shaken, and the Steeple of Saint Paul's in London, about three of the
clock in the afternoon, was set on fire in the midst of the shaft, but by the
labor of vvell-disposed people the same was squenched.

Adam Molins, Bishop of Chichester, Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal, was by
Seamen slain at Portsmouth. -- Bluebeard, a Fuller taken beside Canterbury,
for raising a Rebellion, was hanged and quartered.

Suffolk was banished the Land, who sailing toward France, was met on the
Sea by a Man of War, and was beheaded, his corpse was cast up at Dover. The
Commons of Kent did rise in great numbers; one Jack Cade being their Captain,
these Rebels did great mischief, putting to death whom they pleased, until at
last the King offering them a pardon if they would submir, they condescended
to it; Jack Cade their Captain fled, and was slain in the Wild of Sussex.
after this the King went down into Kent, and finding who were the chief of this
rebellion, caused them to be hanged, drawn and quartered; the 29. of June,
William Bishop of Salisbury was murdered by his own Tenants.

London against the Italians and Lumbards.

Erith were taken four great fishes, whereof two were Whales: Frenchmen landing
at Sandwitch, wasted the town, and slew the inhabitants.

Thomas Piercie, Lord Egremount, and Sir Richard Piercie his brother, being
prisoners in Newgate, brake out by night, and went to the King, other prisoners
took the leads of the gate and defended themselves a long while against the
Sheriffs, and all other Officers.

Fleetstreet, between men of the Court, and the inhabitants of the same street,
in which fray the Queens Attorney was slain: for this fact the King committed
the Governors of Furnival, Clifford, and Barnards Inn to prison, and William
Tailor Alderman of the Ward, with many others, were sent to Windsor Castle.

Germany at Magunce: William Caxton of London Mercer, brought it into England
in the year 1471. and first practiced it at the Abbie of St. Peter's at
Westminster.

Edward Earl of March got his kingdom from him.

Edward Earl of March came to London with a mighty power of March men, and
accompanied with the Earl of Warwick, the 26 of February, where he was
joyfully received: Edward being elected, was proclaimed by the name of Edward
the fourth, on the fourth of March, and King Henry lost his kingdom, when he
had reigned thritty eight years, six months, and odd days.

Edward the fourth.
EDward Earl of March began his reign the fourth of March by the name of Edward
the fourth, in the year 1460.

The twelfth of March Walter Walker Grocer, living in Cheapside, for speaking
some words against King Edward, was beheaded.

The thirteenth of March Edward took his journey toward the North, where
between Shierburn and Tad-Caster, all the North part met him, and on Palm
Sunday the twenty ninth of March fought a great battle, in which were slain
Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, John Lord Clifford, John Lord Newel, Leo
Lord Wells, and many of rank and quality on both sides, to the number of 357
and eleaven persons, but King Edward got the field, the Duke of Exeter, the
Duke of Sommerset, the Lord of Ross; the Lord Hungerford fled to York to King
Henry, and then with the King and Queen, and Prince fled to Barwick and so to
Edenborough.

Margaret landed in the N^rth, where having but small succor, was fain to take
the Sea again, and by a tempest of weather was driven to Barwick where she
landed, but lost her ships and goods.

Many battles were fought between the two Kings, Henry and Edward, and much
blood was shed on both sides, striving for supremacy, one while the Commons
with some of the Lords would have Henry restored again to his former dignity.
and another while Edward should rule; at length Henry being overpowred, was
arrested, and sent to the Tower, where within a while after, he was murdered,
and buried at Chertsey since removed to Windsor.



Thomas the Bastard of Fauconbridge with a riotous company of shipmen, and
others, of Essex and Kent, came to London, where being denied passage through
the City, he fired the gates, w^n the Bulworks at Algate, and entered the City;
but the Citizens killed them that entered, causing the rest to fly pursued them
as far as Black wall, slaying many.

Edward rode into Kent, where he caused inquiry to be made of the foresaid
riotous persons, hanged the rich by the purse and the other by the necks: the
Major of the town with others, were beheaded there.

Thomas the Bastard of Falkonbridge was taken at Southampton and beheaded.

Exceter was found dead in the Sea, between Dover and Callice.

John Goose was burnt on the Tower hill.

Edward in his progress hunted in Thomas Burdits Park, at a Buck and slew many
Deer, among the which, one was a white Buck: Thomas Burdit, when he understood
thereof, wished the Bucks head in his belly that moved the king to do it;
Burditt was apprehended of treason, condemned, drawn from the Tower of London
to Tiburne and there beheaded.

George Duke of Clarence, Edwards broth^^ in the Tower of London was drowned in
a Butt of Malmsey.

London, and diverse other parts o^ the Realm.

Martins le grand, in London, three were drawn to the Tower hill, and there
hanged and burnt, the other were pressed to death.

Edward making great provi^^on for war into France, ended his life at
Westminster, the ninth of April, in the year 1483. when he had reigned twenty
two years one month, and odd days; he was buried at Windsor, he left issue,
Edward the Prince, and Richard Duke of York, and five daughters: Elizabeth that
after was Queen, Cicely, Ann, Katherine and Bridget.

Edward the fifth.
EDward the fifth about the age of thi^teen years, began his reign the ninth of
April, in the year 1483 which Prince reigned a small space, either in pleasure
o^ liberty, for his unnatural uncle Richard Duke of Gloucester, within three
months, deprived him of his life and Crown, as it was generally reported, this
Edward reigned two months and ten days.

Richard Duke of Gloucester.
RIchard the third, brother to Edward the fourth, was proclaimed king the 22 of
June in the year 1483. he put to death Anthony Woodvile, Earl Rivers, Lord
Richard Gray, the Q^eens brother, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and Sir Richard Hawes at
Pomfret, and William Lord Hastings, in the tower of London, all in one day.

He was crowned at Westminster on the seventh day of July.

After this were taken for Traitors against the king, Robert Ruff Sergeant of
London William Davie Pardoner, John Smith Groom of king Edwards stirrup, and
Stephen Ireland Wardroper in the Tower, with many more, who were charged that
they had sent Letters into Britain to the Earl of Richmond and of Pembrook,
and also that they were minded to steal our of the Tower Prince Edward and his
brother, for the which they were drawn from Westminster to the Tower of
London, and there upon the hill they were all four beheaded.

A grudge began between king Richard and the Duke of Buckingham, insomuch that
the Duke conspired with some Noble men against him, intending to bring into the
land Henry Earl of Richmond as heir to the Crown, for which conspiracy the Duke
of Buckingham was beheaded at Salisbury.

The thirteenth of December, was a great fire in Leaden Hall in London, where
was burnt a number of houses, and all the stocks for gunnes and other provision
belonging to the city.

King Richard borrowed great sums of money of the City, but being cut off before
the time of payment came, the City lost it.

Collingborn Esquire, was drawn from Westminster to the tower of London, and
there upon the hill was headed and quartered.

Roger Clifford Knight, and one Fortescue, were drawn through London; and at
Saint Martin le grand, Sir Roger would have broke from the Sheriffs, and taken
Sanctuary, but the Sheriffs took him again, and had him to tower hill, where he
was beheaded, and Fortescue had his pardon.

Henry Earl of Richmond, Jasper Earl of Pembroke his Uncle, the Earl of Oxford,
and many other Knights, and Esquires, with a small company of Frenchmen, landed
at Milford Haven on the sixth of August, whose coming when it was heard of in
Wales, diverse Noble men with great companies met him, and then marching
against king Richard at a village called Bosworth near to Leicester, he met
with his enemies the 22 of August, where between them was fought a very sharp
battle, in con^lusion whereof, King Richard with diverse others were slain, and
King Henry obtained a Noble victory; and immediately the L. Stanley crowned him
King in the field, with the crown which was taken off King Richards head:
Richard was buried at the Grey-Friers Church at Leicester, when he had held the
crown two years, two months.

Henry Earl of Richmond.
HEnry the seventh, born in Pembroke Castle, began his reign the 22 of August,
in the year 1485. he was a Prince of mavelous wisdom, policy, justice,
temperance, and gravity; and notwithstanding many great troubles and war, he
kept his Realm in right good order, for the which he was greatly honored of
Foreign Princes.

On the 22 of August was a great fire in Bredstreet, in the which fire was
burnt the Parson of Saint Mildreds, and one man more of the Parsonage there.

The sweating sickness began the 21 of September, and continued to the end of
October, of the which sickness a number of people died.

The 30 of October, King Henry was crowned at Westminster; he ordained a number
of chosen Archers, to give daily attendance on his person, whom he named Yeomen
of the Guard.

King Henry borrowed certain sums of money of the City, which was repayed the
nexr year after.

Wheat was sold for 3 shillings the bushel, and Bay Salt at the like price.

The Cross in Cheap Side was new builded.

The King married Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Edward the 4th, by the which
means the two Houses, York and Lancaster, were united.

Roger Shavelock a Tailor within Ludgate slew himself; and forasmuch as he was
a man of great wealth, there was a great contest between the Kings Almoner, and
the Sheriffs of London.

London; for the which many of them were sore punished.

London for six pence the bushel, Bay Salt at three pence half penny, Nantwitch
salt for six pence the bushel, white herrings at six shillings the barrel, red,
at three shillings the Cade, red sprats six pence the Cade, and Gascoin wine at
six pound the Tun.

Sir William Stanley was behe aded on Tower Hill.

Perkin Warbeck arrived in Kent, where when he and his company saw they could
have no comfort of the country, they withdrew again to their ships; but the
Mayor of Sandwich, with certain men of the country, fought with the residue
that were left behind, and took 169 persons, who were hanged in Kent, Essex,
Sussex, and Norfolk.

Cornwall; which under the leading of James Lord Audley, with Michael a
Blacksmith, and others, came to Black Heath, where the King met them, overthrew
them, and took their Captains: there was slain of the Rebels three hundred, and
taken fifteen hundred.

The Lord Audley was beheaded on Tower Hill, the Blacksmith and Flamock were
hanged and quartered at Tyburn.

The King sent an Army into Scotland, under the Earl of Surrey, and the Lord
Nevil, which made sharp war upon the Scots. In Bedfordshire at the town of
Saint Needs, fell hailstones eighteen inches about. Perkin Warebeck landed in
Cornwall, went to Bodmin, where being accompanied with three or four thousand
men, he proclaimed himself King Richard the fourth, second son of Edward the
fourth: from thence he went to Exeter and besieged it, which City was valiantly
defended by the inhabitants, but many of the Rebels were slain, and the^
withdrew themselves to Taunton; from thence Perkin fled to Bewdley, where he
took sanctuary, and was afterward taken, and pardoned his life.

Thomas Watrings, for naming himself to be Edward Earl of Warwick, who was then
kept close prisoner in the Tower.

Perkin Warbeck and Iohn-a-water were executed at Tyburn.

Edward Plantagenet, Earl of Warwick, son to George Duke of Clarence, was
beheaded at Tower Hill. Shortly after, Bluet and Astwood were hanged at Tyburn.

November at night, a perilous fire began upon London Bridge, near to Saint
Magnus Church, whereof six tenements were burnt. The 7 of February certain
houses more consumed with fire, against Saint Buttolphs Church in Thames Street.

Marshalsey broke out, and many of them being shortly after taken, were put to
execution, especially those that had lain for Felony.



About this time the City of Norwich was much wasted with fire, there was 160
houses consumed, with most part of their goods.

King Henry died at Richmond the 22 of April, when he had reigned 23 years, and
8 months, and was buried at Westminster in the new Chapel, which he caused to
be builded: he left issue Henry Prince of Wales, who succeeded in the Kingdom.
Lady Margaret, Queen of Scots, and Lady Mary, promised to Charles King of
Castile.

Henry the Eighth.
HEnry the Eighth, at the age of eighteen years began his reign the 22 of
April, Anno 1590. of personage he was tall and mighty, in wit and memory
excellent: the third of June he married Lady Katherine his first wife, who had
been late wife to Prince Arthur deceased. On Midsommer day the King and Queen
were crowned at Westminster.

Richard Emson Knight, and Edmond Dudley Esquire, who had been great
Counselors to King Henry the seventh, were beheaded on Tower Hill the
eighteenth of August.

Richard Hunne, a Merchant-Taylor of S. Margarets Parish of Bridgestreet, who
had been put in the Lollards Tower about the end of October, was now the fifth
of December found hanged in the same place, and after burned in Smithfield.

Westminster and Lambeth.

May-eve was an insurrection of young men, and Apprentices of London, against
Aliens, of the which diverse were hanged, with their Captain John Lincorn a
Broker; the residue, Ill Mayday.
to the number of four hundred men, and eleven women, tied in ropes all along
one after another in their shirts, came to Westminster Hall with halters about
their necks, and were pardoned.

England of the svveating sickness, and especially about London; wherefore
Trinity Term was one day at Oxford, and then adjourned to Westminster.

May was Edward Duke of Buckingham beheaded.

King Henry wrote a book against Luther, and therefore the Pope named him
Defender of the Faith.

December, in the City of Coventry, Francis Philip, Christopher Pickering, and
Anthony Mainle, intended to have taken the Kings treasure of his Subsidy, as
the same came toward London therewith to have raised men, and to have taken
the Castle of Killingworth, and then to have made wars against the King, for
the which they were drawn, hanged and quartered at Tyburn; the other of their
conspiracy were executed at Coventry.

February, four Merchants of the Still-yard did penance at Paul's, and Doctor
Barnes bare a faggot.

November, December, and January, fell abundance of rain, that thereof ensued
great floods, which destroyed cornfieldsd, pasture, and beasts; then was it dry
till the twelfth of April, and from that time it rained every day and night
till the third of June.

Such a scarcity of bread was then at London, and all England over, that many
died for want of succor: The bread-carts coming from Stratford to London, were
met by the way, and the people were ready to p^ll it out of the carts, insomuch
that the Mayor and Sheriffs were forced to go and rescue the same, and see the
carts brought to the markets appointed: Wheat was then at fifteen shillings the
quarter; shortly after the Merchants of the Still-yard brought from Dansk such
store of wheat and rye, that it was better cheap in London, then in any part of
the Realm beside.

Richard Rice a Cook was boiled in Smithfield, for poisoning diverse persons at
the Bishop of Winchesters house.

The eleventh of April, seven men with their horses, and a ferry man; were
drowned at Lambeth.

Thomas Bilney was burned at Norwich.

May was taken between London and Greenwich, two great fishes, called
Hurlepools.

Five men were hanged and quartered at Tyburn, for coining and clipping of
money.

A great fish was taken at Blackwall, which was brought to Westminster to the
King.

May was a great fire at Salters Hall in Bredstreet.

The fourteenth of August was a great fire at Temple Bar: the sixteenth of
August was the Kings Stable burned at Charing Cross, wherein were burned many
great horses, and great store of hay.

London, the Prior of Beval, the Prior of Exham; Reynolds a Brother of Simon,
and John Hail, Vicar of Thisleworth, were all condemned, drawn, and hanged, and
quartered at Tyburn, the fourth of May.

The eighteenth of June, three Monks of the Charter House of London, Exmewe,
Middlemore, and Nidigate, were hanged and quartered at Tyburn.

The 22 of June, Doctor John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, was beheaded on the
Tower Hill.

The sixth of July, Sir Thomas Moor was beheaded on Tower Hill.

Within a while after the Lady Ann Queen was had to the Tower, and there for
things laid to her charge, was shortly after beheaded: The nineteenth of May,
the Lord Rochford, Brother to the said Queen, Henry Norrice, Mark Smeton,
William Brierton, and Francis Weston, all of the Kings Privy Chamber, about
matters touching the Queen, were put to death.

In the beginning of October, at an Assise for the Kings subsidy kept in
Lincolnshire, the people made an insurrection, and gathered nine and twenty
thousand persons together; against those the king did send the Duke of Suffolk,
the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Earl of Rutland, with a strong power, whereof,
when the Rebels heard, they desired pardon, brake up their Army, and departed
home, but their Captains were apprehended and executed.

The ninth of October, a Priest and a Butcher were hanged, for speaking in the
behalf of the Lincolneshire men, they were hanged at Windsor.

After began an insurrection for the sames causes in Yorkshire, the people
gathered to the number of forty thousand, against those Rebels the king sent
the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Marquess of Exceter, with
a great Army, with whom a battle was appointed to be fought, on the Eve of
Simon and Jude, but there fell such rain the night before, that the two armies
could not meet, whe^eupon they desired the D. of Norfolk to sue to the King for
a pardon, and that they might have their liberties, which the Duke promised,
and rid post to the king then lying at Windsor, to know his pleasure, and so
appeased them; Ask that was the chief in this rebellion came to London, and was
not only pardoned but rewarded with gifts: the king dealt with this Ask as his
Father did with Perkin Warbeck, let him alone a while to see what he would do,
and these kings did but just play with these miscreants as the cat plays with
the mouse, for they were both of them hanged.

The twelfth of December, the Thames being frozen, the king, and Queen Jane
rode through London to Greenwich. The third of February was Thomas Fitz Garret,
son and heir to the Earl of K^ldare beheaded, and five of his Uncles, drawn,
hanged, and quartered at Tiburn: in this month Nicholas Musgrave, Thomas
Gilby, and others, stirred a new rebellion, and besieged the City of Carlisle,
from whence they were driven, and many of them put to death; also Sir Francis
Bigott, and others began a conspiracy, and for the same were atainted.

The twenty ninth of March were twelve men of Lincoln drawn to Tiburn and
there hanged and quartered for a new rebellion.

In Somerset shire was another rebellion began by Mr. Paulet, and some other of
his friends; the chief of them to the number of sixty were condemned, whereof
fourteen were hanged and quartered, one of them was a woman.

In June the Lord Darcie the Lord Hussy, Sir Robert Constable, Sir Tho.
Pierce, Sir Francis Bigott, Sir Stephen Hamelton, Sir John Bulmer, and his
wife, George Lumbley Nicholas Temple, Robert Ask, William Thrift, Abbot of
Fountains, Anthony Abbot of Gervaur, the Abbot of Rivers, William Prior of
Burlington, all these were put to death. Sir Robert Constable of Hull, Ask
hanged on a Tower ^t York Lady Bulmer burned in Smithfield Lo^d Darcie beheaded
at Tower hill, Lord Hussy at Lincoln, and the rest of them suffered at Tiburn.

The twelfth of October was born at Hampton Court, Prin^e Edward, and Queen
Jane lost her life the 14 of October.

Alwin a P^iest, Harsam customer of Plimmouth, and Thomas Evel were all hanged
and quartered at Tiburn.

The twelfth of May Friar Forest was hanged and burned in Smithfield, for
denying the kings supremacy, with him was burnt the gathering of Wales, (that
is) as much as to say Darvar an image.

The seventeenth of May was a great fire at Saint Margaret Pattons in London,
where many houses, and many persons were burned, Edmond Cunningsby for
counterfeiting the kings sign Manual, and Edward Clifford for the same cause
were hanged at Tiburn.

The first of September, was one Cartwel hangman of London, and two other
hanged by Clarken-wel, for robbing a Booth in Bartholomew fair.

Henry Marquess of Exceter, Earl of Devonshire, Hen. Pool. L. Mountacute, and
Sir Edward Nevil, the 9th of Ian. were beheaded on tower hill, two Priests,
Crofts, Collins, and a Mariner, were hanged and quartered at tyburn.

John Lambert was burnt in Smithfield, on Ashwednesday, John Potter and William
Mannering hanged in Paul's Churchyard, for killing of Roger Cholmley Esquire; in
the same place.

The third of March, Sir Richard Carew knight of the Garter, and Master of the
kings horse, was beheaded on towe^ hill.

The Vicar of VVansworth with his servant and his Chaplain, and Friar Ware w^^e
h^nged and quartered at Saint Thomas VVatrings.

At this time were all monasteries suppressed because the king like Ianus would
look two ways.

The Abbot of Reading, and two Priests, were hanged and quartered at Reading;
the same day was Richard Whiting, Abbot of Glassenbury, hanged and quartered at
Towerhill, besides his Monastery, according to an old Prophecy.

The Lady Anne Cleve received at Black Heath, and brought to Greenwich, and the
sixth of the same month married to King Henry.

The ninth of July, Thomas Lord Cromwell, Earl of Essex, was committed to the
tower of London: the 28 of July he was beheaded on tower hill, with the Lord
Hungerford. King Henry was divorced from the Lady Anne of Cleve.

The thirtieth of July, Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerrard, William Jerome, Priests,
we^e burned in Smithfield, the same day Thomas Abell, Edward Powel and Richard
Featherstone, were hanged and q^^^tered for denying the kings sup^emacy, the
fourth of August, were drawn to Tyburne, six persons and one lead Laurence Cook
Prior of Doncaster, William Horn a Lay b^other of the Charterhouse, Giles Horn
Gentleman, Clement Philpot, Edmond Broomeham, Darbie, Kenham, Robert Bird,
Gervis Carow, all put to death for denying the s^p^emacie.

The King married again.
The eighth of August, Lady Katherine Howard was ^hewed openly as Queen at
Hampton Court.

Great draught, and a great death of hot bu^ning, agues and feavours. the salt
water flowed above Londonbridge.

Ralph Egerton, and Thomas Harman, put to death for counterfeiting the Kings
b^oad Seal. In April, certain persons began a new rebellion in Yorkshire,
which were shortly taken and put to death in several places, of which Leigh
Tattersal and Thornton were put to death at London, Sir John Nevil Knight, and
ten persons more were put to death at York.

The Countess of Salisbury was beheaded in the tower, Damport and Chapman were
hanged at Greenwich for a robbery.

The 21 of June Lord Leonard Gray was beheaded on the tower hill; he was Deputy
of Ireland; the same day were hanged at St. Thomas VVatrings, Mantile, Roydon,
and Frowds, Gentlemen, for spoil and murder they had done in Nicholas Pelhams
Park: the Lord of Dacres of the South being in company on Saint Peter's day, was
led from the tower to tyburn, and there hanged.

On Christmas Eve at night began a great fire in the house of Sir John
Williams, master of the Kings Jewels, where many of those jewels were burnt,
and a great many of them stolen.

The Lady Katherine Howard, whom the King had married, for her unchaste living
with Thomas Culpeper, and Francis Durham, was by Parliament attainted, Culpeper
and Durham were hanged at Tyburn. The 23 of January the King was proclaimed
King of Ireland: the 13 of February were beheaded within the Tower, the Lady
Katherine Howard, otherwise called Queen Katherine, and the Lady Rochford.

March, Margaret Davy, a Maid, was boiled in Smithfield, for poisoning three
households where she had lived.

The 12 of July, King Henry married Lady Katherine Parre, late wife to the Lord
Latimer.

Anthony Person, Robert Testwood, and Henry Filmer, were burnt at Windsor.

A great plague was at London, and therefore Michaelmas term was adjourned to
Saint Albans.

This year ^han^ed four eclipses, one of the Sun the 24 of January, and three
of the Moon.

German Gardner, and Lark Parsons of Ch^lsey, Singleton and Assbey, were hanged
at Tyburn for denying the Kings Supremacy.

April a Gunpowder house in East-Smithfield was blown up, and therein burned
five men, a boy, and a woman.

This year was taken by the Kings ships on the English Coast, the number of
three hundred French ships, so that the Grey-Friers Church in London was laid
full of wine; the Austin-Friers and Blackfriars were laid full of Herrings,
and other fish, that were taken going into France.

A Priest did penance at Pauls-Cross, and there confessed that he pricked his
finger, when he was at Mass, and wiped it on the Corporis and Altar cloth, and
went about to make the people believe that the miraculous Host did bleed after
the words of Consecration.

The 13 of February, a Priest was set on the Pillory in Cheap Side, and burnt
in both cheeks with the letters F and A. a paper on his head wherein was
written, For false accusing; which judgment was given by the Lord Chancellor
in the Star-^hamber: a notable example of Justice.

a land, but the Beacons were fired, and the country came down so fast upon
them, that the French men fled.

Some certain ships of the Kings Ships.
called Hedgehogs, one of them had a mischance before Westminster, a firkin Men
burned.
of powder took fire, and killed seven men, and the eighth man was drowned.

The 20 of July the King being at Another mischance.
Portsmouth, the goodly ship called the Rose, with Sir George Carrow the
Captain, and many other Gentlemen, were drowned in the midst of the Haven.

The French were beaten off at the Isle of Wight; and likewise in Sussex, at a
place called New Haven.

One William Foxley, Potmaker for the Mint in the tower of London, fell asleep
the 27 of April, who could not be wakened neither by kicking, cramping, or
pinching, till the first day of the next term, which was full fourteen days
and fifteen nights: the cause of this his thus sleeping could not be known,
though the same were diligently enquired after by the Kings Physicians, and men
of learning, yea, the King himself examined him, and he was in all points found
as he had slept but one night; and he was living till the year of our Lord,
1587.

The 16 of July were burned in Smithfield for the Sacrament, Anne Askew, John
Lassels, Nicholas Overden Priest, John Adlam tailor, and Doctor Shaxton,
sometimes Bishop of Salisbury, preached at the same fire, and recanted,
persuading them to do the like, but they would not.

The Admiral of France came to England where he was gallantly and honorably
entertained: the English in those days kept them at a distance, and forced
them to submit.

The 12 of December Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Henry Earl of Surrey, his son
was sent to the tower.

Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey was beheaded on the tower hill, the 19 of January.

The 28 of January King Henry deceased, and left the Crown to his son Prince
Edward, Lady Mary his daughter by Katherine, and the third, Lady Elizabeth by
Queen Anne of Bullen: he deceased when he had reigned 37 years, nine months,
and odd days, and was buried at Windsor.

Edward the Sixth.
EDward the sixth began his reign the 24 of January, 1546. when he was but nine
years old: King Henry his Father had appointed by his Will for his
Privy-Councel, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Chancellor, the Bishop of
Durham, with others, to the number of sixteen. The sixth of February the Earl
of Hertford was elected to be Protector to the Kings person: the sixth of
February the Lord Protector in the Tower of London, endued King Edward with the
Order of Knighthood.

King Edward was crowned at Westminster the twentieth of February.

May, Doctor Smith recanted at Pauls-Cross.

The Lord Protector, and the rest of the Council, sent Commissioners into all
parts of the Realm, willing them to take down all images out of their Churches,
for the avoiding of idolatry: with them were sent diverse preachers to persuade
the people from their Beads, and at that time procession was forbidden.

The Church Service read in English to the people.

On Saint Peter's day Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester, preached before the
King, for the which he was sent to the Tower.

July a Priest was hanged and quartered in Smith-field, for killing one Mr.
Body, one of the Kings Commissioners; other of his Fellows were put to death in
other places.

A great pestilence in London.

The 16 of September Saint Anns Church within Aldersgate was burnt.

January Thomas Seimer Lord Admiral was sent to the Tower of London, he was
Brother to the Lord Protector; on the 20 of March he was beheaded on the
Tower Hill.

April six houses at Broken-wharf were burned.

In May, by reason of a Proclamation for Enclosures, the Commons of
Sommersetshire and Lincolnshire made a commotion, and brake up certain Parks of
Sir William Herberts, and the Lord Sturtons; but Sir William Herbert slew and
executed many of those Rebels. In July the Commons of Essex and Kent, Suffolk
and Norfolk, rose against Enclosures, and pulled down many parks and houses.

Also the Commons of Cornwall and Devonshire, desired not only the enclosures
might be disparked, but also to have their old Religion: these besieged the
City of Exeter, which was valiantly defended; John Lord Russel with a number of
Soldiers entered the City of Exeter, slew and took prisoners more then four
thousand, and after hanged a number of them in the town, and about the country:
the Lord Gray likewise, with strangers, horsemen, slew many people, and spoiled
the country.

The last of July, William Lord Marquess of Northampton entered the City of
Norwich, and on the morrow the rebels also entered the town, burnt part
thereof, put the Lord Marquess to flight, and slew the Lord Sheffield.

Diverse persons were executed as aiders of the aforesaid rebels, of the which
one was hanged within Algate, and an other at the Bridg-foot, toward Southwark.

The rebels in Norfolk and Suffolk encamped themselves at Mount Surrey, near
unto Norwich, against whom Sir John Dudley Earl of Warwick went with an army,
where meeting with the rebels, they had thought all to have died in the place,
but God brought it to pass, as well there as in all other places, they were
partly by power constrained, partly by promise of a pardon persuaded to submit
themselves, the Earl of Warwick entered the City of Norwich the 27 of August,
when he had slain above five thousand rebels, and taken their chief Captain,
Robert Kett of Windam tanner.

The twentieth of September, Edmond Bonner, Bishop of London, was sent from
Lambeth to the Marshalsey, for a Sermon which he preached at Pauls-cross, on
the first of December: on the first of October he was deprived of his
Bishopric, and sent again to the Marshalsey, for disobeyding the Kings order
in Religion.

The twentieth of November, Robert Kett, and William Kett his brother, were
d^livered out of the tower of London, to Sir Edward Windam, Sheriff of Norwich,
where Robert Kett was hanged in chains on the top of Norwich castle, and
William Kett hanged on the top of Windam-steeple.

The nineteenth of January were murdered by St. Sepulchers Church without
Newgate, in London, two Captains that had served the King at Boloigne, and
elsewhere; the one that was murdered was Sir Peter Gambo, the other Filieirga;
which murders were committed by Charles Gavero, a Flemming, who came post from
Barwick to do that act; the next morning he, with three of his companions, were
taken in Smith-field; and carried to Newgate; and the twenty fourth of January
they were all 4 hanged in Smithfield, Charles Gavero, -- Balthazar Gavero, --
Nicholas Dissalveron, -- and Francis Devalasco. --

The twenty seventh of January, Humphrey Arundel Esquire, Thomas Holmes,
VVinslowe, and Bury, captains of the rebels in Devonshire, were hanged and
quartered at Tyburn.

The tenth of February one Bell was hanged and quartered at Tyburn for moving a
new rebellion in Suffolk.

The second of May, Ione Butcher was burned in Smithfield for heresy, she held
that Christ took no flesh of the Virgin Mary, Richar^ Lion* Godard Gorran, and
Richard Ireland were executed the fourteenth of May for attempting a new
rebellion in Kent.

In the month of May, a miller at Battle-bridge was set in the pillory in
cheap side, and had both his ears cut off, for speaking some words against the
Duke of Sommerset.

On Saint Valentines day at Feversham in Kent, one Arden a gentleman was
murdered by consent of his wife, for the which fact, she was on the fourteenth
of March burnt at Canterbury; Michael, Master Ardens man was hanged in chains
at Feversham, and a maiden burnt; Mosby and his Sister were hanged in
Smithfield at London; Green, which had fled, came again certain years after,
and was hanged in chains in the highway over against Feversham, and
Black-VVill, the Ruffin, that was hired to do the act, was burnt in Zealand at
Flushing.

The twenty fourth of April, a Dutchman was burnt in Smithfield for an Arrian.

The twenty fifth of May an earthquake about Croydon, and those parts, did put
the people in great fear.

February, Sir Richard Vine, and Sir Martin Patridge were hanged on tower hill;
Sir Martin Stanhope, with Sir Thomas Arundel were beheaded there: the last of
April a house near to the tower of London, with three barrels of powder, was
blown up, the Gunpowder-makers, being fifteen in number, were all slain.

The third of August, at Middleton, eleven miles from Oxford, a woman brought
forth a child which had two perfect bodies from the navel upwards, and were so
joined together at the navel, that when they were laid out at length the one
head and body was West, and the other East; the legs of both the bodies were
joined together in the midst, they lived eighteen days, and they were women
children.

The eighth of August were taken at Queenborough three great fishes, called
Dolphins and the week following at Black-wall was six more taken, and brought
to London.

The seventh of October were three great fishes called Whirl-pools taken at
Gravesend.

The eighth of October was three more great fishes, called Whirlpools, taken at
Gravesend and drawn up to the Kings Bridge at Westminster.

King Edward being at the age of sixteen years, ended his life at Greenwich, on
the sixth of July, when he had reigned six years, five months, and odd days,
and was buried at Westminster.

The tenth of July was pro^lamation made of the death of King Edward, and how
he had ordained that the Lady Jane, Daughter to Frances, Duchess of Suffolk;
which Lady Jane was married to the Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth son to the Duke
of Northumberland* should be Heir to the Crown of England.

The eleventh of July, Gilbert Pott drawn to Ninion Sanders Vintner, dw^lling
^^ the sign of S^int -Iohn-Bapt^st-head within Ludgate, was set on the pillory
in Cheap, wi^h both his ears nailed to the Pillory and cut off, for words
speaking at the time of Proclamation of the Lady Jane.

Lady Mary eldest daughter to King Henry the eight fled to Frammington Castle
in Suffolk where the people of the country almost wholly resorted unto her.

In Oxford Sir John Williams, in Buckinghamshire Sir Edmond Peckham, and in
diverse other places many men of worship offering themselves as guides to the
common people, gathered great powers, and with all speed made toward Suffolk,
where the Lady Mary was. Also the thirteenth of July by the appointment of the
Council, the Duke of Northumberland, the Earl of Huntington, the Lord Gray of
Wilton, and diverse others, with a great number of men of Arms set forward to
fetch the Lady Mary by force, and were on their way as far as Bury.

The ninteenth of July the Counsel assembled themselves at Baynards Castle,
where they communed with the Earl of Pembrook, and immediately with the Lord
Mayor of London, certain Aldermen of London, and the Sheriffs, Garter King of
Arms, and a Trumpet went into Cheap, where they proclaimed Lady Mary daughter
to King Henry the eight, Queen of England, France and Ireland.

The twentieth of July, John Earl of Northumberland, being at Saint Edmonsbury,
and having sure knowledge that the Lady Mary was at London proclaimed Queen of
England, returned back again to Cambridge, and about five of the clock in the
Evening, he came to the marketplace and caused the Lady Mary to be likewise
proclaimed Queen of England: but shortly after, he was arrested and brought to
the Tower of London, the twenty fifth of July under the conduct of Henry Earl
of Arundel, thus was the matter ended without any bloodshed, which men feared
would have brought the death of thousands.

Queen Mary.
MAry the eldest daughter to King Henry the eight, began her reign the sixth of
July, in the year 1553. She came to London and was received with great joy, and
entered the Tower the third of August, where Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Doctor
Gardner, late Bishop of Winchester, and Edward Courtney, son and heir to Henry
Marquess of Exeter, prisoners in the Tower, discharged: the fifth of August,
Edmond Bonner late Bishop of London, prisoner in the Marshal Seas, and Cutbert
Tunstal Bishop of Durham, prisoners in the Kings Bench, were restored to their
Seas: shortly after, all the Bishops which had been deprived in the time of
King Edward the sixth, were restored to their Bishoprics again, also all
beneficed men that were married, or would not forsake their opinions, were put
out of their livings and others set in the same.

The eleventh of August, certain gentlemen minding to pass through London
Bridge in a Wherrie, were there overturned, and six of them drowned.

The thirteenth of August master Bourn a Canon of Paul's, preached at Paul's
Cross, so offended some of his audience, that they breaking silence cried out,
pull him down, and one threw a dagger at him, whereupon master Bradford, and
Master Rogers, two preachers in King Edwards days, with much labor conveyed
the said master Bourn out of the audience into Paul's School.

The twenty second of August, John Duke of Northumberland, Sir Iohu Gaites, and
Sir Thomas Palmer Knights, were beheaded on tower hill.

The Queen was crowned at Westminster the first of October by Doctor Gardener
Bishop of Winchester.

The twenty f^f^h of October the Ba^ge of Gravesend was overturned and forty
persons drowned.

In the beginning of the month of January, the Emperor sent a nobleman called
Egmont, and certain other Ambassadors into England, to conclude a marriage
between King Phillip his son, and Queen Mary.

The twenty fifth of January, Sir George Gage Chamberlain, certified the Lord
Major of London, that Sir Thomas Wiat, with cettain other Rebels, were up in
Kent, whereupon great watch was kept, and that night the Lord Major himself
rode about the City to look to the same and every night after, two Aldermen did
the like; in the day time the gates of the City were guarded by substantial
Citizens.

The 27 of Ian. the L. Treasurer came to Guild Hall from the Counsel, to
request the citizens to prepare hundred foormen well armed, to go against
Wiat, which was granted; and on the morrow were sent to Gravesend by water.

The twenty ninth of January, the Duke of Norfolk wirh the Captain of the
guard, and other Soldiers, and the Captains and Soldiers that were sent from
London, minding to assault Rochester Castle, where Wiat and his company lay,
but the Captains of the City fled over Rochester Bridge to Wiat, so that the
Duke was feign to fly for London again to save his life.

Thus Wiats number being straightened with the Queens Ordnance and treasure, the
thirtieth of January he removed to Black Heath.

Henry Duke of Suffolk Father to Lady Jane, flying into Leicestershire and
Warwickshire, made Proclamation against the Queens marriage with the Prince of
Spain, but the people gave no regard to his words.

The first of February the commons of the City assembled in their Liveries at
the Guild Hall in London, whether the Queen with her Lords came riding from
Westminster; and there after vehement words against Wiat, declared that she
meant no otherwise to marry then the Counsel shall think both honorable and
commodiously to the Realm, and therefore willed them truly to assist her, in
oppressing them that contrary to their duties rebelled, she appointed Lord
William Howard Lieutenant of the City, and the Earl of Pembrook, General of the
field, which both prepared all things necessary: Wiat entered Southwark the
third of February wherefore the draw bridge was broken down, Ordnance bent to
that part, general pardon proclaimed to all that would give over and forsake
the rebels. After Wiat had lain three days in Southwark, he turned his journey
to Kingson on Shroue-Tuesday in the morning, being the sixth of February, where
he passed over the Thames, and purposed to come to London in the night, but by
reason that the carriages of his chief Ordnance brake, he could not come before
it was fair day.

The same Shrove-Tuesday in the afternoon were two men hanged in Paul's
Churchyard, one of them was late Sheriff of Leicester, the other a Baker.

On the morrow early in the morning, the Earl of Pembrook and diverse others
were in Saint Iame's field, with a great power, and their Ordnance so bent,
that Wiat was forced to leave the common way, and with a small company came
under Saint Iame's wall, to escape the Ordnance, and so went by Chearing-Cross
to the Bell-Savage, nigh unto Ludgate without any ressistance, in at the which
gate, he thought to have been received, but perceiving that he was deceived of
his purpose, he fled back again, and at Temble Bar, was taken and brought by
water to the Tower of London.

The tenth day of February, the Duke of Suffolk which was taken in Leicester
shire, was brought to the City of London, by the Earl of Huntington, and one of
his brethren with him, and so had to the tower.

The twelfth of February Lady Jane and her husband Lord Gilford were beheaded.

The fourteenth of February about the number fifty of Wiats faction were hanged
on twenty pair of Gallows. in diverse parts about the City proclamation was
made.

The seventeenth of February, that all strangers should depart.

The twenty second of February certain of VViatt faction to the number of four
hundred and more, were lead to Westminster, coupled together with halters
about their necks, and their in the tilt yard, the Queen who looked forth of
her Gallery pardoned them.

The twenty fourth of February Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk was beheaded on the
tower hill.

The eleventh of April Sir Thomas Wiat was beheaded on the tower hill, and
after quartered; his quarters were set up in diverse places, and his head on the
Gallows, at Hay hill, near Hide Park.

The twenty seventh of April, Lord Tho. Gray was beheaded: William Thomas
Gentleman, for conspiring the Queens death, was hanged and qua^tered.

The tenth of June Doctor Pendleton preached at Paul's Cross, at whom a gun was
shot, the bullet lighted on the Church wall, but he that shot it could not be
found.

The nineteenth of July, the Prince of Spain arrived at Southampton, after he
came to Winchester, and there going to Church, was honorably received by the
Bishop, and a great number of Nobles on Saint James day; the marriage was
solemnized between him and Queen Mary shortly after they came to London, where
with great provision they were received of the Citizens, the eighteenth of
August.

The 26 of October. a Spaniard was hanged for killing an ^nglish-man.

The eighteenth of November, great joy there was among the people, with ringing
of bells, prayers for the Queen, and thanksgiving in all churches for he^ being
with-childe, which proved no such matter.

The 4 of Febr. Ioh. Rogers, Vicar of St. Sepulc. was b^^nt in Smithfield.

On Easter day a Priest n^med William Slower, with a wood knife wounded an
other Priest, as he was ministering the Sacrament to the people in Saint
Margarets Church at Westminster, for the which fact the said William on the
twenty fourth of April had his right hand cut off, and for opinions he held in
matters of Religion, was burned nigh unto Saint Margarets Church.

The tenth of May, William Constable a millers son* who had named himself to be
King Edward the 6th, was sent to the Marshalsea, and the 22 of May he was
carried about Westminster Hall, before the Judges, whipped about the Palace,
and then through Westminster into Smithfield.

The first of July, John Bradford was burned in Smithfield for Religion.

In the month of August* a monstrous fish was brought to Lin, of forty foot in
length.

In October fell such abundance of rain, tha^ for the sp^ce of six days men
might ^ow with Boats in Saint Georges fields; water came into Westminster Hall
half a yard deep.

The twenty sixth of October, Doctor Ridley, and Doctor Latimer were burned at
Oxford for Religion.

William Constable, who had caused letters to be cast abroad, that King Edward
was alive, and to some showed himself to be King Edward, the thirteenth of
March was drawn, hanged and quartered at Tyburn.

Cardinal Pool the Sunday following was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury.

The twenty eighth of March, part of Newgate, called Mannings Hall, was burnt.

Certain persons purposed to have robbed the Queens Exchequer, to the end they
might be the better able to make war against her; Udal Throgmorton; Pecham,
Daniel, and Stanton, were apprehended, and diverse others fled.

The twenty eighth of April, Throgmorton, and Richard Udal, was hanged and
quartered at Tyburn.

The nineteenth of May, Stanton was likewise executed at Tyburn.

The eighth of June, Rossey, Detick, and Bedell, were executed at Tyburn.

The eleventh of June, Sands, a younger son of Lord Sands, was hanged at Saint
Thomas a Watrings, for a robbery.

The twenty seventh of June, thirteen persons were burnt at Stratford the Bow.

The eighth of July, Henry Peacham, and Thomas Daniel, were hanged and headed
for conspiracy on Tower Hill.

Cleba a Schoolmaster, and three Gentlemen in Lincolns-Inne, being brethren in
Norfolk, were hanged and quartered at Bury for conspiracy.

About this time began the hot burning Fevers, whereof died many old persons,
so that in London died seven Aldermen in the space of ten months.

The 21 of November, a man was brought from Westminster with a paper on his
head, riding with his face toward the horse tail to the Standard in Cheap Side,
and there set on the pillory, and after burned in both the cheeks with the
letters F and A, for falsely accusing a gentleman of treason.

The sixteenth of December, a stranger born was arraigned for making keys to
Newgate to have murdered the Keeper, and let forth the prisoners; at which time
of his arraignment, he thrust a knife into the side of his fellow prisoner,
that had given witness against him, so that he was in peril of death thereby,
for the which fact he was taken from the Bar into the street, before the
Justice Hall, where his hand being first stricken off, he was then hanged on a
Gibbet: the Keeper of Newgate was arraigned and indicted for that the said
prisoner had a weapon about him, and his hands loose.

The Lord Sturton murdered two men, for the which he was conveyed from the
tower of London to Salisbury, and there hanged, with four of his servants, the
sixth of March.

A Blazing-star was seen at all times of the night, from the sixth to the tenth
of March.

The twenty third of April, Thomas Stafford, and others, to the number of
thirty two persons, coming out of France, took the Castle of Scarborough, which
they enjoyed two days, and then were taken and brought to London.

The twenty eighth of May, Thomas Stafford was behe^ded on the tower hill, and
on the morrow after three of his companions were drawn to tyburn, and there
hanged and quartered.

The first of January, the Frenchmen came to Calice with a great Army, and
within four days were masters thereof, and shortly after won all the pieces on
that side of the Sea.

The French King also invaded Flanders, spoiled and burnt Dunkirk, before King
Philip could come to the rescue.

The seventh of July, within a mile of Nottingham, a tempest of thunder, as it
came through two towns, beat down all the houses and Churches, the bells were
cast to the outside of the Churchyard, and some webs of lead, four hundred
foot in the field, writhen like a glove, the river of Trent running between the
two towns: the water running, was with the mud carried a quarter of a mile, and
cast against trees; trees were pulled up by the roots, and cast twelve score
off; a child was pulled out of a man's hands, and carried a hundred foot, and
then let fall, and died; five or six men were killed; there fell some
hailstones that were fifteen inches about.

The Quartain Agues continued very sharp, insomuch that many old folk died,
especially Parsons and Priests, so that a great number of Parishes were
unfurnished.

King Philip being absent out of the Realm, Queen Mary ended her life the
seventeenth of November, in the year 1558. when she had reigned five years,
four months, and odd days: the same day deceased Cardinal Pool, and a little
before two of her Physicians, beside many Bishops and Noble men: Queen Mary was
buried at Westminster, and Cardinal Pool at Canterbury.

Queen Elizabeth.
November, 1558. came certain news unto the Parliament House of the death of
Queen Mary, whereat many rejoiced, and many lamented, and forthwith her death
being generally known, they proclaimed Lady Elizabeth, second daughter to Henry
the Eight, Queen of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith: this
was done in London and Westminster, the Queen was then at Bishops Hatfield, but
not proclaimed there till two days after.

The Queen came shortly after from Hatfield to the Charterhonse, until the time
of her Coronation she stayed there: the Bishops kneeling down acknowledged
their allegiance: the fourteenth of Iannary she rode in triumph to the Palace
of Westminster, and the next day was crowned by Doctor Oglethrop, Bishop of
Carlisle.

The twentieth of January began a Parliament, wherein the fruits, tenths, and
supremacy were reserved, and connexed to the Crown. In this Parliaments time
the Queen granted license for a free disputation to be held in Westminster
Church, concerning some different points in Religion, but it came to no effect.

The twenty fourth of Inn, the book of Common Prayer was established, and the
Mass clean suppressed in all Churches.

In ancient time many images were in Churches, which were maintained by Queen
Mary, but by Queen Elizabeth beaten down, and burned in the open streets.

The fifth of Inly, through shooting off a gun in a house in Crookedlane, a
barrel of gunpowder took fire, which blew up four houses, shattered many other
houses, slew twenty persons outright, and hurt as many, besides great damage to
houses and goods.

The tenth of April, William Geffery was whipped from the Marshalsea to Bedlam,
for publishing, that one John Moor was Jesus Christ; which said John Moor,
after he had been well whipped, confessed himself a cozening knave.

June, between four and five a clock in the afternoon, a terrible tempest
chanced of thunder and lightning, and chiefly about London, where amongst many
harms, it fired the lofty Spire of Pauls-steeple, and began about the top
thereof, which was two hundred foot high from the top of the stone battlements;
the fire ceased not till it came down to the roof of the Church, and consumed
all the bells, lead, and timber-work.

March a Mare brought forth a Foal with one body, and two heads, and a long
tail growing out between the two heads.

A Sow farrowed a pig with four legs, like to the arms of a child, with hands
and fingers.

In April, a Sow farrowed a pig with two bodies, eight feet, and but one head,
many calves and lambs were monstrous; some with collers of skin about their
necks, like to the double cuffs of shirts, and neckerchiefs, then used.

May, a manchild was born at Chichester in Sussex, the head, legs and arms were
like an Anatomy, the breast and belly big, from the navel a long string hanging
about the neck, a collar of flesh like the ruff of a neckerchief, coming up
about the ears.

Ianurry, a great tempest of wind and thunder happened in the town of
Leicester, which uncovered many houses, and overturned many.

Pestilence in 108. Parishes in London, besides eleven in the Suburbs.

The eighth of July, a great tempest of thunder and lightning, by the same was
slain a woman and three kine in the Covent Garden, near Charing Cross; in Essex
a man was torn in pieces, his Barn beaten down, and his hay burnt.

An earthquake in the month of September in Liucolnshire and Northamptonshire.

From the first of December to the ^^elfth, was such continual lightning and
thunder, that the like has not been seen nor heard by any man living.

December, was driven or the shore at Grimsby in Lincolnshire, a monstrous
fish, in length nineteen yatds, his tail fifteen foot broad, and six yards
between his eyes.

The twentieth of September rose great floods in the Thames, that the marshes
were overflowed, and many cattle drowned.

The seventh of October, all the North parts of the element seemed to be
covered with flames of fire, proceeding from the North-East, and North-West,
toward the midst of the firmament, and descended West.

The twenty first of December. began a frost, which continued so extremely, that
on New Years even people went over, and along the thames on the ice, from
London Bridge to Westminster, some played at the Football; diverse of the Court
being there at Westminster, shot at the Butts upon the Thames; and people, both
men and women, went on the ice, in greater numbers then in any street in
London: On the third day of January it began to thaw, and on the fifth day was
no ice to be seen between London Bridge and Lambeth, which sudden thaw caused
great floods, and high waters, that bare down bridges and houses, and drowned
many people in England, especially in Yorkshire, it bore away Owse bridge, and
many other bridges.

The sixteenth of June, began a tempest about nine a clock at night, so great a
tempest of lightning and thunder, with showers of hail, which continued till
three of the clock in the next morning, so terrible, that at Chelmesford in
Essex, five hundred acres of corn was destroyed; the glass windows of the East
side of the town were beaten down, and on the West and South-sides of the
Church were beaten down, with all the tiles of their houses, besides diverse
barns and chimneys, with the battlements of the Church which were overthrown:
the like harm was done in many other places, as at Leed, Crainbrook, and Dover.

This year, by the commandment of the Council, diverse musters of light horsemen
on sundry days, and in diverse places about the City of London, were taken by
the Mayor and other Commissioners for that purpose: But thus it happened on the
eighth day of October, that Sir Richard Mallory riding through tower-street
toward the tower hill, there to take muster as was appointed, he was met by Sir
Francis Iobson then Lieutenant of the tower, and by him forbidden to enter the
Hill with the Sword before him, whereunto no answer was made by the Mayor, but
the Sword was violently seized upon by the Lieutenant, and his men, and
defended by the Officers of the Mayor, so that the Lieutenant called for more
Officers, and assistance out of the tower, and the Mayors Officers were minded
to raise tower-street, and some of the City, so there was like to have been a
great tumult, but the Lord Mayor caused proclamation to be made, that no man
should draw a weapon, or strike a stroke, but every man to depart home,
horsemen and all, till they were again warned to appear, which was on the same
day seventh night, being likewise Monday, and the fifteenth day of Octoher,
they did there appear before the Mayor, and did muster in the very place where
they were appointed, where by the Councels appointment, the Mayor had the Sword
peaceably born before him, as had been accustomed.

December, there arose a great storm of wind, by whose rage the Seas and
thames overwhelmed many persons, and the great gates at the West end of Saint
Paul's Church in London, by force of the wind were blown open.

Thomas Gresham built the Royal Exchange, by the advice of Queen Elizabeth, at
his own proper cost and charges, a fit meeting place for Merchants, who in
former times used to meet in Lombard Street.

April, by great misfortune of fire, in the town of Ossestry in Wales, to the
number of two hundred houses, besides cloth, corn and cattle, were consumed.

The seventeenth of May, in the town of Milnal in Suffolk, thirty seven houses,
besides ba^ns and stables, were consumed with fire in the space of two hours.



On the twenty eighth of March, the Queen sent three of her Ships to Sea, to
wit, the Antelope, the Swallow, and the Aid, and one Bark, against the Subjects
of King Philip, who fought with eleven Sail, and brought home great treasure.

Within a while after they fought with fourteen Sail more, whereof six of them
were sent into the river of thames.



The eleventh of October were taken in Suffolk at Downham-bridge, seventeen
monstrous fishes, some of them twenty seven foot in length, two miles from
Ipswich.

The twenty seventh of January, a French man, and two English men were drawn
from Newgate to Tyburn, and there hanged; the French man was quartered for
coining of gold counterfeit; the English men, the one had clipped silver, the
other for coining tin-money.

The plague increasing, Michaelmas term was adjourned unto Hillary term.

Northumberland, and the Earl of Westmerland, for rebellion in the North, to be
proclaimed traitors, and forthwith prepared an Army to suppress them, the
twenty fourth of November.

The two Earls were overthrown, and fled into Scotland.

The other rebels were taken by the Earl of Sussex.

The fourth and fifth of January did suffer at Durham, to the number of sixty
six Constables, and others, among whom an Alderman of the town, and one Parson
Plumtree: then George Bowers Marshall did see them executed in every town, and
other places, betwixt New Castle and Wetherby, about six miles in length, and
four miles in breadth.

The 22 of February, Leonard Dacre having raised a number of people, the Lord
Hunsdon setting on him with a company of valiant Soldiers, slew many of his
people, and forced him to fly into Scotland.

On Good Friday, the twenty seventh of March, Simon Digby, John Fulthroppe
Esquire, Robert Pennieman, Thomas Bishop Gentleman, were drawn from the Castle
of York, and there hanged, headed, and quartered.

The seventeenth of April, the Earl of Suslex, with the Lord Hunsdon, Master
William Drury, High Marshal of Barwick, with all the Garrison, and power of the
same, began a journey into Scotland, and entered into Tividale, burnt,
overthrew, and spoiled all the Castles, towns and villages before them, till
they came to Craling.

Sir John Foster with a Garrison entered Scotland, burnt and spoiled Cargeln;
there both the Armies met, and overthrew all that came before them, till they
came to Godworth: the Lieutenant returned to Barwick the 22 of April.

The Lord Scrope, Warden of the West marches, entered Scotland the eighteenth
of April, burnt and spoiled almost Dunfreize, took many prisoners, and returned
safely: the marches of England were so well guarded by the Lord Eure, Sir
George Bows, and other of the Bishopric, that not one house was burned, nor
one cow taken away out of England: there were razed, and overthrown, and burnt
in this journey, above fifty strong Castles, and Piles, and above three hundred
towns and villages.

The twenty seventh of May, Thomas Norton, and Christopher Norton of Yorkshire,
were drawn from the Tower to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered for
rebellion.

The twenty eighth of May, the Castle of Hambleton was yielded to Sir William
Drury, and by him presently burned.

A conspiracy was made by certain gentlemen, and others, in the County of
Norfolk, ten of them were condemned of High Treason, three of them were hanged
and quartered, which were these, Throgmorton, Thomas Brook, and George Deadman.

The fourth of August, the Duke of Norfolk was removed to the Charter House
near Smithfield.

This day Iohu Felton was arraigned for hanging a Bull at the gate of the
Bishop of Londons palace, and also two young men for coining and clipping, who
were all all found guilty of high treason.

The eight of August John Felton was drawn from Newgate into Paul's Church yard,
and there hanged before the Bishops palace gate, and being cut down alive, was
bowelled and quartered, the Sheriffs returned to Tyburn with two young men,
which were executed for coining and clypping.

The 5 of October, happened a terrible tempest of wind and rain, so that many
ships and boats were drowned, the water overflowing, drowned many towns,
villages, cattle, houses and goods, besides many men women and children were
drowned in their beds.

February, at Kingstone, neat Marlech, in the County of Hereford, was seen the
ground to open, and certain rocks with a piece of ground removed, and went
forward the space of four days, it removed it self between six of the clock in
the evening, and seven the next morning, forty paces, carrying great trees and
sheep coats, some with threescore sheep in them. The depth of the hole, where
it first broke out, is thirty foot, the breadth of the breach wa^ eightscore
yards; it overthrew Rinnastone Chapel, also two high ways were removed, nigh
a hundred yards, with trees and hedgrowes, the ground in all is 26 Acres, and
where tillage ground was, there is pasture left in place, and where was
pasture, there is tillage ground gone upon it.

The first of June John Story Doct. of the canon Law, who before had been
condemned of high treason; was drawn from the Tower to Tyburn, and there hanged
and quartered.

The sixteenth of July, Rebecca Chamber for poisoning her husband Thomas
Chamber, was burnt at Maidstone in Kent.

The seventh of September, the Duke of Norfolk was removed from the
Charter House to the Tower.

The sixteenth of January, Thomas Duke of Norfolk was arraigned in Westminster
Hall, and there by his Peers found guilty of high treason.

The eleventh of February, Kenelme Barn, and Edmond Mather were drawn from the
Tower of London, and Henry Rolfe from the Marshall-see in Southwark, all three
to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered; Barn and Mather for conspiracy, and
Rolfe for counterfeiting the Queens hand.

The tenth of March, deceased Sir William Pawlet Knight, Lord Saint John Earl
of Wiershire, Marquess of Winchester, Knight of the Garter, one of her
Majesty's privy council, and Lord high Treasurer of England, he was borne in
the year of our Lord 1443. he served Henry the seventh, Henry the eight, Edward
the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth: himself did see the children of his
childrens children growing to the number of 103.

This year 1572 was the massacre in Paris.

The second of June, was Thomas Duke of Norfolk beheaded on tower hill.

The twenty second of August, Thomas Piercie Earl of Northumberland, now
brought out of Scotland, whether he had fled, was beheaded at York.

The twenty fifth of March, being Wednesday in Easter week, George Brown,
cruelly murdered, near to Shooters hill in Kent a wealthy Merchant of London
named George Sanders, which murder was committed by the procurement of Mistress
Sanders, wife to the said George Sanders, for the which fact, George Brown was
hanged in Smithfiold, in London, the twentieth day of April, and after hanged
in chains near the place where he did the deed: Mistress Ann Sanders, Mistress
Ann Druery, and trusty Roger, Mistress Drueries man; being all consenting to
the murder, were all hanged in Smithfield on the thirteenth of May: not long
after, Anthony Brown, brother to the said George Brown, was for notable
fellonies conveyed from Newgate to York, and there hanged.

The second of Inn a great tempest o^ rain and hail happened at Tocester in
Northamptonshire, where six houses in that town were borne down, and fourteen
more fore perished, the hail stones that fell were six in hes about, one child
was there drowned, and many sheep and other cattle.

The sixteenth of June Thomas Woodhouse Priest, was arraigned in the Guild Hall
of London and condemned for high treason; who had judgment to be hanged and
quartered, and was executed at Tyburn the 19 of June.

The sixteenth of August, Walter Earl of Essex sailed into Ireland with the
Lo^d Rich, and many other Gentlemen; the Earl after many great dangers on the
sea, landed at Knockfergus, the Lord Rich after the like dangers landed at
Castle Kilciffe, Sir Brian Makephelin; on the sixth of September came to
Knockfergus to the Earl of Fssex, and there made his submission: After him,
Ferdorough, Macgillastick, Roze, Oge, Mackwilline did the like; and diverse
others sent their messengers to the Earl, to signify, that they were at his
command; as the Baron of Dongarrow, Condonell, Odonell, and the Captain o^
Kylulto.

The Earl of Essex having the Country of Clanyboy, and other, the Queens
Majesty directed her letters to the Deputy of Ireland willing him to make the
Earl of Essex General of the Irish Nation.

July, in the Isle of Thanet, a monstrous fish of the Sea did shoot himself on
shore, where for want of water, beat himself on the Sands, and died; the length
of this fish was twenty two yards, the nether jaw twelve foot, the opening,
the thickness of the back whereon he lay, to the top of his belly, was fourteen
foot, his tail o^ the same breadth; between the eyes twelve foot, some of his
ribs were sixteen foot long, his tongue was fifteen foot long.

The fifteenth of August, being Sunday, Agnes Bridges, a Maid, about the age of
twenty years, and Rachel Pinder, a wench about twelve years of age, both of
them counterfeiting to be possessed by the Devil, stood at Pauls-Cross, where
they acknowledged their hypocritical counterfeiting, requiring forgiveness of
God, and the world, for they made the people believe many strange things.

The fourth of September, in the afternoon, such a storm of rain happened at
London, as the like a long time could not be remembered, insomuch that the
channels of the City ran so violently, that a Lad about ^he age of eighteen
years, near unto Dowgate, was borne down the stream, and by the same carried
from the Conduit there toward the thames, with such a swiftness, that no man
with staves, or otherwise, could stay him, till he came against a cart-wheel
that stood in the watergate, and there he was taken up dead.

Westminster on the sixth of November; the same sixth day in the morning, there
happened two great tides in the river of thames; the first by course, the
second within an hour after, which overflowed the marshes: the fourteenth of
November, about midnight, diverse strange apparitions of fire and smoke were
seen in the air, to proceed out of a dark cloud in the North, toward the South
which so continued till the morning: the next day following, the heavens did
seem to be all on a fir^, and over our heads, the flames from the Horizon round
about, did seem to meet.

The twenty fourth of February, at Flies in February
Tewksbury a strange thing happened after a flood, in the afternoon there came
down the river of Avon, a great number of flies and Beetles, such as in Summer
evenings use to strike men on the face, in great he^ps, a foo^ thick on the
water, so that to credible men's judgments, there were within a pair of Butts
length of those flies, about an hundred quarters; the mills thereabout were
quite dammed up with them, for the space of four days after, and then were
cleansed, by digging them out with shovels: from whence they came is yet
unknown, but the day was cold, and a hard frost.

The sixteenth of February, between four and five a clock in the afternoon,
great earthquakes happened in the City of York, Worcester, Gloucester, Bristow,
Hereford, and the countries about, which caused the people to run out of their
houses, for fear they should have fallen upon their heads: in Tewksbury,
Bredon, and other places, the dishes fell from the shelves, and books in men's
Studies fell down before their faces: In Norton Chapel the people being on
their knees at evening prayer, the ground moving, caused them to run away in
great fear, fearing that the dead bodies would have risen, or the Chapel have
fallen; part of Rithing Castle fell down, with certain brick Chimneys in
Gentlemen's houses.

The 22 of July, two Dutchmen Anabaptists were burned in Smithfield.

The thirtieth of July was a great tempest of thunder and lightning, both men
and beasts in diverse places were stricken dead; also hailstones fell which were
seven inches about.

The twenty sixth of September, a Poulterers wife in the Parish of
Christ-Church without Newgate, was brought to bed of four children at one
birth, and the same day month, the mother was buried, but all the four
children were living, and were christened, but lived not long after the mother.

February, Anne Averies, Widow, f^^swearing her self for a little money, that
she should have paid for six pound of tow at a shop in Woodstreet, of London,
fell immediately down speechless, casting up at her mouth the same matter,
which by natures course should have been voided downwards, till she died; a
terrible example of Gods Judgments against them that make no conscience of
forswearing themselves.

March, in the night, a Tilt-boat, with the number of thirty persons, coming
from Gravesend to London, were all drowned, except one boy.

The month of August, many complaints being brought to the Queen against the
Flushingers for great spoils and robberies by them committed upon her Subjects,
her Majesty gave commandment to put four good ships, and two Barks of her own
to Sea, under the charge of Master William Hollstock, Esquire; Controuler of her
Majesty's Ships, with eleven hundred men, victualled for six weeks, in which
time was taken eight Flushingers Ships and Barks, prizes, and two hundred and
twenty Sea-rovers in them, who were sent to several prisons.

Walter Earl of Essex, and Earl Marshal of Ireland, Knight of the Garter, died
in Ireland the twenty fifth of August, at Divelyn, and was buried at Carmarthen
in Wales.

The seventeenth of March, through a strange tempest which happened in the
North, near the town of Richmond, not only cottages, trees, barns, and
hay-stacks, but also the most part of a Church called Patrick Brunton, was
overthrown, with most strange sights seen in the air, both terrible and fearful.

The twentieth of June, William Lumley, a poor man in the Parish of Emeley, in
the County of Worcester, being kept in prison by a wealthy Widow, he having a
Mare of 22 years old with Foal, within three days after foaled a mare colt,
the which immediately had an Udder, out of which was milked the same day a pint
of milk, and every day after gave above three pints, to the great relief of his
wife and children, the which colt continued so a long time after, as has been
seen by many thousands.

The fourth, fifth, and sixth days was the Assizes held at Oxford, where was
arraigned and condemned one Rowland Inks, for his seditious tongue, at which
time there arose amidst the people a damp that almost all were smothered, very
few escaped that were not taken at that instant; the Jurors died at that
instant; shortly after died Sir Robert Bell, Lord Chief Baron; Sir To de Olie,
Sir William Babington, Master Wenman, Master de Olie, High Sheriff, Master
Danvers, Master Harcourt, Master Kirk, Master Fietplace, Master Greenwood;
Master Foster, Master Nash, Sergeant Barham, Master Stevens: there died in
Oxford three hundred persons, and sickned there, and died in other places two
hundred and odd, from the sixth of July, to the twelfth of August, after which
day died not one of that sickness.

On Sunday, the fourth of August, between the hour of nine and ten of the clock
in the forenoon, whilst the Minister was reading of the second Lesson in the
Parish Church of Bliborough, a town in Suffolk, a strange and terrible tempest
of lightning and thunder, struck through the wall of the same Church into the
ground, almost a yard deep, drove down all the people on that side, above
twenty persons, then rending the wall up to the Vestry, cleft the door and
returned to the Steeple, rent the timber, brake the chains, and fled toward
Bongey six miles off; the people that were stricken down, were found grovelling
on the ground more then half an hour after, whereof a man and a boy were
found stark dead, the other were scorched; the like flash of lightning and
cracks of thunder rent the parish Church of Bongey, nine miles from Norwich,
wrung in sunder the wiers and wheels of the Clock, slew two men which sat in
the Belfrey and scorched another, which hardly escaped.

November, at night was seen a blazing Star with a long stream, which star was
seen till eight a clock in the morn.

The seventeenth of January one Simon Pembrook, dwelling in Southwark, being
suspected to be a conjurer, by the Commandment of the ordinary judge for those
parts appeared in the parish Church of Saint Savior, at the Court holden
there; this Simon leaned his head upon the Pew where the Proctor stood, which
after he had done for a little space, the Proctor lifted up his head to see
what he ailed, and found him to be dead, and straightway the said Simon fell
down and ratled a little in the throat, and never spoke after; this was done
just as the Judge came into the Church, who said it was the just judgment of
God upon him: after his clothes being opened, there were found about him
devilish books of conjuration and abominable practices; a picture of a man,
having three Dice in his hand, and this writing, chance, dice, fortunately, and
diverse papers of such like matter, as behad dealt in for men, such as are
mentioned in Leviticus. chap. 20. ver. 6. If any soul turn himself after such
as work with spirits and after soothsayers, to go a whoring says the Lord, I
will put my face from that soul, and will cut him off from among my people.

The third of February, John Nelson for denying the Queens supremacy was drawn
to Tyburne and there hanged and quartered.

The fourth of February and the night following fell such abundance of snow,
that on the fifth in the morning the same was found at London to be two foot
deep, and being driven northeast on bancks, it was found to be an ell deep, and
in some places a yard and an half; in the which drifts of snow, in the
countries, many cattle, and men and women were overwhelmed, and lost, it snowed
till the eighth day, and freezed till the tenth: then followed a thaw with
continual rain a long time after, which caused such high floods, that the
marshes and low grounds were drowned; the water rising so high in Westminster
Hall, that after the fall thereof, some fishes were sound there remaining.

The twenty fourth of April, Matthew Hammont of Hithersey three miles from
Norwich, Plowright, for denying Christ to be our Savior, and publishing diverse
other horrible heresies, was convented before the Bishop o^ Norwich, condemned
in the consistory, and delivered to the Sheriffs of Norwich, to be executed,
but because he had spoken treasonable words against the Queen, and some of her
Counsel, he was by the Major Sir Robert Wood, and Sergeant Windham condemned to
loose his ears, which were cut off the thirteenth of May, in the market place
of Norwich and on the twentieth of May, he was burned in the Castle Ditch.

This year Mark Scaliot, Blacksmith of London, for trial of his workmanship,
made one Lock of Iron, Steel and Brass, of eleven several pieces, and a pipe
key, all clean wrought, which weighed but one grain of gold: he also at the
same time made a chain of gold of 43 links; to which chain the lock and key
being fastened, and put about a fleas neck, she drew the same with ease; all
which lock and key, chain and flea, weighed but one grain and a half.

The seventeenth of July, the Queens Majesty being on the river of thames,
being betwixt her Manor of Greenwich, and Deptford, in her privy Barge,
accompanied with the French Ambassador, the Ea^l of Lincoln, and others, it
chanced that one Thomas Appletree, Serving-man, being in company with some of
his friends, would needs discharge a Caliver, being charged with a bullet, and
shooting at random, by misfortune shot one of the Watermen in the Queens
Barge; the second next unto the Bales of the said Barge, who sat within six
foot of her Highness, clean through both arms, for the which fact the said
Thomas was on the 21 of July brought to the water side, where was a Gibbet set
up, and when the Hangman had put the rope about his neck, he was by the Queens
pardon delivered from execution.

This year, John Fox of Woobridge, 269
William Wicnor, Robert Moor, Englishmen, having been prisoners about the space
of thirteen years, In Turkey.
with more then two hundred of diverse Nations, freed themselves, by killing
their Keeper, and returned home to their own countries.

In the month of September and October, fell great store of rain, which caused
great raging floods in sundry places of this Realm, which caused many men,
cattle, and houses to be drowned: In the town of Newport, the cottages were
bo^ne down, and the corn lost, pasture ground overwhelmed, cattle d^owned: In
the town of Bedf. the water came up to the market place, where cupboards,
chests, and forms swam abour the houses; their fuel, co^n and hay, was by the
water borne away; also the town of Saint Edes in Huntington-shire, was
overflowed s^ddenly, when all men were at rest in their beds, the waters brake
in with such force, that the town was all defaced, the Swans swam down the
market place, and all the town about the boats did float, Gormanchester was
suddenly suppressed, their houses full of water, and their cattle destroyed.

April, being Wednesday in Easter week, about six a clock in the evening, a
terrible earthquake happened at London, and generally throughout all England,
by violence whereof the great clock bell at Westminster struck against the
hammer, as diverse clock bells did, both in City and Country: In London a piece
of the Temple Church fell down: in the late dissolved Church of the
Grey-Friers, now called Christ-Church, in the Sermon time, one stone falling
from the top of the Church, killed a young man outright, and one other stone
so bruised a maid, that she lived but four days after, the man and the maid
being fellow servants in one house: diverse were bruised, and run out of the
Church. Some stones fell off from the Church of Saint Paul's in London, and some
from the Church of Saint Peter's at Westminster; diverse chimneys lost the^^
^ops, and ships on the Thames, and on the Seas, were seen to totter: this
earthquake did not continue above a quarter of an hour in London, but in diverse
parts of Kent, it held them so terrible, that the people went out of their
houses, for fear they should fall on their heads.

The thirteenth of June, about six a clock in the morning, at Shipwash, within
Bothel-Baron in Northumberland, there happened a tempest of lightning and
thunder, after the which, of a sudden, came great showers of hail, among the
which were stones of diverse shapes.

The seventeenth of June, in the Parish of Blandsdon in Yorkshire, after a
great tempest of lightning and thunder, a woman of fourscore years of age,
named Alice Perin, was delivered of an hideous monster, whose head was like
unto a Sallet, the forepart of him like a man, only he had eight legs, and not
one like an other, and a tail of half a yard long.

The 23 of September, at Fenistanton, in Hnntingtonshire, one Agnes, wife to
William Linsey, was delivered of an ugly and strange monster, with a black
face, mouth and eyes, like a Lion, and both male and female.

The eighth of October appeared a Commet or Blazing-star bushing toward the
East, which was seen by night two months together.

The thirteenth of October, a man was drawn to Saint Thomas a VVatrings and
there hanged, headed, and quartered, for begging by a license; whereto the
Queens hand was counterfeited.

In the marshes of Dainsey Hundred, in a place called Southminstor, in the
County of Essex, there suddenly appeared an infinite number of mice, which
overwhelmed the said marshes, and did gnaw and shear the grass by the roots,
spoiling and tainting the grass with their venomous teeth, in such sort, that
the cattle that grazed thereon were smitten with a murrain, and died thereof;
which vermin could not be destroyed by the policy of man, till it came to pass,
that there flocked about the marshes such a company of Owls, as all the Shire
was not able to yield, whereby the marsh-holders were shortly delivered from
the vexation of those mice; the like of these was once in Kent.

The Queen the fourth of April dined at Deptford, and there after dinner
entered the ship wherein Captain Drake had sailed about the World, and being
there, a Bridge that her Majesty came over broke, being upon the same more then
two hundred persons, and no hurt done by the fall, and there she Knighted
Captain Francis Drake in his ship.

This year was to be seen two Dutchmen of strange statures, the one i^ height
seven foot, and seven inches, in breadth betwixt the shoulders three quarters of
a yard, and two inches, the compass of his breast one half yard, and two in hes,
and about the wast one yard and one in^h; the length of his arms to the hands,
a full yard, a comely man of person, but lame of his legs, for he had broke
them with lifting a barrel of beer; the other was in height but three foot, he
had never a good foot, nor any knee at all, and yet could dance a Galliard; he
had no arm, but a stump to the elbow, or little more on the right side, on the
which singing he would dance a cap, and after toss it three or four times, and
every time receive the same on his stump; he would shoot an arrow near the
mark, flourish with a Rapier, throw a Bowl, beat with a hammer, hew with an
Axe, sound a trumpet, and drink every day ten quarts of the best beer, if he
could get it.

The first of December, Edmond Campion Jesuit, Ralph Sherwin, and Alexander
Brian, Seminary Priests, having been arraigned and condemned for High Treason,
were drawn from the tower of London to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered.

John Pain Priest, being condemned of High Treason for words by him spoken, was
executed the fourth of April.

The fifteenth of May, a Blazingstar appeared about ten a clock at night
descending in the North-west, the beard whereof streamed South-west.

The twenty eighth of May, Thomas Ford, John Sherret, and Robert Johnson,
Priests, having been before condemned of High Treason, were drawn from the
Towor of London to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered; and on the thirtieth
of May, Luke Kerby, William Felby, Thomas Totten, and Laurence Richardson,
were for the same treason in the same place executed.

The nineteenth of July, certain Firkins of Gunpowder, to the number of seven,
and as many more of Sturgeon laden in a Cart upon Galley Key, some small
portion of the same powder being shed on the ground, the horse in the same Cart
striking fire with his foot, fired all together, where the Sturgeon was blown
away, some into the Thames, and some elsewhere; one Firkin was driven through a
loom wall that was boarded over; the Crain at the Wharf, with many houses
thereabouts, were sore shattered, many men and horses blasted, three men and
seven horses killed.

The twelfth of August, there arose a great tempest of lightning and thunder,
whirlwind and rain, besides hailstones fashioned like the Rowels of Spurs, two
or three in^hes about, in the County of Norfolk; which tempest beat the corn
flat to the ground, rent up many great trees, and shivered them in pieces: at
Hemming, a mile from VVorsted, the West door of the Church weighing above three
hundred weight, was lifted off the hooks, and blown over the Font, within one
yard of the Chancel-door; the top of the Church was riven up, and the lead
blown away; five webs of lead were ruffled up together like a glove, and blown
into a field without the Churchyard: at East Russen were many Barns blowed down.

The seventeenth of January, in the Parish of Armitage in a place called
Blackmore in Dorsetshire, a piece of ground containing three acres, removed it
self from the place where it was planted first, and was carried clean over an
other Close, where elder and willow trees grew, the space of forty Goad, every
Goad containing fifteen foot, and has stopped up a highway that di^ected
toward the market town of Cearn; and yet the hedges wherewith it was enclosed,
inviron it still, and the trees stand thereon bolt upright, saving one Oak that
is almost twenty load, and the ground remains a deep pit.

January, being Sunday, about four of the clock in the afternoon, the old
underpropped Scaffolds of the Bear-Garden, on the South Side of the Thames,
over against the City of London, overcharged with people, fell down, whereby to
the number of eight persons, men and women, were slain, and many others sore
hurt and wounded; a friendly warning to such as more delight themselves in the
cruelty of beasts, then in the works of mercy, the fruits of full possessed
Faith, which ought to be the Sabbath days exercise.

William Prince of Orange was slain by Iowrigny a Wallon Soldier, who
notwithstanding sundry extreme torments inflicted upon his body in prison; as
also having his flesh pulled off with hot pinchers upon an open Stage, yet he
never shrunk, or craved any favor, neither repented him of the fact.

On the sixteenth of April, about eight of the clock in the morn, a Gunpowder
house in Fetter-lane, and many other houses neat adjoining, were blown up, with
the loss of fifteen hundred weight of powder, two men and one woman were slain,
and diverse others sore hurt, and some strangely saved.

Elias Thacket was hanged at Saint Edmonsbury in Snffolk, on the fourth of
June, for sedition; John Coping on the sixth, for publishing certain books
seditiously penned by one Robert Brown against the book of Common Prayer,
established by the Laws of the Realm.

On the seventeenth of September, John Lewis, who named himself Abdoit, an
obstinate Heretic, denying the Godhead in Christ, and holding other
detestable opinions, was burned at Norwich.

The twenty fifth of September, a monstrous child was born in Yorkshire, having
two heads.

The tenth of October, at Caster in Norfolk, about two miles from Yarmouth,
there was a fish, by force of the Easterly wind driven ashore, the length
thereof, from the neck to the tail, was seventeen yards and a foot, the head
was great, for the chap of the jaw was three yards and a quarter in length,
with teeth of three quarters of a yard in compass, great eyes, with two great
holes over them to spout water, her tail was fourteen foot broad in thickness,
from the back to the belly, she was four yards and a half.

James Earl of Desmond, in Ireland wandering without succor, being taken in his
Cabin by one of the Irish, his head was cut off, and sent to England, where
the same, as the head of an arch traitor was set on London Bridge, on the
thirteenth of December.

The thirteenth of December, a fire beginning in a Brew House in the town of
Nantwich, from the West end of the town, the flame was dispersed so furiously,
that in short time a great part of the South side, and some part of the East
side was burned down to the ground; which fire continuing from six a clock in
the evening, till six a clock in the morning, consumed in a manner all the
whole town, and about the number of two hundred houses, besides Brew-houses,
barns, stables; and in all about six hundred houses.

John Sommervile of Edstow in Warwickshire, of late discovered and taken in his
way, coming to have killed the Queen, confessed that he was moved thereunto by
certain traiterous persons, his Kinsmen and Allies; as also by reading of
certain seditious books lately published for the which the said Sommervile,
Edward Arden Esquire, Mary Arden his wife, Father and Mother-in-law to the said
Sommervile, and Hugh Hall Priest, were on the sixteenth day of December
arraigned in the Guild Hall in London, where they were found guilty, and
condemned of High Treason.

On the nineteenth of December, John Sommervile, and Edward Arden, being
brought before the Tower of London, to Newgate, and there shut up in several
places; within two hours after, Sommervile was found to have hanged himself,
and on the morrow after, Edward Arden was drawn from Newgate to Smithfield, and
there hanged and quartered, whose head with Sommerviles, was set on
London Bridge, and their quarters on the gates of the City.

On the tenth of January, William Carter was arraigned, and condemned of
High Treason, for printing a seditious book, and was so the same drawn from
Newgate to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered.

The seventh of February, were arraigned at Westminster* John Fenne, George
Haddock, John Munden, John Nutter, and Thomas Hemerford; all these were found
guilty of High Treason, and had Judgment to be hanged and quartered, and were
executed at Tyburn on the twelfth of February.

May, Francis Throgmorton was arraigned at the Guild Hall in London, where
being arraigned, and found guilty of high treason, had Judgment to be hanged,
drawn and quartered the tenth of July next following, the said Throgmorton was
conveyed by water from the Tower of London to the Blackfriars stairs, and from
thence by land to the Sessions Hall in the Old-Bailey, without Newgate, where
he was delivered to the Sheriffs of London, laid on a h^rdle, drawn to Tyburn,
and there hanged and quartered.

The 21 of January, Jesuits, Seminaries, and other Mass Priests, to the number
of twenty one, late ^^isoners in the Tower of London, Marshalsea, and Kings
Bench, were shipped at the Tower-Wharf to be conveyed toward France, and
banished this Land for ever.

The second of March William Parry was drawn from the Tower, through the City
of London, to Westminster, and there in the Palace Court was hanged and
quartered for high treason; as may appear by a book entitled, A true and plain
Declaration of the horrible Treasons practiced by William Parry, that Arch
Traitor.

The twenty seventh of April, Philip Howard Earl of Arundel, for attempting to
have passed beyond the Seas, without license of the Queen, was sent to the
Tower.

On the twentieth of June, Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, prisoner in the
Tower of London, upon suspicion of high treason was found there to have
murdered himself.

The fifth of July, Thomas A^^field Seminary Priest, and Thomas Welby Dyer,
were arraigned at London, and found guilty, and had Judgment to be hanged as
Felons, for publishing books containing false, seditious, and slanderous
matter; these on the next morning were executed at Tyburn.

On the fourth of August, at the end of the town called Nottingham in Kent,
eight miles from London, the ground began to sink, three great Elms being
swallowed up, and driven into the earth, past man's sight.

The fourteenth of September, Sir Francis Drake, General as well by Sea as by
Land, Christopher Carlisle Esquire, Lieutenant General, Martin Frobisher, with
diverse other Gentlemen Captains, and two thousand and three hundred Soldiers
in twenty two Ships and Pinnaces, departed from Plimmouth, and passing by the
Isles of Bayon, and the Canaries, arrived at Saint Iago, which City they took
and burned; after they sailed to Saint Domingo, which they spoiled, and
ransacked, and retiring homewards, razed and spoiled the City and Fort of Saint
Augustine, in Terra Florida; and the twenty seventh of July, in Anno 1586.
arrived at Plymouth.

The nineteenth of September, to the number of thirty two Seminary Priests, and
other prisoners in the Tower of London, Marshalsea and Kings Bench, were
imbarqued to be transported to Normandy, and banished for ever.

The nineteenth of January, Nicholas Devoreux was condemned of treason, as
being made Priest at Rhemes in France: also Edward Barbat Priest, for coming
into this Realm, was likewise condemned of treason, and both drawn to Tyburn,
and there hanged and quartered, on the 21 of January.

On the same day a maid was burned in Smithfield, for poisoning of her Aunt
with whom she lived, and would have poisoned her Uncle, but that she was
prevented.

The fourteenth of March, at the Assizes kept at the City of Exeter, in
Devonshire, before Sir Edward Anderson, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
Sergeant Floriday, Sir John Chichester, Sir Arthur Basset, and Bernard Drake,
Knights: Thomas Carew, Richard Carry, John Fortescue, John Waldran, and Thomas
Risdon, Esquires, and Justices of the Peace: of the common people died very
many Constables, Reves, Tythmen, and Jurors, especially of one Jury, being
twelve of them, died eleven, a strange sickness.

This sickness began first among the prisoners, and then fastened on the rest by
degrees.

The seventeenth of March a strange thing happened; Mr. Dorrington of
Spaldwick, in the County of Huntington Esquire, one of her Majesty's Gentlemen
Pentioners, had a horse which died suddenly, and being ripped up to see the
cause of his death, there was found in a hole of the heart of the horse a worm,
and of a wondrous form, for it lay on a round heap in a Call, or skin, in the
likeness of a toad, which being taken out, and spread abroad, was in form and
fashion not easy to be described; the length of which worm, divided into many
grains, to the number of eighty, spread from the body like the branches of a
tree, was from the snout to the end of the longest grain seventeen inches,
having four issues in the grains, from whence dropped forth a red water; the
body in bigness round about, was three inches and a half; the collar was very
like the collar of a Mackarel: this monstrous worm, crawling about to have got
away, was stabbed in with a dagger, and died, which after being dried, was
showed to many Honorable persons of the Realm.

The eighteenth of June, one Elks Clark, for counterfeiting the Queens Sign
Manual, to a presentation of the Parsonage of All Saints in Hastings, directed
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, or to his Commissary General, (the Diocese of
Chichester being void) that he might be instituted Parson there, was drawn,
hanged, and quartered at Tyburn.

In the month of July diverse traiterous persons were apprehended, and detected
of most wicked conspiracy against her Majesty; and also of minding to have
stirred up a general Rebellion through the whole Realm, for joy of whose
apprehension, on the fifteenth of the same month at night, the Citizens of
London caused the Bells to be rung, and Bonfires to be made, and also
banqueting, every man according to his ability, some in their houses, some in
the streets, with singing of Psalms, and praising God for preserving her
Majesty, and the people of this land; which doings of the Citizens were so well
accepted of her Majesty, as by letters to them directed may appear.

The seventh of September, certain of these wicked subjects were indicted:
First, For intending treason against the Queens own person: Secondly, For
stirring Civil War within this Realm: and thirdly, For practicing to bring in
a Foreign Power to invade the Realm: Seven of them appeared at Westminster, on
the thirteenth of September, who all pleaded guilty, and were condemned.

On the eighteenth of September the other seven were likewise arraigned, who
pleaded not guilty, but were found guilty, and were condemned.

These traitors, fourteen of them in all, were executed in Lincoln's Inn fields,
on a Scaffold of timber made strongly for that purpose, even in the place where
they had used to meet, and to confer on their traiterous practices, there were
they hanged, drawn and quartered: seven of them on the twentieth of September,
to wit, John Ballard Priest, Adam Babington Esquire, John Savage Gentleman,
Richard Barnwel Gentleman, Chidrick Titchburn Esquire; Charles Tylney Esquire,
Edward Abbington Esquire: the other seven were also executed on the 21 of
September, to wit, Thomas Salisbury Esquire, Henry Dunne Gentleman, Edward
Jones Esquire, John Travers Gentleman, John Charnock Gentleman, Richard Gage
Gentleman, Ierom Bellamy Gent.

The eighth of October John Low, John Adams, and Richard Dibdail, being before
condemned of treason in being made Priest, by order of the Bishop of Rome, were
drawn to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered.

The eighth of February, being Wednesday, according to sentence lately given by
the Nobility, Mary Stuart Queen of Scots, about ten of the clock before noon,
was executed, and suffered death, by beheading, on a Scaffold set up on purpose
at the great end of the Castle of Fodringay in the presence of George Talbot,
Earl of Shrewsbury, Henry Gray Earl of Kent, principal Commissioners, and
others the Gentlemen of the country near adjoining to the number of three
hundred; all her apparel was burned, but her body with the head was honorably
buried at Peterborow, on the first day of August next following.

Monday the twenty fourth of February, a man was hanged for Felony at Saint
Thomas a Watrings, being begged of the Surgeons for an Anatomy; after he was
dead to all men's thinking, cut down, and stripped, laid naked in a chest,
thrown in a cart, and so brought from the place of execution, through the
Borough of Southwark, and the City of London, to the Chyrurgeons Hall in
London, near unto Aldersgate, the chest being then opened, the weather being
extreme cold, he was found to be alive, and lived till thursday next following,
and then died.

The twenty third of February, a Gunpowder house at Redriff was blown up, and
much harm done.

Tilbury in Essex, to encounter with the Enemy, if he should attempt to land in
any place of that country, whereof the Earl of Leicester, Lord Steward of her
Majesty's household, was Lieutenant General; as also of the armies levied
against Foreign Invasion; the other to be employed for the Guard of her
Majesty's person, under the charge of the Right Honorable the Lord Hunsdon,
Lord Chamberlain to her Majesty: the Camp at Tilbury consisting both of
Horsemen and Footmen, raised out of all Shires, were of Lancers, two hundred
fifty three, of light Horsemen seven hundred sixty nine, of Footmen twenty two
thousand: the Army for the Guard of her Majesty's person, four hundred eighty
one, light Horsemen one thousand four hundred thirty one, Footmen thirty four
thousand and fifty. The Navy set forth, and armed for the Seas, consisted
partly of her Majesty's ships, partly of her Subjects, which were furnished out
of the Port-towns whereunto they belonged: 269
Of this Navy, the chiefest and greatest part was under the charge of the Lord
Charles Howard, of Essingham Lord, Admiral of England, and were addressed to
encounter with the Spanish Fleet: the rest of the Ships were assigned unto the
Lord Henry Seimour Admiral of the Fleet, to guard the Narrow Seas, and to stay
the iss^ing out of the ships and vessels prepared by the Duke of Parma at
Dunkirk.

The twenty third of May, the Lord Admiral come to Plymouth, with the Fleet
aforesaid, finding there Sir Francis Drake in a readiness with more then 50
ships and Pinnaces: the twenty fourth of June, the Lord Admiral issued out
toward Plimmouth; he divided her Majesty's ships into three parts, viz. Sir
Francis Drake in the Revenge, he being Vice Admiral, with other, toward the
Islands of Scilly; John Hawkins Rear-Admiral, in the Victory, with other,
toward the Isle of Ushent; and the Lord Admiral, with the rest, remaining in
the Sleeve, appointed other there, all to discern if the Spanish forces did any
way pass.

The nineteenth of July, intelligence was brought to the Lord Admiral by a
pyrat Pinnace, whose Captain was Thomas Fleming, that the Spanish Fleet was
descried, and that it was near.

The twentieth of July, the Lord Admiral made toward the sea, and the same day
had sight of the Spanish Fleet, in number by estimation one hundred fifty eight
sails, the Lord Admiral cast about toward the land to interrupt them from
landing, and having got the wind of them, followed them close all that night,
and so continually from place to place, until the second of August, in which
space having by the power of God wonderfully overcome them, he returned to
Margaret in Kent: now the Camp being kept at Tilbury in Essex, under the charge
of the Earl of Leicester, the ninth of August, her Majesty repaired thither,
where all the whole camp being set in order of Battalia; she passed through
every rank of them, to their great rejoicing, and lodged that night, and the
night following, in the house of Master Edward Rich, in the Parish of Hornedon;
on the next morning, she returned to the camp, and on the twelfth returned to
Saint Iame's and shortly after the camp was dissolved.

Sunday the twentieth of August, Master Nowel Dean of Paul's -- at Paul's Cross,
in the presence of the Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen in scarlet, all the
Companies in their liveries, preached, and moved them to give God thanks for
the great victory given to our English Nation, by the overthrow of the Spanish
Fleet.

August the twenty sixth, at the Sessions nere unto Newgate, were condemned
eight men for being made Priests beyond the seas, and remaining in this Realm
contrary to the statute, four temporal men for being reconciled to the Church
of Rome, and four others for releiving the others.

September the second, at night a fierce fire brake out over against the Dutch
Church in London, to the great terror of the whole City, but by the burning
down of one house, and pulling down some other, the fire was quenched.

September the eighth, the Minister at Paul's Cross, moved the people to give
God thanks for the overthrow of our enemies the Spaniards, and there were
showed eleaven Ensigns or Banners, taken in the Spanish ships by our men, and
on the next morning hanged on London Bridge, toward Southwark, where then the
fair was kept, being our Lady day.

October the eighth, a stable was burned with the number of twenty horses, at
Drury house near the Strand.

November the nineteenth, was this year kept holy day through the Realm, with
Sermons, singing of Psalms, Bonefires, and much rejoicing and thanksgiving
unto God, for the overthrow of the Spaniards, our enemies upon the seas, and a
sermon at Paul's Cross tending to that end.

November the twenty fourth, being Sunday, the Queens Majesty having attendants
upon her the privy counsel and other of the Nobility, honorable persons, as
well spiritual as temporal in great number, all on horseback, did ride in a
Chariot Throne; the Lord Mayor and, Aldermen attending her, with all the
companies in their Liveries, stood along to Paul's Church, where she heard a
Sermon preached by Doctor Pierce, Bishop of Salisbury, and then went to the
Bishops Palace where she dined, and returned to Somerset house by torch light.

January the fifth at night, a great wind in the North-east, overturned trees,
and did great harm in many places.

February the first, two soldiers were set on the Pillory at Leaden Hall,
where they stood for the space of three hours, the one had his ear nailed, the
other his tongue pierced with an aul, which aul remained in his tongue till he
was taken from the Pillory, for abusing their Captains with bad words.

About this time Francis Ket Master of Art, of Wimondham, for holding diverse
detestable opinions against Christ our Savior, was burnt near to the City of
Norwich.

February the fifth, two Soldiers were hanged on trees at the miles end for
being mutinous.

April the fourteenth, Philip Earl of Arundel, was arraigned at Westminster of
high treason, and found guilty by his Peers, and had judgment accordingly.

April the eighteenth, Sir John Norris, and Sir Francis Drake, with six of her
Majesty's ships, twenty ships of war, and an hundred fit for burden, having in
them a choice company of Knights, Captains, Gentlemen, and soldiers, departed
from Plymouth, and the twenty third of the same arrived at the Groin, the
twenty sixth, they took the lower town with great store of Ordinance, victuals,
cables, and other furniture for shipping; about the sixth of May they fought
with the Spaniards, at Borges Bridge, where the enemy fled with the loss of
seven hundred men, the lower town of Groine was burned, and the ninth of May
our fleet set sail, the Earl of Essex, Sir Philip Butler and Sir Roger Williams
met the Fleet, so that on the sixteenth the whole navy arived at Phinicha
where they set to land, and the same day won both town and castle, after this
they divided the Army, whereof part matched with Sir John Noris by land, to
Lisbon* the rest with Sir Francis Drake passed by sea to Cascales; the twenty
fourth our men entered the suburbs of Lisbone, where they obtained rich spoils,
and plenty of every good thing: the twenty seventh the Army left Lisbone and
came to Cascales, without any great fight or skirmish, where they took the town
and then returned for England, but landing at Vigoe, they took the town, and
wasted the Country.

The twenty first of June Sir Francis Drake arrived at Plymouth; and the third
of July, Sir John Norris with the rest of the Fleet arrived there also; the two
Generals being offended one with the other.

The first of August at night, was the greatest lightning and thunder, that
ever was seen or heard of any man living, and yet but small hurt done, God be
praised.

The sixth of November Lodowick Grevil of Warwickshire Esquire, was brought
from the Tower of London to Westminster, and there at the Kings Bench Bar for
murder, and other notorious crimes wherewith he was charged, arraigned, and
found guilty; but standing mute, had Judgment to be pressed to death, which
was performed in the Goal of the King: Bench in Southwark, on the fourt^enth of
November: on the which day for the same fact, his man was hanged at the Court
Gate at Westminster.

November, the Citizens of London were o^ten^i^es affrighted by fire: first on
the twentieth, about four a clock in the morn, on Fish-street Hill, where one
fair house was burn^d to the ground, and some people, in helping to quench it,
were consumed, and the houses next adjoining to it. Also the one side of Saint
Leonards was sore spoiled: On the twenty two of November at night, about eleven
of the clock, one other house over against the first was in great danger, but
soon slaked: On the twenty sixth, about one of the clo^k in the morn, one other
house and some people were burnt, and many other houses near about were spoiled.

The fifth of January, about five a clock in the evening before Twelfth day,
began a terrible tempest of wind in the South-west, which continued with great
vehemence till about eleven a clo^k at night: this in the City of ^ondon blew
the tiles off men's houses, and caused them to fear the overthrow of their
houses: the lesser West-gate of Saint Paul's, next to the Bishops Palace, was
broken, with bolts, and locks, and strong bars of iron, so that the same was
blown over.

In the Country, houses and barns were blown down, and some far from the places
whereon they had stood, besides t^ees in great numbers to^n up by the roots: At
the Sea a great deal of harm was done at Southampton; the Ships and Barks
riding at anchor, we^e driven a shore and sunk, the like was never seen.

The fifth of March, a maid was burned in S^int Georges field without
Southwark, for poisoning her Mistress, and other people.

This year 1589. Henry Duke of Guise, and his B^other the Cardinal Guise, were
both slain by the commandment of the French King Hen. the third. This Duke was
wonderfully beloved of the Clergy, and of the Peers, and Commons of France, of
the Conclave, and many Foreign Princes; the manner of his death was taken very
grievously.

Within a while after, the said King Henry of France was also slain by a Friar,
in revenge of the death of the two Brethren before named, and the Friar himself
was instantly slain by them that were about the King, who slew him with the
same envenomed knife wherewith he stabbed the King: this Henry the third was the
last of the House of Valois, and presently upon his death, Henry of Burbon,
King of Navarre, laid just claim to the Crown, but it was a long time e're he
was settled: by the help of Queen Elizabeth at length he enjoyed the Crown of
France peaceably, without any further molestation.

The next year following, the great and ancient City of Paris, by their new
King Henry the Fourth, was besieged, which City, until the day of their
visitation, was a glorious and a flourishing City, and the most populous City
in all Europe, until for their better defense, they were constrained to pull
down all their Suburbs; and altho^gh the Siege lasted not above five months,
yet such was the extremity of famine amongst them, as it may well be said to be
greater then that of Samaria, or Jerusalem; for after they had eaten all their
herbage and carrion, and all manner of moist leather, with whatsoever else they
could get, many of them did eat their own children, and the children of others.

On Wednesday in Easter week, by shooting off a gun in the town of
Ulfringhamton in Staffordshire, about the number of eighty houses were burned.

In the month of January, one Nicholas a Perveyer, for converting to his own
use certain provision taken for her Majesty, was hanged for example to others.

The sixteenth of July Edmond Copinger, and Henry Arrington Gentlemen, came
into Cheap, and there in a Carre, proclaimed news from heaven (as they said) to
wit, that one William Hacket Yeoman, represented Christ, by partaking his
glorified body, by his principal spirit, and that they were two Prophets, the
one of Mercy, the other of Judgment, called and sent of God to help him in
this great work: these men were afterward apprehended; the twentieth of July,
Hacket was arraigned, and found guilty, as to have spoken diverse most false and
traiterous words against her Majesty, to have raced and defaced her Arms, as
also her picture, thrusting an iron instrument into that part that did
represent the breast and heart, for the which he had Judgment, and upon the
twenty eighth of July brought from Newgate to a Gibbet in Cheap, where being
moved to ask God and the Queen forgiveness, he fell to cursing and railing
against the Queen, he made a prayer against the Divine Majesty of God, he was
therefore hanged and quartered: His immodest speeches at his arraignment and
death, utterly disgraced all his former seemed sanctity, wherewith he had
shrewdly possessed the common people.

The next day Edmond Copinger having wilfully abstained from meat; died in
Bridewell; and Henry Arrington, long after in the Compter, submitting himself,
writ a book of repentance, and was delivered.

On the twenty eighth of October, Ben O Royrk, a great man of Ireland, was
arraigned at Westminster, and found guilty of High Treason; and on the third of
November executed at Tyburn.

The tenth of December three Seminaries for being in this Realm, contrary to
the Statute, and four other for relieving them were executed, to wit,
Ironmonger a Seminary, and Swithen Wells Gentleman, in Grayes-Inne fields,
Blaston and White Seminaries, and three others at Tyburn.

The fourteenth of January, Captain Arnold Cosby an Irish man, did forcibly set
upon John Lord Burk, near to the town of Wansworth, in the County of Surry, and
there upon a malicious intent did wilfully murder him, giving him one mortal
wound with a Rapier, by means whereof he fell down; and after that, the said
Cosby with a Dagger gave unto the said Lord Burk twelve, or more several
wounds, of the which mortal wound he died within two hours after, for the
which fact he was hanged on a Gibbet near Wansworth, on the twenty 7th. of
January.

The eighteenth of February, Thomas Parmort was convicted of two several
High-Treasons, one for being a Seminary Priest, and remaining in this Realm,
and the other for reconciling John Barwis against the form of a Statute: the
said Barwis was likewise convicted of treason, for being so reconciled, and
also of Felony for relieving the said Priest: Thomas Parmort was executed in
Paul's Churchyard, on the twentieth of February.

The 27 of Febru. Sir John Parrot Knight, was arraigned at Westminster, and
found guilty of Treason, and had judgment, but died in the Tower.

The fourth of May, a Tilt-boat of Gravesend, having in the same Boat about the
number of forty persons, was overrun by a Hoy, so that the greatest part of
them were drowned over against Greenwich, the Court then being there, the Queen
beheld the mischance.

In the month of June a young man was hanged in Smithfield, and a woman was
burnt, both for poisoning her husband a Goldsmith.

The fourth of September a woman was burnt in Smithfield, for poisoning her
husband.

The sixth of September, the wind being in the West, as it had been for the
space of two days before very boisterous; the river of Thames was made void of
water, the wind forcing out the fresh, and keeping back the Salt, that men in
diverse places might go two hundred paces over, and then fling a stone to the
land. A Collier on a Mare rode from the North side to the South, and back
again, on either side London Bridge, but not without peril of drowning both
ways.

City of London, for afferming her self to be the daughter of Phillip King of
Spain, as she had been persuaded by some accounted Soothsayers; after proved
liers, for she was known to be a Butchers daughter in Eastcheap.

March the twenty first Henry Barrowe Gentleman, and John Greenwood Clark,
Daniel Studley Girdler, Sapio Bislot Gentleman, Robert Bowlet Fishmonger, were
indicted for felony, the said Barrow and Greenwood for righting certain
seditious books tending to the ruin of the Queen and state, Studley, Billot,
and Bowley for publishing and setting forth of the same books, and on the
twenty third, they were all arraigned, found guilty, and had judgment the last
of March, Henry Barrow, and Greenwood were brought to Tyburne and there hanged
the sixth of April.

About the same time Henry a principal penner and publisher of books, entitled,
Martin Mar Prelate was apprehended at Stebbenheath by the Vicar there, and
sent to prison, in the month of May, he was arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar,
condemned of felony, and afterward conveyed from the Kings Bench to Saint
Thomas watrings, and there hanged, this pernicious book much troubled the
people.

July the nineteenth, the Court of Assise was kept in Saint George's fields in
a tent there, set up on purpose, many prisoners were arraigned, nineteen were
burnt in the hand, but none executed; this assise was made an end the same day,
which was thought to have lasted three days, but the justices made have away
for fear of being infected with the pestilence.

This year no Bartholomew fair was kept, because of the sickness.

The whole number buried this year within the City of London, the Suburbs and
other places adjoining, as well of the plague as other diseases from the twenty
first of the month of December in the year 1592. until the nineteenth of
December 1593. was as follows, within the walls of all diseases, 8598.
whereof the plague 5390. without the walls and in the liberties, 9295. the
plague 5285, so that within the City and liberties, of all diseases, 17863.
whereof of the Plague 10675.

February the eighteenth, Harrington a seminary, was drawn from Newgate to
Tyburn, and there hanged and cut down alive, he strugled with the hangman but
was quartered.

The last of February, Rodoreck Lopez a Portugal as it was said, professing
Physic, was arraigned at the Guild Hall in London, and there found guilty, and
had judgment of high treason, for conspiring her Majesty's destruction by
poison.

In this month of March, were many great storms of wind, which overturned
trees, houses, steeples, and barnes, in Worcester shire, in Bewdley Forest,
many Oaks were overthrown, in Horton wood of the said shiere, more then one
thousand five hundred Oaks overthrown in one day.

In Stafford shiere, the shaft of the steeple in Stafford town was rent in
pieces, along through the midst, and thrown upon the Church, wherewith the said
roof was so broken, that one thousand pound would not make it good, houses and
barnes were overthrown in most places in that shiere, in Canck Wood, more then
three thousand trees were overthrown, more then fifty steeples in Staffordshire
were blown down.

The eleventh of April was a great rain, which continued more then twenty four
hours, and withal a great north wind.

April the fourteenth, a woman was burnt in Smithfield for killing her husband.

May the second came down great floods by reason of sudden showers of hail and
rain that had fallen, which bare down houses, iron mills, provision of coals
prepared for those mills, and likewise cattle.

June the seventh Doctor Lopez, and two other Portugals were drawn from the
Kings Bench in Southwark to Tyburn and there hanged and quartered.

This year in the month of May, fell many great showers of rain, but in the
months of June and July much more, for it commonly rained day and night till
Saint Iame's Eve; and on Saint Iame's day it began again and continued two
days after, notwithstanding there followed a fair harvest in the month of
August; but in September great raines rai^ed high waters, such as stayed the
Carriages, and bore down b^idges, as at Cambridge, Ware, and elsewhere, so that
grain grew to be of a great price, as a strike or a bushel of rye, five
shillings, of wheat, six, seven, or eight, which dearth happened more by means
of transporting by our Merchants, then the unseasonableness of thew eather.

December the thirtieth a woman was burnt in Smithfield for coining of money.

February the tenth, two Captains named York and Williams, were executed at
Tyburn for felony.

February the tenth, Southwel a Jesuit that long time had lain in the Tower
of London, was arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, he was condemned, and on the
next morrow, drawn from Newgate to Tyburne and there hanged and quartered.

This year by reason of the late transportation of corn into foreign
countries, it was grown here to an excessive rate, so as in some parts of the
realm, from fourteen shillings to four marks the quarter.

C^r^ain men for coining were hanged, also a Scrivener in Holbourn was hanged
and quartered for taking the great Seal of England from the old Patent, and
putting the same to a new.

On the twenty ninth of June being Sunday in the after noon, a number of unruly
youths were gathered together on Tower hill, being blamed by the warders of
Tower street ward, who willed them to seaver themselves and depart from thence,
these youths threw stones at them, and drove them back into Tower- street, and
were hartned on by a soldier, who sounded a trumpet, but the trumpeter and
many other of them being taken by the Sheriffs of London, and committed to
prison, about seven a clock the same night, Sir John Spencer Lord Mayor, rode
to the Tower hill, attended by his Officers and some others, to see the hill
cleared of all the tum^ltuous people where about the middle of the hill, some
Warders of the Tower, with the Lieutenants men, told Sir John that the sword
ought not to be born up there, and two or three cat^hing at it, some bickering
was there, insomuch that the sword bearer was hurt amongst them, but the Lord
Mayor seeing the hill cleared of all trouble, rode back, and the sword bearer
bearing up the sword.

July the twenty second, in the presence of the Earl of Essex and others sent
from the Queen, were arraigned at the Guild Hall, five of those unruly youths
that were on the Tower hill apprehended, they were condemned and had judgment
to be hanged and quartered, and were on the twenty fourth day of the same month
drawn from Newgate to the Tower hill, and there executed.

February the twentieth, five men for cousning and counterfeiting of
Commissions, were set on the Pillory in West Cheap, some of them had their ears
nailed, and some cut off, some that had before lost their ears, were burnt on
their cheeks and foreheads.

In the month of May fell continually rain, every day or night, whereby the
waters grew deep, brake over the high ways, namely, betwixt Ilford and
Stratford the Bow, so that the market people riding toward London hardly
escaped, but some were drowned, also toward Lambeth in the high way, people not
on horseback were born on men's b^cks, and rowed in Wherries in Saint Georges
fields.

Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Haward, high admiral of England, embarked
with one hundred fifty ships on the first of June, weighed An^hor, and hoisted
up sails, and took their way from Plimmouth toward Spain, and wone Cadiz and
returned with great booties and spoils.

Sunday the eight day of August, great triumphs was made in London for the good
success of the Earl of Essex against the Spaniard, the winning and burning of
the famous town of Cadiz, the overth^ow of the Spanish Navy, with orher
victo^ies; a sermon of thanksgiving was preached at Paul's Cross in the
fo^enoon, and bonefiers with great joy in the afternoon.

August the fifteenth a new house in Fleetstreet, hardly finished, suddenly
fell down, and with it one old house adjoining next to it, by the fall whereof,
the man of the house with a man servant and a child were killed.

Sunday the fifth of December, great number of people, being assembled in the
Cathedral Church of Wells in Somersetshire, in the sermon time before noon, a
sudden darkness fell among them, and storm and tempest followed after, with
lightning and thunder, such as overth^ew to the ground them that were in the
body o^ the Church, all the Church seemed to be on a light fire, a loathsome
steanch followed; some stones were stri^ken out of the Bell Tower, the wiers
and iron^ of the clock were melted, which tempest being ceased, and the people
come again to themselves, some of them were found to be marked with strange
figures on their bodies, and their garments not perished, nor any marked that
were in the chansel.

A Parliament began at Westminster on the twenty fourth of October, on the
which day many people were were smothered and crushed to death, pressing
between White Hall and the College Church to have seen her Majesty and the
Nobility, riding in their robes to the said Parliament.

This year pepper was sold for eight shillings the pound.

January the twenty fifth, one named Ainger, was hanged at Tyburn, for wilfully
and secretly murdering of his own father, a Gentleman and a Counselor of
Graies Inn, in his chamber there.

April, Twiford town in Devonshire was burnt by casualty of fire, beginning
first in a poor cottage; a woman there frying Pancakes with straw the same
fired the house and so to the town, about one of the clock in the afternoon;
the rage of which fire lasted one hour and an half, consumed four hundred
houses, one hundred and fifty thousand pounds consumed in money, plate,
merchandise, householdstuffe and houses, fifty persons, men, women and children
consumed, an alms house preserved, with poor men therein in the midst of the
fire.

July the twelfth, one Johannes Buckley, a priest made beyond seas, having been
arraigned in the Kings Bench on the third of July, and there condemned of
Treason for coming into this land contrary to the Statute was drawn to Saint
Thomas a Watrings, and there hanged and quartered, his head set on the Pillory
in Southwark, his quarters in the high ways toward Newington.

The first of September, in the afternoon was great thunder and lightening at
London, two great cracks, as it had been the shooting off Ordnance, some men
were hurt at the Postern by the Tower of London, and one man slain at the
Bridgehouse in Southwark over against the Tower.

November the ninth, an Esquire at Greenwich was arraigned at Westminster, and
found guilty of high treason, and on the thirteenth drawn from the Tower to
Tyburne, and there hanged and quartered.

In the month of July, were drawn hanged and quartered 2 Priests, one of them
was named Hunt, and the other Sprat, for coming into this Realm contrary to the
Statute, they were executed at Lincoln, two other Priests Edward Thing and
Robert Nutter, were likewise executed for this same offense at Lancaster, also
Thomas Pallafray a Priest executed at Durham, and a Gentleman with him for
relieving him, and lodging him in his house.

August the fifth, James King of Scots, escaped a strange and strong conspiracy
in Scotland, practiced by the Earl of Gowry and his brother.

February the fifth in the morning being Sunday, a great tempest of wind brake
the Windmil beyond Saint Giles in the fields without London, the miller thrown
one way, an other man an other, one thrown north and the other south, a part of
the Mil-roof and half the millstone likewise thrown down.

Sunday the eighth of February, about ten of the clock in the forenoon Robert
Devoraux Earl of Essex assisted by diverse noble men and gentlemen in warlike
manner, entered the City of London at the Temple bar, crying for the Queen, till
they came to Fanchurch street, and there entered the house of Master Thomas
Smith, one of the Sheriffs of London, who finding himself not master of his own
house, by means of the strength the Earl brought with him, and being ignorant
of his intent and purpose, conveyed himself out of a back door to the Lord
Mayor of the City, whereupon the Eearl and his troop turned into Grace street,
and there perceiving himself and his assistance to be proclaimed Traitors, also
the Citizens to be raised in Arms against him, he with his followers wandering
up and down the City, toward Ludgate would have passed through, which was
closed against him, so that he was forced to return to Queen Hith, and from
thence by water to his own house in the Strand, which he fortified, but
understanding that great Ordnance were brought to beat down his house, he
yielded and was conveyed to the Tower about midnight.

February the seventeenth, Captain Thomas Lee was drawn to Tyburn and there
hanged, bowelled, and quartered, for conspiracy against the Queen, he took it
upon his death that although he deserved death, yet he was innocent of that he
was condemned for.

The eighteenth of February, John Pibush a Seminary Priest, after seven years
imprisonment in the Kings Bench, was hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas a
Watrings, for coming into this Realm, contrary to the Statute.

The nineteenth of February, the Earl of Essex, and the Earl of Southhampton,
were both arraigned at Westminster, and found guilty of high treason.

Ashwednesday the twenty fifth of February, the Earl of Essex was beheaded
within the Tower, between the hours of seven and eight a clock in the
morning, being present the Earls of Hartford and Cumberland, the Lord Thomas
Haward Constable of the Tower for that time, and not passing sixty or seaventy
persons more; the hangman was beaten as he returned thence, so that the
Sheriffs of London were sent for to assist and rescue him from such as would
have murdered him.

The seventeenth of February, Mark Backworth, and Thomas Filcoks Seminary
Priests, were drawn to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered for coming into
the realm, contrary to the Statute.

And the same day a Gentlewoman named Ann Lina a widow was hanged in the same
place for relieving a Priest in her house contrary to the Statute.

February the last, a young Gentleman named Waterhouse was hanged in
Smithfield, for speaking and Libelling against the Queens proclamation, and the
apprahending of the Earl of Essex.

March the thirteenth, Sir Gelly Merrick Knight, and Henry Cuff Gentleman, were
drawn to Tyburn, the one from the Tower, the other from Newgate, and there
hanged and quartered, as being actors with the Earl of Essex.

March the fifteenth, a new Scaffold was carried from Leaden Hall in the night,
to the Tower hill, and there set up by torch light.

The eighteenth of March, Sir Charles Danvers, and Sir Christopher Blunt
Knights, were upon the new scaffold beheaded.

Two men were set on the Pillory in Fleetstreet, whipped with gaggs in their
mouths, and their ears cut off for attempting to have robbed a Gentlewoman in
Fetter lane, in the day time, putting gaggs into the mouths of the servants of
the house because they should not cry out; one of these thieves was afterward
hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Watrings.

August the twenty sixth, Desmond and an other Knight brought out of Ireland,
were sent to the Tower of London.

In November, the Lady Mary Ramsey, widow to Sir Thomas Ramsey, sometime Mayor
of London, was buried in the Parish Church or Hospital of Christ-church by
Newgatemarket, a charitable dole or arms was given for her on the same day in
the afternoon, at the Leaden Hall, seventeen poor people being weak and aged,
were there among the sturdy beggars crushed and trodden to death.

Lightning and Thunder often before Christmas, and in the holidays, and an
Earthquake at London on Christmas Eve at noon.

In the month of January, news came out of Ireland, that on Christmas day, that
the Spaniards and Irish were overcome and slain in great numbers, and the
English were victors.

The eighteenth of January at night, Bonfiers were made, with ringing of Bells,
for joy of the news out of Ireland, the victory of our men against Tyrone.

Windsor Boat was cast away against Black Friars stairs by a tempest.

April the nineteenth, Peter Bullock Stationer, and one named Ducket, for
printing of books offensive against the Queen and State were hanged at Tyburn.

April the twentieth, Stichborne, William Kenson, and James Page, Seminary
Priests, were drawn to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered.

The last of June, Atkenson a customer of Hull, was set on the Pillory in
Cheap, and with him three other, who had been brought thither on horseback,
with their faces toward the horse tail, and papers on their heads, they were
there whipped on the Pillory and lost their ears by judgment of the
Star Chamber, for slanderous words by them spoken against the Counsel.

The same day in the afternoon fell great lightning and thunder, with
hailstones in many places of nine inches compass, which in Sandwich in Kent
lay a foot deep on the ground, broke the glass windows of their Churches and
many tiles off their houses, some barnes were fired with lightning.

February the seventeenth, William Anderson alias Richardson a Seminary Priest,
was drawn to Tyburn, and there hanged and quartered for being found in England
contrary to the Statute.

In the month of March, the Q lying at Richmond, dangeros sick, strait watches
were set in London, with warding of the Gates; Lanthornes with lights all the
night hanged out of Windows, at which news the people were sore perplexed.

Thursday the twenty fourth of March, about two of the Clock in the morning
deceased Queen Elizabeth, at her Manor of Richmond in Surrey, being aged
seventy years, and had Reigned four and forty years five months and odd days,
whose Corpse was privily convaied to White Hall, and there remained till the
twenty eight of April, and then buried at Westminster.

The same day aforesaid, the Nobility and Council of State, with as great
peace, prudence, and providence, as the heart of man could imagine, assembled
themselves together, and far beyond the general imagination of all men, being a
matter of remarkable conscernment, took speedy order, as well for the instant
manifesting the Queens death, as in publishing to the whole Realm, for their
lasting comfort, the true and lawful Successor, and about eleven of the clock
the same Thursday in the forenoone, which according to the computation of the
Church of England is the last day of the year, 1602. being accompanied with the
Lord Major, Aldermen and Sheriffs of London, and many other of most Reverend
and Honorable quality, at the Cross in Cheap, Proclaimed, James the Sixth of
that name King Scotland, to be the right King of England Scotland, France and
Ireland Defender of the faith, being lineally descended from Margaret, the
eldest daughter to King Henry the Seventh, by Elizabeth his wife, which was the
eldest daughter of King Edward the fourth, the said Margaret was married to
King James the fourth of that name, King of Scotland, in the year of our
Redemption 1503. who had Issue James the fifth: Who was father to Mary Queen of
Scotland, and the said Mary was mother to James the Sixth, Monarch of the
Island of great Brittany, and King of France and Ireland; This forenamed
Proclamation, was most distinctly, and audibly read by Sir Robert Cecill
Principal Secretary unto Queen Elizabeth, also the Lords and Privy
Counselors of Estate, with great diligence, send speedily Condinge Messengers
to his Majesty into Scotland, who manifested, their whole proceeding, with
tender of their zealous love and duty, and the peoples universal joy, and
great desire to see their King, which his Majesty most graciously accepted,
approved all their proceedings, and returned them all Princely thanks,
Authorizing the Lords, and others late Privy Counselors of Estate to the
Queen, to persist as they had begun, until He came personally unto them.

This Change was very Plausable, and well pleasing unto the Nobility and
Gentry, and generally to all the Commons of the Realm, among whom the name of a
king was to strange, that few could Remember, or had seen a King before, except
they were aged persons, considering that the Government of the Realm had
continued near the space of fifty years under the Reign of two Queens, which
is the far greater part of an old man's age, but tidings hereof being brought to
the king in Scotland, he called a Co^nsell to him, and taking order for settling
all things in his Realm of Scotland, began his voyage toward England.

King James.
Elizabeth of Famous memory, the Nobility of this land, and P^ivie Counselors
of estate unto the said Queen, accknowledged James the sixth then King of
Scotland for their lawful king, and within six hours after her death, the
said Lords and Counselors, gave full satisfaction unto the people by three
proclamations, the first at the Court Gate, the second at the Cross in
Cheapside, and the third at the Tower, by the name of James the First King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, the King being
then full thirty six years of age, and Crouned King of Scots in his infancy,
began his Reign over the Isle of Great Brittany the 24. of March, 1602.

The Nobility and State aforesaid, with ^ll speed sent Charles Piercy, and
Master Thomas Sommerset, with Letters unto the King signifiying the death of
the Queen, and the tender of their duties, love, and alegian^e, but Sir Robert
Carry rid post, and b^ought the first news to ^he king and as he rod gave
knowledge un^o his brother Sir John Carry, then Governor of Barwick, this
calm and discreet course, of the English Lords, in Proclaiming the King, and
quiet settling the whole Estate, without faction or interrupti^n, was as
plausible unto all his loving Subjects, as admired of Foreign Nations.

April the fifth, the King came from Eden-Borowgh to Barwick, and the next day
came news of many disordered persons, that were in Arms in the Borders,
whereat the King was much troubled, and forthwith there was power sent to
suppress them, and after that, when the King came to London, he with the advice
of the Counsel, set all the parts of the North Borders, in as good condition,
as any other parts of his Dominions.

April the tenth, diverse prisoners were discharged out of the Tower, amongst
whom, the Earl of Southampton was the chiefest.

April the twenty seventh, was thirteen persons slain and blown in pieces by
misfortune, at the Gunpowder Mill at Reddriffe.

April the twenty eight, at Westminster a very Royal Obsequy, for the late
Queen Elizabeth, according to the Kings appointment, by his Letters to the
Lords of the Privy Counsel.

May the nineteenth, Proclamation was made for the suppression of disordered
persons in the North: and for the mutual Peace and Amity of both Kingdoms.

June the first, there was one whipped through London, for presuming to come to
the Court, having his house infected.

June the fourth, Vallentine Thomas, having been many years prisoner in the
Tower of London, was arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, and there condemned of
High Treason, for Conspiracy against our late Queen, and some of her Counsel,
and the seventh of June, about Six of the clock he was drawn from the Kings
Bench in Southwarke to Saint Thomas a Waterings, and there hanged and quartered.

July the second, the King Solemnized the Feast of Saint George, at Winsor, and
Installed Prince Henry Knight of the Garter, and there the chief Ladies of
England, did Hommage to the Queen.

There were also made Knights with Prince Henry, the Duke of Lennox, the Earl
of South-Hampton, the Earl of Mar, and the Earl of Pembroke.

Within a few days after were made diverse Proclamations for the apprehension
of Anthony Copley, Sir Griffin Markham* Knight, and William watson, and
William Cleark Priests and about the same time was apprehended as Traitors,
the Lord Cobham and his brother, the Lord Gray, Sir Walter Rawley, and others.

The fifth of August was Commanded by the Bishops to be kept as a Holy day,
with Prayers, Preaching and thanksgiving to Almighty God, for the Kings escape
from being murdered by Earl Gowrie in Scotland.

The Plague, increased most g^ievo^sly in London, and thereupon it was ordered
that every Wednesd^y the^e should be a general Fasting and Prayer, with
preaching, through the land, to d^aw the people to humility and rep^ntance.

This year was Bartholomew fair forbidden to be kept, and Michaelmas Te^m
adjorned, and to be kept at Westminster, but by reason of the sickness, it was
afterward kept at Winchester, and the Lord Mayors great tri^mphs and feasts was
this year omitted.

The fourth of November, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray of Wilton were b^ought
from the Tower of London unto Winchester, to be arraigned; and to that purpose
were sent to W^nchester, Sir Walter Rawleigh* Sir Gr^ffin Markham Knights,
George Brook brother to the Lord Cobham, Anthony Copley Gentleman, William
Watson and William Cleark P^ie^^s: and the same day out of the G^tehouse at
Westminster* went Sir Edward Parham, he was acquitted by the Jury. The twenty
ninth of November were executed the two P^iests and six days after was George
Brook hanged, and the ninth of December, Sir Griffin Markham and the two
Barons, after they had been severally brought upon the Scaffold in the Castle
of Winchester, and had made their confessions, and p^epared themselves to die,
upon a sudden, the Kings Warrant written with his own hand, was there
delivered to Sir Benjamin Titchborne, High Sheriff of Hampshire, ^ommanding him
to stay execution, these three and Sir Walter Rawleigh were returned P^isoners
to the Tower again, the fifteenth of December.

From the twenty third of December 1602. unto the twenty se^ond o^ December
1603, the^e died of all diseases, within London and the libe^ties thereof,
thi^ty eight thousand two hundred forty and four, whe^eof, of the Plague,
thirty thousand, five hundred s^venty eight, and the ne^t year afte^, London
was clear of that infection, and then were all the shires in England grievously
visited, note the work of God.

March the fifth, was proclamation m^de, for authorizing the Book of Common
Prayer.

February the twenty second, Proclamation was made against all Jesuits and
Seminaries, that they should forthwith depart out of the Kingdom.

March the fifth, Proclamation was made for conformation of the Ecclesiastical
government of the Church of England, and the book of Common P^ayer, as it had
been used in the time of Queen Elizabe^h.

At this time Robert Dove of London Merchant Tailor, gave competent me^ns ^o^
ever, for the toling of a bell in Saint Sepulchers Church, to cause good people
to pray for such prisoners as are to be executed out of Newgate and to cease
when they are executed; this bell should begin to toll at six a clock in the
morning, and the same is made known to the Prisoners that the said bell is to
put them in mind to p^epare themselves for death.

Upon the first day of May, Richard Haydock a Physician, asked forgiveness of
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, for deluding the King and many others,
under pretense of being inspired, and to preach in his sleep by night, with
which de^eit he had strongly possessed the vulgar, as it was hard to remove them,
although he confessed the abuse.

In this month John Lepton of Kepwick in the County of York Esquire; a Gentleman
of an an^ient family, and of good reputation, his Majesty's servant, and one of
the Grooms of his most honorable privy Chamber, performed so memorable a
journey as I may not omit to record the same to future ages, the rather because
I have heard sundry Gentlemen who were goo^ horsemen, and likewise good
Phys^tians affi^me, it was impo^sible to be done without danger of his life.

He ^ndertook to ^ide five several times betwixt London and York, in six days
to be taken in one week, betwixt Monday morning and Saturday night, he began
his journey upon Monday being the twentieth day of May, betwixt two and three
of the clo^k in the morning, forth of Saint Martins near Aldersgate; within the
City of London, and came into York the same day, betwixt the hours of five and
six in the a^ternoon, where he rested that night; the noxt morning being
Tuesday, about three of the clo^k, he took his journey fourth of York, and came
to his lodging in St. Martins aforesaid, betwixt the hours of 6 and seven in
the afternoon, where he rested that night, the next morning being Wednesday,
betwixt two and three of the clock, he took his journey forth of London, and
came into York about seven of the clock the same day, where he rested that
night, the next morning being Thursday, betwixt two and three of the clock, he
took his jo^rney forth of York, and come to London the same day, be^wixt seven
and eight of the clock where he rested that night* the next morning being
Friday, betwixt 2. and 3. of the clock, he took his journey toward York, and
came thither the same day betwixt the hours of seven and eight, in the
afternoon, so as he finished his app^inted journey, to the admi^ation, o^ all
men in five days, acco^ding to hi^ p^omise, and upon Monday the twenty seventh
of this month, he went from York and came to the Court at Greenwich upon
Tueseday the twenty eight to his Majesty in as fresh and cheerful manner, as
when he first began.

The second of July 1605 seventeen Scottish Ministers, contrary to the Kings
former Exp^ess Comandment, h^ld a Sollemne Assembly at Aberdine in Scotland,
who being Convented for the same before the Coun^^ll of Scotland utte^ly
denied, not only their Lo^dships authority in that behalf, but the Kings also,
saying that in matters Ecclesiastical they neithe^ owe no^ ought to
acknowledge themselves in any subjection, either to the King or to any
Temporal power; and that all Sp^rituall difference, ought to be tried and
determined by the Church, as Competent Judges, justifying their voluntary
meeting to be good and warrantable by the word of God, alleging the several
Assemblies of the Apos^les, without knowledge or con^ent o^ any Temporal
Es^ate, for which Riot, and for denying the Kings Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical, Six of the chief of them the tenth of January following at
Blackness, were ar^aigned and condemned of High Treason.

July the eighth Proclamation was m^de against Pirates, and other English
Ma^iners, and Soldiers, who under pretense of Serving the Sta^es* robbed
diverse English men and others who made complaint thereof to his Majesty. Now
this is the third Proclamation against Pirates.

William Calverley of Carverley in Yorkshire Esquire, murdered two of his own
children, at home at his own horse, then stabbed his wi^^ in^o the body, with
full intent to have killed her, and then instantly with like fury went from his
house, would have killed his child at nu^se, but was p^evented, he was p^est
to death at York the fifth of March.

Thomas Pearcy, Robert Catesby, and o^her^ in the last year of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, by the Ins^igation of certain Jesuits practiced with the King of Spain,
to send a well furnished Army upon England, promising him great aid, to
entertain them at their arrival at Milford Haven, and to that end the King
promised to send them fifty thousand pound, for Levying of Horse and Foot, and
preparation in England for them of Ammunition, but when this was in a manner
concluded upon Queen Elizabeth died, and the King of Spain upon certain
knowle^ge that King James was establi^hed, di^p^tched his Embassado^^^ ^n^
Commi^sioners for England, for con^^^mation o^ a la^^ing Peace between them,
yet nevertheless, the said Robert Catesby sent Thomas VVinter again to the King
of Spain, to Resollicite their former project, but the King answered him? Your
old Queen is dead with whom I had wars; and you have a King with whom I have
ever been at Peace and amity, and for continuance thereof, I have sent my
Commissioners, and until I see what will become thereof, I will not hearken
unto any other course whatsoever, when VVinter returned and made this known
unto Catesby, Percey, and the rest, they began to cast about what might be done
of themselves, to the Advance of the Roman Catholic Religion, but first they
would see the event of the first Parliament, if they would mittigate any former
laws, and try what good the conclusion of Peace with Spain would do before
they attempted any further, but when they perceived, that neither Parliament,
nor publi^ke peace so^ted in any part to their desires, and that the peace
concluded with Spain, was rather a more ready means for the law to proceed
against them then otherwise, because the peace concerned only the amity of
christian princes, for the general good of Christendom, without any particular
or private respect; then Catesby told the rest he had a devise in his head that
should free them and the rest of the Catholics here in England from their
oppressors, and when he had found out fit Ministers for execution of his
devise, after they had taken oath and Sacrament for se^recie, he told them he
had devised the mean to blow up the Parliament house* by undermining the same,
when the King, and Queen, and Prince, and Commons were assembled, which project
they presently embraced, and forthwith Pearcie hired lodgings close to the
Parliament house, and then they appointed miners, who with great difficulty
dug and undermined part of the wall, but after a while they understood that
the vante right under the Parliament house was to be let, then Guido Faukes
hired it, this Guido Fawks was of late a Soldier in Flanders and for that
purpose sent for, who by consent of the rest changed his name, and was called
John Johnson, Master Pearcies man, after they had hired the vaute, they
secretly conveyed into it thirty and six barrels of powder and covered them
over with billets and faggots.

About ten days before, the Parliament began, an unknown party met with a
servant of my Lord Mounteagles, and delivered him a letter, charging him
speedily to deliver it to my Lord, which he did, when his Lord had read it, and
observed the dangerous contents, with a special caveat not to appear the first
day of Parliament, he was amazed, and forthwith delivered it to the Earl of
Sallisbury the Kings chief Secretary, and Counsello^ of State, when the Earl
had judiciously observed the strange phrase and teno^ thereof, with the
terrible threats therein against the whole state, he acquainted the Lord
Chamberlain therewith, and then they showed it to the Lord Admiral^, the Earls
of Worcester, and Northampton, who instantly consulted what was fittest to be
done, omitting neither time, diligence, nor industry, all which
notwithstanding, they could not as yet find out the depth of this mystery, and
were therefore much troubled in mind, because the appointed day of Parliament
drue near, which was Tuesday the fifth of November: the Saturday before, the
King being returned from hunting, the said Lord acquainted his Highness with
what had past, and when his Majesty had well noted the strange contents of the
letter, which purported the sudden ruin of the state, the King said that
notwithstanding the slight regard that should be given to scattered Libels, yet
this was more quick then was usually in Libels, and willed them to search in
all places as well not daily frequented as of usual repair, and as conce^ning
any foreign disturbance or inva^ion, he well knew the force and preparation of
all Ch^istian Nations, and that whatsoever plot and treason was now in hand, it
must be performed in some unsuspected place, and by some homeb^ed Traitors,
whereupon new search was made, about the Court and Parliament house, but co^ld
not as ^et find any thing out worthy their labors, all which labors, all which
searches was performed with such silence and discretion, as there rose no
manner of suspicion either in Court or City, the Lord Chamberlain whose office
it most concerned, never rested day nor night, and the night before the
Parliament, as Sir Thomas Knevet with others scouted about the Parliament
house, espied a fellow standing in a corner very suspiciously, and asked him
his name, and what he was, and what he did there so late, who answered very
bluntly his name was John Johnson, Master Pearces man, and keeper of his
lodgings, Sir Thomas Knevet still continued his search in all places, and
returning thither again, found him lingering there, still searched him, and
found under his cloak a dark Lantern with a candle burning in it, and about
him other signs of suspicion, that he stood not there for any good, then the
Knight entered the vaut, where he found the powder covered with faggots and
billots, and then the Lord Chamberlain commanded the Traitor to be bound, and
being now three of the clock in the morning, he went unto the King, and with
exceeding joy, told his Majesty the treason was found out, and the traitor in
hold, the King desired to see Faukes, who when he came before the King, used
like traiterous speeches, as he did at his first apprehension, affirming he was
the only man to perform this treason: saying it sore vexed him that the deed
was not done, and for that time would not confess any thing, touching the rest
of the conspirators, but that he himself only alone was the contriver and
practiser of this treason.

Between five and six a clock in the morning, the Conusel gave order to the
Lard Major of London to look well to the City, and in very calm manner, to set
civil watch at the City Gates, signifying therewithal that there was a plot
of treason found out, and that the king would not go to Parliament that day,
the same day in the afternoon the manner of the treason was by way of
Proclaimation made known unto the people, for joy whereof there was that night,
within the City and about as many bonfires as the streets could permit, and the
peole gave humble and hearty thanks to Almighty God for their King and
Countries right blessed, escape.

Within three days after two other Proclamations were made, signifying unto
the people who were the chief Conspirators, with commandment to apprehend
Pearcy and Catesby, and to take them alive if it were possible, which said
Pearcy and Catesby were gone to Holback in Warwick Shire, to meet Winter,
Grante and others; where under pretense of a great hunting they made account to
raise the Country and surp^ize the lady Elizabeth, from the Lord Harrington,
whom they meant to Proclaim Queen, and in whose name they meant to take up
Arms, being persuaded that the King, the Prince and the Duke of York, were at
that time blown up in the Parliament House, but when they found their treason
was known and prevented, and saw the Kings Forces round about the house, so as
they could not escape, Pearsey and Catesby very desperately issued out, and
fighting back to back, were both flain with one Musket shot.

Saturday the ninth of November, the King went to Parliament, where in the
presence of the Queen, the Prince, the Duke of York, the Ambassadors of the
King of Spain, and the Archduke, and the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and
Commons of the same, he made a very solemn oration, Manifesting the whole
Complott or this treason.

January the nineteenth, a great Porpaise was taken alive at West-Ham, in
alittle Creek; a mile and a half within the land, and was presented unto
Francis Gofton Esquire, Chief Auditor of the Imprests, and within a few days
after, a very great Whale came within eight miles of London: whose length was
diverse times seen above the Water, and the same was judged to be a great deal
longer then any Ship in the River.

A few days before Christmas, the Parliament broke up, and began to sit again
the twenty second of January being Tuesday, and continued until the twenty
seventh of May next following, in which Parliament, they gave the King and and
his Successors, three entire Subsidies, and six Fifteens, and then the
Parliament was proro^ged, until the eigh^een^h o^ November at this (...) the
Clargie gave unto the King and his Successors four entire Subsidies, and in
this Parliament it was enacted, that the fifth of November should be kept Holy
day for ever, with preaching, and giving God thanks for his mercy, in
preventing that terrible danger, of the late practice by Pearcy and Catesby
with the rest of their wicked Crew, to blow up the Parliament House.

Ianury the twenty seventh, at Westminster were Arrained Thomas Winter, Guydo
Fawkes, Robert Keys, and Thomas Bates, for plotting to blow up the Parliament
House, Digging in the Mine, taking oath and Sacrament for secrecy, and Sir
Everard Digby for being made acquainted with the said treason, yielding assent
to it, and taking his corporal oath for secrecy all which Inditements were
proved against them, and by themselves confessed, and thereupon had Judgment
given them, to be Drawn, Hanged, and quartered, their limbs to be set upon the
City Gates, and their heads upon London Bridge according to which sentence, the
thirtieth of January, Sir Everard Digby, Robert Winter, John Grant, and
Baits, at the West end of Saint Paul's Church, and the next day after the other
four were executed in the Parliament yard, and six of the eight acknowledged
their guiltiness in this horrible plot, and dyed very penitently, but Grant
and Keys did not so.

Saturday the twenty second of March, between six and seven a clock in the
forenoon; a rumor was so dainly spread throughout the Court, and the City of
London, that for certain, the King that morning was slain, as he was a h^nting
in Okeing Park, twenty miles from London, which dreadful news still
increased, until nine of the Clock, being seconded by Infinite suggestions, by
reason whereof it was generally received for truth, and thereupon the Court
Gates were kept shut; The Lord Major began to set Cuard at the City Gates, and
to raise the Trained bands; Sir William Wade Liverenant of the Tower did the
like with his Hamlets within his liberties, and the Parliament was much amazed:
but by eleven of the Clock, the joyful news of the Kings good health was made
known in London by Proclamation, as it had been at the Court an hou^e before,
whereat the people began to revive their vexed spirits, which till then were
wonderously surcharged with hearts grief. This flying news went three days
journey into the Country before it was surp^est.

Friday the twenty eight of March, 1606. was Araigned and Condemned Henry
Garnet, Provincial of the Jesuits in England, for being acquainted with the
Gunpowder plot, and consealing the same, for the which* he was condemned to be
Drawn Hanged and Quartered and his head to be set upon London B^idge, and
according to that Sentence he was Executed the third of May at the West end of
Saint Paul's Church where he acknowledged the greatness of his offense, in
consealing the treason; and besought all Catholics to forbear and desist from
Treason and all other violent attempts whatsoever, against Kings, and Princes,
saying that all such practices were utterly against the Catholic Religion.

The twenty nine and thirtieth of March, the wind was extreme violent, so as
it caused much Shipwreck upon the Coasts of England France and the Low
Countries, in brought in the Sea and drowned much Cattle, and in Picardie
near Dyope, it blew down a steeple which Slew sourscore persons in the fall
thereof, in Flanders, and up toward Germany, there were many Churches, Towns,
Windemills. and Trees blown down, and the eighth of June following it rayned
twenty four hours, and the next day there arose great land floods which
carried away Mills, Trees and Houses, made new Currants where never any was
before, it carried away great store of Cattle, Timber and other things from
off upland grounds.

The tenth of June Proclaimation was made for the banishing of all seminaries,
Jesuits, and Romanpriests.

The fifteenth of July the wife of Richard Homewood of East Grimsteed in Sussex
without any known cause, murdered her own three children, and threw them into a
pit, and then cut her own throat likewise.

The twentieth of January, it pleased God to send a mighty westwind, which
continued sixteen hours, which brought in the sea, by reason whereof, and of
high springtides, both which encountered the land waters, after a great rain,
which caused the River of Severn, beginning as far as the Mount in Cornwall, to
overflow her banks all along on both sides, up into Somerset shire, and
Gloucestershire, in some places the water overflowed the banks three foot, in
other places five foot, and some places seven foot, by reason of which sudden
inundation, much people and cattle were drowned, many Churches and villages
borne down and spoiled and some utterly destroyed, and in Wales in several
places, it did great harm in manner as aforesaid, the like before was never
known.

Maundy Thursday, the second of April, there happened great inundations of water
in Kent, Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, and the seventeenth of April, there arose
in the City of Coventry a most strange and dreadful inundation.

November the twenty sixth, proclamation was made concerning the Earl of Tyrone
Terconnel, and others of Ireland, signifying their purpose and practice to
exterpit the English Nation out of Ireland, and to confer and yield the
kingdom of Ireland, to the Pope, and Tyrones soliciting foreign Princes to
attempt the conquest thereof.

The twentieth of December, proclamation was made to apprehend the Lord Maxwel,
who wounded the porter and so brake prison out of Edenborough Castle, this Lord
Maxwel aided James Mackdonel to escape likewise.

December the eighth, begun a hard frost, and continued till the fifteenth of
the same, and then thawed, and the twenty second of December, it began again to
freez very violently, so as some persons went half wap over upon the ice, and
the thirtieth of December, many people went quite over in many places, and so
continued till the third of January* the people passed daily between London and
the Bank-side at every half ebb, for the flood removed the ice, and forced the
people daily to seek new paths, except only between Lambeth and the ferry at
Westminster, by which it became very firm passage, until the great thaw, and
from Sunday the tenth of January, until the fifteenth of the same, the frost
grew extreme, so as the ice became firm, and removed not, and then all sorts
of men women and children went boldly upon the ice in most parts, some shot at
pricks, others bowled, and daunced, with other variable pastimes; by reason of
which concourse of people, were many that set up boothes, and standings, upon
the ice, as fruit-sellers, victuallers, that sold beer and wine, shoomakers,
and a barbers tent, every of them had fire near unto them, the fifteenth of
January it began somewhat to thaw, and so continued four days together; yet
nevertheless the great ice upon the Thames held firm and passable, and became
somewhat smooth, like as in the last great frost in the year 1564. which before
were very craggy and uncertain: the nineteenth of January, the frost began
again, but not so violently, until Sunday the twenty fourth of January, and
held on until the thirtieth of the same, the first of February the ice began to
break by little and little, and the next day in the afternoon all the ice was
gone, and quite dissolved, so as no sign remained thereof. Many bridges were
spoiled by this frost, and much foul pe^ished, especially small birds, which
in many places* were found frozen to death* this frost was more grievous in
France and Ireland then in England.

February the ninth, Sir John Ramsey Knight, Baron of Barnes, Viscount
Hadington, married Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Robert Earl of Sussex, the
King gave her in marriage, and at dinner he drank to the Bride and the
Bridegroom in a fair cup of gold, which he gave him, and with it six hundred
pound a year pension out of the Exchequer, to the longest liver of them both,
this the King did do, to reward his faithful service, against the dangerous
treason of Earl Gowry in Scotland.

March the tenth, was laid the first stone for the new building of Algate, but
it was not fully finished till the next year after, this ouldgate was taken
down and finished at the charges of the Citizens.

April the eleaventh, George Iervas a Seminary, was drawn to Tyburn and there
executed.

April the eleaventh being Monday, the quarter Sessions was held at Edmonsbury,
and by negligence an out malthouse was set on fire, from whence in most strange
and sudden manner, through fierce winds, the fire came to the farther part of
the town, and as it went, left some streets and houses safe, and untouched; the
flame flew clear over many houses near unto it, and did much spoil to many
fair buildings fardest off, and ceased not until it had consumed one hundred
sixty houses, besides others, and in damage of wares and household goods, to
the full value of threescore thousand pound, the King showed a great deal of
kindness to the distressed inhabitants, as in giving them five hundred load of
Timber to repair their houses, as in preferring their best means to raise their
general and particular estates, and in giving them a new Charter, the Knights
and Gentlemen likewise of the County performed great kindness unto the
townsmen, the City of London gave freely toward their relief.

April the nineteenth, at White Hall dyed Thomas Earl of Dorcet, Lord High
Treasurer of England, he died suddenly at the Counsel table.

April the twenty ninth proclamation was made, commanding the oath of
allegiance to be ministered to all persons that should come from beyond the
seas, only to distinguish honest subjects, from traitorous practisers, and not
for any point or matter in religion, all known Merchants and others of honest
state and quality, was exempte from taking this oath, this proclamation was
made, by reason that many suspicious persons of base sort came daily from
beyond seas, and refused to take the oath.

June twenty third, Thomas Garnet a Jesuit was executed at Tyburne, having
favor offered him, if he would have taken the oath of allegiance which he
refused.

This Summer at Astley in Warwick shire, by reason of the fall of the Church,
there was taken up the corpse of Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset, he was buried
the tenth of October, 1530 in the twenty second year of the ^aign of Henry the
eighth, and albeit he had lain seventy eight years in the the Earth, yet his
Eyes, Hair, and flesh remained in a manner as if he had been newly buried.

For these five years past, great and manifold Roberies spoils, Piracies,
murders and Depredations, within the Streights, and elsewhere, have been
committed by several Companies of English Pirates, as well upon our own Nation
as others, but especially upon the Florentines and Venetians, wherewith his
Majesty was much grieved, and for that cause published from time to time
several Proclamations, denownsing the same offenders to be Rebels, and
therewithal gave order for their suppression and apprehensias Traiters and
peace breakers: but all this prevailed not, for they still prevailed, persisted
and maintained their former villainies* with which offenders there were some
English Merchants who very cunningly underhand used Commerce, Track, and
Traffic for stolen goods, to the great Cheri^^ing, of those Malefactors, and
dishonor of this Nation, for redress whereof the King by Proclamation the
eighth of January, Prohibited from all manner of meddling, or dealing with them
upon great penalties, all English Merchants whatsoever, Commanding the judge of
the Admiralty to proceed severely in Justice against all such offenders, and
that from him there should be no appeal granted to any person touching the
premises: all which notwithstanding the number of Pirates still increased, and
did much damage to the English Merchants and to all other Nations, there were
Hollanders and Easterlings, that at this time and before became fierce Pirates,
and held consort with the English Robbers, viz. Ward, Bishop, Sir Francis
Vorny: and others, whereupon the King of Spain sent certain Ships of War,
under the command of Don Lewis Faxardo, who very pollitickly about the middle
of July came upon them at Tunis, and sudenly burned twenty of their ships,
lying in Harbor, at which time though Captain Ward escaped in person, by being
then a shore, yet his great Strength, and Riches perished in the fire, with
some of his Confederates.

December the two and twentieth, Nineteen Pirates were executed at Waping some
had been in consort with the English Pirates.

Sunday the nineteenth of February, when it should have been low water at
London Bridge, quite contrary to course, it was then high Water, and presently
it ebbed almost half an hour, the quantity of a foot, and then suddenly it
flowed again, almost two foot higher then it did before, and then ebbed again,
until it came to its course almost as it was at first, so that the next flood
began in a manner as it should, and kept its due course in all respects, as if
there had been no shifting nor alteration of Tides, all this happened before
twelve a clock in forenoone, the weather being indifferent calm.

The thirteenth of June the King, Queen and Prince, with many great Lords and
others, came to the Tower, to make trial o^ the Lions single valor, and to
have the Lions skill, a great fierce Bear that had killed a Child, but the
Lions being tried by one and one at a time, and lastly by two together which
were bread in that open yard, where the Bare was put loose for Combat, yet
would none of them assail him, but fled from him, to their Dens, after the
first Lion was put forth, then was there a Stone Horse put into the Bare and
Lion, who when he had gazed upon them a while, fell to grazing, standing in the
midst between them both, and whereas at the first there was but two Mastives
let in who fought sto^tly with a lion, there was now six Dogs let in, who flew
all upon the Stone Horse, being most in their sight at their first entrance,
and would soon have wearied the horse to death, but that suddenly, even as the
King wished, there Entein th^ee stout Barewards, who wondrous valliantly
rescued the Horse, and brought away the Dogs: whilst the Lion and the Bear
stood staring upon them, and the fifth of July, this Bare according to the
kings Commandment was bayted to death by Dogs, upon a Stage, and the Mother
of the murdered Child had twenty pound given her out of the money given by the
people to see the death of the Bare.

Robert Allyley being Araigned at Newgate for felony, stood mute and and
refused the ordinary trial, whreupon as the manner is, the Hangman came unto
him to bind his hands, but Allyley resisted, and with his fist stroke him on
the face in the presence of the Judges, who presently Remembered, that this
priprisoner but the last Sessions before was there Convicted of Felony, and
for the same had obtained the Kings Special pardon, which pardons in general,
are unto all persons but only upon their good behavior unto King and his
Subjects, and thereupon the Court gave judgment, that for the blow he gave, his
hand should first be cut off: and then his body to be hanged for that fact, for
the which he had his pardon, according to which sentence he was presently
executed at the Sessions Gate.

Thursday the third of May, the French Queen was Crowned with all Solemnity in
Paris, and having been ten years before married to the King, and the next day
was murdered in his Coach as he rode through Paris by a base villain that
stabed him into the body twice with a long knife, that he died instantly, and
his body was carried to the Loover, presently upon the Kings death, the Queen
was made Regent, during her sons minority, viz. Lewis the thirteenth. The
twentieth of May, being Sunday, our King, Queen and Prince, the Duke of York,
the lady Elizabeth, and all the Lords and Ladies of the Court mourned in Black
for the death of the French King, Henry the fourth, and about the end of June,
was he buried in Paris in as great Royalty as ever King of France; upon the
murrher of this French King, the Lords and Commons of the house of Parliament
of England, humbly besought the King to have a more especial care then
formerly, for the preservation of his Royal Person; and also to the speedy
order for the avoiding of Emminent danger and keeping his subjects in their due
obedience, and forthwith, the Commons of the Parliament, for the manifestation
of their alleigance, love and duty they voluntarily of their own accord took
the Oath of Allegiance, and after them the Lords of the upper house did so
likewise, who ministered the same Oath to all their servants and followers, and
such as refused to take oath were put from their Lord Services, and the Bishops
in the Convocation House ordained that every Bishop in their several
visitations, should minister the same Oath unto all their Clergy, which they
performed accordingly, this oath was also ministered to others as follows,
according to the Tenor of a special Statute made this Session of Parliament
made in that behalf.

The fourth of June Proclamation was made commanding all Roman Priests and
Jesuits, and Seminaries, to depart this Kingdom, by the fourth day of July
next, and not to return upon pain of the severity of the Law, also by this
Proclamation, the King straightly commands, all Recusants to return home to their
dwellings, and not to come within 10 miles of the Court, without special
license, but to depart from London, and the Court by the last day of this
Month: and to remain confined according to the Tenor of the Statute in that
behalf provided.

Presently after that the Oath of Allegiance was ministered unto all officers,
Atturnies and Clerks, belong-to any of the Courts at Westminster Hall, and the
Exchequer, and unto all Advocates, and Proctors of the Spiritual Courts, this
Oath was also administered unto all Lawvers, in the Inns of Court, and Chancery,
and unto all Students and Scholars in both the Universities.

The appointed time now drew near, or Prince Henry to be created Prince of
Wales, and upon Thursday the last of May the Lo^d Mayor and the Aldermen being
accompanied with 54 several Companies of Citizens of London in several Barges,
bearing arms distinguished by their proper Ensigns, Banners and streamers in
warlike manner, and therewithal plentiously furnished with several sorts of
excellent M^sick, and had also to entertain the Prince diverse pleasant and
ingenious trophies upon the water, all which in comely order went to Chelsea,
the Lord Mayor as Admiral going foremost, where from nine a clock in the morning
till th^e^ in ^h^ afternoon, they attended the coming of the Prince, who could
not come sooner by reason of the low ebb, at which time the King came from
Richmond, being very honorably accompanied and attended, and from Che^sea the
Lord Mayor and Citizens, conducted his Highness unto the Court at White Hall,
as they returned from Chealsea the citizens led the way, and the Lord Mayor
followed them, going always next the Princes Barge, to see this joyful sight,
the people for seven miles space, swarmed on both sides the River, and the
Thames was covered with Boats, Barges and Lighters, full fraught with men,
women, and childred; and upon Sunday the third of June, the King made twenty
five Knights of the Bath, and the next day the King crowned the prince his
eldest son, Henry prince of Wales, in the great chamber at Westminster, being
perormed with great magnificence and solemnity, and with full consent of all
the Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons of the Parliament, being all
there present, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London were also present at this
creation, the princes titles were then proclaimed, Viz. Henry prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornewal, and Rotheser, and Earl of Chester, in honor of this creation:
there was the next night at the Court, a most rich and royal mask of Ladies,
viz. the Queen, the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to our Sovereign Lord the King,
the Lady Arrabella, the Countess of Arundel, the Counress of Darbie, the
Countess of Essex, the Countess of Dorset, the Countess of Mountgomery, the
Visecounts of Haddington, the Lady Elizabeth Gray, the Lady Elizabeth Guilford,
the Lady Katherine Peter, the Lady Winter, the Lady Windsor, and upon
Wednesday in the afternoon, in the Tilt yard there were diverse Earls, Barons
and others, being in rich and glorious armor, having most costly caparisons,
wondrous ri^hly embrodered, with pearl gold, and silver, the like abillements
for horses were never seen before, presented their several ingenious trophies
before the King, Queen, and Prince, and then ran a tilt, where there was a
world of people assembled to behold them, and that night there were other
triumphs upon the water, with ships of war, and Galleys fighting one against an
other, and against a great Castle builded upon the water, and after these
battles, then an hours space there were many strange and variable fire works
in the Castle, and in the ships and Galleys.

This year the King builded a most stately ship for war, being in all respects
the greatest and goodliest ship that ever was made in England, and this
glorious ship the King gave to his son Henry prince of Wales, the prince
named it after his own dignity and called it the prince.

The seventh of December, John Roberts a Benedickt Monk, sometimes provincial
of the Benidictans in England, and Thomas Summers a Seminary, were condemned at
Newgate and hanged at Tyburne, they having been before sundry times taken and
bannished, and yet presumed to return again, and bear to practice against King
and State.

Upon Newyears day at night, the prince o^ Wales being ac^ompanied with twelve
others, viz. Two Earls, three Barons, five Knights, and two Esquires, they
performed a very stately mask, in which was an excellent Scene, ingenious
speeches, and rare songs, and with great variety of most delicate Music.

The twentieth of April 1611. Sir Thomas Overburie was committed to the Tower,
and died there the fifteenth of September, next following.

May the thirteenth being Monday in Whitson week, at Windsor were enstalled
Knights of the Garter, Prince Charles Duke of York, son to our sovereign Lord
the King, and Thomas Earl of Arundel, and Robert Vi^^ount Rochester.

Wednesday the eighteenth of March, 1611. Bartholomew Legate an obstinate
Heretic, and a strong Arian, was burned in Smithfield, and the eleaventh of
April following, viz. Edward Wightman an other perverse Heretic, having
refused more favor then he could desire or deserve, was burned at Lichfield,
this Heritick would have made the people believe that he himself was the Holy
Ghost, and immortal, with other vild opinions not fit to be mentioned amongst
Christians.

May the twenty ninth 1612. Richard Newport and William Scot Seminaries were
executed at Tyburne.

June the twenty fifth, Robert Carliele, and James Edwin, were executed for
murdering John Turner fencer, and the twenty seventh of June the Lord Sanquire
was arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, for conspiring and hiring the said two
persons to kill the said Turner, the Lord confessed the Indightment and was
executed upon a Gibber, the 29 of June at Westminster.

In the months of October, November and December, there happened great winds,
violent storms, and tempests, which caused much shipwreck upon the Ocean, in
havens and Rivers, and did great damage upon the land, and the net spring
extraordinary rain fell, even till Saint Iames-tide, and yet upon the humble
and hearty prayers of the people in all Churches, it pleased Almighty God to
send a more plentiful harvest then had been in many years before.

Friday the sixteenth of October, 1612. at eleven a clock at night aririved at
Gravesend the most illustrious young Prince Fredrick, the fifth of that name,
Count Palatine of the Reyne, being very princely attended, he was received by
Sir Lewis Lewkenor Knight, master of the ceremonies, whom the King had sent
before to attend the coming of the Prince, upon knowledge of his arrival, the
King sent speedily the Duke of Len^x, with other Earls and Barons, to signify
his hearty welcome, and the next Sunday they accompanied the Palsgrove by
Barge, from Cravesend to White Hall, where Prince Charles Duke of York
received him at his first landing, and brought him up into the great
bankqueting house, where he was entertained by the King, Queen, Henry Prince of
Wales, and the Lady Elizabeth.

The twenty ninth of October, the Palsgrave dined at Guild Hall, and the chief
nobility of the Land, where he had presented unto him a rich Basin and Eure,
and two Liverypots, richly engraven, and richly gilded.

Friday the sixth of October, died the most noble and hopeful Prince Henry,
Prince of Wales, he was royally buried in the Chapel Royal at Westminster the
seventh of December.

Upon Saint Thomas day, the Palsgrave and Grave Marris were elected Knights of
the Garter, and upon Sunday the seventh of February, the Palsgrave and Grave
Maurice was enstalled at Windsor.

The fourteenth of February being Shrove Sunday, the Lady Elizabeth was married
to the Palsgrave, in as most royal manner as ever Princes were, with masking,
tilting, and turnament, and many rare shows both by land and water, where the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, in behalf of the City and themselves,
presented the bride with a very fair chain of oriental Pearl.

And thus Reader have I presented thee a chain of the best oriental pearls I
could pick out of K. James his reign, being most remarkable, and worthy
observation, who was called a second Solomon, and the peacemaker of
Christendom, and had peace with all Nations: and I conclude thus,

If we by Kings again should ruled be,
We wish to have no worse a King then he;
This land did flourish, by the trades increase
He ruled, he swai'd, he lived, he di'd, in peace.
Remarkable Passages, The Life and Reign of King Charles.
CHarles the second Son of King James, on the ninetenth day of November, in the
year 1600. During his Infancy he was of a very sickly constitution, and at his
birth so unlike to live that his Christening was dispatched in haste, but as he
grew in years he did grow into strength.

Albany Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Rosse, and Barron of Ardmanock,

March, King James had news that Queen Elizabeth was dead, by Sir Robert Carry,
for which good news this young D. of Albany was afterward committed to the
charge and governance of Sir Robert Caries Lady.

June 1604. he was created Duke of York, Thomas Murray a Scot by Nation was
made his Tutor, he profited exceedingly in the knowledge of good letters.

Henry, whom he immediately succeeded in the Dukedom of Cornwall.

November 1616. he was creared Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester and Flint.

February 1622. attended with the Duke of Buckingham, Sir Francis Cottington,
and Master Indimion Porter, he being disguised took Ship at Dover, arrived at
Bulloign in France, and having casually had a sight of Lady Henretta Mariah, at
a Mask at Paris, he rode post from thence to the Court of Spain.

March, he arrived at Madrid, and the King of Spain being informed by Count D:
Olivares what a hazzardous adventure he had taken to have a sight of the
Infanta, he had that Royal entertainment given him, which a Princely Suitor
might expect, and by his Courtly and Gallant behavior, did win much on the
affections of the Infanta, and the Articles of the Marriage were agreed upon,
but the Pope protracting time, and there being no hope of the Restitution of
the Palatinate, which was one of the gratest occasion of his Journey, having
desired leave to return, he with much danger arrived at Portsmouth on the fifth
day of October 1623.

The treaty with Spain being not now likely to proceed, it was now thought fit
to negotiate a Marriage with the Princes Hennaretta Mariah the youngest
daughter of France, which in the year 1624. was carrion by the Earl of
Holland, and afterward concluded by the Earl of Carlisle, and King James did
seem to be exceedingly well pleased with it.

March the seventh, King James died at Thebalds, and immediately afterward
Prince Charles was Proclaimed at the Court Gate, King of Great Britain France
and Ireland. The Funerals of the deceased King were celebrated on the seventh
of May, and presently afterward were the Espousals of King Charles with the
Lady Hennaretta Mariah, who on the twelfth of June landed at Dover, the King
being then at Canterbury, did meet her the next day at Dover, His first
complement unto her was, that he would be no longer master of himself then he
was a servant to her. And this love he continued to the last hour of his life,
for on the day before his unfortunate end, his daughter the Lady Elizabeth,
with the Duke of York, being with much ado permitted to come unto him, he
desired the Lady Elizabeth to assure her mother if ever she again did see her,
that his thoughts had never strayed from her, and that his affections should be
the same to the last.

On the Thursday following they came from Gravesend to Whitehall with a very
great company of Lords and Ladies, and the Great Guns from the Ships, and the
Tower of London did thunder forth their gratulations as she passed by them.

On Saturday the eightenth of June, there was a Parliament assembled, but the
plague growing hot, it was adjourned to Oxford, where the King did put them in
mind as before of necessity of putting forth his Fleet the in pursuance of the
war, in which they had engaged his father, but the began now to quarrel at the
greatness of the Duke of Buckingham, and laid something to his charge in
reference to the death of his father, whereupon the King expecting moneys to
advance the affairs of the Kingdom, and not accusations against those who were
then the principal Ministers of state dissolved the Parliament.

The contagion raging in London, Michaelmas Term was ordered to be kept at
Redding, and special Instructions were given to the Judges to put in execution
the statutes against Recusants.

February the solemnity of his Coronation were celebrated. And a Parliament was
called again on the sixth of the same month, where the King demanding a supply
for moneys, and representing that on the year before, the Fleet miscarried at
Cuziz for wat of it, Master Clement Cook son to the Lord Cook stood up, and
said it was better to dye by a foreign Enemy, then to be destroyed at home,
at which most insolent words the King was much troubled, and instead of
satisfaction, hearing of a Declaration that was then contriving by some busy
heads he disolved that Parliament also.

This year the King of France seized Bordeaux and other places, and then began
an open war against England, wherefore in the year following the Duke of
Buckingham, with ten of the Navy Royal, and ninety Marchantmen, set sail from
Portsmouth, and landed at the Isle of Ree from whence in September following he
was beaten off with the loss of 2000. common Soldiers, and fifty Officers.

England, whom they found to be powerful at Sea for his assistance, the King
called another Parliament on the seventeenth of March, where a bill being drawn
up against Tunnage and Poundage, which the King by no means, would condescend
unto, the Parliament was adjourned the twentieth of December. In the meantime the
Duke of Buckingham being ready again to set sail from Portsmoth was killed by
John Felton, a discontented officer of the last years Army, who for that
offense was hanged up in chains, near unto the place where the murder was
committed.

The Duke being slain the Earl of Lindsey was chosen Admiral, who found the
Haven of Rochell so strongly barred, that it was impossible for his Ships to
force their way and give relief unto the besieged who thereupon submitted to
their King without delay.

In the year 1629. a peace was concluded betwixt England and the two Crowns of
France and Spain.

The Parliament called on the year before was dissolved by the King who
extremely complained against the carriages of some men in the House of Commons,
who being examined by the Lord Treasurer were sent, some of them to the Tower,
some to the Gatehouse, and some* to the Fleet.

Charles James, eldest son to the King was borne at Greenwitch, May the
thirteenth, and dyed almost as soon as he was borne; being first Christened by
one of the Kings Chaplains.

Layton a Schotchman having wrote a Book inciting the people to kill all the
Bishops, had his nose slit his ears cropped, and was stigmatized in the forehead.

Peter Paul Rubin, the famous Painter, having made overtures for a peace with
Spain, the said peace was afterward proclaimed, November the twenty seventh
1630. In which it was articled, that the King of Spain should use all his power
and interest with the Emperor for the restitution of the Palatinate to King of
Bohemiah.

Charles Duke of Cornwall by birth, was born at Saint Iame's, May 19. 1630.

April, the Earl of Castle-haven being Arraignen at the Kings Bench Bar, and
found guilty of Rape and Sodomy, was by his Peers condemned, and executed on
the Tower Hill the fourteenth of May following.

On the 4. of Novem. the Queen was delivered of her eldest daughter who was
baptized Mary.

Paul's was this year begun to be repaired, and on the second of December the
King was visited with the small pox.

May the thirteenth, the King went to Scotland attended with a gallant train,
and on the tenth of June he was crowned at Edenbrough, and on the twentieth of
July returned safe to the Queen at Greenwitch.

This year the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Doctor Abbot died, and Doctor Land
then Bishop of London succeeded in his place.

On the thirteenth of October, the Queen was delivered of her third son, who
was Baptized James, and on the twenty fourth of the same month was Created
Duke of York. Orders were sent into Scotland for the observing of the Church
Discipline as in England which was the the occasion of great tumults, and the
sad war that followed.

Grotius in his Book entitled Mare Liberum, and answered by Master Seldom in
his book entitled Mare Clausum.

Writts being issued out to raise money for a certain number of Ships to be set
forth, for the defense of the Nation, which then was called Ship money, some of
the discontented members of the former Parliament were absolutely against it
and it begat a great quarrel.

March 1635. William Iuxon, Bishop of London was made Lord Treasurer.

On the eighth of January, the Lady Elizabeth was borne, who survived her
father, but dyed with hearts grief not long afterward.

September the Earl of Arundel was sent Ambassador extraordinary to the
Emperor.

This year 1636. Master Prin, Doctor Bastwick, and Master Burton in the month
of June were sentenced in the high Commission Court, and ordered to be
banished, etc.

Master Hamden refusing to pay Ship money, sentence passed against him by
twelve of the Judges, who absolutely declared for the legality of it, only
Judge Hutton, and Judge Crook dissented.

June 1637. the Book of Common prayers being begun to be read in Scotland
according to the Kings orders, there began a great uprore, all the Churches
protesting absolutely against it, whereupon by the Kings Command, a
Proclamation was published, and severe penalties to be inflicted on the
contemners of it, but nothing would prevail, whereupon the Marquis of Hamilton
was sent down to Scotland, and a treaty there was but it took no effect, for
during the said treaty the Scots had provided all things necessary for war, and
not long afterward Episcopacy was there totally abollished.

This year on the seventeenth of March the Queen was delivered of a daughter,
who at the Font received the name of Ann.

This year there were great contestations in Scotland* two Petitions were
presented against the Common prayer book, Proclamations were made at
Edinborough, and several places, for preventing of disorders, but to no
effect, for the Covenanters every where began to raise Arms, impose texes,
seize on the Kings Castles, and prepare for war, having chosen David Lesly an
old Soldier for their General.

On the latter end of October, the Queen mother came into England, which many
people looked upon as a forerunner of mischief.

March 1639. The King set forth against the Scots attended with a Royal Army,
and on the seventeenth of June, a general accord was made at Barwick, upon
which the King presently disbanded his forces and returned to London, whither
he was no sooner come, but the Scot did openly protest against the
Pasification, and retained the Officers of the Army in pay, hereupon the King
was enforced to call for the Lord Leievetenant out of Ireland, whom not long
afterward he created Earl of Straford.

The Bishop of Canterbury reviving the ancient Ceremonies, was looked upon as
addicted too much to to the Religion of Rome.

August, 1640. Another Parliament assembled, and the King finding that they had
no desire to assist him with money to advance against the Scots, but were ready
to comply with them he dissolved that Parliament, to the great grief both of
City, and country.

July the eighteenth, The Queen was delivered of a Son who was baptized Henry.

On the twentieth of August, the King marched toward the North in his own
person, having received some large contributions from the Clergy, and a very
considerable number of the Gentry, At Annick he understood of a defeat given by
General Lesly to a party of his, consisting of 3000. foot, and 1200. Horse,
that Sir Jacob Ashley had deserted Newcastle, and that the Scots had imposed a
task of 350. pound a day on the Bishopric of Dirham, and 300. pound a day on
the Countey of Northumberland, which sad news did much afflict him.

On the twenty fourth of Septem. the Lords being assembled with the King at
York, it was resolved that a Parliament should be called on the third of
November following, In the mean time the English to gain a cessation of Arms,
was enforced to yield to the Scots unreasonable propositions. This Parliament
by reason of the long Sessions of it, being called the long Parliament being
met, Master Prin, Master Burton, and Doctor Bastwick were released of their
Imprisonment having great damages allowed them.

The Earl of Straford, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop Wren, were
impeached of High treason and to the Tower, Sir Francis Windebank, and the Lord
Finch fled beyond the Seas, and most of the Judges who had declared themselves
for Ship money, were voted delinquents, Judge Barkely was arrested by the Usher
of the Black Rod for high Treason, as he sat one the Kings Bench.

March, 1641, the trial was of the Lord Straford, which continued many days,
and having said as much for himself as man could speak, and the King himself
interceding for him, it made his cause the worse, and on Wednesday the twelft
of May, he was beheaded on Tower Hill.

On the second of May the Lady Mary was married to the Prince of Orange with
great solemnity.

Three hundred thousand pounds was ordered for the Scotch Army to send them out
of England to which they were a charge unsupportable.

The Parliament adjourned from the eight of September to the twentieth of
October, and on the tenth of August the king went to Scotland, and came back to
London on the beginning of November following.

About the latter end of October, brake out the barbarous and inhumane
Rebellion in Ireland, where above two hundred thousand persons were most
barbarously murdered.

January 1642. the King attended with diverse Gentlemen, came into the house of
Commons, and seating him in the Speakers Chair demanded five members of the
house to be delivered to him, whose names were, Sir Ar. Hazelrig, Master
Denzill Hollis, Master Prin Mr. Hamden and Master Sroud, but finding they were
not there, he went into his coach for London, being informed they were fled
thither, and made Proclamation for their apprehension, which the Commons voted
illegal and scandalous.

In February the King and Queen went to Canterbury with the Princes, wife to
the Prince of Orange, the Queen understanding that the house intended to charge
her with Treason went along with the Princess her daughter into Holland. Much
about this time the Bishops were quite voted down.

The king coming back to Greenwitch went afterward toward York, in the mean
time the Parliament does Seize upon the Magazine at Hull, and Regiments of
Horse and Foot are Listed, and the Earl of Essex appointed to be General, the
noise of whose preparations, does hasten the King from York to Nottingham,
where he Sets up his sttandard, and much increases his Forces, as he marches,
and on Sunday, October twenty third, was the great Battle fought at Edgehill,
the fight terrible, and five thousand slain upon the place; He afterward
marches toward London, and at Brainford, defeateth a Regiment of the
Parliaments, but finding how numerous the Earl of Essex Army was, that lay
betwixt Brainford and London he retired to his Winter quarters at Oxford.

February 1643. the Queen who had bin accused of pawning the Jewels of the
Crown came to him, and brought great supplies of powder, Arms, and Ammunition,
The ensuing Summer made the King master of the North and West. Some few places
only excepted. The Earl of Newcastle had cleared all beyond the Trent but
Hull, and Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice had redewced Bristol Exeter and all
the Towns of any importance in the West, Pool, Lime and Plimotuh excepted, but
making some stay to reduce Gloucester the Siege was raised by the Earl of Essex,
and on the twentieth of September the famous Battle of Newbery was fought,
where many were flain on both sides, and on the next day Prince Rupert
follow-the Rear of the Earl of Essex Army almost as far as Reading.

Oxford, he Summoned a Parliament, which appeared on the two and twentieth day
of January, and on the Sixteenth of the same month the Scots Army entered
England, consisting of eighteen thousand foot and two thousand horse; at this
time Newark being besieged by Sir John Meldrum, with an Army of seven thousand,
Prince Rupert with four thousand horse and one thousand foot does raise the
siege: not long afterward Latham house was relieved by him.

The Queen went from Oxford to the west of England April 16. where at Exceter
she was delivered of a daughter Henretta, who not long afterward did follow
her into France where she still remains: on the year before she was brought to
bed of a daughter at Oxford, whose name was Katharine, and died almost as soon
as it was born.

The King having given a defeat to Sir William Waller at Cropredy Bridge,
advanced after the Earl of Essex and followed him so close, that at last he
forced him into Cornwall, his horse taking the advantage of the night, made a
shift to escape, but the foot came to capitulation, and delivered up their Arms
and Artillery, there being nine thousand arms, and forty nine pieces of
excellent brass Ordnance, the king made such a stay in Cornwall, that before he
could return to Oxford, the Earl of Essex was again in the head of an army
seconded by the Earl of Manchester and Sir William Waller, and at Neubery again
there was a very hot encounter in which both sides drew off by degrees, and the
Parliaments side had the better of it.

Prince Rupert having marched from Latham house to York, some certain months
before, there was a terrible fight at Marshon Moore between the army of the
prince Rupert, and the forces of the parliament, where multitudes being slain,
there was three thousand taken prisoners, twenty pieces of Ordnance, and a
considerable number of Officers: not long afterward York was surrendered, and
Colonel Brown at Abingdon performed remarkable service.

January 1645. Sir John Hotham was executed on the Tower Hill for betraying his
trust, and on the next day, his son followed the same fortune.

On the tenth of January the Archbishop of Canterbury voted guilty of High
Treason, was brought unto the Scaffold on Tower Hill where his head at one blow
was severed from his shoulders by the hands of the executioner.

The town of Taunton held out gallantly against the Kings party, Pomferat was
relieved by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, the Treaty at Uxbridge took no effect, the
Earl of Essex being thought to be too mild, the Lord Fairfax is made Captain
General of the Parliaments forces, in the mean time the kings force who had
taken the field not long before do range up and down the countries, and having
relieved Chester they faced Leicester, and presently after began to storm it,
the Kings Canons playing upon the town a whole day and a night, many breaches
were made, and the contestation was carried on with much resolution on both
sides, in some breaches they came to the push of pike, on Saturday they entered
the town, where much treasure was taken, and in hot blood many were put to the
sword.

Sir Thomas Fairfax, who (as I have said) was wholly made General in the place
of the Earl of Essex, hearing this, advanced from Gilling to Naseby, where
observing great bodies of horse to appear on the hills near Harborough, he
ordered the army to randezvouse near to Naseby to which places the royal army
made their approches.

Saturday the fourteenth of June, both armies engaged, the King having the
better at the first, for Prince Rupert had routed one wing of the Parliaments
horse, and followed the chase at Maston Moor so unadvisedly, that he left the
whole body of the foot open to the other wing, who giving them a gallant
charge, did put the whole army to an absolute rout, and made themselves masters
of the kings Camp, carriage and canon, and of his Cabinet also where many
letters were found which the Parliament afterward published.

After this Leicester was immediately reduced, and General Fairfax, marching
into the West defeated the Lord Goring, and became master of all the Garrisons
in the West, and for a conclusion of all, had the City of Bristol surrendered
unto him; at the same time there being no hope of relief, Pomfret, and
Scarborough, and Carlisle, and some other Garrisons in the North, did yield
themselves unto the mercy of the Parliament, and Bazing house, which a long
time had been besieged, was stormed and taken by Lieutenant General Cromwell.

A great defeat was given to the Lord Hopton, at Torrington, and the same
fortune attended Sir Marmaduke Langdale at Sherburn, all being lost in the west
the prince of Wales found the opportunity to conveigh himself into France.

The King marching toward Chester which was then besieged by Sir William
Berton, and Colonel Jones was persued in the way, and charged in the front by
the besiegers, routed at Bouton heath, where the Lord Bernard Stuart was killed
upon the place, the last of the three brethren that had lost their lives in
their princes quarrel.

After this the King returned to Oxford, and was so much incensed against his
two Nephews, prince Rupert and Maurice, for delivering up such places of great
importance in the west, the loss of Bristow did most of all perplex him, who
thereupon when prince Rupert and his brother Maurice returned to Oxford did
command them to be disarmed, and would not suffer them to walk the streets with
their swords by their sides as they had done formerly, though afterward they
were restored again to all apparances of favor.

March, Sir Jacob Astley was beaten at Donnington near unto Stow in the Would,
in the which fight himself was taken prisoner, and the kings hopes quite lost.

Wherefore on the twenty seventh of April, he left the City of Oxford in a
disguse, and on the fourth of May did put himself into the hands of the Scots
at Newark, who carrid him to Newcastle, which occasioned the surrender of
Oxford to the Lord Fairfax on the twenty fourth of June following.

On the fifteenth of July prince Rupert went for France, and prince Maurice to
the Hague.

In the midst of August or thereabouts the Scots sold the King for the sum of
two hundred thousand pounds in ready money, the Commissioners sent by the House
to receive him, did bring him to Holmby.

On the fourteenth of September the Earl of Essex died.

February, the Scots abandoned Newcastle, and the Parliament voted the Army to
disband, those only excepted who were reserved for the subduing of Ireland;
there began now to be some contestations in the House betwixt the Presbyterian
and Independent party, and the Parliament began to find that they had not the
Army so much at their devotion as they conceived.

On the fourth of June, Cornet Joyce carried away the king from Holmby, and
brought him to Newmarket; on the twenty eighth of June he was brought to
Hatfield, and from thence to Causam, where after much importunity, his children
were permitted to come unto him, at whose sight he was very joyful.

On the seventh of August, the Lord Fairfax and his victorious Army, did ride
in triumph through the City of London; a little before this, there were eleven
of the members of parliament impeached, and Major General Massey, and Colonel
Poyntz abandoning the guarding of the City did fly over into Holland.

From Casam Lodge, the King was removed to Hampton Court, where being terrified
with the apprehension of some dangers, he put himself into the power of Col.
Hammond in the Isle of Wight who secured him in Carisbrook Castle during his
restraint: in this place he wrote that excellent Book entitled Icon Basilicon.
Propositions were here sent unto him by both Houses of Parliament as had been
before at Newcastle, and Holmby house, to which he returned the same answer as
he did then.

January, that no more addresses should be made unto his Majesty.

February the twenty first, Judge Lenkins was brought unto the Bar of the
House, for which he was fined a thousand pound, and a charge was voted to be
brought in against him.

The Wel^h being up in arms to the number of eight thousand foot, and four
hundred horse, were defeated by Colonel Horton.

There were several insurrections in Kent, Cornwall, Essex, Suffolk,
Cambridge-shire, and other places. There was a sharp encounter at Maidstone
betwixt the Kentish forces and those of the Parliaments, the fight continued
six hours, at the last, the town was taken, and 1400 prisoners with good store
of booty.

The Seamen revolt and refuse to serve the Earl of Warwick; the Earl of Holland
rises in arms with the Lord Francis, brother to the Duke of Buckingham, the
Lord Francis was killed about King-stone, and the Earl of Holland flying to
Saint Needs was taken by Col. Scroope and sent prisoner to Warwick Castle.

Sir John Owen is taken prisoner in Wales, the Kentish being scattered did put
themselves in the town of Colchester, which being strongly besieged by Sir
Thomas Fairfax, did yield upon composition, Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George
Lisle were there shot to death, and the noble L. Capel was reserved for the
scaffold, where he looked death in the face with an undaunted magnanimity.

The mariners that revolted being discontented that prince Rupert, and prince
Mauris were there Admirals fell off with the greatest part of their ships, and
return again to the Earl of Warwick.

Lieutenant General Cromwell, having reduced Wales, and the three Captains that
were the ringleaders, having yielded themselves, whose names were Langhorn,
Poyer and Powel, two whereof were afterward shot to death, he marched against
the Scotts in Lanchashire, who allthough they were formidable in their numbers,
yet he discomfits them, takes all their Foot, Canon, Arms, Ammunition; the
Duke did render himself prisoner to the Lord Gray, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and
Lieutenant General Middleton were both taken prisoners.

Following this blow Lie. Ge. Crom. advances into Scotland, and suppressed all
those that did there oppose him, and had the towns of Barwick and Carlisle
delivered to him.

In the mean time the Parliament recall the Votes of no addresses to the King,
and ordered that a personal treaty should be at Newport, in the Isle of Wight,
but the Commissioners sent thither, spent so much time before they drew toward
a conclusion, that they gave the Officers of the Army the oppertunity to frame
a remonstrance, in which it was declared that the King was the sole cause of
all that bloodshed which had been in the kingdom, and nothing could be more
expedient then to bring him to the bar of Justice; in persuance whereof, some
of the officers having seized upon his person, did bring him over to Hurst
Castle in Hampshire, and from thence by degrees to Windsor, and at last to
Westminster.

In the mean time the Army having purged the House of all those Members whom
they conceived to be opposite to them, they did erect a High-Court of Justice,
Sergeant Bradshaw being chosen to be presis^dent of it.

On Saturday January the twentieth, his Majesty was brought from the Palace of
Saint James unto Westminster Hall, where being brought up into the Court, he
was no sooner sat, but the Lord president told him that they were assembled by
the authority of the Commons of England to proceed to his trial for betraying
the trust reposed in him by the people, and commanded his charge to be read,
which was to this effect.

That being admitted King of England, and entrusted with a limited power to
govern according to the laws for the good of the people, out of a wicked design
to hold up a tyrannical power to overthrow the peoples rights, he the said
Charles Stuart has traitorously and maliciously leavied war against the
parliament, particularly on or about, the 13 of June 1642 at Beverley, and on
the 24 of August, at Nottingham, where he set up his Standard of war, and on
the 23 of October at Edgehil, and at many other times in other places, by which
cruel and unnatural war by him levied, much innocent blood has been spilt,
much treasure wasted, and some parts of the land spoiled even to desolation, by
which, and by granting Commissions to the prince his son, it appears that the
said Charles Stuart is the author and contriver of the said unnatural war, and
thereby guilty of all the murders and Treasons committed in the said war, for
the which he is impeached, as a Tyrant, Traitor, and Murderer, and it was
desired that he may answer the premises, that such procedings and sentences may
be had upon him as are agreeable to Justice.

Lord President. Sir, you heard your Charge read, and it is desired that in the
behalf of the Commons of England you do put in your answer to it.


King. I would know by what power I was called hither, I was not long ago in
the Isle of Wight, how I came thither it is too long to relate, I would know by
what lawful Authority I was brought from thence, and when I know that I shall
answer. Remember, I am your King, and what sins you bring upon your heads, and
think well upon it, I say, think well upon it before you go from one sin to a
greater; I will not betray my trust, by answering to a new and unlawful
Authority.


Lord Presi. If you had been pleased to have observed what had been-hinted to
you, you would have known by what Authority it is, by that Authority, which
Authority require, you in the name of the people of England by which you are
Elected King to answer them.


King. Sir, I deny that.


Lord Presi. If you acknowledge not the Authority of the Court they must
proceed.


King. Let me know by what Authority I am called hither, I stand more for the
privilege of my people then any that is seated here.


Lord Press. The Court desires to know whether this is all you will answer.


King. I do desire that you would give me, and all the World satisfaction in
this; It is no slight thing you are about, I am sworn to to God for the peace
of my Country, and therefore you may do well, first, to satisfy God, and
afterward the World, by what Authority you do this, There is a God in Heaven
that will call you, and all that gives you power, to account.


Lord Pres. The Court expects your final Answer, you desire satisfaction of
their A^^hority, It is by Gods Authority, and that's our present work.


King, That Which you have said satisfies no reasonable Man.


Lord Pres. That is in your apprehension, We that are your Judges think it
reasonabl.

The President commanded the King to be taken, who accordingly was convayed
back to S. Iamses. On the Monday following, the Court having met in the Painted
Chamber, did order that the King should be suffered to argue to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, which if he did, the President should give him to
understand, That the Commons in England Assembled in Parliament have
Constituted this Court whose power may not, nor shall not be disputed against
by him.

Immediately afterward, the Court being set the Captain of the Guard was
commanded to fetch the King, and Solicitor Choe having read the Charge as
before, he required the King to give his positive answer, which if he refuse,
it should be taken pro Confesso, and the Court should proceed to Justice.


Lord Prisi. I require your positive Answer.


King, I protest against the Jurisdiction of this Court, if power without Law
may alter the fundamental laws of the Kingdom, what Subject is he that can be
secure of his life, or Estate. And proceeding to show Reasons why he could not
allow the Authority of the Court, he was interrupted by the President, who told
him that the Court desired a direct Answer.

The King, I understand law, and Reason, and therefore under favor, I do plead
for the liberty of the people more then you do, and therefore if I should
impose a belief upon any Man without giving reasons for it, it were
unreasonable.


President. The Votes of the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament are the
Reasons of the Kingdom.


King. The Commons of England were never allowed to be a Court of Indicature:
The King urging again to give in his Reasons, the President told him that his
Reasons were not to be heard against the highest Jurisdiction, to which the
King answered, Show me the Court where Reason is not to be heard. Upon these
words the President commanded the King to be taken away, and the default
recorded.

On the day following the Court met again, and the King being brought, and
seated in his chair. The President told him that it was not for him to dispute
the prerogative of the Court, and being sensible of his delays the Court
required him positively to answer whither he was guilty or not guilty of the
Treasons laid to his Charge.


King. I desire to know whither I may speak freely or not.


President. You are not to be permitted to run out into any discourses until
you have given a direct answer to the matter laid in charge against you.


King, I valve not the Charge a a rush, It is the liberty of the People that I
stand for; Being here interrupted, he proceeded, Sir you ought not to interrupt
me. How I came here, I know not, there is no Law to make your King your
prisoner.


President, The Court once more demands your possitive Answer. To which the
King replied. To give satisfaction to the people of my clearness, and to
satisfy them, that I have done nothing against the trust committed to me, but
to alter the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and to acknowledge a new Court
against their privileges, you must excuse me. To which the Presid. replied.
This is the third time you have affronted and disowned the Court. How far you
have preserved the privileges of the the people, your actions have spoke, you
have written your meaning in bloody Characters, but Sir, The pleasure of the
Court is, that the Clark record the default, and Gentlemen you that have the
Charge of him, Take away the prisone^, who was immediately convayed back to
Saint Iamses.

On Saturd^y, June the twenty seventh, the court sat again, and the King
desired that he might be heard to speak, and hoped he should give no occasion
of interruption.


President. You may, but you must hear the court first, whereupon the President
addressing himself to the Court, told them that the prisoner at the Bar has
been several times charged with Treason, and has been so far from obeying the
Court, by submitting to their Justice, that he began to debate their Authority,
and being required to answer he was pleased to be Contumations, whereupon the
Court having Considered of the notoriousness of the Fact were resolved to
pronounce Sentence on the prisoner, but in respect he desired to be heard
before Sentence, the Court was resolved to hear him.

The King told him, A hasty Sentence once past may sooner be repented, then
called, I do desire to be heard before the Lords and Commons in the Painted
Chamber if it be reason, and really for the welfare of the Kingdom, and liberty
of the Subject, I am sure of it, it will be well worth your hearing before my
sentence be past, I therefore do conjure you, as you love that which you
pretend, which I hope is real, the liberty of the Subject, and the peace of
the Kingdom, that you will grant me a hearing before you pass sensentence.


President. This is but a further declinig the Jurisdiction of the Court.

The King told him It was no declining the Jurisdiction, although he could not
own it.

The President told him that what he offered, tended to a delay, which neither
the Kingdom nor Justice could admir, but the Court was content to withdraw for
a time; hereupon the King being withdrawn, after the space of half an hour the
Court did sit again, and the prisoner being brought, the President told him
that the Court had withdrawn pro forma tantum, and that having considered what
he had offered them, and of their own Authority, which was grounded on the
Supreme authority of the Parliament, they had Acted according to their
Confession, and being now his Judges they were to know, that Judges were no
more to delay then to deny, and were therefore resolved to proceed on
punishment and judgment.


King. It is vain for me to dispute, I know yo^ have power enough, but I would
fain know the lawfulness of that power. I do put at your doors all the
inconveniences of a hasty sentence, which the child unborne may repent.


President. The Court desires to know, If you have any thing more to say
before sentence.


King. If you will grant me this delay, I doubt not but to give you some
reasonable satisfaction, I require you therefore, as you will answer at the
dreadful d^y of Judgment, that you will consider it.


President. If you have nothing more to say, we must proceed to Sentence.


King. I have nothing more to say.


President. Then the Court has something to say to you, though it will not be
acceptable to you, and proceeding in a long speech, showing how Kings had been
executed for their misgovernment. The King desired to be heard concerning the
Imputations laid to him, before that sentence was prono^n^ed.

The President replied that his time was now past and not far from Sentence and
because they would not acknowledge him to be a Court, they could not admit of
what had to say, and the Clarke by the Presidents appointment, did read the
Sentence, which was: That for the Treasons and Crimes laid to his charge, the
Court did adjudge him the said Chales Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, and
Murderer to be put to death, by severing his head from his Body. The sentence
being read, the Court stood up in Confirmation of it, as the Act and Resolution
of the whole Court. The King offered again to speak something, but the Presid.
would not hear him, and commanded the prisoner to be carried away, and convayed
to Whitehall.

On Monday January, 29. The King desired that he might have the happiness to see
his children, which was granted him, they were with him, three or four hours,
and at the parting there was a sad farewell betwixt the Father and the children.

On the day following he received the Sacrament, and about ten of the clock,
being attended by a Regiment, Doctor Iuxon being on the right hand of him, and
Colonel Tomlinson on the le^t, he walked on foot th^o^gh the Park from S.
Iamses to White Hall. In the way some of the Foot Soldiers reviled him, the
King hearing of them did pity them, and said, Alas poor men, they will speak
as much of their own Colonel for a tester.

And going on, he desired the Bishop of London and the Colonel to go a little
faster, for said he I am now going for a Heavenly Crown, which I do with less
trouble of Spirit, then I have often fought for an earthly Diadem. As soon as
he came into White Hall, he immediately retired himself into his cabanet
chamber, where he continued in his devotions, and dinner being ready he refused
to eat, and only refreshed himself with a Manchet and a Glass of Claret wine.

About one of the clock he was conveyed through the Banqueting house, and a
way being made through the great Window he came upon the Scaffold, which was
covered with black, where he beheld two Executioners, and both of them
disguised with visards, which nothing affrighted him, and pulling off his
doublet he was to be seen by all in a Silk Wast-coate of Azure Color. The
multitude that were on the ground making a great and confused noise which were
increased by many Troops of Horse that were near unto the Scaffold to attend
the Execution, he addressed him to Colonel Tomlinson in these words.

I shall be very little heard of any body else, I shall therefore speak a word
unto you here. Indeed I could have held my peace very well, if I did not think
that holding of my peace would make some men to suppose that I did submit as
much unto the guilt as to the punishment; But I conceive it is my Duty first to
God, and then unto my Country to clear my self, both as an honest Man, a good
King, and a good Christian. I shall begin first with my Innocence, and in troth
I think it not very needful for me to insist long upon this, for all the world
knows that I never did begin a war with the two houses of Parliam. and I call
God to witness to whom I must shortly make an account, that I never did intend
to incroach upon their privileges. They began upon mine. It was the Militia
they began upon. They confessed that the Militia was mine, but they thought it
fit for to have it from me; And to be short, if any body will look into the
Dates of the Commissions, of their Commissions, and mine, and likewise to the
Declarations, he will see clearly that they began these unhappy troubles, not
I; So that as for the guilt of these enormous crimes that are laid against me,
I do hope that God will clear me of it. I will not (for I am in charity) and
God forbid that I should lay it upon the two ho^ses of Parliament, there is no
necessity of either. I hope they are free of this guilt, but I believe that
evil instruments betwixt them and me, have been the chief Cause of all this
bloodshed, so that, as I find my self clear of this, I hope and pray to God
that they may also. Yet for all this, God forbid, that I should be so evil a
Christian as not to say, that Gods judgment are just upon me. Many times he
does pay Justice by an unjust sentence, that is ordinary. I will only say
this, that an unjust sentence that I suffered to take effect, is now punished
by an unjust sentence upon me; So far I have said to show you how that I am an
innocent man. Now for to show you that I am a good Christian I hope (poynting
to Doctor Iuxon) there is good man will bear me witness, that I have forgiven
all the world, and even those in particular, who have been the chief causers of
my death, who they are God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive
them. But this is not all. My charity must go further, I wish that they may
repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular, I pray
to God with Saint Steven, That this be not laid to their charge, and withal
that they may take the right way to the peace of the kingdom, for my charity
commands me, not only to forgive particular men, but to endeavor to the last
Gasp the peace, and happiness of the Kingdom; So sirs I do wish with all my
soul, that they may endeavor the peace of the Kingdom.

Now sirs I must show you both how you are out of the way, and put you in a
way. First, you are out of the way; for certainly all the way that you ever had
yet, as far a I could find by any thing, is in the way of conquest: Certainly
this is an evil way, for conquest in my opinion is never just, except there be
a good and a just cause, either for matter of wrong or a just title; and then
if you go beyond the first quarrel that you have, that makes it unjust in the
end that was just at first; for if there be only matter of conquest, then it
is a great robbery, as a Pirate said to Alexander, that he was the great
Robber, himself was but a petty Robber; and so Sirs, I do think, for the way
you are in you are much out of the way. Now sirs, for to put you in the way,
believe it, you will never go right, nor will God ever prosper you, until you
give God his due, the King his due, that is, my successor, and the people their
due; I am as much for them, and more then any of you; you must give God his due
by regulating rightly his Church, according to the scripture, which is now out
of order, and to set you in a way particularly now I cannot, but only a
National Synod freely called, freely debating among themselves, must settle
this, when every opinion is freely and clearly heard; For the King indeed I
will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct you for that, therefore
because it concerns my own particular, I do only give you a touch of it. For
the people I do truly desire their liberty and freedom as much as any body
whosoever; but I must tell you, that their liberty and their freedom consists
in having government under those laws by which they live, and their goods may
be most their own, it is not in having a share in the Government, that is
nothing pertaining to them. A Sovereign and a Subject are clean different
things, and therefore until you do that, I mean, that you do put the people
into that liberty which I speak of, they will never certainly enjoy themselves.

Sirs, it was for this that I am hither come, for if I would have given way to
an arbitrary power, that is, to have all laws changed according to the power of
the sword, I needed not to have come here, and therefore I tell you, and I pray
to God it be not laid to your charge that I am the Martyr of the people.
In Troth sirs, I should not hold you any longer, I will only say this to you,
that I could have desired some little time longer, because I would put this
which I have said in a little better order, and have had it a little better
digested then I have now done, and therefore I hope you will excuse me, I have
now delivered my conscience, and I pray God you take those courses that are
best for the good of the kingdom, and your own salvations.


Doctor Juxon. Although it be very well known what your Majesty's affections
are to Religion, yet because it may be expected that you should speak something
to give satisfaction to the world therein, I must beseech your Majesty to
declare your self in that particular.


King. I thank you heartily my Lord for this remembrance, I had almost
forgotten it; in troth Sirs my conscience in religion is already, as I think,
well known to all the world, and therefore I declare before you all, that I die
a Christian according to the profession of the Church of Engl. as I found it
left unto me by my Father: and (pointing to the Bishop of London) this I do
believe, that this honest man will witness with me. Then turning to the
Officers, he said, Excuse me for the same, I have a good Cause and a gracious
God, I will say no more. On this the Bishop of London said unto him, There is
but one stage more; this stage is full of noise and tumult, it is but a short
one, but you may consider it will soon carry you from earth to heaven, and
there you will find an abundance of unrepented joy and comfort. To this the
King replied, I pass from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where there
is no disturbance, no disturbance in the world. The Bishop melting into tears,
assured him that he was exchanged from a temporal to an eternal crown: a good
exchange. After this, the King putting his hair under his cap, after some short
and fervent ejaculations in private, with his hands and eyes lift up to heaven,
immediately stooped down and laid his neck upon the block, and the King
perceiving the Executioner prepared and armed to give the fatal blow, said unto
him, Stay for the sign: and after a very little pause, stretching forth his
hands, the executioner at one blow severed his head from his body: and even his
enemies wept in private for what they had done in public.

His body was put into a coffin covered with black velvet, and carried from
thence to his house at Saint Iamses, where being embalmed and wrapped up in a
sheet of lead, it was exposed to the view of the people.

On Wednesday the 7 of Feb. his body was delivered to two of his servants to be
buried at Windsor, where the next day the Bishop of London, the Duke of
Richmond, the Marquess of Hartford, and the Earls of Lindsey and Southampton
repaired, and buried him in a vault in St. Georges Chapel, it being the same
vault where Henry the eight had been heretofore interred.


The Life and death of Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector.
OLiver Cromwell was born in the town of Huntingdon, he was descended from the
family of the Williams in the Coun. of Glamorgan, one whereof marrying with the
only child and daughter of the Lord Cromwell, raised and beheaded by Henry the
Eight, the whole Family afterward retained the Name of Cromwell which was
thought more Honorable.

In the month of August 1649. Six months after the decease of King Charles
Oliver Cromwell, being chosen by the Parliament to be Governor of Ireland,
advanced into that Nation with a very gallant Army of Horse and Foot, where
having taken and besieged Dogheda, by degrees became absolute master of that
whole Nation.

In the same year Doctor Dorislaus who assisted at King Charles his death,
being sent as Agent into the Low Countries, was killed at the Hagne; and Mr.
Acham being not long afterward sent as an Agent into Spain, was killed at
Madrid.

In the year 1650. the Commonwealth of England preparing to make war against
the Scots, Oliver Cromwell, who for his many great services in the wars of
England, was made Lieutenant General, was now chosen to be Generallissimo of
the Armies of the Commonwealth of England in the place of the Lord Fairfax.

This year in the month of September, was the famous battle of Dunbar, where
the English having totally overthrown the Scots, did take ten Colonels, 12
Lieutenantcollonels, 9 Majors, 47 Captains, 72 Lientenants, and eighty
Ensigns, two and twenty great Gunns, and arms for fifteen thousand men.

In the same month Edinburgh and Leith were taken.

Col: Eusebius Andrews being discovered to bring over Commissions to raise
soldiers for the King of Scotland, was condemned for it, and beheaded on Tower
hill. Much about the same time General Blake at sea did ruin Prince Ruperts
Fleet.

In the year 1651. the Arms of the Crown of England were put down by order of
Parliament, and the Statues of King Chales were put down, one of them at the
old Exchange, and the other at the west end of Paul's.

This year the Lord Saint John and Mr. Walter Strickland were sent Ambassadors
into Holland, where they were much affronted by the English Royalists.

The Isle of Scilly was reduced, and one Brown Bushel was beheaded at London,
a famous Royalist both by sea and land.

This year M. Love and Mr. Gibbons were beheaded on Tower Hill.

In the month of August the King of Scotland with an army of twelve thousand
men, did enter into England by the way of Carlisle, and on the third of
September following was the battle at Worcester, where the King of Scotland
being over-powred lost the day, where there were taken six Colonels of horse,
eight of foot, thirty seven Captains of horse, seventy three of foot, seventy
^^x Standards, ninty nine Ensigns, one hundred fifty and eight Colors, all
the Canon, the Royal Standard, the Kings coach and horses, the King himself
made an escape strangely, and in a disguise passed unknown into France.

This year the Isle of Iersie was taken and the Isle of Man reduced; and not
long afterward the strong castle of G^ernsey was surrendered to the Pa^liament.

In the month of May 1652. was the first Sea Fight betwixt the Engglish and
the Hollanders, General Blake gave the first volley, and let fly three guns
at Van-trumps flag, to which Van-trump answered by a shot from the stern of his
ship backwards, signifying his disdain to veyl his flag, and instead of
striking his main top-saile, he caused a red flag of war to be set up in token
of a combat to his whole Fleet, and without any further delay he gave Genesis
Blake a broad side, who returned two for one, and for the space of four hours
together both Fleets did fight with great animosity. In this fight it is said
that one Holland man of war was sunk, and another taken with thirty guns: on
the English side there were some slain, and more wounded, and the ship Genesis
Blake commanded as Admiral, was much indammag'd in her masts, sail, tackling,
and apparel.

This action being disowned by the States of Holland, there was afterward open
war proclaimed betwixt the two Nations, and the greatest part of the English
Fleet sailed Northwards toward the Isle of Orkeney under the command of
General Blake, thinking the Dutch would be ready there to convey home their
Fishermen: in the mean time another Fleet of the Hollanders were discovered not
far from Plymouth, against which Sir George Ascue advanced with forty men of
war, and though in his first charge he was sufficiently dammaged in his sails,
masts and yards, yet he got windward of his Enemies, and once again charged the
whole body of them. Amongst the English there were several hurt and killed,
and it was conjectured by the wrack that two of the Holland men of war were
sunk: the night coming on, the English made toward Plymouth to repair their
vessels, but especially their masts, yards, and tackling which were so torn in
the fight, yet they were enforced to give over the enemy.

In the month of September General Blake fought with the French fleet that
were carrying Auxiliaries and provisions to the relief of Dunkirk, and having
mastered them to obedience, it was the only means that Dunkirk was surrendered
to the Spaniard.

Some few days afterward he discovered about sixty sail of Holland men of
war, commanded by Admiral de Wit, on the backside of the Goodwins Sands,
whom he followed almost as far as West-chappell in Zeland, and took the
Admiral of the rear squadron.

Not long afterward there was another fight betwixt eleven of the Holland men
and a squadron of the English in the Mediterranean sea, where the the English
being overpowred by numbers, the Phaenix, a very gallant Frigot, of five and
forty guns, was boarded by a Holland man of war, and enforced to yield.

On the ninteenth of September a part of the English fleet set sail for
Denmark, to demand the English ships that were there detained, and whose lading
was carried on shore and sold. This Embassage was fruitless, and no
restoration made until many months afterward: coming home the Antelop Frigot
being Admiral, commanded by Captain Ball, steering too much to the shore, did
run upon the sands, where she was lost, and it was ten to one that the whole
Fleet had not followed her, she bearing the lanthorn. She was an excellent
Frigot, and carried fifty brass guns.

Not long afterward the Hollanders came forth to sea again with fourscore
ships and upwards, against whom the English Fleet, under the command of Genesis
Blake, advanced; it is said they consisted not of above two and forty ships,
and that not above half of them engaged in that days service, and bare the
brunt of the puissant Holland Fleet. The Avent-guard and the Victory, two brave
Frigots, having been that whole afternoon engaged in the midst of the enemy,
who fired from all sides on them, got off in a very good condition. The
Garland, a frigot that carried forty pieces of Canon, was boarded, and being
over-powred on all sides, was enforced to yield; the Bonaventure, a gallant
ship, going to relieve the Garland, did fall also into the hands of the
enemies. General Blake, who commanded the Triumph plunging into the midst of
his enemies to fetch off the Garland and Bonaventure, was clapped on board by the
Dutch, and had his foremast shot down close to the board; but having stoutly
defended himself, he at length got clear, and went off with the rest of the
Fleet.

But on the latter end of February 1653. the English did put forth to sea again
with a gallant fleet, Genesis Blake in the Triumph followed by Genesis Dean, having
discovered 80. Holl. men of War (who seemed to out-dare them between the Isle
of Wight and Portland) began the fight; the English Fleet came not up unto
their General, who all the morning had been engaged until two in the
afternoon, at what time there was a most cruel fight, which continued till
dark night. The English lost the Sampson, which was so leaky and so
unserviceable, that the Hollanders sunk her themselves after they had taken
her. On the next day and the day following the Engglish again assaulted the
Hollanders; on the last day the fight was more obstinate then the former. The
English in this fight took about nine men of War, and fifty Merchants ships,
and sunk several other ships; fifteen hundred prisoners were brought up to
London. Genesis Blake was hurt in this encounter, having done as much as could be
expected from a gallant seaman, and many of his captains and officers, who were
men of great courage, were both hurt and killed in this desperate encounter. In
this spring the English lost some ships at Legorne, captain Badily who
commanded a squadron of nine men of War, being not able by the averseness of
the wind to come up and assist captain Appleton, whose Frigots not equal to the
Hollanders were surrounded by them. There were lost in this fight the Leopard
and Smugge Frigot, which carried fifty pieces of canon; she was boarded and
taken by the Dutch Admiral, and for the space of five hours maintained a stout
fight with him and two other great ships. At the same time the Bonaventure, a
gallant frigot of the English was blown up, an iron bullet from the enemy
having unhappily fired the powder. The Pilgrim was also taken, having her main
and mizen masts both shot down. The Levant Merchant another stout English
frigot was taken. The Sampson being assaulted by young Van-trump, and a
fire-ship of the Hollanders, was soon set on fire, and perished in the sea.

Not long afterward Genesis Cromwell alleging that the drifts of the Parliament
were to establish themselves in a perpetual Senate, which was directly against
the ambition of his spirit, which desired predominant over all, he found the
means to dissolve the long Parliament, which very few seemed to be grieved at;
and that all the world might be satisfied with the reasons wherefore he did it,
he published his Manif^esto for it.

A Council of State was presently settled, and not long afterward there was
another great fight betwixt the English and the Dutch, which continued for the
space of two days: in this fight the English lost Genesis Dean one of their
Admirals, who was taken off by a great shot in the first days engagement: there
were slain of the English (as the lists then gave account) one hundred and
threescore men, and two hundred and forty hurt; of the Hollanders one thousand
and five hundred were taken prisoners, and six men of war were sunk; the
English pursued their victory to the very mouth of the Texell, and blocked up
the Hollanders in their own ports.

In the mean time on the beginning of July Genesis Cromwell called another
Parliament, which by reason of the sudden and unexpected dissolution of it, was
called the short Parliament.

On the latter end of this month there was a memorable fight betwixt the Dutch
and the English, during the time of a treaty betwixt both Nations, this battle
was fought with admirable resolution on both sides. The fight began in the
evening, which though but short was very smart. The Dutch in the nightime
being recruited with five and twenty gallant ships, did fall of themselves the
next morning on the English fleet with a great deal of gallantry and
resolution. In this fight Admiral Van-trump was slain: there were twenty men
of War of the Hollanders sunk or burnt in this fight. Of the English there were
slain outright eight Captains, and five hurt: the Triumph and the Andrew, two
Frigots, were sorely put to it, and received great damage in their sails and
rigging. The Hollanders seeing so great a number of their ships lost did face
about, and did bear away with all the sail they could make unto the Texell and
the Engl. not judging it expedient to engage too far upon them, did set sail
with the whole Fleet toward Yarmouth, to dispose of such ships as were
disabled, and to put their wounded men on shore.

The Pa^liament before mentioned being conceived too weak to go on with the
management of the great and high affairs of State, it was dissolved on the 12
of December. following.

And presently afterward the Lord G. Cromwell was declared and sworn Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England Scotland and Ireland at Westminster,
in the presence of all the Judges, the Barons of the Exchecquer, and the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of the city of London. At this time certain Articles were
presented, which he took a solemn oath (according to his custom) to see them
kept, protesting moreover that he would mind nothing so much as the good of the
Commonwealth, and the glory of God. Presently after this he was proclaimed
Protector at the Palace-yard in Westminster and at the old Exchange by the Lord
Mayor.

His Highness being now where he would be, desired to know the affections of
the people. A report was raised that a great part of the army was discontented
at his inauguration unto his new dignities, whereupon the disaffected in
several counties thinking to join with them, did take up arms, and finding the
succourse promised and expected to stand out against them, they cried out they
were betrayed, and most of them being taken were sent to foreign plantations.
On this account Sir Henry Slingsby was taken prisoner in Yorkshire, and
beheaded afterward upon another account of the same nature. M. Penruddock, M.
Luces, M. Thorpe, M. Kensey, M. Graves, who cried out much against Sir Joseph
Wagstaffe, were condemned and executed in Wiltshire.

Much about the same time Mr. Peter Vowel was hanged at Charingcross; and on
the same monday M. John Gerrard and the brother to the Portugal Ambassador
were beheaded on Tower Hill.

On the third of September another Parliament was assembled, which was
dissolved again on the January following.

This year the Marquess of Leda came over in a magnificent manner, as an
Ambassador from Spain, but his Highness at that time having no desire to make
any alliance with Spain, did conclude a peace with the Crown of France.

This year on the latter end of December, a gallant Fleet under the command of
General Pen and General Venables, did put forth to sea, who on the tenth of
May following arrived at Iamaica, the design having miscarryed, as Sancto
Domingo in Hispaniola.

On the fifth of April the articles of peace were signed and delivered on the
behalf of the two Nations of England and Holland, the Protector to testify his
joy did most sumptuously entreat the Holland Ambassadors.

This year the Highlanders in Scotland disdaining the subjection of General
Middleton, but General Monk falling into the North of Scotland did give them
so full a charge on the latter end of July, that he absolutely defeated them,
and made them incapable of ever appearing in arms again.



The Lord Bulstrode Whitlock was sent Ambassador into Sweden, where he entered
into a close league with that nation.

General Blake arriving with his fleet at Sunis, sent unto the Governor of
the place to demand satisfaction for some English ships which the pirates in
those parts had taken away, which being denied, he came with the Vice Admiral
and Rearadmirall within musket shot of the Castle, on which he incessantly
fired, and on the other forts whilst the other ships took the opportunity to
fire, part of the Turkish Navy then riding in the Haven. This was so well
performed, that in four hours space nine great vessels were burnt down to the
very keels, the English losing but five and twenty men, and five and forty
wounded. Hereupon the King of Tunis sought to the English for peace, and
restored the prisoners which Blake had demanded for little or nothing.

The Lord Willougby of Parham, the Lord Newport, Mr. Seamor, and M. Newport,
were sent to the Tower upon the suspicion of a new Conspiracy.

His Highness going into S. Iamses Park for his recreation, had his coach ready
for him, which was drawn with six Flanders horses, he undertook to drive the
coach himself, but the horses impatient of his command did fly forth, and
threw him out of the coach-box on the ground, being much hurt and bruised. Not
long afterward his eldest son had a fall from his horse, and did break his leg
of which he still goes lame.

His Highness sent twelve good men of War well manned, and well provided with
all necessaries, to Iameica with Colonel Humpheries Regiment, not long
afterward Gene. Pen, and after him General Venables arrived from Iameica, who
had not the same countenance from his Highness, as when they did put forth to
sea.

In the year 1656, Seven Spanish Ships coming from Lime in the Indies most
richly laded, were incountred in the way by General Montague, about nine
leagues from Cadis, The fight was violent, and the rather because it was known
with what metal the Ships of Spayn were laded. In the fight, the fortune of
England easily prevailed, there was one Ship burned, another sunk, two were
taken, and two run a ground, and one got away with a Portugal prize. In the
ship that was burned, was Marquess of Budex, his wife and one daughter, In
another of the Ships that were taken, was the young Marquis his brother, and a
sister that was set on shore in Spain, The two brothers were brought to
England, and a long time prisoners in Chelsy College, from whence they had the
fortune to make their escape.

Spain, Blake understanding where they had unladen, resolved with himself,
though he missed of the money, to be revenged on the purse, and made up to them
with the greatest part of the strength he had, and burned and sunck sixteen
great vessails, amongst which there were five Gallions, the Admiral,
Vice Admiral, and Rear-Admirall, the greatest part whereof had Brass Ordnance
mounted on them. His Highness rewarded this service of Blakes with a Diamond
Ring worth a thousand pound.

On the beginning of May the English were sent to assist the French, with a
body of six thousand Foot, under the Command of the Noble Sir John Reynolds.

In the middle of the month of June, his Highness was installed in the
Protectorship, when the Trumpets sounded there were few or almost no
acclamations of the people although the numbers were almost infinite, who
thronged to behold him at his Investment into his new dignities.

This veer the Fort of Mardike was convaied unto the English, and Sir John
Reynolds coming for England, was at Sea, most unfortunately, if not cruelly
cast away. General Blake being sick, died in the sight of Plimmouth, and had
the Honor to be buried in the Chapel of Henry the Seventh.

Henry Cromwell the younger son of the Protector was made Lord Deputy of
Ireland, and not long afterward the Court began to be full of Jealousies, for
now there was a new report of another conspiracy against the Protector, for the
effecting whereof White Hall should have been set on fire by one John
Syndercombe and some others, Syndercombe was apprehended and sent to the Tower,
and sentenced to lose his life, which many that knew his crime affirmed would
never be by a public Execution, he died suddenly in the Tower, on the night
before his execution, to the murmuring of many, and the admiration of all,
howsoever his Body was brought to Tower Hill, where it was buried under the
Scaffold, and (to increase yet more the noise of the people) it had a stake
drove through it.

On the fourth of February 1658. his Highness put a period to the Parliament
then being, on the proceedings whereof so many hopes depended, he said he would
trust no more to men but rely on GOD only. The Parliament being thus dissolved
a high Court of Justice was presently erected.

Many young men were acccused, and at this court of Justice, were condemned to
dye, whose last words on the ladder, and the haltars about their necks, were,
that they were drawn in by those men, who afterward did accuse them: the old
Knight, Sir Henry Slingsby said he was trappanned, Colonel Ashton and some
others, who were hanged, drawn, and quartered, confessed rather a desire then
any ability, to put the plot in execution, and all of them absolutely denied,
and seemed to abhor that most barbarous, and desperate design of setting the
City on fire.

At the same time, and for the same plot, Doctor John Hewyt was beheaded on the
Tower hill, whose death was much lamented by many learned Divines, but above
all, by the pious Lady his wife, who not long afterward, petitioned to the
Parliament for justice, for the death of her husband.

In this year on the second of June, a Whale of a prodigious bulk, being sixty
foot in length, and of a proportionable bigness, was cast upon shore not far
from Greenwich, which was taken to be a presage of new events to come.

The English and French having overthrown the Spaniards in a memorable battle,
not far from Dunkirk, which was at that time besieged by them, it was the means
that not long afterward, the most considerable Town of Dunkirk was surrendered
to the English.

In July, the Lady Elizabeth Cleypole, second daughter to the Protector,
departed this life; she was a Lady of a gallant spirit, and dyed in the flower
of her age, which struck more to her Fathers heart, than all the heavy burden
of his affairs, so great a power has nature over the dispositions of men, when
the tie of blood is seconded by love and likeness: she dyed with good lessons in
her mouth, and seemed to despise the frailty, of greatness, and the pomp of the
earth, her last words were very memorable, and left a great impression in the
breast of her Father.

Not long afterward, it pleased God, that the Protector fell sick himself, he
languished about a fortfortnight of a disease, which at the beginning was but
an Ague, but on Friday morning, the third of September, he had all the signs of
a dying person; and about three of the clock in the afternoon, he departed the
world, being disserted his vital parts were found to be sound, and whole, only
his heart was dried up, and no blood in it, to make it either moist or warm.

His greatest care was to name a Protector, to be his successor, which was
Richard his eldest Son, a Gentleman of great hopes, of a generous spirit and
beloved, even of those who were enemies to his Father, of whose short
Protectorship, we will give you as short, but as precise a view as possibly we
can, committing nothing that is superfluous, nor omitting any thing that is
memorable.

The Life of RICHARD, Son to OLIVER, during the short time of his Protectorship.
OLiver, the Protector of these three Nations, was no sooner dead, but on the
day following, being Saturday Septem. 4. Richard his eldest son was proclaimed
Protector with great solemnity, both at the old Exchange, and in other places;
the Commanders of the Army were the first that acknowledged him, and they were
the first that forsook him. The flatteries of the people did seem to promise a
long continuance to his regency, for from the first week of his Protectorship,
almost to the last, there were nothing but gratulations from one place or
another to him, with as many protestations that they would live and die in his
service: The very same they presented to the Parliament, when the supremacy of
power was restored unto them, to be as officious, no doubt, to third interest,
if a third interest had gained the predominancy.

The first care of our niece Protector, was for the funerals of his father
which were resolved should be solemnized with extraordinary magnificense, to
leave more glory on the name of his father, and to beget a greater estimation
in his own.

Wherefore being imbalmed, and wrapped in a sheet of Lead, the hearse on the 26
of September, was conveyed about ten of the clock at night, from White Hall
to Somerset house where it remained some days in private, before it could be
in a readiness to be exposed to the public view. The Effigies (more richly
adorned then ever was any King of England) was l^id first on a bed of state,
afterward it was set upright, there was nothing admitted that was in Art, or
Wealth, or Industry to render it illustrious.

On Tuesday, November 23. the Effigies with all the solemnity, and Pageantry
that could be was brought in a stately Chariot from Somerset house to
Westminster Abbey, and that day, and many weeks afterward, the people in great
multitudes came to behold it, and with their hats off, did reverence to it, in
the same place, where before the Alter stood in the Temple of God; but this
blind superstition had its period in the month of May following, at the time
of the restoration of the long Parliament, who having taken away the power
from the son, might well pull down the image of his Father.

Not long afterward, his Highness was advised by his Counsel to choose a
Parliament, it being conceived to be the only way to establish himself in the
affections of the people; Writs therefore were issued for a free Parliament,
which met on the seven and twentieth of January next en^^ing, where the death
of the two speakers Mr. Chalonel Cruse, (a person of admirable knowledge, and
integrity) and Mr. Lis^eho^e Long, Recorder of London, we^e the forerunners of
the short life of that Parliament, and of the short government of the Protector
himself.

In this Parliament, the Lady Mary Hewyt, (sister to the Earl of Lindsey, and
the Relict of Doctor John Hewyt not long before beheaded) petitioned the grand
Committee of the whole House for grievances, against the High Court of Justice,
for taking away the life of her deer husband; but some Members of the House of
Parliament, who were present at the reading of it, did declare themselves to be
concerned in it, and alleged that it was the privilege of a Member of
Parliament, not to be petitioned against any where* nor to seek redress from
any Court but from the Parliament it self; the Petition therefore was returned
from her to the Committee with that intimation.

After this, and several other Petions of a high nature, for unjustly
apprehending and detaining men Prisoners in the Tower, and for the bannishing
and the selling of several Gentlemen to the Barbados, for slaves; for which
Sergeant Maeynerd was ordered to bring in a Bill for prevention of the like
Tyranny in the future: the accounts of the Commonwealth was called for, and a
Committee being appointed to examine them, it was found that in the last five
years, the Commonwealth was much in arrears, and by the ill mannagement of
those who were entrusted with the receipts and disbursements of the money, they
were run in debt no less than five and twenty hundred thousand pounds.

At the last, some transactions in the Army, being taken into consideration,
and it being voted that all Officers of the Army, should repair to their
several charges, and that they should hold no meeting during the sitting of
Parliament, but by the consent o^ the Protector, and both Houses; and that none
should be in office but such only as world subscribe not to interrupt either
house of Parliament in their proceedings, it wrought so much upon the spirits
of some of the Commanders, that not long afterward, the Parliament was
dissolved, and a period given to the Government of the Protectorship.

THE RESTORATION Of the Long PARLIAMENT.
THe long Parliament being dissolved in the year 1653. by the Lord Oliver
Cromwell, were now encouraged by the Lord Fleetwood, and many other of the
Commanders to return to exercise of their former power, and promised the
uttermost assistance of the Army therein, and accordingly on the seventh of
May, 1659. some forty of them, or thereabouts, did meet in the painted Chamber,
from whence, having the Mace carried before them, they passed into the house,
where a Declaration was passed; that all such as shall be employed in any place
of power in the Commonwealth, be persons fearing God, and faithful to the
Commonwealth: After this, they chose a Counsel of State, consisting for the
most part of their own Members.

There being at the same time, many Members of the same Parliament, in London,
and some of them in the Hall, they endeavored to go up into the House, but
were not permitted by the Souldery; amongst these Members was Sir George Booth
who being of a high spirit, and discontented at it, did speak some words very
hastily, which as rashly afterward, he did put in practice.

The Parliament removed Col. Berkstead, from being Leiutenant of the Tower,
many Petitions and complaints being preferred against him, and Col. Fitz was
chosen to supply his place.

A pardon was pulished for the most part, of whatsoever had been acted from the
interruption of the Parliament, in April 1659. until the new convention of them
on the ninth of may, 1659.

In the Month of June, Leiu. General Fleetwood was made Commander in chief of
all the forces in England and Scotland; the Lord Henry Cromwell, was removed
from his command in Ireland, and Commissioners were appointed to govern that
Nation in his place.

The Militia of the City of London, and of the respective countries were
revived, and the Commissioners for the Militia of the three Nations, were
signed and delivered by the Speaker of the Parliament, and ordered so to
continue.

In the month of July, there was a whisper throughout the Nation, that now was
the time for a free Parliament, and for the taking off the Taxes from the
shoulders of the oppressed, whereupon there began to be a general insurrection
(almost) all England over; but it was quickly supposed by the vigilance, and
the industry of the County Troops. The insurrection which was most great, and
dangerous, was in the Northwest of England, where in the Counties of
Lancashire, and Cheshire, and parts adjoining, Sir George Booth had drawn
together an Army of four thousand persons, some of them, both Commanders and
others, having been actually, in the service of the King of Scotland, and the
King his Father; against these the Lord Lambert marched, with an Army
consisting of about seven thousand horse and foot, and having given them a
great rout at Winnington bridge, he totally dispersed them.

Sir George Booth was taken afterward at Newport Pagnel, being disguised in
the habit of a Lady, from whence being sent to London with a strong guard, he
was en^ounterd in the way by a party of Colonel Hackers Regiment, who did
conveigh him prisoner to the Tower of London, where for the present he
continues having been oftentimes examined by Sir Arthur Hazelrige, Sir Henry
Vane, and others.

A Proclamation was agreed upon, that if John Mordant Esquire, Son to the Earl
of Peterborough, Major General Massy; Charles Stuart, Earl of Litchfield, of
the family of the Duke of Ritchmond. Sir Thomas Leventhop Knight, William
Compton, Son to the Earl of Northampton; Thomas Fanshaw, son to Sir Thomas
Fanshaw Knight, and Major General Brown, do not render themselves to the
Parliament, upon the seventeenth of September, or to the Counsel of State, they
shall be accounted guilty of the treasonable crimes that are charged against,
which time is not expired at the ending of this History, it being Thursday
September 8. in the year 1659.

To begin the year the Army submitted to the Parliament, who sat again at
Wewminster; the nine Commanders, whose Commissions were made void on the
twelfth of October. were all commanded to depart to their houses most remote from
London, if otherwise they were found to stay there, to be secured, Sir Henry
Vane was required to go to his house at Raby, in the County of Durham, and
Major Salloway was committed prisoner to the Tower.

General Monck, being on his march to London, according to the desire of
Parliament, Mr. Scot, and Mr. Luke Robinson, were sent to congratulate him; the
Parliament conferred on him, for his remarkable service, a thousand pound a
year, and the Lord Mayor called a Common-Counsel, where it was ordered, that
three of their Members should be sent unto him, to acquaint him how sensible
they were of the great service which he had performed for the good of the City,
and Commonwealth, for which they were resolved at his coming to the City, to
give him some testimony of their gratitude.

On the eighteenth of this month, the Parliament resolved upon Commissioners
for the great seal, and Judges of the several Courts of Justice in Westminster
Hall, as also of Judges for the Court of Admiralty, and for the probate of
Wills.

The City of Excester, and Count of Devonshire, have declared for the recelling
of the Members that were secluded in the year 1648. which on wednesday last,
was delivered by Mr. Bamphield recorder of Excester, to Mr. Speaker; and it is
informed that other Counties are adjoining with them, in a petition to the same
effect.

The End.

