ENGLANDS JOY, FOR THE KINGS Gracious Proclamation for the banishing Papists.

1 KING. 18.21. How long hault ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God,
then follow him, if Baall, then follow him.

2 KING. 17.24,25. And the King of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from
Cuthagh, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in
the Cities of Samaria, in stead of the Children of Israel, and they possessed
Samaria, and dwelt in the Cities thereof.

And so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they feared not
the Lord: Therefore the Lord sent Lions among them, which slew some of them.

Printed M.DC.XL.

ENGLANDS JOY, for the KINGS gracious Proclamation for the banishing of Papists.
I Confess that Prayer is so forcible, that it opens the gates of Heaven;
and as you read, how the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, in the form
of fiery tongues, so through the enforcement of Prayer, all blessings
spiritual and temporal are let down amongst the children of God, like Peter's
sheet. Who would not then ask to obtain: seek to find: knock to have it
opened: and importune the father of mercy to have no denial, considering the
Parable tells us, That the wicked Judge who neither feared God nor man, granted
the widows Petition to be delivered from her clamors, and her troublesome
attendancy: and thus are we beholding to our God.

But now, to make God beholding unto us, were a secret out of the
Treasure-house of heaven indeed, wherein I will be bold to tell you how you may
be proficient, and invite you to wisdoms school to learn a cunning, which
the heart of the natural man is incapable of; and that is, to retribute
thanks to God, to give his glorious name the praise, to be grateful unto
him, and to rejoice in hymns and spiritual Songs, when a benefit is imparted,
and our souls are comforted.

What a story is the story of the Jews, being delivered from Hamans cruelty
and persecution, for the purpose in hand. The Text says; Hester 9.17,18
That they rested the same day, and made it a day of feasting and gladness, a
good day, and sent portions and presents one to another: but wherefore was all
this? For saving their lives, and prevailing against their enemies.

But, oh thou God of heaven! that ridest upon the wings of the wind, and
hold the reins of the kingdoms of the world in thy hand, to let loose or
restrain at thy pleasure. Thou know that we have more causes to rejoice and
be glad then the Jews, in their Purim. For, if we may compare the less with
the greater, they had but the preservation of their bodies, and a slight
triumph against their corporal enemies, we are in the way to save our souls
and put our spiritual adversaries to flight, the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil

What? Papistry to be suppressed? The Priests and Jesuits to be banished? And
the Gospel of Jesus Christ to flourish? Psalm 45.
My soul leapes for joy, and my heart is enditing a good matter, I speak of
the things which I have made, touching the King; my tongue is the pen of a
ready writer. Oh blessed be GOD for this alteration?

Does not Jeremy tell us, that, Jeremy 31. Math. 2.
In Ramah there was a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great
mourning, Rachell weeping for her children, and would not be comforted because
they were not. Did not al England wring their hands for sorrow, and begin to
mourn and be affrighted, when they saw the Papists so arrogantly mischievous,
to insult in every town and shire, and mock us to our faces, as if Sandolet
and Tobiah were to scoff and deride the Jews, when Nehemiah came to re-edifie
the Temple? And has not God put into the Kings heart to dam up this
inundation, and to keep the raging Sea within limitation, that it do not
overflow the lower and fruitful grounds.

Mark but the progression of business, tell it to your Children, and write it
in the Phylacteries of your garments. Did not we determine some 16. years ago
to match with Spain? And did not Spain resolve to overmatch us in the
contract? Did he not resemble an unmannerly and impudent guest, who invited to
some neighbourly meeting, would not only come himself, but brought a whole
rablement of Cormorants with him, so Spain must not only condition for a
daughter, but the Papists through the kingdom have liberty of Conscience,
Mass in their houses, Priests within their doors, penalties remitted, and the
Pursevants and Officers restrained from their privy searches, whereby the
Spanish Ambassador presumed on his meritorious service, and some Papists
triumphed, as if the wiser sort knew they were in the right. And was not this a
fearful beginning, and who knows with what strength the strong man would
have increased in keeping his possession: so have the Papists done within these
2. or 3. years, and insolently bragged of their great forces, and impudently
threatened the utter overthrow of us all, especially of our renowned City of
London.

But was this all? No, no, the several shiers of England, worse then the Jews
that poisoned the springs of sweet water, in these days had malicious
instruments to corrupt the youth of the Country, and the Priests, Jesuits and
Friars ran from house to house, and made them all amazed with crying out;
Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

But now Papistry shall be suppressed, and the Priests and Jesuits banished. O
blessed alteration! O blessed King! oh blessed Parliament! The Ambassadors
houses were so many hives, to which the drones resorted, who not only fed upon
the honey of the Bees, but presumed to kill and beat them away, which preserved
them: Thus these unconstant people, not only despised the Pastors of their own
Congregations, and under protection of the Prerogative of Kings, railed on the
Lord and his anointed: The Streets swarmed with ruffianly apparitions, Priests
in disguised apparel, and Jesuits in Courtly vestments. And what did they?
Not only watch the outward behavior of men, and government of the City, but
took advantage of the weak, carnal Gospeller, and set upon them with the
outward glory of a visible Church.

The Cathedral of Paul's had her walks mingled with a number of peremptory
and audacious Romanists, who not only branded us for lukewarmnesse and
unjustifiable actions, but boasted both of and in their disputations, that they
had put the true and learned servants of God to silence, as if Sidchiah should
strike Machiah on the face, and peremptorily ask him, when the Spirit of God
departed from him, to be infused into such an underling.

The Court has not only every corner, but public walks filled with Papists,
and Hispaniolized temporisers. And what did they, appear in several disguised
forms, and their corrupt hearts taught their tongues to vent forth blasphemy,
and notorious abuses: For as you read how Jeremy was taken by his Enemies, and
brought before the Princes and Priests, for weakening the hands of the men of
war, and danted their hearts that wished well to the peace of Sion: So played
these imposturing spirits, charming all men with such subtilties. What? the
house of Austria to be checked, and the Emperor of Germany to be affronted?

What? Spain to be threatened with war, and intrusions of hostility? Who is
able to cover the Vienna, as Xerxes once did the Hellespont, with a
numberless, and invincible Armado, to set upon the Island of Brittany as a
Conqueror, and to make England to tremble with the multitude of his forces,
and yet dare you talk of war and assisting the Low Countries? But now God be
thanked, Papistry shall be suppressed, the Priests and Jesuits banished, and
these mighty Bulls of Bashan either have their horns sawed off, or their chaps
musled, and what an alteration is here?

Oh let us then give thanks unto God, and confess his mercy is beyond our
apprehension, and his benefits are Ocean in comparison of our duty, or standing
poole of deserving. And seeing the King is so gracious to look upon us, like a
fair moving Planet, in a conspicuous Orb, from whose influence can proceed
nothing but sweet presages: Seeing our Parliament is so religiously Honorable,
to sound the foord of Spaines projects, and their countries hazard by
collusion, and halting between two opinions; with the plummets of true
Wisdom, and zeal to the Gospel of Jesus Christ: Seeing that they are so
indulgent, and will not suffer either the wild Bore of the Forest to trample
down the hedges; or little Foxes to destroy the Grapes, but are willing that
Iehojadas filthy garments may be taken away, and a Crown of pure Gold set upon
his head, seeing the people are prepared to call and hasten one another to go
up to the Temple of the Lord; and rather then Ruben shall raise a heap of
stones like an Altar, to put the people in fear of Idolatry, they are ready to
arm with their brethren, and examine how the matter stands, let every man
exhilarat himself, and cry out: Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why
art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, he
is the health of my countenance, and my God: So then if Paplstry shall be
suppressed, the Priests and Jesuits banished, and our enemies, both Foreign
and Domesticke overreached: let God have the glory, the Prince the honor, the
Parliament the commendation, the people the comfort, the Country the benefit,
and every true hearted Christian sing Iopaean, and Epithalamions to Jehovah.

Mark the difference between flourishing Kingdoms through the blessing of
reformation, and advise of good governors, and the fearful distraction of
Commonwealths, where irreligion and indirect courses over-maister: While the
ambition of Athalia was predominant over her affection, and drive her headlong
to all obscenity and tyranny, she committed idolatry, she neglected the house
of God, she defiled the Altar, she destroyed the seed royal, she usurped the
Diadem, and disturbed the peace of Judah and Israel: But when Iehoash was
miraculously preserved and instructed by Iehojada: Athalia is slain: Iehoash
does that which is right in the sight of God, the Priests repair the Temple,
the Altars are cleansed, the Common wealth reformed, and the whole Country
resetled in order; and was not this a great alteration?

In the story of Manasses, and Ammon his Son, you shall find these
imputations of wickedness cast upon them by the holy Ghost: He did that which
was evil in the sight of the Lord, he lived after the abominations of the
Heathen, he reared up Altars for Baal, he offered incense to the Host of
Heaven, he made his Sons pass through the fire, he used enchantments,
observed times, and dealt with familiar spirits, and wrought much wickedness
before the Lord: But when Josiah came to reign, and was instructed how? he
feared God, and lived uprightly, he cleansed and repaired the Temple: he
commanded the book of God to be read, he rent his clothes, as stricken with
compunction of soul, he made a covenant with God to observe his testimonies,
he put down all the Offices of Baal, and the groves dedicated unto him: He
slew his Priests, he solemnized the Passover, and he performed the words of
the Law, which were written in the Book; and was not this a great alteration?

Thus it is between the government of Spain and England, especially the
contrariety of Religion, and diversity of serving God, between Papists and
Protestants: the Papists both in Spain and in England, commit blasphemous
idolatry, are polluted with incests and fornication; derogate from the honor
of God, to attribute adoration to creatures, pacifieth himself in the
Labyrinth of aequivocation: Dissemble with God, their own souls, and all that
deal with them, care not by what means, or treachery they compass their own
ends, deny Christ's presence in Heaven, a maine article of Faith, extenuate the
power of the Godhead, by allowing a deity to Creatures, and invocation to
Devils* First, they have made many Saints that are passed down to Hell. Allow
of murder, and monstrous impiety: and in a word, are poisoned with the dregs
of abomination, wherewith the whore of Babylon has filled her cup.

The true Protestant and zealous Christian allows God the pre-eminence of all
adoration, will by no means blaspheme with idolatrous exorcismes, detesteth
whoredom, and all incestuous Leprosy, defieth the participiation of Gods
glory to murder, simply and plainly contriveth his affairs, and keeps his
word, though it be to his own hinderance, intermeddles not with matters of
state, except he be called to place of eminency, is with Anna praying in the
Temple, and continually rejoices in the conversation of Gods servants, and
makes the Church the sanctuary of his soul, in a word, is ruled by the
directory of Gods word, and neither dare abuse the Majesty of Princes by inter
jecting a Jealousy and suspicion between the Prince and the Subject, nor
run away with the deceit of his own heart, in presuming to be more holy then
his brethren, or prejudging others either maliciously, or foolishly. And is not
this a great alteration? And is not this cause enough to induce us to thank
God, and acknowledge his mercy and kindness, that our King and Parliament
would go and buy eye salve without money, perspicuously to look into the
enormities of the Church and Common wealth, and not only with Nehemiah, to
abridge the extremity of usury: compel a relaxation of debts and oppression,
keep and sanctify the Sabbath, drive the Merchants and Sellers of meat out
of the City, and at last put away their idolatrous wives: but also will not
suffer the Ammonites and Moabites to come into Gods Temple, but enforce them to
banishment out of Jerusalem. For as you read how Jacob after his return from
Laban cleansed his house of the idols: so did Nehemiah in despite of Eliashib
the Priest, who had allied himself to Tobiah a stranger and idolater, put him
from his lodging, and cast out all the snuff out of his chamber, which in the
text is likewise called cleansing, and thus thanks be to God, our great
Nehemiah dealt with the Papists, he has not only thought them as pricks and
thorns in the sides of good Christians: but now found them as noy some and
infectious weeds in the Common wealth, to choke and eat up the sweet
Flowers, and springing grass; and thus has the Church of God example enough
in Scripture to be an enemy to Gods enemies, and fall to reformation with
courage and magnanimity.

Shall such a man as I fly (says Nehemiah) shall such a King as I (says King
Charles) that have been trained up from my infancy to deny Popery, and suffer
my Kingdom of great Britain, the very nursery of zealous professors, and
mirror of purity and piety, to be defiled and contaminated with the poison of
superstition, and now I have recollected my self, shall I give way to rotten
and filthy policy to eat upon the heart of true Religion, or suffer private
ends to thicken themselves, like some obscure and dangerous cloud, to stand as
an interposition between the Sunny splendour of Gods word, and the fair
progress of government? No, No: J will now be my self, and therefore if
either the Pope, or Spain deride me with Michol for dancing before the Arc,
and bringing it into Gods house: I will answer with David, I will yet be more
vile and zealous for the Lord; and as he told his wife; that therefore God had
taken the Kingdom from her Father, and invested him with the Diadem: so may
King Charles answer Spain, that therefore God will make him mighty in his
Provinces, in despite of malignant opposition, and great Britain shall not be
only able to stand firm, like an impregnable Rock in all honor, riches, and
prosperity: but of sufficiency to protect distressed neighbors, and recover
unfortunate and surrepted Provinces. Therefore away ye Friests and Jesuits,
pack hence for your lives; and let me not hear any further of your daring
impostures, and you that will remain Papists, and with the Adder stop your
ears, that charm the Charmer never so cunningly, he shall not prevail to
remove you, take heed and be warned, that you live modestly in your
wilfulness, neither daring to break our Statutes against those Locusts of
Rome, nor to insult your selves, or be offensive to any civil conversation, by
thewrong defense and supportation of Romes corrupted Doctrine. For I protest
unto you by the faith of a Religious King, I take a pleasure in hearing, what
God said to Abraham: Genesis 18.19
For I know him, that he will command his children, and his household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment, that the
Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken unto him: And therefore
as I am Gods substitute in the supreme royalty, so will I be his instrument in
the practice of this Reformation, neither suffering any Papist whatsoever, to
have the use of Idolatrous masses, nor to bring up their own children in the
Cimmerian darkness of ignorance, and divelish devotion: For the Apostle tells
us plainly, Colos. ^.
that the tormenting of the body, worshipping of Angels, observing of Days,
and many foolish humiliations, likewise denying of lawful marriage, and
forbidding of meats, and celebrating of superstitious times, are all the
doctrines of the Devil: and is not this joy to great Britain, and how are our
hearts cheered, as you read of the Israelites, that in the time of Solomon
rejoiced with one another, and made merry eating and drinking under their own
Vines?

Thus shall we see the backs of our adversaries, and by Gods special favor
and grace the banishment of Priests and Jesuits: But ye Magistrates of the
Common wealth, let them not imitate the Israelites in this, to rob the
Egyptians in their departure out of Egypt? Let them not export our treasures,
nor enrich other Countries with our spoils: Let not your Ladies bestow their
jewels and ornaments upon them: For though they could be contented to love them
with gratuities and presents, yet must the Common wealth reserve some secrets
of State, not to be impoverished by the lavish gifts of those, that understand
not the Mystery of carrying wealth out of the Land, or consuming our silver in
trifles, let none of their houses be furnished with those remnants of
gew-gawes, wherein the ancient idolaters excelled them in be decking their
idols, I mean their medales, crucifixes, relickes of Saints, the Wood of the
Cross, the milk of our Lady, and a thousand such like trumperies fit for
nothing but toys to play with all, as Apes do with Nut shells: For as you
read how the children of Israel were tainted with the gross superstition of
Egypt: so must needs the tender hearts of your women be captivated with the
reservation of these things: Let your Pursevants and Officers a Gods name be
the researchers of suspected places, that the very children, which as yet, know
no harm, may be sent to the Schools of the children of the Prophets, and by
that means learn to live in the fear of God, and dye in his favor: Let the
potent men be disarmed a Gods name, not to give them cause to think the better
of themselves, as if they were to be feared, or reputed dangerous and
politic: but as you take knives and other hurtful things from mad men to
prevent mischief, that they neither endanger others, nor themselves: In a
word, let all good orders be observed, and a fashionable body of a religious
Common wealth erected, that his Majesty's person may be secured, the Prince,
and the rest of that Royal issue protected and pleased, the honest neighbors
sublevated with care and diligence, the whole Island flourishing with prosperity
and confidence, the poor releeved, the trades restored, the City repaired, the
Merchant countenanced, the Soldiers esteemed, the Clergyman beloved, the well
deserving reverence, the weak supported, the obstinate finner punished, the
offender through frailty remitted, and all justifiable actions practiced to the
glory of God, and comfort of our own souls.

Then if there be cause of war, and so success fallen, Moses and Israel
shall sing a song of Triumph to the Lord, and Miriam the Prophetess shall take
a Timbrell in her hand, and all the women go after her with Timbrels and
Dances: Then if there be the flourishes of peace, and that Solomon has
finished the Temple of God, and his own house, 1 King 3.22.9
he will present himself before the Lord, and kneel to his prayers, spredding
forth his hands toward Heaven: And then to conclude both in war and peace
shall great Britain confess to the Lord. What is man, that thou should
think upon him, or the son of man, that thou will remember him? And so
praise the Lord in his Sanctuary, and in the firmament of his power: praise him
in his mighty acts, and according to the excellency of his greatness, praise
him for thinking upon us, even in this particular of suppressing Papistry, and
banishing the Priests and Jesuits.

I will meddle with no matter of State, nor adventure traducing for self love,
or advising others wiser then my self, but keep close to the shore of this
one special observation: Let the adversaries of Religion say what they can to
accuse a Protestant of one murder, whereas God and the world knows, that not
only the turbulencies of Europe have been blown up with Popish breath, and
sufflation of Consistorian Cardinals: but the fearful slaughters of Princes
have been andaciously prosecuted, either by Friars and Priests, or such
instruments, whom the pestilent Jesuits have seduced: what state then in the
world (especially our reformed Churches) if there were no other cause then this
affrighting, would endure them in the government, and therefore now this must
needs be a happiness to England, that at this instant such a mercy flows
toward us, as a Proclamation against them.

How Geneva has continued, and groaned under the pressure of many
difficulties, yea, endured diverse assaults of whole Armies, and volleies of
shot, from the mounted Cannons against her; and yet was never any attempt made
upon the Duke of Savoy, and her adveisaries by her procurement, or suggestion,
is well known to the world.

In all those bloody massacres of France, and terrors of the civil wars
there, what one mischief was ever conceived against the persons of their
Kings, by any Protestants, and who but Papists durst lay hands on the Lords
Anointed? In that fiery trial in the days of Queen Mary, when the rages of
Papists made them more furious, then a Bear robbed of her Whelps: What one
Protestant slipped out of the circle of obedience, to put her in suspicion of
her life, yea it is well known, that the Protestants of Suffolk, advanced her
to the Crown though they were the first that felt the effect of her
ingratitude. In all the troubles of Germany, and exactions upon the free
Cities, how securely did the Emperors go on concerning their own persons,
and when did you read of a Pope slain, but as they poisoned one another. I
will name but one thing in the Low Countries, and that is the pride and cruelty
of the Duke of Alva; so that if ever an excuse might have been made for taking
away a Tyrants life, it might here in some action or other, have received a
justifiable form, and yet Alva lived without touch, and practiced all manner
of wickedness without control: whereas on the contrary side in these
Countries formerly mentioned, there has bin a 1000 several murders committed
upon the bodies of public and private persons, or at least prosecuted with
resolution to be actuated upon advantage by Popish Priests, Jesuits, and their
Officials, and Ministers: Is it not high time then to banish them our
Commonwealth, or do as we have done (and so it shall be no new matter or
devise of punishment) even hang them up at Tyborne, or detrude them into the
house of slaughter, where Justice is predominant.

Mark for Gods sake, mark the secrets of good husbandry, he that means to
till and manure a woddy ground, must leave no stumps within touch, lest he
break his plow in the labor, and see fresh sciences, as sprigs to sprout up to
choke the Corn: the best way is to stock up root and tinde, and follow the
picke-axe with a spade, that the ground may be thoroughly searched indeed; and
so must great Britain do with this brood of Vipers, either pull out their
stings, or chap them in pieces: For so were the Priests of Baal served at
several times, and in several places by Gedeon, John, Elias, Josias, and
other good Priests and Princes: but seeing this good beginning of our gracious
and judicious King, in quenching the smoke of these firebrarnds, which in time
would either have blinded our eyes, or put them clean out, has cheered our
hearts, and powered the balm of Gilead into our wounds, let him have the glory
of his own handy-worke, and great Britain the joy, and so both he, Great
Britain, and every true Christian retribute all possible thanks to the
ancient of days, whose hairs are as white as wool, and dies as a flame of
fire; and to the voice that commands us out of Babylon, lest we be destroyed
in her abominations: For Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, because
she made all the Nations drink of the Wine of the wrath of her Fornication.

FINIS.

