A FUNERAL ELEGY Upon the Death of that Excellent and most worthy Gentleman
John Winthrop Esquire. Late Governor of his Majestyes Colony of Conecticot; Who
deceased April, 1676.
Anagr.
John Winthrop,
Oh Print Woe nih.
LEt woe be printed nigh unto our Land,
Since that Jehovahs formidable hand
Has been bereaving us this fatal year,
Of such a Star within our Hemisphere.
A Star of such resplendent glorious Light,
Whose Fellow never yet approacht our sight
Nor ever are we like his Peer to see
In all his comprehensive rarity.
A precious Pillar in his earthly station,
A pious servant to his Generation,
Although his Extract was sublime and high,
Yet was he clothed with humility.
His place of bearing Rule it was so sweet,
That Justice did with mercy in him meet.
His Learning was so grand that all may ghess
Our Winthrop's Master of the Languages,
Whose travail's far into outlandish places,
They did augment his other worthy graces.
And lest his Gallantry should seem to fall.
Behold his worth in matters Physical;
My Pen can never fully it rehearse,
Whose Fame did overrun the Universe.
His Powders, Cordials, and his (...) Pills.
Over flew the Mountains, and the fasting Hills.
So pregnant was his skill, none can discry,
And lofty Judgment into Chimistry.
Incomparable was the depth he had
In rare Inventions, sons of men to glad.
When Hartfords Charter was in some suspense
This worthy Hero must away from hence.
Our Jurisdiction rightly to maintain,
And mediate before his Sovereign:
For which great Service who so fit as He,
One of the Imperial Society.
A man of wisdom, Patience, Love, and Peace,
To Rich and poor his virtues did increase,
His labor and his dealings were so free,
That none did more abound in Charity,
His Remedies they did not only tend
Unto men's bodies, but a better end.
When Subdivisions in the Church did rise,
He had great skill to heal their Maladies.
Surcease my mournful Muse, further to add
Of this great Patriot, unless I had
Briarius hands to set his virtues forth,
And Argus Eyes to weep his golden worth.
ACCROSTICON.
Environed with grief well be we may,
On every side in such a cloudy day,
He being gone who was our Countries glory,
Not to return which make our hearts so sorry.
Woe and alas unto our Colonyes,
In midst of our other miseryes,
No mortal can express what dolor it is,
To be bereaved of such a Gem as this.
Himself could only let us understand,
Rightly to value such a heavy hand;
Oh may this dismal loss never be forgot,
Per Plymouth, Boston, and Conecticot.
EPITAPH.
HEre lies a Nonesuch for all virtuous things,
Fittest to be discoursed of by Kings.
Mors omnibus communis.
FINIS

