A Full Description of The Manner of Executing the Sentence upon Titus Oats FOR
Perjury.
As it was Awarded at the Kings-Bench-Bar at Westminister, May the 16th. 1685.
as follows. To be divested of his Canonical Habit for ever; to wear a Paper on
his Fore head, declaring his Horrid Perjuries; to stand in the Pillory of
Monday at Westminster Hall-Gate; on Tuesday at the Royal Exchange; on Wednesday
to be Whipped from Ald gate to Newgate by the common Hangman; on Friday from
Newgate to Tyburn; and to stand in the Pillory also every 24th. of April at
Tyburn; every 9th. of August at Westminster, 10th of August at Charing Cross,
11th of August at Temple Bar; and every 2d of September at the Royal Exchange;
being Fined One Thousand Marks for each Perjury, and to suffer Imprisonment
during Life.

a series of numbered scenes from the punishment of Titus Oats The Explanation
of the Figures.
1 In Westminster Hall with a Paper on his Forehead of his Crime. 2. Stripped
of his Canonical Habit. 3. Standing in the Pillory. 4. His Whipping at the
Carts-Arse. 5 Tyburn.



HEre Gentle Reader, thou may cast thy Eye,
And see the Due Reward of Perjury.
Perjury! of that black Dye, that dismal Hue,
Which none but Oats, and his Infernal Crew
Could ere have Impudence enough to Frame,
Three whole deluded Kingdoms to Inflame.
The Blood of Murdered Innocents to shed,
And pull down Vengeance on his Guilty Head.
A Viler Mass of Villainous Shams and Lies,
Imposture, Cheat, Delusion, Forgeries,
Not all Hells Imps could e're together twist:
Nor Blacker Lips the Holy BIBLE Kiss't.
Whole Deluges of Blood could scarce assuage
The Hunger of his All-Devouring Rage;
So Keen his Spite, that nothing Great or Good
From his Destroying Oaths protected stood;
The shining Virtues of our Gracious KING
Could not escape his Venoms poisoned sting.
The Perjured Slave (void of all Grace and Shame)
Durst even profane the Mighty YORKS bright Name.
Great YORK, to his Eternal Glory due,
Truest of Friends, and Faithfull'st Brother too.
Whom now Just Heaven to his Right-ful Diadem Brings
The Best of Subjects Crowned the Best of KINGS:
Nay, the Black Gaul of his polluted Tongue
Durst even the Royal Spotless CATHERINE Wrong;
The Sacred Partner of Great CHARLES his Bed;
A purer Saint a Life on Earth n'ere lead,
Since the Blessed MARYES Glorious Race was run,
The Maiden-Mother t'an Immortal Son:
Her to his Plott the Impious Slave durst bring,
As Poysoner to her best Loved LORD, AND KING.
A Lie so Rank, so Execrably Base,
Would raise a Blush even in an Aethiops Face.
Yet this Bright Saint the Traitor durst bring,
And never Tremble at the Blasphemy.
But now his Damn' o Designs are all Unhinged,
And Guiltless Blood will be at last Revenged.
And as a Penance for his Crying Sin,
His disrobed Gown, does the first Scene begin,
Too long a cover to the foul Fiend within:
Whilst over his Brow, like Murdering Cain's old Brand,
In Capital Characters his Treasons stand,
TO Expose the Pest and Monster of the Land.
Then to the Pillory his Front of Brass,
And Face of Steel in solemn Triumph pass.
Exalted here to all the Gazing Crowd
(No Shame too Public, and no Scorn too Loud:)
His advanced Head, and his noos'd Neck we see;
A Neck would even Disgrace the Tyburn Tree.
Then up toward Paddington behold him Trot,
His Shoulders laid as naked as his Plot.
To the Carts-Tayl our little Titus Tied,
Whilst Brisk Jack K^tch bescowers his Swearing Hyde;
And the kind Lash does his Jirkt Bones Cajole,
Not half so Tough as his more Hardened Soul,
LONDON, Printed for Tho. Graves, 1685.


