Great Bittains Joy, AND Good News for the NETHERLANDS.
By an Honorable Peace Concluded betwixt England and Holland, upon the 9th. of
February, which was proclaimed in Holland upon the 24th. day with all
imaginable Joy, and in London upon the 28th. day of the same Month, the Lo^d
Mayor and Aldermen being present, with the Heralds at arms in their
formalities, with five of the Kings Maces, besides my Lord Mayor's: and many
thousands of people thronging to express their joy for so great (...) as all
true Subjects shall reap thereby.
Tune of, Digby's Farewell.




COme all Loyal Subjects I pray you draw near,
For here is glad tidings your hearts for to cheer,
Now England and Holland does shake hands again,
No more we shall thump it upon the salt Main,
The Pike, and the Musket, the Trumpet, and Drum,
Shall all be laid by, now the business is done;
Then let no more Wars in our Nation be named,
For now to our comfort the Peace is Proclaimed.
The last February the twenty fourth day,
In Holland the Peace was Proclaimed, and they say,
Such loud acclamations of joy there was shown,
The like in that Country before never was known,
From the highest to the lowest their joys did abound,
Their sorrows in Brandy most freely they drowned:
Then, etc.
The twenty eight day, here in London likewise,
We had it proclaimed with shouts and with cries,
The Show it was splendid as e're it could be,
And all things performed with great gallantry,
The Streets and Belconies so thronghed they were,
That happy was he could come nigh for to hear;
Then, etc.
The rest of the day was concluded with joy,
The Bells in all Parishes rung merrily,
The Bonefire fl^mes mounted up to the skies,
And plenty of liquor was every man's prize,
The Rich and the poor did all play their parts,
For all were concerned, there was no sad hearts;
Then let no more wars in our Nation be named
For now to our comfort a (...)
Our Merchantmen now they may freely spread sail
And Trade to the Indies with a merry gale,
The Pickaroon Capers no more they need fear,
The Seas shall be quiet, and all shall be clear,
With costly rich lading they shall return back,
And bring our young Ladies fine toys which they lack,
Then let no more Wars in our Nation be named,
For now to our comfort the Peace is proclaimed.
The Shopkeepers they shall have Trading good store,
And money more plentiful be then before,
Their Wares they shall buy at an easier rate,
And have better times for to get an estate;
Likewise the poor Tradsmen no more shall be sad,
For he shall have work enough to make him glad:
Then, etc.
The Countryman no more shall complain,
For he shall have money come in for his Grain,
Their Rents shall be easy, and wealth it shall flow,
And they be encouraged to plow and to sow,
Nay, that which is more, all their joys to increase,
Before it be long their great Taxes will cease:
Then, etc.
Poor men shall no more be afraid of a Press,
Nor forced to leave Children and Wife in distress,
They need not hereafter in holes for to lurk,
But boldly and freely may follow their work,
The Seamen and Soldiers their limbs shall not lose:
But briskly and merrily drink of their house:
Then, etc.
All neigbouring Nations shall likewise rejoice,
with whom we have comerce for wares that are choice.
We shall not repine now for want of a Trade,
Which late in this Nation so much was decayed,
For plenty and peace they do always agree,
And produce good times, and days of Iubile:
Then, etc.
Then welcome sweet Peace to our Albion shore,
I hope dreadful Wars shall mo^est us no more,
The fruits of our labor with joy we shall reap,
And that which was dear we shall now have it cheer;
Then let us praise God that such blessings does bring,
And always prove loyal and true to our King;
And let no more Wars in our Nation be named,
For now to our comfort the Peace is proclaimed.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


