By the Commander in Chief of the PARLIAMENTS Forces in IRELAND.
WHereas, the Lord in Mercy has been pleased, to blese the Endeavors of his
poor unworthy Instruments in this Army, in bringing the work of Mar in this
Nation to so hopeful a Period; yet withal considering that every Condition
has us Temptations, and even outward Peace and Successes attended often times
with the greatest and most dangerous appearing in a Spirit of Carelessness and
Negligence, arising much from Inconsiderateness and slighting of Enemies
(because but few, and their Condition low) too little minding how God can, and
often does make poor despised handfuis of the Enemy, prevalent against, or at
least vexations to his own Instruments (whom he has before eminently used)
when they are given up to, or acted by the forementioned Spirit of Negligence
in the Duties of their Places, and having too evident grounds to fear and
believe, that such an evil Temper is much broken in upon this Army, since the
days that God lessened the number of their Enemies, so as that, that
conscientious Care which has formerly been observed in the keeping close to
Duty, is much abated, partly through the Officers absenting themselves too
frequently from their respective Commands, or in being too careless and remiss
when present with them to execute the Duties of their Charges, whereby the
through and effectual prosecution of the Enemy yet remaining is not only
neglected, but some of the Officers themselves become incapable of giving a due
account of the Trust committed to them,

As perticularly appears in the supine Carelessness and Negligence of Captain
Deyas in the late loss of the Fort of Archeen in the Isle of Arran: For
Prevention of which Evils in future, and the sad Consequencies of them; I
thought it my Duty with the Advice of a Council of Officers, to Publish this,
which I desire and hope, may be in Mercy a Warning to all, both Officers and
Soldiers under my Command, who are hereby required diligently to Observe and
Execute the ensuing Articles according to their Capacities respectively. ( viz.)

I. That no Commander in Chief of the Forces in any Precinct, be absent a night
out of the said Precinct, unless upon Public Service or business relating to
his Charge, without leave from my self or other Superior Officer, upon penalty
of loss of Place.

II. That no Governor of a Garrison in any Precinct, do leave his Government or
Command or be absent a night from his Charge, unless upon Public Service
against an Enemy, or upon necessary business relating to his Command, without
leave from a General-Officer or the Officer Commanding in Chief in the
Precinct, or whom he shall Authorize so to give leave, upon loss of Place.

III. That no Inferior Officer whatsoever, be absent without leave, a night
from his Charge, upon penalty of Cashiering.

IV. That no private Soldier shall depart a Mise from his Garrison or Colors,
without leave from his Officer, upon the penalty provided in the first Article,
concerning Duties in Camp and Garrison, Expressed in the Book of Articles.

V. That the Commanders of the Forces in their respective Precincts, or such as
shall be empowered by them, in giving leave to any under them, do both respect
the season of doing it, the Number they give leave unto, and other
Circumstances, so as the Public Work may not suffer thereby; and likewise that
the said Commanders do as often as they can, take a view of the Forces under
their Charge, inquiring diligently after their Discharge or Neglects of Duty,
and cause such Neglects to be Punished.

VI. That a strict Care be always had in the disarming all Irish whatsoever, or
others who have been in Arms against the Parliament at their entering into any
Garrison, upon penalty of Cashiering the Officer commanding the Guard, who
shall be Negligent herein.

VII. That the Officer commanding any Guard, do not set forth a Sentinel
without a Match lighted, except he have a fire lock Musket: And that no Officer
be absent from his Guard, nor suffer any Soldier to be off from the Guard, but
upon a justifiable Occasion, until they be releived, upon penalty of Cashiering.

VIII. That at no time, above the Number of two Irish at once (and those
unarmed) be suffered to enter into any Castle, Fort, or Citidel upon any
Occasion whatsoever, without special Order from the Governor, nor the Grate or
Door of any Castle, Fort, or Citidel stand open but at the time of passing in
and out, upon penalty of Cashiering the Officer commanding the Guard wherein
they entered, or such Grate or Door stood open.

IX. And lastly, for the due and frequent Exercise of Troops and Companies
(whereof there is lately too much Neglect) as also touching defending of
Garrisons with Care, and to the utmost extremity, and in all other perticulars
requisite for preserving the Discipline of the Army, the Officers are required
to observe and put into Execution the Printed Book of Articles, which are to be
Published once every Month atleast by the Chief Officer present with every
Troop or Company, or upon default thereof, the said Officer shall for the first
Offense forfeit one Months Pay, for the second two Months Pay, and for the
third be Cashiered.

And all Officers whatsoever, who are now absent from their Charges without
special License, are required to repair unto their respective Commands, within
three days after Publication hereof.

Dated at DUBLIN, December the 21, 1652. Charles Fleetwood.

Printed at DUBLIN, by WILL. BLADEN. Anno Dom. 1652.


