Die Mercurii, 7. Junii; 1643.
WHereas there is an Ordinance of Parliament passed, bearing date the Tenth day
of this instant May, concerning the taking of Horses for the service of the
Parliament; It is further Ordered, and Declared by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, as well in pursuance of the said Ordinance, as by way of
addition, That his Excellencies occasions may be served, and yet with the
greatest ease to the Counties as may be; That the Deputy Lieutenants, or the
Committees for the Propositions, or any two of them, within the several
Counties, when the Lord General shall require so many Horses out of any
County, shall immediately leavie such a number upon every Division and Hundred,
as in a proportion the several parts will afford; And shall cause the Horses
so proportioned, to be delivered accordingly.

And in case the said Deputy Lieutenants, or Committees, shall not execute
according to the said Ordinance, and deliver such Horses as are fit for
service, nor in such time as the Lord General shall direct; Or that the Lord
General shall find, by reason of some great exigencie, that the said
circumstances cannot be observed without danger to the Army, and insert the
same in his VVarrant, Then such Officers as his Excellency shall appoint,
shall raise and take such number of Horses as are required by his Excellency,
within the places appointed, rendering an account to his Excellency for the
same, having regard always of those persons that having expressed their good
Affections by contributing upon the Propositions, and submitting to the Orders
and Ordinances of Parliament; And in case that upon any exigencie the Horses of
such persons as have expressed their Affections to the Parliament as aforesaid,
shall be taken, That their Horses shall be valued by the Constables, and
certified to the Commissary in London, for valuing of Horses, Arms, etc. And
the parties repaid for them upon the Public Faith. Provided always, That
this Ordinance shall not extend to the seizing or taking any Horses, Mares, or
Geldings of any the Members of either of the Houses of Parliament, or of any
Peer, or of any of the Assistants of the House of Peers.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliament. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, 1643.


