BY THE COUNCIL.
WHereas the late Parliament dissolving themselves, and resigning their Powers
and Authorities, The Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by a LORD PROTECTOR, and Successive Triennial Parliaments, is now
established; And whereas OLIVER CROMWELL, Captain General of all the Forces of
this Commonwealth, is Declared LORD PROTECTOR of the said Nations, and has
accepted thereof: We have therefore thought it necessary (as we hereby do) to
make publication of the Promises, and strictly to charge and Command all, and
every person and persons, of what quality and condition soever in any of the
said three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conform and submit themselves
to the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other
public Ministers and Officers, whom this may concern, are required to cause
this Proclamation to be forthwith published in their respective Counties,
Cities, Corporations, and Market Towns, To the end none may have cause to
pretend ignorance in this behalf.

Given at White Hall, this sixteenth day of December, 1653.
IRELAND. By the Commissioners of the Commonwealth of England for the Affairs
of Ireland.
THe Proclamation abovementioned lately coming to our knowledge, We held it our
duty, for prevention of public disturbances and interruptions in the
administration of Justice, to publish the same: To the end, that all Sheriffs,
Mayors, Bailiffs and other public Officers and Ministers in this Nation, whom
the same does concern, may take notice thereof; Requiring all Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, and all Sheriffs, Judges, Justices of the Peace,
Commissioners for Administration of justice, and all others who are entrusted
with the management of any public Affairs, to be vigilant in their Respective
Charges and Trusts, That the public service may be carried on, and that the
Common Enemy, upon this Change of Government, may not take any advantage, to
contrive or act new disturbances against the public Peace.

Dated at Dublin the thirtyeth day of January, 1653. Signed by Order and
Command of the said Commissioners. IO. HUCHES. Secr.

DUBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1653.


