C2 R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

WE cannot but call to mind that as the Declaration set out and published by
the late Lords Justices and Council, bearing date the 30th. of April, 1662. did
so far indulge those Recusants, Non-conformists and Sectaries, who were
misguided and did not conform to the Laws of the Land, concerning Uniformity of
Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and the Administration of the
Sacraments, that they were not to be further proceeded against for the Offenses
then past; so that Proclamation contained also a premenition to them, that no
person or persons were for the time then to come to expect the like indulgence,
and yet it is found that that extension of His Majesty's gracious clemency
toward them, has not wrought those effects of Conformity in those persons,
which that high favor from His Majesty has deserved: And although His Majesty
might be thereby provoked, and that most-justly, to proceed against them with
that strictness which is due to such great contempts, not only of His Laws,
but also of His Clemency: Yet considering that we well know that such is His
Majesty's abundant goodness and tenderness toward His Subjects, as he wishes
rather that those of them who are misguided, may be won by gentleness, than by
the strict execution of His Laws: And considering also that We do believe that
the rendering hitherto fruitless the hopes We had of their Conformity, proceeded
rather from the seducement of others, than from evil in the minds of the
people themselves, therefore as a means to preserve the people front the danger
of such seducement, as We did formerly give Orders for suppressing unlawful
Assemblies, so We have larely directed Our Letters into leberal parts of this
Kingdom, to remove the persons of some Ministers, or pretended Ministers,
whereby they may not have such opportunity as they have hitherto had to
continue their evil practices in seduting too many of the People: And We
conceiving that from thence may yet follow the desired Conformity from them;
and considering likewise, That We now find that some attempts have been made to
draw into the late borried Conspiracy for taking His Majesty's Castle of
Dublin, some persons that are as yet Non-conformists, and that they (agreeable
to the duty and loyalty of good Subjects to His Majesty) utterly declined any
Conjunction in so Traitorous a Design, We therefore judge it fit once more to
make a further trial if by any gentle ways or means the seduced people may be
reclaimed; and to that end do hereby declare, That for the time past all
Offenses committed against His Majesty's said Law of Uniformity of Common
Prayer and Service in the Church, and the Administration of the Sacraments,
shall be no further proceeded against before any His Majesty's Judges of Assize
or Justices of the Peace, but that there be a stop put to all proceedings and
penalties for such Offenses for the said time past.

And as We have taken this course to prevent any such trouble or punishment to
the people by Authority of the Temporal Courts, so We are well assured that We
need not give any directions to the Archbishops or Bishops as to the Spiritual
Courts in regard We are well satisfied that such is the Piety and Moderation of
the Archbishops and Bishops, that they are willing and ready without looking
back into the former Errors of any of the People, to receive and embrace into
the Bosom of the Church all such of them as shall desire to conform themselves.

And We do further Declare, that after the 24th, day of December next, no
person or persons are to expect the like indusgence, but that all Judges of
Assize and Justices of Peace, and all others concerned, are thenceforth to see
the said Law duly put in execution: Provided, That this indulgence extend not
to any Minister, or pretended Minister, that shall go about to dissuade the
People from their Obedience to the said Law: And of this Our Declaration We
require all his Majesty's Judges, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and all other
Officers whatsoever whom it may concern to take notice, and to take rare that
any Writ or Process issued for attaching any persons for any the said Offenses
past as aforesaid, be not executed.

Given at the Council Chamger in Dublin the 29th. day of June, 1663. GOD SAVE
THE KING. Ja. Dublin. Mount-Alexander, Anglesey, Shannon, Hen. Midensis, Fran.
Aungier, R. Coot, Paul Davis, Fra. Hamilton, Rob. Forth, J. Bysse, J. Temple,
Ja. Ware, G. Wentworth, Rob. Meredith, Tho. Clarges, Edw. Massy, Tho. Pigott.


DUBLIN,
Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY; and are
to be sold by Samuel Dancer next door to the Bear and Ragged-staffe in
Castle-street, 1663.


