The happy Meeting of King William and Q^^^^ M^ry, at his Return from and after
his Conquest in Ireland.
elaborate woodcut of Mary II and William III meeting on horseback Well met,
most ve^tuous (...) England,
After my Conquests gained in Ireland
Over mine, and yours, and England's Foes,
In midst of Thousand Deaths, fighting with those
That would enslave our ^u^jects, us Dethrone;
Set up the French, and change our Religion.
Welcome my most beloved Prince and King,
Of whose victorious Arms the World does ring:
Let Triumphs still attend, and Heavens bless
And Crown your Actions with desired Success.
Let England's Glory (...) let France's fall;
Laurels King William Crow^ in spite of all
Printed, colored, and sold by William, ^^tley, Stationer, at the Knave of
Clubs in the Borough of Southwark, at the Bridge Foot who prints all sorts of
the newest Fashion Paper for Hanging of Rooms.



WHat Pen can write the smallest part, or thing,
Of the Heroic Actions of our King?
Never did Heaven apply a Remedy more fit
To a Disease, than did that Victory hit,
^d at the River Boyne, in Ireland,
^ing his Passage with his Sword in's Hand:
In midst of Bullets flying, God directs
One for to touch, not hurt, whom God protects.
The Victory's gained, the French and Irish run,
Forsaking Dublin the Metropolitan,
Where the oppressed did wait, and silence keep;
For God had lulled there Enemies asleep;
Who when they waked, shook with their trembling rage,
Yet wanted Skill or Courage to engage;
Some wanted Hearts, some wanted Wills to obey,
Some they had both, yet fled in Troops away.
The Frenchmen shook, base Fear there Hearts subdued;
They even fled too, when no Man pursued:
Forsook of God, of Courage quite herest,
Scarce of this mighty Host a handful lest;
Like great Goliath, when he self he curs',
Had these not done so too, they had surely burst.
What matters Force, remember Gideon's Flail,
The Man whom God sends forth he must prevail,
And God has brought him back to us again,
And to the Enjoyment of his Royal Queen.
Consider then, and gratefully repay
Those that have saved your Lives, when bleeding lay,
When L^ws and Liberties were torn away:
If not like those that grudge the King their Prayers,
You are Betrayers of your selves and Heirs,
This King preserved our Throats, and saved our Laws,
Which the late King had doomed to serve the Cause,
Let Plagues his Popish Foes to ruin bring,
Whilse we support, ay, and defend the King.

