News from Hereford.
OR, A wonderful and terrible Earthquake: With a wonderful Thunderclap, that
happened on Tuesday being the first of October, 1661. Showing how a
Church-steeple, and many g^llant houses were thrown down to the ground, and
people slain: With a Terrible Thunderclap, and violent Storms of great
Hailstone, which were a^^u^ the bigness of an Egg, many Cattle being utterly
destroyed as they were f^^ding in the field. Also the wonderful Apparitions
which were seen in (...) into the great amazement of the Beholders, who beheld
two perfect ^^ms and hands; in the right hand being graspd a great broad sword,
^n the left a b^ul full of Blood, from whence they heard a most ^^^^nge noise,
^o the wonderful astonishment of al present, the ^ight caused diverse women to
fall in Travail; amongst whom ^^e Clerks wife one Margaret Pellmore, fell in
labor, and ^rought forth 3 children, who had teeth; and spoke as soon as ever
they were born, as you shall hear in the following relation, the like not known
in any age.

The Tune is, A^m not too high.
Repent



OLd England of thy sins in time repent
Before the wrath of God to thee is sent,
For such great wonders in late time have been,
The like before I think was never seen.
But this which here to you I shall unfold,
It is the strangest thing that ere was told,
Yet not so strange but that it is as true,
Yea every word I dedicate to you.
On Tuesday last October the first day,
In Herefordshire there happened such a fray,
By a most terrible Earthquake that did hap,
And violent storms too by a Thunderclap.
About two of the clock in the Afternoon,
There did arise a violent storm right soon,
The Air did darken, and did look unkind,
Then rose the storm and a high mighty wind.
Which for two hours space most vehemently
It mad^ the tyles from off o'th housen fly
And v^hemently it did blow and tear.
That people durst not to go out of door.
And by this storm Church-steeples were blown down,
The ^wo ^t^iost of famous Hereford Town
Besides most famous houses great and small,
Did by this Tempest and the Earthquake fall.
And by the houses fall much blood was spilled,
For many men and women too were killed,
By this most sudd^n Accident I say
And fearful chance and lamentable fray.
After this mighty Tempest it was past
The Air did se^m to clear then a^ the last;
And people did look ou^ upon the Air,
And all the Element beg^n ^o clear.
But presently it ov^rcast again
At six or seven a clock with might and main,
Toward the Eveni^g it began to hail.
Which made ye peoples hearts more sore to quail
The hailstones full as big as Eggs were seen,
The like in England nere before has been.
No tyles nor stones could make ye hardness yield
It did destroy the cattle in the field.
Then followed a terrible Earthquake,
Which made the ground and houses for to shake
And did continue half an hours space,
It many famous buildings did deface.
And surely did amaze both all and some.
The people thought that the last day was come
Immed^^tely a Brightness did appear,
And as Noonday it seemed 'twas so clear.


THen presently the Air against clouds,
with a thick darkness overspred with clouds
And out of which appeared two arms and hands,
At which amazement thousands people stand.
And gluts their eyes with fullness of this fight.
When they beheld in those two hands that night
In ye right hand was grasped a great broad sword
And in the left a cup of crimson blood.
Another wonder appeared from these Skies,
Which was beh^ld by thousand peoples eyes,
There seemed to them a piece of Corn to grow,
And in this sight se^m'd ready for to mow.
And ready for to mow't a Sy^^e lay ^y,
And from the place came a most mighty cry,
Which said woe, woe to man that draws breath
And the Inhabitants of all the Earth.
At the conclusion of this mighty si^ht,
It fearfully did men and women fright,
Women with child which in that town did dwell
A many into labor present fell.
Amongst the rest and strangest too of all,
Unto one Margret Pellmore did befall,
The Clerks wife of the Town as I am told,
Who bor^ 3 children the like was nere unfold.
These children they had teeth and spoke as soon
As ever they into the world did come,
These words as follow di^ from them proceed
The same is verified for truth indeed.
The first did say this d^y no man can shun,
Which is appointed and not yet begun:
Where will be found the second child it said
Sufficient men alive to bury the dead?
These words did then from the 3d. child proceed
Where will be corn enough to satisfy your need?
These were the words they said at that same tyd
And presently all these three children died.
What man is able in our E^glish Land
The meaning of these things to understand?
It does b^token anger great from God,
How he will smite us with his heavy Rod.
Except by prayer we speedily repent,
And of our wicked sins for to relent,
The cup of blood appeared in the Sky,
And sharp edged sword great wars does signify.
The childrens words do mean great sicknesses,
And to this land the Lord will send great cries,
For to fulfill all what the children said,
The living scaace be able to bury the dead.
The Famine so shall poverish to the Land,
Thus shall we feel Gods wrathful heavy hand.
These are but warning-pieces to you all,
Therefore repent good people great and small.
Your selves be sure fail not to prepare,
To meet the Lord a coming i^ the Air
Give praise and thanks so long as you have breath
Unto your mighty God of Heaven and Earth.
By W. K.
A List of the names of the persons that witnesses the truth of this, are as
follows.
Churchwardens.
Fran. Smalman. Hen. Cross,
Constables.
Peter Philpot. Nich. Finch,
James Tully. Geo. Cox Gent. John Groom. Robert Mauricee. Thomas Welford
And diverse others, too many to be here inserted.

Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere; and W. Gilbertson.


