IRELAND.
By the Lord Deputy and Council.
HENRY CROMWELL.

WHereas in pursuance of an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord Protector and
Council, bearing date the 23. of June 1654, confirmed by Parliament, many Godly
and able Ministers have resorted into this Land; yet nevertheless for that
diverse persons who have been ejected in England, and disallowed in Scotland,
for scandal or insufficiency, have also adventured without any allowance or
lawful admittance to intrude them(...) of this Nation from whence if no^
timely prevented, may ensue the corrupting of the People in their judgments and
conversations, and disaffecting them to the present Government and Peace of
these Nations. The Lord Deputy and Council taking the same into their
consideration, do Order and Declare, That the Justices of the Peace of each
respective County within this Nation, shall at their next general Sessions of
the Peace, or at the Public Assizes which shall first happen after Publication
hereof, take the premises into their due consideration, and upon perusal of
the List of Ministers and Schole-Masters, allowed by Public Authority within
their County (hereunto annexed) or otherwise by the best ways and means they
can, certify under their, or any three of their hands, within Six Months after
the said Assizes or Sessions or afterward as there shall be cause, the Names
and Places of abode of all such persons as either do or shall publicly preach,
or teach Schools within their County, and are not, or shall not be persons
allowed or admitted as aforesaid; To the end, upon representation thereof to
the Lord Deputy and Council, due and speedy course may be taken for the
encouragement of such of them as shall appear to be able and of Godly
conversations; and for discountenancing and removing such as shall appear to be
scandalous and insufficient.

Dated at the Council Chamger in Dublin the twentieth day of January, 1657. W.
Steel Canc. R. Pepys. Miles Corbet. Math. Thomlinson. William Bury.

Ordered by the Lord Deputy and Council, That this Declaration be forthwith
Printed and Published.

Thomas Herbert Clerk of the Council.

Imprinted at DUBLIN by WILLIAM BLADEN, Anno Dom. 1657.


