A Practical Grammar, OR, The Easiest and Shortest WAY TO Initiate Young
CHILDREN IN THE LATIN TONGVE.

By the Help whereof, a Child of Seven Years old may learn more of the Grounds
of that Language in Three Months than is ordinarily learnt in an Year's space
by those of greater Age in Common Grammar Schools.

Published for the Use of such as love not to be Tedious.

To which are Added TABLES of Mr. Walker's PARTICLES, by the Assistance whereof
Young Scholars may be the better enabled to Peruse that Excellent and most
useful Treatise.

By J. Philomath. Master of a Free School.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs, over
against the Stocks-Market. 1682.

Kind Reader,
AFter various Essays, and several Methods, proposed to facilitate the Teaching
and Learning of the Latin Tongue, this Little Piece adventures to present it
self to thy View; not to challenge Pre-eminence of All that have gone before,
but to submit it self to the impartial Scrutiny of thy Candid Judgment, which
it the more boldly craves, as due to a Minor; being the Issue of some Years
Observation, whereby (without Impeachment of any preceding Overtures in this
kind) Experience has sufficiently confirmed, That short Rules, and pat
Examples, Instruct better and faster than long winded Notions and perplexed
intricate Sentences, too difficult to be comprehended by Children: for the
Benefit of whom these ensuing Collections are principally intended. The Age we
now live in expects a more early Product, and quicker Improvement of Youth than
heretofore, not to say (though dearly experimented to the great Trouble and
Dissatisfaction of many Teachers in this Kingdom) a laudable Advancement of
such to a competent Knowledge in that Language, as our Predecessors deemed
either altogether incapable thereof, or, by reason of their tender years, unfit
to be taken into their Tuition. And indeed it seems almost impossible, at least
extremely difficult, to satisfy those craving Expectations by circuiting in
the old obscure Rote of the Common Grammar, whose Compilers have freely
expressed themselves, in their Introduction, so far from attributing a complete
Perfection or Self-sufficiency to that Model, that they declare it imposed, not
with Intent to put a stop to the Industry of succeeding Generations, in tracing
out a more exact Method, or accommodating the same to different Ages and
Capacities, but to prevent the grand Inconveniences of worse; there being then
so much Distraction in the Multiplicity of Forms, that it occasioned great
Confusion. Now as their sagacious Foresight suggested hopes of further
Improvement of their Labors by Posterity, so we trust no unprejudiced person
will charge this small Breviary of what was then delivered, with envious
Suggillation or Pragmatic Novelty, since it seems only to design a Confirmation
of their well-grounded Presages, That from those very Foundations a more
Expedite Way would one day be found out to lay them. How far this Elementary
And if this find Acceptance, a Greek Grammar may be produced much easier than
any that has been yet Extant.
performs that Task, I conceive it not a proper undertaking to endeavor here
to determine, since it is now become the Object of Common Censure, and may be
approved or disliked, used or rejected at pleasure. Much less shall I go about
to direct the Intelligent how it ought to be used, being so plain and easy,
that every one that can read English, and understand Common Sense, may at first
sight discern how to proceed, and by due Advertence Instruct himself and
others. I shall only add, that if it has gained the least Advantage to the
Ends proposed, it must be acknowledged due to the afore-cited Preface, which
gave the first occasion of farther search into these Particulars. The whole is
left to thy Discretion to embrace what thou think useful, to Correct what
thou find amiss, and to Supply what thou apprehendest wanting, a service
likely to prove no less beneficial to the tender and more indocile Infantry in
Public Schools, than grateful to their Instructors, whose Obligations will bind
them to return deserved Thanks for the Favor.

A Practical Grammar.
PArts of Speech are Eight;
1. Four declined: Noun, To all which belongs, 1. Two Numbers, Singular, Plural.
2. Three Persons.
Pronoun, Verb, Participle.
2. Four undeclined: Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection.


Of the Two Numbers.
1. The Singular Number speaks but of one. a pen a boy an hare an Ox the
World an hand a bird an heart a man the King a book a nail an hair a chick the
Queen 2. The Plur. speaks of more than one, and ends in s, and in some words
in n, as pens boys hares oxen worlds hands birds hearts men Kings books nails
hairs chicken Queens

There are Three Persons, both
Singular. Plural. 1. I, Ego. We, Nos. 2. Thou, Tu. Ye, Vos. 3. All other
Nouns, Pronouns and Participles are of the third Person, Singular or Plural,
except ipse, idem, and qui, which are joined to all Persons.

Moreover, There do belong to Nouns, Pronouns, and Participles,
1. Six Cases, the
Nominative, Genitive, Dative, Accusative, Vocative, Ablative,
Known by these Signs,
a, an, the, before the Verb. Of (usually) after a Noun. To or for (the use of
one) and before a Noun. a, an, the, after the Verb. O. In, with, from, by, out
of, and of after a Verb passive.
II. Three Genders, the
1. Masculine, Hic. 2. Feminine, Haec. 3. Neuter, Hoc.
Singulariter Pluraliter Nom. Genesis Dat. Acc. V. Abl. Nom. Genesis Dat. Acc. V.
Abl. Masc. Hic Hunc Hoc Hi Horum Hos Fem. Haec Hujus Huic Hanc Hac Hae Harum
His Has His Neut. Hoc Hoc Hoc Haec Horum Haec

There be two sorts of Nouns which use to be joined together in Speech:

1. Substantives, which have a Plural Number (ending commonly in s, sometimes
in n,) and for the most part a, an, or the, before the Singular. 2. Adjectives,
which have no Plural ending, nor (if alone) a, an or the before them: but may
receive after them one of these words, Man, or Thing.
There be Five Declensions known by the Ending of the Nominative Case, as in
the following Examples:
Singulariter Pluraliter Nom. a an the Genesis of Dat. to for Acc. a an the Voc. O
Abl. from Nom. a an the Genesis of Dat. to Acc. a an the Voc. O Abl. from 1 a ae
ae am a a ae arum is as ae is 2 er ir us um i o um er ir e um o i orum is os i
is 3 a c e i l n o r s t x is i em a c e i l n o r s t x e es um ium ibus es es
ibus 4 us u us ui um us u u us uum ibus us us ibus 5 es ei ei em es e es e^rum
e^bus es es e^bus

1. Nouns of the first Declension end in a, and are of the Feminine Gender. A
Man, Vir. A Pen, Penn. a. A Lord, Domin- us. A Bean, Fab- A Finger, Digit- A
Rule, Norm- A Ring, Annul- A School, Schol- The World, Mund- A Woman, Faemin-
The Wind, Vent- Fortune, Fortun- Water, Aqu- A Kingdom, Regn- um. Joy, Laetiti-
An Apple, Pom- 2. Nouns of the 2 d Declension in er, ir and us are Masculines,
in um Neuters. A Word, Verb- Study, Studi- Loss, Damn- A Book, Lib- er. A
Field, Ag- A Boy, Pu- A Goat, Cap-

3. Nouns of the third Declension, if Substantives, are, 1. Masculines, which
end in an, anis. Titan, the Sun. in, inis. Delphin, a Dolphin. o, onis. Ligo, a
Spade. on, onis. Damon. onis. Canon, a Rule.
er, e^ris. Crater, a Cup. ris. Passer, a Sparrow.
ter, tris. Venture, a Belly. ex, e^cis. Vervex, a Weather. cis. Codex, a Book.
or, oris. Viator, a Traveller. oris. Rhetor, a Rhetorician.
os, oris. Honos, Honor. ois, Heroes, a Nobleman.
il, lis. Mugil, a Mullet. ul, ulis. Consul, a Consul. ans, antis. Quadrans, a
Farthing. ens, entis. Tridens, a Mace. unx, uncis. Septunx, seven Ounces.
2. Neuters ending in a, atis. Poema, a Poem. e, is. Rete, a Net. i, is.
Sinapi, Mustard. al, alis. Capital, a Coif. ar, aris. Calcar, a Spur. en, nis.
Nomen, a Name. ur, oris. Jecur, a Liver. uris. Guttur, a Throat.
us, oris. Pectus, a Breast. eris. Vulnus, a Wound.
ut, it is. Caput, an Head.
3. Almost all others are Feminines, especially such as end in as, atis.
Vanitas, Vanity. adis. Lampas, a Lamp.
ax, acis. Fornax, a Furnace. es, is. Seeds, a Seat. e^tis. Quies, Rest. e^dis.
Merces, a Reward.
io, ionis. Natio, a Nation. Lectio, a Reading.
ix, i^cis Radix, a Root. Nutrix, a Nurse.
inx, ingis. Syrinx, a Flute. anx, ancis. Lanx, a Platter. do, dnis. Rubedo,
Redness. go, gnis. Imago, a Picture. ux, ucis. Crux, a Cross. is, inis, is
Masc. as Sanguis, Blood. is. Fem. as Avis, a Bird.
4. Nouns of the fourth Declension in us are Masculines, in u Neutters: as, A
Step. Grad- us.
A Wave, Fluct- An Army, Exercit- An Uproar, Tumult- Food, Vict- Fruit, Fruct-
A Knee, Gen- u.
An Horn, Corn-
5. Nouns of the fifth Declension are all Feminines, except Meridies and Dies.
A Face, Faci- es.
A Kind, Speci- A Thing, R- Faith, Fid- Hardness, Duriti-
So much of Substantives; next follows Declination of Adjectives, which are
either of the first and second Declensions, as durus, or of the third alone, as
tristis.

Dur -- us Bon -- us Tard -- us Alo -- us Crud -- us Alt -- us Pulch -- er Pig
-- er Nig -- er Integ -- er Sat -- ur.
Singulariter Pluraliter Masc. Fem. Neut. Masc. Fem. Neut. Nom. us er a um i ae
a Genesis i ae i orum arum orum Dat. o ae o is is is Acc. um am um os as a Voc. e
er a um i ae a Abl. o a o is is is

In like manner are declined all Participles in tus, sus, xus, rus and dus:
(...), tuus, suus, noster, vester: Likewise totus, solus, unus, ullus, (...),
alter, (...), neuter, nullus; saving that these Nine make the Ge^^tive Singular
in ius, and the Dative in i. x Meus makes mi in the Vocative Case, and ^^lius,
aliud, in the Neuter Gender: x And the Six last lack the Vocative Case.

Trist -- is Lev -- is Util -- is Mo^ -- is Auda -- x Supple -- x Feli -- x
Atro -- x Am -- ans Ing -- ens Obedi -- ens Dur -- ior Lev -- ior Pulchr -- ior
Nigr -- ior.
Singulariter Pluraliter Masc. Fem Neut. Masc. Fem. Neut. Nom. is x ans ens ior
e x ans ens ius es ia Genesis is um ium Dat. i ibus Acc. em e x ans ens ius es ia
Voc. is x ans ens ior e x ans ens ius es ia Nostras, atis. Vestras, atis.
Gujas, atis.
Abl. e i bus

N. B. Such as end in x, ans and ens, are of all three Genders in the
^ominative Case singular, and increase in the Genitive. These with Comaratives,
make the Ablative singular both, in e and i. Others only in i, and increase not
in the Genitive Case, (except Vetus.) Note also, That Comparatives in the
Nominative, Accusative and the Vocative Plural, form the Neuter Gender in a,
and the Genitive in um, the rest in i^, ium.

There be three Degrees of Comparison, the 1. Positive. 2. Comparative. 3.
Superlative. Hard, Dur -- us. Bold, And -- ax. us ax more, or er most, or est
Light, Levis. Lowly, Suppl -- ex. is ex -ior Loving, Am -- ans. Happy, Fell --
ix. ans ix -ius issimus Great, Ing -- ens. Fierce, Fer -- ox. ens ox Fair,
Pulch -- er. Sick, Aeg -- er. er -ior rimus Black, Nig -- er. Slow, Pig -- er.
-ius Fiery, Igneus. Watery, Aqueus. eus Godly, Pius. Ungodly, Impius. ius magis
maxim Stout, Strenuns. High, Ardnus. uus

Except from these Rules, these that follow:
Good, better, best, Bonus, melior, optimus, Bad, worse, worst, Malus, pejor,
pessimus, Great, greater, greatest, Magnus, major, maximus, Little, less,
least, Parvus, minor, minimus, Much, more, most, Multus, plurimus, Multum,
plus, plurimum, Old, elder, eldest, Vetus, veterior, veterrimus, Senex; senior,
maximus natu, worse, worst of all, deterior, deterrimus, Long ago, former,
first, Pridem, prior, primus, After, later, last, Post, posterior, postremus,
Above, higher, highest. Supra, superior, supremus. summus. Below, lower,
lowest. Infra, inferior, infimus. Within, inward, inmost. Intra, interior,
intimus. Without, more outward, outmost. Extra, exterior, extimus. extremus. on
this side, nigher hither, nighest hither. citra, citerior, citimus. beyond,
farther off, farthest. ultra, ulterior, ultimus. near to, nearer, nearest.
prope, propior, proximus. naughty, naughtier, naughtiest. nequam, nequior,
nequissimus. A great while, longer, very long. diu, diutius, diutissime. often,
oftener, very often. saepe, saepius, saepissime. lite, very lately. nuper,
nuperrime. rich, richer, very rich. dives, ditior, ditissimus.

Adjectives not Compared are,
Cicur, claudus, canus, calvus, Degener, dispar, almus, salvus, Egenus, memor,
magnanimus, mirus, Jejunus, crispus, unicus, delirus, Canorus, balbus, ferus,
vetulus, Silvestris, mediocris, edentulus. Also,
1. Gentiles, Romanus, Graecus, etc. 2. Possessives, Fraternus, herilis, etc.
3. Numerals, Septimus, ternarius, etc. 4. Diminutives, Tenellus, tantillus,
etc. 5. Materials, Aureus, aereus, lapideus, ligneus. 6. Temporals, Matutinus,
hesternus, biennis. 7. Compounds of gere and fero, Salutifer, Corniger.
And Words ending in
1. (...). Moribundus, cunct abundus. 2. imus. Bimus, trimus, maritimus. 3.
ivus. Deliberativus. 4. plex. as Duplex, triplex. 5. ster. Campester,
sylvester.
Pronouns are these:
1. Substantives, 1. In English, 2. In Latin, I, me, we, us. Ego, nos. Thou,
thee, ye, you. Tu, vos. He, she, it, him, her. Ille, iste, ipse. They, them.
Illi, isti, ipsi. Self. Sui. 2. Adjectives. My, thy, or thine, his, their:
Meus, tuus, suus. Our, your: Noster, vester. This, these, that, those: Hic, is.
Which, whose, whom, what, who: Qui, quis.

Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipfe, iste, is, qui and quis, are thus declined:

N. Ego, I. G. Mei, of me. D. Mihi, to me. A. Me, me. V. Caret. A. a me, from
me.
Pluraliter
nos, we. nastram, of us.
nostri, nobis, to us. nos, us. a nobis, from us
Singulariter
tu, thou. tui, of thee. tibi, to thee. te, thee. O tu, O thou. a te, from
thee.
Pluraliter
vps, ye. vestrum, of you.
vestri, vobis, to you. vos, you. O vos, O ye. a vobis, from you
N. caret. himself, or themselves.
G. sui, of D. sibi, to A. se, V. A. a se, from
Singulariter
N. is, ea, id, that. G. ejus. D. ei. A. eum, eam, id. V. A. eo, ea, eo.
Pluraliter
N. ii, eae, ea, those. G. eorum, earum, eorum. D. iis, veleis. A. eos, eas,
ea. V. A. iis, vel eis.
He, she, that. N. iste, ista, istud. G. istius, of. D. isti, to. A. istum,
istam, istud. V. A. isto, ista, isto, from.
Pluraliter
they, those. N. isti, istae, ista. G. istorum, istarum istorum. D. istis. A.
istos, istas, ista. V. A. istis.
So are declined ille and ipse, saving that ipse makes ipsum, not ipsud in the
Neuter Gender.

N. qui, quae, quod. G. cujus. D. cui. A. quem, quam, quod. V. A. quo, qua, quo
vel qui.
Pluraliter
N. qui, quae, quae, G. quorum, quarum, quorum. D. quibus vel queis. A. quos,
quas, quae. V. A. quibus vel queis. Masc. Neut. N. quisquis, quicquid. Ac.
quicquid. Abl. quoquo, qu^qua, quoquo.
So is quis declined, but that it has quid in the Neuter Gender; and also
these that follow:

Quis- nam, piam, quam, que, putas.

Qui- dam, vis, libet, cunque. Ec -- quis, Ne -- quis, Ali -- quis, Nun --
quis, Si -- quis.

Exceptions from the Rules concerning Nouns and the Declensions.
1. ALi Neuters make the Nominative, Accusative and Vocative the same in both
Numbers, and in the Plural end all in a.

2. Filia and nata make the Dative and Ablative Plural in is or abus; Dea,
mula, equa, liberta in abus only.

3. In the Second Declension, if the Nominative Case 1. Ends in us, the
Vocative shall end in e, except Voc. O Deus, fili, geni. 2. Be a Proper Name in
ius, it makes the Vocative in i.
4. Ambo and Duo are thus declined: Plural.
Amb- Du- o orum obus os obus ae arum abus as abus o orum obus o bous. 5. To
the three first Declensions do belong certain Greek Nouns which end in the 1
st. in as, es, e. These usually make the Acc. sing. in n; but eus makes ea, and
its Genesis eos: Also e the Genesis es, and o, us; es the Voc. and Abl. e or a. whose
Accusative singular ends in a, Plural in as (except Neuters) Genesis sometimes in
dos, eos, ios, yos.
2 d. in eus, os, on. 3 d. a, as, an, ir, i, is, in, on, us, o,


Nouns that differ variously in the Terminations from the common road.
OF the first Declension, Filia, nata, dea, liberta, equa, mula, serva,
conserva, asina, socia, anima, make is, and abus, Dat. Pl.

Nouns in us of the second Declension make the Vocative in e; Deus and other
Nouns ending in us are Atticisms.

The Accusative singular of the third Declension ends in em, but these in im:

Vis, ravis, sitis, charybdis, tussis, Mephitis, cannabis, Magudaris, amussis,
Praesepis, syrtis, opis, pelvis, buris, Sinapis, cucumis, Leucaspis, securis,
Albis, Fabaris, Baetis, Tanais, Tigris, Araris, Athesis, Ligeris, Tiberis,
Tibris.
em and im these;

Aqualis, cutis, turris, vestis, navis, Sementis, puppis, bipennis, febris,
clavis and strigilis.
Ablatives singular of the third Declension ends in e; but,

1. Neuters in all, er, e, make i, but far, hepar, jubar, nectar, make ^.

2. Adjectives with e in the Neuter, Names of Months in is and er, memor,
immemor, make i in the Ablative: Affinis, rivalis, familiaris, contubernalis,
popularis, sodalis, aedilis, annalis, biremis, natalis, bipennis, used
Adjectively i, Substantively e.

Nouns in im in the Accusative make i only in the Ablative, but Baete, site are
read.

Some make i and e in the Ablative: as

They that make im and em in the Accusative: Adjectives of one Termination:
Participles and Participials in ns, (unless put) absolute: Verbals in trix
taken Substantively, together with victrix and ultrix: Adjectives of the
Comparative Degrees, par, the Adjective i: Substantive e: and compar, impar,
uber, degener, dives, locuples, Arpinas.

And also,

Classis, collis, finis, fustis, Ignis, imbris, vectis, postis, Orbis, ovis,
civis, avis, Unguis, pars, furfur, navis, Occiput, sors, supellex, sordes, Pus,
Carthag^, Sidon, Lacedaemon, Tibur, Anxur, and sycyon.
Neuters of the third Declension make a, or ia;

a, whose Ablative singular ends only in e: ia, whose Ablative singular ends
only in i, or e and i, but vetus, uber, bicorpor, tricorpor, versicolor,
unicolor, make a.

Also Comparatives have a, except plus, plura vel pluria.

1. The Genitive Plural of the third Declension ends in um; but

They that make i only, or i and e in the Ablative singular make ium in the
Genitive Plural, except Comparatives, words ending in fex, from facis, memor,
immemor, inops, uber, compos, impos, impuber, puber, dives, degener, congener,
tricorpor.

2. Nouns not increasing of the third Declension make ium, but juvenis, panis,
canis, and words of three sillables make um.

3. Words only Plurals have the Genitive in ium, but opes, primores, lemures,
caelites, celeres, luceres, and proceres, make ium.

4. Words of one syllable ending in a liquid Consonant, as par, parium, but
ren, splen, and fur, make um.

5. All words ending in the Nominative singular in two Consonants, or a double
Consonant make ium, but caelebs, consors, hyems, judex, senex, gryps, lynx,
sphinx, prex and frux, out of use, make u^: So Nouns from capio, as auceps,
forceps, manceps, etc. And words that end in (...) in Greek, as Arabs,
Aethiops, Chalybs, Cyclops, Phalanx, make um.

Lastly, These Monosillables, as, mas, vas, bes, lis, glis, dis, vis, cos, dos,
os, and mus, make ium, but pes, praes, mos, flos, thus, crus, sus, grus, lans,
fraus, bos, make um.

The Dative Plural of the third Declension ends in bus, but bos makes bobus and
bubus, and Cicero has suibus for subus.

The Dative Plural of the fourth Declension ends in ibus, but specus, artus,
lacus, tribus, portus, make ubus; acus and quercus, have no Dative Plural; but
ficus has ficis in Pliny, etc. Quaestus, portus, genu and veru, make both ibus
and ubus.

Rules for Genders of Noun-Substantives.
Nouns Substantives, 1. Proper, towit, Names of 1. Heathen Gods, Men, and other
Male-Creatures, are all Masculines, howsoever they end. 2. Countries, Islands,
Trees, Heathen Goddesses, Women, and other Females, all Feminines.
2. Common of the 1. First and fifth Declension are of the Feminine Gender. 2.
Second and fourth, such as end in er, ir and us, are of the Masculine, in um
and u of the Neuter. 3. Of the third Declension Nouns ending in 1. an, in, on,
er, ter, ex, or, os, il, ul, o, ans, ens, unx, are, for the most part,
Masculines. 2. as, es, is, ax, ix, ux, s, or x after a Consonant, i^, d^, go,
most Feminines. 3. ma, e, al, ar, el, en, ur, us, ut, almost all Neuters.



Except from these general Rules:
I. Names of Trees. 1. Masculines, spinus and oleaster. 2. Neuters, siler,
suber, thus, robur, acer.
II. Of the first Declension. 1. Masculines, such as denote the Actions or
Offices of Men, and Males: as Poeta, scriba, etc. 2. Commons: Auriga, dama,
talpa, verna, and Compounds in a, derived of a Verb.
III. Of the second Declension in us. 1. Feminines. 1. Such as betoken the
Relations, Actions, or Offices of Females. 2. Many Greek Nouns in us, (not
eus.) 3. Humus, domus, alvus, ^^lus, vannus.
2. Neuters: Virus, pelagus, vulgus, penus.
IV. Of the fourth Declension: Ficus, acus, porticus, tribus, manus, idus, all
Feminines. V. Of the fifth Declension: Dies of the Common Gender, and Meridies
of the Masculine.
V: Of the third Declension from Masculines in
1. on. Sindon, gorgon, icon, ^mazon, Feminines. 2. er. Verber, iter, tuber,
uber, ver, cadaver, spinter, zinziber, laser, cicer, piper, papaver, siser,
Neuters. 3. ens. Men's, gens, lens, dis, it is, Feminines; Nefrens, Common. 4. ex.
Feminines, Supellex, carex, pellex, vibex. Commons, Senex, judex, vindex,
imbrex, opifex, forfex, aruspex, and other Compounds ending in fex or spex;
also Pumex, cortex, obex, silex, index.
5. il. Strigil, Neuter. 6. ul. Praesul, exul, Commons. 7. or 1. Arbor, Fem.
and author, Com. 2. Cor, aequor, ador, marmor, Neuters.
8. os. 1. Feminines, Dos, cos, Eos, arbos. 2. Commons, Custos, nepos, bos,
sacerdos. 3. Neuters, os, oris, a mouth. ossis, a bone.

9. ans. Glans, f. infans, c. 10. ^. Caro, f. homo, nemo, c.

Feminines in
1. as. Vas, vadis, mas, aris, gigas, elephas, adamas, Agragas, G^ramas, Masc.
an as, at is, Com. vas, vasis, Neut. 2. ax. Some Greek Nouns. 3. es. 1.
Masculines, Bes, Cres, praes, pes, tapes, verres, Cures, lebes, magnes, aries,
paries, fomes, limes, stipes, terms, poples, ames, cespes, palms, trames,
gurges, tudes. 2. Commons, Haeres, Antistes, Miles, interpres, pedes, comes,
hospes, ales, praeses, eques, obses, vates.
4. ix. Varix, fornix, calix, natrix, cis, Mastix, gis, Onyx, bombyx,
Masculines. 5. io. Senio, ternio, curculio, opilio, mulio, and others in io,
denoting a body, Masculines. 6. is. Masculines.
Mascula sunt amnis, natalis, aqualis, ab ass Nata, ut centussis: quibus add
lienis, and orbis, Callis, caulis, follis, collis, mensis, and ensis, Fustis,
funis, panis, penit, crinis, and ignis, Cassis, fascis, torris, sentis, piscis,
and unguis, Hisce lapis, vermis, vectis, cum postis, and axis, Et sanguis,
vomis, cucumis, glis, mugilis, addas. Communis generis cenchris sunt atque
sodalis, Commons.
Torquis, and extorris, patruelis, perque duellis, Affinis, juvenis, testis,
civis, canis, hostis; His jungas corbis, clunis, cum rest, canalis, Atque
semis, finis, samuis, pulvis, cinis, anguis.
7. ax. Conjux and dux, with its Compounds, Common. 8. s and x after a
Consonant, except Mons, pons, fons, M. calx, C.
Neuters in
1. al. Annibal, M. sal, M. and N. 2. ar. Lar and salar, M. 3. en. Pecten,
lien, ren, splen, lichen, atagen, tibicen, tubicen, hymen, M. Siren, F.
Cornicen, C. 4. ur. Furfur, vultur, turtur, M. fur, Ligur, augur, C. 5. us.
Mus, lepus, Masc. Opus, untis, pecus, ulis, and such as increase long in
Feminines.
udis, uris, utis,


Of Irregular Nouns out of the Westminster- Introduction.
IRregular Nouns are such as vary from the common way of Declining, and either

1. Have too much in

1. The Nominative, as

Baculus, um, a Staff. Acetabula, um, a Saucer. Aranea, eus, a Spider.
Antidotus, um, an Antidote. Alabaster, strum, Alabaster. Cepa, e, an Onion.
Postulatio, atum, a Postulation. Concursio, sus, a Concourse. Attagen, ena, a
Snite. Hebdomas, da, a Week. Lampas, ada, a Lamp. Juventus, ta, Youth.
Senectus, ta, Old Age. Avarities, tia, Covertousness. Materies, ia, Matter.
Some Proper Names which have both the Greek and Latin Termination, as

Ulysses, eus. Adonis, eus. Agamemnon, o. Amazon, o. Evander, drus. Geta, tes.
Ligur, gus. Menander, drus. Palemo, on. Perses, eus. Simo, on. Thimber, brus.
Ode, da.
2. Other cases; as Ancil -- ia, ium and iorum, Saturnal -- ia, ium, and iorum,
jecur, oris and inoris, the Liver. And these Names following which retain the
Greek Termination with the Latin in the Genitive.

Orestes, e, is. Orontes, e, is. Laches, ae, etis. Calchas, ae, ant is.
Paschas, ae, and at is. Sequester, i, tris. Oedipus, i, and odis.
Polipus, Glomus, i, eris. Mulciber, eri, eris. And other Neuters, especially
Names of Feasts.
Likewise Neuters in ma make the Dative and Ablative Plural in matis and
matibus; as Dog -- ma, Poe -- ma, Quinquatr -- ia, is and ibus.

3. Declension; as Laurus, pinus, colus, cornus, which make the Genitive
singular, the Nominative, Accusative and Vocative Plural in us the Ablative
singular in u of the fourth, other Cases of the second Declension.

S. N. Domus, P. N. Domus, G. i, us, G. orum, uum, D. ui, D. ibus, Ac. um, Ac.
os, us, V. us, V. us, A. o. A. ibus
II. Have too little, and want

1. Number, either

1. Singular. Names of 1. Feasts: as

Saturnalia. Parentalia. Bachanalia. Orgia. Dionisia. Compitalia. Vinalia.
Ithmia. Pythia. Olympia. Nemea, Palaria. Batualia.
And 2. some Cities: as

Bajae. Faesulae. Fregellae. Gades. Gabij. Locri. Athenae. Artaxata. Bactra.
Susa.
3. Certain particular Nouns here mentioned:

Acta, Deeds. Adversaria, Postingbooks, Journals. Aedes, an House. Alps, the
Alps. Ambages, Preambles. Annals, Chronicles of things done from year to year.
Antes, the uttermost ranks of Vines. Antiae, Women's Forelocks. Apinae, Trifles.
Argutiae, Smartness or Briskness. Arma, Weapons. Bellaria, Junkets. Bigae, a
Cart with two Horses. Blanditiae, Fair Words. Caulae, Sheepcots. Caelites,
Heavenly Inhabitants. Calendae, Calends of the Months. Cancelli, Lattices.
Carceres, bounds whence Race-Horses started. Castra, a Camp. Cete, a Whale.
Clitellae, a Panel or Pack-saddle. Codicilli, Epistles, Letters Patents of a
Prince. Comitia, an Assembly. Compita, Cross Ways. Crepundia, Rattles.
Cunabula, Cradles. Cunae, Cradles. Decimae, Tithes. Dirae, Curses. Divitiae,
Riches. Donaria, Offerings to the Gods. Dryades, Goddesses of the Woods.
Esquilliae, a Mountain in Rome. Eumenides, Furies. Excubiae, Watches and Wards.
Exequiae, Ceremonies performed at Funerals. Exta, Intrails of Beasts. Exuviae,
things that we put off. Fasces, a bundle of Rods carried before the Roman
Consuls, as Ensigns of Authority. Fasti, Registers Books. Fauces, Jaws. Feriae,
Holy Days. Fines, the Borders of a Country. Fores, Doors. Furfures, the Scurff
of the Head. Gemini, Twins. Gerrae, Hurdles made of Twigs. Gesta, famous
Exploits. Hiberna, Soldiers Winter Quarters. Id^s, Ides of a Month. Ilia, the
Guts. Induciae, Truce. Indigetes, Demi Gods. Ineptiae, Foolery. Inferiae,
Sacrifices performed to Devils. Lectes, small Guts. Lamentae, Lamentations.
Lares, Household Gods. Lautia vel Lautiae, Allowances for the Maintenance of
Foreign Ambassadors. Lemures, Hobgoblins. Liberi, Children. Latterae, Learning.
Lustra, Dens of wild Beasts. Magalia, Magaria, Mapalia, Majores, Ancestors.
Magmata, Pomanders, Wash-balls. Magnalia, great and wonderful Works. Minutiae,
Mites. Multitia, fine Clothes. Minae, Threatenings Nonae, Nones. Nugae, Trifles.
Nares, Nostrils. Oblivia, Forgetfulness. Opes, Riches. Optimates, Grandees.
Phalerae, Horse-Trappings. Plagae, Hunters Nets. Plerique, Many. Plures, More.
Posteri, Posterity. Primores, Nobles. Proceres, Peers. Parapherna, all things
that Women bring their Husbands, besides a Portion. Praebia, Amulets or Charms
hung about Childrens Necks. Praecordia, Midriff. Primitiae, First Fruits.
Quadrigae, a Cart with four Horses. Quirites, Romans. Quisquiliae, the refuse
of things. Rapicia, the tender Leaves of Rapes. Reliquiae, Relics. Rostra,
Pulpits. Sales, Jests. Salebrae, rough places. Scalae, Stairs. Scopae, a Besom.
Scruta, old Rags. Singuli, each. Stativa, a standing Camp. Spolia, Spoils.
Superi, the Gods above. Suppetiae, Aid or Help. Symplegades, the Name of two
Islands. Taphrae, the Name of a City. Tenebrae, Darkness. Tesqua, rough places.
Thermae, Baths. Tonsillae, the Glanders. Tricae, Gugaws. Valvae, folding Doors.
Verbera, Stripes. Vergiliae, the seven Stars. Verenda, the privy Parts of a Man
or a Woman. Vindiciae, an Assertion of ones Liberty. A Rejoinder in Law.
Vinacea, Grape-stones. Vitalia, Vitals.
2. Plural. 1. Proper Names. 2. Most Names of Corn, Spices, Liquors, Metals,
Arts, Vices, Virtues, Diseases and Ages, Except Fabae, Lupini, Zizania, Avenae,
Pices, Cerae, Cardui, Urticae, Malvae, Cicutae, Papavera, Rosae, Lilia, Aquae,
Vina, Musta, Era, Orichalca, Electra, with these other particular Nouns here
mentioned, that follow, that either want the Plural, or have such Cases as are
here set down, or else have it very seldom.

Adeps, Fatness. Aevum, a, an Age. Aer, the Air. Album, a Muster-roll. Allium,
a, Garlic. Arena, Sand. Barba, a Beard. Bilis, Melancholy. Caestus, (r.)
Woman's Belt. Callum, Brawny skin. Cancer, (r.) a Prison. Clavus, (r.) a
Doornail. Cholera, Choler. Crocus, Saffron. Cruor, es, (r.) Blood. Cutis, (r.)
Skin. Fama, as, Fame. Fames, Hunger. Far, rra, Bread-Corn. Fascinum, a
bewitching. Fell, lla, Gall. Fimus, Dung. Forum, a, a Marketplace. Fuga, as, a
flight. Fumus, Smoke. Galla, Galls, or Shoemakers Auls. Gaza, Riches. Genius,
an attendant Angel, good or bad. Gloria, as, Glory. Gluten; Glue. Halec, the
Pickle of an Herring. Hara, an Hoggs-stye. Hepar, a Liver. Hilum, the black
speck of a Bean. Hordeum, a, Barley. Humus, the Ground. Indoles, towardliness.
Jubar, a Sunbeam. Justitium, a Vacation. Juventus, Youth. Lac, Milk. Lethum,
Death. Limus, Mud. Lues, a Murrain. Luculentia, fine speeches. Lutum, a, Clay.
Lux, Light. Macellum, a Butcher's Stall, Shambles. Mel, lla, Honey. Meridies,
Noonday. Metus, us, (r.) Fear. Muscus, Moss. Mustum, a, Metheglin. Mundus,
Women's Decking. Nihilum, Nothing. Nitrum, Salt Petre. Oblivio, Forgetfulness.
Pallor, (r.) Paleness. Paupertas, (r.) Poverty. Pax, Peace. Pelagus, the Sea.
Penum, Meat and Drink. Pituita, Phlegm, or Rheum. Plebs, the Common People.
Pontus, the Sea. Proles, es, an Offspring. Prosapia, a Pedigree. Pubes, es,
ripeness of Age. Pudor, es, (r.) Shame. Ros, es, (r.) Dew. Rus, ra, the
Country. Sal, es, (r.) Salt. Salum, the salt Sea. Salus, Health. Sanies, an
ulcerous Corruption. Senium, Old Age. Senectus, tes, (r.) Old Age. Siler, an
Osier. Silex, ces, Flint. Sitis, Thirst. Situs, us, Situation. Soboles, an
Offspring. Solum, a Soil. Sol, es, (r.) the Sun. Solium, a, (r.) a Throne, or
Chair of State. Sopor, Sleep. Tabes, a Consumption. Talio, like for like.
Tellus, the Earth. Thus, ra, Frankincense. Timor, (r.) Fear. Tussis, Cough.
Valetudo, Health. Velocitas, Swiftness. Ver, the Springtime. Vigor,
Liveliness. Vinum, a, Wine. Virus, Poison. Viscum, Birdlime. Vita, Life.
Vitrum, Glass. Vulgus, Common People.
2. Case, as

1. Aptots, which have 1. the same ending in all Cases in singular only.

2. Both Numbers, Gummi, frugi, pondo, nequam.

3. The Plural only, Tempe, tot, quot, and all Cardinal Numbers from quatuor to
centum.

2. Monoptots, which have one Case only, as Noctu, natu, jussu, injussu, astu,
promptu, permissu, inficias, incitas, nauci, expes.

3. Diptots, which have two Cases only, as Fors, forte, impetis-te, tabi, tabo,
repetund-arum-is, suppeti-ae-as.

4. Triptots, which have three Cases:

1. Of one ending, viz. Nom. Acc. and Voc. as Cete, fas, nefas.

2. Of two endings, as Nom. Acc. Tantundem, Genesis tantidem.

5. Tetraptots, which have four Cases only, as

N.
Nemo, Vesper,
D.
Nemini, Vesperi,
Acc.
Neminem, Vesperum,
Abl.
Nemine. Vespere.
G. Precis, D. Preci, Acc. Precem, Abl. Prece.

III. Change their

1. Gender, and are of one Gender in the Singular Number, and another in the
Plural.

Singular. Plural. Masc. Sibilus, Masc. Neut. Pangaeus, a. Infernus, Jacus,
Locus, i, a. Neut. Rastrum, Fraenum, Capistrum, Filum, Caelum, i. Siser, es.
Neut. Pergamus, Neut. Hierosolyma, a. Carbasus, Neut. Nundinum, Fem. Epulum,
Balneum, ae Delicium,

2. Manner of Declining, as

Singular. Plural. Vas, vasis, vis, vasa, vasorum. vires. Iter, itineris.

3. Both Gender, and Flection, as Supellex, supellectilis, Plur. supeliectilia.

A VERB has
I. Four Conjugations, known by the first person singular, which ends in the

1. First in o with a Consonant next before o. [Except some few in eo, and more
in io, to be learned by Use. 2. Second in eo. 3. Third in o, to be learned out
of a Book. 4. Fourth in io.
Which make the
Preterpl. Supines. abi, atum, atu. ui, i, um, u. ivi, itum, itu.

II. Four Moods, 1. Indicative, which has five Tenses, Signs. 1. Presenttense,
Active, do, do, does. Passive, am, art, is, are. 2. Preterimperfect-tense,
Active, did, did. Passive, was, wast, were. 3. Preterperfect-tense, Active,
have, have, has. Pass. have been, have been, has been. 4.
Preterpluperfect-tense, Active, had, had. Passive, had been, had been. 5.
Futuretense, Active, shall or will, shall or wilt. Pass. shall or will be,
shall or wilt be.

2. Imperative, Active, let. Passive, let be.
3. Potential, Signs.
May or can in the Present- Tense, in the Passive, be.


Future-
Might, would, could, should, or ought in the Preterimperf. alone, Preterperf.
have, in the Passive, been.
Preterplup. had,
4. Infinitive, 1. Active, 1. Pres. and Preterimperf. to. 2. Preterperf. and
Preterpluperf. to have or had. 3. Future-tense, to hereafter.
2. Passive, 1. Pres. and Preterimperf. to be. 2. Preterperf. and
Preterpluperf. to have or had been. 3. Future-tense, to be hereafter.



N. B. The Potential Mood is called Subjunctive when it has the Indicative
Signs, and is joined with Quamvis, quanquam, ne, cum, quod, uti, licet, ut, si,
etc. utinam ne, quin.

N. 2. To the Infinitive belong also four Cases singular of the Participle dus,
called Gerunds, and besides two Supines, viz, the

1. Genitive in di, as amandi of loving, set after certain Substantives and
Adjectives which govern a Genitive Case. 2. Ablative in do, as amando in
loving, put either alone or after one of these Prepositions, A, ab, de, e, ex,
cum in pro. 3. Nominative 4. Accusative in dum, Put alone or absolutely with
the Verb est. put after Ad, ob, propter, inter, ante.


Two Supines ending the
1. First in um, to; as amatum, to love. 2. Second in u, to be; as amatu, to be
loved.
Of Participles there are four kinds, one of the
1. Present-tense, whose English ends in ing, his Latin in ans or ens; as
loving, am -- ans; read -- ing, leg -- ens.

2. Preter perfect-tense, whose English ends in d, t, or n, his Latin in tus,
sus, xus; as lov -- ed, ama -- tus; knit, ne -- xus; seen, vi -- sus.

3. Future, in rus, to or about to; as Lecturus to read, or about to read.

4. Future in dus, to be; as legendus, to be read.

N. B. Certain Verbs in or are Englished with Active Signs only, and called
Deponents; some with either Active or Passive, and therefore called Commons.
Others in o, with Passive Signs only, thence termed Neuter Passives: Of which
three sorts,

1. In Termination, as maereo, maestus, to mourn.

2. In Signification, as vapulo, to be beaten.

3. In Termination and Signification, gaudeo, gavisus, to be glad.

The Formation of Verbs from their Radical Tenses.
From Amo are formed Ama bam, Pr. Im. bo, Future. re, Pr. Inf. ns, Par. pr.
From Ama -- vi, Preter-Perf. veram, Pr. pl. Ind. verim, Pr. pot. vissem, Pr.
pl. po. vero, Fu. po.
From Doceo are formed Doce bam, Pr. Imp. bo, Fut. Ind. re, Pr. Inf. ns, Par.
pr.
From Docu -- i, Preter-Perf. eram, Pr. pl. In. erim, Pr. pot. issem, Pr. pl.
pot. ero, Fu. po.
From Lego are formed Leg -- - cbam, Pr. Im. am, Future. ere, Pr. Inf. ens,
Par. pr.
From Leg -- i Preter-Perf. eram, Pr. pl. In. erim, Pr. pot. issem, Pr. pl. po.
ero, Fut. po.
From Audio are formed Audi ebam, Pr. Im. am, Fut. re, Pr. Inf. ens, Par. or.
From Audiv -- i Preter-Perf. earm, Pr. pl. In. erim, Pr. pot. issem, Pr. pl.
po. ero, Fut. po.


Tenses. Conj. 1. I. 2. Thou 3. He 1. We 2. Ye 3. They Signs do do does do do
do Am- love Present Tense. 1. o as at amus atis ant Doc- teach 2. eo es et emus
etis ent Leg- read 3. o is it mus it is unt And- hear 4. io is it i^mus i^tis
iunt Signs did did did did did did Rog- ask Preterimperfect Tense. 1 abam
abas abat abamus abatis abant Ten- hold 2 ebam ebas ebat ebamus ebatis ebant
Em- buy 3 ebam ebas ebat ebamus ebatis ebant Ernd- instruct 4 iebam iebas iebat
iebamus iebatis iebant Signs have have has have have have Land- praise
Preterperfect Tense. 1 avi avisti avit avimus avistis averunt avere Mon- warn 2
ui uisti uit uimus uistis uerunt uere Defend- defend 3 i isti it imus istis
erunt ere Pun- punish 4 ivi ivisti ivit ivimus ivistis iverunt ivere Signs had
had had had had had Not- observe Preterpluperfect Tense. 1 averam averas
averat averamus averatis averant Terr- fright 2 ueram ueras uerat ueramus
ueratis uerant Occid- kill 3 ram ras rat eramus eratis erant Imped- hinder 4
iveram iveras iverat iveramus iveratis iverant

Persons 1. I. 2. Thou 3. He 1. We 2. Ye 3. They The Passive Voice. am art is
are are are or aris are atur amur amini antur eor eris ere etur emur emini
entur or ris re tur mur imini untur ior iris ire i^tur i^mur imini iuntur was
wast was were were were abar abar abare abatur abamur abamini abantur ebar
ebaris ebare ebatur eabmur ebamini ebantur ebar ebaris ebare ebatur ebemur
ebamini ebantur iebar iebaris iebare iebatur iebamur iebamini iebantur have
been have been has been habe been atus us sum vel fui
us itus
es vel fuisti est vel fuit i. sumus vel fuimus estis vel fuistis sunt, fuerunt
vel fuere had been had been had been had been atus us eram vel fueram
us itus
aras vel fueras arat vel fuerat i. eramus vel fucramus eratis vel fueratis
erant vel fuerant

Tenses. Conj. 1. I 2. Thou 3. He 1. We 2. Ye 3. They Signs shall or will shall
or wilt shall or will etc. Serve- keep Future Tense. 1. abo abis abit abimus
abitis abunt Detin-detain 2. ebo ebis ebit ebimus ebitis ebunt Vert-turn 3. am
es et emus etis ent Vest-cloth 4. iam ies iet iemus ietis ient Imperative Mood
Signs Let Let let Present Tense. 1. a ato et ato emus ate atote ent anto 2. e
eto eat eto eamus ete etote eant ento 3. e to at to amus te itote ant iunto 4.
i ito iat ito iamus ite itote iant iunto Potential Mood. Signs may or can may
or can may or can etc. Present Tense. 1. em es et emus etis ent 2. eam eas
eat eamus eatis eant 3. am as at amus atis ant 4. iam ias iat iamus iatis iant
Sign might would should ought or could Preterimperfect Tense. 1. arem ares
aret aremus aretis arent 2. e^rem e^res e^ret e^remus e^retis e^rent 3. rem res
ret eremus eretis erent 4. irem ires iret iremus iretis irent

Persons 1. I 2. Thou 3. He 1. We 2. Ye 3. They shall or will be shall or wilt
be shall or will be The Passive Voice. abor aberis abere abitur abimur abimini
abuntur ebor eberis ebere ebitur ebimur ebimini ebuntur ar eris ere etur emur
emini entur iar ieris iere ietur iemur iemini ientur be thou let him be, be he
be we or let us be be ye be they or let them be are ator etur ator emur amini
aminor entur antor ere etor eatur etor eamur emini eminor eantur entor re tor
atur tor amur imini iminor antur untor ire itor iatur itor iamur imini iminor
iantur iuntor may or can be may or can be may or can be etc. er eris ere
etur emur emini entur ear earis ear eatur eamur eamini eantur ar aris are atur
amur amini antur iar iaris iare iatur iamur iamini antur might would should
ought or could be arer areris arere aretur aremur aremini arentur erer ereris
erere eretur eremur eremini erentur rer ereris erere eretur eremur eremini
erentur irer ireris irere iretur iremur iremini irentur

Tenses. Conj. 1. I 2. Thou 3. He 1. We 2. Ye 3. They Signs might would should
ought or could have Preterperfect Tense. 1. averim averis averit averimus
averitis averint 2. uerim ueris uerit uerimus ueritis uerint 3. erim eris erit
erimus eritis erint 4. iverim iveris iverit iverimus iveritis iverint Signs
might would should ought or could had Preterplup. Tense. 1. avissem avisses
avisset avissemus avissetis avissent 2. uissem uisses uisset uissemus uissetis
uissent 3. issem isses isset issemus issetis issent 4. ivissem ivisses ivisset
ivissemus ivissetis ivissent Signs may or can hereafter may or can
hereafter Future Tense. 1. avero averis averit averimus averitis averint 2.
uero ueris uerit uerimus ueritis uerint 3. ero eris erit erimus eritis erint 4.
ivero iveris iverit iverimus iveritis iverint

Infinitive

Present
are to
e^re ere ire
Gerunds,
1 andi, of. ando, in. andum, to.
2 3 endi, of. endo, in. endum, to.
4 iendi, of. iendo, in. iendum, to.

Preterper. and Preterplup.
avisse To have or had.
uisse isse ivisse
Supines,
1. atum. 2. 3. um. 4. itum.
Supines
1. atu 2. 3. u. 4. itu.
Future
aturum esse To here after

urum urum iturum
Participles,
1. ans. ing.
2. 3. ens, 4. iens, 1 aturus To or about to.
2 3 urus 4 iturus
1. I 2. Thou 3. He 1. We 2. Ye 3. They might would should ought or could have
been. atus us us itus
sim sis sit simus sitis sint vel vel vel vel vel vel fuerim fueris fuerit
fuerimus fueritis fuerint sim sis vel sit vel simus sitis sint fuerim fueris
fuerit fuerimus fueritis fuerint might would should ought or could had been
atus us us itus
essem esses esset essemus essetis essent vel vel vel i. vel vel vel fuissem
fuisses fuisset fuissemus fuissetes fuissent may or can be hereafter may or
can be hereafter atus us us itus
ero eris erit erimus eritis erunt vel vel vel i. vel vel vel fuero fueris
fuerit fuerimus fueritis fuerint

Mood.

Present.
ari To be.
eri i iri
Preterperf.
atum esse To have or had been
vel fuisse
2 3 um itum
Participle of the Preter.
atus 2 3 us d, t, n.
itus
Future Tense,
atum iri vel andum esse To be hereafter.
um iri vel, endum esse um iri vel endum esse itum iri veliendum esse
Fut. in dus
andus 2 3 endus to be. iendus
Indicative Mood. Sum fui esse futurus, to be. Persons I Thou He We Ye They
Pref. Sum es est sumus estis sunt am, art, is, are Preterimperf. eram eras erat
eramus eratis erant was, wast, were Pref. Fui fuisti fuit fuimus fuistis
fuerunt fuere have been, have been, has been Plusq. perf. fueram fueras fuerat
fueramus fueratis fuerant had been, had been Fut. Ero eris erit erimus eritis
erunt shall or will be, shall or wilt be Imperative Mood. Sum es est sumus
estis sunt am, art, is, are sis as esto sit esto simus sitis este estote sint
sunto be thou be he or let him be be we or let us be be ye be they or let them
be Potential Mood may or can be may or can be, may or can be. sim sis sit
simus sitis sint essem esses esset essemus essetis essent might, would, should,
ought or could be fuerim fueris fuerit fuerimus fueritis fuerint have been
fuissem fuisses fuisset fuissemus fuissetis fuissent had been fuero fueris
fuerit fuerimus fueritis fuerint may or can be hereafter Infinitive Mood. Pres.
and Preterp. esse to be Preterp. and Preterplup. fuisse to have or had been
Fut. fore vel futurum esse to be hereafter

Of certain Irregular Verbs.
Praes. Praeterperfect Tense Infinitive Mood. Participle. Possum potui posse
potens. to may or can: or to be able Volo volui velle volens: to be willing
Nolo nolui nolle no^ens: to be unwilling. Malo malui malle malens: to be more
willing. Fero tuli far latum: to bear or suffer. Feror latus sum fieri latus:
to be Born or suffered. Fio sactus sum fieri factus: to be made or done.

Eo, is, ivi, ire, eundi, eundo, eundu, itu, itu, iens, iturus to go, likewise
Queo.

Indicative Mood.

I Thou He We Ye They. Praes. Possum potes potest possumus potestis possunt may
or can. Imperf. Poteram, as Eram might or could Future Potero, as Ero may or
can.

Potential Mood.

Praes. Possim possis possit possimus possitis possint may or can. So Velim,
nolim, matim. Imperf. Possem posses posset possemus possetis possent might or
could. So Vollem, nollem, mallem.

Infinitive Mood, -- Posse to be able.

Indicative Mood.

Praes.
Volo vis vult. volumus vultis volunt am willing. Nolo nonvis nonvult. nolumus
nonvultis nolunt am unwilling. Malo mavis mavult malumus mavultis malunt had
rather or am more willing.
Fut. Vol -- am es et e^^s etis ent shall be willing. Nol -- am shall be
unwilling. Mal -- am shall be more willing.

Imperative Mood.

Noli do not Nolito thou, nolite do not nolitote ye,
Infinitive Mood. Velle to be willing. Nolle to be unwilling. Malle to be more
willing.

These Verbs in all other Tenses of all Moods are varied like Verbs of the
Second Conjugation.

Indicative Mood.

Pres.
I Thou He We Ye They Fero fers fert. ferimus feritis ferunt, bear or suffer
Feror ferris far fertur. ferimur ferimini feruntur are bornb or suffered.

Imperat.

Pres. bear or let him Let us Bear or let them suffer bear or bear of suffer
bear or thou suffer. suffer. ye suffer, Fer ferat Feramus fer^e ferant ferto
ferto ferrote. ferunto. be thou Let him Be we Be ye Let them born or be born
born or born or be born suffered or suffered suffered suffered or suffered
Far feratur Feramur ferimini ferantur fertor fertor feriminor. feruntor.

Potential.

might would should, etc.

Imperf. Ferrem ferres ferret ferremus ferretis ferrent bear or suffer Ferrer
ferreris ferrere ferretur. ferremur ferremini ferrentur be born or suffered.

Infinitive.

Pres. Far to bear or suffer. Ferri to be born or suffered.

These Verbs in all other Moods and Tenses are of the third Conjugation, and so
is Edo throughout, saving that Es, est, estis, esto, este, estote. Essem,
esses, esset, essemus, essemus, essemus, essetis, essent, and esse are
sometimes used for the same Tenses and Persons of Edo. Fio is a Neuter Passive
of the fourth Conjugation exactly, except Fierem, fieres, fieret, fieremus,
fieretis, ficrent and Fieri.

Pres. Eo is it. imus itis eunt go Imperf. Ibam ibas ibat. ibamus ibatis ibant
Future. Ibo ibis ibit. ibimus ibitis ibunt

Ambio to go about makes ambiam in the future.

go thou, let him go. let us go ye. let them I eat go. ite go. ito ito eamus
itote eant eunto.

The Gerunds and oblique cases of the Partic. of the Present Tense use eun for
ien as Per -- iens per -- euntis eunti eundo etc, Except ambiens.

Of the Preterperfect Tense and Supine of Verbs of the four Conjugations.
1. Verbs of the first Conjugation make their Preterperfect Tense in avi and
Supine in atum.

Except.
Present. Pret. Supine to lotum Wash. la -- vo lavatum Ju -- vo jutum help.
Crep -- o ui crepitum crack Cub -- o cubitnm ly down Dom -- o domitum tame Mic
-- o shine Nec -- o nectum kill Fric -- o frictu rub Son -- o sonitum sound Ton
-- o tonitu thunder Vet -- o vetitu forbid Sec -- o sectum cut Dinic -- o ui
avi discrepitu fight Discrep -- o discerepatu differ Increp -- o increpitu
chide increpatu caen -- o avi atus sum cenatu sup Jur -- o juratu swear Pot --
o potum drink Titub -- o titubatu stumble Do dedi datum give Sto fteti statum
stand- A -- sto a -- stiti astitum stand by

II. Verbes of the second conjugation make the Pret. in ui and the Supine in
itu.

Pres. Pret. Supine To Friend -- eo i. frenum gnash Sed -- eo sessum sit Strid
-- eo Vid -- eo visum see Cens -- eo ui. censum think Doc -- eo doctum teach
Lat -- eo latitum ly hid Mise -- eo mistum mixtum mingle Sorb -- eo sorptum sup
Ten -- eo tentum hold Torr -- eo tostum roast Abol -- eo evi abolitu abolish
Adol -- eo aduliu grow Exol -- eo exoleru decay Inol -- eo inolitum grow bigger
Obsol -- eo obsoletu grow out of use Ci -- eo citum stir up Del -- eo deletum
blot out Fl -- eo fletum weep N -- eo netum spin Pl -- eo pletum fill Vi -- eo
vietum bind Jub -- eo jussi jussum command Al -- geo si be cold Ar -- deo arsum
burn Full -- geo glister Hae -- reo baesum stick to Indul -- geo indultu cocker
Man -- eo mansum tarry Mul -- ceo mulsum assuage Mul -- geo muletu milk Ri --
deo ris^pi laugh Sua -- deo suasum persuade Ter -- geo tersum wipe Tor -- queo
torsum wrest Tur -- geo swell Vr -- geo enforce Ca -- veo vi. cautu be war Fa
-- veo fautu favor Fer -- veo be hot Fo -- veo fotu cherish Mo -- veo motu move
Pa -- veo fear Au -- geo xi. auctum increase Fri -- geo be cold Lu -- ceo shine
Lugeo luctum lament Spondeo spospondi sponsum betroth Tondco totondi tonsum
clip Mordeo momordi morsum bite Pendeo pependi pensum hang Placeo placui
placitus please Careo carui cassus sum want Prandeo prandi pransus sum dine
Mereor merui meritus sum deserve Audeo - ausus sum be bold Gaudeo - gavisus
rejoice

III. Verbs of the third Conjugation are here ennumerated with their
Preterperf. Tenses and Supines.

Pres. Pret. Supine To Bib -- o i bibitum drink Lamb -- o lick Scab -- o
scratch Ic -- o ictum smite Abscond -- o absconditu hide Accend -- o accensum
kindle Cud -- o cusum forge Defend -- o defensu defend Ed -- o esum eat Friend
-- o fressum gnash Mand -- o mansum eat Pand -- o passum pansum set open
Prebend -- o prebensu catch Occid -- o occasum die Occd -- o occisum to kill
Rud -- o to bray scand -- o scansum climb Sid -- o sink down strid -- o gnash
Degrees -- o live Leg -- o lectum read Psall -- o sing Refell -- o refute Sall -- o
salsum salt Em -- o emptum buy succurr -- o succursu help Incess -- o invade
verr -- o versum brush Vet -- o versum turn Lav -- o lautum wash Solv -- o
solutum loose Volv -- o volutum roll Glu -- bo psi gluptu flea Nu -- bo nuptum
be married Scri -- bo scriptum write Com -- o comptum kemb Them -- o demptu
takeaway Prom -- o promptu draw Sum -- o psisumptum take Tem -- no temptu
despise Car -- po carptum crop Re -- po reptum crawl Scal -- po scalptu scratch
Scul -- po sculptu grave Ser -- po serptum creep Clau -- do si clausum shut
Divi -- do divisum divide Lae -- do laesum hurt Lu -- do lusum play Plau -- do
plausum clap hands Ra -- do rasum shave To -- do rosum gnaw True -- do trusum
thrust Va -- do vasum go Mer -- go mersum drown Spar -- go sparsum sprinkle Vi
-- so visum visit Mi -- ito missum send Ce -- do ssi cessum give place Pre --
mo pressum press Ge -- to gestum carry V -- to ustum burn Quatio quassum shake
Percutio percussum smite Compesc -- o refrain Dispesc -- o drive Beasts from
pasture Al -- o altum alitum nourish Col -- o cultum till Consul -- o consultu
counsel Excel -- o excelsu excel Praecell -- o praeceisu surpass Mal -- o
haverather Mol -- o molitum grind Nol -- o be unwilling Occul -- o occultu hide
Volo be willing Frem -- o fremitu roar Gem -- o Gemitu groan Trem -- o tremble
Vom -- o vomitu vomit Accin -- o accentu to sing to a Cano Strep -- o strepitum
make a noise Ser -- o sertum layin order Pins -- o pistum bake Stert -- o short
Tex -- o textum weave Desip -- io dote Rap -- io raptum snatch Ac -- uo ui
acutum sharpen Ann -- uo yield unto Arg -- uo argutu reprove Congr -- uo agree
to Dil -- uo dilutum Imb -- uo imbutu season Ingr -- uo invade L -- uo luitum
pay Met -- uo fear Min -- uo minutum diminish Ren -- uo refuse Resp -- uo R --
uo rutum ruitum rush Sp -- uo sputum sspit Stat -- uo statutu appoint Stern --
uo sternutu sneeze S -- uo sutum sow Trib -- uo tributu give Di -- co xi dictum
speak Du -- co ductum lead Au -- go perplex Cin -- go cinctum gird Clang -- o
sound Fi -- go ficum fasten Fin -- go fictum feign Fli -- go flictum beat
frixum Fri -- go parch frictum Jun -- go junctum join Lin -- go linctum lick
Min -- go mictum piss Meio Mun -- go munctum shite Nin -- go snow Pin -- go
pictum paint Plan -- go planctu lament Re -- go rectum govern Rin -- go rictum
grin Su -- go suck Strin -- go strictum bind Stin -- go Stin -- guo stinctum
extinguish Te -- go tectum cover Tin -- go tinctum color Un -- go unctum
anoint Tra -- bo tractum draw Ve -- bo vectum carry Co -- quo coctum boil Fle
-- cto flexum bend Vi -- vo victum live Flu -- o fluxum flow Stru -- o structu
build All -- icio exi allectum allure Dil -- igo dilectum love Intell -- igo
intellectu understand Negl -- igo neglectu neglect Dir -- igo directu direct
Insp -- icio inspectu look into etc. a specio and rego Ab -- do didi abditum
hide Ad -- do additum add Con -- do conditu build Cre -- do creditu believe De
-- do deditum yieldup E -- do editum publish In -- do inditu put in Ob -- do
obditu put agst. Pro -- do proditu betray Red -- do redditu restore Tra -- do
traditu deliver Ven -- do venditu sell No -- sco vi notum know Igno -- sco
ignotu forgive Pa -- sco pastum feed Quie -- sco quietu rest Sci -- sco scitum
determine Sue -- sco suetum accusto Cre -- sco cretum grow Call -- vo bald Cerno
crevi fee Sperno sprevi spretu despise Ster -- no stravi stratum strew Tero
trivi tritum wear Quaero quaesivi quaesitu seek Sero sevi satum plant Sino sivi
situm suffer Arcess -- o ivi arcessa go to call Lacess -- o Lacessit Pet -- o
petitum ask Cup -- io cupitum desire Vinco vici victum overcome Quinisco quexi
nod Fido fijussum trust Findo fidi fisum cleave Fundo fudi fusum pour out
Scindo scidi scissum cut Ago egi actum do Satago sategi satactum perform Perago
peregi Peractum finish Cogo coegi coactu compel Frango fregi fractum break
Pergo perrexi perrectum go forward Surgo surrexi surrectu rise Percello perculi
perculsu strike Recello reculi recuisu pull back Tollo sustuli sublatu take
away Gigno genui genitum beget Pono posui positum put Rumpo rupi ruptum break
Linquo liqui lictum leave Fero tuli latum bear or suffer Plecto plexui plexum
punish Meto messui messum mow Sisto stiti statu make to stand Facio feci factu
do Jacio jeci jactu cast Fodio fodi fossum dig Fugio fugi fugitu fly Capio cepi
capta take

Such as double the Preterperprovoke fect Tense are,

Pref. Pret. Supine To Cado cecidi casum fall Coedo cecidi coesum beat Cano
cecini cantu sing Curro cursum run De Curro cucurri decursu un down Ex -- curro
excursu run out Prae -- curro Praecursu runbefore Disco didici learn Falso
fefelli falsum deceive Pario peperi partu bring forth Pedo pepedi peditu fart
Pello pepuli pulsum drive out Pendo pependi pensum weigh Posco poposci require
Tango tetigi tactum touch Tendo tetendi tensum tentum stretch out Tundo tutundi
tunsum knock

These following have two of used in Composition only. three Preterperfect
Tenses.

Capess -- o i capessitum go to take Facess -- o ivi facessitum go to do Lino
lini livi levi litum besmear Necto nexui nexi nexum knit Pecto pexui pexi pectu
pexum kemb Pango perpegi panxi pactu bargain join Parco peperci parsi spare
Pluo plui pluvi plutum rain Pungo punxi pupugi punctu prick Sapio sapui sapivi
be wise Vello velli vulsi vulsum pluck Verro verri versi versum brush

These Preterperfect Tenses are

Cellui, plevi from cello, pleo Quassi, crevi quatio, cerno Cubui, levi cumbo,
leo Nivi, lexi niveo, lacio Sorpsi, spexi vasi sorbeo, specio vado

IV. Verbs of the fourth Conjugation make their Preterperfect Tense in ivi, and
Supine in itum, Except.

Singultio ivi singultum sob Sepelio sepultum bury Comperio compertu find
Reperio repertum Farcio farci fartum stuff Refercio si refertum stuff Sarcio
sartum patch Fulcio fultum prop Raucio rausum be hoarse Sepio septum hedge
Haurio haustum draw Sentio sensum perceive Aperio ui apertum open Operio
opertum cover Amicio amictum cloth Sal -- io -- ui and ij saltum leap Sancio
sanxi sancivi sanctum sancitu establish Venio veni ventum come Fio factus su be
made or done Veneo venivi venum be sold Eo ivi itum go Queo quivi quitum may or
can

Of Compounds.

The Preterperfect Tense is doubled is these only.

didici from disco Poposci posco

Do Sto Oleo makes didi venundo dedi Applico make ui or avi
Complico Explico Implico Increpo Discrepo


pessurdo circundo satisdo abscondo di 3ae
except stiti olevi except redoleo ui. suboleo


These Verbs in Composition change the first Syllable.

1. Of both Present Tense and Preterperfect Tense in

e i except Ad Damno Habeo post-habeo Per Lacto Salio In Sacro Statuo Inter
Fallo Cado Trans Arceo Laedo Praester Tracto Cano Post Fatiscor Quaero Ob
Partio Caedo Ante Carpo Tango a ab Patro Egeo de Scando Teneo e Spargo Taceo
remaneo ex Pario Maneo permaneo Pro Farcio Sapio Prae Capto Rapio Sub jacto
Super From Placeo Displiceo only. Di dis Cando re Gradior se con Exc. Atlacto

From Pasco compesc -- o ui
dispesc -- o
Pario comperio peri
reperio
Juro dejero only
pejero
mando commendo Halo anbelo Patior perpetior

II. Of the Present Tense, and such as come of that only

i. Exec. Frango Rego pergo Scalpo makes sculpo Calco culco surgo Salto sulto
Sedeo supersedeo Claudo cludo Emo como Quatio cutio Capio depango Lavo luo
jacio oppango Causo cuso circu ago plaudo plodo Pango repango Lacio circumago
Specio perago From Lego Ago satago Colligo Premo dego Deligo cogo Eligo legi
Seligo

Facio -- Its Compounds with satis been male, or a Noun.

Diligo lexi
Negligo Intelligo The rest change not:
So these Supines in Composition change thus.

c tunsum becomes tusum captum ruitum rutum factum saltum sultum jactum sutum
situm raptum datum ditum cantum statum stitum Partum sparsum Congnosco makes
cognitum carptum Agnosco agnitum fartum Adoleo adultum

The Compounds of Edo, make esum -- But comedo both estum and esum.

Irregular Futures in rus.

From To Orior oriturus rise Morior moriturus die Pario pariturus bring forth
Arguo arguiturus argue Eruo eruiturus root up Nosco nosciturus know Nascor
nasciturus be born Fuo futurus be

These want the Preterperfect Tense and Supines.

To Ambigo doubt Aveo desire Cerno see Clueo be counted Fatisco gape Fero
suffer Ferio strike Furio rage Glisco glow Liquor melt Medeor heal Meio piss
Maelreo mourn Polleo be able Reminiscor remember Renideo glister Rigor grin
Tollo lift up Vergo bend Vescor eat

And Passives, whose Actives want the Supines. Also Inceptives in seo and
Meditatives

except Partur -- io itum Esur -- io

Such as want the Supines only, are before set down in their Order, to which add

To Absilio ui leap away Prosit -- io leap forwards Cl -- uo be famous Gestio
desire Incesso invade Prodigo squander

And also all Neuters of the second Conjugation in eo, except

Caleo calitum be warm Doleo dolitum be troubled Lateo latitum lie hid Noceo
nocitum hurt Oleo olitum smell Pareo paritum obey Placeo placitum please Taceo
tacitum be silent Valeo valitum be in health

Verba Deponentia.
1. Conjugationis jmoe.

A To
Abominor Abhor or hate Adminiculor Help or stay Adulor Flatter Adulteror
Commit Adultery Aelitimor Oversee a Church Aemulor Imitate Affor Speak to
Aginor Buy or sell small Wares Altercor Wrangle Alumuor Nourish or foster
Amplexor Embrace Ampullor Speak big words Ancillor Serve Apricor Sit Sunning
Aquor Water Arbitror Think Architector Build Argumentor Dispute Argutor Speak
sharply Ariolor Prophesy or foretell Aristor Glean Aspernor Despise Assentor
Flatter Aucupor Hawk, or go about to Auguror Prophesy Aversor Abhor Aurigor
Drive a Coach Auspicor Begin a matter Auxilior Help or aid
B
Baccbor Play the Debau Bellor War or Fight Bubulcitor Play the Herdsma
C
Cacbinnor Laugh aloud Calumnior Accuse falsely Caprificor Dress wild figtrees
Cavillor Cavil or reason craftily Cauponor Sell for gain Causidicor Plead an
excuse Causor Except against Comessor Feast together Comittor Accompany
Commentor Devise Concionor Preach Conflictor Fight Conor Endeavor per -- ceive
Conspicor Behold or Contemplor Consider Contemptor Despise often Contor Sound
to the bottom Convitior Rail at Cornicor Chat like a Daw Criminor Accuse
Cunctor Delay
D
Delector Take delight Despicor Despise Digladior Fight withSwords Dignor
Vouchsafe Dominor Rule
E
Essor Speak out Emacror Make or wax lean Epulor Feast Execror Curse Exequior
Execute Funerals
F
Fabricor Invent or Build Fabulor Talk Foeneror Borrow, Acc. to lend on usury,
Dat. Famulor Serve Fari Speak Fatuor Play the Fool Ferior Keep Holyday to float
Fluctuor Rise in Waves: Focillor Nourish or Comfort Fornicor Commit fornicatio
Frumentor Provide Corn Frustror Deceive Furor Steal
G
Gesticulor Leap for joy Glorior Boast Groecor Be merry as a Greek Grassor Rob
or flay Gratificor Gratify Grator Give thanks to Gratulor Rejoice in ones
behalf
H
Hallucinor Mistake or err Helluor Eat much or devour Hortor Exhort Hospitor
Lodge or entertain
I
Jaculor Shoot darts Imaginor Imagine Imitor Imitate Inficior Deny Inimicor
Hate or be an Enemy Injurior Wrong Insidior Ly in wait Interpretor Expound
Jocor Jest
Joculor Jest Jurgor Chide Juvenor Play youthful pranxs
L
Lacrymor Shed tears or weep Loetificor Rejoice Loetor Rejoice Lamentor Bewail
Latrocinor Rob Lenocinor Practice Bawdry: or entice or assure Libidinor Lecher
it Licitor Cheapen or set to sale Limitor Bound Litor Sacrifice Loquitor Speak
much or often Lucror Gain Luctitor Struggle Luctor Wrestle Ludificor Mock
Lurcor Eat ravenously Lustor Haunt Bawdy houses Luxurior Riot
M
Machinor Devise or Plot Moecbor Whore Manticulor Steal craftily Manuor Filch
or Steal Mastupror Frigg Medicor Heal or cure Meditor Muse or meditate Mentior
Ly Mercor Buy Meretricor Play the Harlot Meridior Sleep at Noon Metor Set
bounds Minitor Threaten
Minor Miseror Be sorry for Moderor Govern Modificor Measure Modulor Model or
tune Moror Delay Moror Play the Fool Multor Punish Muneror Reward or give gifts
Mutuor Borrow
N
Naviculor Go out on water in a Boat Negotior Exercise Merchadise Nepotor Live
and spend riotously Nictor Wink, twinkle it, flatter Nidulor Make a Nest
Novercor Play the Mother in Law Nubilor Make Cloudy Nugor Trifle or delay
Nundinor Buy or sell Nutricor Nurse or Nourish
O
Oblector Delight or recreate Obsidior Lie in wait for Odoror Smell Ominor
Prophesy or bode Operor Labor or give himself to Opinor Think Opilulor Help
Opsonor Provide victuals Oscitor Gape for want of sleep Osculor Kiss
P
Pabulor Go a foraging, also to feed and serve Cattle Palor Straggle Palpor
Handle gently Pandiculor Stretch Parasitor Cog, lie and flatter Patrocinor
Defend or plead for Peculor Rob a common Peregrinor Wander as a stranger,
(Treasury or to Travel abroad Periclitor Be in danger Periculor Make Trial
Perplexor Twist together Philosopher Study, profess, or (teach philosophy
Pignoror Take a pledge Pigror Be slow or loiter Piscor Fish Pollicitor promise
often Popinor Tipple, or be sottish Populor Destroy, Precor Pray Proedor Take
away plunder Proelior Fight in Battle Proemior Reward or recompense Proestolor
Abide or tarry for Pressor Press hard Pro^^mior Begin a Speech Propitior
Appease or sacrifice To Inform for a 4th
Q
Quadruplor part of the Penalty Queritor plain Quiritor Call for the help of
the Romans
R
Radicor Take root or grow Ratiocinor Reason Recordor Remember Refragor
Gainsay, or resist Reliquor Be in arrears Rimor Search diligently Rixor Brawl
or scold Ructor Belch or spew Ruminor Chew the Cud Rutor Dwell in the Country
Ruspor Scrape Rusticor Lead a Country life
S
Sciscitor Enquire Scitor Ask or demand Scortor Go a whoring Scurror Jest
saucily Sector Follow or Chase Sermocinor Talk or Commune Siliquor Grow in a
husk Solor Comfort Spatior Walk abroad Speculor Spy Stabulor Stand in a Stall
Stipulor Bargain or require performance of a Covenant Stomachor Stomach at
Suavior Kiss sweet Subsidior Help, if need be Suffragor Vote for to favor
Suppetior Aid or help Suspicor Conjecture or suspect Sycophantor Forge false
Accusations
T
Tergiversor Turn ones back Testificor Bear witness Testor Witness Tricor
Trifle or dally Trutinor Weigh or examine Tumultuor Storm Tutor Defend
V
Vador Take security, or appoint a day of appearance Vagor Wander Varicor Go
stradling Vaticinor Prophesy Velificor Hoise Sail Velitor Skirmish Veneror
Worship Venor Hunt Verecundor Be ashamed or abashed Vermiculor Breed Worms
Versor Be with often, or conversant Viaticor Provide necessaries for a Journey
Villicor Busy about Husbandry Visceror distribute raw meat Vitulor Play the
Calf Vociferor cry aloud Vsitor Dive or duck Vsitor use often Vulpinor Play the
Fox
II. Conjugationis secundae
Censeor Enroll, reckon or account Fateor Confess Liceor set the price higher
Medeor Heal or cure Mereor Deserve Misereor Take pity on Polliceor Promise Reor
Suppose Tueor Defend Vereor Reverence, doubt, fear or dread
III. Conjugationis Tertiae.
Aedituor Over-see a Church Adipiscor Get, gain or obtain Ampleotor Embrace
Avertor Abhor Calzor Disappoint Comminiscor Invent contain Complector
Comprehend or Expergiscor Awake Fruor Enjoy Fungor Exercise a Duty or Gradior
Go by steps Office Irascor Be angry Labascor Fail, decay or faint Labor Slide,
slip or fall Liquor Dissolve or drop Loquor Speak Morior Die Nanciscor Get or
obtain Nascor Be born, grow, spring, breed, be engendered or to rise Nitor
Endeavor or strive Obliviscor Forget Pacisoor Bargain Pascor Feed Patior
Suffer Proficiscor Go forward Queror Complain Redipiscor Recover or get again
Reminiscor Remember Ringor Grin, fret or chafe Sequor Follow Tuor Behold Vescor
Eat or feed on Vlciscor Be revenged Vtor use
IV. Conjugationis Quartae.
Assentior Accord, consent or agree to Crinior Have a bush of hair Experior Try
Largior Give liberally Mentior Ly Metior Measure, set out, esteem, judge
consider Molior Move, endeavor, attempt, labor, build Operior Look or stay for
Ordior Begin Orior Arise Partior Divide Potior Obtain or enjoy Sortior Cast
lots
I Thou He We Ye They Praes Aio ais ait aiunt Imperf. Aie bam bas bat bamus
batis bant Praes. Inquam is it imus iunt Imperf. inquiebat inquiebant Perf.
inquisti Fut. inquies inquiet Imperat. inque ito Aus-im Fax -- o
is it sint Salv -- e eto
Av -- e
et etoie Salve -- bo bis bit Infin. salvere Quaeso Quaesumus

Apage apagite. Cedo Explicit Infit. ovac ovans. Pres. or a for. Imperat. sci
fi are not used.

An Adverb shows the Circumstances of signification in other words; as How?
When? Where? Whither? Whence? How long? How often? How much? After what manner?
Whether or no? Why? and other like circumstances; and ends commonly in o, e,
um, or ter in Latin; In English for the most part in ly. Others are best known
by use, and so are Conjunctions, which differ in use not from Adverbs, only
they are joined to a Subjunctive Mood. An Interjection is a word of Passion, as
^eu! alas! voWo!

Of a Preposition out of Westminster Introduction.
A Preposition is either set before Cases to govern them, or those and other
words to compound them; they govern

1. An Acc. Case these thirty.

1. Ad, to, at, about, toward, into, according to, even to, as to before, by,
near to; in, until, against, on upon, for, amongst; besides, with, after.

2. Adversus - sum: against, to, toward, over against, before, according to.

3. Ante; before, to.

4. Apud, at, among, before, by or near to, within, under.

5. Circa, about, round about, about, the time of, by, near to, concerning, in,
against.

6. Circiter, about, almost, nigh to.

7. Circum, about, to.

8. Cis, citra, on this side, within, short of, before. Also Citra, without,
besides.

9. Contra, against, over against, to the face of.

10. Erga, toward, against.

11. Extra, without, forth, out of, besides.

12. Infra, beneath, under.

13. Inter, between, amongst, in, into at, of.

14. Intra, within, in, short of, as far as, amongst.

15. Juxta, nigh to, next after, together, with or by, as well as.

16. Ob, for, against, before.

17. Penes, in, in my power, possession.

18. Per, by, through, over, about, for, because of, in, at, in the time of,
for the sake of, as to, among, between, before, under, with.

19. Pone, behind, after.

20. Post, after, since, from, behind.

21. Proeter, besides, above, by, beyond, without, against, before, near to.

22. Prope, nigh, hard by.

23. Propier, for, because of, near to, nigh.

24. Secundum, according to, nigh to, next to, next after, about, concerning,
for, in.

25. Secus, near to, by.

26. Supra, above, over, beyond, besides, upon, morethan.

27. Trans, beyond, over, on the other side.

28. Versus, toward, by.

29. Vltra, beyond, above, more, besides.

30. Vsque, up to, well nigh, until, besides.

II, An Ablative Case, these Ten.

1. A, ab, abs, by, after, at, from, of, out of, for, against, on, over,
through, with.

2. Absque, without, but for.

3. Coram, before, in presence of.

4. Cum, with, amongst, by, in, at.

5. De, of, concerning, from, for, on, upon, as to, by, in, at, after.

6. E, ex, of, out of, from, amongst, for, according to, by, on, above, after,
in, with.

7. Palam, in sight of, before.

8. Proe before, for, because of, in comparison of, in.

9. Pro, for, instead of, in defense of, as, as it were, at, in, upon according
to, as to.

10. Tenus, to, up to, down to, nigh to, as to, only in, as far as, within
compass of. Tenus serves also a Genesis Case Plural.

III. Both an Accusative and Ablative, these six.

1. Clam unknown to.

2. Procul, far of, far from, without.

3. Subter, under, in.

4. In 1. Acc. Into, to. before, until, toward, upon, against, about, at, near
to. 2. Abl. In, by, concerning, with, at. 3. Acc. and sometimes an Abl. after,
for, on, upon, among.

5. Sub. 1. Acc. 1. With a Noun of time; about, a little before, toward. 2.
With a Noun of Action, after or upon. 3. After a Verb of motion; to, unto,
under. 2. A bl. Under, in, at, by, hard by, forthwith, or upon, in the time of.

6 Super. 1. Acc. Beyond, above, over and above, besides, amidst, at. set over
or belonging to [in Office.] 2. Abl. Concerning, for about, or at. Acc. or Abl.
upon,

These are used in Composition only 3 am an about, con together. Di, dis, se
apart. Re, again or against, un, ve, without.

Some in Composition change 2, lose 3, or take a Letter for the better sound.
p. 222

Aos before f, is made au, as aufero.

In before b, p, change n into im.
con Ad- Ob- Sub In before c, f, g, l, n, p, r, s, t. Change their last letter
into the Consonant of the word following, as. Accurro Opprimo Suggero Illudo
Corrigo Pellucco Intelligo Effero
c, f, g, p. c, f, g, m, p. l, m, r. l, sometimes.
Con Per Inter Ex before f. Ad sometimes before a Consonant lose a Letter; as,
Aperio Omitto Trajicio Divello

Ob Traens Dis, etc. Con, always before a Vowel, as coemo.


Construction or Syntax has two general Parts, Agreement and Government.
IN Latin Speech there are 3 Agreements or Concords between the

I. Nominative Case and the Verb.

II. Substantive and the Adjective.

III. Antecedent and the Relative.

I. The Nominative Case has a, an, or the, (and sometimes no sign before it,
but (most commonly) comes before the Verb with which it agrees in Number and
Person, as, P raceptor legit, vos negligitis. Frater studet. P ater dormit.

Yet between the Nom case and the Verb may stand
1. A Genitive Case or a Gerund in di; as Facundia Ciceronis celebratur.
Studium discendi me tenet. 2. An Adjective or Participle; also Conjunctive or
Relative Clauses; as, vir doctus studiis addictus, si gloriam appctat, and
sceleratos oderit, merito amatur.
Sometimes the Nominative Case is set after the Verb, if.
1. A question be asked, as Amas tu? Venitne Rex? 2. The Verb be of the
Imperative Mood; as Amito ille. Legate petrus. Taceant coeteri. 3. The Signs It
or There, nor or neither, come before the English of the Verb; as Est liber
mcus, venit quidam.
II. A Noun Adjective cannot stand by it self, but must have a Substantive
[expressed or understood] with which it agrees in Number, Case and Gender; as
Amicus certus magni nomin^s cum ingenti Satellitio bue venit. Homo armatus.
Rara avis. Ager colendus. Meus berus.

III. The Relative rehearses another word going before, (called the
Antecedent) with which it agrees in Gender, Number and Preson; and is always
placed first in the sentence; such are which whom, what, whose, who and that
put for which

This Relative must be
1. The Nominative Case to the Verb when there comes no other between it and
the Verb; as vir sapit, qui tacer. Qui nocent, docent. 2. Such Case as the
Noun, Verb. Participle or Adverb, which after, or the Preposition next before
it do govern, when the Nominative Case comes between it and the Verb; as Hic
est, quem tu quoeris, Ancilla est, quam accersisti. En marcum, cui studeo,
cujus causa boec scribo. Hi sant libri, quibus utor. Quod statui, saciam.
Illam, quem tu colis, amo, prae quo ceteri sordent.
N. B. The Substantive is often understood, and then the Adjective supplies its
place, and may be the Nominative Case to the Verb, or Substantive to another
Adjective, or governed of another word in the sentence; and if Things be joined
with it, or understood, it shall be put in the Neuter Gender, and may govern a
Genitive case; as Omnes mortales sunt miseri. Semperavar us eget. Minimum hinc
acceler lucri. P auca inveniuntur his similia. Quantum babes nummorum tantum
and fidei.

To find the Nominative Case to the Verb. Substantive to the Adjective or
Antecedent to the Relative, you must ask the Question Who or What, and the word
that answers, shall be the Nominative Case Substantive or Antecedent.

The Adjective [in English] stands before the Substantive; The Substantive
follows the Adjective.

All casual words are governed of the word that goes next before them [in plain
sense] according to the sign; (by which the Case is known) or of some
Preposition. Except they have which, who, whom, what, whose, and that for which
joined with them, for then they are governed of the word following.

To confirm this general Rule, take these following; Any Substantive is
governed of another of the same Case going next before by Apposition, if both
belong to one thing; as Tullius Orator. Naso P oeta. Domirus Deus Creator
Mundi, novi Simonem virum egregium, patrem tuum, Lydiae fratrem.

The Nominative Case is governed of the Verb when 1. It is an Adjective, which
agrees with the Nominative Case before the Verb, in Number, Case and Gender; as
Loquor frequens Taceo multus. Scribo rarissimus. 2. It follows. 1. Verbs
Substantives. Sum forem, fio, existo; as, Fama est malum. Deus est summum
Bonum. 2. Certain Passives (especially of calling: as, Dicor, vocor Salutor,
appellor, babeor, existimor, videor, nuncupor, etc. as Croesus vocatur dives.
Alexander appellatur magnus.

2. The Genitive Case is known by the token of after a Noun [expressed or
understood] and is governed of

1. A Substantive betokening another thing going next before; as Facundia
Ciceronis. Amator studiorum. Dogma Platonis. Amor nummi. Laudis cupido. 2.
Adjectives. 1. Signifying desire, knowledge, remembrance, ignorance, forgettirg,
care, fear, and such like passions of the mind; as, Cupidus auri. P eritus
belli. Ignarus omnium. Dubious mentis. Memor praeteriti. Immemor sui. Metuens
tui. 2. Ending in ax, and derived of Verbs; as, Aulax animi. Protositi tenax.
Pecuniarum petax. 3. Having after them the English of or among, whether
Partitives, Interrogatives, Nouns of Number, Comparatives, or Superlatives; as
Aliquis nostrum Quis fratrum? Quatnor judicum. Sapientum octavus. Manuum
sortior. Hominum nequissmus. Romanorum ultimus. 4. Made of Participles; as,
Alieni appetens, sui profusus. Cupientissimus tui. Inexpertus belli. Indoctus
piloe.
3. Verbs. 1. Betokening to Esteem or regard; as Fit parvi virtus, permagni
nummus babetur. P lurimi fit pecunia. 2. Of warning, accusing. condemning,
acquitting, and the like, which three last often change it into an Ablative;
as, Furti se accusat vel furto. Monuit me errati Infamia notatur, poena
liberatur. 3. Satago, misereor, miseresco; as Rerum suarum satagit, miscrere
mei Deus. The two last have sometimes also a Dative. 4. Reminiscor, obliviscor,
Recordor, memini, which govern also an Accasative Case; as, Reminiscor
historiae, Oblivisco, carminis, Recordor pueritiam, Obliviscor lectionem,
Meminitui de te. 5. Sum, when it signifies Possession, or belonging to a
thing, as a Property or Duty; as, bac Domus est patris. Regis est benefacere.
Timidi est optare neccm. Except that meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester bumanum
belluinum, and such like are used in the Nominative Case; as, Hic codex est
meus, nostrum est pati. Humanum est irasci. 6. Impersonals, Interest and
refert; as, omnium interest, P arvi refert; except mea, tua, sua, nosira,
vesira, cuja; as mea interest, tua refert, etc. in the Ablative Cafe.
4. Adverbs of Quantity, Time and Place, with Instar; as multum lucri. Tunc
temporis. Vbique locorum. Instar omnium.

3. The Dative Case is known by the token To, before a Noun, and is governed of

1. Adjectives. 1. Signifying profit or disprofit, likeness or unlikeness,
pleasure, submitting or belonging to any thing, and Adverbs derived of them;
as, Vtilis bello. Paci gravis. Idoneus patriae. Aequalis Hectori. Mihi
proprium, utiliter tibi, vivis. 2. In bilis and dus, derived of Verbs, and
signifying pasfively; as, Flebilis, flendus omnibus. Formidabilis formidandus
bosti.

2. Verbs. 1. Having after them [expressed or understood] the tokens to or for
[the use of any one]; as, Tibi babeo. Mihi seritur. 2. Betokening Profit or
Disprofit, Anger and Threatening, Obedience and Resistance, Comparison and
Trust, Commanding and Showing, Promising and Paying, Giving and Restoring; as,
Bonis nocet. Malis prodest. Irascor tibi. Minatur fratri. Sibi servit. Deo
repugnat. Hero solvit, cui promiserat. Mihi librum reddidit, cui mutuo dedi. 3.
Sum with all its Compounds, except Possum; as also Suppetit; as, Hoc tibi
prodest, aliis obest. Sum tibi praesidio, cui suppetit pecunia. Haec res est
mibi voluptati. 4. Compounded with Proe, ad, con, sub, super, inter, ob, ante,
in, post. Satis, been, male; as, Vrbi praesidet, cui beneficit. Convixit nobis,
quibus obstrepit. Pecuniae famam post-posuit. Ingruit sociis, quib us
maledixerat. Adbaeret nemini. Votis tuis satisfaciam. Bello pacem antefero. 5.
Certain Impersonals, viz. Accidit, certum est, libet licet, pater, liquet,
constat, placet, expedit, prodest, etc. as, Tibi licet, Mihi dolet. Patri
accidit. Vobis benefit. 6. Passives [of the Doer] which have oftener an
Ablative with the Preposition a or ab; as, Mihi [a me] laudatur. Tibi [a te]
fama petituar.

4. The Accusative Case follows the Verb, and answers to the Question Whom
or What made by the Verb, and is governed of

1. Adjectives. 1. Signifying high, long. broad or thick, which have sometimes
also an Ablative, seldom a Genitive; as Turris alta centum pedes. Area lata
tres ulnas. Liber crassus tres ^ollices, vel tribus polli ibus. 2. Exosus and
Perosus, signifying actively, for they have a Dative when they signify
Passively; as, Exosus saevitiam. Perosus Deo. Exosus bonis. Pertaesus has an
Accusative or a Genitive; as Pertaesus vitam or vitae.
2. Verbs. 1. Transitives, whether Active, Common or Deponent; as, Avarus nihil
largitur, Nummos miratur, quaerit opes, quas prodigat haeres. 2. Neuters of the
same signification; as Gaudeo gaudiu. Vivo vitam, which have often an Ablative;
as Ito recta via. 3. Actives of Naming, Teaching and Araying, which may have
two Accusative Cases; as, Voco te Petrum. Doces me literas. Posce Deum veniam.
Induit se calceos, quos exuerat. 4. Impersonals, Delectat, Decet, Juvat,
oportet; as, Tedelectat. Nos juvat. Me oportet. Illum decet.


5. The Vocative Case is always governed of some Interjection.

6. The Ablative Case is 1. Sometimes put alone by it self, or Absolute, (when
the word has before it, Whilst, when, if tho, after that, where,) with a
Participle [being or some other] expressed or understood; as, Rege veniente, me
Duce. Hoc audito. Vrbe dedita. p 355. 2. Commonly joined with some Particle or
Preposition, of which it is governed; as also of

1. Verbs. 1. Of any sort when it signifies an Instrument [wherewith] Cause
[Why] or manner [How] a thing is done; as, Ferit eum gladio. Taceo metu. Dolis
me ludit. 2. Of Plenty, Scarceness, Filling, Emptying, Loading or unloading,
etc. as Affluis opibus. Cares virtute. Expleo te fabulis. Oneras me nugis.
Pondere se levat. And the three former may also have a Genitive. Impletur vini.
Indigeo patris. 3. Of Price [namely of buying, selling, prising, valuing, etc.]
which a thing is worth, costs, or valued at; as Emit aureo, vendidit ass.
Denario constitit. Exc. Tanti, quanti, pluris, minoris quantivis, quantiliber,
quanticunque, tantivis, tantidem. Genitives when put alone without
Substantives. 4. Of Comparing or Exceeding; as, Gradibus multis bunc robore
praestat. Dignitate me praeis. 5. Certain Neuters and Deponents; as, Prosequor
afficio, etc. Prosequor te honor. Afficis me dolor. Vescor pane quo delector.
Vestra fruor amicitia, qua loetor. Gaudeo sociis quibus utor.

2. Adjectives, 1. Comparatives and their Adverbs, having than, by, or in,
after them; as, Frigidior glacie. Pede altior. Melle dulcior. Tanto Doctior. 2.
Signifying fullness, emptiness, Plenty or wanting, etc. which govern a Genitive
Case also; as, Spe or spei plenus Dives opium or opibus Vacuus ira or iroe.
Copiis abundans. expers fraudis. corpus inane animoe or anima. 3. Buying and
Selling; as, Ass carus. Vilis aureo. Gemmis venale. 4. Signifying some
Property or Passion of Body or Mind, as sauciue front or frontem. Aeger
pedibus. Crine niger. 5. Dignus, indignus, praeditus, capto, contentus,
extorris, fretus, Natus, Prognatas, Satus, cret^^, creatus, ortus, editus, opus
and usas for need, as Dignus bonore. Captus oculis. Virtute praeditus. Paucis
contentus. Extorris patria. Diis fret^^. Ancillanatus. Mari ortus. Terra
editus. Opus est mibi numais.

8. Gerunds, Supines and Participles govern such cases as the Verbs which they
come of, and are Construed as follows.

1. The Gerund in di do is put after. 1. Substantives and Adjectives which
govern a Genitive Case; as, Studium videndi Romam. Spes vincendi bostes. Ratio
scribendi literas. 2. Prepositions serving to the Abl. case a, ab, de, e, ex,
cum, in, pro, or alone, when it signifies the cause or manner of doing as, Ab
amando. De edendo, in apparando. Coesar dando, sublevando ignoscendo gloriam
adeptus est. 3. Prepositions serving to the Accusative case ad, ob, propter,
inter, aat, as, ad consulenau tibi, Ob redimendum (...) or Absolately with the
Verb est as vigilanlum est. Abcunaam est.

dum
2. Of the Supines. The 1. First in um follows Verbs and Participles of motion,
as, Eo cubitum Spectatum admissi ludos. Veni auditum Poetas. 2. Latter in u
follows certain Adjectives, as, Facile factu. Turpe dictu, Indignum relatu.

9. Names of 1. Common places, as, ad Vrbem, in foro, 2. Great Places: as, 1.
Parts of the World. 2. Kingdoms 3. Countries. 4. Provinces. 5. Iselands, as,
ex, Anglia veni per Galliam in Italiam. are governed of a Preposition.
3. Lesser Places, as Cities, Towns, Streets, Villages, etc. are used without a
Preposition thus.

In a Place At a Place 1. If the Noun be of the first or second Declension, and
the Singular Number, it shall be the Genitive Case, as, Natus Londini. Vixit
Oxonia. Studuit Lutetia. So bumi, domi, militiae, belli, as Domi bellique
clarus. 2. If it be the Plural Number, or the third Declension, it must be the
Dative or Ablative Case, as Athenis docuit. Cartbagine obijt.


To a place always in the Accusative, as Eo Romam. Neapol m profectus est. So
rus and domum; as, Ite domum.

From By A place always in the Ablative; as Cantuaria, Londino, Eboracum itur.
So rure and domo: as abiit domo

10. Nouns of Time, if they answer to the Question. 1. When? are put in the
Ablative Case; as nocte vigilas. Luce Dormis. 2. How long; commonly in the
Accusative, yet sometimes in the Ablative, as, Decennium vixit vel decennio.
Noctes atque dies studuit. Biennium vel biennio languit.

II. The Question and Answer must be of the same Case and Tense, as, Quid agis?
Lego virgilium. Cujus est bic puer? Xantbi. Quem ad caenam vocasti? Petrum.
Except the word which answers be put in annother Case by some other Rule: as,
Quanti constitit? deuario. Cujus est bic Codex? Meus. cujum pecus? Melibai,
furtine accusas an bomicidij? 'utroque.

Some words govern two cases.

1. An Ecce 1. Of showing a Nominative, as, En Priamus. 2. Of upbraiding an
Accusative, as, En habitum,
2. Sum, do, dono, babeo, duco, verto, accipio, puto and such like admit two
Datives [besides an Accusative] as, Do tibi vestem pignori. vertit boc mibi
vitio. Hoc sibi laudi ducit. 3. Poenitet, toedet miseret, miserescit, pudet,
piget, an Accusative of the person and Genitive of the thing, as Senectutis eum
non poenituit. Toedet me vita. Illum pudet negligentiae. Nati te misereat, oro.
Fratrem tui piget.
These Particles, Et, que, quoque, ac, atque, nec neque, tanquam, item, itidem,
cum, tum, ni, nisi, quasi sed, an, aut, ve, vel, seu, sive, quam, praeterquam,
etc. couple like Cases and Moods; as, Rex and Regina beati. Nec tacet, nec
sapit. Except a former rule requires another Case, as, Studui Romoe and
Athenis, Liber meus and statris, quem emi centussi and pluris.

Of Signs of Words.

CASES are known by Signs. Their Signs are of the

1. Nominative a an the before the Verb and many times no Particle at all.
after the Verb

2. Accusative. 3. Genitive.
Of after 1. ANoun, except 1. dignus, in dignus, opus and usus, for need which
govern an Ablative. 2. Of before mine, thine, his, ours, yours, theirs etc.
where 'tls made by meu^, tuus, suus, etc. 2. These Verbs admonish, accuse,
condemn, acquit, or am, which four last often put it in an Ablative, and
Passives in a Dative.

N. B. Of, after a Verb or Participle is made by a Preposition.

4 Dat. 1. To, before a Noun -- Except it follows, 1. Words of motion and
readiness. 2. Verbs of exhorting, provoking, inclining, calling, belonging, as
atinet pertinet spectat and loquor. Where it is made by ad. 2 For 1. Before a
person, [for the use of.] 2. After, good, fit, profitable, lawful, ready, etc.


Abl.

5. Ablative. With. Except it notes together with (cum^ or comes after Verbs of
Comparing Contending, Meeting and being Angry, where it is made by the Dative.
By 1. Before the Instrument [wherewith] manner (how) and words of Time. 2.
Before Name, Birth, Country or a Noun of measure or space. 3. After
Comparatives and Superlatives.
For after Words of Buying and Selling, and before the word of Price, otherwise
it is a Dative. At or on before Time, age, game. So at Table, at Night, at first
fight, at first coming. Also on after nitor vescor. From is usually expressed
by a Preposition, a, ab, abs. Of 1. Denoting a part after an Adjective or Verb,
signifying Passively. 2. After sick, weary, born, descended, worthy, unworthy,
and opus and usus put for need. 3. After Verbs, of filling, emptying, easing,
depriving, ridding, spoiling, unburdening.
Than, after a Comparative, otherwise quam which makes the two Nouns compared
agree in Case.

These Signs and many more, as, against, before, before, after, between, upon,
over, etc. oftentimes belong to the foregoing word, of which the Case is
governed without their Latin, as to admit (of) to wish (for) to wonder at, etc.

The English Infinitive Mood To with a Verb is Latined after 1. Another Verb of
the Infinitive Mood as Cupio discere. 2. A Noun that governs a Genitive Case by
the Gerund in di. 3. Verbs of provoking, inviting, applying, acting, calling,
etc. Also the Person, matter or Instrument, and some Adjectives, as ready,
flow, etc. by a Gerund in dum. 4. A Verb of motion by the first Supine, Gerund
in dum, or Participle in rns. 5. Sum by a Participle in rus to, dus to be. 6.
Certain Adjectives, facilis, dignus, indignus, turpis, foedus, etc. by the
latter Supine to be.

The Participle in ing. 1 Becomes a Substantive when it 1. Admits of a Plural
number by adding s. 2. Has a, an, or the before it, and of after it. 3.
Immediately follows an Adjective agreeing with it.
2. Is rendered after. 1. Verbs of motion by the first Supine in um. 2. A Noun
governing a Genitive Case, by the Gerund in di. 3. Of, from, by, within, by the
Gerund in do. 4. To, because of, between, before, by the Gerund in dum. 5. Am,
art, are, was, were, etc. by its own Verb. 6. Of, for that, For for because, by
quod. 7. Of, or From, for lest that, by ne. 8. A Verb importing to cease, leave
or give over, by an Infinitive Mood, or a Substantive with a Preposition a or
an.
3. Having is rendered by the 1. Participle preter of a Deponent, as having,
spoken, gotten. 2. Preterpluperfect Tense of the Subjunctive Mood with cum. 3.
Ablative Case Absolute with a Participle of the Preter Tense in tus, sus, or
xus, as having heard this. Hoc audito.



N B. That between two Verbs is put away, and the latter made the Infinitive
Mood with an Accusative Case before it, instead of a Nominative in English.
Again sometimes the English Infinitive is Latined by quod or ut, and a
Subjunctive Mood.

The Prosodia, or Rules to know the quantities of Syllables in the Latin
Tongue.
OF the 22 Letters in Latin there are two general sorts.

I. Vowels five a, e, i, o, u,

II. Consonants all the rest which are twofold.

1. Mutes b, c, d, f, g, p, q, t, j and v, Consonants. 2. Semivowels. 1.
Liquids four l, m, n, r. 2. Double Consonants two, x, z.

N. B. S is a Letter of a peculiar validity, and not reducible to any of the
foregoing sorts, and y, k, and z, are Greek Letters, never used in Latin words.

H, is no Letter but only a note of Breathing.

A Letter or Element is the most simple or least part of which a word is
compounded. Of Letters are made Syllables

A Syllable is a perfect and articulate sound, consisting of one Letter or more.

The Quantity of Syllables is twofold

1. Long marked thus a, an, as, pan, etc.

2. Short, marked thus, as l -- g -- re.

Of Syllables are made feet.

A foot is the joining together of two Syllables or more, according to their
quantity and the use of Poets.

Of Feet two sorts are most usual.

1. A Dactyl consisting of three Syllables, the first long, and the two
following short, as di^cr te^ndrt porrgt.

2. A Spondee, consisting of two Syllables, both long, as vi^r -- tus cau --
te^ for -- nax.

A Verse is the Collection of a certain number of Feet, according to proper
Ruler. Of Latin Verses the two most usual sorts are these.

1. A long or Heroic Verse, consisting of six feet, the four first Dactylls or
Spondees, the fifth usually a Dactyl, the sixth always a Spondee.

2. A short or Elegiac Verse, consisting first of two feet either Dactyls or
Spondees, and then a long syllable, next two Dactyls and a long Syllable.

The last Syllable of a Verse is always common.

To know what Syllables are long, and what short take these directions.

1. Observe the Vowel which gives the sound to the syllable, which

1. If it comes before 2 Consonants or x or z in the same word, or one
Consonant ending the former word, and another beginning the next following it is
long by Position. Except that a short Vowel set before one of the Mutes l or r,
immediately following is held common.

2. If it comes before another Vowel, it is always short. Except. 1. When e in
Genitive and Dative case singular of the 5th Declension comes between 2 Vowels.
as facie^i. 2. In these Genit. Cases illius, ipsius, istiu, uniu, nullius,
ullius, neutrius, solius, totius, i. is common, in alterius i is always short,
in alius always long. 3. Fi in fio is always long, except in fierem, fieres,
fieret, etc. fieri. 4. A Vowel before another in Greek words is most commonly
long, as Rhodope^ius, Orpbe^us.


II. Every Dipthong in Latin is long, as aut, baud, ae^rts, eu ge, except a
Vowel immediately follows, as praealtus, praeibis, praeustus.

A Dipthong is a sound made of 2 Vowels joined together in one syllable, of
which there are five, ae, oe, au, ei, eu

III. Derivative and Compound keep the same quantity as the Primitive and
simple ones of which they come, as amo, anator, amabilis, redamo; except
innuba, prenuba of nubo, and dejro, pejro, of juro.

IV. Of Prepositions these are always long, a, e^, de^, se^, except a Vowel
follows next after. Di^ also is long, except in d -- imo and dsertus. And Pro,
except in these following Procella, profugus, protervus, pronepos, propago,
profanus, profueor, profuna^s, proficiscor, profari, propero, profugio,
profecto, Propheta, propino, in all which pro is short. In procurro, profundo,
propello, propulso, propago, as pro is common. All other Prepositions are
short, except Position makes them long.

V. In all Preterperfect tenses and Supines of two syllables, the former is
long, as vi^di, le^gi, lotum -- Except fdi of findo [not fido] bbi, ddi scdi,
stti, tuli, and Supines qutum, stum, tum, ltum. cutum, ratum, datum, satum and
ctum of cieo.

NB. The first syllable of all. double Preterperfect tenses is always short,
such as ppendi, totondi, momordi, ppedi, rutudi, ffelli, ttigi, ddici, ccidi of
cado, and ccidi of caedo to beat.

VI. Adjectives in nus and osus are always long -- Except diutnus, crastnus,
pristnus, perendnus, bornotnus, serotnus, oleagnus. fagnus, cedrnus, carbasnus
-- and others which denote matter whereof a thing is made, as Chrystallnus,
Myrrhnus, Hiacinthnus, Adamantnus;

VII. Of Conjugations the mark letter is to be observed,

1. In the first a is always long, as abam, abas, averam, aveas, abo, arem,
are, etc. 2. In the second e^ is always long, as e^mus, e^bamus, e^bimus, e^
e^mus e^ e^-e Except a vowel follows next after e, as am, as, at, amus, atis,
ant. 3. In the third is short before r, as ram, rem, rim, to, re, excepting
e^runt, e^re in the Preterperfect tense active, and e^ris, e^re in the Fut.
tense passive of the Indicative Mood, if not before r it is always long, as
e^bam, e^bar, e^mur, e^mini. 4. In the fourth i^ is always long, as i^mus,
i^vi, i^veram i^to, i^tem, i^re, except a Vowel immediately follows, as ebam,
am, amus, ar, atur, etc.
VIII. Almost all other syllables except final, are long or short by Use or
Authority -- and so is,

IX. The increasing syllable of the Genit. case which for the most part is,

I. Long in such as increase in

a -- a -- Except acis -- A few Greek nouns and fax ais -- Annibal and Sal anis
a^is -- Jubar, hepar, par, nectar, baccar. asis atis from as -- Anas.
e^ -- e^ -- e^cis -- nex e^dis -- Pes and his Compounds e^gis -- grex. e^tis
-- Aries, abies, paries, bebes, interpres, teges, seges, and all ending in es
short. e^ais
i^ -- i^ -- i^cis from trix -- natrix, varix, fornix, filix, ix -- appendix,
calix, bistrix, coxendix.
i^ris
o -- o -- ocis -- praecox, and names of Countrymen. olis -- Tripos, etc. onis
-- certain foreign and Gr. Nouns which increase by little o oris from os or --
arbor, marmor aequor, ador, robur, memor, and certain gr Nouns increasing by
little o
otis -- compos, impos.
u -- u -- ulis -- pecus uris -- augur, murmur, furfur, cicur, ligur, vultur.
utis --

II. Short in such as increase in

a -- a -- Except abis alis atis from a
-- -- mis ri ris -- Verb and some Greek Nouns besides aer and ether.
-- -- cis from ex dis -- Psophis crenis gis us nis -- Salamis, Trachis,
Delphis. ps ri it is -- Samnis; Quiris vis
o -- o -- obis ogis opis -- Hydrops, Cenops, Cyclops, Cercops, oris from ur us
ovis
u -- u -- ucis -- Pollux ugis ulis upis uris
y -- y -- ybis ycis -- Bombyx ygis yris

Of the Quantity of ending syllables.
These Terminations are long
a 1. Puta, ita, quia. 2. All cases in a besides the Ablative singular of the
first Declension, as musa, penna bona. And Vocatives of Greek Nouns in as, as O
Aenea, O Thoma. 3. Nouns of number in ginta makes the last common.
c 1. Lac, nc, donc, always short. 2. Fac and the Pronoun hic, which with hoc
(if it be not the Ablative case) is always common.
i 1. Mihi, tibi, sibi, ubi, ibi, in which the last is common. 2. Nis, and quas
always short. 3. Datives and Vocatives of Greek Nouns, as Dat. Phyllid,
^allaabreve, Minoid, Vocat. Amaryll, Alex, Daphn.
n 1. Forsan, forsitan, an, tamn, attamn, veruntamn. 2. In with his compounds
exn, subn, den, pron. 3. Nouns in en that increase short in the Genitive case,
as carmn, pecin, tibicn. 4. Words cut off by Apocope, as mn, vian', nemon'. 5.
Greek words in on by o short, in in by. in in by y. also in an from the
Nominative in a not in as.
as 1. Greek Nouns which make the Genit. singular in dos. as Arca, and the
Latin word Ana. 2. Accusatives plural of such as increase in the Genitive
singular, as Heroa, Phyllidas.
es 1. Nouns of the third Declension which increase short in the Genesis case sing
as mils segs, divs. Except arie^s, abie^. pare^, Ceres and pe^s with his
compounds. 2. Es the second person of sum with his Compounds, as pots, ads,
abs, and the Preposition pen still short. 3. Neuters of the singular, and
Nominatives and Vocatives plural of Greek Nouns.
os 1. Compo, impo, and os ossis, for os oris is long. 2. Greek words written
by short o as delo, logos, etc.

Words are common that end in
o 1. Datives and Ablatives singular of the 2d. Declension, as domino, bono,
magistro which are always long. 2. Adverbs derived of Adjectives in o, as
tanto, quanto, liquido, falso, primo etc. Except sedulo, mutuo, crebro, fero,
common. Cito, moao, and quomodo, always short. Ambo, duo, ego and homo seldom
long. 3. Words of one Syllable in o always long, as do, sto, and ergo put for
causa. 4. All Greek words by o still long, as Sappho, Dido.
b d t.
These Termiations are short
e 1. Ablatives singular of the 5th Declension, as fide^, glacie^. die^ with
its Compounds hodie^, quotidie^, pridie^, postridie^: And re^ with its
Compounds quare^, qua de re^, ea re^, etc. and fame^. 2. Second persons
singular of Verbs of the 2 d. Conjugation in the Imp. Mood active, as doce^,
move^, cave^. 3. Adverbs in e derived of Adjectives, as pulchre^ certain,
valde^, also ferme^ fere^: Except ben and may. 4. Monosyllables in e, as me^,
te^, de^, se, Except qu, n, v inclitic's. 5. Greek Nouns written by or long e,
as ethe^, tempe^.
l 1. Ni^l made by contraction of nihi^l and sol. 2. Hebrew words, as Michae^l,
Gabrie^l, Raphae^l, Danie^l.
r 1. Far, lar, nar, ve^r, fur, cur, and sar with his compounds, as compar,
impar. dispar. 2. Greek words, in er or er long, as ae^r, characte^r, aethe^r,
sote^r, Except pater and matr in which er is short.
is 1. Datives and Ablatives plural of the first and second Declension, as
musi^s, domini^s, templi^s, and qui^s for quibus. 2. Nouns increasing long in
the Genitive case, as Samni^s, Samni^tis, Salamis i^ni^s. 3. Monosyllables, as
vi^s li^s, Except s, qus, and bs. 4. Second persons singular in is whose second
persons plural end in i^tis, as audi^s, veli^s, dederi^s, audi^tis, veli^tis,
dederi^tis.
us 1. Nouns increasing long, as tellus uris, virtus utis. 2. The Genit. sing.
Nominat. Accusat. and Vocat. plural of the 4th Declension in us, as bujus
manus, hae manus, has manus, o manus. 3. All Monosyllables as pus, thus, rus,
mus, sus, crus, etc. 4. Greek Nouns ending with the Dipthong ou, as Panthu,
Sapphu, Cliu.

In scanning Verses certain Figures are used. viz.
1. A Vowel ends the former word. and another begins the following, the former
is struck off by Synalaepha. 2. M ends the former and the following begins with
a Vowel or Dipthong, the last syllable of the former word is cut off by
Ecthiipsis. 3. Sometimes 1. Two syllables are drawn into one by Synaeresis, as
aureu. alve^o. 2. One syllable is divided into two by Diaeresis, as voluisse
for volvisse, suetus for suetus.
4. A short syllable in the end of a word, if it begins a foot, may be made
long by Caesura, of which are 4 sorts, viz. when a short syllable is produced
after, 1. The first foot by Triemimeris, as pectoribus inhians. 2. The first
two feet by Penthemimeris, as Omnia vincit amor and nos cedamus amori. 3. The
three first feet called Hepthemimeris, as Ostentans artem pariter arcumque
sonantem. 4. The four first feet termed Eneemimeris, as Ille latus niveum molli
fulius biacintho.

Mr. Walkers Particles in Tables accommodated to the Capacities and Memories of
young Lads.
A, an
1. Signs of Noun Substantives common. 2. Put for 1. One -- unus. 2. Each or
every -- in with singulus, and sometimes without it.
3. Before 1. A Participle in ing 1. After a Verb of moving -- made by the
first Supine, a Participle in rus, or Gerund in dum. 2. Denoting present Action
-- made by a Verb.
2. Words of Time 1. After, once, twice, thrice, etc. Sign of the Ablative Case
with in or w^^^out it. 2. Having a Participle in ing after them -- by a V^^b.

Above
1. In Order, height and place, generally super. supra -- also. 2. More than,
longer than -- plus, amplius, majus, diutius. 3. Excelling, beyond -- ante,
prae, praeter, ultra, and supra. 4. Higher, in place or dignity -- prior,
superior. 5. After 1. Over -- ad, extra, super. 2. From -- superne, desuper.

About
1. Concerning -- de, super, Abl. circa, Accusat. 2. Near upon, more or less,
over or under -- quasi, ad, instar, plus, minus, praeter, propter. 3. Before 1.
Time -- sub, circa, circiter. 2. Place and Persons -- circa, circum.
4. Or ready, a Participle in rus. 5. Belongs to the foregoing word and is
omitted. About to be -- futurum ut.
Abroad 1. Out of doors, foris. 2. Moving out of doors, for as. 3. A f^r off, or
at a distance, peregre. 4. In the open Air, sub dio 5. In open sight, in
publico, in aperto, in propatulo. 6. All abroad, passim, late. 7. Far abroad
long, lateque. 8. Asunder, apart, di, dis, in Composition.

According 1. To, ad, de, ex, secundum, pro. 2. As, prout, sicut, proinde ut.

Accordingly, juxta, pariter, perinde.

After 1. Before 1. A Nominat. case, postquam, posteaquam, ubicum, or ur. 2. An
oblique case, a, ab, ex, or post.
2. After 1. A Noun of time, post the Adverb, and quam if a Verb follow it. 2.
A Verb belongs to it, and is omitted.
3. Signifying 1. According to, de, ad, and in Acc. also a sign of the Abl,
case of the manner. 2. Nearness or degree, order, or succession, juxta,
proxime, secundum, sub. 3. Afterward, postea, exinde.


Again 1. Once more, iterum, denuo, rursus, ab integro. 2. On the other hand,
e, contra, invicem, vicissim. 3. Hereafter post, posthac, or postea. 4. Even,
etiam, vel. 5. After Verbs, or back again, retro, or re in Composition.

Again and again, iterum atque iterum, etiam atque etiam.

To and again, ultro, citroque. As big again, dxplo major, etc.

Against 1. Before 1. A Noun of time, in Accusat. 2. A Verb with its Nom. case.
dum.
2. After. 1. A Verb of motion. ad, or in Acc. 2. Mind, thought, will, law,
custom, right, just, good, etc. praoeter.
3. Signifying 1. Damage, or opposition, also cross or contrary, adversus,
adversum, in, contra. 2. Defense or Preservation, a, ad, adversus, contra.

Over against, e regicne, ex adverso. To be against, adversor, repugno.

All 1. Whole, totus, integer, universus. 2. Every one, singulus, quisque. 3,
Only, solus, unus. 4. As much as, so much as, how much soever, whatsoever,
quantumcunque, quod, quicquid, quantum, or quam for quantum 5. Otherwise,
omnis, cunctus, universus.

No or none at all, nullus, omnino. Not at all, Non omninoy nequaquam, nullo
modo. Nothing at all, nibil omnino, nibil prorsus, nihil quicquam. Never at
all, omnino nunquam. No where at all omnino nusquam.

Along 1. With a man or a thing, una. 2. Otherwise it 1. Is made by per or an
Abl. case. 2. Belongs to the foregoing word.

As 1. Before a Verb or Participle [in ing] with a passive sign made by 1. A
Verb with dum cum ubi or ut. 2. A Preposition, inter, super, and in an Ablative.
2. For 1. Which, quod, id, quod, qui, quoe, quod. 2. In this regard or
respect, ut, quia. 3. Like as, even as, ut, sicut, velut, quomodo, quemadmodum.
4. According as ut, uti, sicut, ita, ut, pro, prout.
3. Answering to 1. Such, or such an one, qualis, qui. 2. So, or as great as,
as much as as little as, etc. quantus, qui, quam or ut with a Superlat.
4. Doubled with an Adjective or Adv. betwixt, and put for 1. Tho, although,
quamvis. 2. Howmuchsoever, quantuscunque. 3. How little soever quantuluscunque.
5. Found 1. In the former part of a sentence, tam, non, minus, aque. 2. In the
latter part, quara.

And 1. Next before not, autem. 2. If another word comes between and and not,
nec, neque. 3. Before, yet, therefore, and if, omitted. 4. Otherwise, ac,
atque, etc, necnon, que, tum.

At 1. Before 1. Time, Price, Manner, Instrument, Cause, Games, commonly sign
of the Ablative case. 2. Common or great places 1. In a place, in with an Abl.
case. 2. Nigh, near, or close by, ad.
3. Proper and small places 1. of the first or second Declension and singular
Number in the Genitive case. 2 Of the third Declension, or the Plural Number in
the Ablat.
4. A Participle in ing to be varied by when or after that, etc. cum with a
Verb, or an Ablative case absolute.
2. To be at or present, intersum. At supper, inter, super coersam. 3. Near,
nigh, close, ad. 4. Belongs to the foregoing word, and is omitted.

Away 1. Get you gone, or fie, apage, apagite. 2. With, i e. abide or endure,
fero, patior. 3. After a Verb is part of it and omitted. 4. Put for hence or
from thence, it belongs to the next word.

Become 1. Its meet, fit, or handsome, decet. 2. Is made, or proves to be, fio,
evado. 3. Before of, fio, futurum est with a Dative, or de with an Ablative
case.

Before 1. For [before that] antequam, priusquam, 2. In time or place, ante. 3.
In presence, coram. 4. In Comparison prae also 1. More than, plusquam. 2.
Rather than, potius quam. 3. Sooner than, citius quam:
5. Written or spoken, supra, ante, prius. 6. Formerly, olim, quondam.

Being 1. The same with 1. Since that, cum, quandoquidem! 2. Presence in a
place, prasentia. 3. To abide, continue, dwell, esse licet, 4. As being, utpote.
2. Before to with a Verb, a Participle in rus. 3. After far from, ut, and a
Subjunctive Mood. 4. Often left out, and the word following sometimes in the 1.
Ablative case absolute. 2. Same case as the word before by Apposition.
5. With a Verb or Participle, many times quod or quia.

Beside 1. By, or nigh to, prope, propter, juxta, secundum. 2. Except, save,
but, Proerer, extra, praeter quam. 3. Moreover, surthermore, porro, praeterea.
4. More than, over and above, praeter, praterea. 5. Beyond, above, ultra,
praeter, trans.

Beyond 1. On the further side, trans, ultra. 2. Above, praeter, supra, extra,
ultra. 3. To go beyond, or overreach, circumvenio, fallo.

Both 1. Spoken of two, ambo, uterque. 2. Answered by and, cum, tum, and, vel,
and quia doubled:

But 1. After 1. The word nothing what, or what else, before 1. A Verb quam. 2.
A Noun or Pronoun, quin or quod, non and nisi.

2. Cannot, non, or quin with a Subjunctive Mood. 3. Words of 1. Time, cum. 2.
Denying, quin. 3. Not doubting, not hearing, not thinking, not questioning,
etc. quin, or ne, non.






2. The same with 1. Only, tantum, solummodo, or modo. 2. Except, nisi,
praeterquam. But for absque.
But that, ni, nisi, quod, or quod nisi. Not but that, non, quod non.

By 1. Before 1. The Instrument [wherewith] or the manner [how] and words of
time, sign of the Ablative case. 2. Words of place, per or an Ablative case. 3.
Participles in ing, sign of the Gerund in do. 4. Self or selves [for alone]
per, solus.
2. The same with 1. Through, by means of, per. So in swearing, Protestaction,
etc. 2. Before, ance, priusquam. 3. About, circiter, sub, ad. 4. Near, or nigh
to, prope, juxta, propter, ad apud. 5. From, a, ab, abs, ex. 6. According to,
de, ex, 7. Concerning, de, ex, 8. Indirect, evil, malus, sinister, inhonestus.
3. After 1. Comparatives, sign of the Ablative case. 2. Passives, a, ab, abs,
or sign of the Dative.
4. Sign of an Adverb [commonly in im] as by stealth, furtim. man by man,
viritim. Day by day, quotidie. etc. 5. Belongs to the foregoing word, and is
omitted.

By reason of, per, ob, propter. By and by, mox, brevi. By the by, obiter.

By reason of that, or because of, propterea quod.

By the way 1. Slightly, obuer, cursim, perfunctorie, leviter, in transun. 2.
In going, in itinere, in via.

Either 1. One of the two, alteruter, utervis, uter, uterlibet. 2. Or, aut,
vel.

Else 1. For 1. Other, alius. 2. Otherwise, alioqui, aliter, alias, ni, ita: 3.
More, further, praeterea, porro, adbuc, amplius. 4. Besides, praeterea with
nemo.
2. After, or answering to 1. Either expressed or understood, aut or vel. 2.
Whether, sive or an.

Even 1. Not odd, par. 2. Smooth, level, plain, aquus, lavis. 3. Equal or as
big, aqualis, par. 4. Namely, nempe, nimirum. 5. Also, etiam, quoque, vel. 6.
Almost, ferme, fere. 7. With from before 1. Time, jam, inde, usque, a or ab. 2.
Place [i. e. as far as from] usquc, a, or ab.
8. An Expletive is omitted.

Ever 1. For 1. Any [before a or an] nunquis, ecquis, ecquisnami 2. At any
time, unquam, ecquando, siquando. 3. Always, continually, semper, oeternum,
jugiter.
2. After 1. As redoubled with an Adjective or Adverb quam, or ut with a
Superlative. 2. Or for before that, cum, nondum, ut ut.


Every 1. All, omnis, universus. 2. Whole, ad, as ad quadrantem. 3. Each one,
quisque, unusquisque. 4. Before words of time 1. Quot with an Ablat. case, as
quotannis, 2. In with an Acc. case plural, as in horas.


Far 1. Before- 1. A Substantive longinquus. 2. An Adjective or Adverb, multo,
long.
2. After a Verb

So sar from that, ita, non, ut; Adeo non -- ut; Tantnm abest, ut or ue in the
former clause, and nedum in the later.

As far as quantum quoad To usque ad, So far that, eo, eo usque. From, ab
usque, Far from, far off from, long procui, multum.

For Without, from Long. Procul.

Far off
For
1. The same with 1. Instead, or in behalf, according to, considering. pro,
gratia, causa. 2. By reason of, for the sake of, propter, obprae, erga. 3. As,
-- in, pro as, in signum for a sign. 4. For all -- per, for a time -- ad, in,
as in diem for a day. 5. On ones side, a, ab, pro. 6. As for, de, quod, ad,
quantum ad.
2. Before 1. A Sentence, as touching, nam, enim, etenim. 2. Diseases (against)
contra, ad, Except naught for 3. A person (for the use of) sign of the Dative
case. 4. Words of price and wagers, sign of the Ablative case. 5. Part, pro,
ex. 6. A Participle in ing denoting 1. Because that, quod, or qui with a Subj.
Mood. 2. To the end that, causa, and a Geruncive with its Genitive case.
7. Profit and honor, e, ex. 8. Distributives, in Accusative case. 9. Purpose
use, end, etc ad and in, Accusat. 10. An Infin. Mood later of two Verbs
omitted. 11. A case with an Infin. Mood after it.
3. After good, fit, profitable, lawful, etc. sign of the Dat. case.
From
1. Before 1. A common place, word of time, age or order, a, ab, abs. 2. A
Participle in ing, a, ab, or ex, and the Gerund in do.
2. After 1. A word of motion, and before a proper name of a small place, sign
of the Ablatcase without a Preposition. 2. Verbs of differing and taking away,
sign of the Dat. or Abl. with a, ab, abs.
3. With, of, or out, de, e, ex. 4. Often belongs to the foregoing word, and is
omitted.
Hence
1. From this place, bine 2. Signifying the original or cause of any thing,
hinc, ex hoc. 3. After words of time, ad, post.
Henceforth, posthac, quod superest, dein, porro.

Henceforwards, deinceps, quod reliquum est.

His, hers, theirs, its before a Substantive 1. With own, suus. 2. Without own,
illius, ipsius, ejus.
Him, her, them, it with self in the 1. Nominative case, ipse, a, um. 2.
Oblique cases, sui, sibi, se.
Hither 1. Toward this place, horsum. 2. To this place, huc. 3. An Adjective,
citerior.
Hitherto 1. To this time, adbuc, usque adbuc. 2. To this place, or bound, thus
far, bactenus.

How
1. In what manner, quomodo. 2 Before 1. Adjectives and Adverbs come of them
quam.
2. Verbs with admiration Much, and a Comparative degree, quo, quanto:
3. By what means, qui, unde. 4. Put with, or for that, quod. 5. For what or
why? quid.
How far
1. In space or place quam long. 2. In going forward, quatenas. 3. In degree
of Exeess or Excellency, quanto.
How is it that? or why? quid? quare? cur? quid est cur? quid fit ut?

Howbeit, at, tamen, attamen, veruntamen, autem.

However, ut ut, utcunque.

If 1. In the former part of a speech, si, in the latter, sin, 2. Put for
whether, numsi.
If not 1. Put for unless, ni, nisi, si non. 2. Having yet after it, si non,
sin minus.

But if not, sin aliter, sin minus.

In
1. With, to, an Accusative case In 2. Without, to, an Ablative case 3. Before
1. Place, apud, ad, in. 2. Time, in, de, per, intra, inter. 3. Words of Price,
sign of the Ablative case.
4. Put for inward, insitus. 5. Belongs to the foregoing word, and is omitted.
In Latin Latin, in Greek Graece, In English Anglice.

It
1. Before 1. A Verb usually omitted, sometimes id or res. 2 Self, ipse.
2. After a Verb or Preposition, id, hoc, istuc.
Last
1. Signifying 1. Time, postremus. 2. Order or Place, novissimus, extremus,
ultimus, supremus, summus, or Adverbs come of them.


2. To last, perenno, duro.

3. A last, modulus, crepida.

At last, jam, tandem, aliquando, demum, denique, ad extremum.

Let
1. To hire, for Rent, Use, etc. loco, eloco. 2: Alone, or to leave off, or
pass by, mitto, or omitto. 3. To give leave, or to suffer, permitto, sino. 4.
To hinder, obsto, impedio. 5. Delay or hinderance, mora, impedimentum. 6.
Before another Verb, sign of the Inperative Mood; but if the Verb be of the
first person, of the Subjunctive.
Lik^
1. An Adjective, par, similis, aequus. 2 A Verb, probo, gaudeo, cordi est. 3.
Importing likelihood or probability, verisimile, probabile. 4. After the
manner, way, or fash^^^ made by some Adverb denoting that manner, way or
fashion.
Like as, in like sort, in like manner, etc. Quemadmodum sicut, pariter ac,
perinde ac, bujusmodi,

Little before.
1. A Substantive. 1. Parvus, exiguus. 2. Sometimes a Diminutive, as agellus
puella, ungula.
2. An Adjective Positive, aliquantum nonnibil. 3. A Comparative, aliquant.
paul. 4. A Verb, paulum, nonnibil, parum, aliquantulum. 5. Time [space or while
understood.] parumper, paulisper.
Less.
1. With a Substantive -- minor. 2. With a Verb, or no, nothing, never, much,
little, etc. minus the Adverb. 3. Part of a Verb, as to make less -- minuo.
extenuo.
Least
1. Referring to a 1. Substantive -- minimus. 2. Verb -- minime.
2. Following at or the -- minimum, or minime.
Lest, [that] -- ne.

Long
1. An Adjective -- longus. 2. To desire greatly -- percupio. expeto. 3.
Following all (with something between) -- totus, omnis. 4. An Adverb -- diu. 5.
Denoting a 1. Fault -- culpa, as sum in culpa, it is long of me. 2. Good cause
-- causa -- non eras in causa, 'twas not long of you.

Man.
1. No Child or Coward -- vif. Any man, quis, aliquis. Every man, quisque,
omnis. Vnus quisque. No man, nemo.
2. No Woman -- mas, vir. 3. A Servant -- Servus, famulus. 4. Often understood
in Latin after certain Adjectives, viz. good, wise, just, etc.
Much
1. With a Substantive -- multus, plurimus. 2. With a Verb -- multum,
magnopere, vehementer. 3. Of value, price, or concernment -- tanti, quanti,
bujus, magni, parmagni, maximi, plurimi. 4. Before Comparatives and
Superlatives -- multo, long. So How much, quo, quanto. So much, hoc eo, tanto.
5. Belongs to the foregoing Verb sometimes, and is omitted.
More
1. From much -- major, or plus with a Genesis Case. 2. From many -- Plures, and
plura. 3. Before an Adjective or Adverb, Sign of the Comparative Degree. 4.
With Verbs of esteeming, valuing, buying and selling pluris. 5. For 1. Rather
-- magis. 2. Hereafter -- post hac. 3. Further -- amplius ultra. 4. Else or
besides -- praeteria, amplius. 5. More greatly -- plus, magis. 6. Above --
plus, amplius, magis, supra and super.

The more
1. In the former part of a Sentence -- quo, quanto. 2. In the latter -- tanto,
eo So these answer each other, Quot tot, quoties toties, qualis talis, quantum
tantum, quantopere tantopere.
Most with
1. An Adjective or Adverb Sign of the Superlat. Degree. 2. A Substantive,
plexique. 3. A Verb -- maxim, plurimum.
Must signifying
1. Necessity, necesse est. 2. Need, opus est. 3. Duty, oporter.
Near
1. An Adjective -- propinquus. 2. For almost -- prope. 3. Belongs to the next
Verb -- near to, or unto -- prope, juxta, propter.
Next
1. An Adjective -- proximus. 2. In Order. 1. Before a Case -- juxta, secundum,
post. 2. Without a Case -- deinde, deinceps.
3. In Time -- posterius, or some Adverb. 4. In Place -- vicinus.
Neither
1. Of the two -- Neuter. 2. Answered by nor, nec, neque, neve.
Never
1. No, none or not -- nullus, non unus, non ullus. 2. At no time -- nunquam,
non unquam. 3. With the before a Comparative -- nihilo. 4. A Note of forbidding
-- ne.
Never so, or never such, vel, ut, quamvis, quamlibet, etiamsi.

No
1. Without a casual word -- ne, non. 2. Next before a Substantive -- nullus
nequis -- nibil, nequid. 3. Before an Adjective and a Substantive -- non, haud.
4. Person -- nemo, nullus, nequis, non quisquam.
No more -- non plus, non amplius, ne quid ultra, nihil ultra, nihil amplius.

Not
1. In denying -- non, baud, minus, nec, neque. 2. In forbidding. 1. Non, with
a future Tense of an Indicative Mood. 2. Ne, with an Imperat or a Subjunctive
Mood. 3. Noli, with an Infinitive Mood.
2. After 1. Words of Caution, warning, etc. -- ne with a Subj. Mood.
2. Words entreating or deprecating -- ne or ut. 3. Verbs of fearing -- ut or
ne non.
3. In Questions -- non, nonne, annon, and quc the inclitic.
Now importing.
1. Time 1. Present -- nunc. 2. Newly past -- modo. 3. Instantly to come -- jam.
2. Connection -- autem, jam. 3. Transition -- deinceps.
Of
1. The same with 1. Concerning, touching -- de, super. 2. Out of, where of,
noting matter -- e, ex, de. 3. With or by -- Sign of the Gerund in do. 4. From
or by, most commonly after Passives -- a, ab, abs,
2. Before The latter of two Substantives. Sign of the Genesis Case. 2. A
Participle in ing, sign of the Gerund in di.
3. After 1. Nouns of desire, knowledge, remembrance, ignorance, forgetting,
care, fear, etc. Many Participials and all Verbals in ax. Also Partitives and
Comparatives and Superlatives put partitively. Also Verbs of accusing.
condemning, warning, purging, acquitting, and paeultet, pudet, piget taedet.
Sign of the Genitive Case. 2. Nouns and Verbs of plenty or wanting, filling,
emptying, spoiling, disappointing, joy, pride, etc. also after the English of
dignus, indignus, natus, cretas satus ortus editus prognatus creatus, and opus
and usus for need; Sign of the Ablative Case. 3. A Substantive and before mine.
thine, ours, yours, his, and theirs is omitted -- as amicus meus, a friend of
mine. 4. Most Verbs, especially of inquiring or hearing -- a, ab, e, ex, de.

What kind of? What manner of -- Qui, qualis.

On or Upon
1. Before 1. Words of Place for 1. Beside, near unto, toward which -- ad, ab,
a. 2. Above -- in Abl. super.
2. Words of Time Sign of the Ablative Case.
3. Musical Instruments. 4. Words noting Food. 5. Condition. Terms. etc.
2. After Verbs. 1. Of Depending -- a, ab, e, ex, de. 2. Of bestowing,
spending, employing, wasting, losing -- in Acc. 3. Misereor, miseresco -- Sign
of the Genesis Case.
3. For after -- super, as literae super literis or literas. 4. Belongs to the
next word, and is omitted.
Or
1. Alone, or noting Correction -- ve, seu, sive. 2. Answering. 1. Whether --
an, ne, seu, sive. 2. Either -- aut, vel.

Over a super

1. Signifying 1. Beyond -- ultra. 2. Above -- supra. 3. Cross or overthwart --
trans. 4. In Comparison -- prae. 5 After or within -- post, intra. 6.
Concerning -- de, super. 7. Too or too much -- nimius, nimis, nimium.
2. After 1. A Noun of Rule, Power Command -- in Acc. 2. A Verb, Sign of the
Dative. 3. With Verbs of motion -- per, trans. 4. Belongs to the next word, and
is omitted -- All over per, or an Abl.

Ought or must
1. Oportet, debto. 2. The Gerund in dum with est.
Ought for any thing -- quid, ecquid, siquid, res -- for ought -- quantum:

Out
1. From place or number -- de, e, ex. 2. Away or of from -- a, ab. 3. Not
within -- extra. 4. Belongs to the foregoing word, and is omitted.
Out of, for, by reason of, propter.

Own, suus, proprius. -- Own self -- ipse.

Self after a Pronoun, my, your, him, etc. ipse.

Self-same
1. Ipse with Ille, iste, hic, is, qui. 2. Idem -- with ille, iste, quod or
unus.
Since for
1. Seeing that or because -- cum, quando, siquidem, quandoquide. 2. From or
after -- a, ab, ex, post. Sometimes by ut, quod, cum, and postquam 3. Ago,
abhinc, ante, diu, dudum, olim pridem.
So
1. In a former clause, and answered by as or that in a later -- tam adeo
perinde, sic, ita. 2. In a later clause, and answering to as in a former --
sic, ita. 3. For this, that, the same -- id, idem.
So many tot -- So often -- toties. So much, so great -- tantus -- so that,
modo, dum, dummodo -- so -- eu cunque, an Enclitier.

Such noting
1. Kind, sort or quality -- talis, qualis, ejusmodi, and is for talis. 2.
Nature, Disposition or Condition -- sic, ita. 3. So great -- tantus, ita
magnus. 4. This, that, they or those: denoting quality -- hic or is.
Such a -- before a Noun -- tam, adeo.

That
1. Before a Substantive; ille, is, iste. 2. Which or who -- qui, quis. 3. To
the end that, or before, may, can, might, could, should, ought, etc. ut. 4.
Betwixt a Comparative and a Verb is omitted. 5. Put with or for, because quod.
6. Referring to something done or doing 7. After words of Opinion, knowledge
relation or complaint. 8. After 1. Same -- qui, ac, atque. 2. Words of care,
endeavor, desire, entreaty, wishing, warning, counselling, commanding,
obtaining, happening, permitting and affecting -- ing at -- which after volo,
peto, censeo, jubeo, sino facio etc. is elegantly omitted. 3. So or such -- ut.
4. Words of fear in Speeches 1. Affirmative -- ^^. 2. Negative -- ut or ne non.


Before that -- antequam priusquam. After that -- postquam, posteaquam.

Than after.
1. Comparatives. 1. Before a Noun; Sign of the Ablative Case. 2. Before
another word -- quam.
2. Other or otherwise -- ac, atque, quam.
Then
1. At that time -- tum, tunc. 2. Next or after that -- tum, deinde. 3.
Therefore or so then -- ergo, igitur, tum postea, tum porro.
Thence
1. From that place -- illinc, inde, istinc. 2. From that cause, occasion, or
ground -- exeo, inde, exinde.
There
1. In that place -- ibi, istic, illic. 2. Often Sign of the Verb to be set
before the Nominative Case is omitted. 3. In Composition, with, about, after,
at, by, from, in into of, on, out, upon, to, unto, with, withal, etc. ^^,
iste, etc.
The before a Comparative for 1. By how much -- quo quanto. 2. By so much -- eo
tanto.
Through applied to 1. Place -- per. 2. Occasion, cause or means -- ex, per.

Till
1. Before a 1. Noun - in, usque, ad. 2. Verb - dum, donec, quoad.
2. For 1. Before a 1. Ante alone before a Noun of Time. 2. Antequam, or
antea-quam before a Verb.
2. To allure or draw on - lacto, allicio. 3. To plow or order land - colo.

To before
1. A Casual word. 1. And signifying. 1. To the use of - Sign of the Dat. case.
2. In comparison of - ad, prae. 3. Toward - in, erga, adversum. 4. Of, or
concerning - ad, de.
2. Of Time, for until - in, ad. 3. Of that Person, to or before whom any
person or thing is complained, accused, condemned or spoken of - apud 4. And
following. 1 Words of motion, also Verbs betokening to apply, add, appertain,
belong, call, exhort, provoke, invite, etc. And Adjectives of forwardness,
readiness, fitness, inclinableness, etc. ac, 2. According - ad, de, ex,
secundum, pro.
2. A Verb, sign of the Infinitive Mood, and may be rendered after. 1. Any
Substantive or Adjective by the Gerund in dum with ad. 2. A Passive Sign, when
necessity or duty is noted by a Gerund in dum; when purpose or likelihood, by a
Participle in rus. 3. Adjectives of worthiness, fitness, etc. By a Subjunctive
Mood and qui.
4 Substantives that may be varied by who or which, with may, can, might, etc.


To be
1. After. 1. A Passive Sign. or Noun or Verb Substantive. Sign of the
Participle in dus. 2. An Adjective, the later Supine or Subjunctive Mood with
qui. 3. Any other Verb, or an Acc. Case, the Infinitive Mood Passive.
2. Without a Sign, alone, or before a Substantive, Adjective or Preposition in
the same clause - esse or us or qui with sum.
Together
1. After words of Time - per. 2. After words of gathering or uniting - con in
composition. 3. In Company, at the same time or place - una, simul, inter.
Too
1. For also - etiam quoque. 2. For over before an Adjective or Adv. nimis,
nimium. 3. Sometimes by the Comparative degree with quam, qui or ut.
Toward
1. For to noting, favor, reverence, duty, etc. in, ad, erga, versus. 2.
Importing prospect or motion toward a place - ad, in, versus. 3 Denoting
nearness in 1. Time - sub. 2. Place or situation (without motion) - a

Very
1. Before a Substantive for 1. Mere, true, pure - merm, verus, purus, putus.
2. Even - vel, etiam. 3. Himself it self, or themselves, or with or for the
word same - ipse.
2. Before an Adjective or Adverb - multum, valde, admodum, apprime.
Under
1. Referring to 1. Place, viz. below or beneath - sub. 2. Government, or time
of Government - sub abl. 3. Dignity, honor, or order or degree - infra. 4.
Color, show or pretense - per Acc. sub Abl. 5. Number, nothing short of, not
so many as, fewer, than - infra, minor, minus.
2. For lower, an Adjective - inferior.
What
1. For 1. That which - quod, and after, contrary to contra with ac, atque or
quam. 2. To what pass, end or purpose - quorsum. 3. Partly - qua. 4. How - quam.
2. Before a Substantive on which it depends - qui, quis, qualis. 3. A
question, or without a Substantive - quid.
When
1. At what time, or at the time that - quum, ubi, quando. 2. While or whilst
that - in, inter, cum. 3. After that, or as soon as - ubi, tum, ut, postquam. 4.
In a question - Quando?
Whence
1. Any thing comes or proceeds - ex quo. 2. Or from what place - unde?
Where
1. In what or which place - ubi? 2. Any thing began - unde. 3. By what or
which place, or way - qua. 4. Compounded with at, by, from, of, on, in, to,
upon, with, etc. is the same with by which, from which, or what, etc. quis,
qui.
Any where - usquam, uspiam - no where - nusquam, nuspiam, Somewhere - alicubi.

Whether
1. In the former clause answered by or in the later seu sive 2. Which of the
two - uter. 3. To what (or which) place - quo. 4. Whether or no, of asking or
doubting - ne, utrum, number, ansi.
Which
1. A Relative - qui. 2. A Question - quis, 3. For whether of the number -
uter.
While
1. Alone or after great or little - parumper, paulister, aliquantisper diu. 2.
Before go or fince - dudum. For 1. In the mean time or space that - dudum. 2.
So long as - dum, quoad. 3. Until, so long till - donec, dum, tantisper dum.

Who
1. In a Question - Quis? 2. A Relative - qui. 3. An Indefinite - quis and qui.
What soever Quod cunque When Quando Where Vbi

With
Before 1. The Cause Instrument or manner answering to the Question, Why?
Wherewith? How? sign of the Abl. Case. 2. Words that end in est, by 1. A
Positive degree with nimium. 2. A Comparative with aequo or quam and decet.
3. A person with reference to a place, where one is, or to some power with him
- apud, and sometimes ad and penes.
2. After 1. Verbs of comparing, contending, meeting, and being angry - Sign of
the Dat Case. 2. Verbs of beginning put for at of from a, ab.
3. Noting Company or together with - cum - where note that in me -- cum,
tecum, secum, nobiscum, vobis -- cum, quicum, quibus -- cum, the Preposition is
set after its Case.
Within before
1. A word of Place - intra, but if the place be not expressed in tus. 2. A
word of time - cis, in, citra.
Without
1. Not within - foris, extra. 2. Not with sine, citra, extra also sometimes by
1. A Verb signifying to be vold - vaco, careo. 2. A Word compounded with ex,
and in for non. 3. A word of contrary signification to that which follows
without. 4. Negative Particles coming together with Nouns, Participles or
Adverbs.
3. For unless or except - nisi.
Worth noting
1. Dignity or Authority - dignitas, authoritas. 2. Price or value by a Verb of
esteeming, and a Genesis case.
Worth ones labor, worth ones pains, care or while - operae pretium, curae
pretium.

Yet
1. Answering to although. at, certe, tamen, attamen, veruntamen.
2. Joined with but. 3 For notwithstanding, or for all that. 4. Noting
Correction - quanquam, etsi, tametsi. 5. For thither to this time in 1.
Affirmative Speeches - adbuc. 2. Negative ones, with not, nothing, scarcely or
hardly - nondum, necdum, nihil -- dum, neque -- dum, vix -- dum, haud -- du.
6. For still or at this time, adbuc, etiam - number etiam - nunc. 7. With or for
more, i e. further - adbuc etiam.
You and yours directed to
1. One person - tu, tuus. 2. More than one - vos, vester.
N B Sometimes Your is elegantly made by tibi for tuus, and My by mihi for meus.

When a Passive English comes before a Verb
1. Neuter; for the Present Tense Passive make the Preterperfect Tense active,
and for the Preterimperf. Passive, the Preterpluperf Tense active. 2. Deponent,
change the English Passive by another English active, and so make it.
If the Sign of the Case be far from it, or from the Verb that governs it,
reduce the words to their natural order, and so make them into Latin.

If an English seems hard, change it into some other of the like sense.

FINIS.

