A VOICE Out of the WILDERNESS, Crying with many Tears and strong persuasions to
the World for REPENTANCE.

Proving by undeniable Grounds, from the Word of God, that the great DAY of his
righteous JUDGMENT will certainly be in this present Age, namely about the
45th. year after the Ruin of ROME, in 1666.

Wherein are unfolded many great and wonderful Mysteries of God, foretold in
his Word to come to pass unto the end of the World:

This work consists of five small Tracts:
1. To the Church of Rome, printed first in An. 1588. 2. To Qu. Elizabeth,
presented to her in An. 1589. 3. To the E. of Essex in her days, called,
Babylon is fallen 4. To K. James, being an Exposition on 11. 12, 13. chapter Apoc.
5. De fide, against Baro, since translated into English.
By T. L. sometime a Student in the University of Cambridge in the days of Q.
Elizabeth.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold at the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard,
and at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley, 1661.

The Preface to the READER.
Christian Reader,
BE pleased to understand, That whereas there have been several Impressions of
this Authors Works, formerly published, distinctly and by pieces, according as
they were found out, and opportunity served: the first Edition of that, To the
Church of Rome, being in the Authors life time, in the year 88. at Frankford in
Germany; the next at London, the year following. And the Exposition of the 11.
Chapter of the 4th. of Ezra, entitled, Babylon is fallen, printed at London,
in 1610. The Original Copyes whereof are yet preserved, and may be produced, if
occasion require, to satisfy any that may question, whether they bear so
ancient a date. All which being spent, it was thought fit, in respect of the
excellency and worth of the matter contained therein, and of that great benefit
that Christians may reap thereby, to impart them once more, and expose them to
public view

2. Concerning the Author, and his abilities, it were enough to say, that those
excellent endowments, wherewith he was accomplished, especially th^se choice
and peculiar gifts and graces, which God did conferr upon him, are every where
conspicuous, throughout his writings, to the discerning Reader: and do
sufficiently demonstrate and testify his preparation by, and Authority from
God, in divine and heavenly things.

3. For the time, wherein he first writ, it is evident, it was in the days of
Q. Eliz. toward the latter end of her Reign: unto whom he presented the
Treatise, entitled, An Advertisement to Q. Eliz. with his own hands, in the
mean and obscure habit of a humble Shepherd, which employment for some weighty
considerations, he willingly underwent. Neither let any be moved at his low
estate: many took offense at Christ for his poverty: Is not this the Carpenter,
say they, Mar. 6. 3. Joh. 6. 42. 66.
the son of Mary? and they were offended at him. And in another place, Is not
this Jesus, the Son of Joseph, whose Father and Mother we know? from that time
many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. They were
offended at his mean and outward appearance. Others being misled by the
Rabbis, and blinded with the glory of the world, expected a Messiah presently
to Reign in Majesty, whereas the true Messiah, promised the Fathers, foretold
by Moses and the Prophets, was first to do the will of God, and suffer, and
undergo the death ^f the Cross, and at length, after the troubles of the
Church, and her warfare ended, the full number of Gods elect complete, and the
tedious and tyrannous reign of Antichrist past, then to receive his Kingdom,
and great power, sit upon the Throne of David, and reign over Luke 1. 32. 33
the house of Jacob forever. The Emperor Domitian, when some of Christ's
kindred (whom he suspected) were brought before him, beholding their hands
grown hard with labor, and understanding Eusebius. Hist Eccles. l. 3. c. 17.
their poor estat^, despised them, and let them go. But the truly wise will not
be offended, or stumble at this Authors low condition and manner of living:
considering that many worthy persons, Patriarks, Prophets, and other holy
Servants of God, whose memory at this day is precious with all good people,
have been exercised in the Shepherds life.

4. The first Martyr was a Shepherd: Abel was Genesis 4. 2. 3 Genesis 47. 3.
a keeper of sheep, and he brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the
fat thereof. Thy Servants are Shepherds, say the Patriarks, the Sons of Jacob,
to Act. 7. 22. Heb 11. 14.
Pharaoh, King of Egypt, both we and also our Fathers. Moses, learned in all
the wisdom of the Egyptians, refused to be called Son of Pharaohs Daughter,
relinquisht the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, and beca^e a Shepherd: and leading
this contemplative life, God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob appeared to
him, while he kept the Flock of Jethro, by the mountain of God, even Horeb.
Exodus 3. 1.
And in that estate he continued about 40. years: during which time, it is
supposed he wrote the Books of Genesis and Job, for the comfort of his
afflicted Brethren in Egypt. And thus it pleased God to exercise Moses in a
Shepherds life, that he might thereby be weaned from the pleasures of Egypt,
and, as it were renounce the world: and by that pastoral Life, as a kind of
introduction, prepared for the Government, which God afterward laid upon him,
as Psalm. 77. Thou leddest thy Psa 77. 20
people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Lastly, That Gods power
might appear, in raising Moses from this contemptible kind of Life, especially
Genesis 46. 34.
in the opinion of the E^yptians, who abhorred all keepers of Sheep, to that
high place, calling and Authority, to the which he was afterward advanced.

5. David, sometime a Shepherd was appointed King over Israel. Thy servant,
says he to King Saul, kept his Fathers Sheep, and there came a Lion and 1 Samuel
17. 34. Psalm. 78. 70, 71.
a Bear, etc. He chose David his Servant, and took him from the Sheep-folds:
from following the Ews great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his
people, and Israel his Inheritance. Amos that holy Prophet, when Amaziah the
Priest of Bethel was angry with him for prophesying, and accused him for
conspiring against the King, bidding him be gone, and prophecy no more at
Bethel; for, says he, it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court, Amos
7. 13. 14, 15.
thus answered, and said to Amaziah, I was no Prophet neither was I Prophets
Son, but I was an Herdman, and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit, and the Lord took
me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, go prophecy unto my
people Israel.

6. And this renowned Author, upon whom God conferred like Gifts and Graces, as
upon the Prophets of old, and raised him up in this last age of the world, that
he might be a special instrument of his Glory, and direction to his Church and
people, though he were very learned, was not ashamed of this low and
contemptible Calling, For he was, in that estate, instructed of God, prepared
and fitted for a more excellent work and employment, to feed the flock of God,
to comfort and refresh the Souls of repentant Men and Women. He was not
troubled at the Glory, nor afraid of the pride and power of Rome, Whose power,
says he, is breath not to be accounted of, nay, To the Church of Rome, p. 1.
we are not only ready to give up our bodies, but our souls to be sacrificed,
in witness of the cause pleaded before you this day. Or should our voice be
ashamed of her preparation? Behold ye scorners, like as a mighty wind that
passes your ear, and blows not upon ye, so shall ye hear great things to
day, and not be moved therewith. And poor, and slight, and simple as she goes,
she has authority to give joy to the living, and life unto the dead. And in
the Treatise to Q Eliz. thus he writes, I your Servant cannot but speak the
things I know, and testify what I have Advertis. to Q. Eliz. p. 41.
seen and heard, what though I be no Minister, nor Son of a Minister; Shepherds
and Clowns have been Divines sometimes, and why not I?

7. But to come nearer the matter chiefly intended, here we may consider, that
when the Assyrian, Chaldean, and Persian Monarchies drew to their fatal end
and period; it pleased God to raise up Prophets, holy men, Jonah, Amos, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Ezra, etc. whom he instructed with heavenly
wisdom, and furnished with extraordinary gifts, enabling them to foreshew and
denounc his Judgments upon the Churches Adversaries, inevitable ruin to their
chief Cities, seats of the Empires: and also to admonish the people, and
forewarn them of the evils to come, that his Elect might be brought to
repentance, and all others, being admonished, left without excuse. So now in
this last age, the time of the reign of the 4th. Beast, [the Roman Monarchy]
hastening to an end, it cannot be denied, but that God raised up many Prophets,
sent diverse of his Servants, to detect, oppose, and cry out against the
Abominations, Idolatries, Superstitions, and Delusions of Rome, the Western
Babylon, denounc Judgments to his and his peoples implacable Enemies; and
comfort his chosen and faithful with promises of deliverance and salvation. To
the Church of Rome, p. 1.
Amongst whom certainly this Author, who ever he was, is not to be accounted
the least, Many and sundry voices, says he, have been heard out of the
wilderness in these latter days, whereunto had we given good and diligent
ear, we had perhaps discerned the time of our visitation. Nevertheless he that
writes, testifyeth, the Kingdom of God is at hand.

8. Amongst many great and weighty matters which he treats of, and unfoldeth
in his writings, that, concerning the period, and final determination of the
reign of Antichrist and his Church Dominion, is one of the most remarkable: at
present chiefly noted, and generally fixed in the minds of the people, in
respect of its near approach. He declares the number of the Beast, viz. the
Pope, sole Monarch (as the Jesuits will have it) both spiritual and temporal of
the Western Babylon, in manner as Daniel did the hand writing against
Belschatzar the last Monarch of the Eastern Babylon. (...)] Mean, Mean, i. e.
Numeravit, Numeravit: which Daniel thus interprets, Dan. 5. 25. and seq.
Numeravit Deus regnum tuum, and complevit illud. God has numbered thy
Kingdom, and finished it, h. e. God has finished and ended the days of thy
Kingdom: and the end of thy life and the Chaldean Empire is come. (...)]
Thekel, appendit: i. e. Appensus fuisti lancibus, and inventus es minus habens.
Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. (...) Upharsin, or as
after v. 28. Upharsin, and dividentes, i. scindunt. Allusio est ad Persas, qui
dicuntur (...) Nam haec dictio est aequivoca, Gemminatio autem ista (...),
facta est ad majorem exaggerationem: vel, ut alii volunt, prius significat
finem Regni, secundum mortem Regis, and finem vitae ejus. Vatab. Annot. in Dan.
5. 25. Nota, Upharsin verti potest primo, and dividentes, secundo, and Pe^sae.
Pharsin enim sunt Persae. Q. d. Persae in stant tibi o Belshazzar, qui cum
Medis divident regnum tuum. Ar. Mont. in Loc.
(...)] Pheres, Divisum est Regnum tuum, and datum est Medis, and Persis. Thy
Kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and Persians. In the same night,
says the Prophet, v. 30. was Belschatzar slain, and Darius the Mede took the
Kingdom: And then ended the Babylonian Monarchy. So that the number of the
Beast, or the number of the man of sin, is nothing else but the period and
final determination of the usurped Tyranny and Dominion of Antichrist, (as this
Author well Expos. Apoc. c. 13. v. 18.
interprets) which the Lord, for the glory of his name, consolation of his
Church, and confusion of her Foes, with a mighty and outstretched Arm, will
bring to pass in the year 666. viz. in 1666 the Millenary number (for
brevities sake) being omitted, For the time of the Reign of the Beast, and of
the Churches sufferings and persecutions, during her abode in the wilderness,
is expressly mentioned to be 42 Months, Apoc. 11. 13, 15. a time, times, and
half a time, Apoc. 12. 14. 1260 days, v. 6. that is, so many years, a day
being put for a year, as Ezekiel. 4. 6. the beginning of which term, he places at
the year 406. at what time Innocent the first, then Bishop of Rome, obtained at
the hands of the Dragon, priority of place, suffrage and censure over all.
Which was effected and brought to pass, when Honorius the Emperor, at the
importunity of the said Bishop, subjected the power of the East Empire, (which
most withstood the West and Roman supremacy) with all other Churches
whatsoever, to the Church and Sea of Rome, in the said year, 406.

9. And then, in that year (says this Author) In Apoc. 13. 18.
my Lord of Rome shall lay down his proud waves, and though he fortify never so
strong, and lay his foundation low as Hell, and build his Turrers as high as
Heaven, and place his Miter above the Stars, yet in that day, he shall die the
death of the Uncircumcised, and perish like the Amorite, whose fruit is
destroyed from above, and root from beneath: and the multitude of his offenses,
shall consume the multitude of his Forces, and it shall be more possible for
him, and easy to him, to weigh the fire, or measure the wind, or call again
the day that is past, or recover the verdure of the withered Grass (as a holy
one says) then to avoid this Council and Decree of his downfall here determined
by the Spirit against him, saying, And his number is 666.

10. And then all Kingdoms and People shall see the eternity of that Amm.
Marcel. l. 14. c. 13. and l. 15. c. 17. Aeterna in antiquis inscriptionibus
nominatur. Ortel. Thesaur. voc. Roma. In numis antiquis insidens Scuto Roma,
victoriam dextra, scipionem sinistra, gerens, cum hac inscriptione, visitar,
Romae aeternae, Martin. Lex. Philolog. voc. Roma.
eternal City (as one of her own calls it,) and the immortality of her soul,
meaning, the Sovereign power and supremacy of her Caesar's and high Priests, to
wither, die, and forsake the earth for ever. And as Babylon her Mother left
unto her the inheritance of her pride, and prophanations; so shall she also
leave unto her, the heritage of her Death and Judgments: for as her glory has
been great, so shall her dishonor, when all her excellency shall be translated
into shame and sorrow.

11. And here by the way, I thought fit to note, and let the Reader know, that
it is now well understood, and received as a truth, (as it ought) that the Pope
[viz. the succession of Popes, for 1260. years, namely, from the year 406. to
1666.] is the very Antichrist, the Man of sin, foretold in the Scriptures: and
Rome, Babylon, signified under the name of Babylon, Apoc. c. 17. and 18. and
now denied almost by none, except the blasphemo^s Sect of the Familists, who
violently wrest the Scriptures into senseless Notions, inextricable, monstrous
Allegories; pervert, hide and darken their genuine, true, direct meaning, by
strange, unheard of Dreams, and Enthusiasms, strains of Philosophical
inventions, Exotic, affected terms, barbarous, foreign and Uncouth Language,
whereof the writings of Henry Nicholas, Jacob Behmen, Dr. P. and other
namelesse Impostors of our Age, are ample testimonies. It being the design of
the said J. Behmen, with his Translators, and Abbetto^s, as it seems by the
multitude of irrational, Atheistical Books, which they have lately published,
and yet promote, to undermine and subvert the true, Christian, Apostolical
Faith, and Doctrine of the Gospel, and knowledge of Christ crucified; and in
stead thereof, introduce and spread amongst us the horrible darkness of the
Gentiles vain Philosophy; preferring their muddy, poisoned puddles, before the
pure wholesome fountain of Gods word, their abstruse, perplexed Speculations,
before the plain, comfortable, saying doctrine of Christ, his Prophets, and
Apostles: that, if it were possible, they might draw in others into the same
Condemnation with themselves. Of which I thought fit to admonish the Reader,
that he may beware of their train, and avoid the snares, which they have
cra^^ily spread throughout our Israel. It being an undoubted truth, that to
entertain the doctrines of Familisme, is to renounc the Christian Faith, and
leave the way to Life everlasting: because they are altogether repugnant to,
and inconsistent with the true estate of a Christian, and means of salvation.
For these Familists have arrived to this height of impudence, not to be ashamed
to affirm; That perfection may be attained in this life, that there is no
Resurrection of the body, but what is past already; that there is no Judgment
to come, but that Christ is now at this present, upon his Throne, and Seat of
Judgment, within every one, judging and condemning the world: that there will
be no eternal Condemnation, Reward or Punishment, but that all, at last, must
go into God, and, as a drop of water falls into the vast Ocean; so all must (as
they dream) be swallowed up, and involved in the immense and boundless Abyss
of Eternity etc. From which sad and deadly imaginations the Lord preserve every
poor, humble, penitent soul; they being no other, than the (...) (...),
profunditates, the depths, the profound Profunditates Satanae sunt abditae and
latentes ejus cogitationes, in speciem bonae and honestae apparentes, quando se
in Angelum lucis transformat, 2 Cor. 11. 14. Sed cum Paulus dicat se non
ignorare profundas illas Satanae cogitationes, 2 Cor. 2. 11. simplex erit
sensus, si profunditates pro sublimioribus quibusdam mysteriis accipiamus. Acsi
diceret, qui non cognoverunt errores illos pestiferos, quos ipsi haeretici
profunda dei mysteria jactant, cum tamen ex Satanae officina prodierint. Marl.
in loc. Adverte non esse hic (...), ut de elatione and superbia accipias, sed
(...), i. profunditates, quibus versutiae and nequitiae diabolicae fraudis
intelliguntur. Zeger. in loc. Impostores [quales hodie sunt Familistae]
blasphemias suas vocabant profunditates, seu profunda mysteria and abstrusam
sapientiam, long perfectiorem, quam quae ab Apostolis praedicaretur. Christus
concedit esse (...), profunditates, sed Satarae, a malo Doemone ex Orco
inspiratas, eoque aversandas, exterminandas procul. Par. in Apoc. 2. 24.
wiles and deep delusions of Satan.

12. And yet some of this Generation have had the face to affirm that this
excellent Author was of their mind in this matter; and thereupon have
preferred and commended his writings to their Proselytes, as a means to bring
them to their principles. Whereas on the contrary, they might, if they would,
have understood, what their woeful estate is like to be, and what his mind and
thoughts concerning them were, while he ranks them with such as are to be
excluded from the holy City, and Land of rest for ever; writing thus, And all
those, that so poison, doctrines of death, lifting To the Chapter of Rome p. 37.
up their bold and shameless voice, like Cantibanks in market places,
avouching the goodness and proofs of oils and ointments, which cannot give a
foot to the lame, nor Eye nnto the blind, as Arians, Vbiquitists, Libertins,
Familists, Coinonists, or any such other Antichrists like to these, shall be
cast out, and reap their part with Liars, and Sorcerers, whose worm dies not,
whose cry is everlasting, and shall not enter into the rest of God for ever,
nor see his holy City.

13. But that these Enemies both of Scripture and reason, may have no color or
occasion to allege, Behm. mist. mag. c. 36. n. 15.
I speak without book, I shall declare the matter in their Rabby's own words,
as I find them rendered by his Translator, who was best acquainted with them.
The Antichrist, says Behmen, who is the Tower of Babel, viz. the self will of
the Hamlike man, domineereth in the Temple of God, and there has set up
himself in the place of the holy Spirit.

Sect. 16. He tells us, That the temple of God is the formed word of the humane
languages and tongues, in man's understanding, as it is written, the word is
nigh the, namely in thy mouth and heart, and the seat and habitation of the
opposite adverse Devil, is the monstrous property out of the dark world.

Sect. 17. In this formed word of divine understanding, the Antichrist, viz.
the will of self out of the properties of nature, has set up himself, with his
property of nature, as if he were God.

Sect. 18. The like we are to understand concerning the Antichristian,
Babylonicall beast of reasons self-will, which terms it self divine, and is
only a monster of the true man, which died in Adam, to the holy Image of Gods
spiritual world,

Sect. 20. Thus understand us now, what the Antichrist, or the Babylonical
Whore, with the Dragon Beast is, as may be seen in the Revelation. Every man
which is not born again of God, has the mark of the Beast, and the false Whore
in him.

Sect. 21. The Beast is the Animal [Natural] earthly Ham-like man, who is from
the Limus of the earth, according to the earthly grossness and malignant
malice, which arises out of the dark world, and stands in the curse of God.
This Beast did arise in Adam and Eve, when they did imagine after evil and
good, and came into its self fullness, away from the divine power and will, and
is before God only as a Beast. This Beast the Devil has infected with his
desire, and made it wholly monstrous, so that it only lusts after vanity, as
a Cow does after Grass.

And though, Sect. 15. He had discovered Antichrist, to be the self will of the
Ham-like man, or the Tower of Babel, yet, Chap. 15. Sect. 44. He tells us, that
the judging, censuring and condemning others without Gods command, is only the
Antichrist both amongst Jews and Christians. Which description of Antichrist he
devises, of purpose to dete^^ his Readers from censuring, and rejecting (as
their duty is) his filthy dreams and diabolical dictates. And with like intent,
as it seems, Dur. Hotham Esquire. in the Narrative of his Life, tells a story,
from his two Germans, of one, that upon saying, Here lived that Heretic Jacob
Behmen, fell down dead.

14. Where you may note the singular craft and subtlety of the Devil, who would
have the cheats and delusions of this Deceiver, pass unreproved. By the same
art and method proceeded his Brother-Impostor, Mahomet: who, the better to
convey his dreams and imaginary Phrensies down to succeeding Ages, without
suspicion of forgery; and procure an awful reverence and respect to his
Satanical impostures, as divine, persuaded the poor Arabians, that he received
his Law, contained in the Alcoran, from God, by the Angel Gabriel: that it was
composed Osiand. Epit. Hist. Eccles. Cent. 7. l. 1. c. 15. vid. Postel. de Orb.
Conc. l. 2. c. 13.
by the holy Ghost: and that the meaning the reof is only known to God, and
the most wise, that wholly believe it: Peccatum maximum and irremissible esse
etc. That it is an unpardonable sin to despise or contradict either him or it.
Incredulos Alcorano in Inferno, ardente sulphur atque pice etc. that they, who
believe it not, shall endure everlasting torments in Hell: and therefore, that
they ought to believe and receive whatever is writ therein, without disputing,
censuring or enquiring: yea, that it is a wickedness Nefas esse quicquam de
Alcorano mutare, aut addere, vel etiam quaestionem de eo movere etc. Osiand.
ibid. c. 14.
to move any Question about it. and paenam Osiand. ibid. c. 16.
gehennae minatur ijs, qui consortium etc. And he threatens Hell to such as
have any dealings with men, that believe it not etc. Terriculamenta Postel. ubi
supra.
sunt ista, ne a lege ejus descisceretur. Mere Bugbears contrived to affright
from rejecting his blasphemous Law.

Sect. 22. This Deluder proceeds, But the whore (says he) of the beast, is the
poor soul, captivated in vanity, which soul had its rise in the formed word of
the 3. principles, which was Gods Image.

Sect. 23. But now the poor captive soul lies in this gross Beast, and is
captivated in its own self-born will, viz. the whore, etc. and longs after
God from whom it proceeded.

15. Rejoice ye Romanists, triumph ye Monks and Jesuits, and thou Friar
Maluenda, write no more Books in defense of the Pope of Rome, whose black and
notorious spots of Antichristianism, thou, by thy great learning and parts, in
two large Volumes, have endeavored to hide, and keep close from the world: and
instead of him, the very true Antichrist, would craftily impose upon us, a
fictitious, counterfeit one, of thine and thy brethrens devising, persuading
that he must be a Jew Vid. Romae ruinam, c. 7. ubi Antichristi Papicolarum
historia fuse narratur.
, of the Tribe of Dan, begotten by a Devil, of a Nun etc. for behold, this
Monster, your friend, outvies you in craft, obscures your subleties with his
diabolical inventions, and frees you from your fears, laboring to persuade the
world, that Antichrist, the Beast, and his number, Babylon, Whore and all, are
Mist. mag. c. 36. ubi supra. and n. 1. and 49. Threefold life of man, c. 11. n.
52. and c. 3. n. 61. 62, 63.
in every one: and would remove all suspicion of Antichrist, his number and
mark, far enough from the Pope, and lay the Brat, (the Mist. mag. c. 36. n. 24.
Bastard he calls it) at the holy Patriark Jacobs door. Jacob, (says this
Blasphemer) came with 70. souls in all, with all his children, of which 66.
were proceeded out of his loins, which went with him, for Joseph had Id. ibid.
n. 9. 10.
begotten two sons in Egypt. This number 66. is a great and mystical number,
as also the number 70. which is the number of the great Babel: and the number
66. is the number of the Beast, and of the Whore, etc. with a heap of the like
irrational, senseless, absurd, confused stuff, most like the ruins of Babels
Tower: wherewith I shall not any further trouble the Reader, who [ex ungue
Leonem,] may guess at the rest by this little. And certainly the discreet,
Christian Reader, considering this Impostors writings, from first to last so
directly contrary and repugnant to the writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
and the comfortable Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; as also the strange and
dangerous History of his life, written by Dur. Hotham, and annexed to his
Mysterium magnum, by H. B. as himself tells us, wherein is not obscurely
signified his acquaintanc with black, diabolical Magic, Necromancie,
familiarity with evil Spirits; his commerce with them, and their apparitions to
him^ I say, who so considers this, cannot rationally conclude any other, but
that the said Jacob Behmen was a man plainly distracted, or at least wholly
taken up and possessed with the deep delusions of Satan, who is able to
transform himself into an 2 Cor. 11. 14.
Angel of light, as the Apostle teaches.

16. And yet this Monster, for so perhaps you will think he was in shape of
body, as well as atheistical opinions of mind, if you believe the Relater of
his life, his dear friend Mr. Dur. Hotham, His stature, says he, was exceeding
little, he had a low forehead, his temples prominent, his Nose large and
gibbous; his Eyes gray, and somewhat glistering; his Beard thin, and somewhat
short; and his voice low. I say, this notorious Impostor, the said Narrator of
his Life, tells us, He doubts not, but his Reader is sufficiently convinced,
that he was a Saint: but how to get him a place in the Church Calendar, which
is now so thronged, he confesses, he is to seek. Yea, and the abovesaid H. B.
who seems to be perfectly baptized into his [Behmens] Spirit, (they are his own
words) is not afraid to H. B. Pref. to the Reader, prefixed to the 4. Tables
etc.
write, that he was a deep illuminated man of God: and further, although all
wise and sober Christians, the Children of God, may easily discern, that his
dictates were no other, then the mere frothy products of his own fancy,
vitiated and deluded by the unclean and lying Spirit: that he was a Man, whose
writings, (though not to us made Canonical by miracles) manifestly appear to
have been the dictates of Gods Spirit, (as he the said H B blasphemously
affirms) by divine influence, and (as it is his own expression) out of his
three-leav'd Book, which the hand of God had opened in him: wherein he found
the knowledge, not only of all that Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles taught in sacred Scripture, but of all Mysteries, as himself affirms,
in his Epistles. And further, as he brings H. B. ibid.
in his learned German, relating it, that God stirred up this our dear Brother,
Jacob Behmen, (a plain unlearned Tradesman) and gifted him with such a noble
endowment of the universal knowledge of God and Nature, and shown him the
Center of all beings, how all things arise from God originally, consist in God,
and again return and flow into him etc. And in conclusion the said H. B. H. B.
ubi supra.
tells us, that this Deceiver had the knowledge of that wonderful Mystery
(containing the secrets of the whole Creation) The Language of Nature, and that
in his native tongue, whereby the very name of every thing gave him clear
inspection into the nature of it. This knowledge had Adam in his innocence, but
lost it by his fall, else it had been understood (says he) as Behmen affirms,
in the language of every Nation. Parallel hereto, is that of Mr. Hotham, in his
life, Going abroad (says he) into the Fields, to a Green before Neys-Gate, at
Gorlitts, he there sat down, and viewing the Herbs and Grass of the field, in
his inward light, he saw into their Essences, use and properties, which were
discovered to him by their Lineaments, Figures and Signatures. But leaving this
blind leader of the blind, and his monstrous, horrible notions, and delusions,
with his wretched, possessed Disciples, I proceed.

17. And now let the Familists think of me, and say what they please, I have
the testimony of my own conscience, that what I have herein said, has not been
out of disaffection to any of their persons, (though I know diverse of them) but
only moved with sense of pity to their Souls. For undoubtedly, unless they
can now in this day of grace, and time of salvation, hear the voice of God,
unharden their hearts, attain repentance and remission of sins, they must, at
the second and glorious coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Resurrection of
the dead, at which, (as close as they carry it) they now make a mock, and
reject it as a Scarecrow, impudently affirming, that it is past already, as
their predecessors, Hymenaeus, Allegoricam quandam Resurrectionem fingebant
Hymenaeus and Philetus: quod etiam hac aetate tentarunt impuri quidam Canes.
Calv. in loc. Resurrectionem (ut quidam ferunt) appellabant [Hymenaeus and
Phil.] successionem illam, quae ex procreatione liberorum fit. Vide autem quot
mala oriantur, si dicatur factam esse jam Resurrectiouem. Privamur pr^sentia
Christi, non est retributio, neque ultio: mentitur qui ista est pollicitus; and
multa hujus generis: ut si Resurrectio non est, neque Christus resurrexit,
neque Judex erit Vivorum and Mortuorum. Isid. Clar. Annot. ad 2. Tim. 2. 18.
apud Crit. Sac. T. 7. Col. 3882. Qui aberrant a salutari doctrina gloriosae
Resurrectionis, non retinent fundamentum, quia negata Resurrectione, totus
Christianismus negatur, 1 Cor. 15. Tales igitur Apostolus dicit (...), 1 Timothy
6. 21. h. e. veram doctrinam: Apostolo ipso (...) per (...) exponente, 2 Timothy
2. 18. Scult. in Epist. ad Tim. c. 5. apud Crit. Sac. Tom. 7. Col. 3887. (...)
vid. 1 Cor. 15. 12. Si^ut Philosophis mala vita mors dicitur, ita vita correcta
(...). At in Evangelio (...), aut (...) tam aperte, and tot locis describitur,
ut non possit alia intelligi, quam quae erit post Corporis ab Anima
sejunctionem: quae sejunctio vulgari sensu mors dicitur: and certe illa nisi
speretur, ne altera quidem illa morum (...) talis erit, qualis fuit in
Apostolis, and fidelibus Discipulis. Quare istis (...) sensum maxim
necessarium excludentibus, omni modo obsisti debet. Grot. in loc. apud Crit.
Sac. Tom. 7. Col. 3896.
Philetus, Saturninus, Basilides, Cerdon, Valentinian, Marcion, Apelles,
Hiera^, Manes, and of late, amongst others, Tho. Muntzer, David George, Joh. of
Leyden, Knipperdoling, Henry This H. N. Successor of David George, affirmed,
that there is no other Christ but holiness, and no other Antichrist but sin:
that the Family of love has attained the same perfection that Adam had before
he fell: that there is no Resurrection of the body: that the day of Judgment is
already come, and that this H. N. is the Judge of the world: that there had
been Seven great Lights in the world, and that he was the Eighth, and greatest
of all: that Angels were born of women; that there was a World before Adam;
that in H. N. dwells all perfection etc. and other blasphemous matters. He
further affirmed, that at last, God would bring all men, nay, the Devils and
evil Spirits themselves into perfect happiness. All things that were spoken of
Devils, Hell, or evil Angels, and eternal Judgment, he said, were only told by
Scripture, to cause fear of civil punishment, and establish right Policy.
Anonym. in vit. H. N.
Nicholas, and this new upstart, Jacob Behmen, did, and a rabble of others,
their infatuated, stupid followers at this day do, subverting the faith of
some, I say, unless they can now attain Repentance and forgiveness of sins,
they must then be excluded the holy City; and stand without, and reap their
part with the Abominable, Murderers, Whoremongers, Sorcerers, Idolaters, and
all lovers and makers of lies, whose worm dies not, and torment is everlasting.

18. Thus you may see, by what is premised, how the Familists have not been
wanting to do service to Satan, in concealing Antichrist, all they could, from
the world, as others before them, at his instigation, have done; the cause
whereof, I shall now a little enquire into. When this unwearied Enemy of
mankind, after whose ruin he thirsts, perceived, that by means of the
wonders, lies, and delusions of Antichrist, a great multitude, even the third
part of the sons of men, were to be Apoc. 9. 18.
subdued and invassal'd to him, and so perish; he took care to conceal him, and
give in a wrong and false information of him to the world: well knowing, that
many would follow him headlong to destruction, and, being partakers of his
sins, must also partake of his misery and judgments, who otherwise, had they
understood who he was, might have been aware of his Deceipts, and escaped.
Wherefore he craftily infused into men's minds, a false notion of Antichrist,
setting him out in counterfeit, lying colors, one while persuading the world
that he must be a Spirit,; otherwhile, that he should be Nero, who in the end
of the world, a little before the Day of judgment, should be raised up, to
torment the inhabitants of the Earth. And then, which most prevailed, that he
must be a Jew, of the Tribe of Dan: and at 30. years old, appear with a vast
Army, and in three civil years and an half, overrun and subdue all the
Kingdoms of Europe, and bring in subjection most of the other habitable parts
of the Earth, as it is written, Power was given to him over all kinreds,
tongues and Nations; and that he should be a most potent Monarch, Apoc. 13. 7.
far exceeding all that were before him, and reign from sea to sea, and from
the River to the ends of the Earth; and that he must reign in Jerusalem, and
kill Enoch and Elias; and at last, mount Olive^ cleaving asunder, be there
swallowed up, and sink down quick into Hell, with diverse other such Legendary
fancies, as our In Apoc. 13. 18.
Author notes, never meant, not sent from God. And all this has been chiefly
managed and carried on, by the art and contrivance of Friars, Monks, Jesuits,
and others, sworn Vassals of the Beast, on design and purpose thereby to raise
a dust, and cause a mist to darken the truth, and divert the worlds eye from
beholding the great and very Antichrist, sitting at Rome, and domineering in
the Church of God, unto a fictitious, imaginary one, that must never come.

19. But all these proving forgeries and devises, and the Romanists case being
grown desperate, and past recovery, they are at last befriended by the subtle
Familists, who have the forehead to affirm, in their canting language, that
Antichrist is the Tower of Babel, or the self-will of the Ham-like man, etc.
and that the Babylonish Whore is Sin, or the Soul captivated in vanity, or the
self-born will etc. with other like idle, ridiculous fancies, absurd
inventions, as you may see in Behmens Mysterium magnum, and the rest of his
monstrous writings. And herein, whether the very Jesuits, and other learned
writers of the Church of Rome, have not been far more honest and ingenuous, I
refer my self to the impartial Reader. For they being convinced and overborn by
the light of truth, and many direct, evident places of Scripture, do, in their
Commentaries on the Revelation, and other writings, confess the matter, and
plainly tell us, that by Babylon in the Apocalypse, is to be understood no other
then the very City of Rome in Italy, where the Pope now reigns; and which, they
also grant and affirm, must be burnt with fire, and utterly laid wast before
the end of the world, by the Kings of the Earth, who formerly had given their
power to the Beast. Two or three of the chief whereof, for the Readers
satisfaction, and to put the matter out of doubt, I shall here produce, and
cite their very words, as they fairly lie in their own writings.

20. And first, let Ribera the Jesuit speak, Scriptores, qui aliter
interpretati fuerant, veritate coguntur nobis favere, Romam esse hanc urbem
fornicariam, vastandam, etc. The writers, Says Ribera, Com. in Apoc. 17. n.
20. 22.
he, who did otherwise interpret, are forced by the truth, to yield to us, that
this whorish City, to be destroyed, and laid wast, is Rome. Et verba
praecedentia, Deus dedit in corda eorum, ad desolationem and incendium Romae
pertinent etc. And the following words, God has put into their hearts, have
respect, says he, to the desolation and burning of Rome etc. And Id. in Apoc.
14. n. 39.
elsewhere he writes, That under the name of Babylon, is to be understood Rome,
[non solum qualis sub ethnicis Imperatoribus olim fuit, sed etiam qualis in
fine Seculi futura est] not only as it was under the heathen Emperors; but as
it shall be toward the end of the world. Again, whereas she says in her
heart, I (...) a Queen, and am no Widow etc. he clearly alludes, says Id, in
Apoc. 18. n. 18. 19.
he, to the words of Isaiah, c. 47. concerning the Chaldean Babylon, which was
a figure of this second Babylon etc. And (he adds) concerning her punishment,
he likewise says, These two things shall come upon thee in one day, loss of
Children, and Widdow-hood. But the words of John, says he, are not to be
taken, as spoken of Rome, when the Apostle lived, but they are to be understood
of the latter age of the world, when the servants of God are commanded to
depart out of her, lest they be punished with her etc. Thus Ribera.

To him consents Viega, of the same Society. Vt intelligeremus, says Blas. de
Vieg. in Apoc. 17. Com. 1. Sect. 3. n. 5.
he, sermonem esse de urbe Romana etc. That we may understand that the words
are concerning Rome, the Angel concludes, And the woman, that thou saw, is
the great City, that raigns over the Kings of the earth. For in St. John's time
the City of Rome had command over almost all the Kings of the earth. Again, Cum
fidelibus Id. in Apoc. 18. Com. 1. Sect. 1. n. 16.
praecipitur etc. When the faithful are commanded to depart out of Rome, lest
they be involved in her calamity, it is thence evident, says he, that not only
Ethnic Rome is there by meant, but that, which shall flourish in the latter end
of the world.

With them accords Cornelius a Lapide: Dico Babylonem, says Cornel. a Lap. in
Apoc. 17. 1.
he, hic and Capite sequenti, est Roma, etc. I affirm, that Babylon both here,
and in the following Chapter is Rome, as it was in the time of St. John, and as
it will again ^e in the time of Antichrist. In another place thus he Id. in.
Apoc. 18. 4.
writes, Audivi aliam vocem e coelo dicentem, etc. I heard a voice from heaven,
saying, depart out of her my people. He warns the Christians, says he, to flee
out of Rome heathenish in the end of the world, when it is to be destroyed.
Again, he Id. in Apoc. 17.
writes, Cum liber signatus, puta Apocalypsis, sit prophetia de futuris in fine
mundi etc. Seeing the Book of the Revelation is a prophecy of things to be
done in the end of the world, under Antichrist, it follows, that these things
are to be understood of the City of Rome, which shall be toward the end of the
world, and consequently, says he, Rome must return to her pristine splendour
and Idolatry etc. And further, Hii odient fornicariam etc. these shall hate the
Whore, that is, Babylon, i. e. Rome, says this Jesuit.

To them subscribes Suarez, and confirms it in these words, Sub Suar. T. 2. Qu.
59 Disput. 56. Sect. 2.
aenigmate purpuratae Meretricis, Apoc. 17. exprimitur Roma etc. Under the
figure of Babylon, Apoc. 17. is represented Rome, as it is manifest from the
last words of the Chapter, And the woman that thou saw, is the great City
that raigns over the Kings of the earth; for no other City had then universal
dominion, besides Rome. And concerning her ruin, thus he Idem contra Praef.
monit. Doctis. Regis Jacobi. l. 5. c. 7.
writes, Desolatio Romae, quae praedicitur, Apoc. 18. erit sempiterna etc. The
desolation of Rome, foretold, Apoc. 18. will be perpetual, therefore it is
certain that this prophecy was not fulfilled in any of the former
destructions, or calamities, that befell Rome. Thus Suarez, one of the chiefest
late Writers of that side.

To these I might add Lessius, Salmeron, Tirinus, Estius, Malvenda, Alcasar,
with their two Cardinals, Baronius, their Annalist, and Bellarmine, their
Golia^, to make up the Jury full: who all unanimously agree, and give up their
verdict, that Rome is signified and figured under the name of Babylon: yea, and
diverse of them affirm, that she, being guilty of the blood of the Saints, and
Martyrs of Jesus, must be burnt with fire, and made desolate, by the Kings of
the Earth, (who formerly had given their power and strength unto the Beast)
before the end of the world. But their words at present I omit, and refer the
Reader to their Writings and Commentaries on the These. Apoc. and other
Scriptures, relating to this particular: or to the Treatise, entitled, Romae
Ruina finalis, An. D. 1666. c. 4. where he may find them and others, with
their words and judgments in this matter, cited and produced at large. And now
I submit it to the judgment of the Reader, to determine, whether of the twain,
have dealt more fair, and honest, in this particular, the deluded Jesuits, or
blasphemous, horrible Familists; and resume the consideration of this excellent
Author, and his incomparable writings.

21. After he had laid before Q Eliz. the absolute necessity of Repentance, and
showed what graces she must attain, and way, she must walk in, to obtain that
everlasting Crown, and Inheritance promised the Fathers, and all their faithful
Seed, he thus Advert. to Q. Eliz. p. 51. and 52.
concludes, And this is the generation of the Counsel and wisdom of God, and
the true description of all her Children; which if you understand, and do
thereafter, then shall you discern those reprobate times, and save your self
from the visitation to come. What man is he that traveling by desert places,
and seeing the day at his going down, hastes not to recover his Inn, for fear
le^t the night leave him in distress. Hasten then after the Counsel and
Correction of God, while yet the Day lasts; for behold the Night comes.

And these are all, which I advertise you, few as they be, and simple as they
go, yet (if truth deceive me not) their right understanding is far finer Gold,
then is your Scepter, and much more honoura^le then your Fathers House. And
this shall be for a SIGN, that I speak not of my self: Behold the Mountain,
which you fear so much, I mean the Beast, the Man of sin, Lucifer, son of the
morning, the Horn, that has so many hundred years, blasphemed Heaven, and
oppressed Earth, behold, I say, though now he be so great, as that he makes the
Earth to tremble, and shake, with a word only, the very roots of Kingdoms, the
time hastes, and is at hand, wherein he shall be made so little, as neither
name, nor remnant of him, nor son, nor sons son, shall be found upon the Earth.
For his days are numbered, signed and sealed up in the Book of God, and yet
Seaventy and seven Viz. 77. years: which added to 1589. the year, wherein this
Author writ that Treatise, reaches to the year 1666.
days, and his number 666. shall be fulfilled. And all his Princes, his
Sorcerers, and multitudes of People, which now rejoice and clap their hands,
drunken with the whordoms and prosperity of Babel, shall then lie comfortless,
and wring their hands as fast: for Beltis their God is dead. And the death of
Babylon shall be the life of Sion etc.

22. In which passage this is remarkable, that he gives this for a SIGN, that
he speaks not of himself, namely, the destruction of Rome in 1666. By which
it is clear, that he puts the credit and truth of those other great and weighty
matters, throughout his writings, concerning the Principles of the doctrine of
Christ, regeneration, and way to salvation, (so much now questioned and
gainsaid) upon this conclusion, that is to say, to be received as the very
truth, if that come to pass; but rejected, if not: as if he had said, If i^
come not to pass, that Rome, the Seat of Antichrist, be destroyed, and burnt
with fire, by the Kings of the earth, that formerly had given their power and
strength to the Beast) at the end of 77 years, after this, viz. in the year
Apoc. 17.
666. then look upon my writings, as no other then my own private conclusions.
But, if you see the judgment foretold, executed on that great City, in that
year, 666. then receive what I have writ, as the truth, concerning those other
things, far more excellent, and of greater concernment then this. But hitherto
his writings have bin by all sober, discerning Christians, that have seen them,
received and embraced as a great Treasure, containing in them most spiritual
and heavenly truths, consonant and agreeable to the doctrine of Christ, his
Prophets, and Apostles. And p. 32. To the Church of Rome, he says, And this is
the high and holy one, To the Church of Rome, p. 32.
that bears record with his poor Servant that wrote these things: and we
know, that his record is true, thereunto bearing witness thousand sighs and
tears. And that it might be confirmed under three, the love of God diffused in
his heart, the garment dipped in the blood of the Lamb, cries out uuto you,
testifying with him these things are true. And p. 19. he asks his Adversaries,
Which of you reproves him, that writes of a lie? And yet none of them, ever
answered, or convinced him of a lie: though diverse (whereof some now living)
have in vain attempted it, to their shame and loss.

23. But if any doubt arise, how the overthrow of Rome, could be a Sign to the
Queen, that he spoke not of himself, seeing it was to be 77 years after that
time, and she dyed long before: The Reader is to note, that he does not say,
This shall be for a Sign unto you, o Queen, but, This shall be for a Sign, that
I speak not of my self. A Sign to the world: that is to say, a sure sign, an
evident, undoubted token, an undeniable, firm, insoluble Argument, to the
succeeding age, the following Generation, viz. to the People, that should be
living in 666. and see Rome, the habitation of Antichrist, laid even with the
ground: a clear, convincing Sign and demonstration to them, that he spoke not
of himself, but as a humble Servant of God, guided and directed by his holy
Spirit, that reveals secrets, and gives wisdom and understanding, and
leads into all truth. Wherefore, it is written, Apoc. 13. 18. Here is
w^^dome, let him that Apoc. 13. 18.
has understanding, count the number of the Beast, etc. as intending, or
pointing at the very man, (as one well observes) whom God foreknew, and had
determined first of all, to give that special gift of wisdom and understanding
unto: it being the great secret, on which the knowledge of that other greater
secret, concerning the year of the end of the world, depended, as Daniel
declares, Chap. 12. 11, 12, 13. Which undoubtedly was Dan. 12. 11, 12, 13.
no other, then the Author of this ensuing Treatise, he being the first
discoverer of that great secret of the number of the Beast, i. e. of the end and
determination of the reign of the Beast, as above is noted.

24. Agreeable to this, namely, that a Sign, for assurance of a truth affirmed,
or confirmation of a thing promised, does not always necessarily come to pass
in the life time of him or her, to whom, the promise is made, or truth
declared; but may be for posterities sake, and be accomplished and fulfilled
long after, for their establishment, and confirmation; an eminent Example we
have in Abraham, Genesis 15. When God had promised him the Land of Canaan, to
inherit it, Genesis 15. 8.
Lord God, says he, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? (...)] In
quo i. e. unde, quanam re, qua ratione, ut Vatablus, Mercerus, Pareus, and
alii: viz. By what means, token, or Sign, shall I know, etc. The answer is:
Know of a surety, that thy Seed shall be a stranger in a Land which is not
theirs, and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them 400. years, and thou
shall go to thy Fathers in peace, and be buried in a good old age: but in the
4th. Generation they shall come hither again, (...)] For the iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full, v. 13. 15, 16. Which Sign came not to pass in
Abraham's days, but long after, in the fourth generation, after 400. Munst.
Clar. and Caiet. in Genesis 15. 13 Musc. in loc. Q. 3 p. 375. Zeg. in Act. 7. 6.
Riv. in Ex. 12. 40
years: that is to say, at the end of 430. years, from the promise first made to
Abraham, Genesis 12. in the 70. Musc. ubi supra, Q. 2. p. 373 P. Mart. in Genesis 15.
13 Bibliand. in Tab. 3. Chron. Capel. in an. Abr. 70 Tremel. in Genesis 11. and
Exodus 12. 40. Codom. Chron. l. 1. c. 3. Mercer. in. Genesis 15. 13. D. Ed. Sims
Chron. ad an. Mundi, 2077. Abr. 70. Vid. Scal. in Can. Isagog. 322. and Drus.
in Act. 7. 6 apud Crit. Sac. T. 7. Col. 2204.
year of his age, when he went out of Chaldaea to go into Canaan: And it came
to pass at the end of 430. years, even the self same day it came to pass,
that all the Hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt. It is a night
to be much observed unto the Lord, for bringing them out from the Land of
Egypt. Exodus 12. 41. 42. And thereby Moses, and all the faithful posterity of
Abraham, were comforted, Hoc expetiverat [Abram] cupiens promissionem illam
possessionis terrae Chanaan insigni aliquo foedere and notabili signo
confirmari, ad roborandam posterorum suorum fidem and fiduciam. Perer. in Genesis
15. 9. and post, Videlicet id facere Deus voluit, [de foedere cum Abramo
firmato agit] ad ingenerandum animis posterorum Abrae certam ejus terrae
possidendae atque obtinendae fiduciam. Id. ibid. v. 18. Hoc quidem partim
Abrahae causa testatum est oportuit; sed maxim ejus posteros spectavit
Dominus, ne in suis aerumnis deficerent, quorum exitum fore laetum and faelicem
Dominus promiserat, praesertim cum ipsa diu^u^nitas ingenti taedio non careret.
Calvin. in loc. Nec dubium est, quin Abraham hoc posteris suis assiduis
concionibus inclucarit and commendarit, ne fracti calamitatibus cederent, sed
urgerent firma fide, and in concussa spe promissionem terrae Chanaan, and
liberationem. Luther. in loc. Quemadmodum legimus Joseph hujus rei certissimum
fuisse, cum de ossibus suis mandavit fratribus. Marlorat. in loc. Hoc in
Abrahami and Israelitarum ejus posterorum consolationem est scriptum: nec
dubium quin diligenter a majoribus Mosis, literis consignatum in posterorum
consolationem. Vnde and fideliter a Mose relatum, ut Israelitae, quibus tunc
haec scribebat in Aegypto, vel in Deserto, cum essent mo^ in terram Chanaan
introducendi, animum in tam gravi servitute non desponderent, sed scirent
praestitutum esse afflictionibus tempus, post quod, eorum persecutores, poenas
darent, and ipsi liberarentur gloriose, Mercer. Praelect. in Genesis 15. 13, 14.
confirmed and ascertained of the truth of Gods promise, made to that Patriark,
renewed to Isaac, Genesis 26. 3, 4, 5. and to Jacob, Genesis 28. 14. 15. and 35. 11.
12. namely, that they should inherit the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting
possession, as it is written, Genesis 17. 8. In Abraham's time, the iniquity of the
Amorites was not full, and so the punishment was deferred till after four
Generations, viz. 400. years, when they were ripe for Judgment. And when this
Author writ, the sins of the Romanists, the wickedness and impieties of the
Western Babylon were not full: but when the measure of her iniquity is filled
up, and her sins shall have reached unto Heaven, Apoc. 18 5. when her unjust
dealing is ascended unto the most High, and her pride to the Almighty, 4 Esd.
11. 43. then will God remember her iniquity and violence done unto Sion, and
visit her transgressions in his wrath, and vex her, lay her wast, and make her
utterly desolate in his sore displeasure. For after 77. years, [viz. after the
said year 1589.] when her wickedness and blasphemies are arrived to the
height, when there is no remedy nor healing, when she is ripe for punishment,
then shall the Judgment, that has so long attended for her, at length lay
hold upon her. Behold, says he, thus says the truth, in the year, which shall
be 1666. the judgment, pronounced, shall lay hands on thee, And as all thy
fearful wings and feathers be already descended and blown down, so before that
day (which is so nigh at hand) the Tyranny of thy malicious Heads and cruel
Claws shall be consumed, and brought to naught. And in that day, thy vain Body
shall be burnt with fire, and shall be so clean cut off from the Land of the
living, that neither Son, nor Nephew, as the Prophet speaks, nor branch, nor
remnant of thy name, shall be found upon the Earth. For as it is purposed, so
shall it come to pass, and, as it is consulted, it shall stand. Isaiah c. 14.
v. 22. 24.

25. After the Abomination of Rome is past, there will be but a few years,
namely 45. to the end of this present, evil, corrupt World, as Daniel foretold,
Chap. 12. Dan. 12. 11, 12, 13.
from the time, that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the
abomination, that makes desolate, set up, there shall be a 1290. days.
Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the 1335. days, But go thou thy way
till the end be, for thou shall rest, and stand up in the lot at the end of the
days: viz. of the 1335 days above mentioned, that is, in the general
Resurrection, and end of this world, when Daniel, and all the dead must rise,
as it is at large else where Romans Ru. c. 6.
declared. And then at length will the Lord return to reign with his Servants,
the holy Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, and all the Elect, both of Jews and
Gentiles, that were in all ages of the world, as it is written, The Lord will
give him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of
Jacob forever, and of his Dominion there shall be no end. According as he had
spoken by all the holy Prophets, and as it is, Psalm. 2. Ask of me, and I will
give thee the Heathen Psalm. 2. 8.
for thine Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession.
and Psalm. 72. He shall have Dominion also Psa. 72. 8. and seq.
from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth. They that dwell
in the wilderness shall bow before him, and his Enemies shall lick the dust.
The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring presents, the Kings of
Sheba and Saba shall offer gifts. Yea, all Kings shall fall down before him,
all Nations shall serve him. His name shall endure for ever, his name shall be
continued as long as the Sun, and men shall be blessed in him, all Nations shall
call him blessed. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does
wondrous things, and blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole
earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen. And then all Israel shall be
saved, as St. Paul says, Romans 11. And blessed and happy, and only Romans 11. 26.
happy are they, that are regenerate here, and born again, and overcome their
corrupt and evil desires, and are mortified to this sinful world, and live unto
God, by faith, which is the first Resurrection: blessed and holy Apoc. 20. 6
Psalm. 37. 18. 19.
are they that have part therein, for on such the second death has no power,
for they are made unto God, Kings and Priests, and shall reign upon the earth,
and dwell therein forever, with their Lord and Redeemer in that world, which is
to come, when all things, upon which the curse came, shall be restored and
renewed, and wherein righteousness and peace shall dwell and flourish for ever,
as it was foretold and declared by all the Prophets and Apostles.

26. But that time, between the Ruin of Rome, and end of the World (which will
not exceed 45. years) although it will be joyful to the faithful and chosen of
God, in respect of the near approach of the Lord, and of those graces and
comforts, which God will give them to enjoy: yet it will be very toublesome and
heavy upon the world, upon all the dwellers upon earth, who have their
conversation below; and especially (in respect of outward troubles and fears)
the more Northern parts of the world; for then, viz. about 30. years after the
fall of Rome, as may be gathered from the Scriptures, will Gog and Magog, with
their numerous Armies, viz. the Turks, Tartars, Armenians, Persians, Arabians,
and other barbarous Nations, spread themselves upon the Mountains of Israel, i.
e. will come down, in great and vast multitudes, upon the plains of Germany, and
other parts of the Empire, with intent to swallow up, and overwhelm the
Christians, and endeavor to extirpate and blot out the name of Christ from
under heaven, and subject all Europe to the Ottoman yoke, and blasphemous Law
of Mahomet. And will thus continne war upon them, till fire from God, out of
heaven, devour them, as it is written, Apoc. 20. and as the Lord, by Ezekiel,
does declare, saying, And I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and Apoc.
20. 9
upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great
hailstones, fire and brimstone. Ezekiel. 30. 22.


27. To conclude, as concerning this Authors name, we have, at present, nothing
of certainty, more then from himself, in that Treatise to Q. Eliz. p. 52 where
he thus writes, J. T. L. testify those things, with my own ^and, in sober
humbleness, commending them to your Majesty, only in Advertis. to Q. Eliz. p 52.
regard of my duty, and for no other reward. Give your promotions to those sons
of Beor, that rise so early, and s^dle their Asses to post after them: For I
your Servant have bread and water enough, thanks be to my God, and am therewith
as well content, as if my Lands were as larg, as are the Roialties of the
little Bird, that possesses all the Fields, over which it flies.

Finally, The premises being considered, I make bold, and am no whit ashamed,
to affirm, (though the world will not bear it) that this Author was a most
choice and special Servant of God, immediately guided and directed by his holy
and ever blessed Spirit, as the holy Prophets and Apostles were: and raised up
by God in this last Age, to show these great things, and the end of this World,
to this Generation, and to call for, and exhort to Repentance, 120. years
before hand; as Noah was, to foreshew the end of the old World, by the Flood,
and exhort the Nations to Repentance, 120. years, before it came. Therefore,
commending his writings (so many of them as could be found) here presented
together in the following Treatise, to all well disposed, humble Christians,
who have their hope, not only in this 1 Cor. 15. 19.
life, but in that, which is to come, (for so are the Apostles words to be
understood, contrary to the false, Atheistical gloss of the Note Reader, that
in discourse with a chief Rabby amongst the Familists, when I alleged St.
Paul's words, 1 Cor. 15. 19 [If only in this life we have hope in Christ, we
are of all Men most miserable] to prove the Resurrection, and his assured hope
of Salvation in the world to come; he denied it, in hearing of diverse, saying,
that, the Apostles meaning was, if we had only hope in this life, and not the
thing hoped for, we were most miserable; but now (says he) we have both the
hope, and the thing hoped for, the promise, and the thing promised, all that may
be expected, we have in this life; as he affirmed, agreeable to the rest of
their blasphemous Principles.
Familists) then to receive and enjoy eternal rest, and an Inheritance amongst
Gods Elect, the faithful Jews and Gentiles, in that Land promised the Fathers;
I say, commending his writings, as a most inestimable Treasure, to all sober
Christians, hoping that themselves may see and find, that they are undoubtedly
the very truth, as in due time will appear: and desiring them, as they tender
and value their own everlasting peace, and happiness, and as they must
certainly answer it, at the great Day of the coming of Christ, and Resurrection
of the dead, that they would, above all things, take heed of, and avoid the
horrible infatuations, the pernicious, poisonous Doctrines, and Principles of
the shameless, blasphemous Familists, so directly contrary to, so wholly and
absolutely inconsistent with the grace of God, and state of Salvation: I take
my leave, and rest their

Christian Friend, J. W.
Land. Apr. 15. 1661.
A VOICE Out of the WILDERNESS CRYING, With many Tears and strong persuasions to
the World for REPENTANCE.

Proving by undeniable Grounds from the Word of God, that the great Day of his
righteous Judgment shall certainly be in this present Age, before 61. Years
after this present Year 1651. shall be expired.

And unfolding many great and wonderful Mysteries of God, forespoken in his
word, to come to pass and be fulfilled, from the rising of Julius Caesar,
first Emperor of ROME, to this present time, and from hence to that Great Day
of the Lord.

Things that were never discovered by any Writer before this known; and such
as greatly concern the Church and Chosen of God, in this last time.

Expressed in a very high Prophetical style, and clear evidence of the Spirit,
and of Power from above, which the judicious Christian Reader may well perceive.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. 1651.

TO THE CHURCH OF ROME.
MANY and sundry voices have been heard out of the Wilderness in these latter
days, whereunto had we given good and diligent ear, we had perhaps discerned
the time of our visitation; nevertheless, he that writes testifies, the
Kingdom of God is at hand.

WHat neighbor or friend is he, who seeing his next or beloved in danger, does
not cry, ^ake heed? and though such one may be found, yet cannot we hold our
peace: Generations sinful and ^dulterous, why should we fear or shame, to
speak amongst ye? your number? and has it not been always the complaint of
the holy Ghost, in the days of the Prophets, Apostles, and to this hour? Lord
who has believed our sayings? and to whom is thy arm revealed? your nostrils?
whose power is breath not to be counted of? nay, we are not only ready to give
up our bodies, but our souls to be sacrificed, in witness of the cause pleaded
before ye this day; or should our voice be ashamed of her preparation? behold
ye scorners, like as a mighty wind, that pas^eth your ear, and blows not
upon ye; so shall ye hear great things to day, and not be moved ^herewith;
and poor, and slight, and simple as she goes, she has authority to give joy
to the living, and life unto the dead. Amongst whom lie thou buried, rotten,
and past rising up again: thou, that si^test careless, like a Queen in
pleasure, and glorifien the self, saying in thy heart, I am alone, and besides
me is no other, I may not be widow, or desolate for ever, and, like a fool,
have not considered, th'older thou art, the nigher to thy grave. But thou
say, tush, am I not great? Where dwells then the power that may do all
these things? Wherefore thus says the truth, although thou be now so high, as
that the word forespoken is fullfilled in thee, And who is like unto the beast?
or who may war with him? behold the day hastes, and is at hand, wherein thou
shall be made so little, that thy name and remnant shall not be found upon the
earth; and all thy many horns, and multitude of Witches, (whose arm and
counsel have been thy help and treasure from thy youth,) shall fall and
perish, as fire consume^h straw, and not be able to deliver thee any more; for
thy days are numbered, and yet two Months, two Weeks, two days and a half,
and thy number six hundred sixty six shall be fullfilled: Happy man that lives
to see that day, and behold there be living that shall see it.

And Tire and Sydon, with all thy Cedars, though now they surfeit in wealth, in
pride, and pleasure, shall then lie comfortless and wring their hands, for
Babylon their Lord is dead. And thy death shall be the life of Israel but his
light may not long endure (as test^fieth the Prophet.) And then, and in those
days shall be fullfi^^'d the great mystery of God, proph^^ied by the mighty
Angel, who set his right foot on the Sea, and left upon the Land, and lifting
up his stro^gest arm to Heaven, swore by him that lives for ever and ever,
There shall be time no more.

He that blasphemeth, let him blaspheme still; and he that lives at ease, take
his pleasure still, nevertheless the special day is at the door, to give to
every one according to his ways. And yet thou say, I am his house, his
sanctuary, and place of his dwelling: wherefore (Discoursers) (...) once shall
be wrought in your eye to day, all the gate^ of his City shall be laid open
before ye, and none of ye shall enter into it.

All are wise, and every one shall give account according to that he has
received; I ask then, and have not all received? yes verily, the voice of God
is written up, and placed in the eyes or hea^ts of all, as it is wirtten, Their
sound is gone forth over all the earth, and their words unto the worlds end.
But all have nor obeyed, as test^fieth the Prophet; and therefore the Kingdom
of Heaven is likened to a Field containing Corn and Weeds: to a Net.
enclosing fish of all sorts, good and bad: to a Wedding, whereunto all were
bidden, those that refused, those that came prepared, and those that came and
were (...) apparrelled: to Servants, good, diligent, faithful, bad, slow, and
unprofitable: to Virgins, some wise whose lamps did watch while they slept,
(...) foolish whose lamps did sleep with them: to a house, of great and large
receit^ garnished with v^ssells of gold and silver, of wood and clay, then and
in that day to be employed to their use of honor and dishonor, when he shall
come in glory, to judge and reward the world, separate the stranger from the
child, the goa^ from the sheep, the sinner from the just: and this is the
Kingdom whereof it is written, Many are called

Lords of Sodom, may it then plea^e your dead and dry eyes to consider, that
in this great company of hearers, two special differing companies are
commended unto ye: the one that hearing the voice, obeys and does it;
the other, that hearing transgresses, and does not; called in Scripture, Ha^ed,
bond, forsaken, cast out, children of evil, vessels of wrath, and such like:
compared to a Man, who built a house, and laid no foundation, and when the day
of reckoning, the day of tempest came, the building fell, and the fall thereof
was great, and lamentable for ever. But they that hea^ing the Commandments of
God, observe and do them, are called in Scripture, beloved, free, chosen,
beautiful, children of promise, vessels of mercy, Israel, Jacob, his people,
his heritage, a holy Nation, a holy City, a kingly and holy Priesthood, his
house, his Temple, his Tabernacle, Saints, Sion, Jerusalem from above, the
pillar and upholder of truth, his vine, his Church, his Body, his Spouse, and
such like: compared to a Builder, that dug deep, and laid his foundation on
the Rock, whose work endured the day to come, and gave glory to the worker: to
a Grain of Mustard-seede, whose great increase for his little body, is
mavelous compared with other herbs; to Leaven, which seasoneth the whole
wherein it is hid; to a Pearl of price, for which the Jeweller adventureth by
Sea, by Land, by fire, by water to attain; to a Field wherein lies hidden a
treasure of such quality, that the possessor sells all he has, to make a
purchase thereof: to a Seed, prospering from Blade to stalk, from stalk to
head, the Lord of the ground neither sleeping nor waking knowing how: And this
is the generation of them that seek him, the portion and Kingdom whereof it is
written, But few are chosen. And of this company and no other, speaks the
Scripture, which says: Where two or three be gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them. And again: And behold I am with you from day
to ever, even to the worlds end. And again, Fear not little flock, for it
has pleased your Father to give you a Kingdom. And again, And I will
entreat the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, who shall remain
with you for ever. And again, But when the Spirit of truth comes, he shall
lead you into all truth. And this is the City and house spiritual, built upon
the head of the corner, which through the strength and glory of the foundation,
remains and lives for ever, as it is written, And upon this Rock will I
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. And this
is the Church and Sanctuary of God, the stones of life and glory everlasting,
disdained and trodden under of worldly builders, prepared notwithstanding from
above, and appointed to serve for his Tabernacle and place of his dwelling: for
he that is highest, dwells not in Temples made with hands, as testifies the
Prophet. Heaven is my seat, and earth is my footstool, what place of rest
will ye build unto me (says the Lord) O house of Israel? These things had ye
understood, then had ye been wise and learned Scribes, and like unto the
householder, which brings forth of his store and provision, as time and
occasion serves old and new.

And this is she which erreth not, dissenteth not, for all her Children are
endued with a tongue and taster of truth: all are prepared with one and
selfsame water: all are purged by one and self-same fire: all are Servants to
one and self same Lord, who by the sweet and accepted Sacrifice of his own
body has sanctified, and made them of sinners. Sons of God, as it is
written: He that sanctifies, and they which are sanctified, are all of one.

And this is she which prepares her self for the Wedding, arrayed in a white
and righteous garment, which her Lord the Bridegroom gives her with Lamp
watching night and day, waits and attends his coming, whose modest
countenance, whose chaste and comely steps, walk in our streets, and the world
regards not; for her name is hidden, written in the heart, not in the skin,
and the light of her beauty is in the spirit within, not in the (...) without,
whose praise is not of men, but of God. And yet thou say, let me see her:
behold, he that writes testifies before the Throne of God and all his holy
Angels, that he knows not any one this day, after the flesh, that takes
part with him: what then, shall I say I am left alone? God forbid, for I see
and hear with the ears and eyes of my soul, the groans, the chains and tears
of seven thousand, whose obedience is greater then mine, and of which number I
am the least, and as a poor, and miserable, and borne out of time, am not
worthy to be one of them.

And this is she who once (Balaam) walked in thy streets, and all the earth was
filled with her beauty, until thy Father lifted up his saucy head, pursuing
her blood and generation: for there is enmity between him and her, her seed
and his for ever, but she laid her Babe before the Throne of God, whose eye
defended it from all his teeth and fury. And in those days, her Lord the
Bridegroom gave her two wings, whose Feathers were made of the word of truth,
and she flew into the Wilderness, where she had a rest provided from the face
and fear of her enemy, a time, and times, and half a time; and there
remains she, her hour, her day, her month, and her year, eating no other
thing then that which God gives her. And thy Father fell heavy, exceeding
wroth thereat: and sat him down by the Sea side, in a Throne newly erected to
the honor of his name, mourning and pining, that the woman with her Boy had
escaped his hands so. And calling his powers and counsel about him, devising,
found out a way to appease his wrath, namely to be revenged but on the remnant
of her seed which she left behind: and while he sat in Consistory, seeking
best means t'accomplish his purpose, thou liftedst up thy Nose out of the many
waters, and presently his dump was turned to a dance, thy heads and horns were
so like his own, that he rejoiced wholly to see thy unhappy day, and having
nothing greater to show his love, parted with thee his Kingdoms, and glory
thereof, planted thee in his old and ancient Throne, where once his name was
honored, and gave into thy hand his great power, and chiefest of his host,
Wonders, Lies, Murder, and bad thee war and have no fear, for it was
appointed, the third borne among the Sons of men, should be subdued unto thee.
And it pleased the Lamb to give thee leave among the rest, to bid battle to the
seed and remainder of his handmaid, and to give up their blood to the pleasure
of thy Swords, during the thousand two hundred and sixty, the days of
relegation: but when those two and forty months shall be expired, thou shall
lay down thy proud waves, and he that is highest, shall set thee alive in
judgment, and the earth shall accuse thee of deceit, the Heavens of blasphemy,
and thou shall be divided, and cut out in pieces, for thou have troubled the
meek, and him that pursued peace, have loved liars, destroyed the true and
fruitful branch, and overthrown the walls of such as mourned, and did thee no
harm. And in that day, thy Crowns shall be turned to baldness, thy silk to
nakedness, thy sweet and pleasing voices to houling, thy lights to darkness,
and the blood of his servants shall he weigh before thee, and value it unto
thee, and thy parts shall burn until thou pay the price thereof. And that
judgment may even now begin to take hold of thy bones, it shall be showed thee
this day, what manner of men they are, which hear, and do the Commandments
of God, their breadth, their length, their height, their depth, their name and
their countenance, shall be laid before thee, and thou, thy Prophets and
Children, shall see, and wonder, and die.

All are learned, all have knowledge, and the covenant of death was written in
our hearts, when we were yet but tender, lodged and sleeping in the loins of
Adam, wrapped us up in our sins, and transgressions, like as the Spider in his
toil the silly Fly, against the day of slaughter. But he that is highest,
pitying the world which he loved so, in the riches of his benignity, devised a
way, to set free again the work of his hand, which law through sin had
imbondaged to death, and made a testament of life and peace, in the blood and
mediation of his Son, the price and redemption of that which was lost, and
wrote inheritors of his merciful Covenant, all and as many as believed in the
Mediator thereof. And unto Adam, his lost Child, gave it he, saying; The seed
of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head, and all the Children of Promise
took hold thereon, embracing the seed which by the death of death, delivered
the sinner: And unto Abraham his Servant renewed he his Covenants; Cast me out
Agar with her Son (quoth he) for that which is borne after flesh is bond, and
shall not inherit with the free. And remembering his mercy, promised in his
time to visit Sara, and to raise unto him a seed, which should be the joy of
many Nations: and Abraham believed, and got a grave and honorable name above
all his Brethren, namely, to be the Father of all those many Nations, that were
to inherit the Covenant and Testament of promise. And by the hand of Moses his
faithful, calling Israel unto him in the Wilderness, before the fearful
Mount, gave unto them the Covenant of captivity once for all, written down by
the hand of his Angel, in two Tables of stone, commanding it to be set up in
the eye of Israel, that they might see and read their wounds and
transgressions, which had subdued them to death, and calling to mind his
Testament of mercy, wherein from beginning his soul delighted, promised by the
same Moses, to raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto
him, and every soul that would inherit his favor and Covenant of promise,
should hear him. And Moses calling Israel together, testified unto them that
day, heaven and earth bearing witness, he had set life and death, curse and
blessing, to wit, the Covenants of works and faith, of Law and grace before
them. But Isreal's heart was fat, and understood not all these things, and
seeking the inheritance by the Law of works which had concluded them being yet
unborne under curse and reproof, fell out, and lost the way which led to the
blessing and land of the Fathers covenanted by promise; but by David his Boy,
whom his heart approved, calls them back again, (...) (says he) (...),
giving them to understand the table of Sina, whereon they thought to save
themselves; justified to their face, all their doings were abominable, as it is
written: The Lord looked down from heaven upon the Sons of men, to see if
there were any that understood and sought after God. But behold, they are all
gone astray, all are become abominable, there is not one that does good, no not
one. There is not a godly to be found on earth: not a righteous amongst the
sons of men, all lie in wait for blood, and every man hunteth his neighbor as
with a net: he that is best is but a bryer, and he that is most righteous as a
thorn. And ever and anon remembering his mercy, testified by the same David,
that if they would attain the Land and Inheritance promised the Fathers, they
should not offer him his beasts or his birds to eat, but unharden their
hearts, and hear his voice that day, that then it should come to pass, they
should enter into his repose, and Canaan spiritual, into the which their
Fathers could not for their unbelief. All the Prophets bearing witness
thereunto, that look how high the heavens were distant from the earth, so far
were his offerings differing from theirs: for all their ways and thoughts were
spotted like to the garment of a Tiger, transgressors of his fiery Covenant
which he struck with their Fathers in Horeb, as it is written, And the
testament which I gave them they kept not, and my soul despised them (says
the Lord) And still and evermore remembering his mercy, commended unto them the
day to come, wherein he would strike a new and an everlasting Commandment with
the house of Israel, not like to that he covenanted in the Wilderness, which
neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear, but his new Covenant should
be a Covenant of mercy and love, and no man should be able t'attaine it, by
rending his Garment, by Rams, or streams of Oil, but by rending his heart, by
hearing and believing the redemption which should be set in Sion: for he had
said, and would not repent for ever, The just shall live by faith. But Israel
was hard, and evermore in heart turned back into the Wilderness, choosing
rather to be the Sons of Agar, inhabitants of Sina, which ingendereth to death,
then children of promise, Citizens of Jerusalem from above, which begets to
life: refused his Law and Testament of grace, so often covenanted and commended
unto them: which he notwithstanding in fullness of time performed unto Jacob,
sending down out of his bosom the Mediator thereof, apparrelled in blood,
mounted on his little hill in his city of peace, with promise, that every
sinner should be delivered from shame, that puts trust in him. And when the
time came, was found walking in the st^eets of Jerusalem, his steps beautiful,
as are the steps of God: the flames and Angels of heaven, ascending and
descending at his commandment; and it was fulfiled which was spoken, In Jury
is God known, great is his name in Israel: and opening his mouth taught them,
and mavelous gracious and true were the words which proceeded from him: told
them their Fathers were wonderfully indeed fed and clothed in the Wilderness,
and yet were dead, because they were not fed nor clothed with him, who feeds
and arayeth to life everlasting: and the food and raiment which he gave, was
his blood, and they that are fed and apparrelled therewith, are those that
believe in him: commanded them not to work as did their Fathers in the
Wilderness, but as did Abraham, whose Children they pretended to be and were
not, for he believed in him, being yet but promised, whom they refused, now
performed, and witnessed plainly in their ears that day, there were no other
works but these alone, that led from the rod of th'oppressor to the Land of
promise, saying, This is to do the work and commandment of God, to believe in
him whom God has sent. Which thing your Fathers the Pharisees denying to do,
evermore seeking (after their hard and brazen progenitors) t'establish a
righteousness and justice of their own, to work the works and Commandments
of God, according to their way and meaning, by doing, refusing the justice
appointed by God, to work his works and Commandments according to his way and
meaning, by believing: rushed against the square, approved, precious stone
which was set up in Sion, and were bruised and broken to death everlasting.

And do thou know (Balaam) what it is to believe in him whom God has sent?
We speak the things we know, and testify what we have seen and learnt: That
which is borne from below is flesh, subdued unto sin, imbondaged to death, and
cannot see the inheritance and Kingdom of God; wherefore it was requisite a new
birth to be established, subduing the flesh unto the spirit, delivering from
the power of sin, and breaking the chains of death. Without the which, vain
and impossible is the Commandment, to believe in him whom God has sent: as it
is written, Unless a man be begotten by water and by the holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God.

So many Baalists heapt on another, at your conspiracy he^d at Trent, against
God, and his anointed, and knew not what it is to be borne of water and of the
holy Ghost? have ye indeed so planed the c^^atures of God, wrought in them a
belief, ye are successors and dispensers in heavenly things, and understand
not earthly?

There was a man sent from God, his name was John, your Fathers ran out in
troops to see him, a strange and sour fellow, was not lodged like a Prince, nor
clothed like a Courtier, neither wine nor water drank he, no other drink but
^ears, and in his mouth never entered bread.

Murderers, how chances it, that hanging up his dead body in your Courts and
Caves, drawing it through your streets once a year at the least, denying it
the natural courtesy of burial, you have not considered that he was
appointed from heaven, the Minister of the Baptism of water? as of himself he
testifies in a place, saying: He that sent me to baptize with water said unto
me, on whom thou see the Spirit descend and tarry he it is that baptizeth
with the holy Ghost. Do ye know wherefore his Lord gave him that honorable
testimony? namely, that he was more then a Prophet, and that among all the sons
of women, there was none to be found his greater? because, who so is not
prepared by him, which was appointed the Minister of the baptism of water,
shall never be purged by his Lord which comes after, who sanctifies with fire
and with the holy Ghost: for this was the Angel, appointed to go before the
face of the great Dominator, and teach the Children that sat in Prison, in
darkness, and shadow of death, that if they would be Sons of the Fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they should prepare their hearts by water, as did
the Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And therefore his Lord in parable
calls him the Mourner, wot ye why? because who so sorroweth not with him,
shall never rejoice with the Bridegroom, shall never see the birth of the holy
Ghost, the faith which believes in him which God has sent.

The poor woman which entered into the house of Simon the Pharisee, where her
Lord was at meat, and falling downwashed and kissed his feet, how comes it to
pass, (ye wise) that nayling up her dead body in your Groves and Temples to
the view, ye have not considered her tears and her love, preaching and crying
so many hundred years, the birth of water* of the holy Ghost? but ye say, when
Elias comes he shall restore all! Murderers, and do ye indeed lie in wait
for another Elias? behold the first came, and had not his God delivered him
from your hands by wonder, sending down his Chariot and Horsemen of fire, ye
had slain him with the rest of his Prophets, for ye sought his life also: and
the second came, a righteous and holy man, and behold, as innocent as ye
pretend to be, his righteous blood shall be found in your Courts, and his holy
head in one of your vessels: and do ye yet more attend a third Elias, like to
your stiff reprooved brethren, which walk stinking in your streets to day,
gaping the coming of a second Messiah? wherefore thus says the truth, there
shall no Elias come: and he that reading, considers the dwelling, the fare,
and raiment of the second Elias, how read and swollen were his eyes with tears,
how dry his lips with sighs, and does not weep and wayle with him, if seven
thousand Mourners should rise from the dead, they cannot make that man to
sorrow. This was the voice, who in the days of his flesh, called unto Israel
from out of the Wilderness, crying that if the would be sons and daughters of
God, they should not look up unto their pa^entage, boasting their pedigree,
^etcht from the loins of Abraham, but should take up the true and perfect
sorrow for their sin, and the unspeakable de^i^e to be reconciled to God, as
did his servant Abraham: that then the God of Abraham would turn to the
Children, a^ he did unto the Fathers, write his Laws ^n their hearts, cover
their offenses, and be unto them a God, and a Father, and they to him sons and
daughters: and every one which was to receive the light that followed, in whose
hand was the power to make of a ^^nner a Son unto God, hearkened to the Mourner
of Israel, sat down, and sorrowed with him.

And he that sorrowed, sorrowed indeed, his eye refused sleep, his mouth dened
t'eate, lost and dead was his cheer, his mirth was t^^n'd to sadness, and if
an asked what ill he had; seight, and could not speak, so great was his
sorrow: and walking all alone, sought for the night to cover him; and ever as
he went, wrote up with tears, the day was not made for him, that is in sorrow:
and in the night as dark as 'twas, his eye which now had clean forgotten rest,
beheld as in a table painted out, his wounds and transgressions, and fear, and
judgment: the Arrows of the Highest peirced him so, that he besought the day
to wake, for help and ease of sorrow; but when the day arose, the Sun
discovered his filthiness, drew him forth naked before the light and Throne of
God, laying truly to his charge, it was he that had polluted the earth: and
what pen may tell his fear? or who may conceive his sorrow? Like as the Heart
chased with Hound, recovering in going down of his strength some little
advantage, stands, hearing the cry of them that trace his blood so truly,
feeling the strength of his legs departed, looks about for the water brook to
recover his force a new, and finding not, pants and shuts often his fearful
eye, ready to give up the living breath which holds his silly bones together:
so trembles this guilty soul, and finding the pleasure of his pleasures past,
departed like friends in adversity, that knew him now no more, would feign
look up to heaven, as to the water brook, but durst not, for he had sinned
against it, and before him that sits thereon, fell down, and broken to
water, washed with tears the day wherein he was borne, and charged it with
cruelty, to call him out of his mothers womb, when there was no need of him.
Alas, might not the Sun have gone his course (quoth he) tho I had never been?
or had the Covenant of night and day been lost, and if my mothers womb had been
my grave (quoth he?) and seeing his fear so multiplied, he might no longer
live, wrote up with tears his last complaint, and laid it before the Throne of
God, confessed he was nothing worth, beseeched him to remember the Testament of
his mercy, the delight and pleasure of his soul, before the foundations of
creatures were laid, in it, to pity and call again, the poor and lost work
of his hand, which sin and filthiness had led away to death.

And this is he, that is poor, and bruised, that labors and is heavy laden,
sick, lost, dead, and lives now no more: this is he that travelleth* like a
woman, that labors, that weepeth while the world sporteth, devising
pleasantly to pass the time away. And this is he that is turned, begotten by
water, prepared by the Mourner, and unto whom God has sworn by the honor of
his name, He shall not die.

Murderers, stand forth, tell me, may ye set your penance by this man's
repentance? behold this man, of a hill, is become a valley: of a flint, soft
and tender as water: of a prudent and wise, become a babe: and like unto the
little one, which holding on his mothers breasts, cries, and fears the
regard of a stranger: so weepeth he if sin do but see him: Thou, standing on
the tops, despisest him that lies below, judge him a fool, and one that
knows not to use the time, and after thy heart hard as Adamant, subdued to
filthiness, despairing of a better promise, can not go down and sit, and
tell tears with him: bearing thy self alost, movest like an Oracle, faist, but
thou art wise: and like a fool, have not considered the word that solloweth
(...).

O just and righteous judgment of God, which by a low and simple word, has
sealed to reprove the wisdom of the world, and hidden from her proud and
prudent Children, the knowledge of his truth and heavenly things, and showed it
to babes: for even so it pleases him.

Murderers, may your penance yield such fruit as brings forth this man's
repentance? behold this man has lost his taste, and relish in sin for ever, and
in the ways wherein his soul delighted once, and took his course with
pleasure, now grieveth, fears, bewaileth ^he day that ever he walked therein:
what will thou minister to this man, to recover him to joy again? oil? corn?
wine? youth? strength? beauty? the world and glory thereof? nay, he sigheth,
and cannot find his help in them: his stripe is of that quality, as nothing can
heal, but the favor and countenance of him, whom he has offended: and
^urning his eve unto the wall, covers his head with deu^ and heaviness,
weepeth and will not be comforted, until he find the thing his soul so
desires: peace, love, and reconciliation with God.

I call ye all before the judgment seat of God this day, and lay unto your
charge, ye have not known nor learnt these things, and are nevertheless the
worthy fruits, which the preparer of Israel has cried out unto ye, these many
hundred years to bring forth.

Reproved and unbaptized hearts and ears, like to your fathers, which evermore
resisted the holy Ghost, so do ye: what has he at any time written with
tears, and ye not opened and read laughing? when has he commended ye his
orders in grave and funeral robes, and ye not reproved, saying, his humor is
to melancholy? what voice has he sent in lovv and servants tire, and ye not
despised, and said, his invention is simple? when has he encountered those
barred and bolted hearts of yours, with great and strong cries, and ye not
blasphemed, and told him h'is mad? and how may he cook or spice his
Commandments, to have them approved of your mouths, so vvayward and out of
taste? Children of go to death, which of you reproves him that writes of a
lie? wherefore thus says the truth, poor Sodom shall rise in that day, and
lift up their bloubred heads out of their dark dwelling, and the eye of the
Judge shall pity their captivity in respect of yours; for had they heard the
Mourners song as you have heard to day, the light of their repentance had
shined amongst us even to this hour: but this is the (...) poured out upon
ye, such a botch, such a (...) as the day shall come, that among all the
sinful generations of men, no one may be found so adulterous, that will
approve there had been on earth at any time, a race so stif and cast away, as
hearing all these things, would notvvithstanding worship Bell. And he that is
highest, shall show his name, in getting honor over ye, and because ye would
not learn and walk in his vvayes, shall give ye up unto your own, in
blindness, l^ke Sodomites, groping after, and pursuing the blood of his
Testament, till ye fall headlong down into the deep, where Pharaoh and his
men of war do lie: and all the World shall know and fear the holy one, the
Redeemer of Israel, the Lord of Hoasts, who has justified the judgments of
his Servants upon ye. But we will cast ye aside a while, and return to the
poor and broken soul, whom we have left in travel, and guard and watch him
day and night: behold and learn his end, he that is wise will mark his
deliverance, and happy man that can tell his tears, and sit and sorrow with
him.

To this man makes God answer, early or late delivers him: and how much the
longer withholdeth his countenance, retyring as it were his pity from him, so
much the more entendeth to advance his love and mercy toward him, to make him
great and a pillar in his house a comforter of the weak and broken knees of
others, and in his time sends down his promise, the rich and hidden treasure
which from the beginning dwelled with himself, and with his holy one, who day
by day labors, washes, and binds up this broken one, not leaving t'apply
unto his stripe, until he have wrought and shaped in him a full and perfect
assurance, that God has given him unto his Son: in him and through him,
forgiven and covered all those his transgressions, which cried our so justly
against his blood: and whereas in the day of his trespass, was a stranger, and
an enemy, now in his Son, and for his sake, is reconciled and beloved, and is
unto him as a son, and he to him a Father, the treasure which his soul in
the great day of his trouble so unspeakeably desired, and therewithal
commands him to bear written up in the apple of his eye night and day, to
read and consider, what great things have been done for him.

This man is now so assured his ^innes are forgiven him, as sure and persuaded,
that his Lord and Redeemer was once dead, now lives, and never dies more,
what Register may record the sins of him, whose transgressions God
forgets? what power may discover the nakedness of him, whose shame and
offense God covers? who shall be able to cast away whom God approves? or lay
to the charge of him, whom God chooses? may sin wherein he was conceived?
may trespass and filthiness wherein his youth delighted? may the bold and
bloody offenses, which his age has committed? may flesh and infirmities
wherewith he is clothed? may powers and blasphemies, wherewith he is compassed?
nay, this man is at rest, fully persuaded, God being with him, nothing may
prevail against him; as it is written, God justifying who may condemn? This
man is now so assured, God loves him, as that he is sure and fully persuaded,
neither fire nor sword, neither death, nor life, neither Angels, nor powers,
nor principalities, neither things present, nor things to come, neither natures
above, nor depths below, nor any creature other whatsoever, may separate him
from the love which God bears him, in Christ Jesus his Lord.

And this is the says of Abraham, and of Abraham's posterity, which reaches
justice to the sinner, and life unto the just, as it is written: But the just
shall live by faith. And this is the faith, whereof the holy Ghost pronounces,
by the mouth of his servant Paul, in a place, saying: Being justified therefore
by faith, we have peace with God in Christ Jesus our Lord. For he is truly
justified, whose sins are forgiven, as it is written: Blessed is the man
whose sins are forgiven, and whose transgressions are covered. And he is
truly at peace and one with God, that is beloved of him: and all this grace is
reached unto him in Christ, and through him, as it is written: For death and
bondage was given by Moses; but grace and truth by Christ Jesus. And this is
the rest, and peace from above, the birth and baptism of the holy Ghost, the
fire that purges the sons of men, transforming them from sinners, into the
sons of God: and no man shall see it, or have his part therein, that cannot
sing the song of the little children, which sat in the market place, crying and
calling one t'another: We have mourned, and ye have not sorrowed.

Murderers, stand forth; tell me, may you compare your belief with this man's
says? behold, thou beleevest one only God Father Almighty, of whom are all
things, and one Lord Jesus Christ his only Son, for whom, and by whom are
all things: and one Spirit God holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the
Son, the power, the life, and quickner of all things: and thou beleevest that
the Son in the fullness of time, descended from the bosom of his Father, came
into the world, was made flesh, conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of a Virgin,
and that he dyed and rose again, for the redemption of all that believe in his
holy name: and thou beleevest, those that believe in him are his Church, chosen
and gathered from all the winds, a Company undefiled, a holy Universitie, as he
is holy that has chosen them: and thou beleevest they wayle and weep, and joy
together, and thou beleevest their Lord is mounted up into the heavens, seated
on the right hand of God, all power in heaven and in earth subdued unto him:
and thou beleevest all flesh shall rise and stand before him, every man to
receive according to his thoughts. And all these things beleevest thou? thou
do well, thy father the Devil believes them also: and it is so far, that
this faith may save either thee or him, as that it shall increase both your
stripes: for unto whom much is committed, of him much shall be required: and he
that knows and does not, shall be beaten with many rods: And better it were
thou had never been borne, then to have heard and believed all these things,
and not to have sorrowed with the Mourner. And this was the faith of Simon
Magus, one of your firstborn, who hearing Philip preaching, th'Incarnation,
Death and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and forgiveness of sins in his
holy name, and seeing the great and wonderful works wrought by the same,
believed the promise and revelation of life, and was baptized, as it is
written; And Simon also believed, and was baptized: and yet was neither
begotten by water, nor by the holy Ghost: he believed as did the liar his
father, of whom he learnt his juggling, to plane the creatures of God, and was
reborne by water from below, not able to beget the sinner a new: for it is
impossible that blood of beasts, or water of fountains, may either purge or
prepare the sinner. And therefore Peter coming to Samaria, to purge those
sinners whom Philip had prepared by water from above, laid his finger to the
wound: fellow (quoth he) thou have no part nor fellowship with us, nor in this
administration, and showed him the cause why, namely, his unrepentance: giving
him t'understand, it was not possible for his soul to be purged of that gall
and bitterness wherein it lay, because his heart was not prepared by water.
And this was the faith of the Traitor, thy predecessor (Balaam) who sold the
truth and life everlasting, for the reward of iniquity like unto thee, he knew
and believed as thou do, that the blood of his Master was innocent blood,
and was baptized with the self same baptism wherewith thou art baptized, and
yet was neither begotten by water, nor by the holy Ghost, for it was not
possible for him to be purged with Peter, his heart unbroken, hard, and cruel,
r^fusing to sorrow with the Mourner. And this was the faith of Julian thy
Pastor (I touch your mystery now Sir Balaam) whose broad seal and
subscription, hangs even this day unto thy letters Pattens, confirming thy
Throne and Vicardome to thee and thy posterity, was baptized with the
selfsame baptism wherewith thou art baptized, and begotten by the
selfsame faith which thou beleevest, and yet th'uncleane spirit re-entred his
house prepared and swept, and his blasphemous end is known to ye all this
day, to be worse then his beginning: but had he been begotten by the faith
which Abraham believed, the enemy at the return with his seven thousand powers,
had found his house guarded by the stronger, the watchman of Israel had
defended his gates, and kept his walls from ruin: but it was not possible for
him to be cleansed with Abraham, his heart not prepared with water like unto
Abraham's, for his soul was found among the stiff uncircumcised children,
which would not regard their fellows, crying: We have mourned, and ye have
not sorrowed. But I will leave thy penance, thy belief, with all and every
point of thy Doctrine, to him that comes after, behold, a voice shall rise
against thee, discover thy blasphemies contained in thy conspiracy held at
Trent, against the holy one of Israel, and Jacob his chosen, and strike thee
so, with the two witnesses of God, out of whose mouth comes fire to destroy the
gainesayer, that all thy Magicians, all thy false reformed Prophets, shall not
be able to recover thee to life again: and return unto the man who once
labored and was lost, but now refreshed and is found again, whose war and
woes are turned to such a peace and joy, as the world can neither give, nor
take away from him: and let us make research into his life, beholding how he
works: he that is wise will mark his steps, and follow where he goes.

Like as the good and fruitful Tree, planted by the river side, brings forth
her fruit in time and due season: so fruitful now is this branch become, and
after the two noble parts of his faith, spreads out his root to moistness,
and brings forth, a double fruit. The Assurance of mercy and forgiveness of
his sin, works in him such a true and perfect hatred of sin, as no man
knows but he that is baptized in Silo with him: and this hatred dwells not
idle, hidden up, and sleeping in him, but as a City built upon a hill, shows
his bastions and beauty to the passers by: so breaks forth this fire within
him, making known to all his members, the power and strength thereof: retiring
them from their old and wonted ways, remembering unto him, with what a precious
bath and price he is washed and bought from th'uncleane and vain conversation
wherein once he walked, now and ever after to be holy, as he is holy that has
chosen him. What fountains may yield water enough to bewail the state of this
man? for in his members he finds a law, bidding and commanding
unrighteousness, intising to regard his pleasures past, maintaining to be bold
to return again, casting before him day and night the vomit, which now his
soul has cast up, and bleedeth to see or to remember more: and in his spirit
finds another law, remembering unto him the day of his trouble, when fear and
judgment led him chained to death, and how he followed weeping, and had
nothing to say for himself: how then and in that day, he pittyed and delivered
him, with charge to remember, with what a great and precious charge he was
redeemed and recovered again, commanding him therefore not to dare to look
back, or grieve the seed of God, the holy one, that has done all these things
for him. Ah poor and miserable soul, who shall deliver him from his body of
sin? for to the law of his spirit consents he, loves and feign would do
thereafter, but cannot, for he dwells in a house of rebellion, not contented
alone to pursue him by day, as it is written: All the day long am I punished,
and chastised every morning; but while the night lends the little ease unto
his heavy eye, his members watch to sin. Like righteous Lot in Sodom, so
dwells he closed in a City, whose buildings are transgressions, whose
streets are ways of error, whose bulwarks are the strength of death, whose
gates do lead to hell: dying daily, tormented daily, crying daily, to be
delivered from sin, or from the body thereof* and in a great and strong
patience, though now of all creatures most miserable, scorned of Angels,
disdained of men, hated of the world, pursued of his own, unspeakeably
endures all: hoping with a hope, which cannot be confounded, for the
revelation of his life, laid up in the bosom of his Lord and Redeemer, then and
in that hour to be declared and given him, when he shall come to judge the
world with a righteous judgment: rendering to every man just and truly,
according to the ways wherein his heart has walked. And this is the death to
sin, the great affliction, happy man that has his part therein, for he shall
see the day wherein he shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more, wherein the
Sun shall not burn him by day, nor fire by night any more: for the Lamb
that loves him, shall feed and cover him, and lead him to the fountains of
water of life, and satisfy him, and deliver his eye from tears, and he shall
weep no more.

The Other branch of his faith, namely the assurance that God loves him, works
in him of the contrary part, such a love of God, and of his Lord and Redeemer,
as no man knows but he that has it: and this hidden and secret name, rests
not idle, covered or sleeping in him; but as a Sacrifice salted, does prove it
self seasoned to the mouth of the taster: so breaks forth this hidden light,
and shows her beams unto the Worlds end: according to the Commandment: He
that loves God, loves his brother also: not him alone, with whom he prays,
weepeth, rejoices daily, which love is commended unto him by the names of
(...) and (...) but now loves he every man as his brother, knowledging every
man his neighbor on whom he may have mercy, every man his brother whom he may
love: which love is commended unto him by the names of (...) and (...), and
called in Scripture, the love of God. Because it is not learnt of flesh, nor
after the will of flesh, but of God, and by his example: who being fellowed in
glory with the highest, disrobed himself of his beauty, came down into the
world, was found amongst us, in weakness, in flesh and shape of a servant,
obedient to death, even to the death of the Tree, for the Redemption of those,
that were his sworn enemies. And this is the Love, which the World can neither
give nor receive, the Love which forbeareth and is gentle, void of envy,
vanteth not, whose countenance is humbled, whose steps are modest, always
seeking good to others, not giving place to anger, never found devising or
joying in evil, but always rejoicing in the company of truth: bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things. And this
is the perfection, the new Commandment, the Garment dipped in the precious
price, whose often praise* shines in the two Lamps which burn before the
Throne of God, and no man can see it, or have his part therein, that has not
received the promise, and spirit of adoption, wherein he cries, Abba father.
What will thou do to this man to take his love from him? will thou revile him,
charge him with names of Heretic, Sectary, private spirit, Devil? he (bearing
in mind thy blasphemy of old, and how thou did call his Lord (...) and
knowing the Disciple is not above his Master, nor servant greater then he that
sent him,) opens his mouth and blesses thee: for he remembers the
Commandment of his Lord, Bless them that curse ye. Will thou hate him? lie
in wait for him? and swear in thy heart to be his enemy? he weepeth, and
loves thee: for he remembers the Commandment of his Lord: But I say unto
you, love your enemies. Will thou bend thy brow and fist against him? lay thy
hand to the sword, and drive him into the corners of the earth: he goes
weeping and prays for thee: for he remembers the Commandment of his Lord:
Pray for them that persecute ye. Will thou lay thy hand and authority upon him?
draw him through thy streets, and beat out his brains with the stones thereof?
he lifting up his voice, commends his spirit and last request, unto his God
and Father, beseeching him, to forgive his blood unto thee, and sleeps, for
he remembers how in like case, his Lord the Lamb did so. And this is the
renovation spiritual, and first resurrection, Happy man that has his part
therein, for the second death shall take no hold on him. Who lays to the
charge of this man? Who may reprove his light, his steps, and his corrected
customs?

This man if he have been a Worshipper of the Beast, returning to himself,
falls down, and broken to water, powers out his complaint before the Throne
of God, confesses he was conceived in darkness, his birth was blasphemy, his
bringing up destruction, beseeches him to remember his Testament and Covenant
of mercy, wherein from the beginning his soul so delighted, in it to pity, and
gather up again the blood, which sin and abomination has spilt; and raised
up, comes out of Her, ever after offers Sacrifice well washed with water, the
fire of heaven consuming, and giving up the savor before the Throne of God, to
whom, in his Lord and Redeemer, he is now reconciled, and dies inward night
and day, remembering the treason of his life past.

This man, has he been an adulterer, or a defiler of his body, returning to
himself, falls down at the feet of God, and broken to tears, cries, Sodom
was his Mother, Gomorrah his Father, beseeches him to remember him, to
remember his Covenant and Testament of mercy, wherein his soul so evermore
delighted, in it to turn and love again, the poor confounded work of his
hand, by ^in and filthiness cast out to death, and raised up, does so no more,
ever after holds his body chaste or honorable, and bleedeth inward night and
day, remembering th'uncleanenesse of his youth.

This man, has he been covetous? an Userer, an Extortioner, a Fighter, a
Loyterer, a Thief, a Drunkard, Contentious, furious, a dark and
double-dealer, a lover of his flesh, or any such like? returning to himself,
falls down, and molten to tears, powers out his cries before the Throne of
God, confesses he was conceived in death, his teachers and his blood-friends,
the powers and strength of hell: beseeches him to remember his everlasting
Testament, wherein his soul so greatly delights; in it to pity and recover
again, the poor and broken work of his hand, which ^in, and foolishness has
slain: And raised up, does so no more, ever after breaks his bread unto the
hungry; restores the poor man's pledge, that lies bleeding by him, renders
to him to whom he has done wrong; has peace and love with all men; eats not
unless he labor; and by his true and faithful pains, gets his bread;
receiving his increase with moderation and thanksgiving, bears al things,
forbeareth all things, speaks the truth from his Heart, and in his Tongue
uses no deceit, sets by himself now no more, but is become vile and lowly
in his own eyes, and mourning consumes inward ni^ht and day, remembering the
trespass of his time lost.

Come forth ye Thieves and Murderers, out of your Dens and Palaces, you that
have filled the air with voices boasting your works, and called the heavens
into the field, despised their ways in respect of your works. Like as if the
Thistle should brag of his Figs, or Thorn should vaunt it self against
the Vine of Canaan, and say, her berries were better Grapes then hers: Vipers
tell us, may the fruit be good when the Tree is bad? Serpents, how can you do
good works, your selves being evil? but because ye have called him out, modest
and fearful as he is, he comes, accepts the controversy, and may ye indeed,
set your prayers and your pilgrimages by his? may ye compare your fasts, your
mercy, and your alms with his? Look how a grain imbalanced against the round
world, is found light and to bear no scale at all: so are ye found blind,
dead, and abominable, weighed with this man, held up by the finger of him,
whose Hand is an everlasting Scepter, a rod and rule of equity.

Murderers, dare ye to set your prayers by his? Behold this man, early in the
morning, and late in the night season, with broken and humbled knees,
presents himself before the Throne of God: and having n'other Father but him
alone, in sure confidence lifting up his voice, confessing his poverty, shame,
and confusion: gives all praise, honor, and glory, unto his Holy name: and
utterly ashamed now, of his own will and walks, beseeches him to power down
his promise, the ruler and governor of his Kingdom, that being sanctified and
guided by it, he may ever after walk in his Commandments, and work his holy
will, even as his servants, which minister before his Throne in Heaven. And
thereto knowledging he is fed and clothed, not by his own carke and care, but
by the Hand and providence of his Heavenly Father, commends unto him his
body, and the life thereof, beseeching, though he be not worthy the least of
his mercies, it may please him notwithstanding, to continue his love and graces
toward him, and calling to mind his sevenfold offense committed before him
that day, falls down, dissolved into water, beseeches him to look upon his
Lord and Redeemer, in him, and for his sake, to cover his fault and offense
committed, calling him to witness unto his poor and dried soul, how that the
Sun has not gone down upon his anger that day, and seeing the weakness, wherein
he dwells, the power and pride of unrighteousness, wherein he is as with a
Garment mantled, in great and strong tears, cries unto his God and Father to
deliver him from the Egypt, and wounds of the enemy, that no temptation may
lead him to commit evil in his sight. And therewithal in quietness and sure
trust, reclineth himself upon th'arme of his Heavenly Father, knowing in it
dwells all strength, Kingdom and power, to save and deliver the soul that
puts trust in him. And thus, and so prays he, in form and manner as his
Lord has taught him.

Thou watchest and risest early, like him that waits innocent blood, and
coming forth, bowest thy self before the tran^gression and abomination of
th'Heathen, and not considering the Sun is darkened, openest thy bold and
filthy mouth, blaspheming his Tabernacles which are in Heaven, setting them up
as did thy Fathers in the Wilderness, Moloch and Repham, gods of Egypt, to
grieve the ears of the Holy Ghost.

For as between God and the sinner, there is but one Mediator, and Reconciler,
Jesus Christ the righteous: so there is but one only Advocate, and Intercessor
between God and the believer, namely, the Spirit, which proceeds from the
Father and the Son, whose right hand dwells in the bosom of the Redeemer,
and left in the heart of the believer: and lifting up from hand to other, his
poor and broken voices pointed with tears, places them before the Throne of
God, and gives them such grace through his presentation, that they stand among
his holy Angels, beholding his face day and night, depart not his eye nor
memory, till all their requests be granted. And this is the great and
honorable Advocate, whose i^tercession so far excels in power, in
worthiness, in grace, in glory, th'intercession of the mother of Christ, his
brethren, his sisters, his Prophets, his Apostles, his Servants, his Saints and
Martyrs, as is the blood of the Lamb of God more excellent and precious, then
is the blood of Abel. And this is the high and holy one, that bears record
with his poor servant, which wrote these things, and we know that his record
is true, thereunto bearing witness, thousand sighs and tears, and that it
might be confirmed, under three, the love of God diffused in his heart, the
Garment dipped in the blood of the Lamb, cries out unto ye, testifying with him
these things are true. And being compassed with testifiers, in number so
sufficient, in quality so honorable, yet have ye not received our witness,
and behold on earth there are none to be found, that have, or may, or shall
bear witness to the truth, but these three alone.

Murderers, may ye compare your pilgrimages with his? behold, thou go from
City to City, from one place to another, and weariest thy self in ways and
labors, which no man requires at thy hands, and when they say unto thee, Go
into the wilderness to this or that Hermites Cave, there shall thou see the
life, and imitation of the Lamb, and of his servant John: or come to this
grave, go to that, here at Loretta, there at Compostella, there shall thou see
the powers of God, and of his holy one, thou ^not caring no^ considering they
are the comman^ements of abomination that ^itteth in the place ^here he ought
not) go, beleevest, adding to thy ^lasphemy, scorn and derision, offering
to the High^st, the labor and stink of thy feet, for the sin ^f thy soul.

This man, all the days of his life, are the days of his pilgrimage, wherein
like the child that be^aileth the death of his Mother, covered with dark and
mourning colors, wandreth the deserts of this ^ife, in an assured hope, one
day to come to a City ^romised, whose walls are made of everlasting stones,
whose foundation is the strength of God, whose tow^r's his glory. And if any
voice say to him, go into ^he wilderness to this or that Fremites den,
there ^halt thou see Christ: to these or to those dead bones, ^here shall thou
see his works of wonder: he abhor^eth it, for he remembers the commandment of
his Lord. But go not, believe not, take heed, behold, I have fore^old ye all.

Murderers, may vee compare your fastings with his? Behold thou eatest fish
once and twice a week to honor God withal. Egyptians, who has required this
honor at your hands? cares he whether thou eat the flesh of fish, or the
flesh of Beasts? has he not made meat for bellies, bellies for meats: and
shall he not destroy both it and them? And know thou indeed that which
enters into the belly goes out into the draught, and du^st presume t'honour
him with either one or other? wherefore thus says the truth, the sacrifice and
fasts of Jerusalem shall ^ise in judgment against th'offerings, and
fish-fasts of Babylon; and had ye known what that Scripture means* No man
drinking old Wine, will straight way commend the new, for he says the old is
better, then had ye never condemned the new and true fast, t'establish a fast
more vile and filthy then was the fast of Pharisees.

This man, all the days of his pilgri^^ge are a continual fast, night and day
fasteth he, his bread is become affliction, his wine is turned to trouble,
because the Bridegroom is taken from him, and his Lord whom he loves so, is
gone into a far Country. And as concerning meats and bellies, this man is
taught of God, that besides the person of a Christian, (in which respect all
the creatures of God are clean unto him, received in godliness, moderation,
and thankesgiving) he sustaineth the person of a Citizen, and knowing his King,
his Governors, or State, whereunder he is placed, for good and probable
causes, tending to the peace and maintenance of the many (which God especially
will have preserved) have authority to command, and forbid in meats, in
drinks, in cloth, in days, and such like: so eats, so drinks, so
wears, so keeps he, as his Prince commands, giving to his Prince the
obedience that to a Prince belongs, and honors his God with the honor,
which to God appertains.

Murderers, may ye compare your alms, and mercy with his? Behold, thou
devourest the widow, and waterest the seed of adultery, and say thou
feedest Orphans, arrayest thy self with the spoil of Kingdoms, and
nourishest Dragons, eggs of Serpents, and every unclean bird, and say thou
feedest the sons of Prophets: Fool, how can thou give a drink of cold
water to a Prophet, thy self being none of the generation of Prophets? Balaam,
do thou know him that wrote these things? or have thou considered his hunger
and his wants, as thou regarding passest by, like one of the dead and rotten
graves of Sodom, covered with white, with Crimson, and pavonats, (...) written
on thy head before, and on thy scull behind (...)? desires he thy gold, thy
pots, thy puddings, and thy purples, which thou have bought so dear? nay,
Balaam, he serves that Lord, whose inheritance is the earth and the plenty
thereof: has he sadled his Ass at any time, and posted after Balaks
preferment like unto thee? Nay, Balaam, then let his soul be given up to an
unrepentance, like as is thine, have thou any thing to give, that he desires to
receive? no Balaam, he seeks not thine but thee, and this is his desire, that
thou and all the world this day were like unto him, excepting his sin.

Murderers, and dare ye talk of mercy? then tell us, when have ye seen
Christ hungry, and given him to eat? when have ye seen him thirsty, and
given him to drink? when have ye found him a stranger, and opened unto him?
when have ye met him naked, and clothed him? when have ye known him weak,
and comforted him? in prison, and visited him? Can ye minister to whom ye know
not? can ye feed, harbor, cover, comfort, visit, whom ye see not? behold
(Pharisees) I tell ye a mystery, ye shall never see nor know, those little
ones his brethren to whom ye should have ministered, unless your hearts can
melt and sorrow with them: have ye not read (ye wisards) that the blind shall
see, and they that see shall be made blind? This is the judgment which God
has sent into the world, and it is mavelous this day in our eyes: behold,
this man, as touching the mercy which he ought to do, eats his bread with
the empty, and with the dry and thirsty ground weepeth he, the pilgrim and the
sojourner, are ever found within his Courts, his gates are never shut, with the
naked fitteth he, and with his garment covers his shame; with the broken, and
imprisoned, passes he his time, with plentiful and many tears comforting
them, nay, who hungreth, and he not pined? who thirsts, and he not dried up?
which is a stranger, and he not thrown out? who naked, and he not confounded?
who weak, and he not spent? who lies imprisoned, and he not tormented? And as
concerning the mercy, which he ought not to leave undone, this man, if he have,
according to the Commandment of his Lord, to him that asks gives, and to
the borrower lends, looking for his reward and interest, in the resurrection
of the just: if he have not, applies his hand and back to the burden,
knowing he may not eat unless he labor, in great patience and thankfulness,
turning over the leaves of his life, so richly contented, as if his Royalties
were as large, as are the dominions of the little bird, who reigns as wide as
her silly wing may carry her, and wheresoever dismounting, sets her little
foot, looks about for her provision, as if she were at home.

And this is the first, the next, and last, of the living stones and temples of
God, which he (before the day knew his coming up, or going down,) chose and
adopted, in the precious blood of his eternal Testament, to be unto him a
House, a Church, a Tabernacle, and everlasting possession.

And he that writes bears witness, and testifies unto the world, all
those, whether Kings or Servants, wise or simple, learned or Idiots, rich or
poor, old or young, bond or free, that shall be found to have worshipped the
Beast, received the print of his name, and set up in their Tents and dwellings,
his Table, and imitation, rejoice and clap their hands thereover, shall be
thrown out, and have their part with blasphemers, whose fire quenches not,
whose stink is everlasting, and shall not enter into the rest of God for ever,
nor see his holy City.

And all those, that so poison, doctrines of death, lifting up their bold and
shameless voice, like Cantibanks in market places, avouching the goodness and
proof of oils and ointments, which cannot give a foot to the lame, nor eye to
the blind, as Arrians, Vbiquitists, Libertins, Familists, Coinonists, or any
such other Antichrists like to them, shall be cast out, and reap their part
with liars, and Sorcerers, whose worm dies not, whose cry is everlasting, and
shall not enter into the rest of God for ever, nor see his holy City.

And all those that fellow and shuffle themselves in companies, marching under
names and titles, whatsoever as Hussit's, Lutherans, Calvinists, Evangelists,
Protestants, Praecisians, or any such other like to these, and have not their
parts in great sorrow and fear, the preparation and beginning of the wisdom
from above, shall stand without among the Dogs, the Covetous, the Murderer,
the Adulterer, and him that is defiled with unspeakeable uncleanness, and
shall not enter into the rest of God for ever, nor see his holy City.

And now I trust (Balaam) thou see what thou art not: it rests it be showed
thee what thou art.

There was a book written by the finger of God, and as a Table in a good and
perfect light, placed in the midst of the air, that all the world might see
and read the thrice abominable mystery, foretold by the Spirit, his Prophets,
and Apostles, to be wrought by thee and thy Fathers house: And had her proud
and prudent Children, but wiped their eyes wi^h sackcloath, they had beheld thy
enchantments long ere this, and loosed from the bonds of thy father, the great
jugler and Planer of the World, had departed thy Courts, and fled unto the
Mount and little hill of God, where the Lamb does sit. Nevertheless for Sions
sake, and for to still her cries, The morning star, the branch and begotten of
David, will open the mouth of one of his servants, and give him power to
disvaile the Revelation, and he his Servant shall discover thy madness, and
show unto the world the things, which thou, thy witches, and thy Wise, had
hoped to be past finding out.

Thy conception. Thy birth. Thy nurture. Thy perfection. Thy name. Thy mark.
Thy number. Thy heads. Thy horns. Thy vicardome. Thy keys. Thy swords. Thy
succession. Thy Guardrobe. Thy Church, her Ornaments, Idols, Altars, Gold,
Silver, Pearl, Stone, Silk, Copes, Banners, Stincks, Processions, Relics,
Oil, Wine, Wafers, Music, Lights, lies. Thy end. Thy death. Thy judgment.

And in that day, thy name and generation shall stink, from the Center of the
earth, unto the highest Heaven. And thou, that have thrown fire into all thy
Neighbors Tents, and with thy Sorcerers and men of wisdom, not considered,
that though it begin to destroy in Canaan, it shall assuredly end in Chaldea,
shall now be called into battle thy self, and that thou may not hope to
save thy blasphemous head with thy lying tail any more, behold, the days
which were prophesied, are come into the world: and such voices shall rise up
against thee; as that it shall be easier unto thee to command the thunder
silence, when he begins to roar in the midst of the air, or to return the
Arrows of Heaven into the p^ace from whence they come, or to meet the
whirle-winde coming in his strength like a King, his men of Arms, and Fifers
by his side, and shoulder him out of his point into another: it shall be easier
for thee (I say) to do all these things, then t'answer the voices which shall
be heard against thee. And I thy Brother am in Babylon, mourning over thee and
it, and there will tarry, notwithstanding the rage and violence of all thy
Spades, thy Spears and Arcu buzadoes, this day, and tomorrow, and the third
will pay my vows. Amen.

ESAIAS: Bell is fallen, Nebo is smitten down, whose Images were burdens for the
Beasts and Cattle of the field, to overcharge and weary them.
FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO Q. Elizabeth.

Presented to her Majesty by the Author thereof.



First Printed in Anno Dom. 1589. And sundry times since.

TO HIS MOST EXCELLENT SOVEREIGN PRINCESS Queen Elizabeth.
IF it be impertinent and out of season, in regard of your other pleasures, to
advertise these few words, let truth be blamed: for I your servant cannot but
speak the things I know, and testify that which I have seen and heard: what
though I be no Minister, nor Son of a Minister? Shepherds and Clownes have
been Divines sometimes, and why not I? I do not advertise you concerning the
wisdom of a Princess of this World, how to relieve your people if they be
oppressed, nor how to curb them if fulness make them wanton, nor how to raise
a little weal to great, nor how to uphold it from falling down again (for
all these things may you do and perish) but I advertise you concerning a
wisdom from above, which if you understand and do thereafter, then shall your
Scepter be a Scepter of continuance, and you a Princess and a Queen for ever,
not like to Babylon, nor Monarch of the East, nor like the rakehell rout of
Emperors and Kaisers of this world, which for a season flourish, and then go
down to hell: but like unto his Servant David, who in the days of his flesh,
performed the duties of a King of this world, and yet remains a King for
ever, for he observed the counsel and wisdom from above, which made him so
fair in situation, like to Mount Sion, never to remove. And this wisdom
which we speak is a Law, not that of fearful Sinai, a Law of condemnation, a
Statute of execution, a Covenant of death, condemning the transgressor to
everlasting captivity; But it is a Law proceeding out of Sion, a Law of pardon,
a Statute of deliverance, a Covenant of life, redeeming the sinner from the
wrath of the day to come. And therefore this wisdom is called in Scripture,
the new Covenant, the Covenant of Levi, the everlasting ordinance, the truth,
the light, the life, the reward, the promise, the power, the salvation, the
redemption, the sanctification, the justice, the counsel, the correction, the
hidden purpose, the secret intent, the mystery and Kingdom of God.

And one in a certain place, calls it the wisdom from above, because it is
not a virtue engendered, or in begotten by any grace or benefit of nature,
growing to perfection by long study and large experience, Iam. 3. 17.
but a mystery and secret from above, which God determined before all worlds,
and has revealed it to the glory of those whom he has chosen, and this is the
wisdom whose nature we advertise, not in the tea^mes and eloquence of the
Theologall discourses of this age, but in the power and strength of God, able
to raise from death to life, the soul that understands it. The whole nature
and work of this heavenly wisdom, is perfectly set out and declared unto us in
these two. First, in her Tree, next in the fruit thereof. Her Tree in Scripture
is disciphered by the names of cleansing, or washing, or purging, and sometimes
expressed by a borrowed word, as a new making, a new birth, a birth from above,
a re-begetting, and is so called, not in a natural, but in a spiritual
meaning, not because it reduces us into our parents, calling us out of their
bowels again, but by comparation and way of similitude, that like as by our
natural and fleshly generation, we are borne servants and sons of wrath, which
sometimes we were not, so by this spiritual generation and birth from above,
we are borne free, and made the sons of God, which by nature we are not: for
that which is of nature is flesh, subdued unto sin, imbondaged to death, and
cannot see the inheritance and Kingdom of God; but that which is born from
above, is Spirit, redeemed from the captivity of sin and of death, and chosen
to inherit the Kingdom and promise of God. And this birth and propagation
from above, is wrought and brought to pass by these two, to wit, by water and
by fire, whereof this purges, the other prepares. I do not mean the water
of Jordane, nor any waters from below, for it is impossible for the water of
fountains, to break, to mollify, or to prepare the sinner, but the water of
this birth is a force and virtue from above, which turns, and as it were
transhapeth the hard and stony heart of the sinner into tears, preparing it by
this kind of water, to receive the promise and redemption of God. And therefore
the Scripture compares the man that is begotten by water, to a Mount that is
become a Valley, unto a Cedar now become a Plant, to a rough and crooked way
that is become a plain, unto a wise and prudent one, but now become a babe,
unto a stone transformed to flesh, and to a substance hard as Diamond,
translated to a nature as soft as water: by these and such like speeches,
describing the man whose heart is turned from all the joys and contentments of
sin, into a fear and sorrow for them, and from all her temporary and false
pleasing lusts, into a restless and indicible desire to be restored to grace,
and reconciled to God again. For the hill does not more differ from the Valley,
the Cedar from the plant, the crooked from the plain, the discreetly aged from
the little child, the hardness of flint from the softness of flesh, the
substance of Diamond from the nature of water, these (I say) differ not each
from other more, then this man now from that he was. And this is the birth and
preparative of water, called in Scripture the Baptism of John. Whose ministry
was ordained (as testifies the Prophet) to prepare the way before the great
Redeemer, and Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. 4. 6.
by turning the hearts of the Children into water, like to the hearts of their
Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that God might also turn unto them in
mercy and love, as he did unto those their Fathers And therefore his Lord in a
certain Scripture, gave him (in regard of his ministry) that honorable
testimony, namely, that he was more then a Prophet, Mat 11 9. 11.
and that among all the Sons of women there was none found his gr^ater, because
whosoever is not first prepared by the ministry of John, who was appointed the
minister of the baptism of water, shall never be purged by his Lord which comes
after, who sanctifies by the ministry of the Baptism of fire. I do not mean
the fire of this world, nor yet the Element so called, for it is imipossible for
any such fires, to purge, to sanctify, or to refine the sinner. But the fire
of this birth is a heavenly power, and finger from above, which writes in the
heart prepared by water, and in no other Tables, the indeleble Covenant of
mercy and love, which (before all worlds) in the precious blood of the Mediator
thereof, God made with Abraham and his Sons for ever; namely, that he would
remember their sins, and their iniquities no more; and that he would be to them
a God To (...).
and a Father, and they to him a people, Sons and Daughters. And this is the
word, and ingraving of God, which being written in a molten heart, and blown
down with water, refineth it to the sey of Romans 10. 8. Deuteronomy. 30. 12.
the gold of Ophyr. And this is the birth and purgation of fire, called in
Scripture the Baptism of the holy Ghost, the life, the justice, the promise,
and felicity of God, as holy David describes, saying, Blessed is the man whose
sins are covered, and whose God is the Lord Psalm 32. 2. 33. 12.
JEHOVAH.

And this is the Tree and first beginning of the wisdom and counsel of God,
and he that cannot attain thereto, shall never see the reign and prosperity
of Israel, according to the eternal decree, proceeded out of the mouth of the
highest, never to be repented of, or called back again; Unless a man be John
3. 5.
begotten by water and by the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

The fruit of this Tree of life spreads it self into four branches, and as
the Heavens by immutable ordinance, shut up the course and labor of the year
in four seasons, so has the Scriptures complected the whole voyage and
travel of this sanctified and new begotten servant, in these four; Peace,
Patience, Hope, and Love. I do not mean the peace between Amon and Moab,
that is to say, the smooth, the Civil and dissembling truce of the Kings and
Counselors of this world, but a peace which passes their affairs, a peace
which is heavenly and from above, even the peace and reconciliation between
God and the sanctified, in the price and mediation of the Lord of the Covenant:
for what power, what preparation, what terror, or what else may fear him, in
whose heart the finger of God has once engraven a full and persuaded
assurance, that neither fire, nor sword, nor death, nor life, nor powers, nor
principallities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor natures above, nor
depths below, nor any creature other whatsoever, may separate him from the love
which God bears him, in Christ Jesus his Lord? May the sin wherein he was
conceived, or the follies and offenses wherein his youth delighted, or the bold
and bloody treasons which his age has committed? or flesh and blasphemies
wherewith he is entrenched? nay, this man is at rest, fully persuaded God being
with him, nothing may prevail against him, as it is written, If God justify,
who can condemn^? Isa. 50. Romans 8.
And this is the peace which the world cannot give, nor take away from any, to
whom it is given; the peace which the Holy one, the Redeemer of Israel speaks
of in a certain place, saying; Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you, but not as the world gives: let not your hearts therefore be troubled,
nor fear. John 14. 27.


And forasmuch as to be at peace and one with God, is to be at war and odds
with sin, and with all her pleasures, this man in wonderful patience prepares
and armeth himself to meet the enemy. And tho his flesh with all her desires,
like multitudes of Armies incompasse his soul, be sieging, pursuing,
tormenting it day and night, as it is written; We are Ps. 44.
given up like sheep to be eaten, and for thy sake, O Lord, we are slain all
the day long, yet in silence and quietness he endures all, sustained by the
Word, which says, In patience possess your souls: Looking assuredly for the
promise of good things to come, and that with such a Luke 21. 19.
stable and full persuaded expectation, as no power in Heaven above, or in the
earth below, may shame or confound his hope: fully persuaded that tho now he
live closed in flesh, as in a City of transgression (like righteous Lot in
Sodom) scorned of Angels, despised of men, hated of the world, and pursued of
his own, yet that his mourning shall tarry but till morning (...) for then his
life shall be revealed, which now lies hid, laid up in the bosom of his Lord
and Redeeme^, and shall be declared and given him even in that morning, when he
shall come to judge the world with righteous judgment, rendering to every man
just and truly according to the ways wherein his heart has walked. And in the
exercise of these three, consists the death to sin, called in Scripture by
the names of Mortification, the great affliction, the Dust, the Tears, the
shame and oppression of Sion. Happy man that has his part therein, for he
shall live to see the reign Rev. 7. 14, 15, 16, 17.
wherein the Sun shall not burn him by day, nor fire by night, any more, and
wherein he shall not hunger, nor thirst, nor want, nor weep any more.

The fourth and last branch of this Tree of life, is Love, the light and
perfection of the whole estate and travel of a Christian: for can a City built
upon a hill, hide her face from the passer by? or may a Sacrifice salted,
convey his seasoning from the mouth of the taster? may the Sun shine, and not
show his beauty? or may a Candle burn, and not bewray her light? And tho these
creatures could forget their natures, yet cannot the plant in whose heart the
eternal Covenant of Love is once engraven, forget to burn with like
affection, first toward God, then toward men. I mean not those alone which
have received like part and fellowship with him, but toward those also that
are his enemies, which love is commended to us by the names of (...), and is
called in Scripture the love of God, because it is not learnt of flesh, nor
after the will and wisdom of flesh, but by the sample and pattern of that
love, wherewith God first loved us. Who being fellowed in glory with the
highest, as testifies the Prophet, Zach. 13. 7.
disrobed himself of all his beauty, and came down into the world, and was
fonnd in dishonor, in weakness, in flesh, and shape of a servant, obedient to
the shame and curse of the Tree, for the redemption of those that were his
sworn enemies.

And this is the love, whose rich and plentiful nature, the Apostle
describes, saying, Love forbeareth, 1 Cor. 13.
and is gentle, void of envy, and of doing wrong; vaunteth not her self, nor
disgraceth others, seeks not her own, nor gives place to anger, never
devises or joyeth in evil, but always rejoices in the company of truth,
bears all, believes all, hops all, endures all.

And this is that Love, and that new Commandment, whose often praise shines
in the two lights and Lamps of God, which burn before his Throne day and night,
and no man can attain thereto, or have his part therein, that has not first
been cleansed by the promise of the Father, which is the Spirit of adoption
wherein he cries Abba Father.

And this is that Holiness and Newness of life, which the Scripture so often
commends unto us, by the names Vivification, renovation spiritual, and the
first resurrection. Blessed and holy are they that have their parts therein:
for on such the second death shall have no power, as it is sealed in the book
of life.

And this is the first and last, the beginning and the end of the counsel and
wisdom of God, even his secret, hidden, eternal, and only ordinance,
wherein (before the day knew his coming up, or going down) he purposed to save
and to recover again the thing which was lost. And they that understand it,
and do thereafter, are those which are registered in the book of life called in
Scripture by so many fair and beautiful names, as, A righteous Tree, a
pleasant Land, a habitation of Justice, a holy Mountain, a City of truth, a
City sought out and not forsaken, a holy City, a holy Nation, the plantation of
God, the Mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the pillar and sustainer of truth,
Beloved, Beautiful, Free, Faithful, Chosen, Kings, Priests, Saints, Sion,
Daughter of Sion, Mother of the just, Jerusalem, Children of promise, Vessels
of Mercy, Israel, Jacob, Judah, Ephraim his first borne House of Levi, his
Temple his Tabernacle, his Sanctuary, his People, his Vine, his Body, his
Spouse, his Church: and such like. And these are the Stones of Sion, which
although they be (for their transgressions, as testifies the Prophet) scattered
among the heathen, and unbaptized in heart for a season, given up to the
pleasures of Murderers, Jer. 4. 31. 30. 15. Isa. 54.
as to the pains of a woman that travelleth, accounted vile, desolate,
despised, cast away, no body, no where, compared with the glorious Synagogues
and Churches of this world, yet what says the Scripture: Rejoice thou barren
that bear no children, break forth into joy and gladness, thou that
travellest not, for the desolate has many more then the married wise, says
the Lord: Meaning thereby that tho his captive Daughter Sion, during the days
of her soiourning in earth, as in a strange Land, be bowed down, and laid low
like a street, for the beasts of the field, Citizens of the earthly Jerusalem,
to tread upon and go over: yet when the morning Isa. 52.
comes, the morning of extermina^ion, determined to come upon the whole
earth: she shall arise and shake of her graves, her tears, and dust wherein she
lies, and put on a garment of light of beauty, and joy everlasting. And all
the delices, the pompes and paraments of her oppressors, shall vanish as a
dream, Isa. 60. 14. Ier. 20. 16, Ezekiel. 28. 25. Dan. 7. 27. Joel 3. Amo. ^ 9.
Mic. 5. 8. Sap. 1. 9. Hag. 2. 23 Za. 2. 8. Mal. 4. 1, 2, 3.
and themselves covered with torments, shall be sold for slaves to the daughter
of Sion, whom in the days of their pleasures they so much despised, as i^
testified by the Prophets.

And this is the Church and City of God, not like unto the shameless and
adulterous Congregations of these times, pure in skin, and soul in heart,
which ^oast to be that they are not, each discovering other spots themselves
full of Ulcers, daily squaring and falling out like Thieves about the treasures
and riches of God, which appertain to truer men then they. Neither is she like
those foolish and irr^formed reformers, that in all this time have not learnt
to discern between the Image of God, and the Inscription of Caesar: I mean
those that have not yet learnt, that every one that fears God, what or
whersoever he be, sustaineth two persons, the one of a Citizen, the other of a
Christian. Touching his person of a Citizen, if he be called to be a Prince and
Ruler over his brethren, knows that this his authority is the allowed and
approved rule and lawful Seniory, to constitute and determine every vocation,
and therein in those especially, that attend upon the Altar, carefully
foreseeing, that in their sort they be provided for, according to the word
which commands: Deuteronomy. 25.
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn,
prescribing, to every one committed to his charge, in meats, in drinks, in
cloth, in day, and such like, according to his wisdom, heedfully respecting, in
guiding the Bark of his Government (as the Pilot does the Needle) the
commandment of God and quality of his people. On the other side, if he be
called a servant, and to live in subjection, knows that the magistracy
whereunder he is placed, whether it be of one, of few, or many is his allowed
seniory and lawful presbytery, and unto whom by immediate prescription and
authority from God, belongs to defend the innocent and correct the faulty,
and thereafter fears he, taking up his vocation, as his Prince allows,
contented with such dismes as his Prince provideth, eats, drinks, wears
and keeps as his Prince prescribes, giving to his Prince the obedience which
to a Prince belongs. And as concerning his person of a Christian, this man,
whither he be placed in authority, or under authority, knows that neither
Thrones, nor Chaires of state, nor gracious titles of Lordship and Sovereignty
avail him any thing, but that he is called to a like subjection, and equal
participation with the rest of his fellows, as it is written, He that is
greatest, let him be as Luke 22. 26.
the least, and he that is chiefest, as him that serves. For all are baptized
with one baptism, the water of repentance, all are sanctified with one fire,
the Word of Faith, all are children of one Mother, Jerusalem from above, all
are subjects to one Lord, who by his obedience and Sacrifice once for all, has
sanctified and reconciled them, and made them of ser^ants and sons of wrath,
his brethren and sons to his own father, as it is Heb. 2. 11.
written, He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one.
And thus and so walks this man, giving tribute to whom tribute is due, fear
to whom fear belongs, and honor to him to whom it pertains, according to
the commandment of his Lord, which says, Give then to Caesar the things which
are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods. Which many blind and
fleshly humors not considering* have labored and brought forth such error
and distraction, as we see every where this day. Some so drunken with the
primacies and prerogatives of Caesar, as that they fear not to revile the
freedom appertaining to the Kingdom of God.

Others so headlong carried with a false pretended liberty, and freedom of a
Christian, as that they care not to deny the lawful sword and authority of
Caesar, so that amongst so many, so few from time to time are found, that can
discern how Saints are free and yet subject to Caesar. But God loves Sion,
and has chosen it, for in her is truth without confusion.

And this is the generation of the counsel and wisdom of God, and the true
description of all her children, which if you understand and do thereafter,
then shall you discern those reprobate times, and save your self from the
visitation to come. What man is he, that traveling by desert places, and
seeing the day at his going down, hastes not to recover his Inn, for fear
lest the night leave him in distress. Hasten then after the counsel and
correction of God, whilst yet the day lasts; for behold, the night comes.

And these are all which I advertise you, few as they be, and simple as they
go, yet (if truth deceive me not) their right understanding is far finer gold
then is your Scepter, and much more honorable then your Fathers house. And
this shall be for a sign that I speak not of my self. Behold the Mountain
which you fear so much, I mean the Beast, the Man of sin, Lucifer, Son of the
morning, the Horn that has so many hundred years blaphemed heaven and
oppressed earth, behold, I say, tho now he be so great, as that the makes the
earth to Isai.
tremble, and shake with a word only, the very roots of Kingdoms, the ^ime
hastes, and is at hand, ^herein he shall be made so little, as neither name
nor remnant of him, nor son, nor sons son, shall be found upon the earth. For
his days are numbered, signed and sealed up in the b^ok of God, and yet seventy
and seven days, and his number 666. shall be fulfilled. And all his Princes,
his Sorcerers, and multitudes of people, which now rejoice and ^lap their
hands, drunken with the whoredoms and prosperity of Babel, shall then lie
comfortles, and wring their hands as fast: for Beltis their God is dead. And
the death of Babylon shall be the life of Sion, but her light may not long
endure, as testifies the Prophet, and then and in those days shall be
finished the secret known to the Lord alone, even the great mystery and
redemption of God, forespoken of by the Dan. 12. 22.
mighty Angel who stood upon Sea and Land, and swore by him that lives for
ever and ever, That time should be no more. And when these things shall come to
pass, as Revel. 10. 6.
verily in their appointed time they shall, then shall they k^ow that in the
days of their rebellion, there was a voice of a servant of God heard amongst
them.

1 T. L. restifie these things with mine own hand in sober humblene^^e,
commending them to your Majesty only in regard of my duty, and for no other
reward. Give your promotions to those sons of Beor, that rise so early, and
saddle their Asses to post after them: for I your servant, have bread and water
enough (thanks be to my God) and am therewith as well content, as if my Lands
were as large as are the royalties of the little bird, who possesses all the
fields over which it flies.

Proverb. 1. Because ye have despised all my counsel, and refused my
corrections, I will also laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear
comes.
FINIS.
BABYLON IS FALLEN. OR, A Prophecy that had lain hid above two thousand years.

Foreshewing, The rising, continuance, and fall of the Empire and Supremacy of
Rome, with all matters of moment that were to come to pass during the reign
of the Emperors and Popes.

The last being the vanishing of the Germane Empire, lately fullfilled. The
next, the dividing of the Kingdom of France by the Sword of Spain. The third
that of Spain by the Sword of other Nations. The fourth the destruction of
Rome, and desolation of her Church, in the year, 1666. The fifth, the
descending of the Kings of the East, and of the whole world, unto the battle
of the great day of God Almighty.
The first title was only, Babylon is Fallen, with these words of the Prophet.

For I heard the railings of many, and how they watch for my halting, saying,
it may be that he is deceived, Jer. 20. 10. LONDON, Printed by M. S. 1651.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT Lord DEVOREUX, Earl of Essex.
REading of late (my Lord) a Chapter of Esdras, folding up in a mystical and
dark discourse, a living Representation of a long time, whereof the most is
past, and some little to come* ^ thought it no lost labor to take my Pen and
unfold the same, that therein we may behold (which naturally all desire to
see) as well the issues of things to come, as what is past, or now in being:
and thereafter to qualify and moderate our hopes, and call our troubled
thoughts (which otherwise run with reins on Neck) within the Circle and
limitation, bounded and drawn from above.

And finding this Prophecy written by a Man greatly beloved of God, and
thereto (which rare is) a Princes Favorite, high in grace with a King of
Persia; I presumed the rather to present this my Labor to your Hon. Lordship,
as upon whom God has vouchsafed like great and rare graces. 'Tsufficeth that
your Honor read it, greater favor Esdras seeks not.

He Labors not to praise or please, which now a days finds many friends; but
to admonish and forewarne, which fataly finds none, till't be too late.

He fears not the Noble and Learned Reprover of supposed Predictions, for he
has heard him honor the Prophesies of Holy Writ, wherein himself has no
less honor gotten, then given. His other Enemies have wished me to conceal, and
t^ reserve them to a more open hearing. But Esdras is at the next leaf (my
Lord) and craves your Honors patience for an Hour.

BABYLON IS FALLEN. ESDRAS 4. Chap. II.
Verse. 1. Then I saw a Dream.

AFter this, the Prophet saw a Vision, concerning the beginning, continuance,
and fall of The Empire and supremacy of Rome. And this Vision was showed him in
the days of Artaxerxes King of Persia, About four hundred years before the
first stone of Julius Caesar.
her Empire was laid. And behold there arose from the Sea an Eagle.



And there arose among the Nations, the fierce and fearful Kingdom and Empire
of Rome, seen in Vision by the Prophet Daniel, some few years before. Which
had twelve fethered wings.


Wherein should arise and reign twelve Emperors, which should spread their
Power like wings, over all the Earth, in great fear fitting on it. And it
seemed good unto the Prophet to touch by an intellection these twelve only,
both for they are a Jury sufficient to argue the whole suite of Emperors which
did arise and reign in her: as also because they only were native Romans,
descended of the Julij, Seruij, Saluij, Flauij, etc. unlike therein unto the
rest, which were all (or almost all) like change^ble stuff of diverse colors,
so of diverse Nations. Their rising, continuance, and end, is touched in their
proper place. And three heads.


Her three heads are three Kingdoms, fore ordaiued to uphold and maintain the
power of her pride, when all her wings and feathers should fail her. And are
reserved to execute her last will, and finish her Funerals, as shall be
hereafter more at full declared.

Verse. 2. And I saw, and behold, she spread her wings over all the Earth, and
all the winds of the air gathered themselves and blew on her.

By the winds are meant her prosperous and happy success in all her
proceedings. And of necessity it must go well with her, whom every wind does
blow to good. Witness the limits of her territories, from Ganges to Gades, and
from the Sythian Sea unto the Cape of hope: as testifies one of her own,
which says: that she extended her tents to the borders of the Ocean, and the
fear of her name unto the Heavens.

Verse. 3. And I saw, that out of her feathers grew up other contrary feathers,
but they became little feathers, and small.

And the Prophet saw, that among the Princes and Governors which ruled in her,
there arose and grew up certain Kings which were contrary unto her, marking
such a^ intended to root up the Crown and dignit^ of her Empire, to plant
themselves therein, and their house for ever. But their thoughts prevailed not,
for as the verse concludes, their power waned, and they perished like the
rest: what those contrary Kings were, their number, names, attempts and end,
shall be delivered in their place.

Verse. 4. But her heads rested, and the head in the midst was greater then the
other heads, yet rested it with them.

But the three Kingdoms fore-appointed t'accomplish and finish the wickedness
of this great City, were quiet and at rest, as not yet (during the reign of
her feathers) conceived and brought forth. And the Prophet observed, that
the one of those Kings was greater in power then both his fellows, yet rested it
with them. Concerning these three Kings, their names, their greatness, and all
that appertains shall be spoken in due place.

Verse. 5. Then I saw, and behold the Eagle flew, with her feathers, and reigned
upon the earth, and over them that dwelt therein.

Verse. 6. And I saw that all things under heaven were subject unto her, and no
man spoke against her, no not one creature upon earth.

And the Prophet beheld, that this proud City flew with her Emperors and
Legions over all her neighbors, subjecting all the dwellers on earth under
her, in such sort, as there was not a Nation or People to be found under
heaven, that was not either rooted out by her, or enforced to receive their
Governors from her.

Verse. 7. And I saw that the Eagle stood up upon her claws, and spoke to her
feathers, saying,

Verse. 8. Watch not altogether, sleep every one in his own place, and watch by
course.

Verse. 9. But let the heads be preserved for the last.

And the Prophet observed, that this powerful City, in the days wherein
(over gorged with pride) she stood upon terms of her counsel and arms, took
such order (for in evil she was very methodicall) that her Kings and Kaysers,
should neither sleep nor watch, that is neither perish nor rule all at once;
but rise in a successive course, as in the verses following is manifested. And
she further commanded that the three last Kingdoms, ordained to conclude the
number of her fins, should take their ease and not awake, till their time
appointed.

Verse. 10. Nevertheless, I saw that the voice went not out of her heads, but
from the midst of her body.

As he that undertakes a dangerous leap, does first retire, the better
to advance his strength: so to bound fairly over the dark understanding of
these words, we must of necessity look back and carry before us the true birth
and perfect nature of this Empire: which the Prophet Daniel in his vision
designeth under the form of a ten-horned beast, signifying thereby, that it
should be a power upheld by a succession of many Kings; for the horns betoken
Kings, and the number of ten comprehends all be they never so many, as all
numbers are contained under 10. or made of their reduplication be they never so
infinite. And adds further, that his teeth were of iron, his nails of brass,
inferring thereby, the unresistable force of his l^gions and Leaders. And
proceeding says, that there arose amongst his Kings, one of an exceeding
strange nature, signifying by that one, a strange race and succession of
Princes, far differing in shape and form of regiment from all their
predecessors, obtaining dominion not by iron teeth and brazen nails, as did
th'Emperors which arose before them, but by deceit and by a mouth which spoke
presumptuous things against the most high, blaspheming his name, his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven, who by a hidden and unknown force,
should subdue the third part of the world, meaning all Europe with her Princes.
By which delineation, it is evident, that the Holy Ghost accounts the
challenged Prerogative and supremacy of Rome, all one power, all one Empire,
whether it obtain the spoil by force, or by fraud, that is, by power of
Emperors, Chap. 7. 24.
or craft of Popes, who should be far unlike them, as Daniel himself says;
And he shall be unliketo he first. Meaning in sorme of claiming, obtaining, and
maintaining Jurisdiction, not in pride, purpose and determination. So as wemay
behold such an unlikely likeness between them as was between the two Sisters,
of whom it is said. -- facies non omnibus una,
nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse Sororum.


And thus much concerning the Prophet Daniels description of The Empire of Rome;
whence we note, that the same power which Daniel there describes by a beast
with horns, teeth and nails, our Prophet here does delineate by an Eagle, with
wings, feathers, and heads: whose imperial wings after they were so clipped, as
she could no longer fly over all in her proper colors and style of Roma
triumphante, devised how by deceit she might uphold her throne (for to be high
was all her care) and found nothing so fit as to disguise her self, and
challenge prelation under the mask of Roma la Santa. And this is it which this
verse teaches, that when the sinful City saw her feathers so plucked, as the
fear of her arms and forces, might no longer fly into all Kingdoms,
commanding them under the pain of Imperium Romanum; lying by means of this
distres, very weak and in danger of falling; her counsel and body politic,
devised by lies and witchcraft (wherein was all her pleasure from her youth)
to restore the supremacy and honor of her name, under the color of Ecclesia
Dei.

Wherein this race of presumptuous horns excelled the sin of all the horns
that foretime ruled in her, for they, as in whom Satan dwelt but literally did
but in open hostility fight against the highest, setting before him a God made
of a wicked man, whose fathers blood cries out for vengeance night and day,
whose bedfellow was and Soror and conjux, and whose wife was id quod di cere
nolo. But this race of presumptuous and deceitful Kings, as in whom Satan
dwells spiritually, in a hidden treasure of blasphemy, sets up the highest
against himsel^e, and under the Visor of the Church, and the name of God,
blasphemeth his Sanctuary, and the Lord thereof. No marvel then, tho she and
Sion be at ods, for as gold can body it self with any metal lique fiable,
latten excepted, which notwithstanding in outward face and show of all mettalls
is most like unto it: so, no Church is more capital enemy to the true Church,
then she who in outward gesture, grace and countenance, is likest like the
chaste and virgin spouse, and is indeed a whore.

Verse. 11. Then I numbered her contrary feathers, and behold they were eight of
them.

In the third verse of this Chapter, the Prophet made mention of these contrary
feathers, which in their thoughts conspired to raise their house with the ruins
of Rome. And here proceeds more particularly to declare their number,
foretelling there should be eight of them whom we will here call out by name,
that if occasion serve, we may the better know them. The first were West
goths, under the leading of Alaricus. 1 2 3, 4 5, 7 8
The second Hunnes, whose King was Attalas. The third Vandals, their head
Genserick. The fourth Odoacer. The sist East goths, their chief Theodoricke.
The sixth Totilas, bred in Spain, with such followers as for those times that
Country yielded. The seventh Longobards, with their guide Alboinus. The eighth
and last, a home conspiracy, more to be feared (as all included diseases are
most dangerous) then all the rest.

And although many others besides these, as Radagaise, the Alani now called
Almans, the Burgonians conducted by Gundibald, the Vngers, Saracens, etc. were
all in their time as costly enemies to the Empire, as some of these, yet none
did humble the great City, the mother of wickedness, but these eight only.
And therefore the rest may not be allowed to sit at this table, but may serve
to justify the judgment of the Beast, which was thus wounded again and
stricken of all, as she had wounded and stricken all.

And if in reading doubt arise, how these eight feathers may be contrary to the
Eagle, that is, resisters of her power and dominion, and yet be feathers of the
Eagle, that is, mainteiners of the same; The answer is, that they were
adversaries and contrary unto her, as she stood upon terms of Imperium orbis
terrae: but after she had changed her copy, and claimed supremacy under the
cloak of Matter Ecclesia, they were for the most, maintainers of her pride, and
became drunk also with her worship, as other Kings and Princes of the earth.

And thus much for their numbers and names, their several attemp's, their
prosperities and end, shall be presented in their place.

Verse. 12. After this I saw, and behold upon the right side there arose one
feather, and reigned over all the earth.

This feather here described is the first of the twelve, namely Julius Caesar,
who (like an ill interpreter) translated Senatum populumque Romanum, into
Caesarem Augustum Whose image, which in this verse is so lively resembled,
consists of two features* the first, shows the manner of his rising, in
these words. And behold upon the right side, there arose one feather.

Which serve instead of art, to discover the very true l^nes, and cast off his
happiness.

For the house of Cornelii was as eloquent as he, and Marius doubtless as good a
leader as he, and Catilin as nobly borne as he, and all these arose t'invade
the Common wealth, and to translate it into a Kingdom as well as he, but none
of them rose on the right side but he. And thus much for the manner of this
speech; so we take th^s with all, that these words (rightside) in their
natural and proper intent, do signify (as through all this chap.) the surest
and strongest side.

The second feature in this resemblance to be observed, is his power, set forth
in these words. And he reigned over all the earth.

For after he had subdued France, broken the heart of Germany, made his name
known to England, he returned into Italy, overthrew the great Protector of the
liberty Sr. Pompey and his host, in the fields of Pharsalie. And like the fire
of heaven (as one of her Poets says) with such celerity drew after the
relics of that stricken faction, both in Africa and Spain, that in two years
space he brought to pass, that neither City nor creature durst open against
him: which done, he ascended into Italy, and took upon him as Lord thereof,
triumphing in the spoils of the world, and the blood of his Country.

And knowing that the name of a King (which he so much affected) was odious to
the quality and nature of that people; invaded the government under the Mask
of a perpetual Dictator, preserving thereunder (for he was wise above all the
feathers) some ^^pe of recovering their l^te sl^ine liberty, but indeed
establishing a Kingdom from which it could never redeem it self again.

Ver. 13. And when it had reigned, the end of it came; and the place thereof
appeared no more.

But this newborn prosperity (as is the nature of all ^his worlds felicity)
lasted but a while; for in the third year of his Dictato^ship, he was slain in
the Senate, by the conspiration of 24. of whom the most both in his own (so
dangerous is the name of trust) and other men's opinions, were thought his
chiefest friends. And thus was this feather blown away, after it had enjoyed
his pleasure 56 years, and reigned 3. A man for letters, arms, and counsel,
famous far above all his succeeders, and in discreet bounty, and Princely
clemency (rare virtues in such a fortune) without controversy, surpassing all
Princes made of earth.

Ver. 14. So the next stood up and reigned, and it continued a long time, but
after it had reigned his end also came, and as the first it appeared no more.

Next after him arose Octavius, the adopted son of Julius: otherwise also near
him in blood, as being the son of his niece Accia, who having taken revenge
upon the murderers of his father, and obtained in all his wars, foreign and
at home; triumphed Lord over all, adding to his fathers pomp (which he had
bought so dear) th'honors of Parens patriae, and Augustus.

And this fether continued (as the Prophet saw) a long time, for it reigned
Triumvir with Anthony and Lepidus two years, and as Duumuir with Anthony
alone ten years, and then devouring his fellow in a Sea Fight at Actium,
reigned all alone 44 years.

But after it had reigned, his end also came, and (as the Prophet concludes)
he descended like the first, and appeared no more. For by the treason of Livia
his wife, impatient to tarry th'inthronizing of her son (as is the nature of
ambition the nearer the goal, the faster it runs) his lingering soul was taken
from him at Nola in the 70. and sixth year of his transgression, when he had
reigned 20. less.

Ver. 15. Then there came a voice unto it, and said.

Ver. 16. Hear thou that have kept the'earth so long, this I say unto thee
before thou beginst t'appear no more.

Ver. 17. There shall none after thee attain unto thy time, nor yet to the
half thereof.

That we may know there is no God like unto the highest, who only holds the
measures and times of all things in his hand, the Prophet fore-sheweth, that
none of the twelve should continue like to Octavius, nor yet attain unto half
his time: which according to the word of the Lord was accomplished; for his son
Tiberius of all the rest reigned longest, and lon ger by eight years then any
of the rest, and yet could not attain to half the time of his father, which
descended before him.

That God only might be honored in all his works, and justified when he
speaks.

Ver. 18. Then arose the third, and reigned as the other before, and it appeared
no more also.

Then stepped up Tiberius, and reigned in great abomination, as did his fathers
before him, but after a while he descended also and appeared no more. Ne all
his skill in sortilege and wisdom mathematical, whereunto he had sold himself
from his youth, could either foretell or forewarne him of Caius his Nephew, by
whom he was poisoned. in the 70 and 8 year of his mortality, and three and
twentieth of his reign.

Ver. 19. And so came it to all the others, one after another, so that every one
reigned, and then appeared no more

In like sort (says the Prophet) did all the rest which of the 12 remained,
succeslively rise, reign, and perish.

Of whom the first, in blasphemy excelling,, was murdered by the Captain of
his guard, Caligula.
after he had sat in the chair of the scornful 29. years, and in the throne
of his fathers almost 4.

The Second, only* wise in evil, was poisoned Claudius.
by his incestuous wife, his niece Agrippina, in the 64 year of his filthiness,
and 14. of his reign.

The third, a monster, deformed in life, in Nero,
marriage, and end: his life scornful to the height of his Fathers, his
marriage thrice more detestable, his end more unnatural then any of theirs, for
after he had reigned in fin fourteen years, and sin in him eighteen more, fell
by his own sword into the grave of his fathers; and in him descended the house
of the Julii.

The fourth was of another extraction, but Galba.
not of a better, descended of th'antient family of the Sulpitii. rose up late,
put perished early; for he was 60. and three years old before he tasted
The Empire, which he got and lost in 7 months.

The fifth likewise of a new house, but of Otho.
the old building, got possession by the blood of his Predecessor, and by
spilling his own in three months and odd days, lost it again, after he had
walked in the abomination of his fathers, eight and thirty years.

The sixth also, was new and old, in nothing (save gluttony) excelling his
fellows, in life Vitellius.
and death like filthy; descended in the eighth month of his tyranny, after he
had wearied himself in the pleasures of Caprineum (where first his youth was
branded) ^7 and 50 years.

After him arose the seventh, who bought the Crown with the blood of his Mr.
and ware it in Vespatian.
base Covetousness ten years, but then was likewise blown down, having fulfild
the pleasures of 59 more.

The eight was he which executed the vengeance Titus.
due to the great murtheres, th'earthly Jerusalem: who in the 40 year of his
pleasure, after he had reigned 2 years and so many months, was also blown down,
not without the suspected treason of his brother and successor.

The ninth and last, and (if it were possible) Domitian.
the worst of all, who after he had reigned in the lust of his fathers 15
years, and lived therein 30. more, was murdered by the Gentlemen of his
Chamber, and beaten down after the rest which descended before him. So that
every one of them (as this verse Prophesied) reigned, and then appeared no more.

Ver. 20. Then I looked, and behold in process of time, the feathers that
followed stood up on the right side, that they might rule also, and some of
them ruled, but within a while they appeared no more.

And the Prophet observed and saw (after the twelve were descended) the
Emperors that followed to rise, that they might rule also, and as many of them
as rose on the right side, that is: in the str^ngth and power of the twelve,
did in their place (according to the proclamation published in the eight verse)
spread their wings and reign also, as

Nerva Traian. Adrian. Antoninus. Marcus. Commodus. Pertinax. Julian. Severus.
Caracalla. Macrinus. Heliogobalus. Alexander. Maximinus.
And the rest to the third Valentinian.

In whose days the power of The Eagle was so wounded, by th'incursion and
saccage of the two first contrary feathers, that she could never after recure
her self again, but lay sick and kept the chamber some ten generations, which
also lasted but twice so many years, to the rising of Momillus in whom
descended all that was left of the Empire, name and title for ever.

So that all the feathers which the Prophet beheld in process of time to
follow the twelve, and in their strength, their sin and cruelty, to defile the
earth: namely from Domitian, to the third Valentinian, were 50 and 3 Kings. All
which in a while (as this verse concludes) vanished like the 12. and appeared
no more.

Ver. 21. And some of them were set up, but ruled not.

As, Vindex. Piscenius Niger. Albinus. Diadumenus. Maximus. Balbinus. 30.
Tyrants. Firmus Saturninus. Proculus. Bonosus. Aper. Eugenius. Quintillus.
Rusinus. Constantinus non Magnus. Heraclianus.
And others, as in the description of times, may more plainly appear.

Ver. 22. After this I looked, and behold, the twelve feathers appeared no more.

Under the 12. wings or feathers (for both betoken one) are comprehended by an
intellection (as in the first verse) all, which in the strength of the 12.
followed from Domitian, to the third Valentinian, who perished in the year 455.
after he had reigned 30. and lived 5. more.

And thus according to promise made in the first Ver. is presented a tragical
succession of all the Eagles wings, from her first fether Julius Caesar, in
whom the power of her pride began, to the third Valentinian, with whom it
ended; who after they had showed themselves, and trodden down the earth 500
and 30 years, they departed for ever the stage of this world, and al their pomp
and glory descended, and appeared no more.

And here my pen like to the earth which being delivered from her oppressors,
did thirst to be refreshed: so having overcome this part of her task, did think
to find some ease, but in their hopes they are both deceived, for after the
Eagles feathers descended, the sorrows of the earth increased more and more, and
there arose (as seldomes comes the better) a race of Sodomiticall, and
unnatural Kings, who under the visar of Successors to Peter, and Vicars to the
Lamb, so far excelled the whordoms of their fathers the Emperors (whose Vicars
and Successors indeed they are) that they enforced the highest, to pour his
determined vengeance upon the children of men. Who according, to the judgment
foredenounced by his servant John, Poured out his wrath upon the Sea, that it
became like to the blood of the dead: that is Revel. 16.
to say, upon the great City and Empres of the world, by scourge after scourge
(how often and grievous in the ^iew of her contrary feathers may appear) so at
the full avenging himself, there was not a drop of Roman blood to be found on
earth, these many hundred years.

And as the defection and uncleannes was^ general, so was the punishment: for
(as the Apostle in the same cha. prophesied.) The wrath of the highest was
poured out upon Revel. 16.
the rivers and fountains likewise, and they were turned into blood also, that
is: upon all people and nations whatsoever, in such sort, as there is not a
Kingdom this day on earth to be found, that has not been (since the rising of
the beast) cut down by sword, and yielded her stock to strange griffs, as by
the bloody Registers of every particular nation does so clearly appear, as if
it were written with the beams of the sun.

And as the days were evil above measure, so they exceeded in darkness and
ignorance; that my pen has no less trouble, to be delivered of the rest of
her labor, then had the then-dwellers on earth, to endure the pains of their
oppression and travel; but to take into my way again; the Prophet adds. Nor
the two wings.


Figuring by the two wings, the two first contrary feathers, Alaricus and
Attalas.

The first arose in the 19 of Honorius, predecessor to the third Valentinian:
And was the first that slew the great City the murtheres of all the world,
measuring ^^er by famine, sword, and fire; according to the square whereby she
had judged others almost twelve hundred years. Which woeful end (or rather
beginning of her wof^^ll end:) made a certain ancient friend of hers, bew^iling
the night wherein she was smitten, to cry. Nocte Moab capta est, nocte cecidit
murus eius, quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando explicet? And when
this fether Hierout.
had thus trodden down the pride of the Eagle, in the year 410. a 1157 years
after Romulus had raised her walls with the blood of his brother; proceeded to
rip up her bowels, spoiling and burning her principal parts, Latium, Campania,
Apulia, Lu^ania, Calabria, where raging in his highest thoughts, devising how
to spread his glory over all, was by sudden death blown away, and his place
appeared no more.

The Other arose in the 27. of the third Valentinian, in greater fear then did
the first, devouring at his entrance all that rest of Italy which Alaricus had
left uneaten, Aquileia, Verona, Mantua, Cremona, Brixia, Concordia, with all
the now territory of Venice: but by the cunning dealing of the deceitful King,
whose name was then Pope Leo, was entreated to sell the great City, and to
depart Italy, which he left as a wast, stinking in her fiery ruins, and so
repassing the Danub, returned into his Scythia again: where the year following
in top of his fuln^s, was in a night found strangled in his own blood,
whereinto he was dissolved, by th'intemperate use of a wedding feast, and a new
Spouse.

And thus perished this son of Mundzuccus, the scourge of God, and terror of
men (for so he called himself) and which not only the fi^rs of Italy, but his
very shape may well justify; for he is described a man of little stature,
square set, great head, little eyes, thin hair'd, thinner bearded, a nose great
and prominent, his color fowl and gypson like.

Ver. 23. And there was no more upon the Eagles body, but two heads that
rested, and six wings.

And there were no more triumphing feathers to be found on her, for all her
glorious power was descended to two weak and feeble heads, which, for they
reigned not in the strength of their predecessors, the Prophet dayneth not to
call ruling feathers, but resting heads.

The One slept in the east at Constantinople, whom Genesis Marti^n.
serick the third contrary fether, not long before had dishonorably taken
prisoner.

The Other in the west at Ravenna, taken with such a Valontin.
Lethargy, that he neither heard nor felt the Massacre of Ungary, committed by
Hunns; nor the loud and pitiful cry of his chiefest provinces, Spain and
Africa, devoured by Goths and Vandals; nor the tears and deep lament of Gaul
and Britain overflown with Franks and Angles, people from beyond the Rhene, who
not only with their blood and posterity, but with their name also have
stained both Kingdoms to this day. So as the Prophet well concludes, there was
no more to be found upon th'Eagles body, but these two drowsy heads, which
rested, and six contrary feathers, viz.

1 Genserique. 2 Odoacer. 3 Theodorick. 4 Totilas. 5 The Longbards. 6 And the
intestine faction. Of which in the verses following.

Ver. 24 Then I saw also, the two wings divided themselves from the six, and
remained under the head that was upon the right side, but the four continued in
their place.

And the Prophet saw, that two of the six divided themselves in counsel and
manner of proceeding, from the other four: for whereas the four sought to be
Lords of Rome in fee, resolving in their thoughts, t'extinguish the name and
majesty of her Empire for ever, these 2. were of an other mind, for they agreed
to remain under the countenance and favor of th'eagles right head, contented
to wear a crown tho with leave of it: meaning by the right head the east Empire,
so called, in regard it was far stronger in power then the west: whose
broad-speading honor (as in the verse foregoing) was now become a starv'ling,
only his name and appellation continued some ten successions, viz. 1
Valentinian. 2 Maximus 3 Avitus. 4 Majorianus. 5 Severus. 6 Anthemius. 7
Olybrius. 8 Glycerius. 9 Julius Nepos. 10 Momyllus. Which all also vanished (as
before is Touched) in 20 years. And th'Eagles pomp which was at full in
Augustus, was interred with Augustulus (for so was Momyllus called) and with
him descended the name and title of Imperium Romanum for ever.

And the two wings thus divided in policy from the the four, were Genserick and
Theodorick.

Of which the first, trained into Italy by treason of th'Empres, entered Rome
43. years after she had been humbled by the Goths, and led into captivity all
her treasure, and (as is the fatal reward of such offenders) the traitres also
her self. And after 14 days thus laden, departed into his Africa again;
where-over he reigned in peace and pleasure 51 years.

The Other, having obtained of th'east-head the scepter of Italy, according to
his patent proceeded, and got it by Conquest from Odoacer. But after he had
reigned there-over 30 years descended also, leaving his 494.
fame and kingdom to his posterity, having fulfild his pleasures 42 more.

But this Counsel pleased not the other 4. for as the verse concludes, they
remained in other thoughts; drifting in their place to rise and reign, without
leave or license of any.

Ver. 25. So I looked, and behold, the under-wings thought to set up
themselves, and to have the rule.

And as the Prophet beheld the four contrary feathers which were left, he saw
how they also strove in their hearts to establish themselves, but like a dream
their purpose vanished, in the next immediate ver. following.

Ver. 26. Then was there one set up, but shortly it appeared no more.

Then arose Odoacer, the first of the four; leading a people begotten in the
bowels and inmost parts of the North, who hearing of the divided and weak
estate of the Empire, was encouraged to move from beyond 476.
the Danub, in much fear and blood descended into Italy, slew her last Lord and
Emperor Momillus Augustulus, destroyed the name of her Consuler dignity, and
blotted ^ut for ever the memory of her holy Senate, the murderer of Romulus
their first King, and Julius their first Keysar; and not daring as base
begotten, to put on the presence and style of an Emperor (which name this
fether fatally resisted) contented himself with the title of King of Italy.

But his glory endured not: for after he had reigned eighteen years, Theodorick
(as in the 24 verse) took his Kingdom from him by force, and his lise by fraud;
and he descended, and appeared no more.

Ver. 27. And the second was sooner gone then the first.

After him arose Totilas the second fether of the four, by birth a Spaniard, by
blood a West-gothe, (whose fearful fires burn in Rome to this day) but these
days were more in trouble, and (as the Prophet foresaw) in number fewer then
Odoacers; from his first rising always in arms, and after many hopes, and as
many dispaires, was at last put to flight by Narses, whom the East-head had
made Governor of Italy, and flying was wounded so deadly, that as soon as he
gat his Inn he lost his life, after he had worn the Crown (if to fight for a
Crown be to wear a Crown) 11 years.

Ver. 28. Then I beheld, and lo the two that remained, did think also in
themselves to reign.

So as of all the eighth, there remained but the Long^bards, and the intestine
faction, which thought also in themselves to reign.

The f^rst in flamed by the letters of Narses, and with the goodness of Italy,
left their northern denns, and like a fearful storm fell down upon it, and
in two years overthrew it, crowning their Leader Alboinus, 570
King thereof at Milan; who after he had spread himself over the great City,
and over all her Italy three years and a half, was murdered by the treason of
Rosamond his wife, leaving his Kingdom but not his honor to his successors, who
possessed it for 24. generations.

The eight and last, and of all other the most dangerous, was a home
conspiracy, plotting to raise from the dead, the ancient long-before buried
government of Rome to reedifie her. S. P. Q. R. and to root out the Priestly
pre-eminence and Church-superiority, which had so cunningly eaten and destroyed
the secular: which faction after it had taken fire in the hearts of many, and
secretly burned a long time, at length brake out, like the fury and violence of
a risen stream, so as it might not be quenched, but with much blood and
exceeding labor, as in the 31. verse appears.

Ver. 29. But whilst they so thought, behold, there awaked one of the heads
that were at rest, which was in the midst, for that was greater then the two.

And whilst they thus thought, behold there awaked one of the three Kingdoms,
appointed to finish and end the wickedness of The Eagle, figuring by this
resting head, the new west Empire, which title of Supremacy the beast bestowed
(as has been always his practice to run with the strongest) upon Charles King
of France, and son to Pepin the Traitor. This head is said to be awaked, when
it was first raised, which was in the year, 801. wherein it received his
Augustal robe, his crown, and style, viz. Carolo Augusto a Deo Coronato, magno
and piissimo Imperatori Romanorum, vita and victoria. And the title of dignity
Imperial, which had laien dead above three hundred years, was in this year on
Christmas day, thus raised up to life again, to the end it might defend the
proceedings of the great adulteres and murderes of the earth, as by the form of
oath exhibited at his consecration appears; In nomine Christi spondeo, atque
polliceor ego A. Imperator, coram Deo and beato Petro Apostolo, me protectorem,
ac defensorem fore bujus Sanctae Romans Ecclesiae, in omnibus utilitatibus;
quatenus divino fultus fuero adjutorio, pro-ut sciero, poteroque.

In that this head is said to be in the midest, is meant, that it should be
chosen from among the Nations and Kingdoms of the earth, as by experience has
been proved: First, from France, then from diverse Kingdoms and parts of
Germany, where it still remains.

And that the fear and power of this head has been greater then any other
Christian King or Kingdom whatsoever, is it not sufficiently read in the
particular registers of every Nation?

Verse. 30. And I saw, that the two heads were joined therewith.

By the two heads, are shadowed the two Kingdoms of France and Spain, whose
unhallowed league the Prophet foreseeing, says; they should be joined with
this middle-head, and like three parts in one, accord and agree together, to
humble themselves, their authority and power before the beast, and for their
idolshepheard should fight against the Highest, till by the breath of his mouth
they be scattered, like the dust which the wind disperseth.

And these are the three heads mentioned in the first, fourth, and ninth verses
of this chapter; and are therefore said to finish and determine the last end
and wickedness of the whore, because tho all other Kingdoms hate her and make
her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, as England and others have done: yet
these three heads shall love her still, and to their dying day shall burn in
delight with her, but when those three and every of them, shall also forsake
her, th^re shall not be found either Kingdom or creature under heaven, that
shall fall down and worship her.

Verse. 31. And behold, the middle head was turned with them that were turned
with it, and did eat up the two under wings which thought to reign.

And the Prophet saw this middle head (the head of evil,) impart his
fellowship to all Princes and Kingdoms, which desired to be in league with it.
But my task which hastes to an end, will not suffer me now, and here, to
sound this gulf of Santa Liega; suffices that for Sions sake the Prophet
passing by, does point thereat.

And the Prophet beheld, that this middle head did devour and eat up the under
wings, namely the power of the Longohards, and the intestine faction, which
thought also to reign.

The first by the sword of Charles, surnamed (for his exceeding power) the
great, who at the command of Babylon his god, aseended into Italy, took her
King Desiderius prisoner, and led him captive into France and gave his Kingdom
to another. And thus vanished this seventh contrary fether, after it had
humbled the whore, and spread it self over all her quarters 200. and 4 years,
and the fear thereof descended, and it appeared no more.

The Other, first began in the days of Cono The Emperor, who having an action of
contrary opinion, against Gregory the second (for so the beast was then called)
followed it so hotly, that he brought his holiness into such disgrace as that he
kindled a desire in the hearts of many to change their Prelate for a Prince,
and to edify their first and ancient form of government again. This desire
thus begun, by time (as naturally all conspiration does) 798.
gathered st^ength, and adventured (but somewhat too young) to check the beast,
who by reason he was so well guarded by his fore^aid head and champion Charles,
easily neckt it. Notwithstanding some 100 and 50 years after, this ulc^r, now
grown to a riper head, under the practice of one Alberique and Octavian his
son, brake out anew, and charged the beast in so sharp a manner, as without
doubt he had received the ma^e, had not his head in the midst avoided it once
again, whose name was now changed from Charles the great, to Otho the great:
who as being by oath devoted, came to Rome, banished her new risen Consuls,
hanged her Tribuns, and mounted her Prefectus urbis, Mr. of misrule, naked on
an Ass, crowned and a^tended through the city with great derision; from thence
committed to prision, and there executed with exquisite torments. And by this
means, the heat of this defection was so asswag'd, that it 967.
appeared not for 7 years after: but (then under the leading of one Cincius)
flamed out anew, in so furious a sort, as it had doubtless fired the beast out
of al^ his holds, had 974.
not his middle head (Otho the second) hasted into Italy to quench the same:
who (knowing how much it imported to punish exemplarily so dangerous an evil)
prepared in the Vatican a ^umptuous feast, invited thereto all the nobility and
chief of the City: when all were come, saluted and set: caused forthwith to be
proclaimed, that no man on pain of death, should either speak or move at any
thing that should be seen or heard: presently entered armed men and compassed
the place ^ound where the guests were; whereat whilst every one amazed,
doubting what this first course meant, this middle-head drew forth a paper, and
whose names were therein written, commanded to be drawn from the table, and in
presence of all there to be slain. The rest were courteously entertained, and
were as merry as the fear of so cruel a feast would give them leave. Ne yet for
all this the fever so left these patients, but that 1136.
they fell some 162. years after into relapse again; but Frederique the first
(for so was now this head called) with the blood of 1000. and the wounds and
imprisonment of as many more, so branded this Hydra, which had been so often
headed, as it could never after recover head again, but her breath departed,
and her purpose vanished and appeared no more.

Ver 32. And this head did put the whole earth in fear, and ruled therein, and
over the dwellers thereof, with much labor: and it held the government of the
world more, then all the wings that had been.

That this head and his fellows, have more maintained and advanced the rage and
blasphemy of the beast then all the feathers that arose before them, and made
more diligent and cunning inquisition after the blood of Sion then they, is it
not eternally cronicled in the registers of every particular Nation? And
therefore they are called the heads of the eagle, and who knows not that heads
are more able in evil then feathers? And the Prophet beheld that this head
continued longer, and held the government of the world more then all the
feathers that had been, for from the rising of the first fether Julius Caesar,
to the end and expiration of Momyllus Augustulus the last, were not 560 years,
whereas this head arose in the year 801, and has already continued above 700
and 90. and yet still continues, and shall, till he that now is be taken away.

Verse. 33. And after this I saw, and behold, this middle head suddenly vanished
as did the wings.

In that the Prophet saw this middle head suddenly vanish, as did the wings, he
signifies that it shall not be rooted out by force or sword of any, but depart
quietly, and die as it were in bed; but yet (as the truth fore-saith in the
chap. following) not without pain: meaning, that th'Electors shall not choose
to the liking of the beast, nor the beast consec^ate to the liking of them. And
in this difference this head shall die, ne shall this difference be exempted
from pain.

Verse. 34. But the two heads remained which also reigned over the earth and
over the inhabitants thereof.

And when the power of this great head (which is now so little) like a tale
tha^'s told shall be clean ended; yet the fear of the other two shall still
remain, and have dominion over the earth, and those that dwell therein, ^ill the
fullness of their malice and tyranny be accomplished also: which may not long be
unfulfild, for behold, in the very next verse their destruction comes.

Verse. 35. And I saw, and beheld, whilst the head on the right side, devou^ed
that which was on the left.

By the right head is meant (as through all this prophecy) the strongest; so as
the Prophet implies, that the sword of Spain, shall d^vide the strength of
France, that her pride by division made less, may at the last (as every
divided Kingdom does) return to nothing, Neither shall the prosperity of this
right head, be long free from like retaliation, but as the truth fore-saith, He
that divides with the sword, shall perish by the sword. For how may Esdr. 4.
12.
the sword for ever escape him, whom heaven hates, and earth does persecute?
and of whom may be truly said, which was spoken of Ismael, Manus eorum contra
omnes, and omnium contra illos.

And thus shall these heads perish, and have the faster to their end, because
the judgment of the beast is nigh, in the very next verses attending to come
in.

Verse. 36. Then I heard a voice, which said, look before thee, and consider the
things which thou see.

Verse. 37. So I saw, and behold, as it were a Lion came hastily out of the
wood, roaring; And I saw that he sent out a man's voice unto the Eagle, and
spoke, saying:

Verse 38 Hear thou, and I shall tell thee, what the most High does say unto
thee.

The roaring of the Lion is the breath of the Highest, which shall rebuke
The Eagle for her unrighteousnes, and cast before her all her spoils, and set
her alive in judgment, and with the spirit of his mouth rise up against her;
and lay unto her charge as in the text following.

Ver. 39. Art not thou he which of the 4 Beasts remainest, whom I made to
reign in my world, that by them the end of things might come?

Verse. 40. And the fourth is come, and has overcome all the beasts that were
past, and obtained power over the world with great fearfulnes, and over the
whole compass of the earth with extreme oppression, and has possessed so long
time all the world with deceit.

Ver. 41. For thou have not judged the earth with truth.

Ver. 42. But have troubled the meck and hurt the peaceful, and thou have
loved liars, and destroyed the dwellings of them which brought forth fruit, and
have cast down the walls of such as did thee no harm.

Ver. 43. So as thy unjust dealing is ascended to the most High, and thy pride
unto the Mighty.

Ver. 44. And therefore he that is Highest, has beheld the proud times, and
behold they are ended, and their abominations are finished.

And if thou plead not guilty hereunto, behold, a thousand witnesses shall rise
up against thee, and prove the indictment true; that the just judgment which
has so long attended for thee, may at the length be pronounced against thee,
in form as in the text follows

Verse. 45. Therefore appear no more thou Eagle, nor thy fearful wings, nor
thy wicked feathers, nor thy malicious heads, nor thy cruel claws, nor thy vain
body.

And least in thy drunkenness thou may think, thy sin may over-shoot this
judgment to come, and in thy madness glorify thy self as thou have ever done,
persuading thy self thou shall ever be, because thou have been long, and like
a fool have not considered, the more thy years the nigher thy grave; behold,
thus says the truth; In the year which shall be 1666. this Rev. 13. 18.
judgment here pronounced shall lay hands on thee. And as all thy fearful
wings, and feathers, be already descended and blown down; so before that day
(which is so nigh at hand) the tyranny of thy malicious heads, and cruel claws,
shall be consumed and brought to naught. And in that day, thy vain body shall
be burnt with fire, and shall so clean be cut off from the land of the living,
that neither son nor nephew (as the Prophet Esaias 14. 22 Esaias 14. 24
says) nor branch nor remnant of thy name, shall be found upon the earth. For
as it is purposed, so shall it come to pass; and as it is consulted it shall
stand.

Go to now, take counsel of thy Seers, and call thy inchanters about thee;
build thy devices as high as heaven, and lay their foundations low as hell, yet
shall they not deliver thee from the day appointed: but as Salmanazar destroyed
Beth-arbel in the day of battle, wherein the mother with the children was dashed
in pieces; or like the millstone, which the mighty Angel did cast into the Sea,
with such violence shall thou be thrown down, and be found no more.

And all hell shall be moved at thy coming and prepare it self, and raise up
all her dead against that day to meet thee, and all the Princes and Kings of
Nations, whom thou have slain with the cup of thy fornication, shall rise out
of their torments against thy coming, and at thy fight shall wonder, and cry,
and Esaias 44. 10
say unto thee. Art thou become weak also as we? art thou become like one of
us? Is thy pomp bowed down unto the grave? and are thy pleasures departed like
ours? and is the worm spread under thee, and do the worms cover thee also? how
art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer, son of the morning, which have cast l^ts
upon the Nations, and said in thine heart; I will ascend into heaven, and
exalt my throne above, besides the stars of God, and I will sit upon the mount,
even the holy mount of his Sanctuary, and Congregation: I will ascend above the
height of the clouds, and will be like the most High.

And all hell, which once did wonder, worship and kiss thy feet, beholding now
thy nakedness, thy shame and judgment, shall die for grief of mind, and dying
shall say, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, and Esaias 14.
with his word did shake the Kingdoms? that made the world a wilderness, and a
wast of the Cities thereof? Then shall thou lying in tormen^, death gnawing on
thee, answer them and say: We have erred from the way of truth, and the light
of righteousness has not shined upon us, nor has the Wisd 5.
Son of understanding risen over us, we have wearied onr selves in the ways of
wickedness, and we have gone through dangerous paths, but the way of the Lord we
have not known. What has pride profited us? or what profit has the pomp of
riches brought ns? all these things are vanished like ashadow, and as a Post
that passes by. And casting up thy eye to heaven, shall see the righteous
stand in great boldness before thee, and before the face of such as tormented
them, and took away their labors, and thou shall fear exceedingly at the sight
of them, and be amazed at their wonderful deliverance, and dye for grief of
mind, and dying shall say, These are they whom we sometimes had in derisron,
and in a parable of reproach: we fools thought their life madness, Wisd. 5.
and their end without honor. But how are they counted among the children of
God, and their portion among the Saints.

Verse. 46. That all the earth may be refreshed, and come again, as one
delivered from thy violence, that she may hope for the judgment and mercy of
him that made her.

And thy death shall comfort and refresh the earth, and deliver Sion from her
great and violent oppressions: but their prosperities may not long endure, as
testifies the Prophet Daniel. For may Israel dwell safe, and the kings of
The East not know it? Nay verily they shall arise, and Dan. 12. 12. Ezekiel. 39.
come down like a storm, and like a cloud shall cover the earth, and compass
round the tents of the Saints, and the beloved City, till fire descend from God
out of Rev. 20. 9.
heaven (as it is written) and devour them. And in those days shall be
finished the mystery of God fore-declared to his servants the Prophets, and
witnessed by the mighty Angel which came down from heaven, and stood upon the
sea, and upon the earth, and raised up his hand and voice to heaven, and swear
by him that lives for ever and ever (...). Behold it is come, and it is Rev
10. Ezekiel. 39.
done says the Lord, this is the day whereof I have spoken.

For the hope of which day, the stones of Syon dye day by day: tho little
^steeming seven thousand deaths, in regard of the precious assurance engraven
in their breasts, that they shall then and in that day behold the L. that has
so mercifully gathered them from among the Nations: That has so wonderfully
preserved them, from the sorcery of Babylon, which has destroyed all the
earth. That daily leads them in and out, before the scorners, the covetous,
and foolish wise of this world, so prudently and so invisibly, that they seeing
are not seen, and living are not known. That has bestowed on them, a thousand
treasures more then these, so secretly, as no man suspecteth but they that have
them. That has so surely and fully persuaded them, that tho they now go on
their way weeping, yet they shall then return again with joy, and bring their
sheafes with them: and all the earth shall then know, which now is hid, how
much the Lord their Redeemer loved them, and night and day, shall praise and
magnify the just judgment and mercy of him, that ^ath done all these things
for them.

Which day in due time, He that is Highest, shall manifest to all: He that is
Prince and Lord above all, who only has immortality, and dwells in the
light, which none can attain unto, whom no man ever saw, nor can see: unto whom
be all honor and power everlasting. Amen.

Zach. 2. 7. Save thy self O Zion, thou that dwell with the daughter of
Babel. ANd thus my Lord at length I am come a shore, delivered from a dangerous
and scopulous sea, as any is in all the Ocean of the scripture: praying, if I
have made too bold t'impart my voyage to your Lordship, you would be pleased to
ascribe it to the common humor of Travailers, who cannot choose, but tell what
adventures they have passed, and what wonders they have seen. Strange and long
were it to tell your Honor all I saw: and I fear in respect of your hours I
have been too long to tell so much: too much doubtless, in regard of my Pen,
which is so sad and so uncourtly, as were it not for that natural engraven
Noble courtesy, wherewith your Honor is beautified above all comparison, your
Honor might not endure her plain and careless apparition. And thus most
humbly commending my service to your Honors disposing take a shorter leave
then else I would, because I am setting forth to sea again, in hope God
willing, if bread and water fail me not, to discover the Revelation, and to
make known to my gracious Sovereign Princess, that I also among the rest may
be bold to speak, though I care not to be known.

FINIS.
A BREIFE EXPOSITION OF THE XI. XII. and XIII. Chapters of THE REVELATION.
WHEREIN MOST OF THE GREATEST MYSTERIES contained in the whole Book are unfolded.



The Contents are in the next Page.

LONDON, Printed by M Simmons in Alderse-gate-Street, 1651.

The Contents of these Three CHAPTERS.
The Estate of the Primitive Church before her dispersion. The Churches first
persecution by the Heathen Emperors. The Flight of the Church into the
Wilderness. The two Witnesses. The rising of Antichrist, his seven heads and
ten horns. The second Beast, and his two horns. The practice of Antichrist
and his Clergy against the Church. The Image of the Beast. The Mark of the
Beast. The Name and Number of the Beast. The End of the Beast, and destruction
of his City. The year of the End of the World discovered by the Author.
TO His dread and Sovereign Lord, JAMES the first, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King, etc. Grace and Peace.
HOw many there are (most Noble King) that have aimed at the unfolding of this
divine and hidden Prophecy, would require the skill and virtue of a Prophet to
refer. 'T suffices to know they have all left the mark very fair and open for
others to hit; Wherein. howsoever their Zeal, by privilege of charity, may
find excuse, yet their ignorance and error, within these cases (^^ no less
hurtful to the Reader, then dangerous to the Writer) may not find the like
grace.

What I have seen or dreamt, I fear not to offer to the censure of time, the
discoverer of error, and Mother of truth, appointed from above, the only
indubitate touch stone of all divine and Prophetical enterprises.

And although your Highness may doubt of my bold and hardy direction in this
dangerous and scopulous sea, wherein so many great and learned Pilots have
overshot the Cape, as one that fears all Physicians for that he has fallen
into the hands of so many unskillfull; yet forasmuch as the Church is sick,
and the physic of this prophecy needful, I could not choose but speak the
things I know, leaving to your Princely gust to judge whether the Needle of my
Compass be truer touched then theirs.

And for this prophecy was directed chiefly unto Kings, unto a King I have the
rather presumed to recommend the same: and unto You (most noble King) before
all other, whofe fame of wisdom, Justice, and goodness, has advanced your
name and Scepter higher then any power of greatness can do.

And although it be presented by one awaked out of time, yet if it may find
but little protection under your gracious favor for a season, years and age, I
doubt not, will give it a^^^iration and honor enough.

(...) hope of which grace most humbly I reverence your most Princely hands,
commending all their labors to the God of Heaven, who has exalted your arm
so high and made you so honorable throughout his world.

CHAP. XI.
1. The regenerate Christians only are the Church and heritage of God. 3. The
residue are outcasts and refused. 7. Of the two testifiers and preservers of
truth. 13. Antichrist kills them, but the Lord restores them life again.
15. Great dissension arises thereupon: the day of judgment is foreshewed.
VERSE. 1.
And there was given me a reed, like unto a mete yard: and the Angel that stood
by me, said, Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that
adore therein.
AS in a common field, a good Surveyor does measureout each intercommoners
several, by stake or by rod: so in the wide and common field of Christians,
the Lord commands his servant John to survey and apportion out his Church and
partage, which he severeth from the residue of carnal Gospellers, and such
like outcasts; in recommending unto us their inward frame and renewed graces,
under the ^ppellation and names of the Temple of God, the Altar, and them that
adore therein: meaning, that as in the Tabernacle of the congregation, the holy
and most holy places (wherein stood the Table of the Show bread, Candlestick,
Altar of incense, Ark, propitiatory and oracle of god, over-covered within and
without with Angel gold, into which places none but the priests might enter and
adore) were separated by a vail from the outer Court, where the brazen altar
was erected for all the house of Israel to enter and sacrifice, and which
therefore was called the Court of the people: so in the common field and
University of Christians, they only are the Church and heritage of God, which
are sanctified in heart, and holy in life and conversation, and separated (by
the vail of regeneration, that is to say, by the tears of true repentance, and
the assurance of pardon, and reconciliation unto God in Christ Jesus, engraven
in the tables of their hearts by the finger of the Spirit) from all carnal
professors and nominal Christians, in whom is but an outward face and
protestation of the name of Christ only.

VERSE. 2.
But the base Court which is without the Temple, cast out, and measure not, for
it is given to the Gentiles: and the holy City shall they tread under foot two
and forty months.
BUt as for those Common Ca^holique Christians, here resembled to the base
Court which is without the Temple, because they are but overcast only with a
profession of my name, which hear my word, and participate my Sacraments, and
yet are separated by an unregenerate heart, as by a vai', from those Altarsand
priests, in whom my name is honored, cast forth, says the Lord, and measure
not; for howsoever such unleavened companions seem to boast in the name of my
Church, and in the protestation of a Christain calling, yet they are so far
from belonging to my peculiar, says the Lord, as that I have given them up in
reckoning with the reprobate of the Gentiles, and they shall justify mine
account and rejection of them, by their like uncircumcised carriage and
heathenish conversation: for they shall no less defile my holy City, that is
to say, they shall no less hate, accuse, persecure, and keep under water the
true and sanctified Christian. then do the heathen and uncircumcised, as by
overlong experience is well known to the Church of God, which has been, is,
and shall be (till her captivity be returned) opposed for melancholy, mad,
new, factious, schismatic, heretical, by Christian Catholics,
politicians, Atheists, carnal Gospellers, and such heathenish protestors like
to these.

And that the Church of God may not look for other or better entertainment at
these her intercommoners hands, she is here (by the predeterminate counsel of
God) to be trodden like a way, by these Gentiles and heathenish Christians, 42
months, meaning months of years, to every month accounting (by prophetical
supp^tation) thirty years, as in the verse following shall be further
manifested; confounding therein the Remisa ies of Rome, who sweat to persw^de
that they are but months of days, thereby to turn the worlds eye from the
great Antichrist that now is, to a petty Antichrist which shall never come.

VERSE. 3.
And I will give to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two
hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth.
DUring which time of the Churches disgrace and desolation, for the greater
comfort of her Children, and judgment of her adversaries, I will says the
Lord; I, by a wonderful outstretehed providence, will preserve unto the world
the light and power of my two Testaments, to guide their knowledge and
conversation into the ways of peace. Whereby the Lord manifestly reproves the
gross and vain expectation of those, that translate his meaning in this place
to the coming of Henoch and Elias: whereas of Henochs return, either in flesh
or in spirit, there is no syllable of promise in all the Scriptures, and as
touching the spi^ituall return of Elias promised, is already Mal 4. 5. Mat.
11. 14.
performed as the Lord himself proves.

Now touching the time of their keeping watch while the world sleeps, the
Lord voweth it shall be 42. months before mentioned; which being dissolved
into days, after the Calendar of the Hebrews (whose year did drive thirty
days to every month, and twelve months to every year) amount to the just
number of 1260. days here specified: which computation of the years is observed
throughout the whole Bible, Daniel only excepted, who counts after the use
and style of the Chaldeans, in whose tongue, and amongst whom he wrote; and
consequently the months being Prophetical, that is to say, months of years,
to each accounting thirty years, the re^gne of Antichrist must needs endure
1260. years. Which manner of reckoning years by days, though it seem strange,
is usual notwithstanding with the Prophets of God, and therefore is called
Prophetical, as Ezekiel a day for a year, and Ezekiel 4. 6. Dan 9. 24.
Daniels seventie weeks are weeks of years, every week containing seven years,
as throughout this Prophecy. Also the months are months of years, to every
month accounting thirty years. From whence we conclude, Antichrists three
years and a half, both here and in Daniel, deciphered by a time, times, and
half a time, to be years of years, every year containing 12. months of years,
which amount to 360. years, and multiplied by three and a half, do in the
total amount to 1260. years.

And to the end the world may take better notice of these his two testifiers
and preservers of truth, the Lord commends the knowledge of the parties, by
the description of their Garments, in saying, they are clothed in sackcloath;
thereby not only diffevering their testimonies from all the soft and courtly
commentaries of flesh and blood, which for the most are raised with infected
matter, and vested with affected style; but also teaching us that no man can
retain to the Lord, before whom they minister, unless he serve in the same
livery that they do, and can turn over the leaves of his life and pilgrimage
in fasting and sackcloth, and true repentance, as these his servants the
Prophets and Saints have done.

VERSE. 4.
These are the two Olive branches, and the two Candlesticks which stand in the
presence of the Lord of the Earth.
ANd these my two Testaments are those two Olive Trees (says the Lord)
described by my Prophet Zachary, which stand and fructify before the Ruler of
the earth for ever and ever. For their leaf, that is to say, their word and
judgments shall neither wither nor fade, though heaven and earth should perish
and melt away. And they are also two Candlesticks, which carry in them the
light of my truth, and power of my Spirit, the great Moderator of heaven and
earth.

VERSE. 5.
And if any man will hurt them, fire shall come forth of their mouth, and
devour their enemies, and if any man will hurt them, so must he be slain.
ANd if any man shall wrest their word from the aim and intention of their
meaning (says the Lord) or turn their Prophecy out of the way, by perverting
or clipping the honor or purpose of their word, the fire of my wrath denounced
by the the mouth of these my two Testaments (for though they be two, yet they
have but one mouth) shall surely judge and execute those lovers and makers of
lies: and for the more assurance of this sentence against them, the Lord does
iterate the curse and vengeance of his heavy displeasure, saying, And if any
man will hurt them, so must he be slain; meaning (I say) by hurting, all
manner diminishing of the words of their testmonie by falls, blasphemous, and
lying expositions, as some have done.

VERSE. 6.
These have power to shat heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
Prophecy, and they have power over the waters, to turn them into blood, and
to smite the earth with all manner of plagues, so often as they will.
FOr the Lord has touched the mouth of these his two Prophets, as he did the
mouth of Jeremy, and the rest of his servants, of whom he says, Behold this
day have I set thee over Nations and Kingdoms, to plu^k up, root out, destroy
and thro^ down, build and plant. And in another place, Therefore have I cut
them down by my Prophets, and slain them by the words of my mouth. Such
privileges the Lord has given to these his two Testaments, that if they once
shut the heavens that it rain not in the days of their Prophesy; that is to
say, if they denounce a famine of the bread of li^e, to wit, the word and
knowledge of God; or pronounce a sword to come upon a Nation, Kingdom, or
People, which the Lord here signifies by turning waters into blood; or if it
pleases them to Prophecy (which the Lord here calls to strike) of any
Pestilence. Earth quake, or other judgment to come, such power is given them,
that if they say the word, it is done, as it is written. Heaven and earth shall
perish, but the words of their Prophecy shall not pass till all be fulllfiled.

VERSE. 7.
And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast which ascends
from the depth, shall wage battle against them, and kill them.
ANd when his servants the Prophets and Apostles shall have fulfilled their
course, and be translated from the land of their labors, to the land of rest,
leaving to the world the inheritance (as it were) of their ministry sealed up
in the two Testaments of God, to preserve the fear of his Name, and the
knowledge of his pleasure among the Sons of men, which the holy Ghost calls
finishing their testimony; Ant christ the Beast, whose proper p'ace, whence he
is, and whither he must, is here described by the name of the depth, shall not
only hurt and wound them by slanderous and lying Expositions, as his Clerks
and Assects do, but shall set his feet upon their Necks, and tread down their
divine authority by the advancing of his cursed keys, and the beauty of his
whorish Church above them, which the Spirit calls waging battle, inhibiting
them to Prophecy, or teach the words of their testimony vulgarly. And not
only putting them to silence, but also reproving, condemning them for
corrupters, seducers, and sowers of heresies among the people; which
presump^uous blasphemy and murder, the Spirit discovers in saying that he
shall overcome them and kill them.

VERSE. 8.
And their carcasses shall remain in the street of the great City, which is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord also was crucified.
ANd the letter or text of their testimony, which the Spirit calls their
corpse or carcasses, shall remain in their Ho^ses, Cells, Temples, hang at their
girdles through all the Cities and Kingdoms where the Beast and his Church is
adored; which in regard of their number be here named the great City, so in
respect of their execrable worship and adulterous service, contrary to God and
his holy City, they are here called also spiritually Sodom; meaning, that as
Sodom her Sister did for sake the lawful use and prescription of nature, and
wrought filthiness against nature; so these loathing truth, and loving lies,
should erect strange oblations and propitiations, as contrary to the offerings
and satisfactions of the Saints, as was the sin of Sodom opposire to nature.

And the Spirit further calls them by the name of Egypt, for that in
blindness and hardness of heart they every way match the presumptuous and
indorate Egyptians, still pursuing and persecuting the truth, as Pharaoh did
Israel, till the God of Israel destroy them by the Spirit of his mouth, as he
did Pharaoh and his host by water.

And in further detestation of the cruel murder and immanitie of this Beast
and his adherents, the holy Ghost lays the blood of the Prince of the
Covenant to their charge also, as cunningly as they think to convey his
murder, and post it over to Jerusalem. For as the Lord does lay the blood of
his servant Abel to the charge of the Scribes and Pharisees of his own time,
although he were slain long before those Pharisees were borne, or Jerusalem
builded, because they were the very image and lively imitation of his brother
that murdered him: so the holy Ghost does here lay the innocent blood of the
Lord of glory to the Charge of this Crucifier, and his Citizens, because they
are the Children and Generation of that high Priest, and those murderers which
cried, Away with him, crucify him, crucify him. And that we should not
marvel thereat, the holy Ghost in another place goes further, and says, In
her shall be found the blood of the Apostles and Prophets also, and all that
ever for the testimony of the truth were stain on earth.

VERSE. 9.
And there shall of the tribes, and people, and Gentiles, see their dead bodies
three days and a half, and shall not suffer their corpse to be laid in
monuments.
ANd all Nations and Kingdoms where the Beast is worshipped (whom the holy
Ghost for their profanation in life and Religion, calls Gentiles) shall
have, handle, and gaze upon the letter and corpse of his two witnesles three
days and a half, that is to say, the time, times, and half a time, wherein
the Beast shall Reign and persecute, even three prophetical years and (...),
accounting (as in Ezekiel) all days (...) Neither shall they suffer the word
of (...) Pro^^efie to be read, opened, understood, and ^^d up in the hearts of
the people, the true and natural monuments and sepulchers, wherein the
testimony of their words ought to be interred.

VERSE. 10.
And the inhabitants of the earth shall be glad over them; and shall send gifts
one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwell upon the
earth.
ANd all the worshippers of the Beast, here noted, for their number, by the
inhabitants of the earth, shall clap their hands over their own inventions,
and rejoice in the death of the truth, and make merry with Bonefires, Vigils,
Festivals, Processions; and in token of joy, they shall send (as the Spirit
says) gifts one to another. Kings, and Princes, and people shall present and
endow the Beast and his Church with donations, immunities, possessions, gold
and silver offerings, etc. and the Beast (on the other side) shall requite
their kindness with titles, bells, pardons, bulls, and such like: and the Spirit
yeildeth a reason of this their wicked and ungodly comfort, because they had
put out the eyes of his two Prophets, that their whoredoms and p^ophanations
might not be reproved; then which, nothing can be greater torment to the
wicked, nor more unsavory to them that per^sh.

VERSE. 11.
And after three days and a half, the Spirit of life from God entered into
them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon all that saw
them.
ANd forasmuch as in the death and extermination of Antichrist by way of
dependencie, consists the life and resurrection (as it were) of the
Scriptures, the Spirit foresheweth, that after the reign and persecution of
the Beast, which here (as in the ninth verse) is determined by three days and
a half, God will raise up faithful and prudent Priests, Shepherds of
understanding hearts, who shall rightly ^ivide the words and testimonies of his
two witnesses, which the holy Ghost signifies, in saying that the Spirit of
life from God entered into them: for as the letter and text of the Scripture is
the corpse thereof, so their true intent and meaning is the Spirit and life of
them; and by the faithful ministry of such as the Lord shall raise in and
about that time, and for that purpose, the testimony of his two Prophets shall
be restored to their strength and (as it were) to their walking again, which
the Spirit signifies in saying, They stood upon their feet, as well to the
terror and astonishment of all lying and stupidious expositors, as to the fear
and admiration of the children and justifiers of wisdom, as the holy Ghost
concludes, saying, And great fear fell upon all that saw them.

VERSE. 12.
And I heard a loud voice from heaven, saying, Come up hither: and they went up
into heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw them.
ANd the restoration of the true meaning of the Scriptures, which their
enemies so long kept under, by all unjust and cunning shifts, shall be more
famously known and published, then that they may any longer hinder or stop the
glorious course of their wonderful instauration, which the Spirit intends in
saying, that I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Come up hither; meaning that
it should be more possible for their enemies to stay Elias Chariot from
ascending, or pull the wind back from pursuing his point, then to resist the
wisdom of the same, the which shall vindicate the abuse of the Scriptures, and
by the power of their ministry (as in the strength of a cloud) shall hold them
up, and restore them to their spiritual and heavenly meaning again: and the
Beast with all his Sorcerers and liars, which have been their long and ancient
enemies, shall see the glory of their regeneration, and wonder, and die.

VERSE. 13.
And in that hour there was made a great earthquake, and the te^^h part of the
City fell, and there were sla^^^ in the earthquake names of men seven
thousand, and the rest were cast into a fear, and gave glory to the God of
heaven.
ANd at such time as it pleased God to begin his work of instauration, and to
cause the dayspring of his Gospel to shine out of the night of Antichrists
darkness; the abominable and desolate profanation of the Beast, which had so
long time over-cast the earth, was in such sort discovered, that the very root
of his throne and usurped authority was dangerously shaken, which the holy
Ghost closely foldeth up, in saying, There was made a great earthquake. And
further fore shows, that out of this concussion there should arise so great
defection, that the tenth part of his worshippers should revolt from him, and
that this revolt and defection must cost the lives of many thousand men, which
the Spirit utters in a manner of speech strange to us, butusual with the
Scriptures, calling men names of men, as Chap. 3. 4. and meaning by seven
thousand many thousand, using the determinate number of seven indefinitly, and
for a number indeterminate, as it is also in Scripture often. Which broils and
bloodshed concerning the institution of religion, are so sufficiently reported
in the Commentaries of Bohemia and Germany, and in the troubles of France and
Flanders, and other Nations, as if it were purposely registered in proof of
this prophecy.

Lastly, the Spirit concluding* foretells that many kingdoms in this
defection, should quite forsake the Beast, and haste them out of Babylon home
again to build the walls of Jerusalem, and to restore the morning and the
evening Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, as in the former time, and in the
days of old, in saying, And the rest were cast into a fear, and gave glory to
the God of heaven.

VERSE. 14.
The second Woe is gone, and behold the third Woe will come quickly.
THe first woe was the blasphemy of Arianisme, which the holy Ghost in the
ni^th Chapter most aptly resembles unto a smoke ascending from the depth,
saying, That the Sun was darkened, and the air with the smoke of the pit;
meaning by the Sun, the Son of God; and by the air, the word of his truth,
by whose only mean and interposition, the object of his Deity was truly
discerned: and in regard of this first woe which was kindled by Arius,
wherewith the inhabitants of the earth (as the Spirit foretold us) should be
tormented five months, meaning months of years, which by Prophetical
account amounts to one hundred and fifty years, which was the time of the
Arian persecution, as in the Ec^lesiasticall Histories more plainly appears,
The holy Ghost. I say, in regard of this first woe, calls the tragical
reign of Antichrist the second woe, whose long time of tyranny within this
Chapter, in a general manner is declared, and in the 13. Chapter following,
more particularly and exactly discovered, though at the writing of this
Prophecy, it had his being only in the foreknowledge of God, and was not yet
begun to be acted, much less fully ended: yet in respect it is here in a
gene^all manner fully revealed, the Lord (to whom all things past and to come
are present) says, The second woe is gone, upon determination whereof the
third woe must ensue; which, for it surpasses both the former in terror and
greatness, the holy Ghost brings it in with a word of audience, Behold, the
third woe will come, meaning the great and terrible day of the Lord,
fore-denounced by his servants the Prophets, in the which all Nations shall
stand as Prisoners before him, and receive every one according to the ways
wherein their heart has walked.

And because the day of the Lords coming in glory, and consummation of the
world shall not lon^ tarry after the determination and consumption ^^
Antichrist (as in the last verse of the thirteenth Chapter following, shall be
more fully declared) the holy Ghost adds the word quickly, as a precise note
of his speedy coming, which our Lord also in another place confirms by a
like word immediately, saying, And immediately after the tribulation of those
days, (speaking of the tyrannous reign of the Mat. 24.
self same Antichrist) they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of
the air.

VERSE. 15.
And the seventh Angel sounded with a Trumpet, andthere were made loud voices
in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are made our Lords and his
Christ's, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Amen.
THE understanding of this verse depends upon the 8. Chapter, where it is
said, And when he had opened the seventh Seal, there was made silence in
heaven, etc. And I saw seven Angels stand in the sight of God, and there were
given them seven Trumpets, etc. Where the holy Ghost means by the Lamb, the
Son of God; and by opening the seventh Seal, a more particular discovery of
all such things as concern the estate of his Church from his ascension to his
coming in Majesty, divided into seven acts, declared by seven Trumpets,
sounded by seven Angels, of which acts the sixth was the pageant of the
de^olation of Antichrist; the seventh and last is the coming of the Lord in
the clouds of Heaven, and consummation of the world, uttered in these words,
And the seventh Angel sounded with a Trumpet, and with a loud voice proclaimed,
the Kingdoms of this world, so long time usurped by Monarchs and Antichrists,
which by right of Lordship and Inheritance, did evermore belong to the God of
Heaven, and Prince of the Covenant, shall how at length be restored to the
right Lord and lawful owner, and of his reign, dominion and glory, there
shall be no end, as the Spirit concludes, saying, And he shall reign for ever
and ever. Amen.

VERSE. 16.
And the four and twenty Elders which sat on their seats in the sight of God,
fell on their faces, and adoring God, said, We thank thee Lord God Omnipotent,
which art, which wast, and which shall come, because thou bast received thy
great power and brightness.
BY the four and twenty Elders is meant the testimony of Moses and the
Prophets, who for that they spoke by the sevenfold Spirit of Majesty which
burns night and day about the Throne of God, are here said to sit on their
seats in the sight of God. And for that their judgments denounced from time to
time against Antichrist and his Worshippers, are now just^^^^^ upon them, and
the everlasting Kingdom of the Lord their God (who has stretched his wings
from Sea to Sea, and from the river to the end of lands) is now set up for
evermore; therefore the Spirit says, that they fell on their faces, and
adoring the justification of God, brake forth in praises and thanksgiving,
saying, We thank thee Lord God Omnipotent, etc,

VERSE. 17.
And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead
to be judged, and to render reward to ^hy Servants the Prophets, and Saints and
to the^ ^ha^ fear thy Name, little and great, and to destroy the^ that have
corrupted the earth.
ANd all Ki^gdomes, Nations and people which have evil intrea^ed Jerusalem,
and made a sport of the shame and affliction of Jacob, shall now reap the fruit
of their savage and hea^henish lives, and (mangre their fury) shall endure the
wrath and judgment of him, who with justice judges and fights, as the
Spirit affirms. saying, And the Genti^^ were angry and ^hy wrath i^ come, and
the time of the dead to be judged. And the Spirit further ^estifieth, that the
Lord (for whole glory that day was made) shall render to every one their due
hire or wages, (for so ^^e Origina^l imports, commonly inte^preted reward)
first to his Saints and servants, and all that ove come, their hi^e and wages,
which by promise, and for his own^ Name sake, is due unto them; Next, to all
ex^cra^le Atheists, blasphemous Catholics, incredulous Heathen, liers,
Heretics, carnal Gospellers, and all other brazen and unregenerate
Ch^istians, the hire and wages which to their works, and deeds an^ merits ^s
due, ^s the Spirit concludes, saying. And to render reward unto thy servants
the Prophets and Saints, and to them that fear thy name little and great and
to destroy them that have corrupted the earth

But concerning this seventh age, wherein the Lord shall come in Majesty to
judge the quick and the dead the Holy Ghost deferreth yet a while to speak
mo^e particularly thereof, and resumeth more exactly to entreat of the term
and pers^cution of Antichrist: and his a^complices, against the Church and
Spouse of Christ, that so the glory of his justice in their just refuration and
judgment, may be more bright and manifest.

CHAP. XII.
1. A confirmation of the Prophecy following. 2. The description of the Church,
and of her Primitiv^ fruit. 4. The Chur: hes first persecution raised by
Ethnic Rome, by whose immanity it came to pass, that her beauty was no more
seen in her visible and eminent graces, but lived here and there dispersed and
scattered over the face of the Earth. 8. The great battle between
Christianisme and P^ganisme. Christ and his Truth overcommeth Jupiter and hi^
profenation. 18. The Emperor re^oveth his Throne, pretending to stop the float
of the Enemy, but intending to root out the dispersed remnant of the Church
VERSE. 1.
And the Temple of God was opened in heaven and the A^k of his Covenant was
seen in his Temple, and there was made lightnings, voices, thunders,
earthquakes, and great hail.
THE Apostle having drawn in the former part of this Prophecy a slight
draught (as it were) and designment of Antich^ist, does now in the Prophecy
following revisit and perfect the discovery of the Beast, and hang him up to
the view and discerning of heaven and earth. And to the end that this his work
of manifestation may carry in it fair and uncontrollable credit, the Apostle
in this Verse assures us, that he reveals no other word concerning the
Church and her pressures here on earth, during the personal absence of her
Lord, then that which he heard at the Council table of God, which he
delivers in a manner of speech usual with the Prophets, And the Temple of
God was opened in Heaven, and the Ark of his Covenant was seen in the Temple,
alluding to the Temple of Jerufalem, and ^ignisying thereunder that the words
of this Revelation are no less sooth and true, then if he had received them
from the Oracle of God, which spoke from over the Ark of his Testament, within
the Temple of Jeru^alem, whose words and answers, for their divinity, Majesty,
power and glory, are here, as elsewhere, figured by voices proper to God, and
not to man, as Fightning, thunders, earth quakes, and hail.

VERSE. 2.
And a great sign appeared in Heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun, and the
Moon under her feet, and on her head a Crown of twelve Stars:
BUt before the Spirit takes in hand to discover the persecutors of the Church,
it pleases him first to describe the Church it self, that so the barbarous
immanitie of her enemies may be more apparent and justly abhorred, being used
against a creature of such virginal, innocent and patient modesty, who for
her rare and admirable beauty is here called a great sign, or heavenly
apparition, symbolizing her ^earfull, modest, sober and matron-like behavior,
with the appellation and quality of a woman; for so she is in holy Scriptures
often called, The fairest woman, the Kings daughter, daughter of Sion, daughter
of Jerusalem, the Spo^se of Christ, Mother of the just, etc. And to the end she
may the better be discerned of us, the Apostle describes her garments and
wearing, saying, she was cloa^hed with the Sun, meaning that she had put on
the Lord Jesus, Sun of justice, that is to say, her Soul was vested with an
assurance of the mercy and love of God in Christ Jesus her Lord; which justice
or justification of the Spouse and her children, is called in holy Scripture by
way of Metaphor, the white stone, and the wedding Garment. For as a Stoale or
Garment covers the shame and nakedness of our vile bodies: so the mercy and
love of God, insured us in Christ Jesus our Lord, hides the shame and
nakedness of our sinful souls. And to prove that her Garment was truly woven
of the two divine threads, to wit, the assurance of mercy, and the assurance of
love in Christ Jesus her Lord; the Spirit gives in for evidence, the fruits of
this her lively and justificall faith, closely hiding her newness of life, her
hatred of sin, and her love of God, as under a veil, in these words, And the
Moon under her feet; signifying thereby, that she had now quite forsaken and
forgotten her fathers house, that is, had slain her natural, sinful, and
wonted affections, and was revived, and renewed in mind, and with her Lord was
now risen, and ascended up, as he into the heaven of heavens, so she to a new
custom and carriage of life, far above and higher then the Moon: for all her
study and hearts delight was now in heaven, where her hope, her love, her life,
and her dearest Lord lives and reigns, God, to be praised for ever and ever,
Amen.

Last of all, the Spirit sets forth her head-attire, whereby her honor and
estate was best known, and wherein she most delighted, saying, that she wore
on her head a Crown, made of a metal much finer then gold, for it was made
of the doctrine of the 12. Apostles, who for that they are the Lords lights,
and lanterns to guide the feet of sinners when sin has benigh^ed them, are
here called by the names of Stars, And on her head a crown of twelve Stars.

VERSE. 3.
And being great with child, she cried, traveling and laboring to be
delivered.
ANd by the words which her ears received, her heart conceived, and she was
great with fear and godly sorrow, t^avelling under the burden of her sins, and
restle^^e desire to be reconciled to God: which anguish and pains of her
sorrowful heart and broken spirit, the Apostle most excellently compares to
the sorrows of a woman in travel. In which her spiri^uall labor and pain,
she could by no means be relieved or eased, until her Lord were fashioned in
her, that is, u^till her heart were sanctified by faith: for no Treacle could
h^al her miserable wounded soul, but the assurance of mercy only; nor any
water could quench the burning fla^es of her restles desire, but the love of
God only, insured her in Christ Jesus her Lord, and written in the fleshly
tables of her heart, by the finger of God, according to his promise, his first
and last and everlasting covenant

VERSE. 4.
And another sign appeared in heaven, for lo a great red Dragon having seven
heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven diadems.
AS night does follow day, and the shadow the body, so must the C^osse ^ol^ow
Christ, and affiction his Church; whose Sun could no sooner shine, but the
envious man raised up a mighty storm of persecution to cloud the br^gh^esse of
her beautiful beams; which for the extraordinary surie thereof, the Apostle
calls a wonder or sign, meaning the Churches first and primitive persecution
raised by Eth^ik Rome, who for hi^ power, immanitie, and malice to the Church
of God, is here called a great red Dragon; and both for that his Throne and
City was feated on seven hills; as also for that he was in all ^mpietie, pride
and profanation, the total sum and epitome (as it were) of all the seven
Mona^chies, unto whom (from the beginning of time, to the end thereof) was
given and g^anted the charter and commission of blasp^eming God, and corrupting
his world (as in the 13. Chapter following is more particularly discovered) the
Apostle adds, Having seven heads.

And in regard his power did beat down the power of all Nations, and made
spoil and purchase of all Kings and Kingdoms on earth, the Spirit says, he
had ten bornes: for the horns signify Kings and Kingdoms, and the number of
ten include all, be they never so many, as all numbers are made of ten, and
their reduplication, be they never so infinite.

And because he came to advance his ^ead so high, by the power of his sword,
his Leaders and legions, the Spirit crowns his heads with magnificence and
diadems, saying, And on his heads seven diadems.

VERSE. 5.
And his tail drew the third part of the Stars of heaven, and cast them to
the earth. And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
delivered, that when she had brought forth he might devour her Son.
THe head of this great red Dragon, was his Regal first estate, governed by
Romulus and six other successive King coa^s, which Seneca calls his infancy
or nonage, wherein he lived, swathed and nourished in blood 244. years, as his
own Historian reports.

The body of this great red Dragon was his Consuls second estate, which Seneca
calls his full age, part Aristocraticall, part Democraticall, and was
therefore styled, Senatus populusque Romanus: from whence partly by reason of
his over-we^gh^ and fulsome abundance, as one of his own notes, Romany
laxitas mundi and rerum amplitudo dam^o fuit; and partly for want of enemies
abroad to wreak their proud and kingly humors on, he fell into th'intestine
evil of civil wars at home, which did cast him into his minority and wardship
again.

And this his last estate of regiment imperial, the holy Ghost here calls
his tail, which confisteth of a rout of Monarchs, seventie Keysars long, who
for that they so furiously persecuted and havocked the blood of the chiefest
Saints and servants of God, the Spirit says that with his cursed tail he drew
the third part of the Stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth.

And not contented with the slaughter of his fairest lights and stars of his
Church, proceeded to desolate the whole host of heaven, even all the seed of
the Spouse, named before the Churches child, and here her Son, meaning those in
whom, by the ministry of his fairest stars (his Servants the Apostles) Christ
was now formed, and of whom the Church was now ready to be delivered; for so
much the Apostle unfoldeth in these words, And the Dragon stood before the
woman which was ready to be delivered, that when she should bring forth, he
might devour her son.

VERSE. 6.
But she brought forth a man-child, who was to govern all Nations with an iron
rod: and her Son was taken up to God, and to his Throne.
BUt notwithstanding all their fury, the Church brought forth her first fruit,
which for their faith, charity, labor and patience, the spirit names a
Manchild: and because they followed the Lord in the Regeneration, and overcame
by keeping his words and works unto the end, they received the selfsame
honor, which to their Lord alone and in chief belongs, namely, that they
shall judge the Tribes of Israel, and have dominion over the Nations, and shall
rule them with a rod of iron, and break their glory like a potters vessel. as
the Lord has promised, Mat. 19. and Apoc. 2.

And in remembrance of the tender care and providence of God over the seed and
first fruit of his Church, the Spirit concludes, that when they had ended
their course, they were taken up to God, and to his Throne, far from the reach
and rage of their enemies.

VERSE. 7.
And the woman Fled into the wilderness, where she had a place prepared of
God, that there they might feed her a thousand two hundred and sixty days.
BUt the Church of God, here named the woman, mother of this fair and
primitive fruit, being no longer able to weather out her storms, was enforced
to hide her beau^y, and to retire her self into the secret chambers of Gods
providence and he^ own conscience, and to take up her lodging in the desert;
not that her light was utterly extinguished, as her enemies reproach her: for
although she were dispersed, distressed, and enforced to hide her extraordinary
and eminent graces; yet the beauty of her true repentance and of her lively
faith, seconded with a charitable life and patient expectation of better things
to come, st^ll shined as a Candle in a dark place; and like a ship preserved
in a tempest, she remained still the same, of whom the world was not worthy;
never wanting the loving protection of her dearest Lord, who in all her
troubles was mindful of her, as of Elias his servant, or Israel his
firstborn; careful to provide her, both of honorable harbor and princely
diet. Her resting place was restless, strewed and scattered far and near over
the face of the earth; for such a lodging oid best beseem her broken and
restless heart, which sojourned in earth, but dwelt in heaven; and did also
best defend her person from the furious inquisitions of her enemies.

Neither was her Lord less loving and provident concerning her food, for he
preserved for her diet the two witnesses of his eternal Covenant, that ^^^m
their breast she might suck the pu^e and who some milk of grace and life, that
so she might be both nobly ha^boured, and pri^cely sed during the tedious and
odious Reig^e of the great Whore the Church of Rome, who during her exile
should ^surp her Chair and under the vizard ^f her name should persecu^e her
name and generation, a thousand two hundred and sixty years, here (as before)
mysti^ally deciphered under a thousand two hundred and sixty days.

VERSE. 8.
And there was wages a battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought with
the Dragon; and the Dragon fought, an^ his Angels.
ANd at the same tim^ that the Temple of God was opened in heaven, the Apostle
also foresaw that great and bloody contention, then which (since the days of
heaven) was ^ever waged greate^^, great in regard of the A^mes, and great in
respect of the cause.

The Armies great, as well for the greatness of the Generals, as for the
valor and number of their Forces.

The General on the o^e side, was the power of God, sciphered by Michael the
Prince of the Covenant, who stood for the children and people of the Highest.
The G^nerall on the other side, was the power of Satan, figured by Ethnic
Rome, here (as before) called the Dragon.

In their Forces are to be considered the Leaders and the Soldiers. The
Leaders and Captains on the part of Michael were Divus Petrus. Divus Paulus,
Divus Johann^^, and the rest of that divine and Noble or^^r of Saints. And on
the Dragons part were Leaders and Chieftains, Divus Tiberius, Divus Caligula,
Divus Claudius, Divus Nero, and the rest of that most fil^hy and execrable
train.

So great was ^he multitude and number of Soldiers, that none of what degree,
sex, age, or condition soever, but must be pressed for the one side or for the
other; the valor and ve^tue of the S^uldiers exceeded all praise; few subdued
many, the weak overcame the stong, a handful of Chr^stians a world of
infidels.

The cause was great, and higher then the heavens; whether God or Be^al, Christ
or Jupiter Christianisme or Paganism were more venerable for antiquity,
majest^ call for amplitude, more constant for continuance, and in all other
respects of wisdom, honor and Majest^e more worthy to be embraced and adored
of the sons of men; which was for life conten^ed by the Dragon, his Angels and
Assects, and was ^o^ life withstood and disapproved by Michael and his Angels,
and their followers. The issue of this contention follows.

VERSE. 9.
But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in Heaven.
AS the battle was great* so was the victory glorious: for though ^he Dragon
with his sapient Senates, his profane Angels, and his unclean abbettors,
intended all their forces, moving (as it is in prove^b) heaven and earth to
make room for the a^omination of Jupter, and to keep under water the
everlasting Lord and Prince or the Co^enant; as among the many Mo^uments of
time is sufficiently proved and maintained by Orosius, and by him, to whom he
wrote, in his b^ok de Civi^ate Dei; yet the Spirit foreseeing the Dragons
^ol^y, and how in vain he kicked against the spur, in scorn of his pres^mption
says, But he prevailed not; and concluding affirms, that the possession of
heaven (so long time usurped by^ incestuous murderers, and execrable
curtizans, gods and goddesses of their own forging) must be resigned now to
the true Lord and owner of all, who has taken his place at the right hand of
the Father, and has deposed for ever from their usurped titles of deity, all
gods and goddesses, phantasmes made of worms, created and divified by
th'inventions, relations, consecrations, and canonizations of the Dragon, his
Tail and successors, as the spirit discovers in saying, Neither the place of
them was found any more in Heaven.

VERSE. 10.
And that great Dragon was thrown down, the old Serpent, called the Devil and
Satanas, which seduceth the whole world, and he was cast into the earth, and
his Angels were thrown down with him.
ANd the great and profane power of the Roman Monarchy, which had so long time
oppressed and corrupted the earth, was now at length detected, and thereupon
disseized of, and from her usurped claim of heaven for ever, as the Spirit
discovers in saying, And that great Dragon was thrown down.

And for that the Devil did corporally dwell (as it were) in her, spreading the
beams of his wickedness at full, in all idolatry, impiety, and presumption
against God, and in all oppression, injustice and immanitie toward man; the
Spirit crowns her with the cognoments of her Sire, calling her, for her
malice to the truth, a Serpent; for her crimination of the Saints, a devil; and
for hostility to God and his Saints, Satanas: speaking therein, after the
manner of the Lord himself, who calls his treacherous steward a Devil,
though he were a man, because the fulness of Satan did dwell in him, filling
his heart with^such a perfect hatred of his innocent Lord, and ^amentable love
of his guilty penie, that he sold Ca^aan for Egypt, heaven for hell, and God
for silver.

And because the impiety of Governors, is not only their own decay by evil
doing, but also by enforcement and evil example, the ruin of their people; the
Spirit lays the seduction of the whole earth to the charge of the Dragon, for
ruling it after the level and prescription of Rome, saying, which seduceth the
whole world; and thereupon gives just judgment and sentence of death against
him, namely, that as in his beginning he crept out of the earth, and by the
scale of his wickedness ascended so high, as to presume to thrust his haughty
head into heaven, and build his nest above the stars; as did his antecefsors,
Assure, Beltassar, Darius, Alexander, and the rest of their compeers: so by a
like power of sword and cruelty, he shall shortly return to his friends
again, and be made even with the earth, from whence his stock and first estate
was borrowed; and the power of his Cesars, counsel of his Senators, sophistry
of his Sorcerers (which with such indurate and obstinate minds, stood for the
honor and worship of Devils) should be no longer able to uphold the reverence
of their Jupiter Capitolinus, who was now detected for a Rogue, and by the
voices of Michaels Angels (as by whips and pasports) was sent home again to
the place of his birth, namely the earth, from whence his mortal and vile
genealogy was taken, and with with him also were Cesars undivified, and (for
all their Senates proud relations) were made to take up the grave for their
latter end, and shame for their same, and worms for their heritage, as the
Spirit soretelleth, saying, And be was cast down unto the earth, and his
Angels were thrown down with him.

VERSE. 11.
And I heard a great voice in heaven, saying. Now is made salvation, and force,
and Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, because the accuser of
our brethren is cast down, who accused them before the sight of our God day
and night.
NEither was this famous victory obtained in ^ corner, or spoken in the ear,
but (as the Spirit reports) so valourously gotten, and so audibly proclaimed,
that all the world heard the repo^^ thereof, witness the records of those
times, at which the holy Ghost points in these words, And I heard a loud
voice in beaven, saying, and sounding the victory of Christ and Christianisme
against the Dragon and his Angels, his sorcerers, and their profane and
^dolatrous paganism, in these devout and divine notes, Now is made salva^ion,
and force, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; and
yields a reason of this so pious and triumphant joy, because the folly and
fury of the Dragon and his Ang^ls, which so continually accused the Saints and
servants of God, for pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, maintainers of
sects, polluters of the Temple, teachers of new Gods, enemies to Caesar,
word-sowe^^, babblers, blasp^emers, is now upon setting and going down for
ever. Which death and downfall of their spiritua^l whoredom, the holy Ghost
di^closeth in saying, Because the accuser of our brethren is cast forth.

And for the greater comfort of the Church, and judgment of her enemies,
concludes, that there is a perfect Court-roul kept, as well of the sufferings
of the Saints, as of the slanders of their soes, so openly ^ommitted in the
face of the Court, and before a judge of so clear a fight and eternal memory,
as that they shall never be discharged or forgotten, which the Spirit infers
in saying, Who accused them before the ^^ght of our God day and night.

VERSE. 12.
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony; and they loved not their lives even unto the death.
LAst of all, the holy Ghost discovers the spiritual armor and weapons
wherewith the Angels and servants of Michael obtained this famous victory over
the Dragon and his Sectaries, and says, that they were tempered of these two
divine virtues, faith and patience. For by the shield of faith, which the
Spirit (by a metonymie) calls the blood of the Lamb, and with the sword of
his two witnesses, and by the word of their testimony, they overthrew all
forces and arguments drawn from reason or reading, which the Spirit observes
in these words, And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their testimony; and all such arguments as were drawn from the block, as
fire, sword, persecution, interdiction, and such like, the Children of the
Church quenched them with tears, prayers, patience and martyrdom, as their
Lord had given them charge, and left them example; which the Spirit uncovereth
in saying, And they loved not their lives even unto the death.

VERSE. 13.
Therefore rejoice O Heavens, and you that dwell in them. Woe to the Earth, and
to the Sea, because the Devil is descended to you, having great wrath, knowing
that he has but a little time.
AS after victory follows division of spoil, so the Spirit shuts up this
heavenly conquest with tri^mph and joy, inviting thereunto all the Saints and
^ervants of God, which have from time to time main^ained and defended the honor
of his Name against the Dragon, his sorcerers and sorceries. And because by
their good profession and godly conversation they testified the glory of God
(as do the heavens) by their obedient conversions, the Spirit crowns them
with the name of the heavens, saying, Therefore rejoice O heavens, and you that
dwell in them.

And on the other part, pronounces Woe, first to all Nations and Kingdoms
accessory to these spiritual whoredoms of the Dragon, whom (according to
their earthly mind) he most aptly resembles to the earth; next, to the Empire
it self, as the scelerum caput and stable of iniquity, whom for his fearful
power and unbridled rage, the Spirit most elegantly calls by the name of the
Ocean, and the Sea: and concludes his woe with a reason why, because both in
one and other, the power of Satan had taken such deep root, that the more the
light of the truth did bewray their madness* the more they strove and stormed
against it; and so much the rather, because their sin was now at the highest;
and that the Kingdom of Christ did gather so fast upon them, that of necessity
a mutation of their fortunes must needs follow, with a subversion not only of
their Paganism, but also of their power Caesaricall; which the Spirit closely
soldeth up in these words, Knowing that he has but a little time; which one
Apostle also observes, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

VERSE. 14.
And when the Dragon saw that he was thrown to the earth, he persecuted the
woman that brought forth the manchild.
ANd when the raging Roman Empire saw, that his maintenance of Jupiter and his
idol art of making shrines, was to descend for ever (as among many voices, some
even to this day are heard to cry vengeance upon his idol, inforc^^g them with
shame to resign their usurped titles of gods, and claim of heaven, to the
true Lord and owner thereof) he took the course of the wicked, whose custom
is, (as one of their own notes) Malitia alia aliam trudere, and to add sin to
sin (as a holy one says) to Deuteronomy. 29*
quench his thirst-with drunkenness: for so proceeded this Beast, adding to
his blindness boldness, redeeming his blasphemy, with rage and persecution;
and was so far from coming to himself, and taking up repentance to wash away
his crying sins, that (as the Spirit concludes) he more and more pursued the
Church, and persecuted the woman which brought forth her first borne and
primitive fruit, here called, for their faith, their patience, and their godly
valor, the man-child.

VERSE. 15.
And there was given unto the woman two wings of the great Eagle, that she
might Flee into the desert, unto her place, where she was nourished for a time,
and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.
BUt the Lord, who had so dearly bought his Shunamite, was no le^^e careful to
preserve and carry her to the place of her rest, with a strong and outstretched
providence, even upon his own 2 wings, whose feathers were made of the truth of
his promise, sealed and delivered by the hand of his two witnesses, which the
Bridgroome, of purpose left with the Spouse, to accompany and guide her,
whenever she removes. If she travel by day they are her leading cloud; if
by night, they are her pillar of fire: if she fly, they lend her wings; if she
wander, they harbor her; if she be naked, they cover her; if in prison, they
visit her; if captive, they redeem her; if she be weak, they sustain her; if
blind, they lead her; if she be heavy, they comfort her; if sick, they recover
her; if she doubt* they resolve her; if she err, they direct her; if she
thirst, they give her to drink; and if she hunger, they feed her, and make her
so strong of constitution, that afflictions are rejoycings to her, banishment a
haven, dispersion a friend, loss and death advantage. And by these comforts
(as by hands) they convey her to her solitude and restless place of rest, as
the Spirit discovers, saying, But there were given to the woman two wings of
the great Eagle, that she might Flee into the desert, unto her resting place,
where, ever since her primitive dispersion, she has lived strewed and
scattered far and near, over the face of the earth, seen and known of her
Lord, by whom she is protected, and of the Children of wisdom, of whom she is
justified: and so does and must remain hidden and retired into the privy
Chambers of Gods providence, and her own Conscience, during the Reign of
Antichrist, whose cursed and arrogant supremacy, was to rise out of the ashes
of the Dragons Emperiority, as the holy Ghost prophesied.

And thus, hiding her eminent primitive graces, must closely and silently keep
the Lords watch, and stand upon her honorable guard three prophetical years
and a half, here (as in Daniel) determined by a time, and times, and half a
time, from the reach and rage of the Serpent, his tail and successors.

VERSE. 16.
And the Serpent cast out of his mouth, after the woman, water, as it were a
Flood, that he might make her to be carried away with the Flood.
ANd when the Dragons train of Cesars (who, for their malice to the truth, and
seducing the Nations, are here called by the name of the ancient enemy and
seducer of mankind, the Serpent) saw, that they could no longer havoc the
Church of God, by reason of her close sight and secret dispersion, they devised
to pursue her with their bloody edicts, and sacrilegious constitutions, which
they breathed out against her, in such raging and furious manner, as the Spirit
therefore resembles the violence of their barbarous inquisitions, and
unprincely rescripts unto the unmercifull rage and current of a flood, hoping,
that as by their unplacable fury they had dispersed and driven the Spouse to
corners, so by the due execution of their cruel promulgations, they might
utterly consume her generation, and blot out all letters of her honorable name;
for to that white only they aimed, as the Spirit concludes, That he might
make her to be carried away of the Flood.

VERSE. 17.
And the Earth holp the Woman, and the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up
the Flood, which the Dragon cast out of his mouth.
BUt in relief of the Churches pressures and persecutions, her Lord gave
charge unto his handmaid the Earth, to comfort, help and succor her his
Spouse: and as Moab was charged to hide the chased Israel of God, and not
bewray him that was fled and escaped, but to dwell with him, and to give him
covert and protection from the face of the destroyer; so here the Earth was
commanded to reach forth her helping hand, and to take in and harbor the Lords
exiles, in the secret chambers of her deserts, mountains and caves, that so
she might either afford her close and quiet safeguard, or in witness of her
faith, and proof of her patience, receive the blood which her cursed brethren
spilt; which courtesy and tender favor, the Spirit remembers to the
perpetual praise of the benefactors of the Spouse, saying, But the earth holp
the woman, and opened her mouth, and swallowed up the Flood which the Dragon
cast out of his mouth.

VERSE 18.
And the Dragon was wroth against the Woman, and went to make battle with the
remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the
testimony of Jesus Christ.
ANd notwithstanding the Dragon by his tail of Caesar's, had thus mass^cred and
dispersed the Church, yet was he not so satisfied, but for very rage fell into
a melanchol^ mood, for cause he could not quite consume and root her h^nou^
out, as the Spirit d^^^loseth, saying, And the Dragon was wroth against the
woman.

And forasmuch as the Churches beauty did most shine in the East, Syria,
Greece, Asia, where she was borne and bred, the Dragon thought it his best (in
policy, which evermore with him was held for chiefest Religion) to i^ch and
set forward his den, and hold his Court further East; which purpose of his, as
close as it was, the holy Ghost discovers, in saying, And he went; and note^h
the true end wherefore he went, not so much to barricade and stop the fl^at and
incursion of the barbarous enemy, as he (fore^ooth) pretended, as to pursue
and consume the dispersed remainder of the Spouse, as the spirit unfoldeth,
saying, to make battle with the remnant of her seed, who for that they were
just of the making and growth of the Churches first and pri^itive fruit,
holding the mystery of faith in a good Conscience, as the firstborne did; the
Spirit sets them forth in the same lively colour^, saying, which keep the
Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

VERSE. 19.
And he stood upon the sand of the Sea.
ANd the Dragon removed his throne, and left his ancient seat and City of Rome,
where he had now kept Court almost a thousand years, and went and pitched his
Throne anew in a have^ Town, between Pontus Euxinus, and Propontis in the East
of Thracia, ancient^y called Byzance, and there erected the new City of Rome,
and called it after his own name, Constantinople, the City of Constantme:
which translation of his r^sidence and chair of estate, one of his own also
notes.

Constantinus apud Thraces, qua Bosphorus aequor
Thracius Euxinis Aegaeum ingurgitat undis,
Constituit sedem Imperii.
CHAP. XIII.
The description of Antichrist and his Devotaries. The description of his
Clergy and of his Religion. The Character of Antichrist. The number of his
Days, and the end of his Reign. The year of the End of the World, discovered
out of Dan. 12.
VERSE. 1.
And I saw a Beast ascending from the Sea, having seven heads and ten horns,
and upon his horns ten Diadems, and upon his heads names of blasphemy.
AND presently upon the remove and translation of the Empire, the Apostle
espied that wicked one, Antichrist, man of sin, in saying, And I s^w; who in
regard of the tyrannous power and bloody use of the unbridled jurisdiction,
that should be given him, he is here termed (as in holy Scriptures other
Monarchs are) a Beast, that is to say, a kind of Government, Kingdom, dominion
or power, exercised and acted by a succession of tyrannous, bloody and beastly
men.

And albeit his perfection in evil stood yet aloof, and was very far off,
young and tender, as lying in swathing clouts; yet the Apostle descryeth him,
as it were through a chink, in saying, coming up. For after the transla^ion of
the Empire, and that now Ethnic Rome began to play the Christian, he was well
nigh a hundred years closely creeping and climbing up, before he could advance
his cursed head and claim of super-eminency. Concerning which ambitious puff
of vain priority, so fair and evident mention is made in the monuments of
time, that the incredible boldness of the adversary is no less mavelous
then his incurable blindness, that has so long time stumbled at this stone,
and so often spurred us, by way of vaunting to show them (if we dare or can)
when this apostasy of Antichrist took her rise and first commencement: which
daring vaunt of theirs, the holy Ghost tripping over as a thing which is or
ought to be known unto us, namely, that the horn of Antichrist and his
apostasy did then first sprout out, when his Church first obtained at the
Dragons hand, priority of place, suffrage and censure over all. For as the Tree
pulls up the creeping Ivy, so the primacie of the Church of Rome pulled up
the aspiring supremacy of the Bishop thereof; which Church pre-eminence and
prelation (after long ruffling and shouldring) was first obtained at the hands
of Honorius (tho afterward upon greater concertation and daggers drawing, it
was by other Cesars and Kings confirmed, renewed and ampliated) who by
the advantage of the weakness and death of his elder brother Arcadius, having
obtained power and protector-ship East and West, subjected the Church of the
East Empire (which most withstood the West and Roman supremacy) with all
other Churches whatsoever, to the Church and Sea o^ Rome, at the instant suit
and importunity of the now Bishop of Rome, whose name was then Innocent the
first, in the first year of his creation, and in the year of Redemption 406.

But the holy Ghost (I say) passing over the punctual and exact moment of
time, when the Egg of Antichrist and his apostacy was first laid, as
otherwhere sufficiently preserved unto us, proceeds to detect the place where
and from whence he should arise, saying, that he saw him lift up his hardy
head from the sea, meaning by the sea, as in the sixteenth of this Prophecy,
the surging, tumbling and raging Sea and City of Rome, where also by a like
loquution he calls all Kingdoms subjected to her, by the name of Rivers. And
that this Beast should thence arise, and there (and not elsewhere) keep Court
and residence, the Spirit proves by an argument drawn from the shape and
proportion of the Beast, for he had the seven heads and ten horns of the
Dragon, meaning that he should sit upon the Dragons hills, and reign in and
over the D^agons City, and array himself with the spo^ls of the world, and hold
in subjection the Kings and States on earth, as the Dragon did; for so much the
Spirit intends in saying, having seven heads and ten horns. And least the
unwary Reader should mistake this great Antichrist for that great Dragon, or
this Beasts supremacy and his pestilent succession for that Beasts
super-eminencie and his execrable tail (as many unwarily have done) the holy
Ghost, in emblazoning his coat, gives him a m^st exquisite difference, in
saying that he wore his diadems, not upon his heads, as the Dragon did, but
upon his horns; signifying thereby, that he should not come to his Crown and
vainglory by the strength of his sword, his leaders and his legions, as the
Dragon did, but by the base and voluntary submission of all such Caesar's, King
and Princes, as should with one counsel and sorce, deliver up their authority
and power secuiar to the devotion and pleasure of the Beast; and therefore the
Spirit crowns not his heads, but his horns, saying, and upon his horns ten
diadems. And concluding shows (even by his head attire) how far unlike this
Dragons High Priest of Rome was and should be to the Lords High Priest of
Jerusalem, who (in stead of having his head-attire emblemished with ^olinesse
to the Lord, as had his servant Aaron) should have his head-peece beslubbered
with names of blasphemy, and upon his heads names of blasphemy, whereof proof
is made in the sixth verse following.

VERSE. 2.
And the Beast which I saw was like to a Leopard and his feet as a Bear, and
his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon gave him his own force, and
his throne, and great power.
ANd forasmuch as the Apostle foresaw that this Beast should be a far greater
adversary, and a far longer persecutor of the Church of God, then any of the
Monarchies which did arise before him; he shaped him an outside answerable to
his inward making, framing his parts of the most notable persecuters that ever
were; as concluding him for his extraordinary wickedness the odd fellow, the
total sum and very accomplishment of all other.

And first for his presumption, in extolling himself above the Prince of the
Covenant, desouling his sanctuary, desolating his sacrifice, burning his
statutes, and insorcing the humble and meek to the abnegation of the truth, by
blood, fire, st^appadoes, and such like exquisite torments; the Spirit
resembles him to his arch-type Antiochus descended from the Monarch of Greece,
here (as in Daniel) deciphered by a Leopard, And I saw the Beast like a Leopard.

Secondly, in pride of life, in pomp and luxury, the Spirit equalleth him with
the Monarch of Persia, and likeneth his arrogant and voluptuous gate to her ^en
Kings, here (as in Daniel) deciphered by a Bear, And his feet as of a Bear.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost ascribes unto him the proud, profane and cursed
mouth of the Monarch of Babylon, in commanding the dwellers on earth (upon
pain of fire and furnace) to adore his golden Idol, which he had dedicated
with cornets, ^ackbuts, psalteries, dulcimers, which also the Spirit covers
(as Daniel does) under the mask of a Lion, And his mouth as the mouth of a Lion.

And last of all, lest happily he should be least beholding unto his Bella
Nympha, his dearest Lady and mistress of Rome, the holy Ghost says, that the
love of his Patroness the Dragon, was equal to the love of a father toward
his son; for she made him heir apparent, and Lord of her Empire, sub^ecting all
things to the feet of his censure, and confirming unto him her throne and
Palace of Lateran, with all the demesnes and glory of Latium, as one of his own
also notes -- Latiumque relinquit Christo, and Romuleam septem cum collibus
urbem.



VERSE. 3.
And I saw one of his heads as it were slain to death, but the wound of his
death was cured, and all the earth was in admiration after the Beast.
ANd presently after this great Antichrist was risen, the Apostle foresaw such
a wound given to one of his heads, that the Beast was in eminent danger to be
stricken down again, and slain in the very egg; for so much the Spirit
notes in saying, And I saw one of his heads as it were slain to death. For
the better opening of which wound, we must not only remember the Beast has
seven heads, but we must also step a little forward, and crave the assistance
of the seventeenth Chapter concerning the interpretation of the seven head^,
which says, that the seven heads are seven hills, and they are also seven
Kings; discovering the true seat and situation of the City of Rome, where
Antichrist should keep his Court and residence, by the seven hills.

And by the seven Kings the seven Monarchies, which from the beginning of the
world to this day, have successively risen and reigned over the earth, of which
seven, the Assyrian Monarchy was the first, and the Roman the sixth, of both
which and their puefellows, is further revealed in the 17. Chapter following.
Mean time we are here to observe, that as the holy Ghost does therefore call
his seven heads by the name of seven hills, because the seat of Antichrist
should be there, and not elsewhere placed and planted; so he names them also
seven Kings, because the power of Antichrist should be an extraordinary
^overaignty, compounded of such spiritual and temporal claims and
jurisdictions, as should be equivalent in presumption and profanation, to all
the transgressions of the seven Monarchies, which from the beginning
hitherunto, have blasphemed God, and corrupted his world.

This foundation laid, does show, that this deadly wound given to one of his
heads, which (as after appears) was the wound of a sword, cannot be meant of
any one of his heads after the first signification, as they are hills, but as
they are Kings, and subject to the sword: and so by consequence intends, that
one of his imperial heads, and namely his fair Adonis, his minion, Lord and
Master of Rome, of whom he had so lately received his breath and being, was so
deadly wounded, as that the Beast himself, thereby was in great danger of
extinction. Thus having found the head, let us look unto the wound, that so we
may the better discern the great danger the Beast was in, delivered in these
words, as it were slain to death. This deadly wound was given and driven home
to the head by the sword and incursion of the West Goths, under the leading of
Alaricus, who in the nineteenth year of Caesar Honorius (of whom the Beast some
four years before had received his life) entered Italy, and gave such a deadly
stroke unto his powerful pate, that for very fear, the beast lock^ himself
up in his den at Ravenna, while the enemy ripped up the streets of his imperial
City, filling them with famine, fire and sword; which night of woe, or ratner
beginning of her woeful night, made an ancient friend of hers, who in her youth
did love her over-well, to bewail and bind up her deadly wounded head, with an
old Ballade, after the tune of the burning of Troy.

Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando
Explicet aut possit lachrymis aequare l^bores?
Vrbs antiqua ruit multos dominata per annos.
And having thus mortally wounded the head of the Beast (in the year of
salvation 410. and 1157. years after Romulus had raised her walls with his
brothers blood) proceeded to seize upon the rest of his dignities, havocking
and burning his chiefest honors, Latium, Campania, Apulia, Lucania, Calabrid,
where raging and devising how to extermine the power of the Empire for ever,
and to, spread his glory over all, was by sudden death blotted out, leaving his
purpose and his Army Royal to his wives brother Ataulphus, who in like raging
have and fury returned to Rome, with an obstinate intent and resolution to
obliterate the ancient name of Rome for ever, and to call her (in honor of his
people) Gothia, or after his own name Ataulpha; which counsel and purpose of
his, had it been effected, Sir Antichrist with all his primacies and
supremacies had bid us good night long ago; and all his gainful en^erludes of
Fides vestra, and Ne deficiat fides tua, and Pasce oves, and Tibi dabo claves,
and Quorum remiseritis, with all his pestilent painted train of succession,
had been dashed in repeating, before ever they had come on stage. But to the end
this recovery might be the plague sore of the earth, his deadly wound was
healed, as the Spirit says, But the wound of his death was cured. For by the
pleasing prayers and subtle intercessions of the Emperors fister Placidia,
whose beauty and body was espoused to Ataulphus, for such a time his fury was
averted, and his design dissolved, and himself not only content at her
amorous mediation to grant the City of Rome pardon for her name, but also to
leave her eclipsed and dying honor, with all her Italy, to her stupefied
Honorius, who for fear was crept into his earth at Ravenna; and taking his
Spou^e Placidia with such dower as himself listed, departed Italy, and pitched
his Tabernacle in France. then one of the chiefest Provinces of the West
Empire. And to this Plaster the Spirit points, in saying, But the wound of
his death was cured.

And the holy Ghost foreseing the greatness of the Beasts power to come, which
was yet but like unto his sin; and how that Satan his creator, who had formed
him after the image and perfection of his own wickedness, should afford him
such letters commendatory to all the world, which naturally loves wicked
inventions, that the primacie of his Church and supremacy of his person should
overspread all, and obtain the praise of ^he earth; concludes of him in this
manner, And all the earth was in admiration of the Beast.

VERSE. 4.
And they adored the Dragon which gave power to the Beast; and they adored the
Beast, saying, Who is like unto the Beast, or who may war with him?
ANd the children of misheliefe ascribed to the Dragon inhibited honors,
decking his heathenish Christianisme with names of holy, and most holy, titles
due to God alone and they adored his execrable inventions and doctrines of
devils, worshipping and divifying his uncircumcised train of Caesar's, who had
granted unto Antichristsuch power incomparable, and uncontrollable
jurisdiction, which the Spirit anatomizeth in these words, And they adored the
Dragon which gave power to the Beast.

And as in evil there is no mean, so these children of unbelief went on, and
bestowed like titles and magnifications upon this base and vile Antichrist, who
as the Prophet long ago foretold us, by policy should prosper, and by peace
destroy many, and strike Dan. 8.
his adorers with such a spiritual drunkenness, that they should not only
hang their gold, but their faith also upon him, and verily believe that this
vile and despicable Antichrist, Delegate to Romulus, and Deputy to Caesar, was
Vicar to the Lamb, and successor to Peter. And thus rejoicing over the error
of their own fantasy, should with Pigmalion admire and dote upon the idol of
their own carving, and falling down should adore and ^rie with that drunken
King, Great art thou, O Bell, and in thee is no deceit: which occasioneth the
Spirit (in detestation of their madness) to disclose their shame, saying, And
they adored the Beast, and said, who is like unto the Beast, or who may war
with him?

VERSE. 5.
And there was given to it a mouth, speaking great things and blasphemies, and
power was given to it to work forty two months.
ANd as the Dragon did bequeath unto Antichrist, his throne and his power in so
large and ample manner, that his priestly key was in cutting and killing, so
like the Dragons sword, that he that is wise, may easily perceive, one
craftsman made them both: so Satan the Master and seducer of them both, endowed
his Antichrist with mouth and lips so like his own, that whosoever hears him open,
may truly say, Quam similes habent labra lactucas, like lips like lettice; at
which the Spirit points in saying, And there was given to it a mouth; and
proves it by an argument drawn from the fruit of his lips, speaking great
things Dan. 7.
and blasphemies. Whereof the Prophet Daniel also inditeth him, fore^elling
that he should open his execrable mouth, and speak words against the most
High; of which presumptuous and blasphemous magniloquence, the holy Ghost
arraigneth him more particularly in the verse following.

And the Prophet also forther reports, that times and laws, and great power
should be given into his hand, for Dan. ^.
a time and times, and the dividing of a time; butting and bounding his
tyrannous reign and government within the self-same circle and period, as here
the Spirit does, by another like prophetical^ construction, saying, And power
was given unto it to work forty two months.

VERSE. 6.
And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blasphe^^e his name
and Tabernacle, and those which dwell in heaven.
IN d^scovering the blasphemous mouth of Antichrist, the holy Ghost does first
and principally challenge him for presuming to lay hand upon his divine and
spiritual sword* and to wear the name and title of Vicar to the Lamb, which
title, name and honor, is only due to the Spirit of the Lamb, the only
moderator, comforter, and commander of all the Lambs affairs and forces in
heaven and in earth: and of t^is principal blasphemy the Apostle condemns
him, in saying, And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God.

Next, the Lord challenges him for presuming to blaspheme the word of God,
superadvancing his whorish Church above the divine eternal testimony, in and
by which the Son of God is named and known; which contumely offered to his
most holy word, the Lord accounts as done to himself and his most holy name;
for so the holy Ghost speaking of that Lord that is faithful and true, who
with justice judges and fights, says, that he was clo^^hed with a garment
sprinkled with blood, and his name is called, The Word of God. The pourtraiture
of which divine and essential word, is the engraven Scripture of his most holy
and written word, and of this blasphemy the Spirit inditeth him in these words,
To blaspheme his name. Less marvel then, if like a raging blood, down bearing
all before him, and over flowing all banks of obedience toward God, he dare
extol his cursed head above all that is called or named God, that is to say,
all magistracy, authority and power secular, which by Gods own ordinance and
commandment, is the only true, lively and immediate representation of his
own person, justice and government here on earth, in and over all temporal
causes and persons, as well Ecclesiastical as civil, of which high treason
one Apostle also convinces him, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

No marvel then, if thus daring to bla^pheme the Lord of the house and his
annoiuted Deputies, he dare blaspheme the house of God, wherein his name is
honored, cursing, reviling, and reputing it a house of schismatiques,
heretics, excommunicates; which blasphemous and undeserved wrong, the holy
Ghost lays to his charge, in these words, and his tabernacle.

And last of all, to show that there is neither end nor measure in his black
presumptuous and blasphemous mouth, the Spirit further charge him with
blaspheming the Saints and servants of God deceased, cursing, reviling and
condemning their doctrine, and yet blessing, adoring and erecting their
shadows, sepulchers, and shrines, for mediators, intercessors, and
reconciliators between God and the sinner; like their cursed fore elders the
Israelites, who boasted in the descent of their Father Abraham, and yet
balsphemed the faith of Abraham their Father, of which blasphemous and
indicible contumely against the Son of God, and his most holy Spirit, the
Apostle condemns him, saying, And those that dwell in heaven.

VERSE. 7.
And it was given unto him to make battle with the Saints, and to overcome
them; and power was given him upon every people, tribe, tongue, and Nation.
ANd as after lightning follows thunder, so after Antichrists blasphemy
follows his persecution, as the Spirit testifies, saying, And it was given
him to bid battle to the Saints; which the Prophet Daniel by way of exposition
also plainly fetteth forth, saying, That he should murder and consume the
Saints and servants of the most High, and with the cursed Philistims should
make his festivalls of Samsons afflictions.

And in further amplification of this his carnificious fury, the Spirit sets
forth the largeness of his charter and commission, by an excessive loquution,
foretelling us that it should be so large and general, that the fire of his
profane and sycophanticall keys should take hold upon every nation and tribe;
as if we please to cast an eye upon the time past, and confer what he had, with
what he has, we shall easily discern the meaning of the holy Ghost in these
words, And power was given him upon every tribe, people, tongue, and nation.

VERSE. 8.
And all that inhabit the earth adored it, whose names be not written in the
book of life, of the Lamb which was slain from the beginning of the world.
THe holy Ghost having in the former part of this Chapter discovered the birth,
place, person, power, blasphemy and persecution of Antichrist, descends now
to the description of his creatures and devotaries, foretelling us that they
should be such only (for unto such only the particle all is here restrained)
as have their portion and interest in this life, whose p^e^y, heaven, hope and
glory is here, and not elsewhere; which kind of out and overcast Ch^istians,
the Spirit describes by a periphrasis most proper to the^r natural and inbred
disposition, saying, they are those that inhabit the earth; therein
discovering them as by a difference divisive from such as are the Lords
pilgrims and strangers on earth, having here no permanent abode or place of
rest, but seeking the things which are above, attend with patience the
revelation of a life and City to come, not made with hands, where their Lord
and their Redeemer live^h.

And the Spirit proceeding shows further, the supreme hidden, and
unperceivable reason why the adorers of Antichrist thus defiled the ornaments
of their calling, and why they loved lies more then truth, the Beasts penance,
more then Gods repentance, the Beasts belief, more then faith toward God; the
Beasts miserable merits, more then the fruits of the Spirit, hatred of sin and
love of God, because (as holy David says) they were not found in the Lords
record, nor written with the righteous: for so much the Spirit unfoldeth,
saying, whose names be not written in the Book of life, of the Lamb which was
slain from the beginning of the world.

VERSE. 9.
If any man have an ear, let him hear.
THE Apostle having sufficiently deciphered the nature and carriage of
Antichrist and his creatures, comes now to discover his reward and judgment,
which howsoever it tarry little or long, is of necessity the reward of sin.
But before the Spirit draws out his sword, it pleases him in his accustomed
mercy, to awake his Church and her enemies, and to move them to a fear and
reverent attention, by a general summons, proclaiming, If any man have an
ear, let him hear.

VERSE. 10.
He that shall lead into captivity, goes into captivity: and he that shall
kill with the sword, must be killed with the sword: here is the patience and
the faith of the Saints.
THe holy Ghost in this verse calls An^ichrist to the Bar, and sets him
before the world, for the very he, on whom the wrath of God and his heavy
displeasure is to be executed. For he, who under color and pretense of weeding
out and rooting up of heretics, has b^ought into the Church, captivity,
inquisitions, tortures and torments, to the horrible murder and slaughter of
the Saints, when in such cases (notwithstanding) he had neither precept nor
example in the life of the Lamb, or his Apostles so to do; he, even he,
says the Lord, is that party, against whom this just judgment of taliation is
laid up in store to be executed upon him in that day, when the Lord shall bring
again the captivity of his Church, which for their sings, he has given up to
the sword and fury of the Beast, until she have bo^ne the burden of her
shame, and (as the Prophet says) renewed her beauty by her sorrows, and her
glory by Ezekiel. 39.
her persecutions, and then shall be fullfilled that which was spoken by the
Prophet, Woe to thee that spoyledst, and wast not spoiled: and did deal
wickedly, Isa. 33.
when they did not wickedly against thee: for when thou shall cease to spoil,
thou shall be spoiled: and when thy sin is ended, thou shall be rewarded, as
here also the Spirit denounces, contesting that God shall scourge him with his
own inventions, and repay him home in his own coin, saying, He that shall
lead into captivity, shall go into captivity, and he that shall kill, shall be
killed.

And in consolation of the Spouse, concludes, that howsoever Antichrist and
his Delegates foolishly thought, by afflicting the Church, to destroy the
Church, yet in her afflictions, consists the very strength and approbation of
her children; for by the things they suffer, they learn obedience, and through
patience their faith is consecrated, by the which they are perfected and made
inheritable of the promise of God: all which mercy and favor is commended unto
them under the hand and seal of afflictions, by which, their mad and drunken
adversaries thought to consume them, and like fools did not consider, that as
the workman does square the stone by strokes, and as the Snake does cast his
old skin by passing through sharp stones, so the Lord does renew his Spouse
by stripes, and brusheth off her old affections, by passing her through the
asperitie of tribulation; which holy and hidden consideration, causes the
Spirit to honor the sufferings of the Saints so highly, as to ascribe unto
them the chiefest stays and supportations of their precious hope and calling,
namely, patience and faith, saying, Here is the patience and faith of the
Saints.

VERSE. 11.
And I saw another Beast coming up from the earth, and he had two horns like
the Lamb, but he spoke like the Dragon.
THe holy Ghost in the verse foregoing, having pronounced sentence of death
against Antichrist, before he comes to the execution thereof, descends to the
arraignment and condemnation of his Clergy, that so they may be carted to the
valley of Hinnom both together, whom the Lord here figureth under the name of
the Beast, saying. And I saw another Beast; comprehending under the singular
number of one Beast, by a manner of speech common to the holy Scriptures, the
whole corporation and university of false and lying teachers, who from the
first Eremite, Hypocrite, Father, Priest, Monk, Friar, to the last trumping and
vagabond Jesuit, have avouched the honor and adoration of Antichrist, And is
most aptly deciphered by their earthly, sensual, and divellish minds, in
pointing to their country and place of extraction, whence and where such weeds
do grow, saying, coming up from the earth. And commends their making and
acquaintance to us, by two exqu^site tokens, the one their person, the other
their doctrine. Touching their shape and person, the Spirit says, that it was
in robe and exterior appearance, the very face and countenance of the Lamb,
decked and garnished with his own two horns, to wit, the Law and the Gospel,
wherewith the Lamb does save and kill; for so the Spirit says, And he had two
horns like the Lamb.

But as concerning the use and force of the horns, the Spirit says, they were
therein so contrary to the Lamb, that when they did open, either to teach the
Law or preach the Gospel, they spoke and taught like the Dragons Doctors, and
like the Priests of Jupiter, teaching and preaching unto the children of the
world, that they ought to worship the God of heaven, as the Dragons Priests had
taught their fathers to worship the Gods of the heathen. Which detestable
profanation of the worship of God, and preposterous adoration of his name, the
Spirit detecteth, in saying, But he spoke like the Dragon.

VERSE. 12.
And all the power of the first Beast he did in his sight, and he made the
earth and the inh^bitants therein to adore the first Beast, whose wound of
death was cured.
BY the power of the first Beast, is meant the purpose and plot of the Dragon,
for the upholding and establishment of their false and godless religion, to
the profanation and extinction of the true worship and service of God, which
forasmuch as he could not effect by force and open e^mitie, I mean by the
bloody persecutions of his profane and Ethnic Caesa^s, he did devise to put a
new string to his old bow, and to work it out by fraud and falsehood of friends,
and thereupon persuaded his Ethnic Caesar's, that in policy it was the best to
play Christians, forasmuch as the world was now so given, as Jupiter with all
h^s idols must needs give place to Christ, because most voices went that way.

And the better to bring the mystery of iniquity to pass, he caused his new
christened Caesar's to set up a race of sycoph^nticall, high, and princely
Priests, who under color of proctering the affairs of the Lamb, should
cunningly cl^p Jupiters coat upon the Lambs back, and bestow all the ceremonies
and ritualls of Jupiter and his idols upon Christ, that so, by turning
Jupiters worship into Christianisme, he might turn the worship of God into
Paganism and idolatry, and that so, he might at the least, profane and
desolate the true worship of the true God, whose Majesty and truth of deity,
they could no way blemish.

And for the better success in this their project, should cause to be erected
throughout all Kingdoms and Nat^ons, certain covents and swarms of false,
ungodly and prostituted Clerks, who by avouching and mainta^ning against all
comers, that Antichrists name is Simon Peter; and that the supremacy his
Caes^rs and his Kings gave him, is the very keys of heaven and hell, which the
Lam^ committed to the dispensation of his Saints and servants: and that the
throne and se^r of wick^dnesse, is Peter's Chair and Sea Apostolic; and that
the execrable form of Jupiters worship, wherein his Lords and Caesar's
delig^ted, is the very true worship and service of God, which ^he Lamb and his
Apostles delivered.

And by these mists, legerdemains, and new editions of old idolatry, should
establish in the sight of Antichrist, the self same p^ophanation, and devout
impiety, which his Antecessors the Caesar's so ardently embraced; for so much
the Spirit rippeth up, in saying, And all the power of the first Beast he did
in the sight of Antichrist: and thereby so strongly deluded and seduced the
children of disobedience (most properly here, as elsewhere, described by the
name of the earth and the inhabitants therein) that they loathed the Sac^ifices
of the God of heaven, and refused to worship, as the Lord commanded, and chose
rather (as the Spirit says) to adore the first Beast, that is to say, to
worship the God of their fathers, as the Dragon commanded them, just after the
prescription of his Caesar's, and manner of the heathen.

And that we may the better discern, from whom those Proctors of Don
Ant^christ borrowed this their abominable Church Service, the Spirit remembers
the repaired wound of their masters creditors pate, mentioned in the third
verse, Whose wound of death was cured.

VERSE. 13.
And he did many signs, so that he made fire to come down from heaven to the
earth, in the sight of men.
THe holy Ghost having arraigned and condemned the Clergy of Antichrist,
touching their doctrine, proceeds further to detect their abomination and
forgery, in seeking to confirm their false doctrine by lying signs and works
of wonder; condemning therein, first their vanity; secondly their presumption.
For as nothing can be more vain and ungodly, then to seek by lying signs and
wonders to confirm the doctrine of the Lamb and his servants, which is all
sufficiently established by their own magnificent and divine miracles, unto
which the Church of God upon her allegiance is enjoined to subscribe: so
nothing can be more presumptious and wicked, then to attempt by fignes and
wonders the confirmation of any other doctrine then that which the Lamb and his
two witnesses have sealed and delivered unto us, according to the statute of
God, Deuteronomy. 13.

And though their signs were many, as the Spirit reports, saying, And he did
many signs; yet were they but forgeries and lies, not wrought in truth and
dignity, but in falsehood and fallacy, as our Lord himself and his servant Paul
foretold us, Mat. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. In which regard the holy Ghost, squaring the
miracles of these exorcists after the rule of their doctrine, which was in show
the Lambs, but in truth the devils; calls also their lying signs, heavenly
fires, saying, So that he made fire to come down from heaven to the earth, in
the sight of men: not that they were in deed and in truth so, but that they
seemed so to be, in the eyes of men, because they were wrought by these
vagabond exorcists, under a pretended and colorable imitation of the name of
the Lord Jesus, who of all heavenly powers and fires is the true Lord and
sovereign commander; so these Clerks of Antichrist must be suitable in their
wickedness, that as their doctrine was opposite to the truth of Christ, so
their wonders might contrary the power of Christ, by a colorable imitation of
the miracles of Christ, and might be a true and perfect depravation of the same.

VERSE. 14.
And he seduced the inhabitants on the earth, through the signs which were
given him to do in the sight of the Beast, saying unto them that dwell on the
earth, that they should make the image of the Beast which had the stroke of the
sword and lives.
ANd the Spirit further disclosing the happy success of these unhappy brokers
and slaves of Antichrist touching their mists and miracles, foretells us,
that as the first Elias, by the miracles of heavenly fire, did induce and draw
the good unto the fear of God, so these imposters of Antichrist, by the lure
of their false and lying fires, should seduce and draw all dunghill and earthly
minded men from the fear of God, in such sure and devoted sort as that they
should persuade them to make the picture and image of the Beasts Religion, and
to embrace and erect such a Christianisme, as should in all points counterfeit
and represent the Paganism of the Dragon, attiring and decking Jupiters
profanation with the holy and honorable names of God, Jesus, Spirit,
Scriptures, Church, Sacraments, Saints, etc. like excellent Comedians who deck
themselves with Crowns, Scepters, Purples, and representations of Kings, when
as indeed they are but the idlest and basest of the people. And as the Lo^d
commanded his servant Moses to erect such a tabernacle of witness here on
earth, as should be in all points after the idea, model and platform of that
divine and eternal Tabernacle which he saw in the mount: so Antichrist (Lord
of misrule) commanded his propudious Clergy to cause all people, nations and
Kingdoms to set up such a Christianity as should in all points answer the
idea, model and platform of that profane and execrable heathenisme wherewith
he saw the Gentiles enamoured; and hereby so strongly seduced the inhabitants
on earth, that they verily thought the mystery of iniquiry to be pure and
undefiled christianity, and that the abomination of desolation, forespoken by
Daniel the Prophet, is the only true, ancient, Catholic and Apostolic
religion; teaching them that perish by consenting unto lies, that they ought to
worship God as the Gentiles did worship Jupiter; persuading them that as the
Gentiles had their Arae, so Christians must have their Altars; and as the
heathen had their bloody Sacrifices, so Christians must have their unbloody
sacrifices, and offer bread and wine to God, as the heathen did to Ceres and
Bacchus; and as the Pagans had their Pontifex maximus, so Christians must have
their Pope; and as Ethnicks had their Sacerdotes, so must Christians have their
Priests; and as the Gentiles had their Gods and Goddesses, so must Christians
have their he saints and she saints; and as the Dragon had his Pantheon, so
Antichrist must have his All saints; and as theheathen had their idols, so
Christians must have their images ^ and as the Pagans did consecrate their
Temples to idols, so Christians must dedicate their Churches to Saints; and as
the Ethnicks had their supplications, so Christians must have their
processions; and as the Gentiles had their Lustrations, so Christians must have
their holy water; and as the Dragon in his Church Service had his Cerei, so
Antichrist in his Church Service must have Candles; and as the Dragon had his
Acerrae or Thuribles, so Antichrist must have his Censors; and as the Dragon
had his Novendiall sacrifices, so must Antichrist have his Masses of Requiem;
and as the Dragon had his Hecatombes, so Antichrist must have his Trentals; and
as the Dragon had his Colleges Sodalium and Arvalium fratrum, so must
Antichrist have his Cloisters of Monks and Friars; and as the Dragon had his
Vestals, so Antichrist must have his Nunns and Sanctimonials; and as the Dragon
did celebrate the birth days of his Caesar's, so Antichrist must solemnize the
nativity of his Saints; and as the Dragon had his Annals, so must Antichrist
have his Legends; and as the Dragon had his secularia Spectacula, to Antichrist
must have his Jubilees; and as the Dragon had his Bacchanals, so Antichrist
must have his Carnivals; and as the Dragon had his Lupanaries, so must
Antichrist have his Stews; and as the Dragon had his inchanters, so Antichrist
must have his Exorcists; and as the Dragon had his Asyla, so Antichrist must
have his Sanctuaries; and as the Dragon had his Exequies and Parentals, so
Antichrist must have his Diriges and his de profundis; and as the Dragon had
his comitia centuriata, so Antichrist must have his Councels oecumenicall; and
as the Beast had his comitia curiata, so Antichrist must have his Counsels
Provincial; and as the Dragon did divisie his Caesar's, so must Antichrist
Canonize his Saints; and as the Dragon enacted civil laws, so Antichrist must
enact canon laws; and as the Dragon had his imperial Rescripts, so Antichrist
must have his Decretal Epistles; and as the Dragon had his Tribunitiall
intercessions, so Antichrist must have his uncontrollable interdictions; and as
the Dragon had and used his Proscriptions, so Antichrist must have and use his
excommunications, and as that Beast commanded his heathen to please their
goddess Juno with Cane vota libens, so this Beast commanded Christians to
please their God with vows; and as the Dragon had his Triceps Hecate, so
Antichrist must have his Triple Tiara, to signify his triple pretended
jurisdiction; and as the Dragon had his Hexaphorom, so must Antichrist be
carried up and down; briefly, as the Dragons Priests did teach the heathen to
worship Jupiter as God, so Antichrists Clergy must teach their Christians to
worship God as Jupiter; and look what form of religion, what manner of life
the Dragon led, the same must Antichrist in his person parallel and maintain.

And to the end we may undoubtedly discern what and of whose image the Apostle
speaks, the Spirit remembers now the third time his recured wound, which
here, speaking more plainly out, he calls the stroke of a sword; not that it
was the only stroke (for many swords did pierce the Dragon, as his had pierced
many) but the first stroke of a sword, which from the beginning and rising of
the Dragons Empire and regiment by Caesar's, did remeasure the fury of the sword
upon his own head and chair of state, as the Spirit notes saying, which had
the stroke of the sword, and lives

VERSE. 15.
And it was given to him to give spirit to the image of the Beast, and that the
image of the Beast should speak, and should make that whosoever honored not
the image of the Beast be slain.
ANd such art and perswasible power was given to those inchanters and apostates
of Antichrist, that they infused such a quickening spirit, such a life, giving
animation into the Ethnic dead and desolate image of the Dragons religion, by
guilding it over with the reverend, divine and honorable names of God
omnipotent, Christ Jesus the righteous, his holy Spirit, his precious blood,
his sacred word, his blessed Sacraments, etc. that they easily persuaded the
blear eyed world to think and believe, that the execrable form and image of
Jupiters abomination, commanded by the Dragon and his Caesar's, was the very
true worship and service of God, commanded by the Lamb and his servants; and
that the picture of Jupiter Olympius, which their Lord Epiphanes had set up and
placed in Sanctum Sanctorum, was the very Ark, and propiti^tory of God, set up
and erected by Moses his servant; and their abominable mystical Mass, the
Sacrifice of an unbloody Messiah, made of bread of their own baking (which the
Patriarks, Prophers and Apostles never heard nor dreamed of) is a Sacrifice not
Eucharisticall, but propitiatory and so all sufficient for the atonement and
reconciliation of God unto the sinner, as if it were figured and sealed in the
precious blood of the Lord of the Covenant; and that the horrible profane and
detestable supper of Thyestes, is the very true, holy and comfortable
commemoration of the Lords love in giving his life for the children of the
Church, and their thankful communion and celebration of the same.

And by these and such like enchantments, these Proctors of Antichrist so
baffled and blinded the Princes and Protectors of their synagogues, that they
inzeal'd them to authorize and erect inquisitions, executions, and torments
against all such as refuse to honor and adore the idol-service and desolation
of their Antiochus; and that all such as do but mutter against the
magnificence of their Church and her worship, which all the world adoreth,
should be accounted as Infoelix Lolium, weeds, Lollards, Heretics,
excommunicates, and sons of death, to the admirable confirmation of the
Spirits prediction in this place, saying, that it was given to him to give such
spirit to the image of the Beast, that the image of the beast should speak,
and make that whosoever honored not the image of the b^^st, be slain.

VERSE. 16.
And he should make all little and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
have a Character in their right hand, or on their foreheads.
ANd the power of these prostibulous Clerks was so catholic and universal,
that they caused all Kingdoms and Nations (figured here by a numeration of
their estates, conditions and callings, little, great, rich, poor, bond, free)
to confederate and unite themselves by a resolute and determinate purpose of
believing and living after the laws and prescriptions of Antichrist; which
league of voluntary and resolute subjection, the Spirit calls the character
of the beast: for as unity and love in truth, and a resolved purpose to live
after the Commandments of God, is the Character and cognizance of the Lamb: so
unity, conspiration and banding against the truth, with resolution to live
after the traditions of Antichrist, is the crest and character of the Beast.
Which profession of obedience was so studiously embraced, and with such joy
received of all the clients and creatures of Antich^ist that the Spirit says,
they did no less p^ide themselves in their errors and abominations, then in
the wearing of their bracele^s and abillements, delivering it in manner of
speech usual with holy Scripture, when it intends to express an ardent and
hearty affection approved both by word and action, by practice and profession,
as Deuteronomy. 6. 8. and 11. 18. where the holy Ghost uses the self same phrase, in
their right hand, or on their foreheads.

VERSE. 17.
And that no man may buy or sell but he that has the character or the name of
the Beast, or the number of his name.
ANd in further proof that Antichrist and his apostaticall Clergy should drive
the Na^le of their imp^ety home to the very head, the Spirit says, that by
them and means of their authority, it should be enacted, that none should
trade or live (for so much the inhibition of buying and selling does infer)
but such as acknowledge and adore the prerogative royal, religion and
discipline of the Beast and his holy Catholic Church (for so by a figurative
kind of blasphemy she must be called) as is confirmed by Antichrist himself,
then named Martin the fifth, in his Bull directed to the inquisi^ors of
heretical pravity (for so it pleases him to term the profession of the
truth) Nec domicilia habeant, nec larem foveant, nec contractus inean^, nec
negotiationes and mercaturas exerceant, nec humanitatis solatia cum Christi
fidelibus habeant, etc. All which their domineering, rage or madness, the holy
Ghost by way of prevision most admirably epitomizeth in these words, And that
no man may buy or sell (no one excepted out of the King of Babvlons decree)
save those only that carry his signing and flesh-mark in their hands or
hearts, as Beasts do in their fells, meaning such as under or above board,
privately or in public, are obstinately and resolutely devoted to live and
dye as the Beast commands; which the Spirit unfoldeth in saying, But he that
has the Character, or are o^herwise allied as it were by way of cognomination
unto Antichrist or his Church Catholic, and are hereafter cleped Papists or
Catholics, revealed in these words, Or the name of the Beast; or last of all,
are sound to adore within the very verge or lists of his reign and Empire
Pontificiall, here butted and bounded within the circle and comprehension of
these words, Or the number of his name, of whichmore at large in the verse
following.

VERSE. 18.
Here is wisdom; he that has understanding, let him count the number of the
Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred sixty six.
THe holy Ghost intending to reveal in this verse, the secret council and
purpose of God, concerning the period and final end of Antichrist and his
Church-dominion, prepares his Reader to attention by a little short Preface,
intimating that it is the discovery of a mystery and point of high
understanding, saying, Here is wisdom; wherein lest we should overrashly judge
(as many have done) the Spirit makes choice of his auditors, and adds for a
bar, not he that will, but he that can, and has understanding, let him audite
and count the number of the Beast; He that has understanding let him count the
number of the Beast; whom lest we should imagine to be a spirit or other
creature of strange shape (as some have vainly phantasied) the Spirit calls
him a man, saying, For it is the number of a man, comprehending by a Synecdoche
under the word Man, a successive state and Kingdom of men, after the speaking
and style of the Prophers: for so the Lord informed his servant Moses to
speak, Let my son go, that is, let my Exodus 4. Dan 7. Dan. 8.
People of Israel depart; and so in Daniel, under the form and name of four
singular Beasts, a^e designed four several Monarchies, most of them
containing a long succession of many Monarchs, The Ram which thou saw are
the Kings of the Medes and Persians: after which manner of speaking, the Spirit
speaks also in this place, and under the name of a man, presents unto us
the whole race and succession of men of sin^e, whose total sum is one
Antichrist, the bounds and limits of whose dominion and ty^anny, the holy Ghost
imp^leth within the circuit of a certain sure prefixed period and determinate
number of years, saying, And the number of him is six hundred sixty six.
Wherein many, as well ancient as late writers (as in the rest) have vainly
imagined, that Antichrist is one singular person, which must suddenly start up,
and after three civil years and a half depart again; and that he must be
by birth a Jew, and of the Tribe of Dan, when notwithstanding those cursed
Scatterbags have neither Tribe nor shadow of Tribe left amongst them; and that
he must reign in Jerusalem, of which City and Temple, there is not any one
stone left upon another; and that he must kill Enoch and Elias, who are to
appear about the Kalends of Greece with diverse other such legendary
fantasies, never meant nor sent from God: so in this point also concerning the
number of Antichrist, they have given up an account so far from the audite of
truth, as nothing can be more. And as men that thought it worth the labor to
find a knot in a rush, so by a conceited framing and anagramming of letters,
they have endeavored to find out such a name, as by characters might express
the number 666; and withal might something square either with the name,
nature, blasphemy or residence of the Bishops of Rome, as (...) for (...),
Remiith Adonikam, filius perditionis, etc. whereunto also may be added the
conjectures of John Wickliffe, John Bale, Francis Junius, men otherwise of good
and worthy memory in the Church of God; as also the conjectures of others as
worthy and honorable as they, that have reserred the number of 666. to the
time of Antichrists revealing and year of rising, when notwithstanding it is a
strange voice, and not known to the ears of the Scriptures, for the word
number to be used for the beginning and rising of any term of time limited and
predicted by the Prophets, but only for the end, period, and determination
thereof.

But if it were lawful to smile in so grave an inquisition, amongst all
fantastical charms and cabalisticall conjectures upon this word number.
there is none more ridiculous then that which most pleases our Rhetorical
Rhemists, who by a rare supputation of characters, have as roundly found out
the Beasts number, as the Sodomites did the doors of Lot, in the name Luderus,
which in the Almain tongue is the name of Luther: and although we are sure,
they cannot so much as think upon the poor Friar Luther, but for very fear
they stink all the world over; yet this device so tickleth the Clergy of
Antichrist, that they pretend to laugh for joy. But as for their prefixed time
of three natural or civil years and a half (which they allot to the reign
and rage of their Antichrist) it does so unevenly square with Luther or
Lutherans continuance, that these miserable Sardonians are feign to eat their
word, and to endure the foolish world to laugh at them, whiles as dying they
feign would seem to laugh at it. But to leave these cursed leaders of the
cursed blind, and return again to those that have thought to calculate and
find out the mystery of Antich^ists number 666 in a word, at a word we say they
are de^eived and err, not knowing the power and construction of the Scripture.

For first, by the word name, delivered in the former verse, in these words, Or
the number of his name, is meant the very existence and person of the man of
sin, by a propriety of speech common to holy Scriptures, as Acts 1. 15. Apoc.
3. 4. and 11. 13. where (by an Hebraisme) names signify men, and are converted
with the parties and persons themselves, as the name of God in holy Scripture
is often taken for God himself: and therefore as in the former verse, the
Scripture calls it the number of his name, so in this verse, he calls it
the number of a man, understanding by a man (as is aforesaid) the total sum of
that succession of beastly men, which make and constitute the existence and
person of one Antichrist: and by the word number, is meant the fatal end and
final determination of their reign and government: for so the finger of God
speaks to Belshazzar, God has numbered thy Kingdom, that is, God has ended
and fin^shed the days of thy Kingdom: so that the number of his name, or the
number of the man, is nothing else but the period and final determination of
the usurped tyranny and domination of Antichrist; which the Lamb, the Lord and
preserver of Israel, for the glory of his name, consolation of his Church, and
confusion of her foes, with a mighty and outstretched arm shall bring to pass
in the year which shall be 666.

For forasmuch as the egg of Antichristianism was laid in the daves of
Innocent the first, successo^ to Anastasius the first also of that name, in the
year of salvation 406. as is before delcared; and that by express commission,
there was furthermore granted to the Beast, his heirs and successors 1260.
years, for the hatching, fostering and perfecting this child of perdition and
mystery of iniquity, which being added to 406. by rule of true audite must
needs verify this admirable judgment, which the Spirit of God has here
denounced and determined to make good upon him in the year which shall be
1666. In which account and discovery of his end, the holy Ghost of purpose
leaves out the millenary number, as not only known perfect and immutable
(for that these vile and evil days shall not exceed more thousands then one)
but as respecting also the common use of all Nations, as well Hebrews a^s
Gentiles, who in their styles (for brevitie sake) do no less often speak and
^rite by th'^mperfect number, omitting the ^illenary, then after the perfect,
adding the millenary, as Munster well observes.

And in that year my Lord of Rome shall lay down his Vide Calendarium Hebraicum
Sebastiani Munsteri.
proud waves^ and although he fortify never so strong, and lay his foundation
as low as hell, and build his turrets as high as heaven and place his Miter
above the stars, yet in that day h^ shall die the death of the uncircumcised,
and perish like the Amorite, whose fruit is destroyed from above, and root from
beneath; and the Amos 2. 9.
multitude of his offenses shall consume the multitude of his forces; and it
shall be more possible for him and easy unto him, to weigh the fire, or
measure the wind, or call again the day that is past, or recover the verdure
of the withered grass (as a holy one faith) then to avoid this counsel and
decree of his downfall here determined by the Spirit against him, saying, And
the number of him is 666.

And then all Kingdoms and people shall see th'eternity of that eternal City
(as one of her own calls it) and th'immortality of her soul, meaning the
sovereign power and supremacy of her Caesar's and high Priests, to wither, die,
and sorsake the earth for ever: and as Babylon her mother left unto her
the inheritance of her pride and prophanations, so shall she also leave unto her
the heritage of her death and judgments: for as her glory has been great, so
shall her dishonor, when all her excellency shall be translated into shame and
sorrow.

Now therefore as King Belshazzar cried aloud, when he saw the handwriting
against him, that they should bring the Chaldeans, Astrologians and inchanters
to read and interpret; so thou that once and long before our days, have been
deemed by Laws of all Nations a power so sovereign and holy, call now about
thee thy Council and thy Clergy (who call themselves good men, learned and
wise, whose only grace is to love antiquity, gravity, wisdom and constancy)
ca^l them I say, cloth them with purple and chain them with gold, yet shall
they not deliver thee from this judgment to come; but as the millstone which
^he mighty Angel took and cast into the sea, which may not rise and float
again, with such violence thou and thy Church in that hour shall be thrown
down, and shall be found no more.

And all such Kings on earth, or rather Kings of earth, whose love thou have
stolen to the loss of their souls, that have lived in drunkenness, delights
and wantonness with thee, shall weep and wail for thee (as for their
fi^st-borne) when they shall see the smoke of thy torments ascend, and the
Apples which thy soul Iusted after, to depart from thee, and no man to buy thy
t^ash and commodities any more for that God which judges thee, is a strong
Lord, and thy derision shall be the joy and Allelujah of Sion.

But her fair and ^a^cyon day may not long endure before the Lord (that with
justice judges and fights) shall come in the clouds of heaven, to render
unto every man according to the ways wherein his heart has wa^ked, as more
directly is revealed in the 20. Chapter following. But as concerning the day
and hour of the coming of that Lord, who for the glory of his name shall
bring these things to pass, it is fast sealed up in the treasury of God, far
beyond the aim of all ^is servants on earth, or Angels in heaven; and yet his
beloved servant Daniel is bold in spirit, and lays down the year to be the
five and fortieth year (according to his Chaldaicall supputation) after the
consumption and extermination of Antichrist, that it may be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Prophet, Verily the Lord of hoasts will do nothing, but he
reveals his secrets unto his Servants the Amos 3. 7.
Prophets.

DAN. 12. 11, 12, 13. And from the time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken
away, and the abomination that makes desolate set up, there shall be a
thousand two hundred and ninety days.

Blessed is he that waits and comes to the thousand three hundred and five
and thirty days.

But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shall rest, and stand up in thy
lot, at the end of the days.


FINIS.

