BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CONFEDERATE CATHOLIQVES OF IRELAND.
WHereas diverse ill affected to the Government of this Kingdom have endeavored
to lay scandalous aspersions upon this Assembly, affirming that it was called
out of a design to conclude a Peace dishonorable and unsafe in matters
concerning Religion without regard had of the Acts and Orders of former
Assemblies: And although the many testimonies We have given of our zeal
toward the advancement of Religion, to the wasting of our Fortunes, the loss
of many lives, and to the danger even of an extirpation of the Nation, leaves
us no way subject to such Calumnies, in the opinion of any indifferent Judge:
yet least any of easy belief, should be seduced by such sinister means, We
do unanimously declare in pursuance of our former several expressions and
protestations in our Oath of Association and otherwise, that We will, to the
uttermost of Our power and abilities, labor and endeavor the preservation and
advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion, the immunities and privileges
thereof, and therein are so far from declining the acts of the former
Assemblies as that in any Peace to be concluded, we will not receade from the
Acts, Orders, Declarations or Explanations of the said Assemblies, or exceed
the power by them reserved, and Declarations by them made, concerning the
settlement of the Peace and quiet of the Kingdom: And therefore we do
further declare, all and every person and persons, of what degree or quality
soever, that ought to assist in this Assembly, and yet will absent himself
from the same, on any such pretense, and without manifest lawful impediment,
to be a person ill affected to the Peace and settlement of the Kingdom, and
accordingly to be treated and prosecuted. Given at Kilkenny, the foureteenth
day of September Anno Domini 1648. and in the four and twentieth year of the
reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of England,
Ireland, France, and Scotland, etc.

RICHARD BLAKE, Prol. Genesis Conv. Phill. Kearney Cler. Genesis Conv.


Printed at Kilkenny, by command of the General Assembly, 1648.


