GODLY and WHOLESOME DOCTRINE, And Necessary for these Times: BEING The Second
Part of the HOMILY concerning THE HOLY GHOST; Dissolving this DOUBT: Whether
all men rightly Challenge to themselves the Holy Ghost, or no?
OUR Savior Christ departing out of the World unto his Father, promised his
Disciples to send down another Comforter, Joh. 14.15.
that should continue with them for ever, and direct them into all truth, which
thing to be faithfully and truly performed, the Scriptures do sufficiently bear
witness; neither must we think that this Comforter was either promised, or else
given only to the Apostles, but also to the universal Church of Christ
dispersed through the whole World. For unless the Holy Ghost had been always
present, governing and preserving the Church from the beginning, it could never
have sustained so many and great brunts of Affliction and Persecution, with so
little damage and harm as it has: And the words of Christ are most plain in
this behalf, saying, That the Spirit of truth should abide with them for ever,
John 14. Matthew. 21.
that he would be with them always, (he means by Grace, Virtue and Power,)
even to the worlds end.

Also in the Prayer that he made to his Father a little before his Death, he
makes intercession not only for himself and his Apostles, but indifferently
for all them that should believe in him through their words, John 17. Romans 8.
that is to wit, for his whole Church. Again, Saint Paul says, If any man have
not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his: Also in the words following, We
have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father: Hereby then
it is evident and plain to all men, that the Holy Ghost was given not only to
the Apostles, but also to the whole body of Christ's Congregation, although not
in like Form and Majesty as he came down at the feast of Pentecost.

But now herein stands the Controversy; whether all men do justly arrogate
to themselves the Holy Ghost, or no? The Bishops of Rome have for a long time
made a sore challenge thereunto, reasoning for themselves after this sort? The
Holy Ghost (say they) was promised to the Church, and never forsakes the
Church: But we are the chief heads and principal part of the Church, therefore
we have the Holy Ghost for ever, and whatsoever things we decree are undoubted
Verities and Oracles of the Holy Ghost.

That ye may perceive the weakness of this Argument, it is needful to teach
you, first what the true Church of Christ is, and then to confer the Church
of Rome therewith, to discern how well they agree together. The true Church is
an universal Congregation or Fellowship of Gods faithful and elect People, Ephesians.
2.
Built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone: And it has always three Notes or Marks, whereby
it is known; Pure and sound Doctrine, the Sacraments ministered according to
Christ's holy Institution, and the right use of Ecclesiastical discipline. This
description of the Church, is agreeable both to the Scriptures of God, and also
to the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, so that none may justly find fault
therewith. Now if ye will compare this with the Church of Rome, not as it was
in the beginning, but as it is presently, and has been for the space of Nine
hundred years and odd, you shall well perceive the state thereof to be so far
wide from the nature of the true Church, that nothing can be more. For neither
are they built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, retaining the
sound and pure Doctrine of Christ Jesus; neither yet do they order the
Sacraments, or else the Ecclesiastical Keys, in such sort as he did first
institute and ordain them: but have so intermingled their own Traditions and
Inventions, by chopping and changing, by adding and plucking away, that now
they may seem to be converted into a new guise. Christ commended to his Church
a Sacrament of his Body and Blood: They have changed it into a Sacrifice for
the quick and the dead. Christ did minister to his Apostles, and the Apostles
to other men indifferently under both kinds: They have robbed the Lay People of
the Cup, saying, that for them one kind is sufficient. Christ ordained no other
Element to be used in Baptism, but only Water, whereunto when the Word is
joined, it is made (as St. Augustine says) a full and perfect Sacrament: They
being wiser in their own conceit than Christ, think it is not well nor orderly
done, unless they use Conjuration, unless they hallow the Water, unless there
be Oil, Salt, Spittle, Tapers, and such other dumb Ceremonies, serving to no
use, contrary to the plain Rule of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.
who wills all things to be done in the Church unto Edification. Christ
ordained the Authority of the Keys to Excommunicate notorious Sinners, and to
absolve them which are truly Penitent: They abuse this power at their own
pleasure, as well in cursing the godly with Bell, Book and Candles, as also in
absolving the reprobate, which are known to be unworthy of any Christian
Society; whereof they that list to see Examples, let them search their Lives.
To be short, look what our Savior Christ pronounced of the Scribes and
Pharisees in the Gospel, the same may be boldly and with safe Conscience
pronounced of the Bishops of Rome; namely, that they have forsaken, and daily
do forsake the Commandments of God, to erect and set up their own
Constitutions. Which thing being true, as all they which have any light of
God's Word must needs confess, we may well conclude according to the rule of
Augustine: That the Bishops of Rome and their Adherents are not the true Church
of Christ, much less then to be taken as chief Heads and Rulers of the same.
Whosoever (says he): August. contra Petiliani Donat. Epi. cap. 4.
do dissent from the Scriptures concerning the Head, although they be found in
all places where the Church is appointed, yet are they not in the Church. A
plain place, concluding directly against the Church of Rome. Where is now the
holy Ghost which they so stoutly do claim to themselves? Where is now the
Spirit of Truth, that will not suffer them in any wise to err? If it be
possible to be there where the true Church is not, then is it at Rome:
Otherwise it is but a vain brag, and nothing else.

Saint Paul (as ye have heard before) says; If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, the same is not his. And by turning the words, it may be truly said: If
any man be not of Christ, the same has not the Spirit. Now to discern who are
truly his, and who not, we have this Rule given us, John 10. John 8.
That his Sheep do always hear his voice. And St. John says, He that is of
God hears God's Word. Whereof it follows, that the Popes not hearing
Christ's voice, as they ought to do, but preferring their own Decrees before the
express Word of God, do plainly argue to the World, that they are not of
Christ, nor yet possessed with his Spirit. But here they will allege for
themselves, that there are diverse necessary points not expressed in holy
Scripture, which were left to the Revelation of the Holy Ghost, John 16.
who being given to the Church according to Christ's Promise, has taught many
things from time to time, which the Apostles could not then bear. To this we
may easily answer by the plain words of Christ, teaching us that the proper
Office of the Holy Ghost is not to institute and bring in new Ordinances
contrary to his Doctrine before taught; but shall come and declare those things
which he had before taught; so that it might be well and truly understood. When
the Holy Ghost, says he, shall come, he shall lead you into all truth. What
truth does he mean? Any other than he himself had before expressed in his Word?
No; for he says, He shall take of mine, and show unto you. John 15.
Again, He shall bring you in remembrance of all things that I have told you.
It is not then the duty and part of any Christian, under pretense of the Holy
Ghost, to bring in his own Dreams and Fantasies into the Church: But he must
diligently provide that his Doctrine and Decrees be agreeable to Christ's holy
Testament. Otherwise in making the Holy Ghost the Author thereof, he does
blaspheme and belie the Holy Ghost to his own Condemnation.

Now to leave their Doctrine, and come to other points. What shall we think or
judge of the Pope's intolerable Pride? The Scripture says, That God resists
the proud, and shows grace to the humble. Also it pronounces them Blessed
which are poor in Spirit, Mat. 5. Mat 14.
promising, that they which humble themselves shall be exalted. And Christ our
Savior wills all his to learn of him, because he is humble and meek. As for
Pride, St. Gregory says, it is the Root of all Mischief. And St. Augustin's
judgment is this; that it makes men Devils. Can any man then, which either
has or shall read the Popes Lives, justly say, that they had the Holy Ghost
within them? First, As touching that they will be termed Universal Bishops, and
Heads of all Christian Churches through the World, Lib. 3. Epist. 76.78.
we have the judgment of Gregory expressly against them, who writing to
Mauritius the Emperor, Condemns John Bishop of Constantinople in that
behalf; calling him the Prince of Pride, Luciser's Successor, and the
Forerunner of Antichrist. Sermon. 3. de Resur. Dom.
St. Bernard also agreeing thereunto, says; What greater Pride can there be,
than that One man should pre^er his own judgment before the whole Congregation,
as though he only had the Spirit of God? And Chrysostom pronounces a terrible
Sentence against them, affirming plainly, Dialog. lib. 3.
that whosoever seeks to be chief in Earth, shall find Confusion in Heaven,
and that he that striveth for the Supremacy, shall not be reputed among the
Servants of Christ. Again he says: To desire a good work, Chrysostom. sup. Mat.
it is good, but to covet the chief degree of Honor, it is mere vanity. Do not
these places sufficiently convince their outrageous Pride, in usurping to
themselves a Superiority above all other, as well Ministers and Bishops, as
Kings also and Emperors? But as the Lion is known by his Claws, so let us
learn to know these men by their deeds. What shall we say of him that made the
noble King Dandalus to be tied by the neck with a Chain, Sabel. Ennead. 9. lib.
7.
and to lie flat down before his Table, there to gnaw bones like a Dog? shall
we think that he had Gods Holy Spirit within him, and not rather the Spirit of
the Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope Clement the Sixth. What shall we say of him
that proudly and contemptuously trod Frederick the Emperor under his feet,
applying the verse of the Psalm unto himself: Thou shall go upon the Lion and
the Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon thou shall tread under thy foot? Psalm.
60.
Shall we say he had God's Holy Spirit within him, and not rather the Spirit of
the Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope Alexander the Third. What shall we say of him
that armed and animated the Son against the Father, causing him to be taken,
and to be cruelly famished to death, contrary to the Law both of God, and also
of Nature? Shall we say that he had God's Holy Spirit within him, and not
rather the Spirit of the Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope Paschal the Second. What
shall we say of him that came into his Popedom like a Fox, that reigned like a
Lion, and dyed like a Dog? Shall we say that he had the Holy Spirit of God
within him, and not rather the Spirit of the Devil? Such a Tyrant was Boniface
the Eighth. What shall we say of him that made Henry the Emperor, with his
Wife and his young Child, to stand at the Gates of the City, in the rough
Winter, barefoot and bare-legged, only clothed in Linsey-woolsey, eating
nothing from morning to night, and that for the space of three days? Shall we
say that he had God's Holy Spirit within him, and not rather the Spirit of the
Devil? Such a Tyrant was Pope Hildebrand, most worthy to be called a Firebrand,
if we shall term him as he has best deserved. Many other Examples might here
be alleged. As of Pope Joan the Harlot, that was delivered of a Child in the
high street, going solemnly in Procession. Of Pope Julius the Second, that
wilfully cast St. Peter's Keys into the River Tiber. Of Pope Urban the Sixth,
that caused five Cardinals to be put in Sacks, and cruelly drowned. Of Pope
Sergius the Third, that persecuted the dead Body of Formosus his Predecessor,
when it had been buried eight years. Of Pope John the fourteenth of that name,
who having his Enemy delivered into his hands, caused him first to be stripped
stark naked, his beard to be shaven, and to be hanged up a whole day by the
hair, then to be set upon an Ass, with his face backward toward the Tail, to be
carried round about the City in despite, to be miserably beaten with Rods, last
of all to be thrust out of his Country, and to be banished for ever. But to
conclude, and make an end, ye shall briefly take this short Lesson; Wheresoever
ye find the Spirit of Arrogance and Pride the Spirit of Envy, Hatred,
Contention, Cruelty, Murder, Extortion, Witchcraft, Necromancy, etc. assure
your selves that there is the Spirit of the Devil, and not of God, albeit they
pretend outwardly to the World never so much Holiness. For as the Gospel
teaches us, the Spirit of Jesus is a good Spirit, an holy Spirit, a sweet
Spirit, a lowly Spirit, a merciful Spirit, full of Charity and Love, full of
Forgiveness and Pity, not rendering evil for evil, extremity for extremity; but
overcoming evil with good, and remitting all Offense, even from the Heart.
According to which rule if any man live uprightly, of him it may be safely
pronounced, that he has the Holy Ghost within him: If not, then it is a plain
token that he does usurp the name of the Holy Ghost in vain.

Therefore (dearly beloved) according to the good Counsel of St. John, Believe
not every Spirit, 1 John 4
but first try them whether they be of God, or no. Many shall come in my name
(says Christ) and shall transform themselves into Angels of Light, deceiving
(if it be possible) the very Elect. Mat. 24
They shall come unto you in Sheeps Clothing, being inwardly cruel and
ravening Wolves. They shall have an outward show of great holiness and
Innocence of Life, so that ye shall hardly, or not at all discern them. But the
rule that ye must follow, is this; Mat. 7.
to judge them by their fruits. Which, if they be wicked and naught, then is it
unpossible that the Tree of whom they proceed should be good. Such were all the
Popes and Prelates of Rome for the most part, as does well appear in the story
of their Lives; Luke 6.
and therefore they are worthily accounted among the number of false Prophets
and false Christ's, which deceived the World a long while.

The Lord of Heaven and Earth defend us from their Tyranny and Pride, that they
never enter into his Vineyard again to the disturbance of his silly poor Flock;
but that they may be utterly Confounded and put to Flight in all parts of the
World. And he of his great Mercy so work in all men's Hearts by the mighty power
of the Holy Ghost, that the comfortable Gospel of his Son Christ may be truly
Preached, truly Received, and truly Followed in all places, to the beating down
of Sin, Death, the Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist; that
like scattered and dispersed Sheep, being at length gathered into one fold, we
may in the end rest all together in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
there to be partakers of eternal and everlasting life, through the merits and
death of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Sam. Thomason. 1685.


