A Brief Account of the Most Remarkable PRODIGIES which happened at the Birth,
in the Life, and at the Death of our Blessed Savior JESUS CHRIST.
To which is Added, A Lively Description of the Person of Christ. 16. March.
1695/6.
Also, Something concerning AGBARVS, Prince of the Edesseans; with his Epistle
to Christ; and Christ's Letter in Answer thereto. Collected out of the Best
Historians, both Divine and Heathen. And illustrated with Observations, both in
Verse and Prose.
By W. L.
In the Days of Tiberius Caesar the Emperor, Publius Lentulus being at that
time President in Judea, wrote an Epistle to the Senate of Rome, Concerning
Jesus Christ, the Words whereof are these, as follows,

THere appeared in these our days, a Man of Great Virtue, called JESUS CHRIST,
who is yet living amongst us, and of the People is accepted for a Prophet, but
his own Disciples call him the SON of GOD.

He raises the Dead, and cures all manner of Diseases.

Well might the Romans at such Works admire:
Jove and his Gods, could never so high aspire.
Those Mighty Works he did declared him more
Then all those Idols Rome did then adore:
The Dead revivd; Who could their Life restore,
But he that first inspired it by his power?
How c^uld the Blind in darkness longer stray,
When the glorious Sun dispel'd it quite away?
And what but Health could seize all Living Things,
When shadowed under his All-healing Wings?
He is a Man of stature somewhat Tall and Comely, with a very reverend
Countenance, such as the beholders may both Love and Fear, his Hair of the
color of a Chestnut full ripe, and plain almost down to his Ears, but from the
Ears downward somewhat curled, and more orient of color waving about his
Shoulders. In the midst of his Head goes a seam or partition of his Hair;
after the manner of the Nazarites; depiction of Christ with orb his Foreheard
very plain and smooth; his Face without spot or wrinckle, beautified with a
comely red; his Nose and Mouth so formed as nothing can be reprehended; his
Beard somewhat thick, agreeable in color to the Hair of his Head; not any
great length, but forked in the midst; of an Innocent Look; his Eyes gray,
clear, and quick.

In reproving he is severe, in admonishing courteous, and fair-spoken, pleasant
in Speech, mixed with gravity.

It cannot be remembered that any have seen him laugh, but many have seen him
weep: In proportion of Body well shaped and straight, his Hands and Arms very
delectable to behold; in Speaking, very temperate, modest, and wise.

A Man for his singular Beauty surpassing the Children of Men.

When all that is Good, most Perfect, and Divine,
To dignifie our Nature did combine;
When Innocence descended from Above,
In brightest Glory and in purest Love;
What else but Beauty could it self display,
Far more illustrious then the clearest Day,
And much more during: That one frowning blast,
At might appreaching, makes to look aghast.
But this, un^angled by devouring Age,
Unruffld by tempestuous Heat, an Age
Continues in a perfect Symetry
And will outlast boundless Eternity.
AFter that Jesus Christ was made manifest unto all men through the working of
Miracles, he drew unto him an innumerable sort of Strangers, far distant from
Judea, (afflicted with sundry Diseases, and every sort of Maladies, being to
recover their health;) of which King Agbarus Governor of the famous Nations
inhabiting beyond the River Euphrates, grievously diseased in body, incurable
by man's cunning, hearing the renowned Fame of Jesus, the wonderful Works which
he wrought, agreeable to the same, published of all men, wrote unto him by
Letters, requiring deliverance from his Disease; Jesus (though not presently)
yielded unto his desire, vouchsafed to answer him by an Epistle, That shortly
he would send one of his Disciples, which should cure his Disease; promising
withal, That he should not only cure his Disease, but as many as belonged unto
him. Which promise he not long after performed; for after his Resurrection,
Thomas, one of the twelve Apostles, sent his Brother Thaddaus, accounted among
the seventy Disciples, by Divine Inspiration, into the City of Edessa, to be
Preacher of the Doctrine of Christ, by whom all things concerning the Promise
of Christ were performed.

The Reader has an approved Testimony of these Things in Writing, taken out of
the Recorded Monuments of the Princely City Edessa; for there are found
enrowled in their public Registry things of Antiquity, and which were done
about Agbarus's time, and preserved unto this Day; and copyed out of their
Registry, and translated by us out of the Syrian Tongue in this manner.

The EPISTLE of Agbarus unto our Savior.
AGbarus, Governor of Edessa unto Jesus the good Savior, showing himself in
Jerusalem, sends greeting; I have heard of thee, and thy Cures which thou
have done without Medicine or Herbs; for (as the report goes) thou make the
Blind to see; the Lame to go; the Lepers thou cleansest; foul Spirits and
Devils thou castest out; and the long diseased thou restorest to Health; and
raisest the Dead to Life. When that I heard these things of thee, I imagined
with my self, one of these two things, either that thou art God come from
Heaven, and do these things, or the Son of God that brings these things to
pass. Wherefore by these my Letters, I beseech thee to take the pains to come
unto me, and that thou will cure this my grievous Malady, wherewith I am sore
vexed. I have heard moreover that the Jews murmur against thee, and go about to
mischief thee; I have here a little City, and an honest, which will suffice us
both.

The LETTER of Christ to Agbarus.
AGbarus, blessed art thou, because thou have believed in me, when thou saw
me not; for it is written of me, That they which see me shall not believe in
me, that they which see me not, may believe and be saved. Concerning that thou
wrotest unto me, that I should come unto thee; I let thee understand, that all
things touching my Message are here to be fulfilled; and after the fulfilling
thereof, I am to return again unto him that sent me. But after my Ascension, I
will send one of my Disciples unto thee, which shall cure thy Mallady, and
restore Life to thee, and them that be with thee.

PRODIGIES at the Birth of Christ.
IN prosecution of my intended method, I first begin with the Birth of the most
Holy and Immaculate Son of God, incarnate, which was (according to the best of
Chronologers) in the 3849 Year of the Word, and in the 48th Year of Augustus
Caesar, second Emperor of Rome, it was attended with many surprising and
remarkable Prodigies and Apparitions in the Heavens, and that after a more
Terrible and Supernatural manner than ever happened in the preceding Ages, as
the learned and warlike Jew Josephus testifies in his Jewish History; which
Sights being unusual, were therefore more Frightful to humane Nature, and put
the Magi themselves (to whom the Vulgar had ever recourse in things of
Consequence) to so great a nonplus, that they could make no evasion, but were
forced to conclude (as well they might) That some more than ordinary Person
should arise. For besides the Account given by the Evangelists, of an Angel
appearing to the Shepherds, and the Star which directed the Wise Men to the
Place of his Nativity, we have it recorded by Paulus Horatius, and Eutropius,
then Secretaries to Augustus, as also by Eusebius, (a very credible Author)
That a Fountain of pure Oil was discovered in a public Inn at Rome, issuing
forth without intermission for the space of a whole Day. Which was a very
notable Instance of the Coming of Him who was the Fountain of all Goodness. And
they farther add, That at high Noon, on a clear and serene Day, the visible
Body of the Sun was environed with a Circle far more resplendent than it self.

Bright Sol surrounded with that Glorious Light,
Withdrew his Beams, and vanished out of sight:
The Righteous Son made that illustrious Day,
Darkness at his arising fled away;
Missed in the Night of blind Obscurity,
Before we grop'd, but now we plainly see.
Gamester in his Ecclesiastical History, affirms, That the very same Day that
our Savior Christ was born, a Temple at Rome, dedicated to the Goddess Pax,
fell to the Ground; adding, that when it was first erected, the Romans
consulted the Oracle of Apollo, demanding how long it should continue, which
replied, Until a Virgin should bring forth a Child: Which they concluded
impossible; and therefore that Temple should never be demolished; nevertheless
they were grossly mistaken, for at the blessed Virgin's bringing forth a Child
(even the King of Heaven) it fell to the Earth, and became a ruinons heap.
Lucas de Cais in his Chronicle of Spain, reports, That he found in the Ancient
Records of that Country, that by computation of Time, on the same Night wherein
our Savior was born, a Cloud appeared about Midnight, giving such a
resplendent Light, that it was hard to distinguish the Night from a clear Day.
So Heaven's bright Nuntio's did of old descend
In Fiery Clouds, not able to contend
With Ph^bus, till this most refulgent Cloud
Changed Night to Day: Dim Sol amazed stood,
Trembling for fear a far more Radiant Light
Should him obscure, and make him rule the Night.


PRODIGIES in the Life of Christ.
I Now proceed to speak of Prodigies which occurred in the Life of our blessed
Savior here upon Earth. Saint Jerome relates, That when Joseph fled with the
Virgin and her Son into Egypt, all the Idols and Images of their Gods tumbled
from their Altars to the Ground; and that their Oracles also ceased at that
time, and never were heard to answer any more: ( Rarities of the Creation, page
84.) About the first Year after the Birth of Christ, Armies were seen at Rome
fighting in the Air. The Sun suffered a violent Eclipse, after which a violent
Tempest of Rain and Hail followed. And about the 12th Year, when Jesus disputed
with the Jewish Doctors, a great and terrible Comet appeared. The Light of the
Sun was apparently seen to fail at Rome. How could he longer cast a glimmering
Ray,
And see the Fountain of his Light decay?
Tiber overflowed Rome: Upon which see Horace in the 2d. Ode of the first Book,
Jam satis terrae nivis, etc. Thirteen Cities in Africa were destroyed by an
Earthquake. Noisome and Pestilential Flies came in great Swarms into Germany.
Caligula that Monster of Mankind was born. King Agrippa was slain. Agustus
Caesar dyed. In the 22d. Year of his Age it rained Blood in Rome, which was a
remarkable presage of the effusion of Christ's most precious Blood. Armies were
seen again fighting in the Air, both in Rome and Pola^d; and a Blazing Star
like a Sword was discerned in the Sky: Soon after whith the Theater erected by
Pompey, was burnt down, and the City of Tiberius drowned. And in the same Year
Tiberius became a most Bloody Tyrant, and committed all manner of Cruelty upon
the Romans.

Strange and Unusual Sights, what else could be,
While our Great Lord sustained such Misery:
Nature unhinged, stood trembling in amaze,
Dreading her Mover would her Beauty raze;
Least she to her Confusion should return,
And Fiery Flames become her Funeral Urn.
Such strange Events may justly seem to bode.
A Wicked People, and an Angry God.
PRODIGIES at the Death of Christ.
IN the 34th Year of our Savior's Life, Tiberius then being Emperor of Rome,
the Wicked Jews most barbarously cruc^fied our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
as produc^d such prodigious Effects, as were never seen in any Age before, and
which were afterward attested and confirmed as well by Heathens as Christians.

At the time of his Death, a very great and thick Darkness happened in the
Daytime, which continued from Six till Nine, and yet the Sun suffered no
Eclipse, for the Moon was at Full, so that it was Miraculous, and Contrary to
the Order of Nature, and could be no otherwise effected than by the Immediate
Power of God, who justly deprived the Sun of its Light, whilst his Son
ignominiously suffered Death for the Sin of Man: Dionysius the Areopagite being
that Day in Athens, and seeing the Son in a total Eclipse, and knowing (being
well skilled in Astrology, and the Course of the Heavens) that such an Eclipse
must be contrary to the known rules of Nature, cried out with a loud Voice,
Either the World is at End, or the God of Nature suffers. Some Authors affirm,
that the Wise Men of Athens were so much affrighted at this Prodigy, that they
presently caused an Altar to be built, and dedicated to the unknown God: and
that St. Paul arriving there, cheeked their blind and superstitious Ignorance,
declaring unto them, That Jesus Christ the Redeemer of the World was that
unknown God, whereby he converted many of them to the Christian Faith. Which
also is a plain demonstration that the Darkness was over the whole World, since
it was at Athens, and other places far remote from Jerusalem; yea, the Moon
being at Full, and having no Light but what she borrows from the Sun, she
became most violently darkened.

Heaven's brightest Darling thus bereaved of Light,
What could succeed but a most gloomy Night?
Darkness his Mourning clothed the doleful Sky,
And thickest Clouds became his Canopy:
All things condole, but the most impious Jew,
Who did his Hands in Spotless Blood imbrue.
I might mention a great many more Prodigies, which I have met with in credible
Authors, but am forced at present to omit them for brevity's sake; desiring
that these, represented unto us in this small Collection, may have that blessed
effect upon every one of us, to make us more circumspect in our ways. And if
such Terrible Apparitions happened at his First Coming, far more Dreadful may
be expected at his Second: For which God of his infinite Mercy prepare us all;
Amen.

FINIS.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

Printed and Sold by J. Bradford, in Jewen-street, near Crowder's-Well, 1696.


