A Despised Virgin Beautified, OR, VIRGINIA Benefited.

Setting forth, though concisely, yet perspicuously, the State of that and the
Neighboring Plantations, both as they have their Blemishes, with the Causes
thereof, and as they may be cured, with the Consequents thereof.

I am black but comely, etc.

Cant. 1. 5. By O. Ll. Gent. sometimes an Inhabitant of Virginia.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, for Edward Dod, and are to be sold at the Gun
in Ivy Lane, 1653.

To the Christian, and to the Judicious Reader, that is well-affected to the
Common salvati on purchased by Christ, or to the Common good of this Republique.
REader, which of the two soever you are, I have a double word to offer to your
consideration; First that the undertaking of this work to express this
accommodation for the benefit of the American plantations, in both Spirituals
and Temporals, is not a thing that I undertook in my own strength, or for any
base ends of my own: But (as the Lord can bear me witness that I ly not) upon
the hearing the minister in public the last Lords day stir up every one to
endeavor the exaltation of Christ in his proper place, internally and
externally, I conceived it a duty incumbent upon me to offer my two mites to
the Lords treasury, if it might be acceptable to him, having nothing else
wherewith to honor him at present; or if it might be profitable for my
longed-for friends in Virginia, who have been often, in my weak measure and
manner (though an unworthy wretch) presented at the Throne of Grace by me, That
God of his infinite riches and glory by Christ would supply all their needs;
and being by so many years experience acquainted what was that necessary thing
that conduces to their eternal well-being and yet there wanting, I have here
presented you (as the Lord enabled me) with what I humbly conceive (ever
submitting to better Judgments) may be the best expedient to accomplish the
happiness of that place. Secondly, I must answer the unsatisfyed Reader, who
knew my former conversation, both there, and here; and how unsuitable it has
been to what I here present; That though he might say, Physician heal thy self,
or, Hypocrite first pull the beam out of thine own eye, etc. I confess what was
my sin; which as it has been my shame, so it is (through grace) and will be
the subject of my sorrow. that I have walked so disorderly; But I hope (through
great grace) by Christ Jesus, I have and shall obtain mercy, and enjoy favor
with the Father, and fellowship in the Spirit with the Son, and Saints; and
that henceforth he will show me (for my self) the coming in and the going out,
and fashion of his Temple; that henceforth he will sanctify me, and preserve
me blameless to the coming of his Son, to the praise of the glory of his
grace; and therefore I beseech you my friends, both of Virginia, and of my
Native Country, who have seen my outgoings, not to be grieved in spirit at my
undertaking of this.

For as I conceive my self bound by duty to undertake this task, so I conceived
there was a great deal of equity in it, both toward the Lord, and toward you
of Virginia, and also you of my Native Country; that as I have been
notoriously evil to the dishonor of God, and the discredit of the Gospel before
you, so I might be notably instrumental (if the Lord please) to promote his
praises in Virginia in the first place; and afterward (it lies upon my
thoughts, and I do believe it will be accomplished) that I shall do the like in
my own Native Country; so that both places shall see the glory of his free
grace to me, and learn to love and fear, believe and close with the Lord of
Love and Life. I beseech you then without prejudice reeeive these weak
exhibitions of my duty and love to my God, my Country, and my Friends, and
pardon what is amiss, and pray for him that would fain be found walking in the
truth, whilst he is,

From my Chamber at the Flying-Post in White Friars, London, this 6th. of
October, 1653. O. Ll.

A Despised VIRGIN beautified, OR VIRGINIA benefited.
AS a skillful Architector that would erect a lofty edifice, and build
beautifully for the benefit of the Owner, digs deeply to lay the foundation of
his Structure; or as a wise Physician will not prescribe physic to his
Patient, till he have seen sure symptoms to know the disease by; the first,
left his building fall, and his labor and charge be lost; the second, left his
Patient fail, and his reputation be blemished.

So in this business that lierh so strongly upon my spirit, to be doing
service for the Public, that thereby my God may be honored, the Gospel
propagated, and the Kingdom of the Lords Christ enlarged; I would willingly
take the wisest, the safest, the profitablest, and honourablest (as to the
Public) way the Lord shall lead me to do, in doing this work; and therefore as
concisely as I can, I shall endeavor to represent my experiences, what I have
(though of weakest judgment) observed to be the disease of that distressed
member of this Commonwealth, both as to Church, and Sat.

And that what are and have been the thoughts of my heart (I hope suggested by
the Spirit of God, for the good of that Country) for near these fourteen years
as concerning what expedient may be fourd to remedy the distress of the
disconsolate Virgin Country Virginia, and render her sound and in perfect
health; therein showing the beauty that may be expected to be seen in her, when
she is prepared for, and presented a spotless Spouse to the Lord Jesus her
husband, and also the benefit of having such a member annexed to this
Commonwealth.

In the discovery of her disease, give me leave to remind you of her
Primo-genitors, or first Masters of Europoean extract, and what have been the
successors for the generality; thereby we shall get a little light into the
originals of her disease, and be the better able to give judgment on her, and
so to prescribe the remedy as the Lord shall in able a poor creature.

Virginia so styled, and taking her name from the late Virgin Queen, (Queen
Elizabeth of happy memcry, as a glorious instrument in the hand of God, for
doing the work of the Lord in her time) which title was given her by the first
Adventurers (as considered to landing, and living there) in Queen Elizabeth's
days. But the Emergencies of the public affairs of those times, took up the
spirits of men from thinking much of that Colony, during the reign of the said
Queen, and the business lay dormant till about the years 1607 or 1608. when
diverse Noblemen, Gentlemen and Citizens, imbodied themselves in this City of
London, and made a Virginia Company, under the specious pretenses of
propagating the Gospel, and preparing a way to the setting up the Kingdom of
Christ Jesus in those American parts, and I believe many godly men really meant
so; and much treasure was advanced by the Adventurers, and by public
authority; which business being then managed (as it is to be feared, because
now heavily felt) by self-ended men, was carried on, as disorderly, so
unsuccessefully.

Disorderly, in that they began not to send over men sound in the faith, pious
in their lives, and sincere in their ends; But the major part of them, poor
spirited, self-ended, and broken fortuned men to manage the work: and with them
as subservient to their self ends; they sent (the greatest part of such as were
sent) under their command, to do the work by their derection; why? they were
such (in general) as were dissolute, wild, debauched, idle, and nonfortuned men
and women; and many of these being raked out of the sinks of the Commonwealth,
which being drawn out of several prisons, were immediately married to such as
they never saw before, and so sent to plant the Country.

Year after year this practice continued, and multitudes through disorder and
want of accommodations died; till at last the company was dissolved, and the
Country infranchised, and then the reigns being laid on the necks of these new
libertines they became more licentious.

Here by the way I crave all sober minded gentlemen, and Planters of Virginia,
to clear me in this, that I tax not all; for I know, and did know many more,
and have heard of more than I knew, of gallant gentlemen of quality, and others
in that Country who have been almost from the beginning there, that I have
observed, and heard of, to be good members of that Commonwealth, and to have
lived soberly and honestly, free from all open vice.

And such as were the people, such were the Priests; for the lowest of the
people here that would consecrate himself might be made a Priest, and then over
there will they go when England spueth them out for their incivilities; and
truly I fear it is too true that I hear thence, that the most of them are so
still.

Now such Priests and such people as before mentioned, so principled, and so
ended, surely could lay but a sorry foundation, for the Gospels Propagation, in
those Plantations; the major part being such, as those few that were good,
could do no good with, either for Church or State.

And truly I find that there is too much of that stock remaining there still;
for now my own experiences of sixteen or seventeen years standing, conferred
with the present times, holds poor Viginia forth in my apprehension as a
disconsolate Virgin, subject to the rape of the strongest ravisher of her
beauty and bravery. For since the late Court-faction came in, and poor
Pensioners came over to be Governors, and other chief Officers, to make up
their broken fortunes, she has been much macerated, her beauty marred, and the
ancient Commonwealths men, who had begun to set forth the beauty and virtue of
that Virgin, were not only disheartened, but many of them destroyed in their
estates, for their fidelity to the grand interest of the well-being of the
Plantation. Witness the difference begun by those of the Court-Faction, as Sir
John Harvy and Secretary Kemp, (both creatures of the Lord Finch, and Sir
Francis Windebank) between them, and the honest Gentlemen, and ancient Planters
of the Country, who had saved the Country with the hazard of their lives and
fortunes; this division descended to the next Governor Sir Francis Wiat, who
removing Sir John Harvy, was himself afterward dislocated by the endeavors of
an Anti-party, who brought in Sir William Berkley, who, what he was, and is, is
too manifest by woeful experience of his twice revolting from this
Commonwealth, and in them injuring the best affected to this Common-weolth,

Yea, and the hand of the Priests is in this also.

But now it will be supposed that this disease is cured by the conquering of
the Anti-party; I conceive it not cured, neither will it be, while there is
either root or branch, in power, in or near that Colony (as it is too near) for
I conceive, whilst that Maryland in the North, and Carolina in the South,
remain in the possession of them it does, though the Court-Faction be now in
the embers, thence will be brought upon any convenient opportunity, bellows of
sedition sufficient to set all our Plantations on fire, they being both of the
same Stock, Simeon and Levi like, brethren in iniquity.

There is yet another inconvenience, which concurring with the former, make up
another malady to make our Virgin the more miserable; and that is the
propinquity of the Dutch, and Swedish Plantations, who much blemish the
beauties of both the elder and younger daughters of Englands Commonwealth, and
prejudice their estate, by receiving and detaining our fugitives, both debtors
and servants, and fiding with Indians.

Now as without she is damnified and endangered, so within she suffers too much
detriment by the adherents of the former faction in the Commonwealth; and so
likewise by the iguorance, and pride of the Priests, the Country suffers
much more in the loss of their spiritual advantages, as shall appear by and by.

But which is more, the main (pretended) end of planting the Country, is
altogether omitted, if not prejudiced; as I shall show anon,

But I love not to rake in the dung nor to cast dirt about, but would willingly
be (if possible, and that the Lord were so pleased) instrumental to do all the
good I could to the Colony; for next the place of my native soil, I love it
above any Country wheresoever I have traveled; and therefore though I be the
worst of sinners, yet I bless God I abound in love to that Country, and do
wish from my very heart, (if I can discern it) to endeavor by all means, and
to improve all interests to advantage the place; and therefore let me crave
pardon if I mentioned any thing that is offensive to any; I cannot hold, love
constrains me, I must discover what I know amiss; it is the work of the
Lord, and I would not be found negligent in it.

The successelesnesse of the Plantation is (to my sorrow) seen by comparing her
deformity and barrenness (as to spirituals) with her younger Sisters beauty
and fruitfulness; who though placed in a far more barren soil, (in relation to
terrestialls) is by ingenuity and industry made far more fruitful and
profitable to her inhabitants, but which is better, she abounds in the work of
the Lord, and in the enjoyment of the manifestation of the abundant love of
God, not only to the English themselves, but the glory of his grace is much
seen in demolishing much of the Kingdom of Satan, and exalting the Scepter of
Christ among the Natives,

A thing which the primary Planters pretended, but by them of new England
intended, and with good success (blessed be God) happily effected in part,
which will more and more increase to the perfect day, I believe and hope.

This being the root of her disease, which makes poor Virginia deformed, and so
consequently despicable, with mourning of Spirit I bemoan her, and wish all
that know her with me to bewail her, and to set to their helping hands and
hearts, (and to implore some means from the great and good God of heaven, who
is both able and willing to help) for her recovery and establishment in her
perfections, which is I conceive, first to set up the kingdom of God there, and
then all other things: shall be ministered.

First, therefore I humbly conceive, that if the Lord would put it upon the
hearts of his people here in old England, and in new England also, to intercede
and plead with the Lord for her, that he would be pleased to set up his name
there, and be glorified in his appearances for his people there; for I verily
believe that the Lord has a precious people there, that have not, nor will bow
the knee to Baal; though now they be under the clouds, and in the clefts of the
rocks; as I shall show you by and by.

Secondly, I would humbly desire that the people of God here, conferring with
their friends of new England, would join together, and make it their joint
desire to the Supreme Authority, that they would unite the English Plantations
which are on the continent, from Cape Florida in the South, to Cape Saint
George in the North, viz. Carolina, Virginia, Maryland, Albion, New England,
New Plymouth, and the Plantations to the eastward of Merimack river, and Nova
Scotia, into one Pattent with New England; it would be of great consequence
conducing to the common good of all those Plantations, and a great profit to
this Common wealth of England.

But which is most of all, it would much enlarge the kingdom of Christ, and
propagate the Gospel to the Natves all along the Continent, as immediately I
shall (through grace, and your patience) show.

But before I hold forth the benefit that may come by this union, give me leave
to answer the coverous Patentee, or Planter of each Pattent.

I say Corolina, Virginia, Mary Land and Nova Sootia, are planted for the major
part with such kind of Planters as formerly I spoke of; who only (especially
in the Southern-Plantations) eat the bread of idleness, viz. by following such
commodities as come with the easiest labor; and not improving all advantages
that might be taken for the advancing of their own interest, in gaining what
fruits the ground with a little more pains would abundantly afford them.

Now if New England men were among them, the example of their industry, with
the sight of the advantages gotten thereby, would excite al ingenious men (as
there is abundance) to endeavor to attain the gaining of the like
accommodations for themselves, which would in the end much enrich the
Commonwealth.

Object. Sir, says the covetous Patentee or Planter of Carolina, or Maryland,
and Albion, we are peculiar Patents belonging to Noblemen in England, who have
purchased their Patents at a dear rate, and expended much money by themselves
and friends to plant these Plantations, and shall we admit of Strangers,
especially of such as are of so different a judgment from us? there is neither
Piety nor equity in this.

Answ. Truth it is, their Patents were granted from the grand Governors of
this Common wealth for the time then being; whose grant I conceive was good, as
to the enjoyment of their tenures to the end pretended; which appears by
their grants, to be to the glory of God and the good of this Commonwealth. But
now being the Commonwealth is under the power of an other administration, (who
I hope truly fear God) which power finding the pretended ends to be falsified,
and instead of setting up the Kingdom of Christ in their Plantations, the
dominion of Antichrist is exalted under the protection of those Noblemen and
their grants, therefore I conceive it to be both just and pious, and for the
profit of this Common wealth, to call in those patents and make them null, as to
the dominion and legislative power given to those Lords; yet in equity, for the
reward of the Adventurers service in gaining such Countries, I conceive it is
as just they should enjoy the chief rents for what they let out to Tenants; and
what they keep in their own hands and improve, to have it free, reserving the
Commonwealth's interest of profits as at first agreed upon.

And as for inconvenience of their being of other judgments as I conceive the
Laws of Christ enforce none to conform to one another judgment (by any
coercive power in man's hand) but as it pleases the Lord by his own Spirit to
act in such as belong unto him; or permit the spirit of Error to persuade
others to that which is evil; and therefore I conceive their cohabitation not
to be any ways disadvantagious to the Commonwealth (for so I hold the
Plantations to be now in the hands of the Commonwealth) and if the Liberty of
the Law be equally alike to all, and the benefit of the Gospel offered to all,
to me it appears in my slender judgment equitable and just, that freedom be
given to all that are members of this Commonwealth equally to cohabite in any
of the Plantations, they conforming to the power of the civil Magistrate,

Now as for new Albion, Sir Edmund Ployden (the pretended Earl of Albion) took
his Patent from the Lord Strafford in Ireland, who made it an Irish Province,
which he should have planted within three years; and yet for some 14, or 15.
years he has done nothing as to purpose of Planting the Country; and
therefore I conceive his Patent void; and liberty might well be given to any,
either of old or new England, to come into that part of the Continent and plant
it.

Object. But Sir says the Virginian, we and our predecessors have born the
heat of the day, and have planted much of the Colony, and cleared much land;
and now would you have the New England men to enjoy the fruits of our labors?
surely this were a piece of injustice and uncharitableness.

Answ. Gentlemen and Contrymen, If I prove it both justice and charity, yea,
and a benefit to Virginia, (which is a subject I chiefly aim at in this
discourse, next to the salvation (ye shall I say in order to the salvation) of
your souls, and the glory of our Savior) to admit the people of New England to
dwell with you, I hope it will be offensive to never a godly or rational man in
Virginia, that loves God, the Country, or his own, and relations souls.

Therefore now give me leave to speak freely, yea and through grace I will
speak freely; for I speak for God, for the Commonwealth, and for your good I
hope.

Is it not justice for this Commonwealth to call in your Patent, who have no
ways performed the trust reposed in you, for the advancing of the glory of God
in your Country, but on the contrary have (by power and authority) acted
against the Lord and his interest? You Will say this is a heavy charge! I must
prove it, and that I do thus.

When there was a godly well-affected party among you, some 12. or 13. years
since, who being sensible of the sad condition their own, their childrens,
their servants, and their neighbors souls were in, sitting in the blackness
of darkness, under a blind, dumb, debauched ministry, (such as the generality
of your Ministers in my time) were when I say they sent to the Churches of New
England, that they should come over and help them, who as brethren
condescending to a compliance with your necessity, and the Call of God, these
godly men sent you over three Ministers of the Gospel, whose admission and
reception was with such a sweetness of affection, that the people from far
parts of the Country came to hear them with joy and cheerfulness while they
stayed; so that there was great hopes, that there might have bin a glorious
work suddenly accomplished, and the main desired end for which your Patent was
granted, might be attained; now when the work was in this forwardness, Satan
stirred up the hearts of some evil men, to expulse them out of your Country,
to the discomfort of the poor souls that were instrumental to bring them in and
to the pulling of the veil of ignorance over the eyes of your souls (if any ye
have) and drawing down a cloud of darkness, and causing it is expansion all
over your Country, which still continues (woe is me therefore) and to the
pulling down, (I am persuaded in my spirit) of that great judgment upon the
land, which was wrapped up in the livs of many hundreds of persons that were
slain suddenly after their departure by the incursions of the Indians April 17.
1644. which cut off 1500. men, women and children in one day, as I was credibly
informed.

Seeing therefore ye have been so unfaithful to the Commonwealth, as not to
preserve the people in peace and safety, much less in godliness and honesty;
I am confident to affirm, it is but just to take away the Vineyard from you,
and let it out to other husbandmen, that will yield the fruits thereof.

And as it is Justice, so it is charity to force in the light of the Gospel
(maugre all evil men's indispositions) that may expel that thick cloud of
darkness that is over you, that so the people that sit in darkness may see
the salvation of God. For what a miserable thing is it, that so many thousand
souls should be in your Country, and I cannot hear of any godly, sincere,
sound, and faithful minister of the Gospel among you, but one; know ye not
that text, My people perish for lack of knowledge; and again, Where there is no
vision, the people decay; and do not your souls in secret mourningly say, this
is truth that I say from the word of God? Therefore these things considered, is
it not charity to force open all the doors and windows that may be opened, to
let in the light of the Gospel among you, even you my Countrymen of England?
For I will say nothing of the Indians among you in this place, but defer that
till anon.

Yea and it is a benefit to your Country that the New England-men should be
admitted to live among you, as for your souls, so for the benefit of the
education of your youth; yea, and for furnishing the Country, with pious
Ministers, painful Schoolmasters, and faithful Magistrates, and a holy people
whose conversation may be such as may adorn the Gospel, glorify God before
your eyes, to your conversion, or at lest to your conviction.

Object. But say you, all this is truth, but now we have cleared the land, and
won it with our bloods from the enemies, shall they now come and enjoy it? this
is hard.

Answ. Why Gentlemen? besides what has been spoken before for the clearing of
the justice of permitting the people of new England to come among you; Is it
not one of your ownlaws? that if any man take up land, and improve it not
within three years; and after he have improved it, if he shall desert it for
three years, it is free for any man to take it up; then from this law I shall
make it appear, that it is not only just, but profitable for you, that new
England men should come and abide with you.

First, for the justice of the cause, how much ground is there untaken up by
you between your lands bounded out, where many single families might plant and
dwell among you in single families; and how much land is there in the bottom of
the Bay in Pottomock, Pottucson, Rhappahanack rivers, and in Carolina, that is
untaken up, where after the manner of their own Country, they might build in
Towns, and dwell together, where they might set up the ordinances, advance
justice in its due and easy administration, with more advantage to the
Commonwealth than now you have it, who come from Accomack, Pottomock, and the
head of James River, for Justice to James-Town, most of these places being
above an hundred miles from Iames-Town?

Yea in James River and other places, how much old ground is there which you
have deserted, where convenient seats for trading might be built to the great
benefit of the Country, and the land improved, in sowing fl^x (an especial
commodity) and other improvements, which you let run wild again after cleared?

How great a commodity would they bring into your Country by bringing in all
manner of trading freely to you without being beholding to the London
Merchants, as they do for themselves, there being sufficient materials with you
for building all sorts of vessels as they do in new England?

Nay what an advantage will it be to the poor Natives, whose lands you enjoy,
if by these means they might have an introduction into the Kingdom of heaven,
in interchange of their sublunarie accommodation? A thing I verily believe,
(upon good grounds) the poor souls do especially desire, in order to be freed
from the service of Satan, the cruelty of which servitude or slaverie they
grievouslie groan under.

Give me leave to give you my reason of this my belief, in the year 1642. (if
my memory fail me not) Captain John West, Master Stephen Gill (I know not
their titles now, for so they were then called) and their wives, with some
other neighbors and Servants went up to Pamunk^y to recreat themselves, and to
Vossite Oppachancanough the old Emperor of the Indians in the Bay, who though
a Barbarian, showed them no little kindness, assigning them part of his Wigwam
(or house) for their lodgings, and causing his Indians to bring them in daily
fresh Venison and other accommodations for their provisions, Prince-like; where
they remained several days, and which is the wonder for which I relate this
story as I received it from Mr. Gill his own mouth) every morning and evning
the English at an appointed hour went to prayers among themselves, at which
time constantly most terrible tempests of wind, and also a great noise, as if
it had been the rattling of chains were running round about the house, to the
exceeding great terror of the Natives, insomuch that they would run among the
English when they were at their prayers for shelter; and this continued
constantly for many days while they were at prayer, in that time only and
no more, which wrought so effectually upon the old Emperor, that he cried cut
to the English when the fear was over, Will none help us to know your and serve
your God? with many other words to the like purpose he often used to them; and
if any day they did not keep the precise time of prayer according to his
observation, he would send to the English to go to worship their God. This
report I had from Master Gill, and I believe Captain West, and the rest of the
company will affirm the same.

Oh then is there not great hope that a happy work might be wrought for God
and for those poor souls, if the new England men might come among you in
Virginia, who have been so happily successful in the conversion of so many
Indians in their own Country, that they may do the like for the Natives in
your parts?

Object. You talk of remoteness of place in the Colonie of Virginia for the
doing and enjoying justice, and if this should be that all the Patents should
be joined in one, how should we come to the enjoyment of the benefit of the
Law? the distance being so great from the South of Carolina, to the Northeast
at Cape Saint George.

Answ. Gentlemen, you know the situation of the coast all along from North to
South, how full of harbors it is all the coast along, and how convenientlie
men may pass from harbor to harbor; And there is a convenient place about
Hudsons Riter, or De Laware-Bay, whereat a convenient Site might be presently
plated, where a seat of residence for the principle Magistrate might abide, and
thither the Patriots of each Province or their deputies might meet once every
year or less, if no occasion require, to consult, consider of, and enact
wholesome laws for the well being of the whole.

But if men will not go by sea, it is easy to go in a small time by land,
there being horses enough in the Country from the utmost bounds of the South,
or North latitude.

And for matters of Meum and Tuum, or for the trespasses they might be
determined in each Province by depuries as before. And I verily believ that if
you would once admit of the Regiment of the Prince of Peace over you, and his
people cohabite with you, there would be less of that litigious spirit, that
now is to be seen among you, and a spirit of peace, and love, and joy in the
Holy Ghost, would be manifested to you, and magnifyed by you.

Object. But if all this were granted, what could we do for this union, seeing
that so near the place you hold forth to be the center of the Country, and a
place meet for the people from all parts to meet for the making of laws, is a
place so near the Dutch Plantation, and the Swedes, that they would be goads in
our sides, and thorns in our eyes.

Answ. As for the Dutch Plantation, if the war continue, we have an opportunity
to make it our own, by the joint-forces of these Plantations by a course of
war, and if peace suddenly succeed these endeavors, their ships will be as
ours, their people as ours in all Plantations and places; we shall be united in
a firm bond of amity, and so theirs indeed will be ours in truth, in the
general accommodation, though their particular interest may be preserved unto
them.

And as for the Swedes Plantation, it is a thing of so small a value, and they
being friends with our Commonwealth it is an easy matter to find an
accommodation so as that they may be satisfied, and this Commonwealth served
with their interest.

Object. What say you to Nova Scotia and the Plantations to the eastward of
Merimach that belong to the French, that being sold to the French by the Kirks
(I believe it is not unknown upon what score, after the English, and Scotch
Nations had so dearly purchased it) how shall they be joined with this Patent?

Answ. First for the French, they desire and apply themselves only to the
trade of the River of Canada, and not one ship in an age scarce comes to the
Southward of Cape Saint George to trade; but admit it were their trade there;
is it not an easy hing for us, to eject them out of that which they cheated us
of by the late Queens means? now in such a juncture of time as that we are
going to differ nationally upon another score, we having both men and shipping
of our own enough in new England which would quickly cast them out upon a
national account or quarrel; By which means the Patent might be enlarged, and
the Gospel further propagated; and a means in time (through the blessing and
providence of God) found to transport the goods of the East India trade, from
Japan, and from the Isles of Mare Delzur to some part about Corsina, or some
other part, and so overland, to the head of the River of Canada, or some of the
great Rivers in Virginia, as formerly it was brought from the head of the red
sea, over land by Caravans to Alexandria in Egypt, and so through the
Mediterranean Sea, all Europe over by the Venetian Argocies; Would not this be
a great enriching to our Commonwealth? yea, and it would be a great means to
facilitate our voyages with speed and safety to Merchants and mariners, who are
subject to great hazard both of goods and lives in going twice under the
Equinoctial line by the way of Cape de buona Esperanza, both going and
returning, and here they have a more speedy and healthful way of trading.

And not only so, but it would be a great assurance to our fishing trade, upon
the coast of Nova Scotia, and new Found land, whereby in America we might draw
a great trade out of Spain and the Streights in a few years, and he encouraged
and enabled by the enjoyment of the commodity of those rich furs, to a further
work of exalting the glory and scepter of Christ in those Northern Countries of
America, as far as Fretum Davies; for I believe the dwarfeish generation of
those Northern Countries, shall speak in time the high praises of our God. And
so I suppose I have answered all objections of my loving Contrymen of
Virginia, for whose sakes principally (as to men) I was excited in my spirit to
set upon this work.

I say, now I have answered all objections that I conceive can rationally be
made, according to the small apprehension the Lord has given me, and the
little experiences that I have of things.

I would now (though before in an intermixed discourse) offer to you a
compendium of the profits and advantages both spiritual and temporal that
might hereby acrew.

First, as to the glory of God, the Gospel in her pristine purity would
shine so excellently among all the English Plantations, that it would be a
glorious thing to behold the change, when we should see in each place and part
of this great continent I mean from Cape Florida to Fretum Davies, not only
all the English, but the Dutch, Swedes, and the remainders of the French,
exalting the praises of God, in their several languages, tongues and speeches;
yea the poor Indians much advantaged, both those that are Southerly and
Northerly of new England as well as those of Massachusetts Bay Patent (I put
little difference between the Patent of the Buy and the Patent of new Plymouth,
they both I hope concurring to the main end as to Godward, and in their
subjection to this Commonwealth) but the beauty of the Gospel would shine
among the Spaniards, and the Indians that converse with them, to the Southward
and Westward of us, who when they see the power of godliness, the purity of
religion, and the manifestation of the Prince of peace and love, coming in the
beauty of the glory of his grace to them, and compare him with the former
representation of him by the Spanish inquisition and tyranny; I am exceedingly
filled in my spirit with the apprehension of what I see a far off (as it
were) of the sweet imbracings of Christ, with acclamations of joy that the poor
seduced Spanish souls, with their abused slaves, both Negroes and Indians, will
entertain Christ and the Gospel, and how they will come flowingly in and
submit to the scepter of Christ, bemoaning his long absence; would count him
the chiefest of ten thousands to their souls, and by this means the Gospel
might be communicated to the nations of Mexico, Brasil, Peru, and so over
Fretum Magellanicum to the ends of the earth; what joy? what comfort? what
happiness? (yea, what a great glory would it be not only to our nation in
general?) but to those that love Christ Jesus in sincerity in each of their
particulars. And what exceeding honor would it be to him whose is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory; which I wish may be ascribed to him in truth, by all
Nations, now and for ever. Amen.

Soli gloria Deo.

