Directions of the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons of the
City of London in Common Council Assembled. To the several Ministers of the
City of London, and Liberties thereof; For the stirring up their Hearers to a
voluntary and general Contribution, for the raising of a Stock, For the
setting of the Poor of this City at Work as is hereafter expressed.
THis Court having received a Narative from the Corporation for the Poor, of
their intended Method for setting the Poor at work on the several
Manufactures hereafter mentioned, Whereby the Poor may be kept from idleness,
and enabled to earn a proportionable livelihood for themselves, which as it
will tend much to the honor of God, the good of the Nation, So unto the
special Weal of this City, in that the Poor shall be kept from extreme want,
the streets cleared from Vagarants, the Unlearned taught, and the Idle kept
from such temptations as attend that kind of life.

Hereupon this Court have thought fit, for the better carrying on the said
work, and encouraging of all well minded persons to a free and liberal
contribution, For the advancement of so pious and charitable a work, have
thought fit to acquaint all persons with the Intentions of the said
Corporation, when they shall be enabled thereunto by a Stock, viz.

1. To clear the streets of all Vagarants and sturdy Beggars.

2. To employ the Poor who are any ways able to work, and have not
wherewithal to employ themselves.

3. To take care that such Children that lie under stalls, and wander about
streets be set to work, and earn their bread, and also receive fitting
Education.

4. That such poor housekeepers, which are in great necessity for want of
work, shall have materials home to their own houses, so as they procure persons
of credit to engage for the return of the same when its wrought.

The way and means (among others) proposed by them to effect the aforegoing
particulars, are as follows.

1. To employ these Poor in the making of all sorts of necessaries belonging
to the Fishing trade, which will accommodate both young and old with fitting
employment.

2. In making Canvas, Pouldavis, Sack cloth, and other Linen cloth.

3. In picking, sorting, carding and spinning of Cotton Wool, for the making
of Fustians, and all other Manufactures which they are capable of, and the
Stock will enable thereunto.

In consideration of these preparations to so good a work, this Court earnestly
desire you in your several places to stir up your Hearers with the most
Religious and pressing arguments to so pious and charitable a Work, That so
this City might not be found guilty of such a neglect as not to provide for the
Poor, whom our Savior has told us, We shall have always with us; knowing
that what we have is received from the riches of his Grace, that respects our
thankfulness by giving to them that want, we being but Stewards, and shall
shortly give an account of our Stewardship.

And what God shall move the hearts of his people to give, This Court has
desired that every respective Alderman, Deputy and Common councel-man in their
several Wards and Precincts, shall upon Monday and Wednesday next, meet in
their several Wards; and subscribe themselves, and take the subscription of
all and every person that shall willingly Contribute, and appoint Receivers of
the same, and return an account of their proceedings therein, unto this Court,
who are resolved to their uttermost both in Care and Council, that the charity
received might be well improved.

Sadler.

Foot, Major.
Commune Concilium tent' in Camera Guildhald. London. sextimo die Februar.
1649.
IT is thought fit and desired by this Court, that every respective Alderman
with his Deputy and the Common-councel-men shall upon Monday and Wednesday
next, meet in his Ward, and send for the Inhabitants thereof before them, and
underwrite, toward raising of a Stock to set the Poor on work, and then take
the subscriptions of the said Inhabitants, (what sums they shall willingly
contribute thereunto) and appoint Receivers of the same; And further that every
Common-councell-man accompanied with such of his Neighbors as he shall think
fit, shall repair to the several houses of those in his Precinct, (who shall
not appear at the said meeting) and take their subscriptions for the purpose
aforesaid, and return an account of their proceedings to this Court.

Sadler.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


