Preliminary ARTICLES (OR PROPOSITIONS FOR A General Peace) BETWEEN His Most
CHRISTIAN MAJESTY AND THE Several ALLIES.
I. THE Crown of France, for the Foundation of a future Peace, will observe the
Westphalia and Nimeguen Treaties.

II. Notwithstanding the said Crown intended to keep Strasburgh and Luxemburgh,
and give for an equivolent Friburg, in the State it is in at present, with its
Dependencies: And also Brisack, with all its Fortifications, except those of
the new City, the Fort of Esch and the Fort of R yne to be demolished:
Nevertheless, upon the Allies refusing to accept them, the said Crown promises
to give up the City of Strasburgh only in the Condition it was in when taken.

III. She offers to deliver up Philipsburgh to the Bishop of Spire.

IV. The Crown of France agrees to raze the Fort of Kiell, and other Forts made
on the Rhyne.

V. As also Fort-Louis and Huninghen.

VI. She agrees likewise to raze Montroyal and Roseback, provided the Allies
will be obliged not to re-fortifie them.

VII. The Crown of France will restore to the Elector Pallatine, not only his
Electoral Lands, but also the Dutchies of Simmeren and Lauteren, and the County
of Spanheim, with all other Places whereof his Electoral Highness has been
dispossessed to this present time.

VIII. Madam the Duchess of Orleans will not proceed by force on her
Protestant Subjects, but will prosecute her Right only before a competent Judge
in relation to the Elector.

IX. This Crown offers to give Satisfaction to the other Crowns, in relation to
other Revenues; that is to say, to the Crown of Sweeden, for the Dutchies of
Deux-Ponts, and all its dependencies.

X. To the Count of Valdentz, for his Town and Castle of Valdentz.

XI. And She will restore Bischweiter to the Count of Hanover.

XII. And give up to the Count of Obersteine the County Delamoetz.

XIII. The Seignory of Salme, and that of Salstein, to the Prince of Salme, or
to whom they lawfully appertain, since there is still a dispute about it.

XIV. The Seignory of Lutstenstein, and that of Altsheim, to those to whom they
belong.

XV. Obsverter to the House of Nassaw.

XVI. To the House of Wirtemburgh, the County of Montraband, Herricourt,
Blamont, and Chastillet.

XVII. Germersheime to the House of the Elector Palatine; notwithstanding
former Treaties.

XVIII. Stadez and Landeburgh to the Count de Valitz.

XIX. The Crown of France will restore all that has been taken since the Peace
of Nimeguen.

XX. As to Lorraine, this Crown would have it referred to the General Treaty of
Peace; and in the mean time, France promises to offer more on this subject than
she has ever hitherto done.

XXI. France will restore to the Bishop of Liege, Dinant, in the State it was
in when she possessed her self of it.

XXII. That to all other Princes, whether comprehended in the Alliance or not,
their Pretensions shall be respited; and that France obliges her self to give
them satisfaction in the time of the Negotiation.

XXIII. That this Crown will acknowledge WILLIAM the Third for Lawful King of
England, without any Reserve or Restriction, though not before the Conclusion of
this Peace; since if this Crown should do it at present, and the Peace should
not be concluded, it would be necessary for her to retract it an inconvenience
she would avoid.

LONDON: Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1696.


