seal
By the Mayor.

To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
IT being Represented to Me, That several Rude and Disorderly Persons have
already begun, in a Riotous and Tumultuous manner, to throw SQVIBS, SERPENTS,
and other Fireworks, in and about the Streets of this CITY, to the great
Terror, as well as endangering the Lives of His MAJESTY's Subjects, the
apparent Breach of the Peace, and the scandal and dishonor of the Government
of this City.

And it being Resolved on by my Self and my Brethren the Aldermen, That for the
future no Squibs, Serpents, or any other Fireworks, shall under color of any
Day of Solemnity, Festival, or other pretense whatsoever, be made, sold, flung
or fired within this City or the Liberties thereof.

These are therefore (for the prevention thereof, and to the end that no Person
may pretend Ignorance) to Require you, That you forthwith give Directions to
your BEADLE, to go from House to House and Warn every Inhabitant within your
Ward, That they do not permit their Children or Servants to make, throw, or
fire any Fireworks in the Streets, or out of their Houses, Balconies, or other
Places; nor that they suffer any Person to come into, or remain in their
Houses, who may be guilty of such Offense.

And for the Exemplary Punishment of such as shall be offending, You are hereby
further Required to Enjoin the several Constables and Beadles, together with
the Watchmen of Your Ward, to be constantly attending in every place of your
Ward, (and more especially every Evening) and that they apprehend and carry
before Me, or some other of His MAJESTY's Justices of the Peace of this City,
all and every Person that shall be found making, buying, selling or throwing
any Squibs, Serpents, or other Fireworks whatsoever, in the Streets, or out of
any Balconies, Houses, or any Place within this City or Liberties thereof.

And although it is the Duty of every such Officer, as well as every good
Citizen, to suppress such Mischiefs; yet for the Encouragement of them and all
others to use their utmost Endeavors to that end, Every Person who shall
apprehend or discover any Person or Persons, making or throwing of Squibs,
Serpents, or other Fireworks, as aforesaid, so that he or they be prosecuted
and convicted of the said Offense, shall (over and above his Charges) have and
receive the Sum of Ten Shillings, for every such Offender so convicted.

And if any Constable, Beadle, or other Officer, shall be found omissive of, or
neglecting their Duty, or concealing any Offender, they shall be prosecuted for
such their Neglect, Default or Concealment, according to the utmost Severity of
the Law.

Dated the Thirteenth Day of October, 1697. Goodfellow.

Printed by SAMUEL ROYCROFT, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON, 1697.


