A NEW AND ACCVRATE MAP OF THE WORLD DRAWN ACCORDING TO THE truest
Descriptions, latest Discoveries, and best Observations, that have been made
by English, or Strangers. WITH BRIEF AND MOST PLAIN NOTES UPON THE WHOLE BODY
OF COSMOGRAPHIE. FOR THE EASY UNDERSTANDING THEREOF
Pleasant and useful for all such as desire to know further than of their own
Home.
The Description and use of the Figure with the twelve Signs showing the
Theoricke of the Sun on the left hand of these two Hemispheares.
THe outward circle of this Figure is divided into 365 days equal and
allowing unto each month his proportion of days, as January 31. February 28.
March 31. April 30. etc.

map of the world, with many small inset illustrations and charts western
hemisphere AMERICA was first discovered ye year 1492. by Christopher Columbus
at ye charge of Ferdinand and Isabella K: and Q: of Castill but denominated of
Americus Vesputius seven years after.
eastern hemisphere To the Right Honble Henry Mountague, Baron of Kimbolton,
Viscount Maundevile, Lo: President of his Ma:ties mos Ho:ble Privy Counsel:
this Mapp of the World, With Himself, and his best Services. Will: Grent. D D.
This South Land undiscovered commonly known by the name of Terra Australis
incognita and Magellanica cannot certainly be affirmed either continent or
Islands only Some few coasts thereof have appeared to Sea men driven thereupon by
extremity of weather whose names are set down. the rest must remain clouded
in obscurity till future times and further discoueries produce them to light.
border illustrations, beginning top left and proceeding clockwise astronomical
table showing the correspondence of the months and the degrees of the
astrological signs depiction of a comet flying over a landscape the
constellations of the northern hemisphere, held up by Atlas The North
Hemispheare
the constellations of the southern hemisphere, held up by Atlas The South
Hemispheare
depiction of four figures labeled Desire, Diligence, Observation, and Peace
Peace is ye Nurce of Science, and these 3 the means to attain it.
figure depicting the division of the heavens into planetary spheres The
Heavens and Elements
portrait of Thomas Cavendish M Thomas Candishe sailed about the World Ano 1588.
portrait of Olivier Van Noort Oliver Vander Nort sailed about the World. 1601.
depiction of a solar eclipse The Eclipse of the Sun
division of the world into zones, flanked by two figures labeled Geographie
and Navigation A Figure of the Sphere
depiction of a lunar eclipse The Eclipse of ye Moon.
portrait of Ferdinand Magellan Ferdinand Magellan. sailed about the world. 1524
portrait of Sir Francis Drake Sr. Francis Drake sailed about the World 1580.


The inward circle is divided into 360 Degrees, giving unto each Sign 30
degrees, the Semidiameter of the twelve Months is supposed to be divided into
60 parts, from which center is supposed another center to be two degrees. 9.
minutes of the said 60. parts, according to Ticho Brache, who m^keth the place
or point of the Suns Apogeum, to be in the 6. degree of Cancer, in this age
of the world. The Apogeum of the Sun is that point in which when the Sun
comes unto, he is in his slowest motion, or furthest distant from the Earth,
that is to say, June 17. then the Sun shall be in the sixth degree of Cancer,
the Perigeum of the Sun, shall be when it comes into the sixth degree of
Capricorn, being opposite to the sixth degree of Cancer. The second moveable
part is divided into 29 days and one half, which does show the age of the
Moon. The next Circle is divided into 24 Hours, and each hour into four
Quarters, each quarter into three parts, each part being five minutes.

The use of this Figure may be this.
FIrst, the day of the Month being given to find the place of the Sun in the
Zodiac, or the place of the Sun being given to find the day of the month:
Take the Index of the Sun and bring it to the day of the month, shows the
place of the Sun in the Zodiac of the 12 Signs. Example, April 14. the place
of the Sun will be found to be in the fourth degree of Taurus.

Secondly, the day of the Change or New Moon being given to find the age of
the Moon, the sign and degree she possesses in the Zodiac, the time of her
coming to the South, and time of full Sea or high water in any Haven, knowing
the time of the Changes or full Moon after this manner.

In some Almanac (or by the Expact) find the day of the change of the Moon
going before the day that ye desire; and so many days after the Change so
many days old is the Moon.

First, bring the Index of Sol or the Sun to the day of the month, and there
stay it. Secondly, bring the Index of the Moon, to the age of the Moon, and
it shows the sign and degree that she possesses in the Zodiac, the hour
and minute under the age, is the time of her coming to the South.

Thirdly, to find the time of high water.

In the Table following find the name of the Port or Haven, and the hour and
minute against that Haven is the hour and minute that ye shall add to the
time of the Moons coming to South, is the time of highwater in the said place.

A Tide Table showing the times of full Sea in the principal Havens in
England, or near about thereunto.
Names of the Havens. H. M. Points of the Compass. Quinborow, Southam.
Portsmou. 0 0 South. North. Redban, Aberden. 0 45 S. W. b. W. N. E. b. E,
Gravesend, the Downs. 1 30 S. S. W. N. N, E. Dundee, S. Andrews, Silli. 2 15
S. W. b. S. N. E. b, N. London, Tin mouth, Har^lepoole, 3 0 South West. N.
East, Barwick, Ostend, Fount. 3 45 S. W. b. W. N. E. b N. Frith, Lith, Dunbar,
Narbo. 4 30 W. S. W, E. N. E. Faymouth, Gernsey, Lizzard. 5 15 W. b. S. E. b.
N. Foy, Lin, Humber, Way, Dartmouth, or Plymouth, Antwerp. 6 0 East. West.
Bristoll, Lanion, Foulness. 6 45 E, b, S. W. b. N. Milford and Bridgewater,
Texel 7 30 E. S. E, W.N.W. Portland, Peter-port, Hage. 8 15 S, E, b E. N.W.b.W
Orkney, Poole, Orwel, Shelens. 9 0 South East. North W. Deep, Lux, Lenoyes,
Needles, 9 45 S. E. b. S. N.W.b.N Bolyn, Dover, Harwich, Yarmou. 10 30 S. S. E.
N. N. W. Gallis, Rye, Winchelsey, Calsho. 11 15 S. b. E. N. b. W.

The use of this Table.
Add the hours and minutes right against each Haven, to the Moons coming to
the South, and the whole result will be the time of the Tide or high water. By
this Table you may see in what point of the Compass the Moon is in at the
time of the Tide or full Sea.

Of blazing Stars.
BLazing Stars or Comets are flames drawn into the higher (...) and long
quietness in the Air: They signify corruption in the air to follow; They
are either signs of wars and death, or tokens of earthquakes, and dearth of
Corn. In the year 1618. there happened a fearful blazing Star from the 18
of November to the 16 of December following: It was seen all over Europe; The
Countries it passed ov^r, were Nova Guinea, the I Will of Java, Sumatra,
Madagascar, Monomotapa Picora, Nombre de Jesus.

The manner of the Moons Eclipse.
THe word Eclipse is as much to say as to want light, and to be darkened, or
hidden from our sight.

The Moons Eclipse is figured at the foot of America, over against your left
hand, which is thus: viz.

When the Sun and Moon are opposite one to the other diametrally, and the
Earth in the very midst between both: that is, when a right line drawn from
the center to the Sun to the center of the Moon, passes through the center of
the Earth: For the body of the Earth being thick and not transparent, casting
his shadow to that point which is opposite of the place of the Sun, will not
suffer the Moon to receive any light from the Sun, from whom she always
borrows her light: And note, that every time she is at the full, she is
opposite to the Sun, and yet the Earth is not at every such full diametrally
betwixt her and the Sun, for then she should be eclipsed at every full, which
indeed cannot be, unless she be either in the head or tail of the Dragon.

Now the Moon is eclipsed in part, when the Sun, the Earth, and the Moon, be
met in one self diametrall line, but the Moon is declining either on the one
side or on the other.

But note that eclipses of the Moon may be universal, because the Earth is
far bigger than the Moon, and thereby able to shadow her whole body,

The manner of the Suns Eclipse.
THe Eclipse of the Sun is showed by that figure at the foot of Asia, against
your right hand, and happens

When the Moon is betwixt the sun and the Earth, which chances in a
Conjunction or new of the Moon: and yet not in every Conjunction, but when it
falls either in the head or tail of the Dragon, which may chance (as is said
before) either totally, or in part; totally, in respect of those parts of the
Earth whereon the shadow directly falls. For since the Moon is far less than
the Earth, she cannot shadow all the Earth, and therefore the eclipse of the
sun cannot be universal but yet to some part of the Earth it may be totally,
to some partly, and to others nothing at all; as may appear by the aforesaid
Figure.

Of the Firmament and Constellations.
THe two Hemispheares in the middle about; filled with Figures of men, beasts,
fishes, and the like embost with stars, do represent the face of the
Firmament or Orb of the fixed stars (those that appear every night) which
were by ancient Astronomers divided into and distinguished by certain
Constellations, and each of these is known by a proper name; Of these
Constellations, the number (according to the ancient account) is 48, that are
divided into three parts: 1 Northern Constellations, being 21 in number. 2
Zodiac Constellations, being 12 in number. 3 Southern Constellations, being
15 in number.


The Northern Constellations consist of 332. stars.

The Zodiac Constellations, which be also called the twelve signs, consist
of 280 stars.

The Southern Constellations, contain 293 stars,

Some of these Constellations, consist of more, some of fewer stars,
according to their greatness or smalnesse,

Besides these there are 1205 stars that are exempt out of all the
Constellations: so that the number of stars set upon both Hemispheares are
1025, and diverse of them have proper Names.

But here is to be understood, that all the stars in Heaven are not numbered,
nor cannot, for that diverse of them are so small; but these 1025 are the
principallest amongst them, and all that have yet ever been accounted of.

The two first parts of ^ll, that is, the Northern and Zodiac Constellations
are contained in that part right against your left hand, and placed over a
piece of America; The last, that is, the Southern, is comprehended in that
other Hemispheare on your right hand, and over the European Sea,

Of the Figure of the heavenly Orbs and Elements,
THe whole world is divided into two parts, viz. Elementall, and Etheriall or
Celestial parts.

The Elementall part is fourfold; viz. Earth, Water, Air, Fire, as may be
seen in that round Figure of the frame of the heavens and elements one within
another; the inmost and middlemost circle containing Earth and Water intermixed
together; The next, the three Regions of the Air: and immediately above that
Orb, is the Element of Fire; all which you may easily discern by their
several names in their proper places.

The Etheriall or Celestial parts do compass the Elementall part: and
contain the ten upper Spheres, viz, 1 the Moon, 2 Mercury, 3 Venus, 4 Sol, 5
Mars, 6 Jupiter, 7 Saturn, 8 the Starry firmament, 9 the Christaline heaven,
having no stars at all; the 10 is the Primum mobile, or first Mover, containing
all the rest within it; and moving from the East to the West carries about
with it in violence all the other Spheres.

The rest of the Spheres have contrary motions, every one in his kind, though
far slower than the other: and their motions are contrary, from the West to the
East, and so are carried about oftentimes by the first Mover, before they make
one perfect revolution in themselves.

The Christaline or ninth Sphere his motion is almost immensible, and is
called The trembling Motion, and is performed, according to the opinion of
later Astronomers, in 49000 years.

The eight Sphere being the Starry Firmament performs his motion in 7000
years.

The rest of the Spheres are the seven Planets; each Sphere contains in it
but one star; whereof the uppermost and slowest is Saturn, which perfecteth
his course in thirty years. Jupiter being next under that makes his revolution
in twelve years. Mars beneath him, finisheth his course in two years. Sol
passes through the Zodiac in 365 days and six hours, which is one whole
year. Venus ends her course somewhat more than a year. Mercury holds equal
pace with the Sun. Luna courseth about the Heaven once every eight and twenty
days.

Geographie, and the Principles thereof.
Certain terms of Land and Water plainly defined and described.
THe Terrestrial Globe is defined to be a Sphericall body, proportionably
composed of Earth and Water: into which two parts it is divided. Whereof the
Earth comes first to view; whose parts are either Real, Imaginary:
and the real parts, either Continents, Islands.


Now a Continent is a great quantity of Land, not interlaced or separated by
the Sea; in which many Kingdoms and Principalities are contained; as Europe,
Asia, Africa, America,

An Island (called in Latin, Insula quasi in salo) is a part of the earth,
environed round with waters; as Britain, Java, S. Laurence Isle, Barmudas.

These again are subdivided into Peninsula, Istmus Promontorium.


A Peninsula, is almost an Island; that is, a tract of Land, which being almost
encompassed round by water is joined to the firm Land by some little Istmus:
as Poloponnesus, Taurica, Cymbrica, and Pervana.

An Istmus is a little narrow neck of Land, which joyneth any Peninsula to the
Continent; as the Straights of Dariene in Peru, and Corinth in Greece,

Promontorium, is some high Mountain, which shoots it self into the Sea,
the utmost end of which, is called a Cape, as that great Cape of good hope, and
Cape Verde in Africa; Cape Comori in Asia, and that of S. Michaels mount in
Cornwall; the North Cape up in Norway, and diverse other.

There are likewise other real parts of the Earth; as Mountains, Valleys,
Fields, Plains, Woods, and the like.

The other general part of the Globe is the Water; which is divided into 1.
Oceanus. 2. Mare. 3. Fretum. 4. Sinus.


1. Oceanus, the Ocean, is that general collection of all waters, which
invironeth the whole world on every side.

2. Mare, the Sea, is a part of the Ocean; to which we cannot come, but
through some Strait, as Mare Mediterraneum, Mare Balticum, and the like.

These two take their names, Either from the adjacent places, as the British
Ocean, the Germane Sea, the Atlantic Sea. Or from the first discoverer, as
Mare Magellanicum, Davis and Forbishers straites, etc. Or from some remarkable
accident, as Mare Rubrum, from the red color of the Sands. Mare Aegeum, Pontus
Euxinus, and the like.


3. Fretum, a Strait, is a part of the Ocean restrained within narrow bounds,
and opening a way to the Sea; as the Straits of Gibraltar, Hellespont, Anian.

4. Sinus, a Creek, is a crooked shore, thrusting out as it were two arms to
embrace the lovely presence of the Sea; as Sinus Adriaticus, Sinus Persicus,
and Corinthiacus.

To this also belong Rivers, Brooks, and Fountains, which are engendered of
congealed air in the earths concavities, and seconded by the Sea-waters,
creeping through hidden crannies thereof. Thus much of the Real parts of the
Globe in general.

Of the Circles of this Map, and their uses.
THe Imaginary parts of the Earth are such, which not being at all in the
Earth, must yet be supposed to be so, for the better teaching and learning this
Science; and are certain Circles going about the Earth, answerable to them in
Heaven in name.

The Meridian (which comes first to be considered) is a great Circle compassing
round the Earth from Pole to Pole; and is that which you see in the
circumference of both Planispheares of the Map; and wherein are written the
names of the Zones and Climates. This chief, first, fixed Meridian passes
through the Islands called Azores, according to the ancient Cosmographers; and
there are two reasons why they did there begin to reckon the longitude of the
Earth:

First, for that at that time there was no Land known further to the Westward
than that place.

Secondly, under that Meridian the Needle in the Mariners Compass had no
variation, but did point directly North and South.

There be also many Meridians according to the diverse place in which a man
lives, the number of them equal to so many points as may be imagined in the
Globe; but the usual setting them known to view, is by ten degrees asunder;
and are those black lines which you see in both Planispheares, running down
along from the North to the South Pole.

The use of the Meridian, is to show the Longitude of any place. Now the
longitude of a Region, City or Cape, is the distance of it East from the first
great Meridian; and this ongitude is measured and numbered in the Aequinoctiall
line by Meridians from the general and fixed Meridian, into the East, and
contains the whole compass of the Earth, viz. 360. degrees

To prove this by example, cast your eye on London, and you shall see it
something to the East of the second black Meridian; pass down with that
black line to the Aequinoctiall, and look as much East there, as London is
from that Meridian above, then count the degrees of the Aequinoctiall, from the
first great Meridian to that place, and that distance is the longitude of
London: which you may perceive to be 20. degrees and better: And the like
manner of working is to be made for all other places.

That line full of degrees crossing both Planispheare: straight a long in the
middle, and dividing the world into two halfes (viz) North and South halfes; is
called the Aequinoctiall line, or the Equator; either because it is of equal
distance from both Poles of the world, or else because the Sun coming in
this Circle makes the days and nights throughout the world of like length;
which happens upon the 10, or 11. of March, and the 13. or 14. of September. It
passes through Abassia or Prester John's Kingdom, and Manicongo in Africa,
through the great Island Sumatra, and the Maldive Isles of Asia; and in
America, through Guiana.

The use of it is to show the Latitude of any Country, City, Promontory, or
the like: Now the Latitude is the distance of a place toward the South or
North, from the Aequinoctiall line or middle of the world; and is reckoned and
measured upon the Meridian toward either Pole: Those therefore have Northern
latitude that inhabit between the Aequinoctiall and ^he North Pole, as they
have Southern latitude that are between the same Equator and the South Pole.

Those black lines thwarting the black Meridians from East to West, are
parallels, and are also called Aequidistants, being distant one from another
10. degrees toward both Poles; and are here set down for the easier counting
the latitude of any place from the Aequinoctiall: as for the latitude of
London; count so many decimall parallels, till you come to the parallel which
is nearest London, (you shall find them to be five) then follow that line to
the Meridian, and see the figures set thereat; they are 50.) moreover, add to
that number of 50. so much as London is s^tuate above that parallel, the space
is one degree and a half; thus shall you find the latitude of London (that
is, the distance thereof from the Equator toward the North Pole) to the 51
degrees and a half: and in the like manner must the Latitude of all other
places be sought. Thus much of Longitude and Latitude, by which two the whole
earth is reckoned.

The Meridian and Aequinoctiall, as also the Zodiac, are filled throughout
with degrees, the number 360. and every degree consists of 60. Minutes, and
contains, according to our ordinary account, 20. leagues, or threescore miles.

The great Circle that is drawn bending bias in one planispheare up to the
Tropicke of Cancer, in the other down to the Tropic of Capricorn, is the
Zodiac; it is replenished with degrees, and bears on it the Characters of
the 12. signs.

The uses of it are to show over what Countries and people the body and beams
of the Sun come perpendicular at some times or other in the year; and it
shows to all (where the days increase and decrease) the longest and shortest
days of the year, for the Sun (which causes the same) being always in
this Circle, and therein moving about one degree a day, all the while he is
coming up from the Tropicke of Capricorn to that of Cancer, the days
increase in the Northern Climates; but contrariwise in his course back from
Cancer to Capricorn, they shorten to us, and lengthen to those in the
Southern Climates; and this Circle shows the four quarters of the year;
Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter.

The Tropicke of Cancer, (so called, or the Celestial sign Cancer) is a
circle, whose distance from the Aequinoctiall toward the North, is 23. degrees
and a half. When the Sun is come so far Northward as to touch this Circle,
then is our longest day in the year.

It passes through the Southermost parts of Barbary and Egypt, Arabia, India,
China, Nova Hispania, and the Island Cuba.

The Tropicke of Capricorn, (likewise so named of the sign Capricorn in the
starry heaven) is a circle of like distance at the other Tropicke from the
Aequinoctiall Southward, that is 23. degrees and a half. When the Sun is
gone down to the circle Southward, it is our shortest day in the whole year.

This Tropicke passes through Monomotapa, Saint Laurence Island, Peru, and
South coasts of Brasile.

The Articke, or North polar circle, is distant from the North Pole, 23,
degrees and a half; so much as the Tropicke of Cancer is from the
Aequinoctiall; but the distance between that Tropicke and it, is 43. degrees.

You may see it pass through Island, Norway, Boddia, Moscovy, Tartary, cross
Davis S^^aites, and Groenland.

The Antarticke or Sout^ ^olar Circle, is distant from the South Pole, 23.
degrees and a ha^^e; so far as the Tropicke of Capricorn is from the
Equinoc^^all.

This circle passes thro^^^^ Magellanica, or Terra Australis Incognita only.

Now these four lesser ^^^cles, (viz.) the two Tropickes, and Polar circles,
do fitly pa^^ ^he Earth into five Zones.

The Zones.
A Zone is a space of Earth, contained between two of the smaller circles, or
within the compass of either polar Circle: the name signifies as much as a
girdle, by reason that each Zone compasses about the earth in manner of a
girdle. Of these there be two kinds, one temperate, the other untemperate.

There be two temper^^e Zones; the one North, the other South.

The North temperate Zo^^, is that space of Earth contained between the
Tropicke of C^ncer, and the North polar Circle.

The South temperate Zo^^ is that space of earth stretched along between the
Tropicke of Capricorn, and the South Polar Circle.

They are called temper^^^ Zones, for that the air thereof has a far better
and more ^^^^erate temperature, and meeter for man to inhabit, than t^^
^^temperate Zones. The breadth of them is 43. degrees a piece, which degrees,
make either temperate Zone to be 2580. English miles broad apiece.

The untemperate Zones are twofold; one exceeding in the extremity of heat, the
other as much in cold; they have bin thought in former times altogether
uncharitable, but latter experience has found them more fi^ for habitation.

The Torrid or burnt Zo^e (which is the hot untemperate Zone) is that space of
heaven which you see contained between the Tropicke of Cancer, and that of
Capricorn. It has the name of Torrid, because the Sun continually passes
thereover, and casting down direct rays, ^^ects it with a mavelous heat;
thereby making it not so convenient for the Inhabitants, as the temperate Zones
are. The breadth of this Zone is comprehended between the two Tropickes, and
contains 47. degrees, that is of English miles 2820.

The frozen Zones are spaces of Earth enclosed within either of the Polar
circles: of these there are two, one North, the other South.

The North fr^zen Zone, is that space of Earth contained within the compass of
the North Polar circle. The breadth thereof reckoned 23. degrees and a half,
(viz.) from the Pole it self to the Polar circle; which of English miles is
1410.

The South frozen Zone, is that space of Earth compassed all about with the
South Polar circle: It has the like breadth from the South Pole, as the other
frozen Zone has from the North Pole and likewise the number of miles is the
same.

They are called frozen Zones, because they (for the most part) exceed in cold;
and that is caused in regard that the Sun, for a good part of the year, is
under the Horizon, and sees them not; and when he is come up into their sight,
his appearance (which is for a pretty long season together) rather comforts
them, than any vertuall heat proceeding from him; for there the air is stuffed
with thick foggy vapors, and his beams at highe^^ fall but very oblikely on
them; so that what through his want and unability to dispel the cold, and the
colds force to resist and bear back the Suns heat; these Zones remain
almost unhabitable, and even (as the word is) frozen.

The names of all these, set in the right place of each Zone, you shall see in
that Meridian going about America and Magellanica.

Of the Climats.
IN that great Meridian going about Europe, Asia, and Afric^ are described the
Climates; Now a Climate is a space of the Earth included within the space of
two Parallels. The use of them is to show the difference of length, and
shortness of days over all the world, as you may see in the midst of every
Climat, set the number of the hours of the longest day in the year, under
that Climat: the longest day in one Climat, differing half an hour from the
longest in another. So that there are four and twenty Climats, consisting of
forty eight Parallels, ere the day come to be 24. hours in length, which is
twelve hours longer than the ordinary Aequinoctiall day is. Now this is to be
understood; Under the Aequinoctiall line, and 13, degrees, that is 3.
Parallels, on either side thereof, the days exceed not the length of twelve
hours, but after in every Clime increase the length of half an hour, so that
there are numbered (as is said before) 48. Parallels, which make 24. Climats,
before the days become 24. hours long; the which length they being grown to,
their increase is then by whole weeks and months, till in the four and
twentieth Clime: about the Pole, the day is full half a year long. And as it is
thus between the Equator and North Pole, so is it between the said Equator
and South Pole: wherefore there are two sorts of Climats, that is, 24
Northern, and as many Southern. The Climes Northward are thus named: the
first is Dia Meroes, because the middle parallel thereof passes through the
midst of the Inland Jland Meroe, in the Continent of Africa; the second is
Dia Sienes; the third Dia Alexandria; the fourth Dia Rhodos; the fifth Dia
Romes; the sixth Dia Ponton; the seventh Dia Borisihenes; the eight Dia Ripheos;
the 9th Per Dianam. The South Climes have the same names, save only that the
word Anti is thereto added; as Anti Dia Meroes; the next Anti Dia Sienes, and
so along unto the ninth Southward: further than the ninth Clime on either side
the Aequinoctiall they are not named; but yet the Climes run on both ways to
the number of 24. as is seen in the Meridian. That there be but nine named;
the reason is, because when these names were given, no more than nine Climats
were known to those of ancient times; but since though the number of them be
increast to 24. the rest are not so known by proper names, but remain
innominate.

The Division of the Earth, and of the four parts thereof.
THe world in later times has been divided into the known and unknown: This
last, since obscurity hides it, silence shall overslip it. The known branches
it self into the fourfold Division, viz. 1. Europe* 2. Asia, 3. Africa, 4
America.


Europe.
TO begin with that quarter wherein we live; Europe (as also the other three)
consists of Continent and Jlands. The Continent hereof is shared by the
inhabitants of these Countries 1 Spain, 2 France, 3 Italy, 4 Belgia, or
Netherlands, 5 Germany, 6 Denmark, 7 Norway, 8 Sweden, 9 Muscovia, 10 Poland,
11 Hungary, 12 Dacia, 13 Sclavonia 14 Greece.


The European Islands are these: 1. The British Isles, viz. Great Britain,
(whose possessors are English, Scots, and Welchmen) Ireland, Orchades,
Hebrides, Sorlings, and other on the East, South, and Western Coasts, 2. The
Mediterranean Isles, which are Majorca, Minorca, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicilia,
Malta, Candy or Creete, Cephalonia, Zant, The Grecian Isles and some other of
less note in the North Seas, Island and Frisland.

Europe is extended in length about 3800 miles in breadth it exceeds not 1200.
On the North the frozen Sea beats the bounds of it, toward the west the
Occidentall Ocean washes it, Southward it is girt with the Mediterranean Sea,
but the Archipelago the Euxine Sea, Meotis Palus, and the River Tanais, (now
called Don) with a line drawn from thence upright Northward, are the Eastern
limits: the chief Rivers hereof, are Danubius, the Rheine and Vistula.

Asia.
BEfore any thing be said of the Province of Asia, a few of her prerogatives
shall be related which ennoble her. As 1. man's creation. 2. The birth of our
Savior, his divine miracles, and the work of our Redemption and Salvation: 3.
The actions memorized by the holy Penmen of the Old and New Testament: also
here were erected the first Monarchies of the Babylonians, Assyrians, Medes and
Persians.

The Continent of Asia contains these Regions.

1 Natolia, 2 Syria, 3 Palestina, 4 Armenia, 5 Arabia, 6 Media, 7 Assyria, 8
Mesopotamia, 9 Persia, 10 Chaldaea, 11 Parthia, 12 Hircaria, 13 Tartaria, 14
China, 15 India.
The Islands of Asia, are Rhodes and Cyprus, in the Mediterranean Sea: in the
Oriental Ocean, Iapan, the Mollucca, the Philippine, Ladrones, Borneo, Gil^lo,
Iava, Sumatra, Zeilan, and an infinte number of less account.

The length thereof reaches 5200. the breadth 4560 miles, or thereabout: It is
bounded Northward with the frozen Sea, and straits of Anian, all the East along
it resists the assault of the Oriental Ocean, toward the South, the Indian,
Ocean and Arabian sea wreak their fury thereon; on the West lies the RedSea and
that Egyptian Isthmus where it is parted from Africa, but where it dis-joynes
it self from Europe, the Western limits are the Aegean and Euxine seas, Palus
Meotis, the River Tanais, and a right line drawn to the North. The chief
Rivers are Euphrates, Indus, and Ganges.

Africa.
AFrica in form resembles a Pyramid, and is built of these Countries on the
Continent: 1 Barbary, 2 Numidia, 3 Lydia, 4 the land of Negros, or Guine, with
the adjacent Provinces, 5 Egypt, 6 Aethiopia or Abassia, Prester John's
Kingdom, 7 Congo. 8 Monomotapa.

The Islands are Zocotara, in the Sea of Arabia, and that of S. Laurence or
Madagascar, in the Indian Sea: but in the Atlanticke Ocean, St. Thomas: the
Isles of Cape Verde, Gorgones, or Hesperides, the Canaries, the Azores.

Africa runs on in length 4150 miles, and is reckoned 2000. miles broad, or
thereabout. The Eastern limits thereof are the Red Sea, and Isthmus of Egypt,
where it is severed from Asia: on the South continually rages the Southern
Ocean: Westward all the Coast is environed with the violence of the Western or
Atlanticke waves: on the North bears the Mediterranean Sea. The Rivers of most
note, are Nilus and Niger.

America.
AMerica or the new World, acknowledges a twofold partition of Mexicana,
Peruana.


America is counted in length from the North pole to the Straits of Magellan
Southward.

Mexicana is that which contains the Northern Tract, comprehending the
Nations of 1 Mexico, 2 Quiviro, (in which is included Nova Albion,) 3 Nico, 4
Florida, 5 Virginia, 6 New England, 7 Nova Francia 8. Terra de Labrador, or
Corterealis, 9 Norumbergs, 10 Estotilland, 11 on the other side of Davis
Straits Greenland, 12 California.

This part is in compass 1300 miles, and looks Eastward upon Mar del North,
or the Virginian Sea: West upon Mar del Zur, and the straits of Anian: the
Northern Coasts extend to the Pole: Southward it is joined to Peruana by the
Isthmus, and that but 17. miles broad. The chiefest River hereof is Rio St.
Laurence, or the River of Canada.

Peruana contains the Southern part of America, and comprehends. 1 Castilia
del Oro, 2 Guiana, 3 Peru, 4 Brasile, 5 Chili, 6 Chica, 7 Patagones.

This part is in compass 17000 miles, being bounded on the North by that
forenamed Jsthmus, with which it is joined to Mexicana, lying East against the
Ethiopian Ocean: Westward the Pacificke Sea, or Mar del Zur, presses upon it:
beneath Southward the straits of Magellan limit it. Herein are these Rivers of
note, Orenoque, Marganno, or the River of Amazons, and the River of Plate.

The Islands of America are, Salomons Isles, which be many in number, and
Turbarones, or the unfortunate Isles, all situate in the Pacifick sea, There lie
in Mar del Nort, Terra nova, or Newfound Land, Bacaleos, Trinidad, Jamaica,
Cuba, Hispaniola, that was first discovered by Columbus, the Lucais 40. in
number, the Summer Jlands, or Bermudas, Smiths I Will, and diverse other.

Are to be sold by Tho: Jenner at the Exchange door in Corne-hill, 1641.


