To the Elders and Ministers of every Town within the Jurisdiction of the
Massachusetts in New England:
The Governor and Council sends greeting;
Reverend, and Beloved in the Lord,
Whereas we find in the Examples of holy Scripture, that Magistrates have not
only excited and commanded all the people under their Government, to seek the
Lord God of their Fathers, and do the Law and Commandment, 2 Chronicles. 14.2, 3, 4.
Ezra 7.25, 26, 27. but also stirred up and sent forth the Levites, accompanied
with other principal men, to teach the good knowledge of the Lord throughout
all the Cities of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 17.6, 7, 8, 9. which endeavors have been
crowned with Gods blessing.

Also we find that our Brethren of the Congregational Persuasion in England
have made a good Profession, in their Book, entitled, A Declaration of their
Faith and Order, Page 59. Sect. 14. where they say, That although Pastors and
Teachers stand especially related unto their particular Churches; yet they
ought not to neglect others living within their Parochial Bounds, but besides
their constant public Preaching to them, they ought to enquire after their
profiting by the Word, instructing them in, and pressing upon them (whether
young or old) the great Doctrines of the Gospel, even personally and
particularly, so far as their strength and time will permit.

We hope that sundry of you need not a spur in these things, but are
conscientiously careful to do your duty: yet forasmuch as we have cause to
fear, that there is too much neglect in many places, notwithstanding the Laws
long since provided therein; We do therefore think it our duty to emit this
Declaration unto you, earnestly desiring, and in the bowels of our Lord Jesus
requiring you to be very diligent and careful to Catechize and Instruct all the
people (especially the Youth) under your Charge, in the Sound and Orthodox
Principles of Christian Religion; and that not only in public, but privately
from house to house, as blessed Paul did, Acts 20.20. or at least three, four,
or more Families meeting together, as strength and time may permit, taking to
your assistance such godly and grave persons as to you may seem most expedient.
And also that you labor to inform your selves, (as much as may be meet) how
your Hearers do profit by the Word of God, and how their Conversations do agree
therewith; and whether the Youth are taught to Read the English Tongue: taking
all occasions to apply suitable Exhortations particularly unto them, for the
Rebuke of those that do evil, and for the Encouragement of them that do well.

The effectual and constant prosecution hereof, we hope will have a tendency to
promote the Salvation of Souls, To suppress the growth of Sin and Profaneness,
To beget more Love and Unity amongst the people, and more Reverence and Esteem
of the Ministry, and will assuredly be to the enlargement of your Crown and
Recompense in Eternal Glory.

Given at Boston the 10th of March 1668. by the Governor and Council, and by
them Ordered to be Printed, and sent accordingly. Edward Rawson Secret


