Abstractum Chirurgiae Marinae. OR, An ABSTRACT of SEA SURGERY: Designed for
the use of such Surgeons who desire to serve at Sea, yet are unacquainted
with Sea practice: In order to their restoring to Health of Sick or Wounded
Seamen; But may all fitly serve for most Surgeons. In Three Compendious
Books. The First contains certain Directions necessary to be observed by the
Sea-Chirurgeon in his fitting out. The Second teaches how he should perform
his Chirurgical Duty being at Sea, both in an engagement, and at other times.
The Third instructs how he must execute the Phisical office imposed on him.

By JOHN MOYLE Sen. sometime a Sea-Chirurgeon in His Majesty's Service.

Licensed, May 25th. 1686. ROB. MIDGLEY.

London, Printed by J. Richardson for Tho. Passinger at the 3 Bibles on
London Bridge. 1686.

TO The Worshipful, The Surgeon General of His Majesty's Navy: AND TO The
Worshipful, The Masters, or Governors of Chirurgeons-Hall, London.
Worthy Gentlemen,
IT is not unknown to some of you, if not to all, that by your appointment I
have had the Honor to be a Sea Surgeon (for not a few years) in His
Majesty's Service; and now I find my self in years, and cannot expect to hold
it much longer at Sea; which turbulent Element requires the best of a Man's Age
in whatsoever Capacity he comes there to serve. But before my Exit I resolved
to write this Abstract, according to what Skill and Experience I have attained
for the use of others of my Calling, who are the true Sons of Esculapius, and
either are, or would be Sea-Chirurgeons, yet whose younger years, or non
opportunities have not permitted them to aim at that degree of Experience, as
is requisite; but are either altogether unacquainted with the Sea Practice, or
at least ways have not been in Engagements, and so need Instruction. I
undertake this, not that I think better of my self than of all other
Sea-Chirurgeons; for there are some who were my Contemporaries in the Wars, and
their Knowledge I esteem as good, and some better than my own: But I undertake
to write this, because I see others have not: And indeed being at present out
of Employ, I have more leisure time than others, or then my self desires, if I
could remedy it: However at this juncture it falls out opportunely to me to
write it, and especially for some reasons urging.

Now as I have had at all times my Employments from Your Worshipful Company, so
I humbly Dedicate this Book unto you. I have taken what care I can to write as
becomes a Surgeon for the good of those that will practice by it, that they
may be provided with Knowledge to help Sick or wounded Sea men, when there is
occasion: More especially considering Your Mature and Piercing Judgments to
whom I present it: I wish I could have done it better, but it is the best I
can, and I hope it will find your Candid Reception. So wishing you all Health
and Happiness, I Subscribe my self

Your Worships very Humble and Affectionate Servant, John Moyle, Sen.

THE PREFACE.
Chirurgical Reader,
I Do not design here to teach you how to be a Surgeon, but will suppose you
to be one already: But I intend to teach you to be a Sea Surgeon, for by
that time you have read this Book, you will find that a man may be an Ingenious
Practitioner at Land; and yet, if he comes to Sea, be far to seek, being
unacquainted with the Sea Practice: Nay, You may have been at Sea, and yet (if
not in a Sea Fight) you will be to seek, not knowing how to behave your self at
such a time.

Now in these three Books I purpose to instruct you in Sea Practice, and make
you able to help Wounded and Diseased Sea men at their need. The first Book
directs you how to fit your self out to Sea, The second shows you how to
perform your Chirugical Duty being at Sea. And the third how to Execute your
Physical part, you have every thing as compendious as possible; (for I affect
not prolixity) yet all as plain as if you saw the things acted before your
eyes. I will not by any means be guilty of applauding my self; but this let me
tell you, in order to gain your good opinion of the Book, That it is no frothy
and uncertain discourse: Nor is it written by one that has attained only
Theorie without Practice, but here is really Experimental Knowledge: The Author
besides his first Rudiments, has since Traveled in the World for this
Experience; and in most of the Sea Fights that we have had with any Nation in
his time, he has been in them, and his hands have acted what he here writes.
He has not picked this out of other Books, he has only made use of The New
London Dispensatory to compare therewith, in order to the regulating of his
Doses, and for other such uses; as any Ingenious Artist in reading this Book,
will easily perceive: You will likewise find here the choicest of Medicines at
this day known in the World, for the Cure of every Disease and Wound. It Is true
there are some that w^^e not formerly used by Sea Surgeons; but since the
Impression of The New London Dispensatory by Doctor Salmon, they are become in
Practice, and are known to be the most excellent of all Medicaments, both
Balsams, Essences, and others. Indeed some of them (as they are of Incomparable
goodness, so they are costly) but a man's Life and Limbs are valuable; and
besides, to countervail the Cost, the Doses are generally very Minute, and
small quantities of such will be sufficient to be carried with you: Therefore
since you must buy Medicines, it is well if you take such of them, (though they
are costly) as are now approved to be most effectual.

Then as to Practice: You shall find here a convenient Method to Practice by:
You are not bound here to give large and loathsome Bolus, or Potions; nor yet
confined to one particular thing, and so necessitate your Patients to Hobsons
Choice, (that or none;) for some Patients can sooner dye than take the former,
and the latter Nausiates being taken often: But I show you here small and
pleasant Doses, or some few grains of some excellent Powder made up in a small
Pill or two, or some few Drops of some Noble Essence, drank in a glass of the
choicest Wine, or Cordial Liquor, which would invite even a Child to take it.

Then if the Patient cannot take a Medicine in one form (as Bolus-waies) you
have another, as Pills to perform the same intention; and if he is averst to
these, you have here some grateful Liquors: This order I have observed for you
throughout the Book: And with it I wish you Prosperity in your Ingenious and
Just Endeavors,

JOHN MOYLE.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle Dedicatory, for aim read attain. Page 7. line 11. for Electum
read Electuarium, and the same here that word is in any other place, p. 16. l.
11, 12. id 30. for Glasses r. Classes, p. 17. l. 19. for Sarrina's Farrina's,
p. 19. the a that is at the end of line 6, buld be at the end of line 3. p. 20.
l. 2. for Cruise r. ^ew, p. 26. l. 2. for lighter r. light, p. 32. l. 12. for
^lecta r. Electu. p. 34. l. 30. for Spirit of Vinum r. Spiri^s Vini, p. 35. for
minus r. minor, and the like where is word is in other places, p. 36. for stuff
r. stuff, p. 37. 29. for these r. this, p. 38. l. 2. for deccicatrum r.
decativum, p. 39. for extramosities r. extraniosities, p. 41. 4. for it r. is,
and for wounds r. wound, p. 54. l. 10. ^ electo r. electu, p. 61. l. 30. for
stuff r. stuph, p. 66. 28. for unguent. and album r. unguent. album and
populion. 68. l. 12. for Cribratum r. Cribrosum, p. 69. l. 23. for ab. r. orab.
p. 80. l. 29. for (and Elixir) r. and give ^lxir, p. 83. l. 1. r. Olium Rosarum
omphacinum, p. 83. 5. for Quint. Coloc. j. r. Quint. Colocynth. s. p. 82. 9.
for Cariostinum r. Cariocostinum, p. 92. This mark that is at the word Liquor,
should be at Sarsa, the ^^xt line, p. 97. for Combotes r. Bombotes, p. 103.
Cymamoy r. Cynamonii, p. 108. for Decoct. Carminativ. r. x. p. 112. l. 11. for
child's r. child, and in the last ^e but two, for ana r. a. p. 123. l. 20. for
now it is held ^d, r. now it is not held good, p. 125. first line, for ^int. r.
Quint. p. 126. last line, for the new Skin, r. a ^v Skin.

The first part contains certain Directions necessary to be observed by the
Surgeon in his fitting of himself out for the Sea.
The First Direction.
WOuld you be a Sea Surgeon; Then it is necessary you should understand,
first, how to fit your self out for the Sea, in order to which, you are first
to consider what those Accidents and Distempers are, that are most incident to
the Sea, that you may provide Medicines and Instruments proper for them.

They are these that follow,

All manner of Wounds, especially by Gunshot, Bruises or Contusions both
outward and inward; Spreins, Dislocations, and Ruptures, Scalding and Burning,
especially with Powder; Pains, Aches, and Numbness of Limbs, Tumors, Ulcers,
and Gangrenes, Ophalmias, Squinzys, Hemorrhage at the Nose, Toothache, Piles,
Procedentia Any.

And then inwardly: The Scurvy, Fevers and Agues; Fluxes, Cholera, Gripes and
Cholick, Surfeits, Colds, Catarrhs, Rhumes, Plurisie, Strangury, and Gravel;
Worms, Costiveness.

Now you must understand that there be several Diseases that are very rarely
cured at Land, and are not expected to be cured at Sea; as Consumption,
Dropsy, Gout, Evil, Palsy, Epilepsie, and others; and several Chirurgical
Operations that are not expected to be performed at Sea, as Cutting for the
Stone, Couching Cataracts, Extirpating Wens, and the like.

The former Accidents and Distempers you are absolutely obliged to provide for,
but these latter not: However, if you think you can do any good in these
deplorable Diseases, with the Medicines or Instruments you have for the other,
you may use your endeavors, and in so doing, you will do well.

The Second Direction.
Secondly, To know what those Medicines and Instruments are, that are proper to
be carried for the Cure of those Accidents and Diseases before enumerated, your
way is to turn over this Book, and see what Medicines and Instruments are here
appointed, and what I have used in every Accident and Disease: Take a Catalogue
of them, the which digest into an invoice to fit by; for I will assure you that
you will here find the best of Medicines, and Balsams that are at this day
known or Practiced withal; and every needful Instrument you will find named,
and the use of it showed occasionally in the Book: Only this observe, that
whereas I in some places name many things that are proper for the same
Distemper, and yet any one of them will cure it: That that is for your full
knowledge, and least you may perchance have one of them, and not the other.

In this case you may choose which of them you believe to be the best, and not
charge your self with more, only this variety you must necessarily use: If a
man cannot take a Bolus, you must have Pills that will perform the same Office;
or if he cannot take Pills, you must have a Potion to execute the same
intention; for some men cannot take one manner of Medicament that can take
another; and a Patient must not be suffered to miscarry because he cannot take
only one sort of Medicine.

To make it more plain to you: There are the best of Diaphoretiqnes, in the
World, spoken of in this Book for the reasons abovementioned, as Mitherid.
Thriac. Ven. Tinctura Gummi, Guaci, and others, all of them extraordinary
proper; but then there is only Thriac Land Nova, that executes the Office of
them all, and may be used in all Diseases wherein Sweating is required; only it
is an Electuary, and it is possible some cannot take an Electuary (although
indeed this may be taken in Wine) then you should have Aqu. Thriac, or the like
to drink.

And this further, If your self has had the experience of any Medicine (that
you do not see named in this Book,) for the cure of any Disease, you may take
that Medicine, and leave out which of mine you think you can best spare: For in
the forming of your invoyce you must consider that you have no more room than
only a Surgery Chest, and Drug Chest to contain all your things; therefore
you are not to carry greater variety than of necessity you must. And let those
be of the most pertinent, and universal tendency, one of which is proper for
the Cure of many Diseases. As indeed, what need a Sea Surgeon to incumber
his Chest with Pil aurae, faetidae, or several others, whilst Pil Rudij of it
self will do all that they can do.

So among Chemical Medicaments what need is there for a Sea Surgeon to take
Aurum Potabile, Precipitatus Aurius: or Mana Mercurij. When Bezoarticum solare
Schroderi, will do as much as them all, in any disaese they are appropriated
unto.

You are therefore I say to take the most Catholic, but no more of a sort,
than necessity enjoins you.

The Third Direction.
Thirdly, In forming your invoyce, you must have a care in regulating your
quantity of each Medicine, that you may carry what is sufficient, but not
superfluous.

To do this, you must first consult what your Complement of men are, and
Secondly, The length of your intended Voyage: At least ways how long it will
be ere you may expect a recrute. For reason tells, that you must fit a greater
quantity of each Medicament for a greater quantity of men, than for a lesser:
and more of every Medicament for a long Voyage than for a short.

The Fourth Direction.
Fourthly, Consider the Chances and Maladies that may be expected in that
expedition you are upon, or Climate you are bound unto; that you may in a
special manner furnish your self with quantities, for those expectations; as if
you go into the Wars, you must expect wounds and broken Bones, then you must
carry more quantity of Vulneraries, than if you were not bound into the Wars.

So as to the Climate: If you are bound to Newfound Land, you may expect the
Scurvy, therefore provide good quantities of Scorbuticks; more than if you were
to go a Straights Voyage: But again, if you were to go to Scanderoon, there is
very often malignant Fevers and Fluxes, but seldom the Scurvy: Therefore you
must now put up greater quantities of Antefebritiques, then of Scorbutiques. I
say, although you must carry sufficient quantities of Medicines proper for
every Accident and Ailment that does usually befall at Sea, yet in a special
manner you must provide for the Accidents and Distempers that may be expected
in the Voyage, or expedition you are now upon.

The Fifth Direction.
Fifthly, You would do well to consider that some Medicines are expended at Sea
faster than others, and some are given in greater Doses than others, and
therefore you must not carry the like quantity of the one as of the other.
There is more of Basilicon used, than of Apostolorum; and more of Diapalma,
than of Ad Herniam, and so the dose of Electum Lenitivum is from vi ad xij,
whereas that of Cario costinum, is but from ij ad iij, therefore it is not
reasonable that you should take as much of the one of these Medicines, as of
the other; except it be because that of the less Dose may be more in use than
the other, and in that Case it may be equalized.

The Sixth Direction.
Sixthly I would advise you if you take greater quantities of those things,
that are least in use, and smallest in Dose, let them be such as will keep good
at Sea for a long time; for then it is true you may have no great loss in them;
but if they be such as will decay in a short time, then you had best be advised
as to your Quantities, an Ounce of Stibium will be as good at seven years end,
as it was the first day; but your Rubarb at 4 years old will have the worm;
therefore when you fit, mind such things as these, and take quantities
accordingly.

The Seventh Direction.
Seventhly, To save charge and encumbrance, let me advise you to inform your
self what Medicines or Drugs are plenty in the Country where you are going,
that you may carry with you out of England as much of those Medicines or Drugs
only as you Judge will serve you thither.

Why should a man carry any quantity of Theriaca Andromica to Venice, when as
that is the place where it is made, and either for Truck, or Money, you may
have the best, and best cheap: Or, Why Cena to Alexandria in Egypt, and I have
seen it sold there, and that of the best in the World, for a quarter of the
money that we buy it at home.

The like I say of Rubarb and Scamony at Ptolemais in Palestine. So that if a
man be bound into any part of Turkey, he need carry only as much of these things
as will serve him thither, and no more. What need is there of carrying Spices
or Gumms to the Indies, or Wine, Brandy, or Recchee to France, Spain, Portugal,
or Italy, when their Ports vend those Commodities. Therefore in your fitting
mind this Direction.

The Eighth Direction.
Eighthly, If you are bound out in a Merchant man to any place that is known to
be sickly, you would do well to put the Commander in mind, to carry in the Ship
some fresh and necessary provisions, least men should be sick and miscarry for
want of it; for it is not all the Medicines in your Chest that will recover
men, without fresh and wholesome Diet.

If you go any Foreign Voyage, or into the Wars in a Ship of the Kings, you
have these things provided for you: for His Majesty graciously allows necessary
Provisions for sick and wounded; which the Surgeon General of His Majesty's
Navy, with care and discretion puts up and disposes of to each Surgeon,
according to the Complement of men the Ship carries, and the Voyages he is a
going; which is a great comfort and refreshment to the Men, and an ease to the
Surgeon in curing them.

The Ninth Direction.
Now as to the Pounds, or Ounces of each individual Medicine that you should
carry for any particular Voyage, and Complement of Men; If it be in a Merchant
man, you have only custom to guide you by; you carry what quantities you know
others have done and have found sufficient. Therefore I Will tell you, that for
my own part when I have gone in a Ship of about 40 men, and a Voyage supposed
12 or 14 Months. I have carried of Medicines of the largest Dose, and most
frequent use, lb ij of each, and of the rest proportionably. However I impose
no quantities on you, you are at your own liberty; only I give you a light to
see by:

And if you go in a Man of War, your quantities are judiciously regulated by
the Governors of Surgeons Hall: So (that if you would) you shall not, take
less quantities than they judge to be sufficient. Therefore I presume not to
advise you to any certain quantities, but refer you to their more mature
Judgments, Only to ready you for their view, let me acquaint you, that when I
my self has gone out in a Fourth, Third, or Second Rate, my largest Jarrs and
Glasses were generally upward of lb iij, that they might contain lb iij
complete, and yet room for fermenting Medicines, and my other Medicines have
been proportioned accordingly; and these have for the most times been approved
of as good moderate quantities. And this farther, when I have gone in a fourth
rate I have taken as great quantities, as when in a second; for you must
consider this, that the length of the fourth rates Voyage may equalize the
second rates great complement of men, and short Voyage, for usually the great
ships are not out above six or seven Months, but the lesser a much longer time.
However, being you put up your Medicines before they come to view them, it is
your wisest way to take no less quantities than you know others have taken, and
have been approved of as sufficient. Otherwise when they come to view, they
will make you take more (as they have sometimes done by me in the like case)
and that will create you a double trouble.

I only give you this light, that you may be in a competent readiness for the
view, and as to the certain quantities you must submit (as I have done) to the
Governors judgment and ordering.

The Tenth Direction.
Having prepared your Invoyce according to the foregoing Directions, you are
now to begin to put up Medicines. And here let me advise you to see all things,
whether they be good.

It Is true the Governors of Chyrurgeons Hall do thoroughly inspect the
medicines that go into the Kings Ships, and will not suffer any thing that is
ill to pass; but you put up your Medicines whilst they are not there. Therefore
to save an after trouble, be very circumspect as to what you take. For so it
is, that in many Medicines one Apothecary can deceive another, and much more a
Sea Chyrurgeon, whose calling it is not to make all his own Medicaments.
However although it is impossible for you to know whether every Ingredient be in
a Compound Medicine that the Dispensatory appoints, yet by the sight, smell,
taste, or consistence, you will judge within a little more or less, (if you
make it your business to understand Medicines) whether it be sound, or
Sophisticated.

Besides you are the Person that must stand or fall by the repute or dis-repute
that your Medicines acquire, therefore it behooves your self to see to the best
of your knowledge that what Medicines you put up be good. Especially if you go
in a Merchant-man where you have no view upon your Chest. And indeed you are
very happy if you meet with an honest Apothecary or Chemist who dispense and
prepare their Medicines faithfully, and that will not put bad things upon you.

The Eleventh Direction.
It remains now that I direct you to take such care in putting up your
Medicines, that they may be preserved good as long as possible. To do this, put
up as many things as you can in Jars, Glasses and Boxes. Let every thing be
well covered that the Air hurt them not, nor that they spill, and so you come
to damage. See that your Rhubarb be new and sound, and that the worm has not
got into it (as it will certainly do at four years old) let it be wrapped in
Cotton, and kept in a Box dry. See likewise that your Liquid Medicines that
will ferment, be put into Jars or Glasses that will hold more then the
quantities you put in them, that there may be room to ferment. Let not such
Bottles of Syrups be Corked, but covered well with Leather and tied hard, and
the Cover pricked, and let your fermenting Electuaries be often stirred down.
Such as grow dry at Sea, add to them some of the humid ingredient whereof they
were made, and Honey to some, Sugar to others, and Spirit of Wine to others.
When your Mass of Pill Rudii grows hard, temper it with rectified Spirit of
Wine by the warm Fire to its right consistence. Other Pills, as Cochiae, or
Ruffi, strew Cream or Tartar on the Mass, and it will preserve them in their
due consistence. Your Rich Confections, as Alchermis, or De hyacinthis will
quickly dry and spoil. Therefore carry the species of such, and make them up as
you have occasion; having with you Syrupus Lemonibus, and others for that
purpose. Let all your Jars and Glasses both great and small be square, and not
round, that they may stow the better; and let them be all strong double
Glasses, that will not break upon a slight occasion. It has been accustomary
to put them into Bladders, as well to save what is in them, (if any one should
chance to break) as to preserve other Medicines from being spoiled, by the
Oils or Corosives, if they should spill, but good double Jars and Glasses
prevent that.

The Twelfth Direction. To fit the Surgery Chest.
Now for the greater safety of your Medicines, let me advise you, not to have
drawing Boxes at the Ends of the bottom of your Chest, as some use to have, and
carry their Seeds and other things in them; for when you shall need any thing
that is in them, you must take out several Medicines that stand in the bottom
of the Chest before them; which Pots or Glasses will be in danger of breaking,
especially if there goes a great Sea, and the Ship rouls.

Some Chyrurgeons (especially in small Merchantmen) carry their Drugs in the
bottom of their Chests, together with some Medicines, which is altogether
inconvenient (if you can avoid it) for there must be a preposterous displacing
of things before you can come at the Medicine you would have, therefore if I am
worthy to advise you, let not your Drugs be in your Chyrurgery Chest; but have
Partitions all over the bottom, and let those partitions be bigger than them at
top; and in them place your greatest Jars and Glasses (and especially your
Oils and Corrosive Medicaments, that if they should spill or break, they
cannot fall on others to indammage them). Besides in one of those partitions,
you may place four of such small square Glasses, as your Oils of Sulphur or
Vitriol are put in, if you wrap them with Tow, and place them decently one upon
another. Let each kind of Medicines be placed in Glasses by themselves; as the
Syrups in one Glass, the Electuaries in another; and so of the Oils, and
Unguents, or Waters; with every Medicament its Lybel upon it. And keep account
in your Book whereabout each Medicine stands, that you may either go or send
for the Medicine you want and find it (as it were) in the dark.

Having thus fitted the bottom of your Chest, there is usually a hanging drawer
under the middle of the top partitions, where some Chyrurgions use to keep
their Instruments; Let that be for your Emplasters. And then fall in hand with
the top of your Chest. You are to place round the top the remainder of your
bigger Jars and Glasses, because they are the bigger partitions: And as in the
bottom, so here, let each kind of Medicines be in their peculiar Glasses and
writ upon.

And in the partitions of your top Drawers you may place in some four, in
others more, of your small square Glasses and Jars; as four ounces, two ounces,
and ounces; and every thing written upon, and account taken in your book, you
will know readily where to find each Medicine in the bottom of any partition,
although its Lybel should be lost, and let your box of small Weights and Scales
be fixed to the inside of the Lid of your Chest, as also your Electuary and
Unguent Spatula's, and Tyle to mix Boluses on; with other Necessaries.

The Thirteenth Direction. For fitting the Drug Chest.
Having furnished your Chyrurgery Chest, now fall in hand with your Drug Chest.
It Is usual to put your Sarrina's, Seeds, Roots, Herbs, Flowers, and such like
in Papers, and so write upon them; but do you put these papers into small
Canvas Bags, each bag marked with a peculiar Mark. Let several of these Papers
be put into one bag; as, the several papers of seeds into one bag, the herbs
into another, the roots into a third, and so of the rest.

Then take account in your Book what is in each bag so marked, and you will
easily find what you want when you have occasion. Let the things be in bags,
because papers break in rummaging, and spill about the bottom of the Chest,
mixing one thing with another.

Here your Box of first intentions are likewise to be placed; (viz.) your
dismembring Pledgets, Buttons and Tents, Rowlers, Cross-bolsters, Linen, Tow,
Tape, Leather, Bladders, and other Necessaries. Be sure your fine Tow be put up
in a bag, least a Candle hap to catch in it. And let your Restringent Powder be
there likewise with the rest of your first intentions. Your box of large
Instruments should be carried there likewise, because there is nothing in that
Chest but what is dry. But see that they be first made sharp and bright by your
Instrument-maker, and let them be often looked on and rubbed with a piece of
dry Cotton, least they should speck or rust.

The Fourteenth Direction.
Now for as much as every Chyrurgeon has not seen made, nor used the first
intentions, I Will show you how to make them now, and how to use them elsewhere.

Take fine Tow, and form round Pledgits smooth and even, and of a reasonable
substance. about the breadth of the end of stump; some bigger and others
lesser, as stumps may be, and some larger than any stump, Let them lie upon a
smooth board, a then beat the whites of Eggs, with acetum, and sprinkle the
Pledgits therewith till they are thorough wet.

Then take another smooth board, and lay upon them to press them hard; after,
take off the upper board and carry them into a Sunshine place to dry; and when
they are thoroughly dry put them up in your box for use. Form likewise
dismembering Buttons in the shape of a large Button; let them be wet likewise
in the same Liquor, and dried, and put up into the Box. Make Tents also of all
sizes, whether for Musket Shot, Pistol Shot, Puncture, or any such Wound
whatever.

These things put up together with the Restringent Powder, are called our first
intention, and ought to be ready by you at all times, and not to make when you
have occasion to use them.

The Fifteenth Direction.
Lastly, Being fitted in all things according to these Directions, and having
your Chests viewed, you are to get them with your self, and cruise on Board,
and see them placed as conveniently as possibly you can, to be got at; and in a
dry place, where wet may not come at them to spoil either your Medicines or
Instruments, and let them be so lashed that they may not overset in bad Weather
by the rolling of the Ship. Being now on Board, and yet in the River, furnish
your dressing Box (that is a box with six or eight partitions with Pots or
Glasses of Oils or Balsams, and Emplasters, ready spread for present occasion)
which box you must every morning carry to the Mast between Decks, to dress such
as have any hurts or ailments; and there with our Mortar we usually ring, that
such as have occasion may hear in any part of the Ship and come to be dressed.
Thus you are completely fitted and ready for any thing that shall happen.

However some of these Directions may seem of smaller importance then others,
yet the least are necessary, and to be heeded; for by the non-observance of
such, my self has sometimes sustained damage and trouble, which by the
regarding of them you may avoid. But I know you would be at greater things, and
you will meet with greater anon.

THE Second BOOK. Teaches how the Chyrurgeon ought to perform his Chyrurgical
Duty being at Sea.
CHAP. I. How the Chyrurgeon should behave himself on an Engagement Day.
I Will Imagine that you are at Sea now in a Man of War, and in sight of the
Enemy; and all men are clearing their respective quarters, and fitting
themselves for fight; at what time you, as you are Chyrurgeon of the Ship, must
prepare as follows.

First you must see that your platform be laid as even as may be, with a Sail
spread upon it, which you must speak to the Commander to order. In a
Merchant-man this is usually in the Cable teere; but in Men of War it is
generally in Hold, abaft the Mast, between that and the Bulk head of the
Cockpit from side to side.

On this platform you must place two Chests, to set your wounded men on to
dress them, one for your self to perform the greater operation on, and the
other for your mate to dress slighter wounds on. You are likewise to have by
you two Tubs with water; the one to throw amputated Limbs into until there is
convenience to heave them overboard; and the other to dip your dismembring
Bladders in, or to wash between each Operation, and for other services.

Let your Instruments likewise both great and small be ready by you on the
Platform. And your first intentions must not now be to seek, nor must any one
necessary now be missing. As your pulv. restring. acetum Ova, Oils for Bruises
and Burnings; Cordials to give when men faint; Seer-clothes ready spread (for
now all fire must be out in the Ship, except Candles and Matches).

Let good store of the largest Candles be placed decently about the Platform to
give good light, and instead of fire to warm your Cear-clothes, or heat your
Oils, as you have occasion; and be sure your restrictives be ready mixed, your
restrictivum Com. in one Basin, and your potential Cautry in another; and your
Aqua stiptica Vitrioli in a third, that they may not be to fetch, or mix when
you have a present need to apply them.

Your Restrictiva Communa is this, Rec. Alb. Ovarium, beat them with acetum,
and mix therewith Pulv. restring. to a fit consistence. By this time I Will
suppose the fight is begun, and your Ship is engaged, and wounded men begin to
be brought down: And first one, who to save his Life, must have his Limbs
amputated.

You see part of the Limb carried away by the Shot; as the Hand from the Arm,
the Foot from the Leg, or else the Bones so shattered, that should you leave it
on, there were no hopes of healing it, nor of saving the man's life. This
indicates amputation, and it is speedily to be done, for it is no time now for
you to pause upon it; your main design is to save the man's life; in order to
which, two eminent purpasses immediately present: The one to take of the Limb,
for if that should stay on, life is not long to be expected, the other is to
stop the violence of bleeding; (for in the Blood is the Life) and if that be
not done, the man will immediately dye.

This latter purpose you are first to put in execution (if possible) for it is
sure the man has bled too much already, before he could be got down to you;
more especially if in a three Decked Ship, and the man wounded on the upper Deck.

Amputation.
Set the man down immediately on your Chest, and let your assistants hold him;
and let one take a fast gripe with his hands above the place you intend to
amputate, drawing up the Muscles with what force he can, and you with large and
strong tape make fast and hard Ligature, to restrain the bleeding; fetch it
several turns about, and let it be about two inches above the place you design
to amputate.

In the mean time let a dram of Cordial be given the man to keep up his
Spirits. If the Operation be on the Leg, let it be about four inches below the
Knee; but if in the Thigh or Arm, as low as the wound will permit.

Together with your Ligature let your assistant gripe hard, and another hold
the end: And you with your dismembring Knife divide the Flesh or Muscles round
the Bones (if it be possible) at two even strokes.

You Will now hear sad schreeking, but let nothing daunt you, be resolute in your
duty, and encourage your Mates.

The Flesh divided, let your assistant draw up the Muscles as tort as possible,
and let him that holds the other part do the like, that the Bone may be seen,
and with your Catling divide the Vessels between the bones (if it is below the
Elbow or Knee) and remove the periosteum, that nothing may hinder the saw: Then
take off the Limb at as few strokes, and as near the upper part as possible,
and let him that holds the end of the Limb have a care that he breaks not the
Bone, before the Saw is quite through. This done, throw it in to your Tub of
water, at the side of the Platform, till there is an opportunity to heave it and
others overboard.

Some after this make actual Cautry on the ends of the Vessels, (and indeed it
were a good way were a man on shore) but by no means do I like fire on a
Platform in time of Fight; for I remember in one of the last fights we had with
the Hollanders, there came a shot in under water, and beat down my Lighter from
before me, and battered things on the Platform. And if such a shot should have
struck a fire pan there it would have hazarded the burning of the Ship. A small
pledget of fine tow is fittest to be applied to the end of the Bone, and the
best Practitioners use it. If it be above the Elbow, or in the Thigh, it is
more proper to touch the Marrow than other things. To the mouths of the great
Vessels you are to apply Buttons armed with your restrictivum Commune, or (if
you fear a violent flowing) with your Potential Cautry, which commonly is that
of Calcanth. rubefactum, or if you first dip your Buttons in the Aqua stiptica
Vitriola, and then arm them, it is a good way. The Buttons applied, let an
assistant hold them on with his fingers ends. Now here some take the
Cross-stitch, and some neglect it, because if it is taken superficially, it
breaks out and does no good, and if deep, the Muscles are punctur'd, which
causes an addition of pain, if not Convulsion.

For my own part I have often used it, and sometimes have done the work as well
without it.

Now let him that gripes force down his hands, that the Muscles may return over
the end of the bone whilst the other hold fast the Buttons to the ends of the
Veins; keeping still your Ligature fast, and do you apply a pledget wet in
acetum, and armed with restrictive to the end of the stump; and another wet and
armed over that, and so large as may reach two inches over the stump; and a
strong Cross-bolster upon that, which your assistant must hold fast to; but
before you bring the edges fast about, let go your Ligature. And then let your
assistant hale up the Cross bolster strongly, and the other force hard with his
hand on the applications; and do you with a single Rouler fetch 3 or 4 turns
something tort, about the place where the Ligature was. If blood appears, clap
an unarmed button on that place, and strip a wet bladder over that to secure
the upper things from being bloody: Then bring to another Bolster, and with a
long double head Rowler make firm bandage, and be sure at every turn that comes
over the end of the stump let your assistants hand be on it to hold it fast to,
until you have fastened your Rowler. Then lay the man so to pass, that the stump
may be higher than the Body, and wrapped warm with a Garment, and a Pillow under
it; but be sure to place him as far off, to the further part of the Platform,
as possible; that there may be room for others, and all that you lay after him,
let them be laid for advantage; for I have sometimes had my Platform so full of
wounded men, that I could not tell how to dispose of more: This done, let him
have another Cordial dram, but have a care of too much, lest it inflame him,
and make his blood more fluid: And have an Eye lest his Mesmates come with
their bottle, and prejudice him with their kindness, as I have sometimes seen;
and so turn your hand to another, and be as expedite in all your operations as
possible.

I have here given you but a touch of this, only to let you know how to behave
your self in time of Fight.

Anon I Will teach you to prosecute this cure to the end: And then I Will show you
how both to begin and end the curing of all other eminent Wounds, or Accidents
that usually happen either in an engagement, or at other times at Sea; for if
you will be a Sea-Chirurgeon, such you must expect to meet with, as others have
done.

CHAP. II. Teaches what is to be done by the Surgeon the next day after the
Engagement.
BUT by the way take notice, that it is not fit to open an Amputation under the
space of at least three days; nor of other great Wounds where there is danger
of an Hemorrhage in less than two days.

The next morning after the Fight, in the first place provide Victuals for the
wounded men: Let your Pot be boiled with Grewel of Oatmeal, Currants, and
Spice; and when it is ready, let it be sweetened with Sugar, and give thereof to
each of them, and let them have it twice a day at least: Then consider what
wounds or accidents should be dressed this second day, which are such as are
burnt with powder, slight Wounds, and all Bruises or Contusions.

These being dressed: Think of a vulnerary Drink for the wounded; (especially
such as are inwardly bruised, or have penetrating wounds.) Now if a man were
ashore, decoctum Traumaticum, or Vulnerarium, Infusus Vulnerarius, or else
Spruse Beer, would be very excellent: But you are at Sea, and have not these
things, nor can you possibly carry with you so many Herbs, Roots, and Seeds as
will make them.

Now, Rec. Sir. de Symphito i Quintessentia Aristolochia Fabri i in a draught
of warm Ale or Beer is very good: But Sanguis Samphiti i. Liquor Salis Gemmae.
gut iij in a Glass of Malago or Alicant is better, (if not the best in the
World. Sperm Caeti ij. Magisterium Salis gr. vi. in Oleo amygdalarum Dulc.
sweetened with fine Sugar, is a good inward Vulnerary. These are things that you
can carry to Sea with you, and have ready to give a man at an instant. It Is
true, many of these things are very rich and costly; and it is like you expected
me to advise you to things of good virtue, and yet of less cost: It Is true they
are so: but then their Doses are not great; and consider that Life is of more
worth than the best of them; besides, if you know any thing more vulgar and of
less value, and yet powerful as to the intention, you may use it, I impose not
on you; you are at your liberty; only pardon me if I advise you to the best of
Medicines, (although never so costly.) And indeed in this case Balm of Gilead
(if you had it) were not too good, I know it to be their only Medicine in
Syria, Egypt, and Palestine: They take half a spoonful of it at a time, the
Christians in a Glass of Wine, and the Mahometans in their Sherbet, when any of
them is bruised, or greatly wounded. And the meaner sort boil the fruit of the
Tree from whence this comes, and drink the Decoction when they are hurt. It
sweats out of the Fruit of the Cedar, and is not much unlike thin Turpentine
both in smell, sight, and taste.

A Merchant in Tripoly in Syria, near Mount Lebanon, showed me, and gave me
both of the Balm, and of the Fruit, when as it was new cut, and brought down
from the Mountain at what time the Fruit was sweating out its Balm.

The Fruit is not much unlike the Spruce buds that we see in New found Land,
which sweat out such another substance.

This day also you must be providing Cradles for the wounded; you must speak to
the Commander to order the Carpenter to make them. And in the night time let
your Mates take turns, to watch by them, lest any miscarriage should be; but
let there be quietness, and as little disturbance as possible, for they will
have many Visitors.

CHAP. III.
THE second day after the fight, besides your giving men their vulnerary Drink,
and dressing the burns and bruses, and slight wounds: See which of the others
are costive, or inclining to be Feverish, and give to such an opening, and
emollient Clyster to prevent ill things that might ensue.

Decoctum Com. per Clist. viij, Electa Len. ij f. enema. This is fittest for
your occasion; likewise this day dress all Wounds that you can without fear of
their bleeding afresh, which I Will instruct you in anon; but to comply with my
promised Method, I Will first show you to prosecute the cure of the Amputated
Wound, and in it of all other amputations.

CHAP. IV. How to prosecute the Cure of the Amputated Wound.
Imagine the third day after the engagement is now come, you must think of
opening your Amputations and most dangerous wounds: Have your Restringent
Major, and your Digestivum Commune ready by you. You will need no fomentation
this dressing, for that by its heat might cause fresh bleeding.

Your Digestivum Com. make thus, Terebenth. Mel Angl. Ol. Catulorum Vitel.
ovor. ana. pts. equal. Misce. These mixed, make an excellent good digestive,
which is commonly used. Your restrictives that you applied at first, will now
stick very hard; therefore you must have great care and patience in taking them
off. When all is off, apply to the ends of the Vessels some of your Restrictive
Powder whether they bleed or not; and to the end of the Bone a little Powder of
Myrrh on small pledgits of Lint or fine Tow; and over these apply your
digestive on pledgits all over the end of the stump; then imbrocate the part
about with Oil of Roses, or Hypericon, and so place fit Bolsters, and roll it
up for this time.

Now this second dressing need not to be taken off under two days, unless some
accident happen. When you dress it next, all danger of bleeding will be over,
and you may prepare your fomentation to help on digestion, and to recollect the
dissipated Spirits. For you will find a discolouration about the end of the
part, but fear not that; for when by the Fomentation, and Digestivum Commune,
Digestion is made, that blackness will vanish. And when you see the end of the
part swell much, it is so much the better; for the Spirits are returned unto it,
and there is less fear of Mortification.

Your Fomentation usually is, Herbae Hypericon, Centariae, Absynth. and other
Fomentation Herbs, which you always have ready by you in your Drug Chest;
decoct two or three handfuls of these in Water, and to the strained Liquor add
a good quantity of Spirit of Vinum Commune, ( alias Brandy) to make it more
strong and lively.

Have Stuphs of Cotton, or Flannel to wring out of this Liquor, and apply them
hot one after one, for a good while together. Then apply to the end of the bone
a small pledgit dipped in tincture of Myrrh hot, and likewise bathe the end of
the stump therewith, and so lay to your Digestivum Commune on pledgits of fine
Tow or Lint. Let your Digestive be moderately warm. When you have digested the
Wound sufficiently, and there is no further danger of Gangreen, then leave off
the Common Digestive, but keep still to your Stuphs and Tincture; for those
will powerfully forward the healing, together with the Vulnerary Drink that I
directed in the Second Chapter; and have a care that he drinks not strong Drink
to inflame.

Now Basiticon Minus, and Linamentum Arcei mixed and applied on your Pledgits
warm to the Wound is a very proper Medicine, and commonly used; for this both
digests and heals: Only let not these touch the end of the Bone, nor yet no
Unctions, nor Corrosive thing whatever; but let your small Pledgit dipped in your
Tincture of Myrrh, be still next the Bone. For these Unctious things will
suffer the moist Humor to fall on the Bone, and that is it that rots and
putrifies the Bone, which the Tincture of Myrrh, or Powder of Myrrh does
prevent. And if the Bone should be foul, by this or the Air, or other accident,
it is but applying your pulvis Euphorbii. next to the Bone under your other
Balsams, and it will delicately scale it. Two or three of these dressings will
bring off the great stuff, and you will have your Wound in a hopeful way of Curing.

Then you may leave of your Unctious medic. and apply only Balsamum
Terebinthine or unguentum Tereb. which will certainly do your work, and heal
the Wound as fast as you would have it. And if you took the Cross Stick, you
may now cut it and pick it out.

The later of these although it is called unguent. Tereb. yet it has no Oylous
or Unctious ingredient in it. It Is thus made.

Rec. Tereb. lb ij, vitel. ovor. No. vj. Mastich. Myrrh. Olibanum ana j f. ung.
That is admirable good for healing, and the Balsam is not inferior, for these
may be applied to the bone it self.

After the Eight at Buda, when the Emperor routed the Turks, I saw in
Constantinople a Turk that had been wounded there by a brace of Bullets that
had been shot through his Arm extremely shattering both bones Vlna and Radius,
and this wound after the blood had been stanch'd, was dressed only with alb.
ovorum, and Tereb. Cypr. misce; and for all the shattered bones were not taken
out, and it was now two months since the Fight, yet the bones were not in the
least foul, nor was there any ill scent, but extraordinary good and laudable
digestion, and the wound inclining to heal, but too fast over the loose bones;
and (when at the request of a Merchant) I had laid it open, and taken out the
splintred ossicles, the Turk healed it himself with that very medicine; it was
almost cured before we parted thence, which was about a fortnight after I had
laid it open. This I insert only to confirm your confidence in the unguent. or
balsam of Terebenth. which must needs be more efficacious than this of the
Turks which I have spoke of, considering the ingredients in them added to
these. When you have healed it so, as you would have it to cicatrize, then you
may at first add to your balsam, desiccatrum rubrum, or diapompholigos; and at
last use them alone. For these will dry and skin it to your satisfaction. And
mind this, that if in the time of Cure the Patient should at any time turn
Feverish, besides administering of Clysters, you must open a Vein.

CHAP. V. How to Cure all dangerous Wounds of the Joints.
We Will suppose before you have quite done with your dismembered man, there is
brought down another, wounded in the Knee, with a Musket Bullet. The Veins,
Arteries; and Nerves are wounded, and the Cartilages and Bones shattered, and
the Bullet sticking in. This is a very dangerous Wound, with intolerable pain,
and a violent efflux of Blood. Here two designs immediately offer; the one to
extract the shot and shattered Bones, and the other to stop the Blood.

Here the latter is first to be executed least the man bleed to Death whilst
you are doing the other. Your way is to make strong Ligature about the Thigh,
so that the blood shall not descend (at leastwise in any great quantity). If
such a Wound should happen in the joint of the Hip, where such Ligation cannot
be made, it were much more dangerous.

When you have made your Ligature as hard as if it were for dismembering, then
with your probe feel for the shot, and with your Forceps or Terebellum extract
it. But if it is near through on the further side, Clap a flat pointed strong
Probe to it, and with your incision Knife cut it out, thrusting it with your
Probe; but be tender of the Vessels, or Nerves, and get the splinter'd Bones
out in like manner; for if you should not do this now whilst the man is hot,
(which must of necessity be done) you will but very ill do it hereafter. If there
be some small extramosities that should escape you now, it is no great matter,
you need not spend over much time (which now is precious) they will come to
hand at another dressing. And if it were a shot that should stay in, if it were
a Musculous part, provided the shot were round and not chaw'd nor jag'd, it
would not be at all the more dangerous. For I have known when such a Bullet
could not be got out, that it has of it self by its own weight made way lower
and lower, to a depending part, where it has appeared through the skin, and
there has been cut out, and has healed after it all along as it has
descended; this happened to one of our Seamen, when we had Wars with Algier,
and fought before Tedellis in Barbary.

This done, dip your Dorcells in your aqua stiptica, squeeze them, then arm
them with your Restringent, and fill the Wound with them; but let no hard Tents
be applied among the Joints, neither here nor in any other. Apply good Bolsters
and make good Bandage, and so give this a Cordial dram, and lay him by the
other; for this is all what can be done at this time, and this wound ought not
to be opened in less time than two days, unless accidents enforce you.

The next dressing be cautious how you apply your Fomentation, least it should
cause fresh bleeding; but let your digestive have powder of Saffron mixed with
it, and let it be applied on Dorcells into the Wound, then will your digestive
be not only suppurative, but also anodine, which is an intention which this
Wound extremely requires, as also prevention of other accidents; as Convulsion
of the Nerves, Contraction of the Muscles and Fever.

Now as your digestive it in the Wounds so all about the Wound let your
Emplast. diasulphuris Rulandi be applied, for that is the most excellent that
is yet known for all Wounds of the Joints, and Nervous parts.

And let there be a strong defensive about the Thigh.

Your pulv. restr. minor with acetum; alb. ovor. and oleum Rosarum, misce. This
is a good defensive; and mind this, That when you apply your digestive into the
Wound, let either the Balsam or Unguent of Terebinthina be applied next the
Bone. This manner of Dressing should be used till digestion is effected. And as
soon as there is no danger of Bleeding, let your hot and comfortable
Fomentation be used, and let your Wound Drink be given inwardly; and let his
body be kept open by Clysters as is taught in the amputated Wound.

Your Wound Drink is, Pulv. ad Casum, jss. and sweat on it, either Sir. de
symphito ij, or Sanguis symphiti ssj, or Quint. aristoloch fabri ij.

Any of the three given in a Glass of Beer, Ale or Wine, first in the Morning,
and last at Night, either alone or mixed together, and Dosed proportionably,
nothing under the Heavens, is (unless Balm of Gilead) more powerful as to this
intention. When you see it begin to suppurate, then apply Balsamum Sulphuris,
or Balsaminae to the Nervous parts, for those are the chief of Medicines in
that behalf, but let either the Balsam or unguent of Tereb. be next, or among
the Bones; and let every thing be applied hot and comfortable. And let warm
Tinctura Myrrhae be your Lotion, and the Emplastr. diasulphuris Rulandi be
still applied warm and cherishing all about the Joint and Part.

This (I am confirmed) you will find to be an excellent method of curing Wounds of
the Joints and Nervous parts.

CHAP. VI. How to Cure a Compound Fracture, and Dislocation together.
BY this time let us imagine another is lowered down to you, who being up aloft
knotting the Rigging, a shot came and carried the Rope from under his Feet that
he stood upon, and he fell down upon the Deck; and dislocated his
Shoulder Bone, and fractured the Os Brachium, so that the end of one part of
the Bone comes through the Flesh and Skin over the other.

This is a notable Accident, and it is impossible but that this man must be much
bruised inwardly by the fall also.

Your way is to let his Clothes be immediately ripped off, and seeing how the
Case stands, give him immediately a Cordial dram, to revive his Spirits; and
then make way to reduce the dislocated Joint; after embrocate about it with
Oleum Rosarum, and clap about it a good Warm Searcloth of Oxycroceum. Let there
be a good Bolster placed under the Arm-pit, and firm and decent rouling.

Next go in hand with your compound Fracture, which will be the more difficult
to reduce, because of the new Located Joint. Now all dislocations and fractures
are reduced either by a slight and sudden Motion, or by a more strong
Extension. The joint of the Shoulder might ('it is like) be done by the former;
but this kind of Fracture will require the latter. There must be a powerful
extension of this Fracture, because the Ends of the Bones are one over the
other. Therefore he that holds the upper part, had need of a good Machine, or
Bandage to hold fast by, against him that extends the other way, that he may
succor the Shoulder-joynt.

It Is like too that the Wound may not be wide enough to let the head of the
Bone easily return, then you must make incision, but have a care of the Vessels.

When the ends of the Bones are evenly placed, embrocate about the part with
Oleum Rosar. and into the Wound apply a small dorcel of Tincture of Myrrh next
the Bone, and on that your digestive on another dorcel; and over all a large
Restrictive of Bolus verus, Sang. Drac. Mastich, and Oliban. ana parts equal,
alb. Ovor. and acetum vini, q.s. misce, f. Cataplasm. Let it be spread thick on
a double cloth, and applied all about, except on the wound; but on the wound
leave a spare place cut out, that it may be come at to be dressed: Place on this
another bolster wrung out of Acetum, but a spare place likewise in it, that the
wound may be come at; then a soft Rouler to come several turns about it, and
every valve as it comes over the wound cut; not to the sides (because they may
hold fast) but in the middle; on this place a small, but thick bolster on the
wound, that may answer the wanting valves. This done, make the smallest part
equal to the biggest, with soft bolsters; so place thereon broad and hollow
splints opposite to the wound, and on each side it, but not on it; the which
let be decently bound on with Tape from joint to joint, yet not to touch the
Joint so as to hurt it; nor yet so hard as to cause ill accidents to the wound
and fracture. So let his Clothes be put about him, and open a vein in the other
Arm, because of his inward contusion; that it may hinder the coagulation of the
blood. Lay this by the rest for this time, and when you see occasion, give him
of the wound drink as you do the others. You must note, if this had been but a
simple fracture, you must on the single Rouler, and over all have made use of
two Roulers more; the one must have begun with two or three turns about the
fracture, and you must then have rouled upwards, with the valves something
close, to anticipate a defluxion of humors, and the other after two or three
turns about the fracture must have been lead downwards with the valves more
open, and after turned a cross at the lower Joint, and so rouled up again to
the other; there to end; and see the Arm made even with Bolsters, and the
Splints applied, this should not be removed under 6 or 7 days, unless
accidents urged; and if heat or pain should, then it were but undoing it
carefully, and bathing it with warm water; and then aplying an Oxicrocium
Sear-cloth about it, and so roll it up again, and let it remain: But this
Compound Fracture admits of no such rouling; but there must be much more care
and trouble about it.

The next dressing of your Compound wound; which must not be under two (if not
three) days time: You must take off all to the single Rouler, but let it, and
all under it remain longer, (unless some accidents have happened) Take off the
small bolster of the wound, and take out the Dorcels: Let all be done with
great care and gentleness, least you displace what you before reduced. Cleanse
the wound with hot Tincture of Myrrhae, then drop into it hot Balsam of
Terebenth, and apply dorcels into it dipped in the same; on these a bolster, and
so make it up again as it was before. Use this manner of dressing till
accidents, or time cause you to take off the restrictive

When you take it off, bathe it, and stuph it well with your hot Fomentation,
but have a care of displacing the Fracture; then apply an Oxicrocium Plaster
warm all over, only on the wound let it be cut as the restrictive before was;
and this will help on a Callous, and the Bone to cement, and is an approved
thing for Fractures, and very Anodine; then let it be made up in every respect
as it was before, and continue this manner of dressing to the end: And when you
can with safety, you may take off the Sear-cloth from the Shoulder, and bathe
and stuph that well and hot to strengthen it, and so apply another Oxicrocium
Sear-cloth to it again.

Be sure in such cures as these, to keep a cool and open Body, and breathe a
Vein, not only once, but oftener.

CHAP. VII. How to cure a wound of the Head, with a Fracture of the Scul.
ANother comes down with his Head wounded, and Scul fractured, which often
happens in time of Fight, by a small Shot or Splinter: I met with several such
in the last Holland Wars: Some the Cutis Muscula, not only much wounded, but
the Scul fractured, so as the Dura matter has been bare. Others again have had
but a slight wound of the outer part, but the Scul has had a small Fracture or
Fissure; and this latter is worser than the former.

The former you see fairly, and by dilating a little with your Incision Knife
of the Scalp wider than the Wound, you easily take out any loose Splinters that
might prick the Meninges:

But the latter, When you have laid bare the Scul, (the which it is not safe to
neglect, upon the least symptoms) you will scarcely see at this time if there
be a Fracture or no: For indeed some have not immediately their Speech taken
away, nor yet Vomit, nor Bleed at the Ears or Mouth, nor (whilst they are hot)
have such signs of a Fracture as other some have.

However the best way is, If you have but any suspicion, to lay the Bone bare,
and the worst that can fall by that, is but healing it again, if there be not a
Fracture; but if there should be one, the neglect thereof were dangerous.

Shave the Head (at least ways a convenient breadth about the wound) that
nothing may hinder your Applications, but that you may decently dress it:
Whether it is the greater or lesser Fracture, if it has done bleeding, dress
it with hot Tincture of Myrrhae on Dorcels, especially next the bone; but if it
bleeds much, apply on the Dorsel of Tincture your, Restrictive on other
Dorsels, and over all, when you have imbrocated all about with Oil of Roses, or
Hypericon; apply a thick double Bolster, and so make good bandage for the
present, and let him not drink Brandy, nor other liquor that will inflame.

The next dressing, whether it be the first or second day after this, have your
Stuphs ready to wring out of hot Spirit of Wine, and apply them.

You Will find now not only by Symptoms, but you will likewise see (if you look
diligently,) whether there is a Fracture or no; if there be, and the man has
grievous pain of his Head, and redness of Eyes, Vomits, spits Blood, it is a
sign that the brain is concussed, and the contused blood would have vent, and
has not by reason of the smallness of the Fracture.

To do this;

Having with your Sculpra removed the Pericranium clearly, apply the Traphine,
Let it be, (if it can) something beneath the Fracture, that the blood may be
better evacuated.

When you are through the first Table, take out your Pin, and then work gently
through the second; but with a steady hand, and great care, lest the teeth of
the Traphine should tear the Dura Matter. When you are almost through, try if
the small piece in the hallow of the Traphine be loose, if it is, then the
Teeth are just through: Now have a care of the Meninges, and take out the
piece; but mind that you apply not your Traphine on the temporal Bones,
Sutures, or Sinciput; and with your Lenticula smooth the Perforation, and when
with fine Lint or Tow you have cleansed the work, place a smooth lawn
Cylendula, dipped in warm Tincture of Myrrh between the Dura Matter, and the other
applications. Or this, Let small fine Dorcels be dipped in the same Tincture, and
applied, filling the wound of the Bone therewith. But to the rest of the wound
on that, Balsamum Terebinthinae is the fittest Medicine, let it be applied warm
on Dorsels, and on it, and over all the head, when it has been imbrocated with
warm Oil of Roses, or Hypericon, let a Plaster of Paracelsus, or Betonica be
warm applied, then clap a good double Bolster over the wound, with a plate, or
broad piece of silver in it, to hinder that the Dura Matter swell not out of the
Scull, (for it will be apt to Tumifie:) Let there be a warm double cloth about
all the head, and with a double head rouler make smooth and decent head
rouling; and let him be laid as free from noise as possible, which is very hard
to do in a ship. The same manner of dressing, (the Traphine only excepted) is
to be used in the greater fracture: If there be some asperities and unevenness
in the edges of the bone, be cautious how you use your capital Instrument (as
Raspitory, File, Saw, or the like) with them, and great care you may do good;
but with this method of dressing, as I directed, you will find the bone to
exfoliate it self to your satisfaction in a little time.

When the Brain and Meninges are well, and the fissure Cements with a Callous,
and the perforation, or great Fracture do heal up with a substance, then you
may leave off the Cylendula, and after washing the Wound with your Tincture,
apply the Balsam only into it, or at least Liniment arcei, and so the rest as
before: But mind in this, and all such wounds to open a Vein often, and keep
the Body open by Clysters, and let your wound drink be given him; either of the
three Medicines in the last Chap. or Pulv. ad Casum: i ss. at a time in Beer,
Ale, or Wine, either alone, or mixed with Sir. Myrtles, causing the Patient to
sweat upon it.

CHAP. VIII. How to Cure Wounds of the Abdomen and Ruptures.
ANother by a Splinter has the rim of his belly dilacerated, insomuch as that
the Omentum appears, and the wound is large. This is a dangerous Wound also:
Here you must immediately make firm stitching, (and the same you must do if it
were any deep incised Wound.) Let it be with a delicate slender Needle, not too
burly, armed with strong double silk, drawn through your Paracelsus, or other
plaster, as if it were Wax. Let not your stitches be too close, but that there
may be room for the blood or matter to come forth, especially in the depending
part: This done, foment it hot with common Spirit of Wine, and then having some
of your Restrictive mixed with Oil of Mirtles, apply it on a double cloth, and
so make good rouling, giving him a Cordial, and lay him for present by the
others; and see you give him of the Vulnerary drink, either of the Symphitum;
or Aristolach, or Pulvis ad Casum mentioned in the last Chapter; and now if
Liquor Salis gemae, gut. iij. or iiij. be added in the drink, it will be much
the better; for it is a great secret in wounds and Ruptures of the Belly. When
you dress it again, be sure you bathe and stuph it well and hot; first with
your fomentation, and then with Liquor seu Balsamum saelis gemae, and Tincture
of Myrrh. Now to digest this wound, as also to heal and preserve it from
gangrene, use Balsamum Vulnerarium Salmonis; (or Balsammae, with oil of Wax:)
or Balsamum Hispanicum; let it be laid on thick, and hot on Dorcels; and let
Emplastrum diasulphuris rulandi, or Paracelsus, or ad herniam Schrod. be
applied hot and large over it, to comfort the whole Abdomen; and all the
dressings following stuph it well with hot Tincture of Myrrh, for that is a
sovereign Medicine. See that his body is kept soluble with Clysters of decoct
Com. pro Clyst. Cum Electo Len. and let him blood, if any thing of a Fever
appears.

Were there a Rupture without a Wound by lifting of a Gun, or other weight:
Then the place ought to be stuffed well with your vulnerary fomentation, and then
with Balsamum salis Gemae, then Emplastrum ad herniam Schroderi malax'd with a
little oil of Wax, and so good bolster and rouling

If the Caul should fall into the Scrotum, together with this, there should be
a Truss, which together with the Rupture drink of Sang. Symp. j and iij or iiij
drops of Liquor salis Gemae, in Ale, or Wine, or the others.

CHAP. IX. How to Cure a penetrating Wound of the Breast, and Ribbs, or Back.
ANother in bording of the Enemy has a Pike run in at his Breast, and goes
slanting among his Ribs, but misseth the Vitals: This is another dangerous
wound.

First give the man a Cordial to revive his Spirits; then having searched
gently which way the wound goes, dip a small tent in Aqua stiptica Vitrioli,
and the glare of an Egg beaten together, this will stop the bleeding
powerfully: Have great care lest your Tent should touch the Vitals, and let it
be but slender, a bolster squeezed out of the same Liquor, and applied: This
wound must be kept open by all means, otherwise it will quickly heal outwardly,
and there will be an Empyema inwardly; and when you dress it next, wash it with
Tincture of Myrrhae, and quint. aristoloch. fabri, with a Syringe, but let the
Patient be placed so, as the wound may be lowest, that what is syringed into
it; as also the matter may come forth of it, and let him lie so in his Cabin
or Cradle. Let the Tents be armed with Balsum Vulnerum salmon, anoint all the
region of the breast, with oil of hypericon, and apply all over a good warm
Emplaster of Paracelsi: This is the right way to digest and heal this kind of
wound; but mind if it runs much matter, and yet offers to heal too fast
outwardly: Then keep it open whatever you do, until the bottom is first well
healed. Here the wound drink must be observed, Clysters likewise, and
Phlebotomy, for in all penetrating Wounds and bruises, I expect the inward
vulneraries to do as much toward the cure, as the external applications.

CHAP. X. How to Cure a Wound by a small shot, through a Fleshie, or Musculous
part.
IF the Bullet is not through, yet almost through, you are taught how to cut it
out in the Fifth Chapter, or else how to extract it. This I look upon as an
ordinary Wound, although never so deep: I Will imagine the shot went in through
the thick of the Thigh, a little below the Groyne, and out (or cut out) in the
hinder part of the hip. You are first to stop the Blood, Take a cupple of Tents
dipped in Aqua stiptica, and then rouled in your restringent Powder, and put one
in at the one Orifice, and the other at the other; and let them be so long, as
almost to meet, but not quite; and if but one Tent, let it not be so long as
the wound is deep, and as the wound heals, make your Tent shorter by degrees,
and apply about the Thigh your Restrictive Communis, mentioned in the Fifth
Chapter, or Diapalma Malaxed, with oil of Roses. When you dress this wound
next, use your Common Digestive, or your Tents; only stuph it well with your
fomentation, and let Tinctura Myrrhae be your lotion, which inject with your
Syringe. When there is good Digestion, then Basilicon minus for a while on yo r
Tents, and at last Linimentum arcei, making your Tents shorter and shorter as
the wound heals: You will know how it incarns by a reddish speck, which you
will see on the end of your Tent when you take it out, and on all the rest of
the Tent pure quitter. If this man be feverish, you may open a Vein in the
time of his cure; and if costive, give him Clysters; and to facilitate his
Cure, let him have of the wound Drink.

CHAP. XI. How to Cure a Wound of the Fleshy Parts, with loss of substance.
NOW I Will suppose a Man has a great part of the Galf of his Leg carried away by
a great shot. Here first you take thick Dorsels or Pledgits, and squeeze them
out of aqua stiptica vitrioli, then arm them either with your restrictive ready
mixed, or with restringent powder alone; You apply these, and good Bolster and
Rouler at present, laying him with the part higher than the Body.

Next dressing it will not be proper to use the hot Fomentation, for it is like
there is an aptness to bleed: But let your common digestive be applied, and a
defensive, of Diach. Sym. and Ol. Ros. all about and above the wound. When you
have the blood securely stopped, let Tincture de Myrhae be your Lotion, and the
next dressing your Fomentation must be applied hot, to recall the Spirits back,
for it is much if you do not see a miss of them.

If either the shot has grazed on the bone, or the flesh is so carried away
that the bone is seen; let Unguent Terebinth. be applied next it, but to the
rest (when it is well digested) Basilicon; and when you would have it incarn
faster, Diapompholigos mixed; or Balsamum Vulnerarium, which is excellent.

If spungious flesh arise, you may correct it with Merc. praecipitatum, or
Alumen Vstivum, or wash the wound with Liquor Salutis, or Liquor Vulnerarius
Schroderi, mixed with a sufficient quantity of Spiritus vini vitriolati, will
make firm and speedy healing. Let both Clysters, wound drink, and Phlebotomy be
minded here likewise, and then the wound will heal more speedily and kindly.

You are taught in the Chapter of an Amputated Wound, how to bring it to a
Cicatrize.

CHAP. XII. How to Cure a deep incised Wound.
ADmit a man has got a great cut on the Face with a Back-sword or Cutlis, so
that the fleshy part of his Cheek hangs down; you are immediately to stitch
this wound, and being it is in the Face, close the Lips of it very even: Let
your Needle be fine and slender, that there may not be an ugly scar afterward.

The best thing to lay first to this wound when it is stitcht, is Pulvis
Thuraloes cum Pilis Leporinis, minutissimum incisorum mixed with the glare of an
egg, and applied on fine Lint or Towe, let it stick on till it comes off it
self: But if it has done bleeding, wash it well with Wine, or Spirit of Wine,
and apply Balsamum Hispanicum fabricii, or that of Dr. Salmons, and lay a
Paracelsus Plaster over all, and a good Bolster, and so roll it up decently.
This latter will go nigh to heal the wound at a dressing by agglutination.

CHAP. XIII.. How to Cure great and deep Contusions, or Bruises, without, any
eminent Wound, and sprains of the Joints.
IF a Man has got a bruise, and it is but superficial, whether of the Limbs or
any other part, it is cured by embrocating hot, and often with Oil of Hypericon,
and applying a Paracelsus, or Opodeldoch Plaster. But if it is deep, and the
Vessels distorted, and the Muscles bruised and writhen, so that there is blood
lying deep between the Muscles it is dangerous.

I saw such a thing before Tripoly in Barbary, when we had wars with that
place. A Ship coming to an Anchor, and the Cable running out, a Kink therein
happened to disaster a Man's Leg, in this manner: The Chyrurgion Embrocated it
with good Oils, and applied good Emplasters to it, but for all that the blood
that was forced out of the Vessels lay deep, and it could not be discussed, but
waxed worse, and in four days time Gangrened; the Chyrurgion seeing that, sent
for other Chyrurgions (and me among the rest) on board, but whilst we were
making ready to amputate it, the Man dyed. In such a case as this, let blood as
soon as you have Embrocated it with hot Oil of Hypericon, and applied your
Emplaster, both about the contused Muscles, and likewise about the distorted or
sprained Joint, and be sure that you make plentiful Phlebotomy, for that will
be a great help; and let the wound-drink be drank plentifully, and that is
another good help. Bathe and stuff the part well and hot (likewise) with
spiritus vini communis, let this be done often, and let your hot Oil and
Emplaster be not only once a day (as is usual) but if you mean to save a man's
Life or Limb, let them be often applied.

If you find for all this, that the pain increases, and the Tumor likewise,
then endeavor to bring it to maturation as soon as possible, for if you cannot
do this, there will be a Gangrene, (especially if it be sultry Weather, as I
remember was then at Tripoly.) Now use no repellents, nor any thing to cool
inflammation, but apply this maturative Cataplasm following, Unguent. Basilic.
Major. de Muslagin. Empl. melilot symp. q. s. misce. fiat Cataplasma.

There is no Cataplasm whatever more excellent than this to bring any manner of
Tumor to digestion; besides, it is made in an instant. Continue the repeating
of this hot Cataplasm, till you see the Tumor rise fairly for a head; and when
you see its ready, stay not for its breaking, but open it by incision, in the
depending part to let out the abundance of goary matter, that it foul not the
Bone, or a Gangrene sieze inwardly. When it has run well, cleanse it with that
excellent Lotion, Spiritus vini vitriolati. Or if it putrified about the Bone,
Tincture of Myrrh syring'd into it is excellent. And on your Dorcels or Tents,
Balsamum vulnerarium Salmonis is now very proper; and over all a diach.
plaster or deminum malax'd with Oil of Roses is now of good use. But let the
spreined joint be still embrocated with Oleum excestrense, or Hypericon, and an
Oxicrocium Seercloth applied warm about it.

CHAP. XIV. How to Cure a Gangrene.
BUT if for all this it would not digest, but a Gangren happens, then
immediately make deep scarification all over; (only have a care of the Nerves)
and let out the clotted Blood in abundance.

Then foment it with a strong Lixivium, made of Wood ashes, in which decoct
your Fomentation herbs, then add a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine, and
as much Sal armoniacum, and common Salt, as will make it as strong as pickle.

Foment with this hot and long, which will get out the Blood, and prepare for
the other Medicines.

Lixivium Capitalis, and spiritus vitrioli seu sulphuris. Heat them, and with
your armed probe, dipped in them, touch the scarifications to the very bottom.
And be sure you have scarified as far as the part is Gangrened. And over this
apply Pledgets armed with hot Egyptiacum, and Spirit of Wine, and Ol. Guaiac.
misce, and so do it up. This will make him feel if he has any feeling in it,
and you need dress thus but once, for it will cause a thick and deep Esker or
hard Scurff; and stop the proceeding of the Gangrene. And give him inwardly
such Medicines as will conduce to stop a Gangrene, and oppose all Venom or
Poison that may infect the Blood.

Thriac Land. nov. ij in a Glass of Wine, and let him sweat upon it is
excellent. Nothing is more powerful in this Case than this is.

Next dressing, let your hot Lixivium still be applied; and apply on your
Pledgets only hot Basilicon, to soften and get of the Esker, at two or three
dressings you will see it to digest, and the dead to separate from the quick. And
let not Phlebotomy be wanting, nor Clysters if you see occasion. It would scare
a man to see what an ugly black scurff is on it, but by thus dressing of it,
you will see it first part or open a little about the sides between the dead
part and the living; and at last come all off together with digestion under it.
Then Aqua Phagadenica is an excellent Lotion. And Liquor Salutis, or
Vulnerarium Scroderi; with oleum Guaicum, and spirit of Wine applied hot on
Dorcels will heal it to admiration. But if it is turned to a Sphasulus, nothing
stops it but Amputation.

CHAP. XV. How to Cure Burns or Scalds.
IT falls out often that either by a Cartridge of powder or otherwise, men are
in a Fight lamentably burned. I have known some so burned that the very Nerves
and Tendons have shrunk; causing great Inflammations, Fevers and other grievous
Symptoms. For whatever part of the Body that happens unto, it dryes up the
moisture of that part. Causing (if the burn be great) an Escar with intolerable
pain.

You have at present a twofold scope to endeavor, that is, to fetch out the
burning, and ease the pain.

First anoint him all over where the burning is, with Alb ovor. and Oil of
Roses and Lini, beaten together.

Then on soft Cloth spread unguent. and alb. populion; misce.

Let it be thick spread and often dressed, for this is a sore that will soon
dry up the Humidity of the Medicines, and if Blisters arise, cut them, that the
hot and scalding water may not ulcerate deeper under them. Let this kind of
dressing be used till the fire's out, but as soon as you perceive the heat to
mitigate, have a care how you apply too cooling things to it any longer, for
fear of a Gangrene, but now endeavor digestion.

Unguent. Basilicon Minus either alone, or mixed with Balsamum Balsaminae is
the fittest Medicine.

Be sure here to mind the man's body, for heat will make him Costive; give him
Clysters, and let him blood (if the burn be deep) for he will be Feverish. When
you see it digests, then Oleum Cerae, Lini, and ex vitel, ovor. misce; are an
excellent Balsam.

Or Balsamum Balsaminae and spirit Guaiac. misce, will infallibly cure although
the Nerves are contracted. If the face be burned, pick out the Corns of powder
with your Needle, some each dress^ng. And mind this, that in these burnt
Ulcers, you bind not too hard, but let things lie easy on, and when you
anoint, let it be with a Feather.

CHAP. XVI. How to Cure a violent Bleeding at Nose.
IT comes often that men are taken with a violent bleeding at Nose. Diverse ways
men have used to stop it, and that which has stopped one man's bleeding has not
stopped another. Some apply wet Clothes dipped in acetum to the Privities, others
make Ligature about the Joints; some apply cold Iron to the neck, and others
stop the Nose with restringent Dorcels.

Now the Veins are eroded within the Os Cribratum, so that your Tent will not
come to touch the place, and the other means do often fail. When you have
filled his Nostril with the Dorcel, the blood comes into the Mouth through the
infundibulum, insomuch as he will spit it out at the Mouth.

Now your way is, to let the Patient forcibly snuff up his Nostril, Aqua
stiptica Vitrioli, and by that it will go to the eroded place. Let him do this
often, then put up a Dorcel dipped in the same; not too hard, to fill up the
Nostril, but wet so as he may snuff the water at the end of the dorcel, and so
let the dorcel stay there. And in the mean time, let him blood to make
revulsion, and by this means it will stop. But for the better security, let him
drink this following; Aqua Papaveris. sir. mirtinorum ana ij, aqua stiptica
Vitrioli gut. xx. Tinctura papaveris and Hyosciami, balsam. Phylosophorum, ana
gut. vj. fiat potus.

Any one of these aforementioned Medicines (especially the aqua stiptica vitrioli)
in Poppy-water is very powerful of it self to stop the bleeding, (if you have
not them all) you may give of it per se to xxx drops.

A Bolus of Thriac Land. Nova j with Sanguis symphiti j, is likewise approved.
Some apply this acollemata to the Frons and Temples.

Bol ver. sang. drac. Calx, thus, Mastich ana parts equal, decoct them. Then
add farina Ovab. q. s. to make it into a Catap. in fine beat Vitel Ov. Cum Ol.
myrtinor. misce. Spread this thick and apply it, it powerfully stops blood not
only at Nose, but likewise any other part; and dissolves blood and dryes it up,
that is gathered into any part by a Fall or Bruise.

CHAP. XVII. How to Cure a Rheumatisme.
THis Distemper called a Rheumatisme, I have often observed Seamen to be
afflicted with in ships that I have been in: It Is like the Gout, but not the
Gout; it siezeth about the Joints of the Feet, or Hands, or both; and if a
flatulent vapor be stird up with it, it shifts out of one joint to another,
and is called the running Gout: There is sometimes a light readness, with small
Tumor, and swollen Veins about the Joints that it siezeth.

He that has it, has lamentable pain and misery, especially in the night. It
never is seen to break, (although I believe by ill handling it would) for I saw
the Gout broke under a Gentleman's foot by the application of Cataplasms; and
together with the virulent matter, there came forth like white seeds in
abundance, harder than the matter; by which a man may see what a prodigious
humor the Gout is of.

I could never find that Purging, or Sweating would do any good in this
disease, but rather exasperate it; and drinking of Wine is an Enemy to it; for
most of them that I have seen have it, have got it by drinking over much raw
Wine, and then lying down in the cold to sleep, whence the Humors plethorick
have not had that expiration through the pores of the skin as they should, and
the humors could not receive the third concoction for want of heat; so Nature
expels the raw humor to the outward or extreme parts: And at the Joints the
Crude humors make a stop, and the blood makes not so good a circulation as it
should: This then is a Rheumatisme.

Now bleeding is the principal remedy in this grief, not only once but often,
and a good large quantity at a time. The best of Oils or Ointments, whether
hot or cold, I could never find to do any good; and Emplasters have signified
as much as nothing. Bathe the part well with Liquor antipodagricus Minsichti,
or aqu. Arthritica Quercitani: Then embrocate it with the quintissence of
Colocynthidos fabri, and Antimony. I say, with the often bathing and chasing in
of these Medicines, and frequent use of Phlebotomy; and when pain is
insufferable, taking inwardly five or six grains of that excellent Nepenthae.

Quintessentia Papaveris and Hyosciami, in a little Ale, or common Water. There
will be present ease, and speedy cure; so if a man has a fit of the Gout or
Sciatica on board, although he does not expect you to cure him, yet he would be
glad of ease if you can give it him; and you have no better way than this to do
it.

CHAP. XVIII. How to Cure settled Pains in any part, Old Aches from former
Bruises, Cramp, stifness of Sinews and Cricks in the Back, numbness of the
Limbs and Joints.
MEn often at Sea complain to you of these things, especially in cold Climates,
and against bad Weather, and will ask you for something of an Oil or Sear-cloth
to ease them.

If it be Cold, Cramp, Numbness, sweat them well, with Methridate, or Venus
Treacle: Then foment the grieved part with hot Spiritus vini Communis, and Oil
of Sulphur; for these will certainly give relief. If it be a Crick in the back,
or old bruises, after this, embrocate well with Oleum excestrence, or
Lumbricorum, and then Emplastrum de galbano Crocato laid warm on, is the best
means that can be used; and for stiffness of the sinews, Oleum Vulpinum, or
Unguent Martiatum, have not their fellows: Or, that Liquor Antipodagricus
bathed on any part, or for any pain hot, and a stuph wrung out of it laid often
on, assuredly does your work.

CHAP. XIX. How to Cure the Squinzie.
SEamen are afflicted with this Disease as well as those at Land; it is an
inflammation of the Muscles of the Throat, with Tumor both outward and inward:
It Is a distemper of Plethory, and suffocates a man in a little time, if not
remedied. Here bleeding is immediately required, first under the Tongue, then
in the Jugulers or Arm, and let it be frequently celebrated, and a considerable
quantity; for this is a main thing in this Cure. Together with bleeding, either
keep the Body open with Clysters: As,

The Common Decoction, and Lenitivum, or Tinctura solutiva j inwardly, which is
an excellent Medicine for that purpose.

Externally bathe it well with acetum vini albi, wherein Sal prunellae,
salarmoniacum, Alumen Crudum are dissolved, and some drops of Oil of Sulphur,
or Vitriol are mixed: Add to some of this Syrrup Diamoron, and gargle it in the
mouth often, and it will abate the inward Tumor and Inflammation of the
Tonseils and Throat, then apply Emplastrum Hyrundinis to the outward Tumor:
It Is this, Nido Hirund, alb. Graecum ana j. figgs, dates, ana No 3. flor Chamo.
pulv. Lini, and fenug. ana vj. decoct in aqu. Com. then add Unguent. dealthea
ij. Oil violar. j. Croc. Angl. j. Vitel Ov. No 1. f. Cataplasma

This, with the Gargarisme, and Lotion, and Phlebotomy, cures the greatest
Squinzy.

CHAP. XX. To Cure the Relaxation of the Vvula's and Amygdalas.
SOmetimes by cold men have their Almonds of the Ears down, and their
Collumella relaxed by a moist Rhume distilling on them from the Brain. The best
way to cure this, is to sweat the man well, to dry up that Rheum that
descends: A dram or two of Lon. Treacle in a glass of Wine is a good Medicine,
and let him wrap his Stockins about his neck, and keep his head warm, and sweat
when he is turned in. Some blow restringent powder upon the Uvula, with their
Uvula Spoon; others dip their wet Thumb in powder of Pepper, and stroke on
them; but the best way is to make a Gargle, with lign. Guaic. in pure white
Wine, and gargle often with it; and put some Spirit of Guaicum in your Uvula
Spoon, and blow it forcibly on the Amygdals and Uvula, for these will
powerfully dry and constringe: When this is done, then stroaking them up gently
with the hands outwardly, is very serviceable. If any bone, or other thing
stick in the throat and cannot be extracted with the forceps, it must be thrust
down with your Instrument of Whalebone, with a small pellet of sponge fastened
to the end of it.

CHAP. XXI. To Cure the Toothache.
THE Quintessenses of Cloves and Colocynthis, are great arcanums as to the
Toothache: But Ol. Odontalgicum Salmonis is now found the best of all. A small
Pellit of Lint dipped therein, and put into the Tooth, with your Fleme. It causes
the Rheum to fall away, and the Teeth to leave aching: If it be a cold Rhume,
you would do well to sweat the Man, with Land. Thriac. If hot, a grain of laud
given inwardly, does a great deal of good, and let him lay down his head, but
hollow, and rotten Teeth are best drawn out.

CHAP. XXII. Of Opthalmias, or Suffusions; and Pearls on the Eyes.
AN Opthalmia is a Disease wherein the eyes, either one or both have a Rhume
descended into them of Blood and Choler, whence Pin, Web, Film, or Pearl
generally comes.

There is Liquor Opthalmicus, and Aqua Opthalmica Schroderi, are excellent
Eye-waters. But that Aqua Opthalmica Salmoniana is most approved of now: It
does not only cure all manner of Rheumatick and blood-shot eyes, and dry up
their Sores, but takes off Pearls and Filmes, by washing the Eyes therewith,
It Is good here to let blood, if it be of Plethory, but if of Cacochymia to
purge the head with Pil extractum rudij ss. Some help to divert the rheum by
blisters behind the ears, and in the Neck: Others make a Seaton in the Neck.
Unguentum Tutiae mixed with Diapompholigos, and applied on Linen double clothes
to the Eyes all Night, and washed off in the Morning with white Rose water, does
greatly help to cure the Eyes.

CHAP. XXIII. Deafness, stoppage of the Ears, Pain, and Imposthume.
IF the Deafness be not Natural, but come accidentally, and yet there be no
stoppage by ear-wax, then spirit Otalgicus dropped warm into the Ears morning and
evening, and Muskified Cotton after it, is the best of Remedies: But if the Ear
be stopped with hard wax, then put oil of Camomil into it two or three times a
day, for 2 or 3 days: At last take warm White Wine, and syringe it often and
forcibly into the Ear, and there will come forth a lump of hard Wax out of the
auditory passage; then stop the Ear with the Spiritus Otalgicus, and Muskified
Cotton, as before: If there be an imposthume, then Balsamus Polychrestus
mynsichti, is of excellent use dropped into the Ear, and Cotton after it: giving
inwardly, Antimo. Diaphoreticum cum Tartar, gr. x, or xv, given in Spirit of
Guaicum for three or four days together.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Piles, and Procedentia Any.
THE Piles is a troublesome thing, and painful, so that a man cannot do his
labor but in misery.

It is a benefit of Nature, and is not to be expected to be cured so as never
to return, especially whilst a man is in his man's estate, and full of Blood.

The best way is to make the Body open and laxative, that there may be no
straining with Tinctura solutiva, or Sir. rosarum solu. j or two: After this,
either Vnguentum Hemorhoidalae, or Oleum Scrophulariae, are excellent
Medicines; but Oleum Succinum anointed on never fails, you may mix it with
Oleum Lini. Inwardly xx or xxx drops of Aqua st ptica vitrioli in warm Wine or
Poppy-water is very prevalent. If the Anus be proceeded, bathe it with warm
Wine, then strew flower of Mastick on it, and return it, and bind it so as it
may take a habit to stay up.

CHAP. XXV. For Boyles and Felons.
TO ripen these Boyles and Felons, apply this Cataplasme.

Unguent. Basilici majoris and Valentiae Scabiosae, e Mucilaginibus Emplast.
Melilot. simplex. q. s. f. Cataplasma. Apply this warm and often, till it is
ready, then stay not its breaking, but open it: Cleanse it with Liquor
Vulnerarius schroderi and Spiritus vini vitriolati, Ana. part. equal. This will
not only mundifie, but applied warm on Dorcels, heals it to admiration. You may
at last use Balsamum Tereb. Simp. and about it a Diachalon cum Gum. plaster.

Note, That if it should be a Pestilential Carbuncle, then add to the
Cataplasma, Emplast. Magneticum Hartmanni; for then it will not only ripen it)
but powerfully draw out the Venom, and Elixir Pestilentiale Crollij ss. in the
morning fasting.

CHAP. XXVI. A Phlegmonous Tumor.
SOmetimes from Plethory there arises a Sanguine Tumor in some part.

If it be in the emunctory, or any part where Nature is designed to exonerate
it self of its too great a quantity of Blood; apply no repellents, only let
blood plentifully at first, and apply a discussive and emollient Cataplasme.

As Emplast. Emolliens and Vngu^n^. de althaea q. s. fiat Cataplasma. The
Emollient Emplaster is thus made, Oxicroc. ij. diach. simp. and Composit and
Melilot. an. j. cum Ol. Camom. Misce.

If you see it inclines to suppuration, and will out, your way is to apply a
supperating Cataplasm as this: Unguent. Basil. majoris, unguent. Scabiosae
valentiae, e Mucilaginibus, and Melilot, Symp. and Comp. f. Cataplasma.

This will bring it to speedy suppuration, being applied very warm and often.

When it has run well, absterge and heal it with Spirit. Vini Vitriolati; for
that applied hot either with Syringe, or on Pledgits or Dorcels, certainly
heals it from the bottom: or Balsum Tereb. simplex, and all over let be an
Emplaster of Diachalon Magnum.

If there is any thing of malignancy in the Tumor, then mix your maturative
with Emplast. Magneticum Hartmanni; as in the last Chap. and inwardly give him
of Elixir Pestilentiale Crollij s. in the morning fasting.

CHAP. XXVII. Of an Erysipelas and Choleric pushes.
SOmetimes there are sudden inflations, bubling Choleric pushes, and
erisipelas Ulcers, as Ignis sacer, or Wildfire, a sharp inflammation; here
Oleum Rosaceum Omphacinum, is of excellent use; more especially if Liquor
Tutiae Mynsichti be first bathed well on the place; and if the Choleric Ulcers
are yet more deep, mix with your Omph. ros. Oleum unguent diapompholigos, and
apply it: Let Blood, and purge Choler: As, Sir. ros. solut. j. quintessentia
Coloc. j. give it in any proper vehicle.

It Is an excellent purpose to the intention, and so is Cariostinum Electu. s.
in the morning fasting.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Phlegmatic Tumors and Ulcers.
A Phlegmatic Tumor is long arising, and not very painful: such are Struma's
and Scrophula's: in the Limbs it pitts. First purge Phlegm and watery humors:
As, Quintessentia Turpethum j. Tinctura salis Tartari gr. x. Magisterium salis
gr. viij. Mix these in Rhenish Wine, or Sack, and let him drink it in the
morning fasting, not only once but often.

Let his Drink be as follows: Sarsaper. Guaic. an. viij. Gum. Guaic. j. Succ.
Liquoriciae iiij. Rectified Spirit of Wine lb viij, mix, digest twenty days,
decant and keep it for use.

Let him drink of this two spoonfuls in a glass of Wine at night when he turns
in, and a spoonful at other times; this is the best drying diet Drink in the
World; not only for this, but the Pox, or Plague, or Scurvy. It Is called Liquor
alexipharmicus seu scorbuticus.

To the part it self apply a hot fomentation or Lixivium; strong Spirit of Wine
applied on with warm stuphs is excellent: Then, Emplast. de galbano Crocato and
ad Tophos, ana part. equal.

To make it into a Cataplasmick consistence add unguent* de althaea. It Is the
most excellent as yet known for this purpose.

If it was an Ulcer before you saw it, together with these means, apply into
the Ulcer, Liquor. vulnerarium schroderi, or Liquor. Salutis.

Let the Ulcers be well washed with these, or either of them; either by
Syringe, or otherwise: Then arm your Dorsels or Tents with Balsam. Vulner.
Salmon. and dip them in one of these Liquors, and put them in hot, and on them
the abovenamed Emplaister, and so make decent rouling, which last is a great
help in the Cure of these Ulcers.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Cancers, Schirrhous Tumors, Phagadenick Ulcers and Fistulaes.
HEre you must use the same diet drink as in the former Chapter. And either to
dissolve or ripen these Tumors; to the other Emplasters there mentioned, add,
Emplastrum schirrhosum Salmonis.

Then have you the best resolvent or maturative of malignant and rebellious
Tumors that ever was invented. And if they be Ulcers, Aqua Phagadaenica,
either of it self, or mixed with Spiritus Vini, is the chiefest Medicine to
bathe and stuff the Ulcers with. Then Balsamum Vulnerarium Salmon. with
Quintessence of Cloves applied hot on Dorsels, with the Emplaister over it, is
a powerful Medicine. If the bone be foul, you have Pulvis Turbith. miner. to
apply next it to scale it. But you must purge this sullen humor out of the
Body, or never expect the Tumors or Ulcers to heal.

To do this, there is no nobler a Medicine under the Sun than, Panchymagogum
Mineralae Quercitani gr. x. in pil ex duobus gr. x. misce fiant pil.

Give this every other Morning fasting, till the body be rectified of this
stubborn and poisonous humor, for this will powerfully bring forth all vicious
and poisonous humors: But if he cannot take Pills, let a spoonful or two of
decoctum Colocynthidos Salmonis in a glass of wine, every other morning, be the
medicine, and look after him as is requisite in Purges.

You must also see to oppose powerfully all venomous quality of the humors,
and besides the dyet-drink give sometimes this, Either Thriac. Land. nova i, or
Bezoarticum solare Comp. Salmon. gr. viij in a glass of Sack, and let him sweat
upon it.

Cancers are usually extirpated, and then the place brought to digestion and
healed.

You extirpate a Cancer with your Catling, but if a Finger or Toe, you
extirpate it with your Chizel and Mallet.

CHAP. XXX. Of Gravel and Strangury.
SOmetimes Men happen to be cruelly tormented with this disease at Sea, and
although they do not expect you perfectly to cure it, yet they would be glad of
a little ease, and it would make any man pity them to see them so excruciated.
If it be about the Reins, then do this, Sal vitriolium emeticum ss Spiritum
Salis gut. xx in a glass of White Wind or Rhenish. this certainly removes and
dissolves it. If in the neck of the bladder, then, Spiritum Nephriticum,
Clossei gut. viij or x in syrup of Marsh-Mallowes, and aqua persicaria. This if
you can have it is insuperable, in forcing away the Gravel and Urine, but if
you have it not, then Aqua Comminuens Calculum Horstii ij, or ts at a time. is
excellent as to the intention.

If a large Gravel-stone stick in the Yard, force it back with your Catheter.
If in the fit of the Strangury, you give something to make the Body soluble,
and carry away the hard feces, that oppress the neck of the bladder, you will
do well; as thus, Tincturam solutivam i Elix. Juniperi, a spoonful in a glass
of Malago.

And in the extremity of misery, that worthy Anodine, Ens veneris gr. x drank
in a glass of Canary, when the man turns in, does not only give immediate ease
and comfort, but likewise dissolves the Tartarous Muscleage, or concreted
substance.

CHAP. XXXI. How to Cure a Clap.
THere is yet another Distemper which Seamen meet sometimes with by going a
shore, and that is a Clap. Now for as much as this is not got by the Ships
work, so it is not cured on the Ships account, but the Man pays you for it: But
it is a Chyrurgical Cure, and you are desired by the Man to cure him.

We commonly call that a Clap (and not the Pox, although a chip of the same
block) when the venomous humor lies about the Genitals or Seed-Vessels, and
has not yet infected the mass of blood, nor got into the bones.

A Clap appears either in a Gonorrhea, Tumor of the Yard, Shankers, pricking
in the Urinary passage, or Bubo in the Groin. Whatever way it appears, bleed
not at all, for that were the way to bring it into the body.

The first thing you must do is to purge out the Poisonous Vapor. The
accustomary way, and indeed a very good way is this, Pil rudii j resina Jalupi
and Calomelos ana gr. x f. pilulae,

If he cannot take Pills then, Electu. pro morb. Gal. Salmon. ij.

Or if a Bolus will not down with him, then, Decoctum Colocynthidos Salmon. two
spoonfuls in a glass of Wine.

If he can take any of these, you may interchange them, as you see fit, because
the too often taking of the same thing cloys the patient.

They must be taken in the Morning fasting, and he must be ordered as to purge;
when he has purged sufficiently, for four or five days, the running will cease;
only some small gleeting it is possible will remain. To Cure which, Tereb. Cypr.
j open it with the Vitel. ovorum, mix it with aqua plantag. strain it, and let
him drink it every night for three or four times. Or,

Icthyocolla decocted, either in water if you are on board, or in Milk if a
shore, an Ounce at a time, and drank whilst it is warm.

Either of these will effectually stop the gleeting.

If there is a pricking in the Yard when the Man makes water: Inject Troches
alba enassis mixed in aqua plantag.: And if little Ulcers, Shankers, Pustules,
etc. be on the Glans, or between that and the prepuce, touch them with Flor.
Egyptiac. or sometimes album Camphoratum will do; But if the Yard is so sweld
that you cannot get at these Shankers, then apply a warm Plaster of Paracelsus
malaxt with unguent de Althea, and that will discuss and resolve it: But if a
Tumor arise in the Groin, purge not by any means, but let the Patient take
this drink following to help to drive out the venomous humor, which nature is
heaving at; and to hinder a farther progress of infection.

Liquor. alexipharmicum seu scorbuticum, sarsa. Guaic. ana viij, Gum. Guaic. j,
Suc. Liquor. iiij, Spirit. Vini rectif. lb viij, mix, digest twenty days,
decant and keep it for use. Let him take two spoonfuls of this in small Ale or
Beer, every morning and night, and one spoonful in each draught he drinks at
any time; and to the Bubo apply this Maturative Cataplasm following to bring it
to a head; (seek not to repel it by any means).

Vng. Basil. maj. valentiae scabiosae, e mucilaginibus, Melilot Comp. Empl.
scirrhosum Salmonis, q. s. f. Cataplasma. This is the best that can be named to
ripen a malignant Bubo or Carbonel; when it is ready stay not its breaking, but
open it, and let it run well; when it has run sufficiently then fall to
purging, as you were taught before, to carry away the relics of the poisonous
humor, then cleanse the Ulcer with aqua phagad* and spirit of Wine, and heal
it with Balsamum Vulnerarium Salmonis, or Essentia Sulphuris, on Dorsels or
soft Tents; and Emplastrum Diach. cum Gum. over all; which method certainly
cures the sevearest of Claps.

CHAP. XXXII. How to Cure a confirmed Pox.
NOW we call this Morbus Venereus, a confirmed Pox, when it has passed the
Liver, and is got into the blood, and that the spots and pustules appear, and
nodes and night pains are felt.

Here the same dyet-drink must be kept to as in the former Chapter, for there
is no better in the World; the same purging likewise must be used as in a Clap:
Purge six or seven days first, and then desist; and sweat two or three days,
and so to purging again: When you would sweat, to some of your dyet-drink add a
spoonful of Spir. Guaic. and make him sweat powerfully, for by this way of
purging and sweating we usually Cure the Pox at Sea.

If there remain the Relics of an old Pox, you have no better way than to
give him Aurum vitae senerti gr. viij, in Pil ex duobus gr. xij, misce.

Let him have this dose every other day, for some time together; and when you
would have him sweat, give him the same dose of the aurum vitae, with Tinctura
Gumi Guaici two spoonfuls in a glass of Rhenish. So this unparalleld Medicine
of it self, by continuing of it thus, will do your work without Fluxing.

THE Third BOOK, Teaches how the Sea-Chirurgeon ought to Execute the Physical
Office imposed on him at Sea.
IT IS so that the Sea-Chirurgion must do the part of a Physician at Sea, and if
he is not capable of that, he is not fit to take charge at Sea; indeed it is to
his cost, for whereas he spends one Crown in his Chyrurgical employ, he shall
spend three in the Physical, (unless he has better luck then I have had).

But since it is so, I Will teach you how to Cure those inward diseases that are
most incident to the Sea, and first I Will begin with the Scurvy.

CHAP. I. Of the Scurvy.
THE Scurvy all men know is a distemper that Seamen are much troubled withal.
It proceeds from putrefaction of the blood, and that from Obstructions, and
those from a corrupt Aliment, or (sometimes) from over full diet, of Flesh or
Fish, and especially when there wants the succulency of fresh Vegetables, as on
shore, for in those Countries where they drink Wine, and eat green Fruit, as
Lemons, Apples, or Roots and Herbs, as Salads, together with their Meat, such
are seldom or never troubled with the Scurvy: Nor our Men neither when we come
in them Countries where those things can be got; but otherwise we are seldom
free of it. This I have experienced, when we have gone a Newfound Land and
Straits Voyage.

And to this we may add difference of Climates, for in Newfound Land,
(although they have had fresh Fish, and other diet) I have known our people
have the Scurvy lamentably, both in the Country and especially after our
departure from thence, between that and the Straits; which when we have arrived
in Spain, and the Combotes have come on board, our men have with Wine and fresh
trade mended presently; This I impute both to the Aliment and Country, for I
have seldom seen the Scurvy got in that Country, or indeed in any part of the
Straits.

It usually appears in spots on the Limbs, and the Legs swell, and pit under
the Finger, with stiffness in the Thighs and Hams, loose Teeth, and rotten
Gums; it is so well known at Sea, that every Sailer that has used the Sea any
time, knows when another has it. But it is Objected against some, that laziness
is the cause of it, and to others, that nastiness brings it on them; but let me
write this word (in vindication of the diseased) that I have known as stout
Seamen, and as stirring, and as neat men as ever crossed over Salt Water,
afflicted sadly with this distemper: Therefore it is not these, but the other
causes that I have named, that brings the Scurvy.

Now as to the Cure, you have heard already what diet and drink they should
have; for with them things that I have named, few Medicines are required for
the Scurvy; but without them, it will puzzle you with all the Medicines in your
Chest to cure it.

I have found it very good to let blood in the beginning of this distemper,
when it comes upon a Plethorick Person, and one that has had a full diet, but
when it has come after a lingering Fever, then not; for very often men have
with it the Jaundice or Dropsy, or both, which Complexed Cacochymia makes it
look like a many headed Hydra, and it will not be cured by only Scorbutic
Medicines, whence we are so often at a loss about it.

If it be the Scurvy only, Electu. scorb. Salmon. ij Calomelos gr. v f. bolus.
give this in the morning fasting. Or, Liquor. scorb. Salmon. two spoonfuls,
spirit salis gut. xx, in a glass of White Wine.

Any of these medicines are well known to be formidable enemies against the
Scurvy: But if it has its rebellious Associates along with it, so that these
medicines are not found capable: If it be Hydropick, then Quintessentia
Turpethum s, Tinct. sal. Tart. j in a glass of Rhenish.

This is a medicine that surpasses all other liquid medicaments in this case;
it purges delicately by stool. Or if the Jaundice, then, Aurum vitae senerti
gr. viij, Elixir purgans Panchymagogum j in a glass of wine. this effectually
Cures, opens Obstructions, and roots out the seeds of stubborn diseases;
working with a great deal of safety and pleasantness, if followed for several
days.

Now when the Scurvy is thus Complicated with these other distempers, there is
usually generated a certain malign or venomous quallity, which is little better
then catching in a Ship; therefore you ought to have an eye to this: So that
now and then s or a j of Quintessentia vitrioli, drank in a glass of Sack, is
the best medicament that the world can afford in this and such like cases. If
you have not this: Theriac. Land. nova j or ij in a glass of Wine is excellent,
and let the man sweat on it. Let him drink half a spoonful of tinctura gumi
Guaic. in all his drink, if it be the moist Scurvy, but if the dry Scurvy, then
Elixir Vitrioli Mynsichti s.

CHAP. II. Of Fluxes.
FLuxes are very frequent at Sea, especially when the victuals grow bad; or
when we come in Countries where we get abundance of bad Wine and beverage, or
are reduced to drink stinking water sometimes; when our English victualling is
done, and we change to some other Country victuals, I have known Fluxes come
all these ways.

Come how they will, our way to Cure them is, first to purge with Rhubarb, and
it is best thus, Rubarb j, Cinnamon j, infuse it all night in Wine, in the
morning strain it, and add to a quarter of a pint thereof Sir. of Myrtles j; f.
potus. let him drink this in the morning fasting.

In this disease let him forbear crude Wine and Fruits; (such as the Scurvy
requires are here Enemies) at night give him a dram of Diascordium when he
goes to try to rest. Next morning have ready a dose of the same infusion of
Rubarb, as before, adding only fresh Cinnamon to it, and this second infusion
has (if not altogether) almost lost its Cathartick quallity, and now is mostly
restrictive. The night following give him a good drink of burnt Wine, with a
branch of Rosemary, and some Cinnamon in it, and sweetened with white Sugar.
This method stops most white Fluxes.

CHAP. III. Of a Dysentery or Bloody Flux.
A Bloody Flux has most frequently the same primary causes as the other,
however there are sharp corroding Chollerick humors, fretting and ulcerating
the Intestines.

It Is requisite here to let blood in the first place; I have found that to do a
great deal of good. Purge him likewise with the first, and then endeavor to
bind with the second infusion of Rubarb as before: But withal there is too
often in this, as in the Scurvy, a secret malignity poisonous and infectious,
and it causes others to fall sick, if it be the ruining distemper in the ship.

This venomous quallity proceeds from the corruption of humors; therefore it
is to be powerfully opposed: Thriac. Land. nova, j in a glass of Wine is very
powerful, and will destroy the very essence of venom; give it not only once
but often. And to heal the Ulcers of the Bowels, give him healing Clysters.

White Wind viij, Quintessence of Aristolcchiae ij, Quintessentia Myrrhae ij,
shake it together. This is the best of all Clysters, to heal the Bowels, if it
be injected warm. And to ease pain and bind after due purging; the best that I
know is this, Syrup. Diamor. j electu diacorallinum ij, Tinctura Mart. pro
deliquio j, Quintessentia papaveris and hyosciami gut. iij, this in a small
glass of Cinnamonwater, drank, is excellent.

And then good Cordials are of great use, for men in a little time grow extreme
faint, Quintessentia Cymamoy, gut. iiij, Tinctura Corallinum gut. x. in a
spoonful of Tinctura vitae is an excellent Cordial.

CHAP. IV. Of a Cholera.
A Cholera is a violent vomiting, and sometimes a looseness with it from
Choleric humors in the Stomach and first passages: The best way is first to
cleanse away these vicious humors.

Spir. vitae Rulandi j, Tinctura flor. reguli antimon. gr. iiij, give it in a
glass of Wine. These will not only carry away the humors both ways, but
thoroughly rectifies the distemper of the Stomach and first passages: When this
has done working, burn him half a pint of Sack, with a branch of Rosemary, and
a blade or two of Mace, and sweeten it with j. of Sir. of Mirtles, or dried
Roses, and let him drink it hot: Or, Aqu. Aromatica j. quintessentia Cynamo.
and Menthae, an. gut. x. Syrup. Dyamor. or Mel ros Colat, j. in a glass of
choice Canary: Or, Elixir Vitrioli j. in Spiritu Menthae.

These are inferior to no stomachicals in the whole World: And let the region
of his stomach be anointed with Oil of Mace.

CHAP. V. Of a Surfeit.
SUrfeits at Sea generally come by over drinking, (although indeed they may
come by over-eating, or from the vitions quality of what is eaten) it is so
that nature refuses to digest the great quantity that a man has drank: As a
man that has a burden too heavy, does not so much as lift at it.

Some nature is so propitious to them, that when they are too full of drink,
they vomit, but some do not; but are extreme sick at stomach, and the head achs
as it would split. Now if such had given them a draught of warm Water, with
some ij Oxymel of Squils in it, they would vomit and prevent a Surfeit;
especially if after their vomiting they had a pint of Wine burnt, with a sprig
of Mint, and a blade of Mace, and sweetened with fine Sugar, and so drank hot:
But if it has passed the Stomach before the man speaks to you; and the Liver
does not digest it, but lets it lie in the first passages, then there is worser
pains and heat.

Now Vomiting of it self will do no good: But, Spirit. vitae Rulandi j Tinctura
a florreguli antimo. gut. iiij. Oxim. Scil. j.

This in a glass of Wine will work pleasantly both ways, and free both Stomach
and intestines of the superfluous humor that Nature is charged withal. Some in
this case use a Clyster, Electum Cariocost. j in moderately hot Wine injected,
excellently draws down the excrement and noxious fumes and evacuates it to the
Patients great ease and comfort.

The Body thus cleansed, let him then drink the burnt Wine hot, and add to it a
scruple of Elixir vitrioli mynsichti, and then it is a powerful stomachical,
and will cause digestion: But sometimes it has past the Liver, and has not
been well concocted there, but is sent as it were half digested into the Veins,
and so there is no third concoction; it does not make blood fit to nourish, and
now it is a confirmed Surfeit, and it is like the Surfeit spots come out; and
there is a Fever, and loathing of Food, but a great thirst, and desire of more
cold drink.

Now ashore it is common in this case to run to the Apothecaries for Surfeit
water, and when he has drank that, and not the better; then to the Doctors,
but it is commonly too late for it, for many a man loses his Life by such
delays, and by trusting to the Surfeit water only. You are here to give
discussing Clysters: As, Decoct. Com. pro Clyst j. Eclect. Cariocostin. j. f.
enema.

And let blood before it is too late; for abateing the great quantity of
boiling blood is a great help: Then purge from the most remote parts, with
Electu. Cath. regali ij. either in Bolus, or a Glass of Wine:

For this is one of the best in this case: Or, If he cannot take this: Then,
Tinctur. Cathart. Grulangij j. in a Glass of Rhenish is a good Medicine; and
Pil. Ruff. s. or a j. is approved.

When these things are first done, then your Surfeit water will do good: The
best of Surfeit water is, Aqua papaveris composita ij. Tinctura Croci j. Elix.
vitrioli j. Thriac Land. Nova, j.

Let him drink this in a glass of choice Canary, and sweat him well. These
things will cure and cause a good digestion in all parts.

CHAP. VI. Of the Plurisie.
MEN are often taken with the Plurisie: It Is a Tumifaction of the inward
Tunicle of the Ribbs, called Plura, with inflammation: Sometime there is windy
Spirit with it, causing pricking, with extreme pain, and a Coughing; because
the Lungs are straightened, and sometimes are inflamed with it: Here bleeding is
to be forthwith celebrated not once, but often repeated. Discussing Clysters
are to be administered: Decoct Carminativum j. as in Chap. 7. Electum cariocast.
j. f. enema.

These carry away a great deal of wind and Pluratick matter out of the Body.

This having done working, Spirit plureticus Rennotti j. Aqua papaveris Comp.
and Liquor Cord. refrigerans an. ij.

These, with the other means will give ease immediately.

If there should be an Imposthume: Then, Antimo. diaph. Cum. Tartar. gr. x. sal
pectorale j. with Spirit. Guaic. a spoonful in Sir. Jujubino, or aqua Hordia.
f. potus.

Let him drink this, and embrocate the side with Oil of Chamo.

CHAP. VII. Of the Cholick and Wind.
AT Sea Men are oftentimes taken with fits of the Cholick, with insufferable
griping. It is by corrupt humors, and windy vapors in the Tunicles of the
intestines; it generally comes by cold. Sometimes the Body is bound with this
Disease, and then in the West Indies it is called the dry gripes. Sometimes
there is a Looseness, with intolerable tortion of the Bowels. If it were wind
alone, an excellent Clyster were that of Tobacco, given in a fumigatory
Clister-pipe: Otherwise a pint of Sack injected has been approved to do good to
a wonder: But if corrupt humors are together with this wind, then your
Carminative Clyster is this: Cem. Calid. quatuor: Bacc. Laur. and and Juniper
ana j. Zedoari j. flor Camom. and Melilot an. pugil: To the strained decoction
x. ol. Camom. ss. Electuar. Cariocost. j. f. enema.

The Clyster injected warm, will work to your hearts content, and there will be
great ease; especially if you give inwardly a good Cordial.

Tinctura vitae a spoonful, Quintessentia Papaveris and Hyosciami gut. iij. in
a glass of choice Sack. By this time he will have wonderful ease and
refreshment.

But to root out the windy, and corcupt Cemenary, purge the Body well: Electum
Cathart. regale ij. or Sir. de spina cervina ij.

These will powerfully eradicate the Distemper and you had better do it at
once, than let it run on, and the Patient not thoroughly well: And then after
all a pint of good burnt Wine, with aromatic Spice in it, and leaves of Mint,
and sweetened with ponder Sugar, and drank hot, is a special thing to close up
your cure.

CHAP. VIII. Of Costiveness.
SOmetimes it happens that men are very Costive, or hard bound; or it may be
there are passingers on board, or delicate persons, that rather suffer a great
deal of misery by this, than to take a Clyster, especially such as are
Sea-sick, and vomit much; I have known some who in a whole week together have
not gone to stool: If any such complains to you, your way is to give him,
either,. Sir. de quincqu. rud. ij. or Tinctura solutiva the like quantity.

Or if it be a person of honor as sometimes happens to be at Sea, Then, Your
Quint. rosar. Palidar j. is the loveliest of all Purging Medicines in the World
whatever. These curiously open, and gently purge, and leave not a binding
quality behind them; and the latter is truly Cordial withal. If it were a
Child's, j. of Manna in its drink would be grateful to it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Worms.
I Have known when men at Sea have been very much troubled with the Worms: And
then it is usual to give them Calomelos j in some purging Pill: Others give
Spirit Vitriol, some drops in their drink, and some Cem. Absynth in ponder in
Honey: But Quintessentia Colocynthidos s, and Quintessentia Centauri Major. and
Minor. j, and Sal prunellae j, these in a glass of Wine or Beer surely destroy
the Worms.

And this excellent Powder, called Pulv. ad Lumbricos Magistralis ana j ad s in
any convenient vehicle is of excellent use as to this intention. But sometimes
you have young Children and tender persons on board that cannot take Medicines,
and yet hap to have the Worms: Then anoint the Belly or Stomach with that
precious Oil of Myrrh, and it will effectually do the work.

CHAP. X. Of Colds, Coughs, Rhumes, Catarrhs.
IT falls out very often that men are troubled with these Distempers at Sea,
and will desire of you something to sweat: Which indeed is the best way, if it
be a new cold: A pint of burnt Wine, with a branch or two of Rosemary, and
Cloves, and Mace, and Cinnamon, with a j of Land Thriac in it, and brewed with
the yolk of an Egg, and sweetened with Loaf Sugar, and drank hot when he turns
in, and so to let him sweat well: This is undoubtedly the best Medicine in the
World.

But a Catarrh is a Rhume that has taken a habit of trickling slily down the
Aspera arteria, and so to the Lungs; this causes extreme Coughing, and by
reason of that straining, the man grows hot and feverish withal, with grievous
Headache, and when any of this Rhume falls into the Stomach, there is a
reaching to Vomit: Nay, such is the Nature of a Catarrh, that it many times
erodes the Lungs, and causes a Consumption.

Now the best thing you can do, is to purge the Brain, and all the Body of that
Catarrish humor: Either Pilulae ex duobus, or extr. rudij j, or half a dram
does it at once excellently well; and when this is thoroughly done, then your
burnt Wine spoken of before will come to bare; and when you have sweat him
well, then these Medicines following are the best that can be used.

Lohoch Crocatum Mynsicti, is a great secret in this Disease, it digests, makes
thick, agglutinates, expectorates, coroborates the Spirits, cools inflammation,
quenches thirst, and eases the most acute pain; it is to be taken of the end of
a Liquorice stick bruised.

Another excellent thing is Sir. Catarrhis Mulleri, this does not only heal the
Ulcers of the Lungs which cause blood to be spit up, and stop the falling of
the Rhume, but cures Consumptions; it is to be taken with a bruised Liquorish
stick as the other pectoral Syrrups are, such as Coltsfoot, Jujubines,
Liquorish, and the like.

But above all that, Infusus Pectoralis Comp. of Doctor Salmons is of
insuperable efficacy, a spoonful or two of it at a time drank in a glass of
Sack, and that often, especially morning and evening: But if you would give it him
to drink, and not by way of Lohoch; then Tinctura Astmatica Millij j, Vinum
Juniperium a spoonful, Elixir Sulphuris, a few drops in a glass of Sack is
excellent.

CHAP. XI. Of Continual Fevers, or Calentures.
THese are very frequent at Sea, especially in hot Clymates. I have had the
woeful experience of them, (as well as of Fluxes) at Scanderoon, and Cypris;
sometimes they have that degree of malignity in them that wants but little of
the Pestilence. Men are usually taken at first with a shivering in their Bones,
as if they had got a cold: They will ask you for something to sweat, and you
will do well to burn him a pint of Wine, and give him a j. of Land. Thriac. in
it, and let him sweat, for this (it may be) may hinder a further progress; But
if notwithstanding this, he turns to burning, and his head to ach extremely,
then defer not to let him blood the next morning; and if you are in a Country
where there is store of Wine, and Men have drank much, and inflamed their
blood, let not one bleeding serve, but repeat it oftener. Give Clysters
likewise to mollify the excrement, and discuss the noxious fumes.

Decoct. Com. pro Clyst. x. Cariocost. or Benedict. Laxativa j. Then after this
try what your burnt Wine will do, for now a breathing sweat will be profitable;
but if it be a malignant or burning Fever, and it is the distemper of the
Ship, or place where you are, it will have a certain time (do what you can) as
it had its beginning, so it will have its increase, state and declination.

All that you can do now is to further (and not hinder) its coming to its
state; Therefore give not too cooling things, for by that means many a Man is
cooled out of his Life; and on the other hand, be cautions how you let him take
things that will inflame; Liquor vitriolatus mynsichti ij. is excellent both
ways.

If you give him cooling things, let them be such as moderately palliate, are
Cordial, and quench thirst, and yet keep him in a moist and natural warmth: As
Aqua aromatica j, Julupium Alexandrinum ij, Elixir vitrioli j; This in a little
aqua Cordialae refrigerans is mighty refreshing, and does not extinguish
natural heat, but powerfully help it.

Again, if you give hot Cordials, let it be such as will not cause burning and
thirst, but oppose that, and rather cause a breathing and natural warmth.

Confectio alc herm. j, pulv. Gascon j, in aqua Cord. frigid. Saxon. ij. This
is a Cordial that would revive (as 'twere) a dying man, and give him, not too
heating, but a breathing and natural heat; But before the Fever comes to its
height, usually men are dileriate, and if it be a right Calenture, he will
think the Sea a Meadow, and seek to leap into it: Then (if you cannot
conveniently give him Clysters because he is unruly) give him, Tinctura
solutiva j. in his Barly-water to keep him soluble. But the noblest Medicine
under the Heavens in this case is Quinta essentia rosarum palidarum j. per se.

This as it is opening, so it is powerfully Cordial and Alexipharmick, and the
pleasantest thing in the whole World.

When his Body is open, then endeavor to give him a little ease and rest. That
excellent Anodine Cordial following I cannot but recommend to you, Extractum
opii anodinum j, Tinctura vitae Minsichti, a spoonful.

Let him take this and endeavor to rest, for this will powerfully exhilarate
the hurt, comfort the Spirits, resist malign atoms, provoke a breathing sweat;
it will do (in a manner) whatever you desire it should do; nothing so friendly
a second at this juncture, whilst Nature is contending with its enemy for Life.

But now methinks I hear my self accused, that I speak of Medicines fitter for
Princes and Noble Personages, who have Money enough, then for Chyrurgions of
Ships to carry to cure Seamen withal: It Is true they are precious, and some of
them of inestimable value: But consider Life is sweet to all men, and I hope it
is no harm to you to know them that are best capable of preserving Life.

But as to the Fever, there are some of that degree of malignity, that they
come to their height, and the man either recovers or dies before the seventh
day, as on the fourth or fifth, such are Pestilential, and strike severely at
Nature. Others are not so acute, but hold till the ninth or tenth day, at what
time, if Nature is not strong, it goes hard with the Patient. But most
recoveries that ever I saw, have been the thirteenth or fourteenth day, for
about that time is the right natural Crisis, that most continual Fevers come
to their state, insomuch as (when I have had twenty or thirty down at a time)
he that has lived to the fifteenth day, I have not feared his miscarrying
afterward; except by carelessness, or some accident, he has precipitated
himself into a relapse. If his Tongue be foul, clear it with your Spatula
Lingua, and in all his drink (which should be only Barly-water) give him xx or
more drops of quintessentia vitrioli. If it be the spotted Fever or
Pestilence, let him neither purge nor bleed, for that were dangerous, but let
him take a dram of Thriac. Land. nova, and half a dram of quintessentia
vitrioli, these in a glass of Sack are the noblest medicines that ever were
known, inwardly; and let him sweat to purpose, whilst he has strength, but
moderately if he be weak; Aqua Epidemica is likewise of singular virtue, j. in
angel. water with Sir. Carioph. And to bring to a head the rising (if any
appears) make use of that excellent Cataplasma, mentioned in Chap. 31. of the
Second Book, and when it is ready, open it and heal it, as there is taught.

CHAP. XII. Of Agues, or intermitting Fevers.
NOW in the time of the paroxisme, them that have the Ague use to Vomit; that
shows a foulness of Body, especially the first passages; and a quotidian, or
tertian, I have often cured by given of the Patients safe Vomits: As, Vinum
antimoniale j. with Oxymel scil. ss. in a glass of Wine.

Give this about two hours before the fit is to come: It Is an excellent thing
against Agues. Then in the time of the fit, when he cries out for drink, let
him have Elixir febrile Horstij, a j or ij in his Barly-water, which you will find
powerful against the Fever: On the well day, in the morning fasting, let him
have Quintessentia Turpethum, and Colocynth. fabri ana ss in a glass of Wine.

These will purge downwards to your hearts content, and in Agues have no
equals. When this has done working, and at night when he turns in, give him of
Aqua febrifuga ij or iij, and sweat him upon it. About two hours before you
expect the next fit to come, (whatever Ague it is, Quartan, or any;) let him
take this following Essentia opij anodinum ij in Liquore Vitriolato Mynsichti
iij.

Let him drink it in a glass of Sack, and mark the event, which doubtless will
be to your infinite satisfaction, and the Patients likewise.

As for your Cordials and Catharticks, and drink, you have them in the last
Chapter, there can be no better.

The powder of the Peruvian bark, called by the Indians Quinoquino, which is
the Jesuits ponder, is given ij at a dose, in a glass of White Wine two hours
before the Paroxisme: I was assured of the goodness of it in Smyrna; the Patiet
(as they affirmed tome) has one severe fit next after the taking of it, but no
more; and if purging does not go before, the Ague will return again in about a
months time, as the Doctors there have observed, as if it had only lain asleep
so long. Oleum febrifugum, and Empl. febrifuga, and Cataplasma febrifugum, are
all found to do good; but what I have written, is a right Method, and sure.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Measles, and Small Pox.
IT many times happens that Men, (especially the younger sort) have these
Diseases in a Ship, and when one has had it, it usually goes to more of them;
it is a nausious Disease in a Ship. They are usually taken at first with a
dullness or heaviness, and then a pain in the back, with grievous Headache. Now
it is held good in England to lot blood in this Disease; but there is a Fever
before the Small Pox breaks out, and a man knows not if it will be the Small
Pox or no, (especially if it has not already been in the Ship;) by reason of
which some are let blood; but if it has been in the Ship, then you will be
cautious when you have these signs, whether it will be the Small Pox or no; an
opening and discussing Clyster can do no hurt; and if it should be a Fever
only, then it will do a great deal of good. If he be a young Person that has
these signs, and one that has not had the Small Pox, you had not best be too
forward in letting blood, but defer it till the third day. You may give some
London Treacle, and a Cup of burnt Wine, and cause him to sweat, and that will
soon show you if it be that Distemper or no, for it will the sooner break out:
If it is not hindered by bleeding, nor purging, nor wet, nor cold, (all which
are by no means proper) it will come out by the third day.

Now your way is to drive it out forcibly, for which there is no better thing
than this: Tinctura Croci j, Antimo. diaph. gr. x. Confectio Alcherm. j.

Let this be shook together in a glass of Sack and Drank, and now let him be
kept exceeding warm, that no cold comes to him; nor let him eat or drink any
thing that is cold, or may cause a looseness, for that were dangerous: He will
be extremely desirous of Drink, and if it be Beer, let it be strong, and let
every draught that he drinks be moderately warm, with j of Ruint Corn Ceru in
it: Every two hours give him a spoonful of Aqua Aromatica, and a j of Pulv.
Gascon, in a little Canary, and this is truly Cordial, and will powerfully
expulse malignity.

Have a care of cooling Juleps, (they are not proper) except such as was
mentioned in the Chapter of a Fever, which will withal cause a breathing kind
moisture, and them you may use moderately.

No matter although he does not go to Stool in four or five days; give him no
Clyster for all that, least you make him take cold: For about the first crisis
he will go to Stool of himself, which is about the seventh day from his falling
sick.

Boil him Fowls, and let him eat of them (if he can) or at least of their
broth; the which let him drink often; he cannot feed himself, his attendance
must do that office for him. Let white Biscuit (if you have any on board) be
steept in his Sack, and let him eat it, and drink the Sack after it. If through
some ill accident, or the great malignity of the Distemper he has not
miscarried before, he will have them at the height before the fourteenth day,
and then recover: But in his recovering, let him have a care of falling into a
relapse by heedlesness; for so some have miscarried afterward. Let his face be
kept as much out of the Air as possible, and let him not scratch off the scurf
with his hands, for by these things the Scarrs will be deep; but anoint his
face gently with your warm Album Camphoratum, and it will cause the scale to
come off easily, and leave the new skin, and comely.

FINIS.
AN ABSTRACT OF SEA-CHIRURGERY.
The TABLE of the First BOOK, containing several Directions.
THE First Direction. Page 1 The Second Direction. Page 2 The Third Direction.
Page 5 The Fourth Direction. Page 6 The Fifth Direction. Page 7 The Sixth
Direction. ibid. The Seventh Direction. Page 8 The Eighth Direction. Page 9 The
Ninth Direction. Page 10 The Tenth Direction. Page 12 The Eleventh Direction.
Page 13 The Twelfth Direction. To fit the Surgery Chest. Page 15 The
Thirteenth Direction. For fitting the Drug-Chest. Page 17 The Fourteenth
Direction. Page 18 The Fifteenth Direction. Page 19
The Second BOOK, Teaches how the Surgeon ought to perform his Chirurgical
duty being at Sea. Page 21
The TABLE.

CHap. 1. How the Surgeon should behave himself on an Engagement day. Page
21 Chap. 2. Teaches what is to be done by the Chyrurgion the next day after
the engagement. Page 29 Chap. 3. Page 32 Chap. 4. How to prosecute the Cure of
the Amputated Wound. Page 33 Chap. 5. How to Cure all dangerous wounds of the
Joints. Page 38 Chap. 6. How to Cure a Compound Fracture, and Dislocation
together. Page 43 Chap. 7. How to Cure a wound of the Head with a fracture of
the Scull. Page 48 Chap. 8. How to cure Wounds of the Abdomen and Ruptures.
Page 52 Chap. 9. How to cure a penetrating Wound of the Breast, and Ribs, or
Back. Page 55 Chap. 10. How to cure a wound by a small shot through a Fleshy or
Musculous part. Page 56 Chap. 11. How to cure a wound of the fleshy parts with
loss of substance. Page 58 Chap. 12. How to cure a deep incised wound. Page 59
Chap. 13. How to cure great and deep Contusions or Bruises, without any eminent
wound, and sprains of the Joints. Page 60 Chap. 14. How to cure a Gangreen.
Page 63 Chap. 15. How to cure Burns or Scalds. Page 66 Chap. 16. How to cure a
violent bleeding at Nose. Page 68 Chap. 17. How to cure a Rheumatisme. Page 70
Chap. 18. How to cure settled pains in any part, old Aches from former Bruises,
Cramp, stifness of Sinews, and cricks in the Back, numbness of the Limbs and
Joints. Page 72 Chap. 19. How to cure the Squinzy. Page 73 Chap. 20. To cure
the Relaxation of the Vvula's and Amygdala's. Page 75 Chap. 21. To cure the
Toothache. Page 76 Chap. 22. Of Opthalmias, or Suffusions and Pearls on the
Eyes. Page 77 Chap. 23. Deafness, stoppage of the Ears, Pain and Impostume.
Page 78 Chap. 24. Of the Piles, and Procedentia Any. Page 79 Chap. 25. For
Boyls and Felons. Page 80 Chap. 26. A Phlegmonous Tumor. Page 81 Chap. 27. Of
an Erysipelas and Choleric Pushes. Page 82 Chap. 28. Of Phlegmatic Tumors and
Ulcers. Page 83 Chap. 29. Of Cancers, Schirrhous Tumors, Phagadenick Ulcers and
Fistulaes. Page 85 Chap. 30. Of Gravel and Strangury. Page 97 Chap. 31. How to
cure a Clap. Page 89 Chap. 32. How to Cure a confirmed Pox. Page 93
The Third BOOK, Teaches how the Sea-Chirurgeon ought to Execute the Physical
Office imposed on him at Sea. 95
CHap. 1. Of the Scurvy. 96 Chap. 2. Of Fluxes. 100 Chap. 3. Of a Dysentery or
Bloody Flux. 101 Chap. 4. Of a Colera. 103 Chap. 5. Of a Surfeit. 105 Chap. 6.
Of the Pleurisy. 108 Chap. 7. Of the Cholick and Wind. 109 Chap. 8. Of
Costiveness. 111 Chap. 9. Of the Worms. 112 Chap. 10. Of Colds, Coughs, Rhumes,
Catarrhs. 113 Chap. 11. Of continual Fevers or Calentures. 115 Chap. 12. Of
Agues, or intermitting Fevers. 121 Chap. 13. Of the Measles, and Small Pox.
123
FINIS.

