OBJECTIONS Against Passing the BILL, As Desired by the Proprietors of the
Lights Now generally Used.
THE Patent under which they pretend to Claim, is granted to Edmund Windus,
These dre the Words of their Patent.
Gent. on his Petition, That he with great Labor and Expense had obtained a
Discovery of a new Experiment, for the great and durable Increase of Light, by
extraordinary Glasses and Lamps; very useful for the great Improvement of
Ship-Lanthorns, Light-houses: dispersing of Light in Mines, and other necessary
and like profitable Uses which require Light and Heat: And therefore craves a
Patent for 14 Years: Which is accordingly granted.

In which Patent, are these Clauses: That if the Invention thereby granted be
not a new Invention: Or if Windus be not the first Inventor: Then the Patent to
be void.

That this Patent is void in Law, is most evident: For these present
Proprietors have suggested in Chancery, That the Patent was granted to Windus
in trust for one Samuel Hutchinson: (as in truth it was.) And in truth these
Glasses used by Hutchinson, and now by the Proprietors, are not a new
Invention: Such Glasses for Light having been used in Lanthorns, above Twenty
Years since; as will be fully proved if required. And to convince the World
that this Patent is void, several Tin-men set up the Proprietors own Lights
against them, without any Variation. And the Proprietors brought Actions
against them on their Patent. To which the Tin-men appeared and pleaded: And
the Proprietors durst not proceed in their Suit.

And the Persons who now oppose the Proprietors, will presently try with them
the Validity of the Patent, whether good in Law, or not. And have given the
Proprietors a fair Opportunity so to do, by having now set up a new and better
Light of Convex-Glass in the City of London.

That the Proprietors knowing the Invalidity of their Patent to support their
Pretense to the Convex-Lights: (Of which they have not a Word in their Patent:)
Have in the Bill inserted a Clause to exclude all others from using
Convex-Glasses. And if any body do use them, on Oath made thereof before a
Justice of the Peace, that he shall grant his Warrant to have them taken down
and delivered to the Proprietors.

Which is destructive and prejudicial to the Public, tending to discourage
Ingenuity and Invention for the public Good: (No great or public Light being
to be made but by Convex-Glasses:) There being a much better Light for the
Public now Invented.

So it is also, establishing a Monopoly of a pretended new Invention of
Convex-Lights: Which was many Years in Use before the Patent:

And executing by Act of Parliament a Patent void in Law, and which cannot by
any means in Law be supported.

The which was never done in any time before: It having been the Wisdom of all
Parliaments rather to condemn Monopolies, than establish them.

And whereas it is pretended, That the Proprietors have been at great Charge
about the said Lights, they have had about Nine Years already, and may have
upon their Patent (if good) five Years more. But if naught, it is conceived
they ought to have no Countenance.

For if a Man will lay out his Money in a bad Title, it is conceived a
Parliament will not make that Title good.

For which REASONS it is humbly hoped the Bill shall not pass.


