To the Right Worshipful The Heads of the respective Colleges and Halls OF THE
University of Oxford.
YOU are desired to signify to your Societies, and remind them, That during
the Solemnity now approaching, on the seventh day of July, All Doctors are to
wear their Scarlet Gowns, and that the Exercises will begin at one of the clock
in the Afternoon, after the ringing of the little Bell at St. Mary's.

You are farther desired to let them know, That the rising Semicircle of the
Theater is reserved for Doctors and Noblemen; and that the enclosure within
the Rail, is the place for Inceptors in Arts. The Gallery beyond the Doctors,
in the Circular part of the Theater, will be the place of Masters. The side
Gallery Westward, is reserved for the Cambridge men: That Eastward for
Strangers. The Galleries in the Front for Ladies and Gentlewomen. The upper
Gallery above the Masters, is appointed for Gentlemen-Commoners and Batchelors.
Those above the Cambridge men and Strangers, for Under-Graduate Scholars of
Houses and Commoners. That above the Ladies for the performances of Music. The
Area, for Batlers, Servitors, and persons of promiscuous quality.

For preserving of Order, there are beside the Curators of the Theater,
appointed several Proctors of it; who according to the Statute in that behalf,
are to take care the public peace be kept undisturbed; and that all persons be
placed in their aforesaid Stations, for whose assistance there are assigned
several Officers and Door-keepers, to be subservient to them, and excute their
Commands.

It is strictly required that during the time of the Act, All persons do appear
in their Gowns and Caps: and particularly, all Under-graduates, and Batchelors
of Arts, comport themselves with that sobriety and modesty, as may tend to the
reputation and honor of the University, upon pain of being put in the Black
Book, and otherwise proceeded against, as the exigence of their faults shall
requrie.

Withal it is required, That no person below the condition of a Gentleman or
Fellow-Commoner, shall presume to wear a silk Cap; and that none pretend to a
place beyond that which really belongs to him.

And it is farther ordered, That no Scholar resident in the University of what
Condition soever, shall be admitted into the Theater, who is not in his Gown
and Cap.

The Names of the Curators and Proctors for this following Act. CVRATORS
John Lord Bishop of Oxford. In te absence of Sr Christopher Wren, Dr. Marshal
Rector of Lincoln.

PROCTORS.
Mr. Pullen of Magd. Hall. Mr. Bateman of Magd. Coll. Mr. Ford of New Coll. Mr.
Hulton of Brasen-nose Coll. Mr. Boise of Corpus Christi. Mr. Mostyn of Christ
Church. Mr. Connant of Mert. Coll. Mr. Tunstall of Queens Coll. Mr. Piggot of
Wadham Coll. Mr. Hunt of Trin. Coll. Mr. Jenkins of Jesus Coll. Mr. Adams of
Exeter Coll. Mr. Farrow of Lin. Coll. Mr. Bennet of University Coll. Mr. Downs
of Pembrok Coll. Mr. Walrond of All Souls. Mr. Harding of St. John's. Mr.
Heicroft of Baliol Coll. Mr. Desmaster of Oriel Coll.


The Proctors are desired to meet during the Act, punctually at one of the
Clock, in the Apodyterium of the Convocation House.




