To the Right Worshipful The Heads of the respective Colleges and Halls OF THE
University of Oxford.
YOU are desired to signify to your Societies, and remind them, That during
the Solemnity now approaching, on the twenty first day of May, All Doctors are
to wear their Scarlet Gowns, and that the Convention will begin at three of the
clock in the Afternoon, after the ringing of the little Bell at St. Mary's.

You are farther desired to let them know, That the rising Semicircle of the
Theater is reserved for Noblemen and Doctors; The Gallery beyond the Doctors,
in the Circular part of the Theater, will be the place of Masters. The side
Gallery Westward, is reserved for the Strangers: That Eastward also for
Strangers. The Galleries in the Front for Ladies and Gentlewomen. The upper
Gallery above the Masters, is appointed for Gentlemen-Commoners and Batchelors.
Those above the Strangers, for Under-Graduate Scholars of Houses and Commoners.
That above the Ladies for the performances of Music. The Area, for Batlers,
Servitors, and persons of promiscuous quality, who are not to be admitted till
their Royal Highnesses and their Train have seated themselves.

The Noblemen and Doctors are desired to meet the Vice Chancellor in the
Apodyterium at three of the Clock, in the Afternoon. The Pro-Procters at one.

For preserving of Order, there are beside the Curators of the Theater,
appointed several Proctors of it; who according to the Statute in that behalf,
are to take care the public peace be kept undisturbed; and that all persons be
placed in their aforesaid Stations, for whose assistance there are assigned
several Officers and Door-keepers, to be subservient to them, and execute
their Commands.

It is strictly required during the time of this Solemnity, All persons do
appear in their Gowns and Caps: and particularly, all Under-graduates, and
Batchelors of Arts, comport themselves with that sobriety and modesty, as may
tend to the reputation and honor of the University, upon pain of being put in
the Black Book, and otherwise proceeded against, as the exigence of their
faults shall require.

Withal it is required, That no person below the condition of a Gentleman or
Fellow-Commoner, shall presume to wear a silk Cap; and that none pretend to a
place beyond that which really belongs to him.

And it is farther ordered, That no Scholar resident in the University of what
Condition soever, shall be admitted into the Theater, who is not in his Gown
and Cap.

The Names of the Curators and Proctors for this following Solemnity.
CVRATORS
John Lord Bishop of Oxford. In the absence of Sr Christopher Wren, Dr. Marshal
Rector of Lincoln.
PROCTORS.
Mr. Pullen of Magd. Hall. Mr. Bagshaw of Magd. Coll. Mr. Warner of New Coll.
Mr. Millinton of Brasen-nose Coll. Mr. Duke of Corpus Christi. Mr. Breach of
Christ Church. Mr. Connant of Mert. Coll. Mr. Lancaster of Queens Coll. Mr.
Thornton of Wadham Coll. Mr. Almont of Trin. Coll. Mr. Edwards of Jesus Coll.
Mr. Gear of Exeter Coll. Mr. Farrow of Lin. Coll. Mr. Tod of University Coll.
Mr. Hunt of Pembrok Coll. Mr. Haly of All Souls. Mr. Edwards of St. John's. Mr.
Heicroft of Baliol Coll. Mr. Desmaster of Oriel Coll. Mr. Hinton of Newinne
Hall. Mr. Say of Heart Hall. Mr. Carry of St. Mary Hall. Mr. Knight of Albane
Hall.


