To the Honorable Visitours appointed by both Houses of Parliament for the
regulating and reforming of the University of Oxford.
The Petition of your Friends and Servants in the said University.
Humbly Shows,
That diverse learned and civil men have much importuned, and some of them
seduced (under pretense of maintaining the old Prelacy and Liturgy) to enter
into a kind of Confederacy with Doctor Fell, and his Delegates, to oppose all
Reformers, both the Parliament, and Visitours, and hinder a just and necessary
Reformation. We do not deny that some of us are exercised with doubts, but we
desire to communicate our special scruples to you in an humble and outrages of
other men, who are as yet (to the great dishonor and prejudice of our
Common-Mother the University) of the same body with us. We consider that to
oppose you our much honored Visitours, is to rebel against the Houses: to
maintain Prelacy is to uphold Tyranny: and to contend for the
Common-Prayer-Booke is to contend for a false Translation of the Canonical
Scriptures, to magnify those books that are not Canonical, and justify the
Court of Rome, not only in admiting dangerous Ceremonies to corrupt the
purity, but in submitting to the Roman Order, which would overthrow the piety
of our Common and public service.

We are bold therefore to remonstrate that whatever is propounded and
delivered by the pretended Delegates aforesaid, as the sense of the whole
University contrary to this Petition, is contrary both to our sense and
consciences; And our humble request is, that you judge not of this University
by the rage and confederacy of some Malignants in it, who would endanger the
whole body to save themselves, and have therefore conspired to set up this
Delegacy to seduce and corrupt the unsettled, to oppose the Visitation, and
hinder the Reformation of this place. Be pleased to command every man to plead
his own cause, and speak for himself, only punish the Heads and Ringleaders
of this Rebellious conspiracy, and pardon all seduced Scholars, who upon
better information, and more mature deliberation, show that they have erred out
of mere simplicity, and do not hate to be reformed.

And we shall pray, etc. June 2. 1647.
Die Veneris. 18. FEB. 1647.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled do appoint and establish Joshua
Cross Master of Arts, and fellow of Lincoln College in Oxford to be senior
Proctor, and Ralph Button Master of Arts and fellow of Merton College junior
Proctor of the University of Oxford, with full power and authority to exercise
and execute the said places and offices of Proctors according to the Laws of
the Land, the Customs and Statutes rightly established of the said
University; And to continue in the said places until the usual time of
Resignation and Election, which shall be in the year 1649. And then the usual
course shall be held for the choice of Proctors as in former times.

Jo Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

At the Committee for the University OXFORD July 2. 1646.
ORdered that no Masters or Heads of any Colleges or Halls, or Scholars, or
other persons be admitted into any Mastership, Governourship, Fellowship,
Schollership, or Office or place of preferment or advantage in the University
of Oxford; And that no Leases of any Lands belonging to the said University,
or any the Colleges or Halls therein be made or renewed, until the pleasure of
the Parliament be made known therein.

F. Rous.
Concordat cum Registris Vniversitatis OXON.

Ita testor Johannes French Notarius Publicus and Registarius Vniversitatis
OXON.



Die Jovis 26, Augusti 1647.
An additionall Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for
the Visitation and Reformation of the University of Oxford, and the several
Colleges and Halls therein.
FOr the more effectual and speedy reformation and regulation of the
University of Oxford, and the several Colleges and Halls therein according to
a former ordinance of the first of May last, and for the explanation of the
same, the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, that the
Cathedral Church and College of Christ-Church in Oxford, with the Deane,
Prehendaries, Students, Scholars, and Officers, thereunto belonging, are
within the words and intention of the said Ordinance to all intents and
purposes: and it is further ordained, that the Visitours thereto appointed, or
any five or more of them shall have full power and authority to tender and
administer the solemn League and Covenant and negative Oath, to all and every
the Governors, Professors, Graduates, Masters, Fellows, Scholars, Students,
and Officers of the said University, and of the respective Halls and Colleges
therein, and to send for, examine and peruse all and every their Books and
Statutes, Registers, Journals, Books of Entries, Accounts, Orders, Writings,
which concern the government or affairs of the said University, or respective
Colleges and Halls, and to send for in custody and commit to prison all such
persons, who after the personal summons shall contemptuously refuse to produce
and deliver the same, or any of them to the said Visitours, or not show
sufficient cause of their not producing them, or any of them respectively,
until they shall be accordingly produced, and delivered, and likewise all such
Masters, Professors, Fellows, Scholars, Students, and Officers of the said
University. Colleges, Halls, or any of them respectively, who during the said
Visitation shall after a second personal summons wilfully neglect or refuse to
appear before them, and also to impannell such and so many Members and
Officers of the said University, Colleges, Halls, and other persons within the
limits and precincts of the said University being of the age of 21 years or
upward as they shall think fit to enquire of, and present upon their corporal
Oaths all offenders and offenses comprised within the said Ordinance upon such
articles of enquiry grounded on the said ordinance, as shall be approved of by
the standing Committee of Lords and Commons mentioned in the said Ordinance,
and likewise to examine witnesses upon oath for proof of an offense or
misdemeanour inquirable or punishable by the said Ordinances: and Oliver St.
John His Majesty's Sollicitour general is hereby required and authorized to
draw up and prepare a Commission, and direct the same unto the said Visitours
for visiting the said University, Colleges, and Halls, and every of them
respectively, and the respective Governors, Masters, Professors, Scholars,
Students, Officers and Members in as large and ample manner as in the said
Ordinance, and this present Ordinance is prescribed without any further
warrant, and that the Commissioners of the great Seal of England, shall have
authority hereby to pass the said Commission under the great Seal
accordingly, and the said Visitours and every of them shall be protected and
saved harmless by authority of this present Parliament against all persons
for whatsoever they shall act or execute in pursuance of the said Ordinances,
and the said Vistours or any five or more of them shall have power to oppiont a
Register, and such other Officers as are necessary to be employed in the said
Visitation, who shall receive such recompense and Salary for their pains
therein, and out of such money as the standing Committee of Lords and Commons
shall think meet, and all Sheriffs, Mayors, and other Officers, are hereby
required to be aiding and assisting to the said Visitours, or any five or more
of them, and to their Officers in the execution of this and the former
Ordinance.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FEB. 18. 1647.
WHereas Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, has recommended Edward Reynolds Master of Arts, to be
Vice Chancellor of the said University. The Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament do appoint and establish the said Master Reynolds to be
Vice Chancellor of the same University, with full power and authority to
exercise and execute the said place and Office of Vice Chancellor according to
the Laws of the Land, the Customs and Statutes rightly established of the
said University, and to continue in the said place until August, 1649. And
then the usual Course shall be held for the Choice of Vice-Chancellours as in
former times.

Io. Brown. Cler. Parl.

MARCH 31. 1648.
WHereas the Parliament have sent down Commissioners for the regulating of the
University of Oxford; and whereas diverse ill affected persons do from time to
time oppose the putting in execution of the Ordinances of Parliament there, you
are on sight hereof, and hereafter as occasion shall serve, to send such
parties or Companies of your Regiment to Oxford as you shall find necessary
upon the desire of the Commissioners for the assisting of them in the settling
of the said University according to Ordinance of Parliament. And for so doing
this shall be your Warrant.

Given under my hand in Queenstreet London the 31 of March, 1648. T. FAIRFAX.

To Lieut: Coll: Kelsay these.

