WHEREAS the Appointment, Ordering, and Government of all Carriers of what kind
soever, Trading to or with the University and City of Oxford, does of Right
belong and appertain to the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the said
University, by their Charters, Privileges, and Customs: the said Carriers to
be Ordered and Governed by such Rules as shall be limited and prescribed by the
Chancellor, Privileges, and Customs: the said Carriers to be Ordered and
Governed by such Rules as shall be limited and prescribed by the Chancellor of
the said University, or his deputy for the time being. AND whereas Thomas Moore
and Robert Stonehill Licensed Carriers of the said University, have undertaken
to provide sufficient Coaches and Horses for the Conveiance of Passengers
between the said University and the City of London, which shall in one day
Commodiously perform the whole Journey during the Summer half year, (that is to
say) from the Twenty sixth day of April, being the Monday next before Easter
Term, to Michaelmas ensuing; for the better regulating of the said Carriers,
and Securing the Convenience of all Passengers who shall happen to go with
them, It is Ordered by the Vice Chancellor of the University aforesaid, as
follows.

1. That the Carriers aforesaid shall not demand above Twelve shillings for the
conveiance of each Passenger. 2. That they, the said Carriers, shall carry
without expectation of farther reward, the necessaries of each Passenger, their
several fardles not being incommodious in their Bulk, and not exceeding six
pound in weight. 3. That they, the said Carriers, shall not upon pretense of
expectation of Passengers, or any other suggestion, delay the time of their
setting out; But before six of the clock in the Morning, be ready over against
Alsouls College in Oxford, and the sign of the Greyhound in Holborne in
London; and Immediately upon the striking of the Clock of St Mary's in Oxford,
and St Andrews Holborn London begin their Journey. 4. That the said Carriers
shall both at Oxford and London keep a Book for the Entry of Names of the
Passengers, and the receipt of the twelve shillings which shall be laid down
upon the entry of their names, and shall be responsible for the fraud or
negligence which shall happen either by themselves or Servants in the aforesaid
particulars. 5. That the said Carriers shall constantly keep their weekly
stages, that is to say, every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday depart from Oxford,
and Tuesday, Thurday and Saturday return homeward from London. 6. That the
said Carriers shall not take upon them to dispose of places in their coach, but
shall permit all persons to be seated according to their priority, in taking of
their seats, and their respective condition. 7. That the aforesaid Orders and
Rules shall not be interpreted to limit or concern those coaches, which shall
as formely perform their Journey in part of two days.
JOHN FELL Vicechancellor.
Ap: 5. 1669.

