DOMINVS ILLVMINATIO MEA blazon of the University of Oxford
At a Meeting of the Heads of Houses, April 28. 1690.
WHereas great Care has been taken for Regulating the Apparel and Habits of
all Scholars of whatsoever Rank or Degree within the University, and in order
hereunto certain Models and Patterns of Gowns, Capps, and Habits to be worn by
all Members of the University, of what Degree, Condition and Quality soever,
have according to the Statutes of the same been made and fashioned, and now
remain in a Press by the Vestry of the Convocation House, for Recourse to be
had unto them upon all Occasions; yet notwithstanding diverse Graduats as well
as younger Scholars, have of late been Irregular in their Habits, by wearing
Unstatutable Gowns and Capps, and also Undecent Apparel, to the Dishonor of
the University and the Government thereof: Wherefore to prevent the ill Effects
and Consequences which such Irregularities may produce, and to take away all
Plea and Pretense of Ignorance or other Excuse, the Vicechancellor and Heads of
Houses, after mature Deliberation had of the Premises, did unanimously agree,
That the Governors of all Colleges and Halls should inform all their Scholars
in their respective Houses, what Sorts and kinds of Gowns, Capps, and other
Scholastical Habits, and Apparel are to be worn in the University, and likewise
to cause a Copy thereof to be affixed in some public Place of their respective
Colleges and Halls. And moreover, they do prohibit all Scholars of what Degree
or Quality soever the use of wearing in public, Hats, much more Hats buttoned
up, Crevatts, and Bands commonly called Crevatt-Bands, or Falling-Bands. And
they do further require, that the Names of those that will not be reclaimed by
this Admonition, be signified to Mr. Vicechancellor, to be punished, as the
Statutes of the University in that Case direct.

Models and Patterns of Scholastical Habits.
I. Servitors Gowns to have round Capes, and Sleeves hanging behind the
shoulder without Buttons.

II. The Battelars Gown altogether the same with the Servitors, excepting that
the Cape be square.

III. The Commoners Gown to be distinguished from the former, by having half a
Dozen of Buttons on each Sleeves, not exceeding the price of Five Shillings the
Dozen, nor the Bigness in the public Pattern.

IV. The Gentlemen-Commoners Gown to be Half-sleeved, and (if they please) to
have Buttons not exceeding Four Dozen, nor the Rate of Five Shillings the
Dozen, nor the Bigness in the public Pattern.

V. A Baronetts and Knights Gown, the same with the former, only distinguished
(if they please) with Gold or Silver Buttons.

VI. Noblemen to wear (if they please) Colored Gowns of the same with the
former.

VII. Bachelours of Arts, and Foundation-Men, that are Undergraduats, to wear
Wide-sleev'd Gowns, the Sleeves not reaching beyond the Fingers-ends, nor above
an Ell in Compass. The Bachelours Sleeves to hang at length, the
Foundation-Mens turned up to the Wrist.

VIII. None to wear Mourning-Gowns, unless upon a Cause approved by the Head of
the House, and to be allowed by the Vicechancellor, and Proctors. And those
Gowns so allowed to be made of Cloth.

IX. Servitors, Battelars, Commoners, Gentlemen-Commoners of all Conditions,
being Undergraduats, to wear round Capps.

X. Gentlemen-Commoners to have a Hat-band round their Capps; Knights,
Baronetts and Noblemen being Undergraduats, to have Velvet Capps, with Silver
or Gold Hat-bands. The Square Capps not to exceed the Breadth of twelve
Fingers; and the Undergraduats Capps to have no Tuffts.

XI. That Persons studying the Law, above Four Years Standing in the
University, and being Entered in the Law Book, be permitted to wear a
Half-sleev'd Gown without Buttons, and a Square Cap. And that no other Person
of what Condition soever, presume to wear a Square Capp, but only those who are
allowed by Statute.

It was likewise at the same Meeting of the Heads of Houses agreed upon, That
no Tailor within the Precincts of the University, presume to make any Scholars
Gown, of any other Fashion then what is above prescribed, under the Penalty of
being Discommoned, and Interdicted all Commerce with the University.

JONATHAN EDWARDS, Vicechancellor.


