The Honorable Visitours appointed by both ^ouses of Parliament for the
regulating and reforming of the University of Oxford.
Petition of your Friends and Servants in the said University.
^^mbly Shows,
THat diverse learned and civil men have been much importuned, and some of them
seduced (under pretense of maintaining the old Prelacy and Liturgy) to enter
into a kind of Confederacy (...) Doctor Fell, and his Delegates, to oppose all
Reformers, both the ^^rliament, and Visitours, and hinder a just and necessary
Reforma^^^. We do not deny that some of us are exercised with doubts, but
(...) desire to communicate our special scruples to you in an humble and
private way; We will not conspire together to excuse the errors, and outages
of other men, who are as yet (to the great dishonor and prejudice of our
Common-Mother the University) of the same body with us. We consider that to
oppose you our much honored Visitours, is to rebel against the Houses: to
maintain Prelacy is to uphold Tyranny: and to contend for the
Common-Prayer-Booke is to contend for a false Translation of the Canonical
Scriptures, to magnify those books that are not Canonical, and justify the
Court of Rome, not only in admitting dangerous Ceremonies to corrupt the
purity, but in submitting to the Roman Order, which would overthrow the piety
of our Common and public service.

We are bold therefore to remonstrate that whatever is propounded and
delivered by the pretended Delegates aforesaid, as the sense of the whole
University contrary to this Petition, is contrary both to our sense and
consciences; And our humble request is, that you judge not of this University
by the rage and confederacy of some Malignants in it, who would endanger the
whole body to save themselves, and have therefore conspired to set up this
Delegacy to seduce and corrupt the unsettled, to oppose the Visitation, and
hinder the Reformation of this place. Be pleased to command every man to plead
his own cause, and speak for himself, only punish the Heads and Ringleaders
of this Rebellious conspiracy, and pardon all seduced Scholars, who upon
better information, and more mature deliberation, show that they have erred out
of mere simplicity, and do not hate to be reformed.

And we shall pray, etc. June 2. 1647.
The Protestation of the Well-affected against the Disaffected Delegacy.
We the Masters, Scholars, and other Officers of the University of Oxford
(understanding that there is a Delegacy set up here in Oxford without any Right
authori^^ for the upholding of the old English Prelacy and Liturgy in (...)
position to the Parliament) do by these presents solemnly pr^^test against the
said Delegacy and their pretended Vice Chancellor Doctor Fell, because he is
neither deputed by our lawfu^^^^^ Chancellor the Earl of Pembroke, nor
elected by this Vnive^sity for to govern it for this year, and therefore is
no way authorized to call or hold a Convocation as Vice Chancellor (...)
Oxford. And the Delegacy chosen by the Assembly of Doctor and Masters upon the
first of June last, is not to be reputed a st^^tuable Delegacy, they being not
orderly called or legally enable to plead as Delegates in the behalf of the
whole University: (...) witness whereof we subscribe our names this third day
of June, 1647.

MARCH 31. 1648. At the Committee of the Lords and Commons for th^^ Reformation
of the University of Oxford.
Ordered,
THat for an Effectual Remedy none of those that have been shall be convicted
to have denied or resisted the Power and Authority of Parliament in the
Visitation of the University of Oxford, shall be admitted to vote, or to give
voice in the Convocation Congregation of that University.

Francis Rou^


