THE PETITION Of the Gentry, Ministers, and Commonalty of the County of KENT.

Agreed upon the General Assizes last holden for that County.

The Copy of which Petition being delivered to Judge Mallet (who was for that
Circuit) and afterward to the Earl of Bristoll.

Which Petition being concealed from the Parliament by the Earl of Bristoll
and the said Judge Mallet, was for the same both committed to the Tower, March
28. 1642.

LONDON, Printed for S. H.

To the Honorable House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The Humble Petition of the Gentry, Ministers, and Commonnalty of the County of
Kent, agreed upon, at the geneerall Assizes of the County.
Most humbly shows,
THat we cannot but take notice, how welcome to this Honorable House, many
Petitions have been, which yet came not from an Assembled body of any County
(as this does) we do therefore hope to find as gentle and favorable a
reception of this as any other have found of their Petitions, our hearts
witnessing unto us, as good, peaceable, and pious purposes as the best.

These are therefore the true and Ardent desires of this County.

1. That you will be pleased to accept our due and hearty thanks for those
excellent Laws (which by his Majesty's grace and goodness) you have obtained for
us. 2. That all Laws against Papists, be put in due execu^ion, and an account
taken of their disarming, and that all Children of the Papists, may be brought
up in the reformed Religion. 3. That the Solemn Litturgy of the Church of
England (Celebrious by the piety of the Bishops and Martyrs who composed it)
established by the supreme Laws of this Land, attested and approved by the best
of all Foreign Divines, confirmed by the suscription of all the Ministry of
this Land. A Clergy as able and Learned as any in the Christian world ere
enjoyed, and with a holy love embraced by the most and best of all the Laity,
that this holy exercise of Religion may by your Authority be enjoyed quiet and
free from interruptions, scorns, prophanenes, threats and force of such men,
who daily do deprave it, and neglect the use of it in diverse Churches, in
despite of the Laws established. 4. That Episcopal Government, as Ancient in
this Island as Christianity it self, deduced and dispersed throughout the
Christian world, even from the Apostolical times, may be preserved (as the
most pious most prudent, and most safe Government) for the peace of the Church.
5. That all differences concerning. Religion and Ceremonies, may be referred to
a Lawful, free, and National Synod, as your Remonstrance promises, to a
general Synod of most grave, learned, pious and Judicious Divines, (the proper
Agents) whose interests, gifts, and callings, may quicken them in that great
Work, whose choice to be by all the Clergy of the Land, because all the
Clergy are to be bound by their Resolutions, and the determination of this
Synod to bind us all, when you have first formed them into a Law, and this we
take to be according to the ancient and fundamental Law of this Land,
confi^med by Magna Charta. 6. That some speedy and good provision may be made
(as by his Majesty has been and is by all good men desired) against the odious
and abominable scandal of schismatical and seditious Sermons and Pamphlets,
and some severe Law made against Lay men, for daring to arrogate to themselves
and to execute the holy function of the Ministry, who (some of them) do sow
their impious and discontented Doctrine even in Sacred places, by abuse of
Sacred Ordinances, to the advancing of Heresy, Schism, Profaneness,
Libertinisme, Anabaptisme, and Atheism. 7. That if the coertive power of
Ecclesiastical Courts by way of Excommunication be already abrogated, or shall
be thought fit so to be, that there be some other power and authority speedily
established, for suppressing the heinous and now so much abounding sins of
Incest, Adultery, and Fornication, and other crimes, and for recovering Tithes,
repairing of Churches, Probate of Wills, Church assesses, providing bread and
Wine for the Communion, and choice of Churchwardens, and other officers in the
Church and especially for Ministers, who neglect the Celebrating of the Holy
Communion, and the Parishioners for not receiving. 8. That the Professors of
that Learned faculty of the Civil Law, and (without which this Kingdom cannot
but suffer manifold inconveniences) may not find discouragements, and so divert
their Studies and Professions. 9. That honor and profits the powerful
encouragements of industry, Learning, and Piety, may be preserved without
further dimination to the Clergy. 10. That you please sadly to consider the
bleeding wounds of our Brethren in Ireland, and with speedy succors endeavor
to preserve them, whereunto his Majesty has promised a gracious concurrence.
11. That you please to frame an especial Law for the Regulating of the Militia
of this Kingdom, so that the Subject may know how at once to obey both his
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, a Law whereby may be left to the
discretion of Governors, as little as may be, but that the number of Arms and
what measure of punishment shall be inflicted upon the offenders, may be
expressly set down in the Act, and not left to any Arbitrary power, and that
according to the president of former Laws the offenders may not be tried out
of the County. 12. That the Precious Liberty of the Subject (the common birth
right of every Englishman) may be as in all these points preserved entire, so
in this also, that no order of either of both Houses not grounded on the Laws
of this Land, may be enforced on the Subject, till it be fully enacted by
parliament. 13. That his Majesty's gracious Message of the 20. of Ian. last,
for the present and future establishment of the Privileges of Parliament, the
free enjoying of our estates and Fortunes, the liberty of our persons, the
security of the true Religion professed, the maintaining of his Majesty's Just
and Regal Authority, the establishing his Revenue, may be taken into speedy
consideration, the effecting whereof will satisfy the desires of all us, his
faithful and loving Subjects, 14. That all possible care may be taken, that
the Native Commodities of this Kingdom, may have a quick vent, and that
Clothing, and other Manufactures may be improved, wherein the livelihood of
many thousands do consist, and that Trade may be balanced, that the
importation do not exceed the exportation, otherwise it will prove a
consumption of the Land. 15. That you please to frame some Laws concerning
Depopulations, Purveyances, Cart-taking, delays in Justice, Traffic, Fishing
in the Coasts, Fulling earth, that out Sea Forts may be repaired, and our
Magazins renewed. 16. That you please to consider the general poverty that
seems to overgrow this Kingdom. 17. Lastly, We humbly beseech you to consider
the sad condition, that we and the whole Land are in, if a good understanding
be not speedily renewed between his Majesty and both houses of Parliament.
Our hopes are yet above our fears, secure them we beseech you, God direct and
guide your consultations for the removing of all distrusts and Iealousies, for
the renewing that tie of confidence and trust, (which is the highest happiness)
between our gracious Prince, and his loving Subjects.

And you shall have the daily prayers of your humble Orators of the Commonalty
of Kent.

To meet at Black Heath the 29. of April, by 9. of the Clock at the furthest
to accompany this Pettion to the Parliament. 1642.

FINIS.

