TWO HORRID MURDERS; ONE, COMMITTED UPON THE PERSON OF HENRY the Fourth of
FRANCE. THE OTHER UPON HIS SON IN LAW, CHARLES the First of ENGLAND.

Of the various and lasting Tortures endured by the Murderers of the One
(extracted out of Mr. HOWELL his History of LEWIS the 13th.)

And of the easy short Punishments undergone by the Murderers of the Other.

Though for the Atrocity of the Fact, They were not inferior to the First, but
considering all circumstances, and complication of Treasons went beyond Him.

By JAMES PARRY of Poston, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Broom at the Gun in Ivie-lane, 1661.

DEDICATED IN ALL HUMBLENESS TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord high Chancellor,
AND PRIME OFFICER OF THE CROWN of ENGLAND.

OF THE TWO HORRID MURDERS, OR PARRICIDES (The Worst sort of Murders)
Committed upon HENRY the Fourth of France, and CHARLES the First of England.
These two Execrable Murders, together with the Murderers, as they agree, and
hold parallel in many things, so they differ in some other.

They agree touching the Atrocity and hainousness of the main Act, both the
Murders being perpetrated upon the Sacred Persons of two Great Christian
Kings; And that They were Murdered by their own vassals who were bound unto
Them by solemn Oaths of Allegiance, Fidelity and Obedience; They agree, that
as the French Assassin alleged that he was lead thereunto by certain
Illuminations which he was contented to call afterward Tentations, so the
Infernal Murderers in England pretended to have Newlights ever and anon; They
both agreed in an abominable kind of blasphemy, in that they made God himself
the chief Author thereof, and that it was his work more then Man's.

They differ, In that the Murder in France was committed by one single
Assassin, for he would never confess in the highest agonies of Torture, that
any knew of it but Himself, no not his Ghostly Fathers, for fear of discovery;
for so he said the Intent might be punished for the Deed.

But the English Murderers, may be called an ugly Hydra with many heads, who
after diverse previous consultations committed the Crime.

The Murder in France was sudden, close and Clandestin, But that in England
was long a moulding, It was done in the face of the Sun, and pretended to be
done according to Justice, and the Laws, in which particular they far exceeded
Ravaillac in a hellish kind of impudence; It was done before the chief Gate of
his own House which was always held a sanctuary.

Moreover, Henry the Fourth was quickly put out of pain, but King Charles was
Crucified as it were long before His death; For those Murderers like so many
Hellhounds may be said to have worried Him up and down from place to place,
from prison to prison a great while, where they studied how to make him weary
of His life before they took it away; For they berest him of those things which
conduce to the common comfort of mankind, (whereof the most infamous Fclou is
not barred of,) as Wife, Children, Chaplains, Servants; and place still about
Him those whose faces He most abhorrd, which put Him in perpetual
apprehensions of being Murtherd privately; And if He was found to like any of
His Keepers, they were presently removed from about Him.

Lastly, The Murderers differ in point of punishment, for though the English
were higher in mischief, being not only Traitors to Him their King upon earth,
but also to the great King of Heaven, and to their own Country, having so
sacrilegiously plundered the One, and plunged the Other in blood and war, yet
They had but a short kind of punishment, lasting scarce a quarter of an hour,
which took away the sense of feeling the rest.

But He of France had lingering Tortures insted of punishments, which extended
to the utmost length of time, possibility of sense, and possibility of nature,
as is mentioned in this Incomparable Histroy, which touching this point begins
as follows.

There was a gentle Calm through all Christendom, and France had not the least
share of it, having continued twenty years together in a constant repose
without the lest tintumarre, or motion of Arms, A rare thing amongst so
spritefull and quicksylver'd people to whom Peace becomes a surfeit any longer
then they have picked up their crummes to feed a new war, say there was a
Catholic peace throughout Europe when Henry the Fourth of France would needs
get a horseback upon a great Martial design which was a mystery for the time,
so that all men stood at a maze what he meant, the business was carried so
closely, whereupon he raises a potent Army of Horse and Foot.

But behold the greatest example of the libricity and instableness of mundane
affairs, and of the sandy foundation whereon the highest pomp and purposes of
Men are grounded that any Age can parallel, For this Great King (as I told you
before,) having a most powerful and a kind of irresistible Army of about
40000. combatants, all choice men, conducted by Veteran Commanders, and the
most expert that Europe could afford, and all of them well appointed and in
perfect equipage; The King having also a mount of gold as high as a lance (as
the French writers have it,) estimated at sixteen millions of treasure to
maintain this Army; He having assured his Confederates abroad, and settled all
things at home; He having also caused his Queen to be Crowned in the highest
magnificence that could be with intent to appoint Her Regent in his absence.

Behold this mighty King amongst these triumphs of his Queen, being to go the
next day to his Army, when his spirits were at their highest elevation, and his
heart swelling with Assurances rather then Hopes of success and glory, going
privately in the afternoon to his Arsenal to view his Artillery, He was stopped
in a small street by so contemptible a thing as a Colliers cart, and there,
from among the arms of his own Nobles who were with him in the Coach, he was
thrust violently out of the world by one of the meanest of his own vassalls,
who with a prodigious hardiness fastening his foot upon the Coach-wheel reached
him ore the shoulders of one of his greatest Lords, and stabbed him to the very
heart, and with a monstrous undantedness of resolution making good his first
stab with a second, dispatched him suddenly from off the earth, as if a Mouse
had strangled an Elephant.

-- Sic parvis pereunt ingentia rebus. The French stories speak of diverse
Auguries and predictions of his death; but I will insert here a passage or two
that are not to be found in any Printed Author, therefore not vulgar, And our
intent is to refrain from stuffing this Piece with any thing that has been too
much blown upon. The first is a Prophecy in an Italian Manuscript from a good
hand written above a hundred years since, which runs thus, Un Gran Re di
Francia havendo le spalle al papa voltate sinchmerd poi a Roma, dallo piu alto
della sua gloria.

Le taglitera la vita,
Un coltell feroce
Che n'andara la voce
Per tutto il mundo.
Thus rendered into English,

A Great French King having his face
Turned from the Pope, shall then embrace
The Roman Faith, but after, He
At highest pitch of Majesty,
Shall by a Fatal knife be rent
To all the Worlds astonishment.
To this may be added the speech of Francico Corvini a Toscan Astrologer, who
the night before the said Henry the fourth was slain, leaning upon a balcone in
Florence which is near upon 600. miles distant from Paris, and as he was prying
into the motions of the stars, he suddenly broke out of his speculations into
these words, To morrow one of the greatest Monarks of Christendom is to be
slain And the very next day the mortal stab was given by Ravaillac: Add
hereunto a memorable presaging Dream that the Queen mother had the night
before the murder was committed, for after the triumphs of her Coronation, she
dreamt that the diamonds and jewels that were in her Crown were all turned to
perl, which have been always held the emblemes of Tears.

That Ravaillac was observed to have been a melancholy odd humorist a great
while, one who had at times some fits and flashes of Illuminations as his
friends gave out afterward; Now, such is the strength of Imagination and force
of Fancy, that having let in false Idoeas into the brain, and being fomented by
some fatuous Zeal, it hurls a man headlong oftentimes upon desperate attempts
and undertakings, of inevitable danger, making him misprise his own life, so
that he may be master of another, specially when the enterprise is heated with
hope of Merit, Revenge, and Fame.

Thus fell one of the compleatest Kings under which the Flower de luces ever
flourished, a spriteful and welltemper'd Prince, excellently versed in the
study and knowledge of men, always well disposed, pleasant and witty, Close in
his Counsels, and constant in his purposes, Parsimonious, yet open-handed to
Cadetts or younger brothers, whom he loved to see about Him rather then Elder
brothers, who were already advanced by Nature; And lastly, though this be but a
quarter Character of Him, He was a great discerner of worth and virtue, a brave
quality, and one of the prime Requisites in a King; For subjects are
industrious or dissolute, They have aspiring thoughts to virtue, and get good
Parts according as their Prince has judgment to distinguish and value their
worth, and so to employ and advance them.

The memory of this King is yet as fresh in France, as if he had been taken
away but yesterday, and his death was universally resented, as much as admired,
both at home and abroad.

But though the Sun was thus suddenly set in a dark ruddy cloud in the French
firmament, yet no night ensued, for another did presently rise up, shot his
rays through every corner of that part of the hemisphere, viz. Lewis the
Thirteenth, etc.

The report of that monstrous Parricide committed on the Person of so glorious
a King did penetrat all hearts, and made a strange kind of consternation to
seize upon the minds of men. Though it was no new thing in France to have their
King torn away from them so, for it was fresh in the memory of many thousands,
how two and twenty years before Henry the third his immediate Predecessor was
dispatched away in that manner, but the Assassin presently found his tomb in
the very place where he did perpetrate the Fact, being immediately hacked to
pieces.

The Court of Parliament presently met that afternoon, and declared Dame Maria
de Medice Queen Regent of all France, which was the next day confirmed by the
young King her Son sitting Himself on the bed of Royal Justice; This was done
without any opposition or scruple at all, for King Henry had designed her for
Queen Regent before during his absence in the wars, and the reverence that all
had to the judgment of so wise and well beloved a King advantaged the work,
with a favorable conjuncture of other circumstances; For both the Princes of
the blood were then absent, The Count of Soillons was far up in the Country,
where he had retired not without some coffeehouse; The Prince of Conde was
then in Italy. There were also two great Armies in motion, one under the
Marshall Lesdigueres in Dauphine, The other under the command of the Duke of
Nevers in Champanis ready to suppress any insurrection.

The Queen Mother being thus established in her Regency put three things to
present consultation.

1. The security of the Kingdom,

2. A satisfaction to Justice for the Murder of the King.

3. His Obsequies, or rites of Funeral.

Concerning the first and last, it makes nothing for our present purpose, but
touching the second which was the expiation of the Kings blood, and
satisfaction to and how Ravaillac should be punished much pains was taken: At
his first examination, they would have persuaded him that the King was not dead
but like to recover, whereat he smiled, saying, that he knew well enough the
Work was done, for 'twas not he but the hand of Heaven that did it: Being
thereupon asked, how he durst embrue his hands in the blood of Gods Anointed,
the most Christian King, and his Sovereign Natural Prince? at the word most
Christian, he smiled again in a king of slighting manner; Being searched, there
was found about him a pair of beads, and a heart made of Cotton with a piece of
wood in it, which he was made to believe was a part of that very Cross whereon
Christ suffered: All means imaginable were assayed to make him discover if he
had had any Instigators or accomplices in this Infernal plot, but he still
answered positively and constantly he had had none at all, saying, that he
durst never speak of it to any, no not to his Confessor for fear of discovery;
for so he might have been punished for the Will only, without the Decd; yet a
Jesuit and a Cordelier Friar who were his Ghostly Fathers, were strictly
examined, but nothing could be had out of them; Thereupon there arose a nice
question among the Divines, viz. Whether the Priest was bound to reveal the
Confesions of his Penitent? But 'twas only propounded, and so left only
problematical and undecided for that time.

Now, Every one did scrue up his invention for the devising some exquisit
lasting torment for Ravaillac; among others the Butchers of Paris who are
habituated to blood, proposed a way to flay him alive, and the torture of
excouation should last for three days; Others gave the draught of an Instrument
in form of an Obelisk where he might be pressd, and the torment should continue
a long time, and life continue; Others propounded a way to have his body quite
cut off from the hipps downwards, and his bowels to be presently clapped on a
hot iron plank, which should preserve the other half of the body, and the noble
parts in pangs of agony a long while.

But the Court of Justice though it fit to wave all these ways, and to
pronounce this Arrest or Sentence of condemnation against him, viz. That
Francis Ravaillack Practitioner (or Pleader) in the Town of Angoulesme, a
Criminal process being formed against him, and after due Examination,
Information, Interrogations, Confession, Denegation, Confrontation of
witnesses, at the instances of the Kings Attorney General, for that most
wicked, most abominable, and most detestable Parricide, committed on the person
of the late King Henry the fourth of most good and laudable memory. For
reparation of which damnable murder the Court has declared, and does does
declare, that the said Francis Ravaillac shall be carried in a tombrell naked
in his shirt, with a flaming torch of two pound weight in his hand, before the
principal gate of the great Church in Paris there to make honorable amends,
and thence to be carried to the Greve or common place of execution, where
holding the knife in his hand wherewith he perpetrated that most accur sed
Parricide, his hand shall be first pierced with the said knife, and then burnt
up with fire of sulf^r upon the open stage; That he shall have the Brodequins
or buskins filled with scalding oil applied unto his legs; That he shall be
pincerd in the paps, thighs, and braun or calf of the legs, that holes shall
be made up and down his body, wherein boiling lead, burning rozin, and wax
metled with sulpher shall be powered; That his body afterward shall be drawn
and dismembered by four horses; That his members shall bethen burnt and reduced
to cinders, and the ashes thrown into the a^ir an utter extinction of him in
this world: That the House wherein he was born in Angoulesme shall be razd and
made even with the ground, provided that he who possesses it shall be
indemnified, and that none shall ever presume to build upon that piece of earth
again. That all his goods stable or moveable shall be confiscated to the King;
That within fifteen days after the publication of this sentence, his Father and
Mother shall quit the Kingdom of France never to return; That his Brothers,
Sisters, Uncles, and others of his Kindred shall never for the future bear the
name of Ravaillac under pain of being hanged and strangled, but change it to
some other Surname.

This dismal sentence was executed to the very height of torture, and extended
to the utmost length of time, possibility of sense, and possibility of natural
strength, for there were ways invented, and such Cordialls given that kept him
from syncopps, and fitts of swowning; Before, at the beginning, and in the
midst of all his torments, there could be no other confession extorred from
him, though he was sifted with all the sagacity and artifice that could be, but
that the sole motives which hurld him on so desperate an attempt were certain
Revelations that he said he had had, which afterward he was contented to call
Temptations; And that he thought he should do a work acceptable to God Almighty
to take away a King who was a Favourer of Heretics, and who went about with
the Army he had raised to perturbe the peace of the Catholic Church, and of
the Holy Father the Pope.

The people in general did love the deceased King so passionately, that
nothing but Imprecations, Curses, and all sorts of Maledictions could be heard
ecchoing from them, so that none did pity him, or were heard to pray with him
or for him all the while he was upon the scatfold, and in the midst of his
torments, nay scarce any were found that wished the salvation of his soul. And
touching his Body after it was torn by horses, happy was he that could get any
piece of it to cast intoa fire, insomuch that it might be said he was burnt in
more then twenty places up and down the City and Suburbs in several great
fires; So Nemesis had her glut, for that infernal Assassin may be said not
only to be executed but extinguished, or rather annihilated and reduced to a
nonentity, only he has a Being in story for an everlasting villain, as he who
burnt the Temple of Diana.

Thus far goes our Noble Historian, whereby it appears, that the English Clime
is far more mild in point of Justice then France, for though the Murder here
was altogether of as transcendent a nature, and more horrid then the French,
considering all circumstances, and complication of Treasons, it being a thing
unexampled since the world began, that a King should be so arraigned before his
own Subjects as a Criminal; nor did their Malice terminate with his life, but
after his death they hired scurrilous Pamphleters to bespatter him, and withal
caused his statutes to be battered, his pictures bu^nt, and his Arms taken
down in Churches; I say, though the English Murderers were far more
abominable, yet their punishment was much more easy and short.

In conclusion, observable it is, that among those varieties of punishments
which were insticted upon Ravaillac, there were two that followed him after
death; For an Edict or Act of Parliament passed, that the House he was born in
should be razd to the ground, and not a stone left on a stone, with a kind of
Anathema that none should ever build or d^^ll there again, Another Act passed
that all his Kindred should take another Surname, and call themselves no more
Ravaillac, under pain of being hanged and strangled.

Which two particulars are humbly recommended to the Great Council of England,
viz. the two Houses of Parliament, upon their Re-accesse.

JAMES PARRY.

FINIS.

