ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
SAPIENTIA (...) blazon of the University of Oxford
To the right Worshipful the Heads of the respective Colleges and Halls in the
UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.
Sirs,
YOu are desired to signify to your Societies, that whereas on Friday morning
next there is intended to be held a Convocation in the Theater, for the
Vniversity's being invested in the Possession of it: All persons under the
Degree of Masters of Art, are to forbear to press, and thereby make
disturbance.

Withal you are desired to enform them whom it may concern, that the rising
Semicircle of the House, is reserved for the Doctors and Noble men; and the
whole Area for the Masters of Art.

You are farther desired to let them know, that in the Afternoon of the same
day, there will be held the Encoenia or Dedication of the House; where, as at
all times during the whole Act: the aforesaid Semicircle, will be the place of
the Doctors, Noble men, and Inceptors in the superior faculties. The Enclosure
within the Rail, the place of Inceptors in Arts. The Gallery beyond the Doctors
in the Circular part of the Theater, will be the place of Masters. The side
Gallery Westward is reserved for the Cambridge men: That Eastward for
Strangers. The Galleries in the Front for Ladies and Gentlewomen. The Upper
Gallery above the Masters, is appointed for the Gentlemen Commoners and
Bachelors. Those above the Cambridge men and Strangers, for Commoners. That
above the Ladies for performances of Music: The Area for Persons of
promiscuous Quality.

For preserving of Order, there are, besides the Curators of the Theater,
appionted several Proctors of it; who, according to the Statute made in that
behalf, are to take care that the public Peace be kept undisturbed; and that
all persons be placed in their aforesaid Stations; for whose assistance, there
are assigned several Officers and door-keepers, to be subservient to them, and
execute their commands.

It is strictly required, that during the time of the Act, all Persons do
appear in their Gowns and Caps: and particularly, all Vndergraduates, and
Bachelors of Arts comport themselves with that Sobriety and Modesty as may tend
to the Reputation and Honor of the University, upon pain of being entered into
the black Book, and otherwise proceeded against as the exigence of their faults
shall require.

Withal it is required, that no person below the condition of a Gentleman or
Fellow-Commoner, shall presume to wear a Silk Cap; or pretend to a place beyond
that which really belongs to him.

And lastly, it is Ordered that no Scholar resident in the University, of what
condition soever, shall be admitted upon any pretense into the Theater, who is
not in his Gown and Cap.

JOHN FELL Vice-Chan: of OXFORD.
The Names of the Curators and Proctors for the Theater, in the following Act.
Curators.
Dr. Yates, Dr. Ironsides
PROCTERS.
Mr. Pullen of Magd: Hall, Mr. Hersent of New Col. Mr. Halsted of Brasenose,
Mr. Fletcher of Corp: Ch: Mr. Martin of Christ Ch: Mr. Huntington of Merton,
Mr. Hobbs of Magdalen, Mr. Robinson of Queens, Mr. Whalley of Wadham, Mr. Field
of Trinity. Mr. Edwards of Jesus, Mr. Colliber of Exeter, Mr. Clerk of
Lincoln, Mr. Thomas of Univers: Mr. Frampton of Pemb. Mr. Workman of Alsoules,
Mr. Asgill of St John's.



OX^FORD, Printed by H. Hall printer to the University. 1669.


