TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of Captain Morgan Polden, Esquire.
Showing, That Sir Henry Cheney Knight, late Lord Cheney, was summoned to
several Parliaments as one of the Peers of this Realm in the time of the late
famous Queen Elizabeth, by the name of Henry Cheney of Tudengton Chr: And
accordingly sat in the said several Parliaments as one of the Barons of this
Realm; as by the Records of this honorable House does appear.

That by virtue of the said summons and sitting, the said Lord Cheney became
seized in fee-simple of the Title and Dignity of a Baron of this Realm,
discendible to his heirs, and accordingly enjoyed the same by the name of Lord
Cheney of Tudington.

That afterward 3. September. 29. Elizabeth, the said Lord Cheney died at
Tudington seized of the said Title of Honor, without issue of his body; after
whose decease the said Title of honor descended, and of right ought to have
descended to Thomas Cheney Esquire, Cousin and heir of the said Henry Lord
Cheney, that is to say, son and heir of Thomas Cheney, son and heir of
John Cheney, son and heir of John Cheney, son and heir of Sir Roger
Cheney Knight, brother of Sir William Cheney Knight, father of Sir Thomas
Cheney Knight of the Garter, father of the said Henry Lord Cheney.

That the said Thomas Cheney about 15. Rs Jacobi died without issue; by reason
whereof the said Title of Honor is of right descended to your Petitioner as
Cousin and heir unto the said Henry Lord Cheney, and the said Thomas Cheney
Esquire; that is to say, son and heir of Dorothy the wife of Thomas Polden
Esquire, sole sister and heir of the said Thomas Cheney the son, as by the
pedigree annexed appears. By reason whereof your Petitioner ought to bear,
hold, and enjoy the said Title of Honor, and all privileges and
preheminencies thereunto belonging.

That your Petitioner having hitherto spent his time in the service of this and
foreign States in the Wars, has not been so pressing in the prosecution of
his right as otherwise he had been: Nevertheless he is now desirous to pursue
the actual enjoyment of that right which the Laws of this Kingdom cast upon
him, and his posterity.

May it therefore please your Lordships to hear your Petitioners Title to the
said Dignity, and upon due proof thereof to admit your Petitioner to the
enjoyment of such Rights, Privileges, and Preheminencies as belongs to one of
the Peers of this Realm.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. MORGAN POLDEN.

Sir John Cheney of Shurland in the Isle of Shepey in Com: Kanc: Knight. Sir
William Cheney Knight, eldest Son. Sir Thomas Cheney Knight of the Garter.
Henry Lord Cheney of Tudington dyed without issue.

Sir Roger Cheney Knight, younger Son. John Cheney. John Cheney of Woodhay in
Com: Berks. Thomas Cheney of Woodhay in Com: Berks: Mary daughter of Thomas
Roberts of Glasenbury in Com: Kane: First wife. Anne daughter of Edward Scott
of Mole in Com: Sussex Second wife. Thomas Cheney next Cousin and heir unto
Henry Lord Cheney by Inquisition. Dorothy Cheney Sister and sole heir to
Thomas married to Thomas Polden of Ewrenminster in Com. Dorses Esquire.
Captain Morgan Polden Son and heir.
Robert Cheney who had issue Henry Cheney.





IT appears to me upon credible testimony, and good Certificates, that
Captain Morgan Polden was the son and heir of Thomas Polden of Ewrenminster
in the County of Dorset Esquire, who married Dorothy Chen^^ who was daughter of
Thomas Cheney of Woodhay in the County of Berks, Esquire; and sister and sole
heir of Thomas Cheney the son, who (...) cousin and next heir of the whole
blood to Henry Lord Cheney of Tudington, as is above expressed.

Heralds Office, ^^^^emb ^^ 1644 Ita testor W^ (...) Lancaster.


