Preparations for each Knight of the Bath.
INprimis, A Bedsted Pallett with a Mattress or Feather-bed, as also Bolster,
Pillow, Blankets, Sheets, Coverlets, and Covering of Red Rug or Say, with a
Demi-Tester to the same of Red Say, without Curtains. Item, His Bath to be
prepared with a Cross Hoop over it, and a Three-leg'd Stool in the one end
thereof, and covered with 14. yards of Red Say, and a Carpet, with 18. or 20.
Else of Linen Cloth to line the same both without and within. ^ing Tubb Bath
and Stool with 3 Legs are to (...) ^^vided at the charge of the Kings Harbor
For his first Habit.
Item, Cloth of Friars Russet to make a long Gown, with wide Sleeves and Hood
thereto, in form of an Hermites weed, tied close about the Middle with a Cordon
of Ash-colored and Russet Silk, (made round of Finger-work, and knit full of
knots before, reaching down almost to the knees) and a white Napkin or
Handkercheif hanging thereat. Item, A pair of Stockings of black Kersey called
Chause Semelle, soaled with black Leather sowed to them; they using with them
no other Shoos, but sometimes wearing a pair of black Slippers to keep them
from taking cold.
For his second Habit.
Item, A Mantle and Surcoat of Red Taffata, lined and edged with white Taffata
or Sarcenet, and thereto fastened two long strings of white Silk, with Buttons
and Tassels of red Silk and Gold, and a pair of white Gloves tied to them: Also
a Coyfe of white Lawne for his head, with a white Hat and a white Feather.
Item, A Sword, the Pomel whereof and the Cross-hilt to be gilt, the Scabbard of
white Leather, Girdle and Belt of the same, with Buckles of Iron or other
Metal. Item, White Boots, and a pair of gilt Spurs, with white Leathers. Item,
Four Horses Sadled, (viz. for Himself, his two Esquires, and one Page:) That
for himself having a black Leather Saddle, bordered with white Leather, the
Arson white; no Croper, but a Pectoral having a Cross Patee gilt thereon; and
on the Forehead another: Also black Stirrup-Leathers with gilt Stirrups. Item,
A black Bridle of Leather, having a broad Reyne and a small long Reyne.
Note that the Horse for the Page, and Horse for the two Esquires, are to be
furnished as the Knight himself pleases.

For his third Habit.
Item, To have a long Gown of Purple Satin, the Sleeves turned up at the
hands half a yard deep, with white Taffata (after the manner of a Doctor or
Batchellor of Law's Gown) edged with white Taffata, and sometimes lined
throughout, with a Hood to the same, pursled with like Taffata about half an
Inch deep. On his left Shoulder a small Lace of white Silk. Item, Two Three
Eschocheons of his Arms, with Crest: And if he be a Nobleman, to be with
Supporters. These are to be cared for by the officers of (...) Item, A Table
and his Mess of Meat.
Also every Knight is to provide an Angel in Gold for his Offering in the
Chapel.

(...)These are to be Provided at the Charge of ye Sargeant of the Chaundry
The Proportions of Cloth and Silk for the Robes before specified.
Inprimis, Three Yards and a half of Gray Cloth for his Gown and Cap. Item,
Thirteen Else of Crimson Taffata for the Robe and Surcoat. Item, Sixteen Yards
of Purple Satin for the Robe and Hood. Item, Three Else of white Taffata to
edge and face the Silk Rober. Item, Cordels or strings, with great Tassels of
Crimson silk and Gold for the Crimson Robe; and a small one of Purple and Gold
for the Purple Robe.
Note that the Esquires and Page are to be richly habited, and that every
Knight to have two Footmen.


