Prince Butler's QUERICAL DEMONSTRATIONS Relating to The East India Trade. Part
II.
1. SInce some very good Friends, of both Old and New Stocks, are endeavoring,
by all honest ways, together, to join, and in order thereto, are Writing,
Pleading, and Printing their Cases; and since Losers have always the Liberty to
speak, why may not I as well Print and Plead my Case; For I am sure I have as
much, nay more reason to do it than they?

2. If these two contending Stocks be made one, and the English Manufacturers
Case be not taken some care of, I can, without Star-gazing, plainly foresee,
That they, and some other Folks, soon Ruined will be; And therefore pray, Mind
what I say; If not for their sakes, for your own, be pleased to take care on it.

3. Is it not much more demonstrable, That the East India Trade is of greater
advantage to England than 'twas two Years ago; For since that time, it has in a
great measure Ruined the Canterbury Silk Trade, and obliged most of the London
Silk Weavers, Throwsters, etc. to give over their several Trades and
Employments?

4. Will not this be of great Advantage to all the Clothing Counties in
England, because some of these poor People, rather than starve, are gone to
Ireland, and set up Trade there; others fallen to Comb, Card, and Spin; make
Cloths; Stuffs and Serges; who being at the Principal Market, can make and sell
them as well, or better, than the Country Weaver and Clothier can do?

5. Does not Sir Jos. Child, who is well known to be Skilful in Trade, prove
plainly, That the Discourse of Trade. The Preface.
East India Trade ought to be greatly Encouraged, when he tells us in Print,
That the Expense of Foreign Commodities, especially Foreign Manufactures, is
the worst Expense a Nation can be inclinable to, and ought to be prevented as
much as possible?

6. Has not the Author of the Essay on the E. India Trade, as sufficiently
proved it Gainful, not Essay on the East India Trade page 14.
only to us, but all Europe, when he tells us, They had been Richer by a full
Third than they now are, if that Trade had never been Discovered or Undertaken;
and that it bears hard only upon those Countries that Consume those Commodities?

7. Is it not plain, That it bears not hard upon England, since it could never
be proved (and I challenge any now to do it) That we Consume at Home, in
Ireland, or our Plantations, above nine parts in ten: Or that in Foreign Parts
(except our Plantations, etc) there are Consumed above one eighth part of the
Wrought Silks, Bengals, and Printed Callicoes?

8. Since it is allowed this Trade is hurtful to Europe, and all are agreed in a
General Peace, What if they should agree to Banish it out of all their
Dominions? But if not, Why should we restrain any part, Since we have nothing
from thence of solid Use, (but) Materials for Luxury, and Page 12.
perishable Commodities, for our Gold and Silver, which is there buried, as the
same Author tells us?

9. Is it not better we should be at four or five hundred thousand Pounds
Charge per An. for Indian Vanities, having such plenty of Money, than for the
sake of employing our own Poor, upon our own Wool, disoblige several Maids and
their Mistresses, who would then be at a loss how to Dress up themselves, their
Chambers, Parlours, and Closets?

10. Is it not our Interest (as the Essayer tells us) to wear these Indian
Manufactures, because they would soon bring down the price of our own so low,
That we may Export them to all Foreign Page 29.
Markets, and be able to under sell all Nations; For (surely) they neither can,
or will ever think of falling in their Prices as we do.

11. Or if they should, rather than leave off and starve, sell their
Commodities as cheap as we, Pray what shall we get by this Learned Advice,
since, after all, our Reducing the Indian, that Work for a Penny a Day, will out
do us all, unless we are resolved to Work as Cheap, or Cheaper than they?

12. Will not the Falling the Prices reduce the Wages of the Poor, and by that
means make the Nation grow Rich, since Sir Jos. Child has very well observed,
That where ever Wages are high, Preface.
throughout the whole World, it is an infallible Evidence of the Riches of that
Country; And where Wages for Labor runs low, it is a proof of the Poverty of
that Place?

13. But if bringing down the Prices will be such an Advantage, Why may we not
as well send for the Corn we spend to the East Country, for theirs is much
cheaper than ours? And then we may send our own Corn with our own Cloth, etc.
to seek Abroad for a Market; Would not this soon Raise the Value of all the
Rents and Lands in England?

14. And to save yet the more, employ the Dutch Shipping, for they always Sail
much cheaper than we do, and then we may send our own Ships to all Foreign
Nations, that either want, or will hire them, or else save the Building of
more, to the much greater Preservation of both our Seamen and Timber?

15. And if naught but cheap Working will vend our Commodities, let us to it in
good earnest, Page 27.
and Employ the Twelve hundred Thousand which the Essay tells us receives Alms,
which by the way is a very great Number, and shows how much we want the poor
Indians to Work for us, and they sure will bring down the Prices so low, that
when our Money is gone, the Indians will take some Stuffs for their Callicoes.

16. What if the Landed Men should apprehend, that this would Beggar their
Tenants, and Fall all their Rents, Cannot we by another Essay, with Rhetorical
Flourishes, amuse them, and then by imaginary, or fabulous Computation, etc.
prove this cannot be; Or that it is our Interest it should be so, rather than
restrain the East India Trade?

17. Has not this Nation been great Gainers for many Years by the use of
Muslings and Callicoes, which are worn in the room of German Linnens, Silesia
Cambricks, and Lawns? For the first we have had for our Money and Bullion: The
last were the Return of our own Woollen Mannfactures, which now we can keep for
our own use at Home.

18. Were not the Silesians very great Fools, when we would not take off their
Cambricks and Lawns, to set up the making of Woollen, with which they now
supply both themselves and their Neighbors; Whereas we could yet have very
well served them both for their Money? And may not some others soon follow such
foolish Examples?

19. If the Parliament would be so kind as to take off the Duty from course
Callicoes, which being from twenty to fifty per Cent. is a very great Clog upon
them; We could then also soon beat them out of most of the rest of their
Linnens, which might be as much more for the Profit and Gain of this Kingdom.

20. But if this will lessen the Customs, we are content they should double the
Duties on all Wrought Silks; for they may well bear about 25 per Cent. And
being such Bulky Commodities, sure none will Run them to save such small
Customs, or the Ladies wear them when they will be so dear: And will not this
please the Clamorous Silk Weavers?

21. Or if they complain still, Can any one think the Parliament may not have
some regard to so considerable a Company of poor Manufacturers as they are?
When as, with no very great difficulty, they lately passed an Act for Relief
and Support of the Hair and Silk Button-Makers?

22. If the East India Company had Imported these Commodities, would it not
have been easier for these Button Makers to have gained their Bill? And since
the Parliament have past an Act in favor of the Trimmings, may they not in
time do as much for the Principal Parts of the Garments?

23. And now to conclude: To your selves be so kind, These Quericals mind, For
they are designed, To inform all Mankind, So as Truth they may find, If not
wilfully Blind: But whosoe'r by private Interest is swayed, Or Money have paid,
To the East India Aid, I am very much afraid, That for all I have said, They
will me upbraid, And cry out I am Mad.

24. But if they do, I must tell them plain, I find in my Brain, So much Sense
still remain, As the Cause I Will maintain, Against them and their Train:
Therefore don't disdain, My Querical Strain, And I shall remain, Your Friend as
before, To stand at your Door, To plead for the Poor, And have yet in store, Of
such Quericals more, At least a whole Score: Which you may have when you please.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1699.


