SOME NEEDFUL INSTRUCTIONS FOR YOUTH.

Formerly Given by a PARENT to his CHILDREN. AND Hoping they may be Serviceable
to others, THEY are now Reprinted, and to be given away, by J. P.

Learn of ME (said our for ever Blessed LORD and Lawgiver) for I am Meek and
Lowly in Heart; and ye shall find Rest to your Souls,

Mat. XI. 29. Be Clothed with Humility: For GOD resists the Proud, and gives
Grace to the Humble,

1 Pet. V. 5. LONDON: Printed by John How, in Ram-Head-Inn-Yard, in
Fenchurch-Street, 1697.

CHAP. I. Dear Children, Hearken diligently to the Counsel and Advice of your
Parents, for they watch over you for your good.
IN the First place, let the Fear of the LORD, Who is the Searcher of your
Hearts, be always in your Minds, that in awe of HIM, you may for ever stand;
not daring to bring the least Reproach upon HIS Holy Name, by any Miscarriages
of yours; so shall you be CHILDREN to HIS Praise, and a Comfort and Blessing to
your Parents.

2. SEE that none of you render Evil for Evil unto any one; but do you ever
follow that which is Good, both amongst your selves, and toward all Men.

3. TAKE heed of letting out your Minds and Affections to Visible things; for
they Perish in the using, and bring Trouble and Sorrow to all whose Hearts are
set thereon; but let your Mind ^lways be retired Inwards, that you ^ay w^^^ to
feel That, which is not of this World, nor esteemed by it; but only esteemed
(...) T^^^e who know the Virtue and Excellency of it, and who have been willing
to part with all to purchase it; It is the Or W^^^ (...) STONE (...) NAME, Re^
2. (...) which no Man nor (...) nor ^^an know, but (...) that has it.
PEARL of greatest price; happy are they that have found, or that yet shall
find it.

4. TAKE heed of entering into many Words, when you are bid to do any Business,
either by your Parents, Masters, or other Superiors; but with all Readiness of
Mind, see you Obey all their Lawful Commands with Diligence and Cheerfulness.

5. BEWARE of mentioning the Name of the LORD in any case, but with Fear and
Reverence; for HIS Name is Hallowed by them that Fear HIM, but taken in Vain by
those that Fear HIM not. And though they seem to Praise or Pray unto HIM, yet
such Services, without HIS Fear, are an Abomination: Wherefore take heed you be
not Deceived by Those, who are only in the good Words, and fair Speeches; but
let your Minds be kept single to the LORD, and HE will show you, who They are,
that draw nigh to HIM with their Lips, when their Hearts are far from HIM; and
from such you are to turn away.

6. LET your Words be few; and be always more ready to Hear than Speak,
especially when the Question is not asked you: But when it is your place to
Speak, be sure it be in Mildness, Love, and Gentleness; lest through your
Provocation you cause others to Sin, and then you will not be Guiltless, for
their Sin will be charged upon you: Wherefore let this be always in your
remembrance, and for ever observed by you, (as it has been the Practice and
Experience of your Parents) to give Mild and Soft Answers, for they do often
turn away Wrath.

7. WHATEVER you see Virtuous in any, be sure to follow That; and what you see
Amiss in others, diligently search your own Hearts, lest your Selves be found
Guilty thereof; for it is an easy matter to see and find Fault with Another,
(most can do that) but few love to Examine Themselves: Be you (my dear
CHILDREN) of that Number, least you Perish with the Multitude; for the Way is
Broad that leads to Destruction, and Many walk therein: Therefore whilst you
are Young, seek after True Wisdom, and it will Guide and Lead you in that
Narrow Way, which all the Holy Men walked in, and in which All must walk,
before they can enter into Eternal Rest.

8. BEWARE of Reading Foolish and Vain Books, which tend only to the Corrupting
of Youth, and Dishonouring the LORD: Wherefore heed you only Those that tend to
Holiness and Virtue.

9. I WARN you; as I did at the first, so I do again Charge you, that you walk
in Fear and in Humility all the Days of your being upon the Earth; then shall
you know, that the LORD has not only Blessed and Prosper'd your Parents, but
will also Bless and Prosper You: But if you depart from HIS Fear, and cast
these my Instructions behind your Backs; then know, that you shall Perish in
your own Iniquities, and I shall (thus far) be clear in my Conscience
concerning you.

CHAP. II.
1. DEAR Children; Beware of a Lying, Flattering, Deceitful Tongue, both in
your selves and others: Also beware of Pride, Highmindedness, and an Exalted
Spirit; for such the Righteous GOD will judge.

2. BUT be you Adorned with Faithfulness, Meekness, and Patience; and let your
Behavior be Modest, Courteous, and Gentle toward all: And whatever you would
have Others do unto You, be sure you do that unto Them; and heed not so much
Their Duties, as your Own.

3. BUSY not your Minds with Others Concerns, but be you Careful and Diligent
in the Discharge of your Own; and then you need not be troubled, what Reproach
you bear for them.

4. BE sure you Waste not the Substance committed to your Trust: Yet, let not
That be a Cloak for Covetousness, ( that Grand Iniquity) but when there is cause
for it, part with it freely, lest through your Unfaithfulness therein, you be
Rejected both of GOD and Good Men; for know, you are but Stewards of what you
Possess, and for which you must be Accountable.

5. BE cautious how you enter into a Married Condition; but when in that State
(whatever Disappointment you meet withal) see that you Faithfully perform your
Relation therein; for another Iniquity and Unkindness to you, will not Justify
nor Excuse your Iniquity or Unkindness to them.

6. BEAR patiently Afflictions, for they are good for you; therefore hasten not
to be delivered from them; but in the Retiredness of your Minds, Consider the
Cause, and being bettered thereby, Bless the LORD for HIS Mercies; for whom HE
Loves, HE Chastises.

7. BE careful with whom you Associate; and choose none to be your Intimates,
but Such who are Exemplary in Virtue and Goodness; so will you avoid much
Contention and Trouble.

8. BE ready to do Good unto All, as Opportunity is offered: And take heed of
Wasting any of the Good Creatures; for if you be Unfaithful in those Things
that are Earthly, who shall commit to you Those that are Heavenly?

9. BE not desirous of Riches or Honor; neither Covet That which is another;
but be Content with your Present Conditions, and Learn to be as well Satisfied
with Want, as Abundance; then will you follow the Steps of your Parents, who
have learned Contentment, whatever befalls them,

10. BEWARE of Jeering, or Scoffing at any; neither give Abusive or Scurrilous
Language, (either by Tongue or Pen) for That will Provoke the LORD's Anger
against you, and bring Reproach and Trouble upon your Parents, who always
Disliked, yea Abhorred, such things.

11. BE careful your Hearts and Minds be kept Clean within, and then you need
not be Advised to have your Words and Actions Clean without, for that will
unavoidably follow.

12. BE not hasty in Reproving or Correcting of any; but if called thereto, let
it be in Love, and in Wisdom; and if the Offense be Great, let it be with
Severity, yet not in Anger or Passion; for That will Harden them against you;
and so instead of bettering them, you will thereby become Transgressors your
selves.

13. BEWARE that your Wills bear not Rule in any case, but let Truth and
Righteousness always be the Sway of your Judgments; then will you be delivered
from that great Iniquity, which has so deeply Corrupted many.

14. BE sure you have regard to the Oppressed, and take heed how you make
Advantage of Another Necessity, but rather Consider how you may be Helpful
unto them; always remembering the Parable of the good Samaritan, Luke 10.33.

15. BE Cautious for Whom you are Engaged, or unto Whom you are Obliged; for
such things do often prove Snares: But be more ready to Give, than to Receive,
and yet be sure to Acknowledge the least Kindness; for Ingratitude is hateful.

16. BE not Self-ended; neither spend too much upon your own Particulars,
either in Meats, Drinks, Clothing, or any thing else, for That may be a
hinderance to the Good you should do; but rather be Sparing in That which
relates to your Selves, that you may be in the better capacity to do the Good
you ought to perform to Others.

17. BE not found in many Needless Words; neither Contend with such as are in
them, for That begets Strife: But as They (out of the Evil that is in their
Hearts) bring forth Evil things; so do You (out of the Good that is in yours)
bring forth Good things.

18. BE not grasping after Earthly Concerns; for They bring Trouble and Sorrow;
and yet, how many, through their Eager Desires after such things, have choked
that Good, which once stirred in them? Wherefore, take Warning, and learn this
as a Truth Experienced by Me, that a Little will Satisfy a Contented Mind.

19. BE not desirous after that Knowledge, which will lift and puff up your
Minds; neither be too Prying into those Mysteries, that are hid; but if the
LORD should Reveal any thing unto You, be sure of Leave, When, and to Whom to
Impart it, not daring, either to Add, or Diminish; for That has been (and is,
this Day) a great and sore Evil.

20. BUT lest, through many Words, your Minds should be drawn forth, and (as
but too too many have been) hurt thereby, it is with me, to Conclude with those
Two Great and Weighty Commandments, viz.. the First is, You shall Love the LORD
with all your Hearts, with all your Souls, and with all your Strength. And the
Second is like unto it, You shall Love your Neighbors as your Selves: For upon
these Two Commandments depends All that can be Written, or Spoken, concerning
your Duties either to GOD or Men.

CHAP. III. Hear Me your Father, O Children, and do thereafter, that you may be
Safe. Ec. III. 1.
1. IF you come to Serve the LORD, prepare your Souls for Temptation. Set your
Hearts aright, and Constantly endure, and make not haste in time of Trouble.

2. WHATSOEVER is brought upon you, take Cheerfully: For, as Gold is Tried in
the Fire, so are Acceptable Men in the Furnace of Adversity.

3. SO incline your Ears unto Wisdom, and apply your Hearts to Understanding,
and seek Her as Silver, and search for Her as for hid Treasures: Then shall you
Understand the Fear of the LORD, and find the Knowledge of GOD.

4. HAPPY is the Man that finds Wisdom, and the Man that gets
Understanding: But where is Wisdom to be found, and where is the place of
Understanding? The Fear of the LORD, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil,
that is Understanding.

5. WISDOM exalts Her Children, and lays hold of them that seek Her; they
that love Her, love Life; and they that seek Her early, shall be filled with
Joy; and wheresoever She enters, the LORD will Bless; and if you commit your
selves unto Her, you shall inherit Her. But at the first, She will Walk with
you by Crooked Ways, and bring Fear and Dread upon you, and Torment you with
her Discipline, until She can Trust your Souls, and Try you by Her Laws. Then
will She return the Straight Way unto you, and Comfort you, and Show you of Her
Secrets. But if you go Wrong, She will Forsake you, and give you over to your
own Ruin.

MY Love is Sincere to All, that in Uprightness of Heart Serve the LORD, in
what Profession, or Persuasion of Religion soever; well knowing, that it is
Those, and only Those, that Love, Fear, and Obey HIM, and do the Things that
are Just and Right amongst Men, that are Accepted of HIM at this Day.

FOR, What does the LORD require of Thee, O Man, but to do Justly, to love
Mercy, and to walk Humbly before HIM?

HAPPY is he that shall be Exercised in these things; and he that lays them
up in his Heart, shall become Wise.

POSTSCRIPT.
Judge Hale's Cont. p. 373. etc.
THERE is nothing in the World conduces more to the Composure and Tranquillity
of the Mind, than the Serenity and Clearness of the Conscience; keep but That
Safe and Untainted, the Mind will enjoy a Calm and Tranquillity in the midst of
all the Storms of the World. And although the Waves beat, and the Sea works,
and the Winds blow; the Mind that has a Quiet and Clear Conscience within,
will be as Stable and as Safe from Perturbation as a Rock in the midst of a
Tempestuous Sea, and will be a Goshen to, and within, it self, when the rest of
the World without, is like an Egypt for Plagues and Darkness.

WHATEVER thou do Hazard, or Lose, keep the Integrity of thy Conscience, both
before Troubles come, and under them; it is a Jewel will make thee Rich in the
midst of Poverty, a Sun that will give thee Light in the midst of Darkness, a
Fortress that will keep thee Safe in the greatest Danger, and that is never to
be taken from thee, unless thou thy self Betray it, and Deliver it up.

THE END.

