THE ANABAPTISTS MERIBAH: OR, Waters of Strife.

BEING A Reply to a late insulting Pamphlet, written by Thomas Lamb, Merchant,
Intitulled, TRUTH prevailing against the fiercest Opposition; OR, An Answer to
Mr. John Goodwins Water-dipping, no firm footing for Church Communion.

WHEREIN The impertinency of M. Lamb's Answer, and the validity of M. Goodwin's
Water-dipping, etc. are manifested by I. Price a member of the Church of
Christ, whereof the said Mr. Goodwin is Pastor.

ISA I. 44.20. He feeds on ashes, a deceived heart has turned him aside,
that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand?
GAL. 1.6.7. I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called you into
the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel, which is not another; but there be
some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. LONDON, Printed
by T. Lock for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at his shop at the Sign of
the Gray-hound in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the Reverend, my honored and beloved PASTOR, Mr. JOHN GOODWIN, and the
Church of Christ, walking with him in the Order of the Gospel, usually meeting
together in Coleman-street, in London.
Honored, and Beloved:
ALthough the separations, rents, and divisions, together with the Distempers
and Distractions lately made by our Brother Lamb, and some few others, from,
and in, the Church, were of a very sad and dangerous import, threatening not to
leave one Stone of Gods Building upon another, which should not be thrown down;
yet, God, (whose only prerogative it is, to bring Light out of Darkness, and
Good out of Evil) has graciously produced a very comfortable, orderly, and
regular settlement out of that Chaos and confusion, in so much, that as the
false Doctrines concerning the necessity of Circumcision unto Justification (as
some now speak little less of Baptism, and that according to their way and
manner) introduced by false Apostles amongst the Churches, in the first
plantation of the Gospel, did occasion several Epistles to be written by the
Apostle Paul, and others, for the vindication and clearing up of the truth, as
it is in Jesus, not only in that particular, but also in many other Truths of
rich and high concernment, and a firm establishment of the Churches in the
Doctrine of Faith, toward God, and love amongst the Brethren: Even so these
late and unhappy differences (through Gods blessings and goodness) have had the
like success amongst you, setting both Pastor and people upon a diligent and
studious inquiery into, and discovery of the Truth, and establishing them
therein. So that out of this Eater has come Meat, the weak are made strong,
and the strong stronger; they that seemed to stagger, do now stand, and the
feet of them that stood are now established, none being in such danger (as
formerly) to be turned out of the way: but those things which formerly hindered
being removed out of the way, Faith and love, Piety and charity, will (as they
do) go on and prosper, yea run and be glorified in the midst of you; you did
lament and mourn, but your sorrow is turned into joy. God has taken away your
Sackcloath and Ashes, and girded you with joy and gladness: The foundations of
your building did seem to be removed out of their places, and the pillars
thereof did tremble; but the Highest himself has established you, and will
guide your feet in the way of truth and peace. And as for our brethren, have
they stumbled (indeed at ceremonies, as the Jews did) that they should fall?
God forbid. But if through their fall establishment be unto you, shall not their
restoration belife from the dead? And let every one of us that stand, take heed
least we fall. If we ponder the paths, of our feet, our ways will be
established: Prove. 4.26.
Though I am not able to add unto your spiritual stature, or increase in
knowledge in the business in controversy, who are so richly instructed herein,
and that very lately by our honored and beloved Pastor, and others; yet if I
do but put you in mind of the things which you know, after mine own wonted
Dialect and plain manner, (being moved hereunto by some of your selves) I doubt
not its Christian acceptance with you; and who knows whether God may not make
five loaves and two fishes, (I mean a little of mean fare) to be as a feast of
fat things unto you. My hearts desire and prayer unto God for you all is, that
henceforth none of you may stumble and fall, Isa. 8.15. 2 Coll: 8. 2 Timothy 3.6,
2 Pet. 2.3. 2 Cor: 11.20:
and be broken, and snared and taken; that no man may spoil you (as
sheep-stealers, snatching you away from the fold or flock of Christ) nor take
you prisoners, nor make merchandise of you, nor bring you into bondage, but
that you may flourish in the Courts of the house of our God, running without
weariness, and walking on without fainting; that it might be with you yet after
many, and many years to come, as it was with Moses in his old age, whose sight
did not was dim, neither was his natural strength abated; that as you have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so ye might walk in him, rooted and built up in
him, and established in the faith, as you have been taught; that your hearts
may be comforted by daily refreshings from the presence of the Lord, being
knit together, yea rooted and grounded in love, increasing still with the
increasings of God, and thriving in all riches of spiritual understanding, to
the perception and acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and
of Christ, that every one of you may be made up of God amongst his jewels, and
be found on the right hand of Jesus Christ among his sheep at that great day,
and may live and reign with him for ever, and ever. Amen. So prays,

The meanest of you all J. Price.
September. 24. 1655.
THE ANABAPTISTS MERIBAH: OR, Waters of STRIFE.
SECT: I.
THe injuries which David received from his enemies were much more tolerable,
then those which he suffered from his friends. The lifting up of the heel of
his own familiar, the man whom he trusted; this was a sword piercing through
his soul. And (doubtless) it was none of the least of Christ's sufferings, that
one of his Family, his society, of his own Disciples, should betray him into
the hands of sinners. That Julius Caesar should be slain by his own Son Brutus
among the rest, this pierced him worse, then any poniard It was Queen
Elizabeth's complaint, that she had found Treason in Trust. How unkindly,
unnaturally, and unchristianly Mr. Mr: Lambs a buse of Love.
Lamb in his late Book has dealt (shall I say) with his old Friend (nay) his
spiritual Father, and Pastor, Mr. John Goodwin, whom (by his own
acknowledgment) God has made seventy times seven times a Messenger, and Angel
of light, life, and peace unto him; is not only the observation, but the very
astonishment of all that know him, there being not many leaves, pages, or
paragraphs therein, not importing rankerous, and malign reflections upon him,
as if to prey upon his honor, and feed upon the blood of his reputation; were
the firstborn of his desires, and the longing of his soul, as after the first
ripe summer fruits. Thence it is, that this division (which he loves) he so
eagerly hunts after his pen (2s it were) senting the track of his former
writings, Mr: Lambs unkindnes^.
that it might bite him (if it were possible) at every turn and ever and anon
he spends an arrow out of his Quiver, seeking to hit him, and fears not. And
having (as he supposes) sped in his sport, what a merry meeting is in Gath; He
rejoices Mr: Goodwins adversarie^:
and feast made herewith in Askelon? whereat the Daughters of the uncircumcised
rejoice, and the Daughters of the Philistines triumph Well, Offenses will come
-- How cruelly the man of his contention has been dealt withal by the world;
yea, and by men of better pretensions, and that for the many good works which
he has done amongst them, and for them, is not unknown unto him. But alas,
these are but the mint and cummin of his troubles, He grieveth M: Goodwin
the mole-hils in his way. But that his own Disciples, and Scholars should be
his executioners, and that for nothing, but his very judgment, and conscience,
in, and about the matters of his God, that the sheep of his Flock, yea the
Lambs thereof should convert into Lions, and Tigers against him; that his most
hopeful, and choicest trees and Vines, should yield the apples of Sodom, Grapes
of gall, and bitter closters, that his pains and labor for their peace should
at last prove not only vanity, but vexation of spirit; that (like the Bird
supposing it her own egg, and in hopes to bring forth in her own likeness) he
should hatch up even Serpents eggs, that strive to sting and devour him; these
cannot be but the great things of his affliction, the mountains of grief
threatening to bring his gray hairs with sorrow to the grave; That those who
were his late joy, and crown of rejoicing, while they stood fast in the Lord,
should now prove a Crown of briars, goads in his sides, and thorns in his eyes;
what can this be, but the very anguish of his soul? But because Mr. Lamb pleads
the glory of God, the good of men, the service of the truth, in all that he
has written, let us with all readiness of mind search the scriptures, and see
whether those things are so or no, which (with little less then even an
Apostolical authority) he would obtrude, and impose upon our Judgments, and
Consciences, for the Oracles of God, and for that end let us consider the Title
(with all that follows)

The title of his Book runs thus in capital letters: TRUTH PREVAILING AGAINST
THE FIERCEST OPPOSITION: M: Lamb
OR AN ANSWER TO Mr: JOHN GOODWINS WATER-DIPPING, etc.


SECT: II.
Mr: Lamb having built, and trimmed, and rigged his ship, etc: not doubting but
he shall ride it over the proudest waves in all storms, or tempests, or
fiercest oppositions that have, or can be made against him. At his first
lanching and setting of her forth, here is the discharging of gun upon gun, and
gun after gun, as if he would scare all the inhabitants of seas, and shoars
with the thundering noise thereof: Hearken, Truth prevailing against the
fiercest opposition; there is one. Or An Answer to Mr: Goodwins Waterdipping,
etc: there is another. Wherein the invalidity of his (Mr. Goodwins) 23
Considerations, etc. there are 23 in one vollie together. Together with a
discovery of his great mistakes in the exposition of eight chief Scriptures
etc: What a noise is here, as if great fleets of arguments under the government
of the most able Generals in the world, must all vale, and strike sail at this
one Vessel The truth is, M: Lamb highly conceited of his Book:
the Title of his book is like a glittering gloworm, seemingly full of light and
heat; but if you touch it, it has neither. Apothecaries boxes have sometimes
goodly titles, when there is never a good drugg, nor any thing medicinal in
them. It is like the name of a Nunnery, on the out. side upon the walls over the
gates, pretending nothing but Virginity within doors, but a little search may
discover (as once to Gregory the great) thousands of infants skuls cast into
fish ponds; which did argue foul doing, under fair shows. We have here Truth in
the Title: and all that is within must be of the same denomination (doubtless)
How often is God entitled to that which his soul abhors! 1 Samuel: 23.7
God has delivered David into my hands (says Saul) because he was in Keilah;
therefore he bears an alarm to all the people to march thither to take him.
Zecharie speaks of shepherds that slay the flock, fleecing them instead of
feeding them; and yet entitle God to the benefit that came thereby. Zach: 11.5
Deuteronomy 23 18.
They say, blessed be God for I am rich. We read of the hire of an Whore
brought into the house of the Lord: and I have heard that in Rome, a Jewish
Maid might not be admitted into the stews of Whoredom, unless she should be
first baptized: 2 Samuel 11 45
David would not commit folly with Bathsheba until she was purified. I have
paid my vows (said the Whore at her doors in the Proverbs) an holy Whore, as
Edward the 4th; was wont to call one of the Nuns, who attended him at pleasure
out of the Nunnery. Here is truth in the Title, without truth in the Pamphlet;
like a window cushion, beautiful without, but rip it up, you (...) find it
stuffed up with nothing but trash and trumperie. Let us but examine what is
within these great swel^ing words, in his Epistles, and their Retinue.

To the Reader:
SECT: An apt similitude, setting forth Mr, Lambs conceit of truth, without
truth on his side.
III.
UPon the perusal of the prescripts, and manuscripts, and postscripts of the
book, I called to remembrance a story, that I have heard of some devout
papists, who through the cunning, and cheating artifice of their ghostly
fathers, were charmed into very large and bountiful offerings, unto a certain
pretended holy relic, wrapped up in several imbroidered and rich mantles and
laid up in a certain place in a chapel consecrated for that purpose. Among the
troops of those zealous Votaries, some (diseased with the itch of curiosity)
were very importunate to see the said relick so famously spoken of abroad in
the world, and were willing to purchase the same at a very considerable rate.
This relic being depolited in the hands of ^he reverend Father the keeper
thereof, upon a certain day appointed for that purpose, he came to give them a
Vision of it; and causing them to stand at a convenient distance from it,
having prepared and raised up the devotion of their minds, with much gravity of
speech, at last with very low genu-flections once and again, and the third time
also, with all reverence he took off one mantle, and then (with the like
ceremony) he took off another; and another, until he came to the very last,
which was of very rich scarlet. When he came to that, he required them with all
serious devotion of mind, and thought, to gather up all their visive faculties;
and to look steadfastly, and fixedly upon the said Relic, when he should
unfold that last mantle, which he said he was to do and to sold it up again,
with all holy celerity and expedition; and having most nimbly opened the said
mantle, and with the like speed folded it up again, he demanded whether they
did not see it. Some held their peace, others said they faw nothing. How? (said
the Priest,) what, saw you nothing? did you shut your eyes? are you wilfully
blind? Pray Sir, said some of them (having a little more courage then the rest)
pardon us; but tell us what it was, What it was (said the priest?) I am sorry
that you have eyes, and cannot see, or (which is worse) you will not see; but
i will tell you what it was; mary it is the breath of the Ass upon which Christ
rode to Jerusalem, when the people cried Hosanna unto him. At which they that
were silent before, did profess they saw it very plainly and wondered that the
rest did not see it; and so they departed very thankful, very much satisfied,
and well apaid at their bargain. In like manner Mr Lamb has filled the ears of
the World round about him with the mighty noise of the great truth of God
concerning baptism on his side, that it is most apparently evident in his
book, and by the light thereof, that the baptism of believers at age, in
opposition to Insant baptism, is the great truth of God, and that the
separation from such societies, as are not of the same says, and practice
therein, is justifiable by the Word or God; that the baptism of such persons
only (and that by dipping them under water) is the initiating Ordinance into
Church-fellovvship: that all Congregations (otherways gathered) are little
betterthen the Synagogue of Satan, though they call themselves Jews (I mean)
the Churches of Jesus Christ; that it becomes all men and Women that would be
accounted visible christians, to become devout Voraries hereunto. And this
grand Truth is as visible in hi^ book, that ever and anon Heaven and Earth,
God. Angels, and me^ are called to Witness men's dovvn-right vvilfulness, in
shutting their eyes when they might see the same, and do homage thereunto: We
have the talk of Truth in the Title truth in the trunck or body, truth in the
tail of the book truth in the praescripts, truth in the grand-scripts- truth
in the post-scripts; but though you unfold mantle after mantl^ seaf after leaf,
page after page, paragraph after paragraph; all which (I confess) are richly
trimd imbroidered, and laced with many holy scriptures, and devout
expressions; yet though you should gather up all your visive capacities, and
abilities of ingenuity, knowledge and Wisdom, you vvil find nothing of that
which you seek for in this kind, but mere air and breath: yea sometimes
breath of a very loathsome savor, proceeding from distempered and ulcerated
Lungs. Nay the truth is, if an ingenious Reader should dismantle his book 1. Of
all the impertinent passages. 2: M. Lambs Book filled, and stuffed with
impertinences.
Of all the Quotations of scriptures irrelative to the business for which they
were quoted. ^l: Of all the vain flourishes and displaying, of his colors
after his conceited Victory, expressed in such words as these, Good Reader judge
etc: again; What man is he that does not glory in men; whose faith and practice
stands not in the wisdom of men, etc: but must conceive etc: again, be
astonished therefore O ye Heavens, and horribly afraid O earth etc: again,
good Reader what say thou? has not Mr: Goodwin the wrong end of the staff
etc: again, I appeal to the Conscience of the judicious Reader etc. again
Heavens, Earth judge; with many more of the same kind: 4ly: Of all his
unbrotherly and unhandsome reflections upon M: Goodwin; let his book (I say) be
dismantled of these, and their likes; he shall find it a mere skeleton, a
starved carcass like one of pharaos lean kind not having so much spirit, life
and strength of argument to the business he pretends unto; as to be able to
crawl up and down in the considerations of any out blind Votaries, that can
discern and offer sacrifice unto mere air and breath folded up in many sheets
of paper: For the eviction whereof let us consider that that follows in the
next place viz* his Epistle to the Reader; which begins thus:

Good Reader: M: Lamb.
GOd knows with what regrett of spirit I publish this Answer to M: Goodwins
Book, etc. SECT: IIII.
THou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not
hold him gu^^^ese that takes his Name in vain. Mr. Lamb pretends much candor
of spirit to M: Goodw:
Goodwin; that ever and anon throughout your Book, after you have given him a
rap (as you suppose) you fall a stroaking him again. First (strapado-like) you
lift him up, then down with him again, then up again: Does not this argue there
was a sore contest between your conscience, and concupiscence in the writing
thereof, and the Victory is deplorable? If you have bitter envyings, and strife
in your hearts (says James) glory not. Mr. Lamb perplexed in his conscience
about writing his Book: James 3: 14. Rev: 8: 11.
Were you not under the malign influence of the star called Wormwood
(mentioned by John) when you wrote that book against Mr: Goodwin, which makes
more then the third part thereof so bitter against him? do you not believe it?
Then let me tell you. How a man may know conscience from concupisence, and when
he is acted by the corrupt principles of the flesh, viz: (popularity, spiritual
pride, and vanity of mind even in seemingly devout, and religious performances,
preaching, praising, printing; discoursing about good things,) and when by the
holy Spirit of God, is a Question; the answer whereunto would be more
profitable, and fit for you, and me to study, and to understand; then to
contend and make war with the chariots, and horsemen of Israel in, and about
the controversy in hand. And were I to give my opinion in the question, I
should think it would not be an impertinency to offer this for one answer, viz:
that in cases disputable, and controversall among the godly, The spirit of God
does not compel in controversal points
learned, and most judicious Christians, the true spirit of God does not use to
compel (that is your own word to the Reader) the more weak, and injudicious,
the milk-sops, or babes in Christ (as you must give me leave to judge you to be,
in comparison of those you contend withal, viz. Mr: Goodwin, M: Baxter) to rise
up with that majestic confidence in, Mr: Lamb a child of under: standing in
comparison with M Goodwin, and Mr: Baxter against whom he writes.
and of their own strength: as if they could make the mountains of arguments,
levied against them, to skip like rams, and the little hills thereof like lambs,
in the presence of their, even of their mighty pens, and parts, as if they were
able to thrash the mountains, and make the hills like chaff before the breath of
their mouth, and that all difficulties, contradictions, and the most able
strong, and fiercest oppositions, should be as dust unto their sword, and
driven stubble unto their bow. And my proof should be Rom: 12: 3: And I say
through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think
of himself more high^y then he ought; but to think soberly, according as God
has dealt to every man the measure of Faith; and the like Philip. 2: 3: Let
nothing be one through strife, and vain-g ory, but in lowliness of mind let
each esteem other better then themselves. The confident, and conceited man in
doubtful cases, has seldom the truth on his side With the low^^ is wisdom;
grace is given to the humble, bashful, shame-faced, that thrust not themselves
into observation. The odoriferous Violet grows low to the ground-ward, hangs
its head downward, hides it self with its own leaves: and the spirit of God is
not a spirit of compulsion in doubtful cases, but of illumination.

But to proceed.

As pure Conscience (at first) separated me from that society whereof he (Mr:
Goodwin) is Pastor, M: Lamb to the Reader.
so now it compels me to make Answer to that Book, not only to defend the
truth, etcs

SECT: V.
I Think here you speak more true then you are aware; Error of judgment often
called by the name of purity of conscience.
for by what light, law, or rule from Gods Word is that Conscience guided that
compels men to separate themselves from the societies of the Saints where
they have often seen the face of God viz. the light of his countenance,
received daily and constant refreshings from his presence; where the visions of
life, and immortality have been brought to light, where they have had most
excellent experience of the presence of Christ in the midst of them, and have
been rapt up (as it were) into the third Heavens, receiving, and partaking of
joys unspeakable, and glorious? I say where is that Conscience instructed from
the Oracles of God, to withdraw and separate from such a Church, and society of
Saints, and that merely because they durst not sin against the light of their
judgments, and consciences; M: Lamb separated from the Church, because they
keep in a good conscience.
because they cannot submit unto such practices (as parts of Gods instituted
Worship, and service) whereof they see not the least hint, or glimmerings of
light, in the holy scriptures for their justification; because they do that (
viz: baptize their children) which they judge themselves bound in conscience to
do, and forbear to do that ( viz: submit to re-baptization, or to be baptized
again, they supposing themselves baptized already) which they believe in their
consciences they should offend their Lord and master Jesus Christ, if they
should do? And is not this our very case? you call us holy and be l^vea,
Brethren of like precious faith with your selves, a Church: and yet you are
compeld in Conscience to withdraw, and separate from us; and why? not because
you question our Saintship, Gods love to us, our love to God, not that you
think the effectual grace, presence, and spirit of God is not with us in our
assembling together from day to day; not that you think that the truth as it is
in Jesus, at least in respect of the great things of faith and love, is not
amongst us; or that the blessed endowments and gifts of the spirit are not
vouchsafed unto us; but merely because we will not deny our Insant-baptisme, and
submit our selves to be baptized again in your way: both which we profess in
the presence of Almighty God, who knows our hearts, we dare not do, as
fearing we should offend against his majesty, and provoke his Jealousy against
us, not having (as we conceive) upon serious perusal of his holy Word, and
several men's writings of piety, and ability, of different apprehensions in the
subject in hand, the very least ground of the truth, to justify our selves, if
we should do so. And we likewise call Heaven and Earth to record, that in the
study of these things, we have renounced all hidden things of dishonesty, all
carnal, and worldly considerations, byassing us in the least herein, as if it
were to avoid the cross, or to share with any earthly interest, which steers us
in our Judgment, or practice; and that it would be a vision of much peace,
satisfaction, and contentment unto us (if we ate out of the way) to be better
instructed: and the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who is blessed for
ever more, The Church from which M. Lamb separated, could allow him his liberty
in the business of baptism, but he will not allow them theirs.
knows that we lie not This is our case; we that are the greater part of the
Church by many degrees, can bear with you, and permit you to enjoy your own
liberty; but you cannot bear with us, but have rent, and torn your self from
us, and entitle the same unto the Word of God, as justifying you therein. These
we shall examine, when we come to your allegations of those Texts urged by you;
having already perused them again and again, and the third time also, and see
not the least breathings of the spirit of God therein for your justification in
your separation. We find the great Apostle Paul in his writing to Churches,
calls them The beloved of God, called to be Saints, to them that are sanctified
in Christ Jesus, Mr: Lambs sepeperation against the current of the scriptures.
to the Saints in Achaia, to the Saints at Ephesus, to the Saints in Christ
Jesus at Philippi, to the Saints, and faithful Brethren in Christ at Coll^sse;
I say we find the Apostle (writing to these) provokes them to love, to good
works, to edify one another, to frequent the assembling of themselves
together, to bear with one another in love, to watch over one another, to be
knit together in love, to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, to
take heed of rents, divisions, and separation^ one from another, etc: You judge
us (or else why have you written us) the beloved of God, a Church of Christ,
Saints in Christ Jesus, holy, and beloved, Mr: Lambs separation merely because
the whole Church will not bow to his dictates.
faithful Brethren; and where, in what Book, chapter, or Verse in the holy
scriptures, do you find the least thing that justifies your withdrawing from
such persons; and that because they will not call you Father, and master?
because they will not bow down their Judgments, and consciences against their
Judgments, and consciences, unto your Judgments, and consciences (being a
lesser part of our Curch, and society) we also believing in our Judgments, and
consciences that you are in an error? Have we not several directions from the
Oracles of God very express of a contrary nature? 14 Rom: 13. Him that is weak
in the faith, receive; let not him that eats, judge him that eats not,
because God has accepted him. Him that is weak, viz: not thoroughly persuaded
in all things pertaining to christian liberty, but judging himself bound still
to the observations of earing, or not eating, meats, according to Moses Law.
receive, viz. into your bosoms affectu charitatis, with the affection of love:
receive him into your Assemblies bear with his weaknesses. Bucer rejected none,
though differing in some opinions, in whom he found aliquid Christi, any thing
of Christ, whose weaklings are to be tendered with all sweetness: Do not judge,
censure, and despise one another, in case you have grounds to believe that God
has accepted him Do not you think that God accepts Saints, holy Brethren,
faithful Brethren, visible Saints? why then do you reject them? If you say,
they are not visible unto you, except they be baptized after your manner, why
then do you call them so? if you say the Apostle there viz: Rem: 14: speaks of
things indifferent, but baptism is a known gospel command. I answer, (if you
consider the reason, and ground why the Apostle would have them receive him
that is weak in the Faith; it is, not because the matters in controversy are
small, and things indifferent, but because God has accepted him: if you believe
in your consciences that God has accepted him, why should not you accept, and
receive him?

2ly: Though baptism be a gospel command, yet many things may be doubtful in,
and about baptism, which may be reckoned of as mean a nature, and
consideration, as the eating o^ meats there spoken of, was, as viz: when, how,
by who^, upon whom, or unto whom, etc; baptism is to be administered; if in
these things there be different apprehension, some saying this, some that, why
let not him that says this despise him that says that, let not him that says
that, ^udg him that says this, for God has accepted him Do you not think that
God has accepted us? that he does accept us, that he will accept us, so long as
we are found faithful unto him, in following him fully, as we can see him
going before us? Would he accept us if we did do what you would have us do
(though it should be granted it was his mind) while we see it not? nay, while
we think ^n our consciences we should sin, and provoak him in so doing? would
he bless us (think you) if we should condemn our selves in doing the things,
that we allow not? Will not he accept us doing all, whatsoever we understand he
has commanded us? if you being a small part of the Church will take liberty to
break away from us, Mr: Lambs pretended grounds for seperationare a foundation
of all divisions in all the Churches of Christ.
being seven times mere then your selves in number, in conjunction with our
Pastor, and several of the Officers, (the major part of them also) because they
do not come over to your opinion; does not this lay a foundation of breaking up
all Churches, and societies of Saints in the world. For if (suppose) ten,
should be of one opinion in a Church, and one hundred should be of a contrary
judgment therein; if those ten should judge that opinion a great truth of
Christ, etc: and the hundred judge it a mere mistake, a small matter, an outward
ceremony in comparison of the great things of God; shall the ten separate, and
be justified therein? what Church can then hold together long? if you say if
the thing (wherein those tenn differ from the one hundred) be essenti^^ I to a
Church, without which the consciences of those ten be fully persuaded the one
hundred are no church, then they ought to separate. I Answer, First, This is
not the case here for you call us a Church in your writing, nay a Church of
ho^ly, and beloved brethren. 2ly: Who shall judge touching this matter, the one
hundred, or the ten? If you say the ten must judge for themselves, and be able
to satisfy themselves in their own peronal walking, I answer, that in such a
case there should be many thoughts upon thoughts, and considerations upon
considerations, much patience, wisdom, sobriety. These should be exercised long
time before the separation be made: that should be the last remedy. See what
the Apostle says in such a case, Phil. 3.15, 16. If in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God sh^^ reveal ^ven this unto you Nevertheless whereto ye
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing; if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, if any among you differ from
other in any particular thing, there is no reason that this should cause
divisions, and separations For, though at present ye are not, yet hereafter ye
may be instructed in all things needful for you, and become of one mind, and
in the mean while whereunto we have already attained, that is:

1. Wherein we have mutual apprehension of mutual duty, let us mutually walk
together, comfort and edify one another Let us walk by the same rule, line, or
path, never stepping over, or out of it, lest we lose all, For this was one of
the laws of those Grecian Races, that they must not only strive and run, but
strive and run lawfully, this (I say) being one of the laws of their running,
viz. that they were to keep themselves in a certain path; line, or chalked way,
out of which they were not to step; if they did, they lost the game. Some say
that they were bounded with swords on the one side of the path, and a great and
deep river on the other side, so that they did not only lose the prize, but
exposed themselves, either to ruin by the sword, or by the river, If they did
not keep their path. Se here, let us walk by the same rule, not running over,
or stepping aside, seperating our selves from the common path, lest we be dipped,
yea drowned by the river on the one hand, or destroyed by the sword on the
other hand, It is not to be expected that our light and apprehensions in all
things should be the same; especially should be the same at all times, and
together, God at sundry times, 1 Hebr: 1 that is, by piece meals, Somewhat now,
and somewhat at another time, speaks unto his people. Whether I go thou can
not follow me now, but thou shall follow me HEREAFTER said Christ to Peter, 13
John 36. But to return to my dear friend, the Antagonist; how many
Exhortations have we in scripture, to love, to edify one another, to build up
one another in our most holy Faith? can these things be done by seperations,
and departing away one from another? How many dehortations are there against
schisms, rents, and divisions against forsaking the fellowship of the Saints,
and the Churches of Jesus Christ which you have owned us to be by your pen, and
I know You cannot without violence offered unto Your soul and conscience; yea,
You dare not deny it. And had your Conscience, judgment, and affections been
enlightened, and heated by the fire of Gods sanctuary, you would have better
considered then so suddenly, and rashly, have rent your self from us, and
written so impertinentlie for the justification thereof. But to proceed You tell
your Reader the several reasons why you wrote that Book:

As pure Conscience etc. so now compels me to make Answer to that Book, etc.
not only TO DEFEND THE TRUTH to the therein opposed, etc. Mr: Lamb to the Reader


SECT: VI.
TO defend the truth opposed by Mr: Goodwyn. Error always defended under the
notion of truth.
Everymans way is right in his own eyes. The Turks style themselves the only
Mausulmans, or true believers in the world. The Papists the only Catholics;
the Jew the holy Nation, the peculiar people, the gnostics of old, the only
knowing men, The Manachees derived their name from Manna, as if what they
taught was to received as the only food that came down from Heaven.
what Sect, party, or faction professing any Religion, but does it under the
pretense and notion of Truth; and withstand their opposits, as do those that
defend the truth? the very Banters, Shakers, Quakers, do they not all plead
truth? do you defend the truth with untruth^ by scandalizing and abusing the
defenders of the truth, as you have M. Goodwin; whereof you must hear, and know
before we have done with your book? but do you defend the truth with the mere
name of truth without any spirit, or power of truth? Let any man that has as
much ill umination, inspection, or ability as to discern truth from untruth in
the ABC things of the scriptures; he shall see, that your greatly conceited
swords, spears and darts, which You have prepared in your Book to defend the
truth (as you call it) are but straw, stubble, and rotten wood to those against
which you contend. And indeed you make use of them as these Egiptians do of
their darts, which they shoot against the sun, that scorcheth them: But alas,
it is out of their reach; scorch them it will, will they, will they, and their
darts fall down again, upon their own heads, But you say, you wrote your book,
not only to dedefend the truth, but first

To vindicate your self with some others from the heavy charge therein given to
the whole world against you, as faith, and trust-hreakers, sacrilegious
Church-breakers, etc.

SECT: VII.
YOu wrote your book, not only to defend the Truth, but also (you might have
said, chiefly) to vindicate your self, etc: I remember when Christ said unto
his Disciples, that one of them should betray him, he that was guilty, was
forward to demand, Master is it; You writ your book to vindicate your self from
the heavy charge therein, viz: in Mr. Goodwins book given against you. Are you
so much as once named in that book? do not you expose your self by name to be
that man of an abused and distempered fancy, of disingenuity, of a wonderful
and strange alteration, for the worse, which by name you were never charged to
be? Did you not plight your faith to walk with them whom you call holy and
beloved Brethren, as a member of that Church, whom you style a Church? can this
he done by your separation from them? have not you broken trust and promise
with them? And could this arise from any thing, but a (most miserably) abused
and distempered fancy? Have not you endeavored to divide Pastor from people;
and people from pastor? to demolish, and tear up by the roots, as thriving, as
loving, as well governed a Church, a Church as full of charity, and good works,
as beautiful an edefice, where Jesus Christ has dwelt, and manifested his
delight therein, by the comfortable influences of his truth, and presence upon
the hearts of your self; and Brethren, as eyes beheld: is not this sacriledg?
Return, return O blacksliding Is^a^ite: remember from whence you are fallen,
and repent. Your second reason of writing your book, is in these words,

2ly: M^ Lamb to the Reader.
To make the world Judges whether we are at Mr: Goodwin represented us, persons
of a misused, and distempered sancie, of stupifled Judgments, to whose
understanding common sense is a mystery inaccessible, wit^ abundance more to
the some purpose.

SECT: VIII.
HEre is (I fear) in this reason also more of the secrets of your heart then
you well consider. M^ Lamb greatly conceited of his own abilities manifested in
his Book.
For what is the meaning of it? is it not to make the wo^ld Judges, that you
are men of solid Judgments, great parts, strong abilities? Why let them look
upon your book, and then let the world be Judges, whether men of such
abilities, parts, and reason as are evident, and conspicuous therein, are such
men as Mr: Goodwin does thus undervalue? Let the world be Judges (if they will
but read your book whether that one of your arguments, does not chase ten, and
five, an hundred, and an hundred of yours, put ten thousand of Mr: Goodwins to
flight: That every one of your reasons, is as a King, against whom there is no
rising up: that when your sun of light appears; all Mr; Goodwins twincling
stars must hide their heads. Hence it is, that you so often invite the Heavens,
and the Earth, and the world to behold, and look upon you, and Ms Goodwin, upon
a public Theater in print, and see, how handsomely you handle your sword, and
hit, and thrust M: Goodwin therewith ever and anon; how you can fight with him
with arguments, fight with him with scriptures, nay, fight with him with his
own weapons, his own Writings; how you can wrestle with him and give him fall
upon fall, and fall after fall, and make good sport for the spectators. Remember
Solomon's council, Be not wise in thine own eyes: and Pau^^ direction, he that
would be wise, must be a fool that he may be wise. A conceit of wisdom, bars
out wisdom. If M: Goodwin, or any others, by pen, or other way, should so much
injure the happiness of the world, as to hide you from them, that they cannot
behold your glory, this is a cup that you are not able to drink of, a baptism,
that you cannot be baptized withal. Your glory you will let no man take from
you: this is as the well of Bethlem, for which you will fight with the best
friend you have in the world. It was the saying of one concerning some
over-weeners of themselves, that they might have proved excellent scholars, if
they had not been persuaded that they were such already, Themistocles listened
to nothing so willingly, as to his own commendations. The Emperor Adrian
oppressed some, and slew others, that excelled in any art, or faculty, that he
might be held the only skilful. And it is said of Aristotle, that he burnt the
books of many ancient Philosophers, that he might be the more admired. Prove:
16.5.
Every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination to the Lord. When a wall
swells, it is near breaking: it is no small art, to conceal art, nor is it a small
glory, to conceal glory. Empty casks sound lowdest, and purses with a very
little money gingles more, then those that are top full. They that best deserve
praises, do most desire concealment; Moses shone, and knew it not. Christ had
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge in him; but they were hid in him: he
did not fret, when he was obscured. The best of men were most modestly
conceited of themselves. Jacob said he was less then the least of Gods
mercies: David, a worm, and no man: Agur, more brutish then any man. Great Pau^
the least of Saints, the greatest of sinners. They that think themselves rich,
and full, able, and strong, know not that they are poor, and miserable, and
blind, and naked. They conceive their mole hill, a mountain, their kestril, an
eagle, their goose a swan, poring upon, and blessing themselves in their own
beauty, while they gaze upon themselves (as you seem to do over the banks of
your baptissmal waters) until they fall into the River, and are drowned thereby.
But to proceed to your third reason of publishing your Book.

3ly: To let the world see that our baptism has not metamorphosed us, Mr:
Lamb to his Reader.
from Lambs to Wolves, Tigers, or Serpent, which is insinuated by M: Goodwin in
his last, etc.

SECT: IX.
INdeed if the world had not seen your Book, Mr: Lamb renders himself in his
Book a visib^e instance of what he seems to withstand; and implead therein,
they might have suspected the due applicablenes of such an insinuation unto
your self; but he that shall see, and read the same; knowing what once you were,
and what that book represents you now to be (if your spirit be in your writing,
may be astonished at the metamorphoses. Have you not rendered your self as sad
an instance of such an alteration, and grown as great a proficient in the black
art for rendering evil for good, (your time, and all things else, considered) as
any of that mystery of iniquity, that ever I knew? Have you not (with all
love, care, and tenderness) been treated withal by your ancient Pastor, as a
sheep and lamb of Christ under him, Mr: Lambs ingratitude, and unkindnes to Mr:
Goodwin.
as dear unto him, as Jonathon to David, nay as Benjamin to his old father
Jacob, the apple of his eye, the signet on his arm? Were you not unto him (you
above any other Member) as John the Evangel^st unto Christ Jesus, always (as
it were) in his bosom, I had almost said his fond-ling? And have not you
heretofore answered, at least seeminglie) nay I think I may say reallie) his
kindness with kindness, his love with love. And now have you not ( Absalom
like) rallied up what strength You can against him? Did you not as yesterday
strive to keep the Flock of Christ, whereof you were (more then a commmon)
member, Mr: L. changed for the worse since his separation.
in a straight hand of unity, and love improving your parts, abilities, and
opportunities to keep them as close together, as the scales of the Leviathan?
And have you not, not only withdrawn your self, but with an high hand stroven
to bring off others into the same condemnation with your self, endeavoring to
tear up our foundations, and encouraging, all you had any hope to engage a
against us and our Church, as the enemies of Jerusalem encouraged one another
against it, race it, race it even to the ground. Did not the language of your
deportment to our Church, pastor, and people speak as Peter to Christ, though
all men would be offended with thee, yet will not I? But have You not like
Orpah in the 1. of Ruth 14. not with so much as a parting salute, turned Your
back upon them, and like the Isralites in the Wilderness, started aside like a
broken bow? and with Peter withdrawn away from us, as if you never knew us?
Yea eagerly, and Tiger^y made at the face of your faithful pastor in the eyes
of all men? Did ever any of the Church lift up such Hosannah^, Mr: Lamb once
the greatest admirer, now the chiefest slighter of M: G:
spread his way with such palm branches, and garments of praise, and
commendations, before his very face, and the face of the whole Church, to the
frequent offense both of himself, and the Church, as You have done? And has
any one of them, yea of them that have departed from us, lifted him (up indeed
but it is) unto the Cross to be crucified in the sight of the world, as Your
self in this book? You seem (indeed) with Jael in your book to speak smooth
words, soft and pleasing language, to spread over him mantles of love and
kindness: but your hammer and nail are ready in your hands to strike him
through the very Temples; rejoicing thereby not the armies of Israelites, Mr:
Lamb first crowns, then kills Mr: Goodwins reputation.
but of the Cananites; dealing with him as Xerxes did with his stears-man,
crown him in the morning, and cut off his head in the afternoon of the same
day. Or like the fickle Isralites, that with great zeal fought but very
lately for David, and a little after cry out, We have no part in David,
neither have we inheritance in the son o^ Jessie, every man to his tents O
Israel: and now all the cry is for Sheba the son af B^^ri; is not here a
change? However you proceed with a very oilie lip, thus,

Had not the truth been dearer to me then any man, Mr: Lamb to his Reader:
I had rather choose to lose my right hand, then set it to a Book that frowneth
on him (Mr: Goodwin) whose credit always was and still is right, dear, and
precious in my sight.

SECT: IX.
YOur pen stumbles at Truth, truth without Truth, being (indeed) more
accustomed to articulate, then to argue out Truth And as for that Truth that
you so much pretend unto in your book; we may as soon find grapes on thorns,
and figgs on thistles, as find it there. He that thinks to be led by the light
that shines therein unto Dothan, shall find himself at last abused by an ignis
fatuus, and conducted into Samaria, in the midst of mistakes Sands his relation
mentions a profane Sect not long since in Aragon, who affecting in
themselves a certain angelical purity, fell suddenly to the very counterpoint
of justifiing beastilitie; and yet called themselves the illuminati as if they
only had been in the light, and all the world besides in darkness. The Jesuits
boast that the Church is the soul of the world; the Clergy of the Church, and
they of the Clergy. Well, but the Truth is dearer unto you, then any man; that
is, your opinion, then any man. How apt are men to assert their own opinion for
tryth? Though the Pharisees, and the Saduces were of one faith touching their
oposition against Paul, while they knew not of whose Judgment he was, yet when
he had discovered himself to be a pharesee, all the Pharise: stuck unto him 23
Act. 9. Jer: 14, 14.
How often are the brats of men's own brains, a (...) vision and divination, a
thing of naught, a deceit of their heart; insisted upon, as the great Truth of
God? Yea urged and prosecuted with a violent opposition of the palpable and
manifest truths of God? The Truth is dearer unto you then any man; that is,
your apprehensions that children must not be baptized, that men, believers at
age only ought to be baptized, (though they were baptized in their infancy,
that being a nul^tie,) Where can we find this great Truth in all the writings
of Gods Word? it is inde^d a serted by your self and several others of the like
authority. But (alas?) must we receive the writings of S. The scriptures know
no such truth as Mr: Lamb so magnifieth as the great truth of the gospel:
Dominick with the same honor and credence, as those of S: Paul? Reading the
bible (said a Jesuit) will sooner make a man a Luthern-Heretick, then a
Roman Catholic. And at a public Assembly of the States of Germany, one
Albertus (a Bishop) by chance lighted upon a bible, and reading therein, one of
the counselors asked him what book that was? I know not (said he) but this I
know that whatsoever I read in it is utterlie against our Religion. So John
Bishop of Misnia confessed that reading the holy bible, he found there in a
Religion much differing from that, that was then established) being popery.)
Certainly an ingenious, and impartial reader of the holy sciptures, Old, and
new Testament, shall find so many expressions importing the grace and favor of
God through Jesus Christ unto children, as that it will hardly enter into his
belief, that it should be the will and pleasute of God, that henceforth, viz:
after Moses administrations are dead and buried) they must no more be numbered,
or reckoned among the family of God, but all cast out as illegitimate. And
when you handle the scriptures about this point, how miserably do you (like
the cammel with his feet before he drink of the clear waters, lest he should
see his deformity) trouble, and muddifie the waters, disturbing the plain
sense and meaning thereof, (as we shall manifest when we come to examine your
allegations of Scripture for your purpose.) But to proceed, you tell us that

Mr: Mr: Lamb to his Reader.
Goodwins credit always was, and still is right dear and precious in my sight.

SECT: X.
THis clause puts me in mind of what I have heard of two Philosophers: Mr,
Labms pen stumbles at his duty, but vents the contrary.
the one knocking at the others door, and demanding of a Maid (that came to
the door) whether her master was within, her master bid her say, that he was
not within; and the Philosopher that was at the door heard him; with which
answer the man went away seemingly satisfied. After a while, the other
Philosopher came unto his door, and knocking, the master of the house himself
asked him what he would have; I would speak with you said he: I am not within
said the Philosopher. Not within (said He) why you speak to me from within.
With that said the Philosopher (that was within) thou clown, would thou have
me believe thy maid, when she said thou were not within? and vvilt thou not
believe me my self, when I say I am not within? He would have him believe a
most appatent untruth; what ever Mr: Goodwins credit was, is it still RIGHT dear
and precious in your sight? What means then your injurious, and unchristian
reflections upon Him? What? the same fountain send forth both sweet, and bitter
Waters? It is said of the Jesuits, as of false phisicians Officiose occidunt:
they kiss, and kill familiarlie. Squire being sent out of Spanie to muther Queen
Elizabath, was taught to anoint the pummel of her saddle with poison and to cry
aloud in the hearing of the people (when he clap it there on with his hand, God
save the Queen. But as Christ said to Him that betrayed Him with a kiss, friend
for so thou would be esteemed by a kiss, wherefore art thou come, as friend?
or as a foe? if a friend, what mean these svvords, if a foe, what means this
kiss? so say I to you, is Mr: Goodwins credit still right dear and precious in
your sight? what means then your Edwardizing Him, your gangreninizing Him, your
six-book-sellerring him, your unhandsome and capricious handling him from place
to place? His Credit seems to be as right dear and precious in your sight when
you wrote that book, as the honor of Jesus Christ was unto them that Crowned
him (indeed, but) with a Crown of Thoms; put a Reed into his hand instead of a
Scepter, and did bow the knee, unto him with Hail, King of the Jews: Just as
King Richard the second, who, when he was to be deposed, was brought forth in
Royal Array, whereof he was presently despoyled. But you justify your present
adversariness against Mr. Goodwin, because it is for the Truths sake, and bring
in Paul reproving (and that sharply too) his beloved Brother, Peter, for his
dissembling, 2 Gal. 11. But is the case like this? Can you with the authority
of Paul charge Mr. Goodwin with the dissembling of Peter? Or are you persuaded
in your conscience that Mr. Goodwin argues against his conscience? Paul charged
Peter to his face for his unmeet contemporizing with the Jews and Gentiles, to
please both, against his conscience: Therefore Mr. Lamb may charge Mr. Goodwin
in print, before the face of the whole world, because he will not contemporize
with him and those of his judgment, and comply with the Church to please them
also; Peter was justly reproveable by Paul, for sinning against the rational
ducture of his Light; therefore Mr. Goodwin is justly reproveable by Mr. Lamb,
because he will not sin against the guidance of his Light. Is not here strange
texting it? After this rate of reasoning are the rest of the Scriptures quoted
by you, insomuch, as he thar reads you seriously, and knew the School of your
spiritual instruction in the things of the scriptures, might well say, you have
too long been a Discontinuant: Gods gifts groan under dis-use, or misuse. Well,
Remember your own Law, we shall have occasion to use it: Thus you give it out;

HE who spotteth the beautiful face of Truth, Mr. Lamb to the Reader.
tho ignorantly (much more if presumptuously) must expect a stain in his own
credit, and be content to suffer so much, as to make the Truth whole.

SECT: XII.
I Hope you will not deny to undergo the Doom and Sentence of your own law,
bespotted the beautiful face of truth, I am sure very arrogantly, tho
ignorantly, especially in some things ascerted by you, concerning Mr. Goodwin;
yea, and in, and about the controversy beetween us, will appear in due season.

THe same person may des^ve at the same time both Thanks, Mr. Lamb to the
Reader.
and Reproof: To return the one, is a point of gratitude; to administer the
other in love, and in the Majesty of Gods word, a point of Faithfulness.

SECT. XIII.
TO that of Gratitude, becomes you to be thankful to Mr. Goodwin: To that of
Reproof, it does as ill become you to reprove him as you do, to lash him with
the Scourge of your Pen, as a puny-Boy; to jerk him as the Bishops and their
shavelings did Henry the second, Mr. Lamb conceited of his majestic Pen.
of England, until they made him, bleed. But whereas you presume that your pen
is clothed with the Majesty of Gods Word, as if it dwelt in Light, and were
like the bright Morning Star, or rather the Sun at Noon in his Majesty:
Consider, Pride is a piece of maduess; and many poor creatures clothed in
Rags, being distempered in their heads, have conceited themselves Kings and
Queens, and their Rags to be Robes: I have heard of a Merchant at Athens, who
being distracted by great Losses at Sea, and undone, thought that all the goods
that came to the City were his; and busy was he from day to day, at the
waterside to look after his Goods: And several Merchants agreeing together to
use the best means they could to have him made whole again, it was at last
accomplished; and then the poor man seeing his poverty, and feeling the smart
thereof, wished the Merchants had not undertook his cure. For then (said he) I
had all things, every man's Goods were mine; but now I see I have nothing at
all, but am a poor miserable man. Thou know not, thou art poor blind, and
naked (said God to the Church of Laodicea.)

IF in this Contest thou find any passages savouring of too much sharpness,
Mr. Lamb to the Reader.
though in Answer to Mr. Goodwins Highest Provocations, look upon me as
disowning them, and mind the Reason of the place.

SECT. IV.
What is the meaning of this? Mr. Lamb at contest with his Conscience.
What strivings and contendings were there between your pen and your conscience
in writing this Book? Why did you suffer your self to he overcome of your own
evil, and did not rather strive to overcome your evil with good. Was not
Conscience and concupisence hard at combeate in your thoughts? Did not the
Flesh lust against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh? Did not your
heart smight you when you began to dip your inconsiderate pen in the blood of
Mr. Goodwins Reputation? Did not your hands tremble when (like Mezentius the
Tyrant, that did use to tie the living with the dead) you bound Mr. Goodwin,
and Mr. Edwards together with the same Cord of dishonor and snacie, when you
chained him with the dis-ingenious and froward six Booksellers in the
Postscript? Will you not own those sharp Passages? Who must own them? But it is
worth our observation, The highest provocation that ever Mr. Goodwin gave Mr.
Lamb.
that Mr. Goodwins VVater-Dipping, etc. (the Book of your quarrel) you confess
to be the highest Provocation that ever he gave you, wherein, notwithstanding
you are not so much as once named, no not so much as with the two first Letters
of your name: The Provocation only was because he cannot bow to your Baptism,
but writes against it. Nebuchadnezers heart was hotter than his Oven against
those Worthies that would not bow down to his Image. Remember, He that is soon
angry deals foolishly. Alexander in his hot blood stewed his dearest friends,
whom he would have revived again with his heart blood if he could. To be angry
with a Brother without a cause, is dangerous. Is it a Provocation of the
highest nature to write against your way, and show unto the world the undue
behavior of the Professors thereof, without the least whisper of your Name
therein? Is this like that meek, that mortified temper and disposition, which
appeared in you when you walked with us? Is not here a fearful Metamorphosis?

Christ's Counsel is not to resist evil, Mr. Lamb to the Reader.
but whosoever will smight me on the right Cheek, to turn the other to him. But
besides, it becomes me to hear much evil from that hand, by which I have
received so much good.

SECT. XV.
HOw easy is it to preach and hard to practice truth: Mr. Lamb acts contrary
to his knowledge of Christ's command.
Have not you endeavored to buffet Mr. Goodwin on both his cheeks, who has
not so much as lifted up his little finger, against either of yours? Have you
taken two blows for one? Nay, have you not given ten for none? Do you know your
Masters will and practice it no better? Is not the knowledge of Christ's will a
great dispositum, a rich Talent? and do you improve it thus? You confess you
have received much good from him, and it becomes you to bear much evil from
him: Have not you requited the good you have received very unkindly? Much good
you have received from him; for which of those good works have you thus written
against him? I know you will be ready to say (with those Jews) for the good he
has done me, I have not written against him, but because he has blasphemed
the Doctrine of Baptism and the professors thereof. Those Jews were holy
persecutors (in pretense at least) Maximinian thought the blood of Christians
an acceptable sacrifice, to his Gods. And so did the Popish persecutors hold
the same Opinion of the blood of the Protestants, in all times, since the name
of Protestantism was heard amongst them. Do you think such a sacrifice as the
spoils of Mr. Goodwins reputation, God will be so well pleased with? that the
first fruits of your Pen (being so bitter against your great Benefactor in the
things of Jesus Christ) should be so acceptable unto him? Do not you think in
your conscience that God will call many to account for the injury that they
have done that man in his name and reputation, for his service in the Gospel?
And will not you be ashamed of your self to be found amongst them at that day?
Well, take heed of haltering up that conscience of yours, that tells you, you
have received much good from him, and cannot but be sore of the wounds you have
given it, by your thus writing against him.

SECT. XVI.
IN the close of your Epistle to the Reader, you commend your book to his
serious consideration, with an ingenious praycr for his illumm^ation to discern
the truth, or mistakes therein contained, and that he might choose that that is
good, and refuse the evil thatshal appear unto him in the perusal thereof.

To your Prayer I can heartily say Amen, and do believe that he, to whose
understanding the very Grass-Hopper of an Argument is not a burden, will be
able to go on his way (contrary to yours, in respect of the point in
controversy) rejoicing, and be no more troubled at the great noise of your
loud pen, then men of understanding are at the popping off of childrens
Gun-pots.

SECT. XVII.
HAving finished your Epistle to the Reader, as your first Court-Gate, you lead
us through another before we come to your building: and that is, another
Epistle to the Church from whence you have rent your self; and this, indeed, is
(like Sampsons Hair) that wherein your strength lies; which being clipped off, I
hope you will appear, even to your self (tho now you seem to have the strength
and confidence of seven men that can render a reason,) to be as weak as other
men are. This Epistle you thus superscribe,

TO my worthy Friends and Brethren of like precious Faith, walking with Mr.
John Goodwin, Mr. Lamb in his second Epistle.
in the right Faith, though not in the right Order, of the Gospel.

SECT. XVIII.
WE suppose our selves in the right Order, in the right Faith of the Gospel,
and that you have disorderly and unduly departed from us; and that your
concluding your self in the Right, and us in the wrong (the matter being sub
judice, and not yet determined) is nothing but a flourish before the Battle;
and a boasting even before your putting on your Armor, as if you were putting
it off. But before you beat us out of the Field, it will cost you hot water, as
well as cold. But you court us thus.

HOly and Beloved, I have been long your Debtor: Mr. Lamb to the Church.
it is fit I should now pay you your own with Interect, by Answering the
substance of Mr. Goodwins Water-Dipping no firm footing for Church Communion,
etc,

SECT. XIX.
HOly and beloved; and yet not Holy enough, nor Beloved enough for your
company; Holy than we.

I confess you have been long our Debtor, even ever since your undue departing
from us, having broken your promise made at your first joining with us, and by
neglecting your Office, being chosen an Elder amongst us, thereby betraying
your Trust, which with all readiness of mind you took upon you at your
Ordination and inauguration into your Office, withdrawing from us, not only
without, but against the leave, liking, and Vote of the Church. But I presume
this is not the Debt of your meaning, but the Book you wrote was the Debt you
meant.

How you became a Debtor to us, in that respect I know not: Most certain I am,
if you had never paid it, it had never been demanded: And now we have it, we
are not two Mites the richer for it, except it be by the discovery of your
self, and not of God, unto us. You have paid us (I confess) with a witness, if
not with a vengeance, by paying our honored and beloved Pastor, for the
blessed Commodities of life and peace, which you have received from him, in
such Coin, which bears the I mage and superscription of the Prince of Darkness
upon it, (scandalls and reproaches) rendering him evil for good (doubtless) to
the great trouble and disquiet of his soul. You have paid the Church also, the
Covenants and bonds which you made, signed, sealed, and delivered unto them in
the presence of God, Angels, and men, with Cain, out of the same treasury,
viz. by seperations, rents, and divisions, being (it seems) the Commodities of
the Countries where you have traded, since your departure from us. In the next
place,

YOu go to unfold the Riddle of your departing from us which you call (at least
by insinuation) a strangeact: but as Christ Jesus, 2 John 15. did a strange act
contrary to his genius, to the amazing of his Disciples, viz. whip the Buyers
and Sellers, etc. out of the Temple. Yet when they called to mind that that was
written, 69. Psalm. 9. The zeal of thy house has eaten me up; this satisfied
them In like manner you bid us (wondering at your sudden departure from us) to
do as they did, viz. To Plough with the heifer of the Scriptures, and then we
shall understand the Riddle, etc.

SECT. XX.
JConfess your sudden departure from us was a Riddle, and is still as
anigmaticall as ever, (all your writings, notwithstanding) as for your instance
of Christ's whipping the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and the
satisfaction that the Disciples had touching that strange act by calling to
mind what was written of him, etc. What Ointment can we draw from hence to
anoint our eyes to perceive this Riddle? Help us to draw the parrallel.

Christ whipped the buyers and sellers of Doves, Sheep, Oxen, etc. out of the
Temple; Even so Mr. Lamb left, departed, and rent himself from that Church of
Christ whereof Mr. John Goodwin is Pastor:

The Disciples of Christ wondered at this strange act; Lambs strange act of
separation from them.

The Disciples remembered that it was written, Even so must we Plough with the
Heifer of the Scriptures, and then we shall easily understand this Riddle, viz.
of Mr. Lambs leaving of the Church of Christ, whereof Mr. John Goodwin is
Pastor.

Where is the man that shall read this, unto whose understanding common sense
is not a mystery in-accessible, but may now easily understand this Riddle?

But yet there is more truth in the writing, Mr. Lambs separation is a full
filling of Scripture Prophesies, John 12.51.
than happily was meant in the writer. The High Priest prophesied (when he
spoke he knew not what) that Christ should dye for that Nation of the Jews:
Even so Mr. Lamb in this saying, viz. that if we Plough with the Heifer of the
Scripture, we shall understand the Riddle of his departing from us, stumbles
and falls at the very truth; and like a blind man with a flaming Torch in his
hand, gives us light to see him walking in darkness. Let us therefore go and
plough with the heifer of the Scriptures. 2 Pet. 2.15. We have a prophecy that
there shall be some that shall forsake the right way, and go astray. Heb.
10.25. We read of men's forsaking the assembling of themselves together. Romans
16.17. We read of men making divisions and offenses contrary unto the true
Doctrine which they formerly received. 1 Cor. 1.10. We have a caution (which
implies a danger) against divisions; an exhortation to be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, etc. Implying, that men are apt to divide, first, in
judgment; next, in practice; Act. 15.1. we read of some that did put life and
salvation in an outward Ceremony, urging that except men were circumcised after
the manner of Moses, they should not be saved, (circumcision it self not being
forbidden, until the necessity thereof unto justification, was maintained:) In
many places more we read, that those persons that did with such importunity,
and upon penalty of life and salvation, insist thus upon any thing but true
faith in Christ Jesus, did separate, and proved very sore enemies unto their
Opposits, (the true believers.) It is an easy matter to take several yoaks of
the Old Oxen of the Old Testament, as well as the Heifers of the new, to plough
in this field. There we read of Cautions, Exhortations, Dehortations, Instances
and Examples, about forsaking the Covenant of God, the Law of God, the house of
God, etc. and ploughing thus with the heifers of the holy Scriptures, we may
find out the Riddle of your departing from us.

SECT. XXI:
In the next place you charge us for mis-judging you, Mr. Lamb in his second
Epistle.
and bring in this as your consolation, that Paul and John, and other holy men
of God suffered in this kind, and why not you?

Where have we judged you? What has been declared by the Church against you?
It is true, your separation from us was voted by the Church, to be in their
judgments and consciences an undue act, which you could not but expect the
Church should do, otherways they should do little less than justify you. But
what ever your person all deportment has been unto them (whereof I delight not
to make mention) yet you know theirs unto you have been friendly and christian,
and that your company and guists, yea, and very countenance, have been very
welcome to them.

YOu tell us that no worldly thing separated you from the Church; Mr. Lamb.
and complain that some body dreamed such a thing.

SECT: XXII:
YOu say some dreamt of such a thing of you: But is not this a dream of your
own brain? dream so, how came you to the knowledge of it? Did they ever tell
you the dream? If they did dream it, it was but a dream; and will you be
offended at men's dreams? How come you to be so touchy? However we see your
mighty care to be well thought of. You will divide from us, break your faith and
trust with us, seek to extirpate and root us up; scandalize our Pastor in the
eyes of all men, rendering him evil for good, and yet would not have any man so
much as dream any thingamiss of you. We cannot dream waking, whatever we do
while we sleep. Well, it was no outward thing caused you to quit your former
standing: but say you,

THe truth concerning it, Mr. Lamb in his second Epistle.
( viz. Baptism and your standing, etc.) struck my conscience, and the light
shone into my Judgment with that clearness, that I could by no means a^oid it
with peace.

SECT. XXIII:
TRuth struck your conscience! Light, is by gradations, causing it to shine
more and more unto the perfect day, making men to grow in grace, The spirit of
God not violent in enlightening men's judgments.
and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Jacobs getting Venison so suddenly, which
was not ordinarily gotten but by much labor and pains (though pleasure) in
hunting, gave his father just cause to suspect that it was but some counterfeit
Venison. For my part I ever suspect sudden flashes. God is not usually in the
Earthquake, nor in the rushing wind, but in the soft and still voice.
Clearness of Judgment in cases controverted among the godly learned, is not
quickly attained. This is Venison usually gotten after (and by means of) much
Hunting. I believe you have made it one of your observations, that in these
latter days some persons have been Planet-struck, blinded and blasted, when
they have thought themselves Truth-struck. You say the Light ( viz. in the
Doctrine of Baptism) shone into your judgment, with clearness. Isa. 28.7. Zach
13.
Men may err in vision, and afterward be ashamed of their own Vision, and
lament themselves with, woe unto us in that we have put darkness for Light, and
Light for darkness. To study the wiles, methods, and subtilties of Satan, in
causing men to err in judgment, is a seasonable study in these slippery times
for our Christian caution against his cunning; his most thriving trade in these
days being to transform himself into an Angel of Light.

SECT. XXIV.
WE have not hitherto felt so much as the weight of your little finger in
arguments. You have spoken much of Truth, of clear Light, of truth in evidence
of the Scripture, of truth clothed with the majesty of God (meaning still in
the point of Baptism, and of withdrawing from those Churches that are not so
and so baptized) as if the ignorance here of were so scandalous, that it
renders men unworthy of the meanest place, so much as of being Dore-keepers in
the house of God. I pray let us see your strength, and show us your Light. For
this end you tell us in these words,

Now what those considerations are, Mr. Lamb,
that commanded my Judgment to that point, whereat it now stands in the
business of Baptism, which is that only thing which separated between me and
you, you have scattered up and down in this my Answer to Mr. Goodwin; but yet I
think good to give you the sum thereof under a few Heads.

SECT. XXV.
YOU say your considerations presented to us in your Epistle to the Church,
from whence you have withdrawn, Goodwin, then for the truth. Well, sure the sum
of all is in your considerations: we will take them into our considerations
also: You deal your self out in the business thus:

1. Mr. Lamb.
I considered the excellency of Jesus Christ above Moses; from thence argued
the ungodliness and danger of slighting him in any of his Commandments. AS for
this consideration, we (with you) speak the same thing, and are perfectly
joined together in the same mind, What will you make of this to your
separation from us? That we shall see hereafter: Well, proceed then.

2. Mr. Lamb.
I found Baptism with Water to be one of his (viz. Christ's) commandments, and
joined with teaching by name in the commission of Christ; and the same presence
of Christ promised jointly to Baptism, as teaching, to the end of the world,
and serving the Grand Interest of Remission of Sins, and Salvation in some
sense, and commanded by Christ to be done upon discipled persons, and that with
huge solemnity, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Spirit, and that too
amongst the last words he spoke on earth. SECT. XXVI.
THat Baptism with Water is one of Christ's commands, and joined with teaching
by name in the commission of Christ, I do not well understand: If you understand
the particle [and] distributively, thus, That Christ commanded, or appointed
his Disciples to Teach, as well as to Baptize, your Yea, in that sense, is our
Amen. But if you mean, and understand the Particle [and] conjunctively (as I
think you do) in this sense, as if Baptism and Teaching must be companions, and
go together, then it is denied. For if there must be teaching wherever there
is baptizing, because they are joined together in the commission, then it will
follow, that there must be baptizing wherever there is this teaching, upon the
same ground; because in the Commission, baptizing is as well joined with
teaching as teaching with baptizing: if you say

Teaching must precede baptizing,

SECT. XXVII.
J Answer, teaching, in the Commission before baptizing, is no more an argument
that teaching must precede baptizing in time, than the prelocation of the word
Jacob before Esau in Romans the 9th. 13. does argue that Jacob was the elder
brother; no more, then because we have Jacob also mentioned before Abraham in
the 7th. of Micah. 20. that therefore Abraham was born after Jacob. Yea, Mark
1.4. We have baptizing mentioned before teaching, or preaching: John did
baptize in the wilderness, and preach the Baptism of Repentance, etc.

SECT. XXVIII.
2. THe Commission (you see) is concerning Nations: Mat. 28.19. The word
Nations does include children.
Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, haptizing them; it is not go, teach
every person, Baptizing them. It is not denied but Nations must be taught,
before Nations be baptized; and families must be taught, before families be
baptized; that is, those that are capable in both, must be taught, and more
than taught before they be baptized. But this does no more argue that every
individual person must be taught, yea and must understand and receive that
teaching, before they be baptized, than it did follow, that because the Nation
of Israel was to be taught and instructed in the ways of God under the Law,
before circumcision, that therefore none of their children must be circumcised
until they were first actually taught and instructed, Genesis 17. and the ten
first verses; you will find that God first instructed Abraham in the Doctrine
of his Covenant, and afterward imposed upon him Circumcision, which was a seal
of the righteousness of faith, or of the Covenant of Justification by Faith.
The Nation of the Jews were Gods taught people, before circumcised: and this is
most apparent that the Proselytes of the Gentiles were first instructed before
they became Jews. This did not argue that their children must not, or might not
be circumcised before they were likewise actually instructed. You know they
were to be circumcised by the express command of God.

You have replied to your self in mentioning the word of God: they had the
express command of God for their circumcision;

SECT. XXIX.
IF God gave his express commands to circumcise the children of taught Parents,
Christ, (for they were his Ordinances) which were very mysterious and
spiritual, Children in Gods acceptance capable of circumcision and the
Doctrine thereof under the Law, why not alike capable of baptism and the
doctrine thereof, under the Gospel?
and which they could not understand until they came to years of discretion;
and that God did thereby instruct their Parents in the extent of his grace,
through the Mediation of Christ, or the Messiah, unto them and their children
(except they themselves did afterward reject and refuse the same) which was
matter of great comfort to them. If children were thus capable under the Law,
except you can find that they are expressly, or by infallible consequence from
the Scriptures, excluded under the Gospel, by what authority dare you exclude
them? Are they not as capable of the Doctrine of Baptism, as the children of
the Jews were of circumcision? Were not there as deep Mysteries in the
Ordinance of Circumcision, as there are in the Ordinance of Baptism? Did God,
did Christ command circumcision to children under the Law, and has God, has
Christ, forbidden or prohibited Baptism unto children under the Gospel? If so,
show us where, and we have no more to say. And whereas you say, show us an
express command for the Baptizing of children, the text is at hand, Mat. 28.19.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, Gods express command for baptizing of children.
and of the Holy Ghost. Are not Nations made up of men, women and children?
It Is true, children are not named in the Commission, neither are men or women
named: if children must be excluded because not named, why do you not exclude
men and women upon the same reason? and whom then will you baptize? If you say,
those that are actually capable of teaching, and no more; I answer, then you
obey not the extent of the Commission, which is not to baptize the capable part
(in your sense) of Nations, but all Nations. If the Jews consisting of men,
women, and children, were a taught Nation in Scripture Language, and in Gods
acceptance, why may not a Nation of the Gentiles consisting of men, women, and
children, be likewise a taught Nation? and the men, women, and children thereof
receive all the characters and signs of Gods gracious acceptance of them all,
as well as the Jews did? If by the word, Nation, in Scripture when applied to
the Jews, the men, women, and children of the Jews are intended (as you know
they are, and as will appear by the Texts in the Margin: Deuteronomy. 4.34. Deuteronomy.
32.28. 2 Samuel 7.23. 1 Chronicles. 17.21. Psalm. 83.4. Psalm. 147.20. Isa. 1.4. Luke
7.5. etc. Act. 8.28. Gal. 3.14. Ephesians. 3.6.
) why then by the word nation, when applied to the Gentiles, shall we not
understand the men, women, and children also? And whereas the Text says, Go
teach all nations, I conceive it was to instruct them to inform the world, that
now the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles also, as to the Jews; and
that the blessing of Abraham is now come upon the Gontiles through Jesus
Christ, being rejected by the Jews, and that the Gentiles should be
fellow-heirs and of the fame body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by
the gospel. The words, Jews nation, under the Law, were comprehensive,
importing the men, women, and children: The words Gentiles and nations under
the Gospel, cannot with the least show of reason be restrictive, importing only
men and women, with the exclusion of children. The salvation sent by God to the
Jews, the blessing of Abraham that was upon the Jews, the Covenant whereof the
Jews were heirs, was such a salvation, such a blessing, such a covenant, as was
assured, signed, and sealed unto the children of the Jews. The children
therefore of those Gentiles that accept of this salvation, this blessing, this
covenant, which the Jews rejected, being in no place of Scripture cut off, God
forbid that we should dare to cut them off, though (it seems) you dare.
Consider, as it is a cursed thing to add unto the word of God, so it is no less
a cursed thing to take any thing from the same. Christ says plainly, go teach
all nations, baptizing them viz. all taught nation: you say, go teach all
nations, baptizing only such of every nation as are actually taught and
instructed. In Scripture acceptance, men, women, and children, made up the
taught nation of the Jews; in your sense and meaning, only the men and women
must be the taught nation of the Gentiles, and children excluded. The Scripture
makes the Covenant of Grace and the figns thereof, to belong to the men, women,
and children of the Jews, and in the application thereof unto the Gentiles,
makes use of the same comprehensive Expressions to them, as were used to the
Jews, viz. Gentiles, Nation. But you will take upon you to cut off more than a
third part thereof, without any commission or authority from God, or from Jesus
Christ, for your instruction or voucher. It is a sin of an equal demerit, to
pull down Gods posts, and set ours up by his, as it is to set up by Gods posts
any posts of our own.

Again, whereas you add in this Consideration, Mr, Lamb.
That the same presence of Christ is promised jointly to Baptism as to
Teaching, to the end of the world.

SECT. XXX.
I Reply, That if by the same presence of Christ, you mean the same, Baptism,
as there is in Teaching, we are Partners with you in the same meaning. But if
by the same presence of Christ your meaning be, the same every way, and no
otherways, that is, there is one and the self same, and no other operating
presence of Christ in the Administration of Baptism, as there in Teaching or
Preaching the Gospel, then it is denied. There is a real, but a different
presence of Christ in the Baptism of Infants from that in preaching the word.
There is a manifold presence of Christ, or operation of his Holy Spirit in the
preaching of the Gospel, which is not at all in the Ministration of Baptism.
There is nothing symbolicall, or otherways, in baptism, preaching Jesus Christ
to be the Son of the Virgin Mary, that he was betrayed by Judas, one of his
Disciples; that he was the Son of David; that he suffered death upon the Cross,
etc. which is to be known by teaching the Gospel: and a suitable presence of
Christ does accompany such Doctrines, etc. But yon insinuate (as I conceive)
such a thing as this, in saying, there is the same presence of Christ promised
unto the Ordinance of Baptism, as is promised to that of teaching, to the end
of the world; viz. That there is such a kind of the presence of Christ in
teaching, which none are capable to understand but persons at years of
discretion, having personally an actual capacity of understanding, receiving
and believing the same; and that the self same presence of Christ there is in
Baptism, whereof children are not capable, I mean, so to understand: and that
therefore, as teaching belongs not unto Infants, because they cannot understand
nor enjoy the presence of Christ in that Ordinance; even so Baptism be longs
not to children, because they cannot understand the same, neither can they
enjoy the presence of Christ therein. If this is your meaning, I answer,

SECT: XXXI.
FIrst, In what sense children are capable of the Doctrine of baptism.
that no such presence of Christ is promised unto, or does accompany baptism,
otherways then was promised unto, or did accompany the Ordinance of
circumcision under the Law. The presence of Christ necessary to make the
Ordinance of baptism profitable, is such a prefence as shall first teach the
subjects of Baptism (to speak in your Language) the Doctrine of dying unto sin,
rising up and living unto God; the Doctrine of mortification, of
sanctification: And secondly, such a presence of Christ, as shall duly affect
their minds with suitable affections and heavenly dispositions under, in, and by
such a vision. Such a presence of Christ as this, was as necessary for the
useful improvement of the Ordinance of circumcision of old, namely, such a
presence of Christ, as should first teach and instruct the subjects thereof,
according to their capacities in the Doctrine of the circumcision of the heart,
the cutting off of the superfluity of naughtiness, the circumcision made
without hands. And thirdly, Such a presence of Christ as should duly affect
their minds with holy and heavenly suitable affections. And the children were
not capable of such a presence of Christ; yet you know they were by Gods will
and pleasure, to partake of that Ordinance notwithstanding. Surely God did not
command the Ordinance of circumcision under the Law, but he did vouchsafe his
presence unto those upon whom he did enjoin it: Even so, as great and
effectual a presence of Christ is promised and performed unto children
baptized under the Gospel, as was performed unto children circumcised under the
Law.

2. The presence of Christ promised and made good unto persons that are found
under those Ordinances which God has appointed, may not be so much for the
present benefit and sensible accommodation of all the true subjects of such an
Ordinance, as for the immediate benefit of the standers by, and persons that
are Witnesses thereof. And the benefit of Christ's presence when it was first
administered unto them, may not influence it self, at least in a sensible
manner, until they come to years of discretion. As the presence of God
blessing the Seeds-man in the act of soweing, is not sensibly found until the
Harvest. You know the presence of Christ in the administration of circumcision,
did not appear in the children of the Jews, in a spiritual benefit, until
they came to years of knowledge, and understanding. Even so baptizing of
children (as well as men and women of discretion) may be accompanied with the
presence of Christ unto the standers by, unto the administrators and Witnesses
of the thing done, and do service for the present upon them, and upon children
also, when they are capable to understand the Mysteries of God imported therein.

As for that passage in this your second consideration, wherein you say that
Baptism with water, etc. is an Ordinance and command of Christ,

Serving the Grand Interest of Remission of sins, Mr. Lamb.
and salvation (in some sense.)

SECT. XXXIII.
IF by serving the grand-interest of remission of sins and salvation in some
sense, be meant only this, How baptism serves the interest of Remission of
Sins, and how not.
that as the other Ordinances of Jesus Christ preaching, prayer, etc. do serve,
or subserve unto these grand ends mentioned; we are all brethren in this
precious faith together with you: We do believe that all Gods Ordinances (and
consequently this of baptism) do accommodate and serve the grand-interest of
remission of sins, and salvation in some sense, though every one in its own
order and manner. But

2. If by serving the grand-interest of remission of sins, and salvation (in
some sense) You mean, as if there was as absolute necessity unto remission of
sins, and salvation, that men and women should be baptized as well as believe,
and that it is not faith alone that justifies, or without baptism, because (as
some of you have sensed it) Jesus Christ has said, that he that believes and
is baptized shall be saved: if you say of haptism, and of the manner thereof,
according to your apprehensions, as the Jews that came from Judea, Acts the 15.
chapt. ver. 1. said of circumcision, except ye be circumcised after the manner
of Moses, ye cannot be saved; if this be your sense concerning baptism, and the
manner thereof, viz. Dipping, etc. then I say, though you, or an Angel from
heaven, shall bring in baptism, or any thing else, in competition with faith
unto justification, as some once brought in circumcision contrary to the
Doctrine of truth which we have received, you are, and shall be unto us, in
this point, as accursed. And we rather affirm, that if in this sense, or with
this hope and expectation, you preach the necessity of baptism and dipping,
etc. that Christ shall profit you nothing.

Again, Whereas you further add in this your second consideration, that
Baptism was

Commanded by Christ to be done upon Discipled Persons. I Answer. Mr. Lamb.


SECT. XXXIII.
1. In whatsense children are discipled persons, and cipled persons, and in
what sense not.
THat if by Discipled persons you mean only persons that are taught and have
learned personally the truth as it is in Jesus, I deny any such command of
Christ concerning Baptism: neither does any word in the commission imply in the
least any such thing. The word in the Commission is Nations; Go ye and teach
all Nations, baptizing them, etc. and we have granted that no nations are to be
baptized, but the discipled nations, as no nation was to be circumcised but the
discipled nation of the Jews. Yet undiscipled persons (at least in your sense
undiscipled) were circumcised; Even so I conceive, though no nations of the
Gentiles were to be baptized, but discipled nations, yet children, not
actually, and with understanding, brought to the knowledge of Christ, may be
baptized.

2. Suppose it be granted that none but discipled persons are to be baptized,
yet will it not follow that children must not be baptized? The reason is,
because in Scripture-sense, children of discipled parents are called discipled
persons, Act. 15.10. Why do ye tempt God to put a yoke upon the neck of the
Disciples; Children are called Disciples in Scripture.
etc. This yoke is circumcision; all are called Disciples upon whom this yoke
was put. Now this yoke was not put upon the neck of the believing Jews, in
respect of their personal subjection to circumcision, for they were
circumcised already: but upon their children, or upon them, in respect of their
children, who are here called Disciples. Again John 9.28. said the Jews to the
man whom Christ cured, being born blind, we are Moses Disciples; we, that is,
the whole Nation of us Jews, are Moses Disciples, under the discipline of Moses
Law. And you know that children were under Moses his discipline in respect of
circumcision.

Again, the Scripture calls children by the name of Gods servants, Lev. 25.41,
42. Then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him,
(speaking of the jewish servants and their children, when the year of Jubilee
comes) for (says God) they are my servants, he and his children, etc. for
they, that is, he and his children are my Servants: If children may be called
Moses Disciples, and Gods Servants under the Law, why may they not be reputed
Christ's Disciples and his Servants under the Gospel?

Again the holy actions of Parents are said to be done also by their children,
2 Chronicles. 20.4. Jehoshaphat proclaimed a fast, and Judah gathered themselves
together to ask, or pray for help of the Lord: Who are meant by Judah? See
verse the 13th. And all Judah stood before the Lord with their little ones,
their wives, and their children; thus children are said to pray with their
fathers. Again Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord
your God, your captains of your Tribes, your Elders and your Officers, with all
the men of Israel, your little ones, your wives, etc. that thou should enter
into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath, etc. Thus children are
said to Fast, to Pray, to Repent, to enter into covenant, viz. in Gods
merciful acceptance, their Parents being exercised in those duties. Why may
they not be said now also to be the same with their Parents? Again Psalm. 22.9.
David says thus: Thou art he that tookest me out of the womb: thou did make
me to hope when I was upon my Mothers Breasts. What is more plain in Scripture
than this, viz. in Gods gracious account children are said to hope and depend
upon him, even before they come to understand the Doctrine of hope. Again, Mat.
18.5, 6. children are said to believe in Christ, and a fearful judgment
denounced against those that shall do them injury. And whether you do not wrong
them by excluding them from the Ordinance of Baptism, it concerns you well to
consider. See the like, Mark 9.36, 37. and 42. compared together. Again, Mark.
10.13, 14, 15. Again Math. 19.13, 14, 15. You shall see the heart and soul of
Jesus Christ is free in the admission of children unto him, though you thrust
them away from him.

As for that last clause in your second consideration, wherein you take notice
that the celebration of Baptism upon discipled persons was commanded to be done

With huge solemnity in the Name of the Father, Son, and Spirit, and that too
amongst the last words he spoke on Earth: I Shall only offer this, that those
words in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost do not
imply the huge solemnity of the administration, (to speak in your uncouth
expression) but a consecrating them unto the service of God, discovered now
unto them more clearly, than formerly, to be the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and it makes not one hair of the head of your Opinion about baptizing of
persons at age, etc. white, or black. And whereas you add with an Emphasis,
viz. and that too amongst the last words he (1. Christ) spoke on earth, it is
so impertinently brought in by you to your purpose, that these first words
shall be the last words that I shall speak unto them; and therefore shall
proceed to your third Consideration, which you give out thus:

3. I find, Mr. Lamb in the second Epistle.
that he (Christ) intended not the reiteration of it (baptism) by the same
person: and that therefore there ought to be all due care of practicing it
without corruption.

SECT. XXXIV.
WE have dug in the same field of the Scriptures with you, Rebaptization
condemned by Mr. Lamb himself.
and have found the same treasures with your self, touching what you say in
this consideration. Only give us a like liberty with your self, to add an Use
of Reproof, or of Correction, to yours of Instruction, viz. that seeing Christ
intended not the Reiteration of baptism, that therefore those are here to be
reproved for their extreme boldness and presumption, that shall press persons
already consecrated unto the service of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost at the
Waters of their baptism in the time of their infancy, and that upon terms
little lower than upon their salvation, to a Reiteration of their baptism,
contrary to the intention of Jesus Christ. Your fourth consideration runs
thus.

4. Mr. Lamb.
I found the design of Christ in the Ordinance it self, be exceeding rich and
spiritual, namely amongst many other ends, etc.

SECT. XXXV.
THE Ordinance of baptism is indeed, exceeding rich and spiritual; but I fear,
while you seek out the spiritualness, and richness thereof administered unto
such persons only, and after such a manner, as you plead for, instead of
finding these, you lose the richness and spiritualness of the baptism you have
received in your infancy; which, however it is, or has been unto you, yet
that Ordinance administered unto others, in their infancy, and duly improved in
their riper years, has been as a cloud dropping fatness upon their souls; and
as the Tree of Life yiedling various fruits every month, yea, every moment, of
rich and pleasant tastes unto their spiritual palate. You proceed in this fourth
consideration to show us wherein consists those rich and Spiritual designs of
Christ: As

1. Mr. Lamb.
To oblige the Disciples unto Christ; that as circumcision bound men to keep
the law of Moses, so does baptism to keep the law of Christ. Therefore the
Spirit borrows the word baptism which respects Christ, to express the
obligation of the Jews to the law of Moses, 1 Cor. 10.2. and were all baptized
unto Moses.

SECT. XXXVI
HErein I confess that (in my judgment) you speak after, Mr. Lamb by
consequents grants that children do capable subjects of baptism,
notwithstanding theio infancy.
or according unto, the Oracles of God, and the analogy of faith. For if
circumcision bound men (that is, those that were partakers of it, who were
children in their infancy, as well as men of riper years;) if (I say)
circumcision bound the subjects thereof, who were children, as well as men, to
keep the Law of Moses; why should not baptism bind them to keep the Law of
Christ? For if circumcision taken or received by children at eight days old,
did bind these children when they came to years of discretion, to keep the Law
of Moses, what tolerable shadow or show of reason can be given, why that
Baptism administered now unto children, should not also bind them all the
after-dayes of their lives to keep the Law of Christ? I very much honor and
approve of your Orthodoxism in this point at this turn. You proceed:

Further the design of Christ is to affect the heart by the will of God, seen
in the Ordinance of Baptism, Mr. Lamb.
as well as heard in the word preached, etc.

SECT. XXXVII.
TO grant you this also (in a due and qualified sense) were but to grant you
out of the abundance of our own apprehensions in the truth thereof. These holy
designs of Christ in baptism,

This being the plain design of Christ in the ordinance, Mr. Lamb.
I considered Infants-Sprinckling, which ordinarily goes for baptism, and
found the great design of Christ in a manner frustrate by it, because there is
no Sign or figure of any such thing as death, burial, and resurrection, and
consequently not that Sermon of the Gospel, which Christ intended to make by
it, as is most evident by Scriptures, which palpably discovers it to be a
humane invention.

SECT. XXXVIII.
IT seems you took Infant-sprinckling, called baptism, Christ when they looked
upon him as the Carpenters Son, or as a Root out of a dry ground, having no
form or comeliness, and beauty, that it should be desired. Mat. 13.55.
And hence it is that it is despised, and rejected, and not esteemed by you.
Well, however to us that believe our Infant Baptism, to be by Gods appointment,
it is precious, but unto those that be disobedient unto Gods will therein, it
is a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense. I believe it has been of a
higher esteem with you. There were some, that grew miserably defective, both in
their opinion of, and respects unto, the Apostle Paul, who once could be
willing to pull out their eyes for him; which argued, themselves, but not the
Apostle, to decline in godliness. The true Reason why infant baptism does no
more good unto some men.
The truth is, as Christ could do no great miracle among those that did not
believe, even so your misbelief of the mind of God in your Infantbaptism, has
hindered the rich and spiritual effects thereof upon your heart and soul. But
you say,

You found the great design of Christ frustrate by it, viz. by sprinckling of
Infants.

SECT. XXXIX.
IT is not one of the least of mercies purchased by Jesus Christ, ignorances of
his people. The froward in heart find no good: certain I am, if there be tares
in that field of Infant Baptism, that God sowed wheat there: and it is the
Enemy that has done this. You find the great design of Christ frustrate by
Infant Baptism. So many of the Jews found nothing of Messiah in Messiah
himself. You find no good in it, because you seek no such commodity there. If
you speak of your personal experience, I am sorry for, and pity your
barrenness. If you affirm it dogmatically, asserting, that you find or
perceive, that the great design of Christ is frustrated by it, I bewail your
thick darkness. However you find no good in it, or that there can be no good
in it; yet you do not expect that we should alter our Opinions of it by your
bare affirming, that you find the great design of Christ frustrated by it. But
you give us a reason of your affirmation:

Because there is no sign or figure of any such thing, Mr. Lamb.
as Death, Burial, and Resurrection; and consequently, not that Sermon of the
Gospel, which Christ intended to make by it, as is most evident by the
Scripture; which palpably discovers it to be a humane invention.

SECT. XL.
First, You have not yet made it appear, that the design of Christ in Baptism,
the Death, Burial, and resurrection of Christ. This you should first have
done, before you had lifted up your heel, and spurned at it, as a thing of
naught, because it did not serve in that warfare. It may be of rich and
spiritual use unto men in some other sacred respects, as well as in these
mentioned.

2. Suppose you do not find any such thing in it, does it follow that it is
not there? The Lord of glory himself was despised, contemned, yea and condemned
too, by many of the Princes of this world, who were great in knowledge, yea and
in zeal too, for external and outward worship; I mean the Scribes and
Pharisees, because they knew him not in his worth and excellence. There might
be treasures of wisdom and knowledge (even of those things you speak of) in
Infant Baptism, yea though administered in the way so much despised by you)
though they be hid there from you: Another reason why some men find no good in
Infant Baptism.
You know when men begin once to despise the Gospel, and continue therein, they
are given up at last to an injudicious mind, having eyes and see not, ears and
hear not; hearts and understand not.

3. As much consimilitude and configuration unto the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection, etc. may be found in the baptism of children, as in the baptism
of men and women. The difference of the subject does not hinder this, but the
manner of administration, viz as performed by dipping, or sprinckling. But

4. In Sacrament all Ordinances, In Sacrament all Ordinances we must have
respect to Gods command, not to the fitness of the things signified thereby.
the institutions and commands of God, are to be observed, more than the
adaption of the sign unto the thing signified according to our thoughts and
apprehensions. Such ceremonies under the Law were appointed by God, to be had
in his worship, which (it is likely) man's wisdom (had the matter been left unto
him) had never chosen unto such ends. If you had perfectly convinced us first,
that dipping, and not sprinckling, had been Gods appointment, in that
administration, we had had nothing to say for our selves, why sprinckling
should be used, when dipping is appointed; but to argue meetly from a conceited
aptness, Mr. Lamb. justifies Papists will worship.
of the manner of Baptism in this way, and not in that, to represent the
supposed ends thereof, is to justify the Papists in their use of their
significant, and teaching ceremonies, which God never appointed.

5. The command being to baptize, and the manner thereof not being directed,
there being in the Scriptures a various interpretation and use of the same
word, wherein the command is given, The command of Christ to baptize, is of
several interpretations.
and no one of these interpretations more than others insisted upon in that
place where it is given, doubtless in such cases, the Churches and people of
God, may use their liberty, in making choice of that, which they conceive most
conducing to their spiritual, and temporal interest. And that being the true
state of the case in hand, therefore, as circumstances may be, he that
baptizeth by dipping, may do well, and he that does it by sprinckling may do
better. And so again on the contrary, as the case may be; he that baptizeth by
sprinckling, may do well, God does command some Sacramental things to be done
that are less significant (as least in man's thoughts) than what he might have
commanded; but his commands are the ground of our duty.
and he that does it by dipping, may do better. The worship of God under the
Gospel, being more spiritual than under the Law; wherein God stands not so
much upon the Letter, as upon the Spirit, and truth of the heart.

6. In Sacramental Ordinances, God may, and (doubtless) does make use of such
tipes and ceremonies, which may not so fully, and in all points of spiritual
instructions (in man's apprehension) answer the things signified, as some other
tipes and ceremonies would, which he does not make use of, and that for very
rich and spiritual ends, which would be too great a digression to insist upon.
As for instance, in that Ordinance of the Supper, he might have made use, not
only of a mere piece of bread and a cup of wine, but also of a competent meal
of comfortable provision, to have showed forth his death and their life, by
means thereof, with much more signification; as suppose it had been by the
killing of some Lamb, or other living creature made for the use of man; and
afterward to have eaten it together in love, and holy mirth. This, a man would
have thought, would have answered the rich and spiritual ends of that
Ordinance better, than a small bit of Bread, and a little Wine would do. If God
says go into the River Jordan, and wash, and be clean, we must not suffer our
hearts to mind the excellent Amana, and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, but submit
unto his Ordinance, though it be never so mean in our eyes. Many times, the
goodly and most likely Sons of Iessie, are rejected, and the contemptible Lad
sought out and crowned. Therefore it is no good Argument to conclude that
sprinckling in baptism cannot be of God, though it should be granted that the
Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, are not so fitly represented by
sprinckling, as by dipping.

SECT. XLI.
7. AND lastly, there is more aptness even in sprinckling the subject of
baptism by water, to the rich, holy, and spiritual ends of baptism, Spinckling
does fully answer the ends of baptism, yea better than dipping.
then perhaps has entered into your minds, seriously to consider; as for
instance.

First, The sprinckling of water does more lively represent the effusion of
Christ's blood for us, and consequently the death of Christ, than a standing
Pool, or River does. It was not simply the blood of Christ, but the blood of
Christ shed, by which we have a Redemption, and Remission of sins. Now though
water in a Pool, or River, might in a dull way represent the blood of Christ,
yet the sprinckling, or pouring of it out, does more aptly set forth the
shedding of this blood. We may well presume that his precious blood did trickle
down from his most sacred Temples, Hands, Feet, and Sides, when he was upon the
Cross, all which (I say) is more significantly represented by Sprinckling, than
by Dipping.

2. A little Water sprinkled and poured out upon a person, does more lively
and significantly set forth the value, worth, and excellency of Christ's blood,
than a great standing Pool, Pond, or River, instructing the beholders thereof,
that it is not the quantity, but the quality, the dignity of Christ's blood.
Though it be but as the blood of a Lamb, yet the Lamb being spotless, and
without blemish, that has purchased redemption, and remission of sins, the
Scriptures take no notice how much the blood was, but what the dignity of that
blood was, that was shed, Act. 20.28. God has purchased the church with his
own blood. Heb. 9.14. It is the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot, etc. that purges the conscience, 1 Pet.
1.19. You are redeemed, not with silver and gold, etc. but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. It is true, a
great Pool, Pond, or River, might better represent the blood of Bulls and
Goats, Oxen and Heifers, Rams and Lambs, etc. altogether, making a great Pool,
or lake of blood which is corrupted, and cannot justify, but a little water
sprinkled does more aptly set forth the value, worth, and dignity of Christ's
blood, which is as it were freshly running out of his veins, and besprinckled
upon the subject in Baptism.

3. The Sprinckling of the water in baptism, does hold a conformity unto, and
preserves the commemoration of, the legal sprincklings, in the Old Testament,
Exodus 24. compared with Hebrews the 9th. you will find that Moses, after he
had preached and spoken the Law of God unto the people, he took the blood of
calves, and of goats, etc. and besprinckled the book and all the people, the
tabernacle, the vessels of the ministry, etc. all things were purged by the
sprinckling of blood. And the Author to the Hebrews refers all to the purging
and purifying of the conscience from dead works to serve the living God, Heb.
10.22 and Heb. 12. ver. 24. You are come, etc. to the blood of Sprinckling,
that speaks better things than the blood of Abel; the blood of sprinckling,
that is, the blood wherewith you are sprinkled, alluding to that blood of the
Old-covenant, mentioned Heb. 9.20. So we are sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, etc. This is more lively represented in the sprinckling of water in
baptism, then in dipping or dowsing the subject of baptism (so much insisted
upon.)

4. This ceremony of sprinckling, or pouring out water, in baptism, does more
lively represent the performance of several promises of sanctification unto
the Gentiles, mentioned by the words sprinckling and pouring out of water, then
that of dipping does, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinckle clean water upon you, and
you shall be clean from all yuor filthiness; and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you, and a new heart also will I give you, etc. So again in Isa. 52 23,
24, 25. it is prophesied of Christ, Behold my Servant shall deal prudently: he
shall be exalted, and extolled, and be very high, etc. he shall sprinckle many
Nations, etc. So again Isa. 44.3. I will pour out water upon him that is
thirsty, etc. I will pour out my Spirit. So again Joel 2.18. I will pour out
my Spirit upon all Flesh, etc. upon all Flesh, as well as upon the Jews. Thus
the ceremony of sprinckling, or of pouring out of water in baptism, does help a
man's faith in the believing and expecting the performance of these promises,
after a more effectual manner, than dipping does.

SECT. XLII.
5. IN the fifth and last place, Sprinckling and pouring out water upon the
subject of baptism, better answers the end of that Ordinance, than dipping the
subject of baptism, or burying him under water.
let us compare your dipping with your notions and apprehensions thereof,
together with sprinckling, and our apprehension thereof: and then see which is
most likely to be the truth, and to answer the nature of a Sacrament.

We have usually considered three things in Sacraments, the outward visible
sign: The thing signified thereby; and the inward spiritual grace. As to
instance, in the Supper of the Lord, the Bread and Wine are the outward visible
signs: The Body and blood of Christ, the things signified: Our spiritual Union
with Christ, refreshment by Christ, interest in Christ, etc. these are the
spiritual graces, etc.

So now consider in our Notions and apprehensions of baptism by sprinckling;
The outward visible sign is, Water: the thing signified by it, is the Blood of
Christ: The inward and spiritual graces, they are remission of sins,
sanctification, spiritual washing, clensing our selves from all pollutions,
etc. (the spiritual graces of any Sacrament being very many and vatious.) Now
let us consider your Notion of Dipping intended by Christ (as you say) therein,
viz. to show forth the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ for sinners,
and the sinners death unto sin, suffering with Christ, Resurrection to all
newness of life here, and glory hereafter. Let us then examine it.

First, Here is water, the outward visible sign; What must this signify? Or
what is the thing signified by it? Is it to answer the Death and Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ? What answers Water? Is it the death or blood of Christ?
So far we grant also, that the Water signifies Christ's Blood. So far I believe
you are right: and this does more lively represent the Blood of Christ
trickling, or sprinckling down by drops and gushes, viz. the sprinckling or
pouring out of water, than dipping into water. But to make it represent the
burial of Christ, how will you make the parallel? Let us try how things will
agree.

1. Here is water, whereinto the subject is dipped, or dowsed: this is the
outward visible sign.

2. What is thereby signified? The Blood of Christ cannot be here the thing
signified; for Christ was not buried in his own blood, but in the earth. Then
the thing signified hereby is the earth; and it can be nothing else, what ever
be the inward and spiritual graces. Now I offer, Where do we ever find water
in Scripture to represent the earth? It does frequently sign fie the Spirit,
the blood of Christ, the pure word of God, whereby men are made clean, when
they are polluted; refreshed when thirsty, etc. But never does it signify the
Earth, as it must here according to your Notion of it, this being to show forth
the burial of Christ. Is not this an earthly and dull interpretation,
representation, and exposition of water in baptism, as you carry it?

Again, to represent unto us the Resurrection of Christ, you must manage it
thus. First here is water, the outward visible Sign. 2. What must be signified
thereby? It cannot be the blood of Christ. For as Christ was not buried in his
own blood, so he did not rise out of his own blood. That that must answer water
here also, must be the earth again, out of which Christ rose. Is not this a
most fansifull and unscripturall use of the word Water? But you will object and
say,

The Scriptures themselves are their own best Interpreter, and the best
Interpreter likewise of Gods Ordinances. And do not the Scriptures refer our
dipping in water to Christ's bu^ ^all; our rising out of water to Christ's
resurrection? Romans 6.4, 5. We are buried with him by Baptism unto death, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we
also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in
the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
resurrection, etc. Col. 2.12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are
risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him
from the dead.

SECT. XLV.
THese (doubtless) are your thoughts, and these are the main Scriptures wherein
you so much boast that you have found out the truth in the matter of difference
between us in this point, sprinckling. But if a man shall seriously consider,
it will appear that it is not the Text, but your interpretation of it, that
thus magnify. And it is your (i. e.) and not Christ's scriptum est, that you
call by the name of truth clothed with the majesty of God (with other great
swelling words.) You deal with us in this point, Anabaptists, and
Anti-Remonstrants, bring their meaning (...) the Scriptures and then force it
upon their brethren for the Oracles of God.
as some others do about the Doctrines of the extent of Christ's death, of
election, and reprobation, of the liberty of the will of man, etc. who
(declining the express letter of the Text) bring their interpretation-sense and
meaning to the Text, contrary to the interpretation, sense, and meaning of
other persons, whose abilities, piety, parts, and worth, are no way inferior
to their own. These likewise will take upon them, to digest their opinions, and
interpretations of such Texts into certain positions, and these must be
Articles of faith, fundamentalls in Religion, the Golden Reeds laid up, even in
the very Sanctuary of God, to try other men's doctrines withal. If they speak
according to their sense, then they speak as the Oracles of God, and according
to the analogy of Faith; then they pass for Orthodox; they have a sacred and
fatherly benediction, an authoritative God-speed in the work of the Ministry,
speaking according to that rule, there is a peace be upon them, and upon all
such the Israel of God. And so they pass with an Ecclesiastical vale to preach
and premulgate their presumed notions, for articles of faith. If you on the
other-hand, and any person comes before them (sitting together, clothed, as it
were, with glory and majesty from on earth, viz. the authority of man) he is
presently brought to the rest, that as the Papists, Prelates in the
Marian-dayes, when they would know ^n Heretic, would presently demand of any
brought before them, what do you be believe concerning the Sacrament of the
Altar? Even so these demand, what do you believe concerning the extent of
Christ's death, election, reprobation, the power of the will, falling away, etc.
If they answer never so pertinently to every one of these, speaking only the
very Scripture phrase, and nothing else, though therein they exercise and
manifest much learning, much dexterity in the Scriptures, much holiness of
mind, sweetness of lip; yet, though they spend several hours and days, in
such examinations, and such answers, yet they are judged subtle men, that
speak warily, and covertly. And so long as they will speak nothing but the
Language of the Scriptures, they are put off, or put by, their enemies their
Judges not being satisfied, who (in a word) will not pass them for Orthodox,
until they leave off, and desist to give their answers thus in Parables (I
mean, in Scripture sayings) and speak plainly, whether they do, or will,
receive their conceits, and plucits, the brood of their own brain, without
sound proof of Scripture, for the infallible truth of God. If they do not, or
will not it is not their piety, their parts, their gifts of knowledge and
utterance, their University education and perficiencie of learning, it is not
Certificates (though never so authenticque) of their holy life, and unspotted
conversation, that shall serve their turn: they are laid aside as men unsound
in the faith; men that believe, and will preach another Gospel; their truth
(or tormentors rather) thus making their own judgments and opinions in the said
points, their positions and articles by themselves made, not only equal with,
but above the Holy Scriptures themselves: Or as the Pope and his Cardinals
make their Canons and decrees of equal authority with the Scriptures, sending
out their Bulls and Excommunications against those that refuse to receive them;
or as the Mohammedan Priests and Turks will not suffer Mebomet-Dictates to be
questioned upon pain of death: even so you produce Scriptures against the
baptizing of children, which you say give a distinct sound, that it is against
the will of God to baptize such, that such were never baptized; that the manner
of baptism, according to Gods express will and word, is by dipping, etc. which
Scriptures notwithstanding make no more for the same, than those Texts that
say, that two Sparrows are sold for a farthing; that they took up so many
Fishes, that the Net broke, etc. And yet he that shall not receive your
interpretations; nay though Paul, or an Angel from heaven say otherways, he
is as a man accursed from Christ: you excommunicate such men, unchurch them,
holding them unfit to partake of the Ordinances of Gods House, although the
Texts in the mean time urged and produced by you (as Balaam by Balack) to curse
us, yet do not curse, but bless us altogether. For confirmation hereof, let us
examine the two Texts last quoted by you: Romans 6.4, 5. We are buried with him
by Baptism, etc. Colloss. 2.12. We are buried with him in Baptism, etc. What
is here against baptizing of children? what to justify separation from
churches baptized only in their infancy? What is here to evince, that it is
the express command, will, and pleasure of God, that baptism must be by the
total immersion of the subject of baptism, by burying and dipping him in the
water? and that every other manner of baptizing is a nullity, and mere babism
and vanity? These Texts speak of the blessed fruits, benefits, and consequences
of baptism, not of the manner of baptizing. All that they say is this, that in,
or by Baptism (be the manner what it will) we are buried with Christ, that is,
we have a blessed fellowship with Christ Jesus in his death, buryall, and
resurrection; God making a blessed co^^enant with us, in baptism, and we with
him, that through the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, he is become
ours, and we are become his; that as he dyed, was buried, and rose again for
us, so we would live, and dye with him unto the world, flesh, and devil, and
henceforth live as those that were risen again with Christ. These Texts do not
prove, first that dipping or plunging in the waters of baptism, is the express
will of God concerning persons when they are baptized, respecting the manner
thereof: Nor secondly, that the persons baptized in those days, were so
baptized; but it proves (as we have said) that whatsoever the manner of their
baptism was, that believers, by their baptism, are buried with Christ, which is
not at all denied; the very design of the Apostle here, not being to set forth
the manner of baptism, but the benefits and fruits thereof. When the Apostle
says in the next verse, Romans 6.5.
if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall, etc.
this does not show the manner of Christ's death, as whether he was killed with a
Sword, strangled, or crucified, etc. but some other thing: if you will know the
manner of Christ death, you must look elsewhere for it. So again, when the
Apostle says in the 3. to the Philippians, and the 3. ver. we are the circume
sion, etc. this does not prove the manner of circumcision, but another thing:
circumcision might be the cutting off of something from the forehead, or
finger, or any other part, for all that can be gathered from that Text, you
must search elsewhere for that. Even so when the Apostle says, we are buried
with Christ, in, or by, Baptism, if you will look for the express will and
command of God, concerning the manner of baptism, you must find it elsewhere,
and not in this place.

And further, Tho it be granted that the practice of baptismin the primitive
times was by dipping; yet will it not follow that dipping is binding upon all
persons in all places.
though it should be granted (as possibly it may be true) that persons baptized
at that time, and in those parts of the world, where (it is likely) it might be
done without danger to their health, etc. were baptized by dowsing, dipping, or
plunging into the water, and that the Apostle might take advantage from the
manner thereof, namely, the more significantly and emphatically to put them in
mind of their being dead and buried with Christ, that is, of their being in the
State of death, and of burial, as they were when under the water, etc. it does
not prove that therefore they ought to be baptized no other way. For though
they were baptized after that manner, yet they might have been baptized after
another manner without offense unto God, if so be they were not tied up and
restrained by God unto that manner, and from all other; show us where is such
restraint in the Scripture. If from those Texts you will prove the necessity of
the manner of baptism to be by immersion, because the Text says, we are
buried: with him in baptism; that is, as Christ was buried in, or under, the
earth, so we were buried in and under the waters, inferring as well the manner
of Christ's buryall, as the manner of our baptism, why may you not infer thence
also the manner of Christ's death, as well as of his buryall? and with what kind
of art can you make the analogy to hold there? The next words speak of our
being planted together in the likeness of his death, etc. Is there any thing in
dipping setting forth the manner of Christ's death? Well, though it be granted
that some were (nay, that all spoken of in the Scripture were dipped in baptism)
yet will it not follow, that if they had been baptized any other way, they had
offended their Liege Lord, except he had denied them their liberty in this
case, and commanded them to be baptized in that manner only, and no other way.

If we seriously consider the Texts by you urged, to prove the necessity of
dipping, viz. Romans 6.4. Coll. 2.12. they intend to teach men the true, and most
necessary Doctrine, and use of baptism, not the manner thereof. The Doctrine,
Benefits, and use of Baptism, these are plainly taught us in the Scriptures,
which (indeed) we should more study and practice, than thus disingeniously to
separate, rend, and run away from the blessed assemblies of the Saints and
Churches of God, because they differ in these external things. And the truth
is, there being (at least that we can find) no one determinate and external
manner of baptism, or using the water in baptism, essential thereunto by Gods
command; that therefore we ought to stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and not be entangled with any yoke of bondage imposed upon
us by man, as you seem to impose this of dipping upon your brethren, having
only such thin, waterish, and slender Arguments and Proofs for the same. But
what you want in evidence, you make up in confidence. To proceed:

6. Mr. Lamb.
I find that as baptism, etc.

THere is nothing under this head, Moat indeed, which unto you may seem a Beam,
is not yet taken away, and which is by you mentioned in this 6th. Particular
speaking of children being baptized in their infancy; you say of them that

SECT. XLIII.
When they are grown up, Mr. Lamb.
they can only tell by hearsay, that ever any such thing was done upon them,
most unlike therefore to feel any such Obligation by it.

TO insist upon this, is but to spend an Arrow upon a Butterflye. Lamb how he
comes to know his name is Mr. Lamb, or whether his Fathers name was Lamb, The
baptizing of children nevertheless efficacious, because when they come to age,
they cannot remember their baptism.
or somewhat else; or whether that the children of Christian Parents have not as
much reason to believe their Parents informing them of the time and place of
their baptism, and instructing them from day to day in the holy and due
improvement thereof, as Mr. Lamb has to believe his name is Lamb, because his
Parents, or Neighbors (if his Parents dyed in his Infancy) told him so? May
not Christians, when they they come to age (nay, are they not bound) as much to
believe their Parents telling them of their baptism, as the Jewish Children
were bound to believe their Parents telling them that the Mark on the foreskin
of their flesh, or the want of their praepatium, was the Mark of their
circumcision which they received, according to the Laws of their religion, when
they were but eight days old? Or whether that baptism, upon such an
information and belief of it, be not as proper, and apt, to do spiritual
service upon their hearts, as circumcision was to do upon the hearts of the
Jews children, when they come to age? It is sad to see such shadows of
Arguments to divert men from the ways of truth.

Your seventh Particular contains little also, but what you have already
spoken, and has been also spoken unto. I see we have seen your strength, and
what you have to say. You run so much upon repititions, but though your spirits
be spent, and strength is gone, yet your courage remains. You have a good mind
at it still. Hence it is that you snatch up your we opens again, tho the
strength of your arm is hardly able to hold them. Here also you reminde us of
your findings, which you have ^an over, and over, and over again; as if you had
no sooner found any thing, but you lost it again, and then you find it again.
What have you found here?

I find the Scriptures in all expressness of Letter, are in many places for
Believers Baptism. Mr. Lamb.
This has been affirmed and granted, granted and affirmed; but what then?

Whereas there is not one such Text for children, Mr. Lamb.
nor any instance of the Baptism, so much as of one child in all the
New Testament. SECT. XLI.
WHat if there be not one such Text for childrens baptism (for it may be your
emphasis lies there) does it follow that there is no text at all for the
justification thereof? We have found text upon text, and text after text,
namely, all those texts (recording the commands of Christ upon his Apostles,
and Disciples, concerning baptism) so, conditioned, qualified, and phrased, as
that all the art and skill, that either you, or the greatest of your Champions
you have, cannot with a salvage unto your right reason, honor, and conscience,
exclude children from the intention of Jesus Christ, as the legitimate and due
subjects of baptism. And where as you say there is not any instance of the
baptism, so much as of one child in all the New Testament, we have found also,
satisfaction upon satisfaction, and satisfaction after satisfaction, from all
those texts likewise, recording the exequation of Christ's commands, concerning
baptism; as that neither you, nor all the Armies of your party can evince the
contrary, but that: here were many hundreds of children baptized, where, and
when Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Regions beyond Jordan, (being Jews,
and therefore would doubtless have quarrelled if their children had been
rejected) were baptized; as also where we read of thousands, and of families,
and houses, etc. that were baptized. But it is worthy observation that you tell
us,

That many learned men have acknowledged, Mr. Lamb.
that Infant Baptism is not in Gods Word.

SECT. XLV.
1. many learned men have acknowledged that there is no expressness of Letter
in Gods word, Mr. Lamb rejoices in the testimony of learned men, when he can
find any of them of his judgment about baptism, though he cautioneth us about
Mr. Goodwins learning.
showing de facto that children were baptized; it is not denied you, nor does
it make any thing for your purpose. For neither is there any expressness of the
Letter, showing where any women did partake of the Lords Supper. And yet you
judge it their duty (being otherwise qualified for the same) to partake
thereof. But

2. If you mean that many learned-men have acknowledged, that Infants baptism
cannot be proved in Gods word to be lawful, nay, not a duty; I cannot but
observe, how that one of a City, and two of a Tribe of learned men of your way,
do amount unto many in your eyes. Surely if you glory thus in the gleanings,
what would you do if the vintage were your own? Why should Mr. Goodwins
learning hang in his light any more than other men's? Well, however every one of
the many you mention, be interpreters, even one of a thousand, yet shall they
not be Rabbis unto me, nor have any dominion over my faith in the point in
hand. You add.

And those that go about to found it (Infant Baptism) on Scripture, build all
on consequences (ifs, may-bees, Mr. Lamb.
why-nots ( which argument Mr. Goodwin has often used to confirm the Doctrine
of general Redemption, and to draw the contrary opinion under the suspicion of
error.

SECT. XLIV.
Does not Scriptures speak consequences in premises, Scripture speaks
consequences, as welas principles or premises.
That any one, whose name was, is, or ever should be, Thomas Lamb, shall, or
may possibly, be saved. Can it not be proved therefore that one Thomas Lamb
shall, or possibly may be saved, as well as if the Scripture had the express
saying therein, that one Thomas Lamb shall, or may be saved. The Scripture
makes mention of Paul desiring. Philemon to receive Onesimus, not as a servant,
but above a servant, a brother beloved. May not a man affirm hence, that
Onesimus was not with Philemon, when he wrote thus unto him? When the Scripture
says (speaking of Christ's Mother) and the virgins name was Mary; may not we
say and insist upon it, as a truth very proveable from the Holy Scriptures that
Mary was a virgin?

Again, if we must not build upon ifs, may-bee's, and why-nots, Mr. Lambs
proofs by consequences are good, but he will not suffer other men to prove
Doctrines by consequences.
how come you to affirm with that magisteriall confidence, as you do, that the
baptizing of children is unlawful, that no children were baptized by John, or
any others mentioned in the Holy Scriptures; that it is unlawful to join with
such persons in Church Fellowship, that were baptized only in their infancy
(with many other of the like nature) having indeed, not so much as any
rational ifs, may-bee's, and whynots from Scripture, for the confirmation
thereof? would any man suppose that so much as a babe in Christ, would reason
after this rate? Where have you been since you left us?

But whereas you add, Mr. Lamb.
which argument (I suppose you mean, which manner of arguing by Mr. Goodwins
adverse, viz. from ifs, may-bee's, why-nots:) Mr. Goodwin has often used to
confirm the Doctrine of General Redemption, and to draw the contrary opinion
under the suspicion of error.

SECT. XLVII.
IT would require you more pains to show us one place in all his writings
(which you say he has after used) of such splashy, pro or con, than the
writing of seven such boo^s as this is, which we now implead You speak much of
your findings; but if you have found any such place in all his writings, namely
where he has denied that true, proper, and natural consequences from granted
premises in the Scripture, are not to be admitted as the truths of God I
believe you may rejoice in it, and eat the morsells thereof your self alone,
having no partner with you therein in any part of the world, whereof the Sun in
the firmament is Overseer. But this is only to give Mr. Goodwin a running-rap;
but you could not reach him. You procee:

8. Mr. Lamb.
I found the unregenerate world naturally falling in with childrens baptism,
which is a shrewd sign is a de^ice of her own, the world loves her own, etc.

SECT. XLVIII.
YOU find the unregenerate world no more naturally falling in with childrens
baptism, found it naturally falling in with the profession of Christ. For they
are baptized and do baptize their children in no other name, nor into the
profession of any other Savior, then Jesus Christ. And is not this a shrewd
argument that this Doctrine of the Messiah, the unregenerate world so naturally
falls in withal, is a device of her own; the world does love her own?

Your 9th. particular is summed up in this, Mr. Lamb.
Infant Baptism is unlawful, because baptism being the initiating Ordinance
into the Church, it lets in a sort of Members, which the New Testament
knows not; namely, such as cannot worship God inspirit, God now seeking only
such to worship him. The whole bedy must be fitly framed together, and every
part must effectually work. And can these things be affirmed of children?

SECT. XLIX.
First, you affirm that baptism is the innitiating Ordinance into the Church I
suppose you mean, not the Church general, but dejure, it is the initrating
Ordinance into particular Churches. If that be your meaning, Baptism not proved
to be the initiating Ordinance into Church Fellowship.
this then is such a conclusion, as you can hardly make good, no not by any
ifs, may-bee's, and why-nots, gatherable from any place, or places in the Holy
Scriptures; that is to say, that baptism did make any person ipsosacto, a
member of any particular Church. But it is proveable that many, and many, were
baptized, of whom it is impossible to prove that by baptism, or any other way,
they were ever immembred into any particular Church. And it is a difficulty too
hard for you or I, or any other in the world to undertake, namely to prove,
that all and every particular member of particular Churches, were ever baptized
at all.

2. It is true, Gad seeks such, and only such, now to worship him, as can
worship him in spirit and in truth, John. 4.23. that is (as I conceive)
according to the context, Now the time of reformation approaches; God will be
worshipped and obeyed, neither in the Judicial rites (consisting in external
performances, as some among you so much contend for, nor according to the
Samaritans false worship, who worshipped their Idol Gods together with God, 2
King. 17.26, 27, 28, 29.) but in a pure spiritual manner, extending to the
very heart, such as was typified by those shaddows: and the Son of God comes
now to draw all men unto this way of worship from the Judicial, from the
Samaritan way. This text indeed (with several others) renders men incapable of
Church-worship in an acceptable manner, that content themselves only with
outward forms, and yet leading a vicious life. But what is this to the
exclusion of children? As for them, here is the grace of the Gospel, that he
accepts of little children, and would not have men forbidden (as you do) to
bring them to Christ. He accepts according to what any person has, and not
according to what he has not.

3. Again, God was always a spirit, as well as now, and he did always seek
for such to worship him, as should worship him in spirit and in truth, as well
as now. He always loved-truth in the inward parts, he always required of all
his Sons to give him their hearts in his worship; he always commanded the Jews
to love the Lord their God with all their hearts, and minds, and soul, and
strength. Did this under the Law any way hinder that children might not be
admitted members of the Jewish Church, because they could not perform, inward,
heart-worship, and spiritual service? did God upon their circumcision accept
of them, as if they did perform all those spiritual services, and
heart-duties, until they came to an actual and personal capacity, actually
and personally to perform the same? And will he not (now) accept of children
baptized, as if they did actually, and personally, perform those services unto
him, which under the Gospel, he requires, until they likewise come to an
actual, and personal capacity so to do? And then will he accept, or reject,
them, as they are found faithful, or unfaithful in these things.

4. Whereas you say, that the New Testament knows us such member; of
Churches, as infants, etc. I answer, that tho I will not say, or deny, that the
New Testament knows not any infant-members of Churches, yet the New Testament
knows, and has taught others also to know, that children are due subjects of
Baptism. And that it never knew, not taught any to know, where ever they were,
or ought to be rejected, and denied the participation thereof. Our controversy
is not about infant-Church-member-ship, but infant baptism.

Your tenth Argument for your belief in the business of Baptism, viz. against
Infant Baptism, and for your separation, Mr. Lamb.
etc. is taken from your observation of the righteous hand of God, who causes
the sharpest and most able Adversaries to you in this point, to let fall such
expressions as justify what they go about to oppose and condemn; (as Mr.
Richard Baxter says) the aged are (1.) the most fully capable subjects, (2.)
the most excellent subjects, (3.) the most eminent subjects, (4.) of whom
Scripture fully speaks; (5.) the greater part of the world when Baptism was
instituted, who were to be partakers of it: But on the contrary, for
infant baptism, he ( Mr. Baxter) acknowledges it so dark in the Scripture,
that the controversy is thereby become not only hard, but so hard, etc.

SECT. L.
YOU needed indeed to have written this in Capital Letters, that every one
that runs may read the profundity thereof. The aged are the most capable
subjects of Baptism; Ergo, Children are no subjects thereof. The aged are the
most eminent subjects; Ergo, Children are no subjects; Mr. Lambs miserable
inferences from Mr. Baxters words.
the Scripture speaks fully of them; Ergo, not at all of Children: The aged
were the greater part of the world that did partake of Baptism; Ergo, Children
were no part of the world that did partake thereof: The proof of Childrens
baptism in Scripture is hard; Ergo, impossible. Can you be offended, that any
that should reason thus, should be esteemed by rational men, persons of a
maimed fancy, having their judgments and understandings stupefied, distraught,
and confounded? Are these Arguments Men, or the shadows of the Mountains? Are
not most, and greater, terms of comparisons, and must these exclude all
positives? He that should say, Mr. Lamb is the most ingenious in all his
Family, does he deny the least degree of ingenuity in his children? He that
says, (I trust the parallel will please you) Mr. Lamb is the most Christian,
most Charitable, most Edifying, most Wise, most Holy, most Humble among his
Brethren; does he deny that there is any christian, charitable, edifying, wise,
holy, and humble person amongst them all, except M. Lamb? If Mr. Baxter has
said more for your way, in those few words, and that upon pure principles of
reason, then he has said against it, in all his whole book, his whole book
would as much edify the world were it in ashes, as it does now in ink and
paper enriched with truth. But alas! the light of God shining therein, will
like the Sun in the Firmament, run its course and prosper, against all that
shall rise up against it.

Again, Do not you blush when you read over this your emphaticall query
(importing an assertion with might and majesty of truth) Does not plain
Scripture proof, and dark Scripture proof, directly oppose? Does Scripture
proof, oppose Scripture proof? Scripture proof is Scripture proof, whether
plain or dark: and must the one oppose the other, because the one is plain, and
the other is dark? Is the Sun in its brightness, and the Sun in a cloud
opposite? Can there be no proof fetched from the Scriptures, but that that is in
the plain expressions of the letter? Again, because Mr. Baxter speaks on the
surer side of the hedge, has the hedge therefore but one side? Because Mr.
Baxter says it is safe baptizing those that are actual believers, not being
baptized before, does he ^imply, that it is safe refusing or neglecting to
baptize infants: What shall we say? If a spiders web be as bars of Brass to
you, there is no hope.

It agrees not with the wisdom and goodness of Christ, Mr. Lamb.
that Baptism should be so dark, as Mr. Baxter says it is, etc.

SECT. LI.
MR. Baxter does not say it is so dark as that the way thereof is not plain
enough to be found by men that will seek it out, agreeable to Gods wisdom and
goodness, that it should be, as his wisdom and goodness have declared it to be
in the Scriptures, and it is no argument of your wisdom and goodness to
question the same.

SECT. LII.
Your 12th. Particular is built upon a false foundation, viz. that by baptism
persons are immembred into churches, which you have not yet proved. Your
quotation of Act. 2.42. will not prove your position. Act. 2.42. Mr. Lamb.
Observe your argument: they that were baptized were added to the Church, ergo
all baptized persons in the Apostles days, were Churchmembers. May not I as
well argue thus? they that heard the word, were baptized, ergo, all that heard
the word in the Apostles days were baptized. To insist more upon this would be
but to follow you in speaking much to little purpose.

SECT. LIII.
Your 13th. Argument is barren of proof altogether, viz. that infant baptism
agrees to the carnal (I presume you mean, sinful and wicked) interest of
men, that preach for filthy lucre, etc. It is wholly denied, standing upon your
own bare affirmation, which shall pass, having your own image and
superscription upon it: and if any will take it for current coin, let him enrich
himself with it, if he pleases.

SECT. LIVE.
HAving thus given us your grounds of your separation from us, as if you had
made us all proselytes by them, having now drawn us not with the cords of a
man, but (as it were) of an Angel, you justify your self in your way, and
bless your self with an expectation, not only of peace, but even of reward, as
a man that has now contended for the faith, ( viz. Gods mind and pleasure that
children should not be baptized) that was once delivered to the Saints, (no
where to be found in holy writ) as of a man that had followed the example of
the holy men of old, in separating themselves from their holy and beloved
brethren, as of one that has followed the Lord fully, by forsaking his Church
and people; as one that has kept the national covenant, by breaking covenant
which he made with the Church of Christ. What shall I say? He feeds upon ashes;
a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor
say, is there not a lie in my right hand?

SECT. LV.
BEfore you have made an end of your Epistle, you have yet one parting-blow
again at Mr. Goodwin, after the manner of some of his quondam adversaries, who
(as you here) have twitted and upbraided him with what he once writ to Mr.
Thomas Goodwin, touching separation from Parish Churches (as you intimate) as
being a weak, fleeting, and uncertain man: though for your part, you profess it
is not Mr. Goodwins shame you seek for hereby, I believe your conscience will
not say it was his glory that steerd your pen herein. M. Goodwin no separate
from the godly Presbyterians in his reformation, as M. Lamb affi^ms.
But to answer you, and all other Scribes of the same Order with you touching
this point;

First know that Mr. Goodwin never came to Coleman-street (at first) as a
parish-person, nor after the manner of such men's inductions into parishes: but
there being a considerable, pious, and godly party in that parish, who having a
longing desire to enjoy the Ordinances of God in purity, purchased the
impropriation thereof, whereby they enjoyed the liberty of choosing their own
Minister. And Mr. Davenport their Pastor having left them, the said party made
choice of Mr. Goodwin to be their Pastor; and accordingly a considerable number
of them did fetch him unto them. He, and they lived together several years
upon the best terms of purity and reformation in the Ordinances of God, which
their light, and the frowardness of the times did admit.

2. That when Mr. Goodwin wrote to Mr. M. John Goodwin not contrary in his
practice to what he writ to Mr. Thomas Goodwin when he was in Holland, as has
been injuriously cast in his teeth by his adversaries formerly, and now by Mr.
Lamb also, after the rest.
Thomas Goodwin (as aforesaid) the said Mr. Thomas Goodwin was in Holland (as
your self observe) at which indeed Mr. Goodwin was offended; namely that the
holy, learned, and good men of those times, such as Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and
others were, should break away out of the Nation, taking with them the
hewen-stones of Gods Temples, as you know many went away into several parts of
America, some to the Summer-Islands, others to Holland and the Low Countries;
at which the Bishops were well pleased, as not doubting but they might (with
more ease) deal with the remnant that were left behind. Mr. Goodwin did often
bewail the departure of those men, and resolved by Gods grace to stand it out
against all the adversaries of Gods people in those times. And you know he did
persist in his resolutions and integrity, even to the making of himself a
byword and a mock amongst them; viz. then when others were fled and run away,
Mr. Goodwin was left to pray, etc. At this, chiefly, and mainly, was Mr.
Goodwin offended with Mr. Thomas Goodwin. Never was he troubled at the joining
together of holy men in any parish, to keep out the vicious and evil party,
according to their best opportunities so to do. Neither did he ever refuse
(that ever I have heard) the entertainment of godly persons (though not of the
parish) into Church communion with him, that did defire the same. Nay several
persons living in several parts of the City out of the parish, were his most
intimate associates even in the ordinances of Gods worship and service, and in
all things relating to reformation, though in that parish (the civil interest
of the parish only excepted.)

3. That M. Goodwin to this day did never separate from them, but has (indeed)
endeavored a stricter way of reformation, in, and about, Church-work, then
some (though I hope) good men of the said Parish would submit unto. Upon which,
some disterences grew amongst them; in all which differences it was never
insisted upon by M. Goodwin, that they should deny themselves to be a true
Church of Christ before; but that for time to come they would walk after a more
visible reformed manner then they did, admitting such godly persons (though not
dwelling in the parish) as should be approved of by the honest party of that
parish, to enjoy after a more visible manner than formerly, an equal interest
and power in voting in Church affairs, (parish civil rights excepted) I say an
equal interest with those godly of the parish. I remember well it was demanded
by the brethren that diffented from Mr. Goodwin, several times, whether Mr.
Goodwin, and the brethren that joined with him, would deny, that they were a
true Church, before these differences did arise amongst them: and it was never
denied, but that they were a true Church, though under much deformity, and want
of Reformation. At last it was assented unto, that an equal number of persons,
chosen by M. Goodwin, on the one party, and the dissenting brethren on the
other party, should meet, and agree, who, how many, and what manner of persons
(not living in the Parish) should be admitted into Church-fellow-ship with
them. And after all things in a publick-meeting in the Parish Church, or
meeting place, were composed by Vote, and a blessed, peaceable, and comfortable
reformation was expected, the brethren formerly dissenting from M. Goodwin,
receded from their former agreements, rent themselves away from M. Goodwin,
leaving him and a considerable part also of the godly party in the parish with
him, to go alone in their Church-Reformation.

For the confirmation of all which, and for the muzling the mouth of scandal,
at, or against M. Goodwin, in and about the premises, I have thought good here
to insert the true Copy of the order of the said Parish-Vestry, with other
passages thereunto belonging, word by word.

At a general vestry, holden the 12th. day of May, 1643. in the Parish Church
of Stevens-Coleman-street, London.
IT is agreed by general consent, that Mr. John Goodwin shall nominate six
Persons of this Parish, to consider of, and compose the present differences
between M. Goodwin, and his people, within the space of one month now next
ensuing if it may be.

The persons named by Mr. Goodwin at the same Vestry, were these following.

Coli. Owen Row, Mr. Mark Hildesley, Doctor Paget, M. John Price, M. William
Mountag^^, M. Richard Ashurst.
The persons named by the same Vestry for the Parish, were these following, Mr.
Samuel Avery, Mr. Andrew Kenrick, Mr. Thomas Bernardiston, Mr. Edward Lucas,
Mr. Joseph Syblye, M. Tho. Fitzwilliam.


And whatsoever shall be agreed by the major part of the twelve persons above
named, there being present an equal number of those named by both parties,
shall be presented to Mr. Goodwin, to obtain his consent.

It was further agreed upon at the same time, that the strangers ( viz. those
that did not live in the said parish,) should be suffered to come to a public
meeting in the Parish Vestry, that they might be known by face, and heard in
their desires, that exceptions might have been made against them (if there were
cause) and (no cause to the contrary appearing) they might be owned as members
of the Church of Christ in that place, and to have their free Votes in all
things relating to the due ordering of the Church, (parish-interest in civil
things only excepted:) All which was agreed upon by full consent: and at the
same Vestry also a certain day was appointed for their solemn seeking of God by
prayer and humiliation, to be kept in the said public meeting place, to
entreat the Lord for mercy for former ignorances and miscarriages, in, and
about his public worship; and to enter into a holy covenant with the Lord, to
be more careful to study the Laws of his house and Ordinances, for the time to
come. There was also a form of an agreement concluded upon to be subscribed by
all persons of the parish, and that lived out of the parish, who should be
owned for members of the Church from that time the true copy whereof is as
follows, We having lately solemnly covenanted to endeavor the Reformation of
Religion in this kingdom of England, in doctrine, worship, discipline, and
government, according to the word of God, and example of the best reformed
Churches; and conceiving it a thing conducible hereunto to agree and promise to
walk together in all the ordinances of God, as becomes those that are fellow
members of a visible Church of Christ, do acknowledge and choose M. John
Goodwin for our Pastor.

About a month after, when the day appointed (as aforesaid) came, wherein the
Resolves of the said Vestrie were to be put in exequation; some of the contrary
party to Mr. Goodwin, receded from their former Votes, and Resolutions,
somenting the old differences still after the said happy and general composure
thereof, to the great amazement, grief, and trouble of the rest. Others met
according to appointment, and the duties of fasting and prayer being finished,
joined together in the Covenant aforesaid, and subscribed the same; the number
of them being about sixty persons, Inhabitants of the said Parish, (all of them
having made a good profession of Religion) besides several others that were not
of the Parish, who joined and subscribed also with them.

The party dissenting (being about twelve or fourteen of the professing party
in number) were still the same as formerly, all endeavors to gain them
notwithstanding, and the disterences grew as great as ever.

At last the twelve persons chosen as aforesaid, six by Mr. Goodwin, and six by
the Parish, having met several times, did conclude upon several proposal, to be
tendered to Mr. Goodwin. And a time was appointed for M. Goodwin to give in his
answer, whether he would consent thereunto, or not: M. Goodwin having perused
the same, immediately consented thereunto, and signified his resolutions to
give in his consent unto the Vestry at the time appointed.

There was also another Vestry held, in which it was ordered as follows.

At a Vestry held the 12th. of December, 1643. ordered,
THat all those that shall desire and be sound worthy by M Goodwin and such as
he shall nominate in the parish, and the parish approve of, to partake of the
Sacrament in this parish, shall submit to have their names written down in a
book kept for that purpose, by which they shall be accounted members of this
Church and congregation, and that other Parishioners, being members, have
liberty to inform those persons so instructed, with their Objections against
any man.

Mr. Goodwin having thus complied with the dissenting brethren, as aforesaid,
and having resolved also to submit unto the proposals aforesaid, and signified
the same unto them, that he would subscribe them in public Vestrie, upon the
day appointed, some few of the said dissenting party (for it is not imputable
to them all) before the said Vestry were to meet, contrary to all former
proceedings relating to union and reformation, applied themselves to the then
Committee of Plundered Ministers, by way of Petition, complaining against M.
Goodwin, that he caused rents and divisions in the Parish, refused to
administer the Sacrament, introduced innovations, gathered a people unto
himself, etc. and in fine, procured (as it was said, though it was never showed
unto the Parish, as I could ever understand) the sequestration of the Vicaridge
of Steven, Coleman-street, from the use of M. John Goodwin, unto the use of M.
Jeremy Whitaker, then living. But M. Whitaker upon the full understanding of
the whole matter, would not accept of the same: By all which it appears to all
impartial men, that ever understood the History of these transactions, that it
was not M. Goodwin, and those of the Parish that joined with him in that
reformation, who separated from the godly Presbyterians, as you call them, but
that they were the true separatists, though they would be known by another
name. And God almighty pardon them, and lay not their separation unto their
charge, and show you mercy also for your groundless separation from us, and for
your untrue charging M. Goodwin for separation from the godly Presbyterians, in
Coleman-street, for those by you meant were not such at that time.

4. Suppose M. Goodwin had altogether been now of another opinion about
Church-work, then he was before, when he wrote that Letter to M. Thomas
Goodwin; must this in M. Goodwins judgment and conscience justify your
separation from the Church where you were, because you judge your present way
the truth, and that you were before in an error? It may (indeed) and I think it
ought, to keep him from censuring you, as sinning against your light and
conscience, as supposing your heart right with God in respect of your
intentions in your separations: and so it does. For where has he censured you,
or the rest of the brethren walking with you, as so sinning? I believe he has
exercised more charity to you-ward in this kind, than you have toward him:
and it is fit he should, for he has more to exercise. But does this wholly
excuse you, or reflect dishonor upon M. Goodwin for condemning your
separation? Suppose you had turned Papists, Jews, Turks in your very judgment
and consciences, or (as many) Ranters and licentious persons, and still by the
delusion of your judgments and consciences; would it have been dishonorable
for M. Goodwin to write against you, because M. Goodwin turned separate from
the Church of England? Certainly a man would think that such arguments as these
would hardly make a Net strong enough to catch and hold a very fly: but a
child is known by his doings. Pro. 20.11.


SECT. LVI.
WE accept of your Exhortation, to suffer none to have dominion over our
faith, to call no man (much less a child) master on earth, in respect of it.
And therefore you must show us better arguments than hitherunto we have seen,
before you pull us away from our present standing in the Courts of the house of
our God where we arefed with the marrow and fatness thereof, and have sweet
refreshings from his presence from day to day.

HAving done with your Epistle, wherein you have contracted what you have
dispersed in your Book, I shall take a very brief survey of the Book and body
thereof also. And because I will not trouble the Reader with vain repetitions,
shall wave that which has been already insisted upon, and speak to the rest.
The whole Book (indeed) containing many needless and heartless repetitions,
unnecessary digressious, tedious prolixities, proceeding not so much from
strength of judgment, as hear of affection, being like corn on the house top,
yiedling neither seed to the sower, nor bread to the eater; or as Iudes clouds
without water, and giving out little refreshment to any man, but blackness and
darkness.

SECT. LVII.
M. Goodwins first consideration is summarily thus. Moral precepts when in
competition with ceremonial, must be obeyed, and Ceremonial suspended, Mat.
12.3, 4.7.11. Mat. 5.23, 24. Hence he inferrs, the inexcusableness of such
persons in the sight of God and men, who pretend themselves disobliged from the
performance of such lawful, yea holy and righteous promises, which they
solemnly made unto their brethren, by a necessity of subjecting to an external
rite or ceremony, as water-dipping is; especially, when the generality of the
most judicious, learned, and faithful servants of God in the Christian world,
adjudged the same no ways necessary, by virtue of any precept or command of God.

To this you answer, that you allow the consideration as importing an undoubted
Truth. But secondly, that this is ill applied unto you, though separating from
the Church whereof you were a member, upon the account of their refusal to be
rebap^ized, and that too by dipping: You ground your exception upon two things;

First, the solemn League and Covenant, taken by you and the whole Nation, to
go one before another in reformation according to light. 2. Mr. Goodwins own
practice, in separating from the godly Presbyterians, and joining in that way
of worshipping God, wherein he now walks.

I Reply: The solemn league and covenant, no pleafor separation.
First, to that of the Covenant, that it was in the very design of it, a
covenant of union, and not of division, of the godly party in the three
nations; that it was intended by the framers, and imposers thereof, that each
person should be an example unto his brother, going one before another in known
ways of joint Reformation; that in things granted by the generality of the
godly party, to be the mind and will of God, each should provoke his brother
unto reformation, not intending hereby, a liberty, much less a duty vowed, and
covenanted, viz. that in case of different apprehensions, especially in smaller
matters, or ceremonies, etc. each should be obliged to run away from his
dissenting brother. If so be that in doubtful, and questionable things, such
as your notions of infant baptism, and rebaptization, etc. are, each should be
bound by this vow and covenant, to follow his own personal conception; where
should two believers be found walking together? And is the national vow and
covenant, which intended to make all the people of God in the three nations to
be one, a sufficient ground to render believers, as so many wandering Cains, to
run away one from another? what, to join together as beacons upon hills do?
Surely you are an interpreter of the solemn league and covenant, even one of a
thousand. To your argument of following your light, Conceit of light
notformerly discovered, no plea for separation.
we have already answered, Sect. 6. and elsewhere. If you will not admit of
limitations and boundaries in granting men a liberty of following their own
private conceptions, you lay a foundation of every man's departure from another,
of justifying men's apostacy (if upon religious pretenses) though it be even to
Turcism, Judaism, and what not?

As for what you offer concerning M. Goodwins separation from the godly
Presbyterians, I have already answered, Sect. 55.

M. Goodwins second Consideration amounts in brief unto this, viz. That
though it were granted, that that very baptism, viz. the baptism of believers
at age, and that by dipping, was the only baptism-Ordinance of Christ, yet
their brethren (though not baptized according thereunto) having no opportunity
through want of light, or otherwise, for the same, and yet withal, an hearty
desire unto it, and endeavor after a discovery of the will of God therein; I
say in this case their brethren are according to divine estimate and
acceptance, baptized therewith. Proof, 2 Cor. 8.12. Mat. 5.28. where God
judges men according to what is found in the heart, whether it be good or
evil.

SECT. LVIII.
TO this you answer: First, by absolute denial of the said consideration, and
affirm it a mistake, that such Churches, not actually baptized with your
baptism, should (the premises notwithstanding) be esteemed by God to have been
baptized, offering only, that that Text, 2 Cor. 8.12. does not prove, that God
judges a man actually and in a formal proper sense to have been baptized, who
never was thus baptized; or that the deed is done, when there is no such deed
done, but only a will to do it.

I Reply. That to insist upon this, is but to suspect the reader a very infant
in understanding, for does the consideration it self, in the very least, imply,
that God judges that actually and in a formal proper sense to be done, which
was never done? nay does it not more then imply that it is only accepted in
respect of reward, as done, though not done? God accepts the will for the
deed.
Is this distinction of the will from the deed, and Gods acceptance of the will
for the deed, as done, though it be never done, a perfect chaos and confusion
unto you? Does M. Goodwin say that God judges that actually and in a formal
proper sense to be done, which was never done? Does he not speak only of
acceptance, as if done? And is this so Aenigmatical and hard a saying to your
understanding? If this consideration given by M. Goodwin, should not import a
truth, what hopes could you and I have of salvation? Does not God accept of our
faith, putting us upon a holy endeavor to keep all his commandments, (though
we keep none, but in many things sin all) as if we did actually and formally
keep them all, and break none? Do you expect at the great day, to be measured
by weight, or by will? Is it the willingness of your mind, or the worthiness
of your works, that is the Ancor of your soul in the day of Christ? But you
have another answer, viz. summarily thus.

2. Though God accepts a desire of obedience (though obedience be not
performed for want of knowledge of Gods mind therein) yet this does not excuse
men's ignorance. God does not justify men in any such false judgment.

I reply. And is this an answer? may not we infer; therefore God does not
justify your ignorance of his mind, in keeping covenant with him and his
Church and people, though differing in some things from you, but breaking the
same as a thread of Tow. Yet we deny not but he may graciously accept of your
will also for the deed. But our work now is about healing this ignorance.

And thirdly, you object,

That if God accepts your will for the deed, your not being baptized, as if you
were baptized, he will also by your own argument (say you) accept of us,
separating from you, as still with you, it being according to our Light, as he
will accept of your selves, as baptized, though not baptized, etc.

I reply, Our Opinion of Mr. Lamb, with others that went from us, more
charitable of them, than theirs of us.
That we judge and censure, not the intentions of your mind, but the
unsoundness of your judgment; we hope, your hearts being right with God, that
he will pardon your mistakes and ignorances, though rending and tearing up by
the roots (so far as in you was) a blessed society of Saints and people of God:
that he will accept of you, that is, pardon you, as he did Paul, though
breathing persecutions against the Churches of Christ, because he did it
ignorantly. And upon these hopes, and opinion we have of the uprightness of
your souls, we can join with you in prayer, and any other Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, though you cannot so do with us. And whereas you say, that we have much
more reason to judge excellently of you, than you of us, because your way is
the poor persecuted way, The praise of the poor a great snare.
ours, the way in esteem, your sayings herein savours so much of vanity, folly,
spiritual pride, and conceitedness, that for your sake I shall forbear to say
more to it. Only remember, there is a snare of secret vanity in gathering up
an esteem from the poor and meaner sort of persons are more apt to trumpet up
such a man's holiness, humility, bounty, charity, etc. then the rich: but I
spare you.

Mr. Goodwins third consideration is collectively thus,

The Scriptures expressly teach, that by faith men become the children of
Abraham, and sons of God, John 1.12. John 2.26. Romans 4.11, 12.16. those then
that are not their brethren, are bastards and not sons. If they that are the
Sons of God, and consequently their brethren, be ashamed of them, and refuse to
own them in their Church Fellowship, they are ashamed of them of whom Christ is
not ashamed, Heb. 2.11. It follows then, that Christ must look upon them as
having a conceit, that they have either more holiness, or dignity, than Christ
himself, in that they are ashamed of those, of whom Christ is not ashamed, etc.

SECT. LIX.
To this you answer, by granting the truth of the consideration, but offer,
that no man's faith was accepted with God in the premitive times, who was found
sticking at any of his commandments. Now baptism being the express command of
Christ, you insinuate no man must be owned by you as Brethren, that stict at
it, as we do. If this be not your insinuation you say nothing, but grant all
that M. Goodwin affirms, and your self to be convicted of disowning Christ's
brethren, as ashamed of them: if this be your sense,

1. I Reply, That you have owned us for holy brethren, Mr. Lamb owns those for
holy brethren, beloved of God, believers, a Church, and yet separates from them.
as walking in the right faith of the gospel, as beloved of God, therefore you
are condemned by your own mouth.

2. You insinuate that we stick at the commands of Christ, which is an
uncharitable and scandalous insinuation. We dare not receive your weak and
shallow interpretation of Scripture, for the commands of Christ; you must prove
it the command of Christ, that persons baptized in their infancy, must be
baptized again; that childrens baptism is forbidden in Scripture, or a nullity:
you may sooner be able to show us one of the feathers of the Raven that fed
Elias, than show us any such thing, and yet you boast that you have the express
will of God, the plain word of Christ, the command of God, etc. for the same
you take your dead and unsound interpretation of Scripture, 1 King. 3.20.
as the Harlot her dead child, and cast it in the bosom of the holy
Scriptures, and this you would enforce upon us, as the offspring of Gods word,
and after a most proud and popish manner, you exalt your interpretation as
equipolent with the Text, and the rejection thereof by those that differ from
you, is the rejection of the command of Christ, the sticking at it, is to stick
at the command of God, exalting your interpretation of the Scriptures, above,
beyond, or besides all that is called Gods, speaking perverse, or distorted
things, to discerp, or violently drag Disciples after you, and indeed, bringing
your sense to the Scriptures, and setting it cheek-by-jowle with the
Scriptures, and not receiving it from the Scriptures.

3. Do you make no difference between sticking (as you call it) at a known
duty, and at a doubtful practice? did not you once stick at it your self as we
do? and had the person done you no wrong that should then affirm that you never
gave any visible testimony or fruit of your faith, until you were newly
baptized?

From the 9th Page of your book, speaking to M. Goodwins third consideration,
you take an excursion, even unto the 32. Page, quite forsaking the business in
hand, and repeating M. Allens Arguments about baptism, which have been answered
once, and again, by Mr. Goodwin; and to run after you, is to pursue the wind,
which will bring nothing but vanity in the latter end.

Mr. Goodwins fourth Consideration runs thus, such persons whom God judges fit
for communion with himself, upon grounds visible unto men, ought not to be
judged unmeet for communion with the holiest of men, Romans 14.1, 2. Act. 10.31.
Romans 14.17, 18. 1 John 1.7. that you therefore acknowledge us to have worth, yea
more worth, holiness, righteousness, the fear and love of God in us, than many
among your selves, baptized after your own minds have; and separating from us,
and not receiving us into fellowship with you in Church-communions, do sin
contrary to the truth of this consideration.

To this you say, (1) The persons to whom the Apostle wrote, Romans 14. were
baptized. (2) That by the word, receiving, is not meant into Church Fellowship,
but into common respect, and brotherly familiarity. (3.) That though it should
be to receive them into Church Communion, it does not follow that they should
be disorderly received. (4.) Upon this ground, godly Presbyterians, godly
Episcopal men, godly Papists, nay honest Heathens, should be admitted into
Churchcommunion. (5.) That it is contrary to Mr. Goodwins own practice, and
having here gotten, as you suppose, Mr. Goodwin under your feer, you flourish
your naked sword, as if the trophies of victory must make halt to your temples,
for you say, who then may not see, etc. but hold a little.

SECT. LX.
1. What if the persons spoken of Romans 14. were baptized, (which we shall
grant, Romans 14.1, 2. There may be visible testimony of faith, without baptism.
whether you be able to prove it or no) what is this to impeach the truth of
the consideration? Could not the persons give visible testimony of their
communion with God before their baptization, or though they had never been
baptized? If so, why were they baptized, having given no testimony that they
did believe, and so were fit for baptism? again, if so, why do you call us holy
and beloved brethren, though not baptized (to speak in the language of Ashdod)
if there could be a visibility of their communion with God without baptism? the
rule imported in the consideration takes place, whether they were baptized or
no.

2. By the word, receive, say you, is not meant into Church Fellowship, but
into common respects: I reply,

1. Their very being in Church Fellowship (the greater and more spiritual
Fellowship) required much more their reception into common respect; certainly,
they that do the great things of the law, will not stick at the tything of Mint
and Commin. 2. If the Apostle would have them to receive them into common
respect, they being already in Church Fellowship, then would not he have any
dis-respect at all in any kind, cither common, or special, upon the account of
their different apprehensions in some things, there being a visible testimony
of their faith, and that God has accepted them; what then have you gotten here
also for your purpose? You object,

3. Though it should be to receive them into Church Communion, it does not
follow they should be disorderly received.

I reply: If Scruple had been about the order or manner of their reception,
some being weak in the faith hereabout, if God has accepted them, except you
will put them upon new terms, which God never did, and be wise above what is
written, receive them, for the reason you see is, for God has accepted them.
You go on.

4. Upon this ground godly Presbyterians, Episcopal, Popish, nay beathenish
persons may be received.

I reply: If a Presbyterian, a prelaticall man, a Papist, nay a heathen can
give a visible testimony of his communion and fellowship with God, and that God
has accepted him, though he should scruple the manner of baptism, and several
circumstances therein, and should make his application unto us, giving
sufficient testimony that God has accepted him, and he promising to walk as a
visible believer, in all the good ways of God, (what ever your principle is) I
am not ashamed to tell you that my opinion is, that he should be received into
Church Fellowship with us, and make no scruple of entertaining those that have
received the Holy Ghost, as well as we. And whereas you speak of Mr. Goodwins,
and tho Church practice in this kind, tho all due care has been exercised, not
to offend weak Brethren, and to keep and preserve the peace of the Church: yet
upon occasion, communion and fellowship with us in this kind, I mean in that of
the Supper, has not been refused, when desired, and the peace of the Church
preserved, as I could instance matter of fact for proof, if it were meet, so
that your Sun of triumph, is turned into darkness; and where is now your
glorying?

Mr. Goodwins fifth Consideration is to this purpose, that learned men are not
agreed about the proper signification of baptizo, whether it be to dip, or
sprinckle, etc. much less illiterate men, for, for all that they know, it may
signify to run or to ride, or what not, as well as to dip, and theref^re
unchristian it is, for brethren to separate from brethren, upon their
difference, in, and about such things, whereof they can have no better
assurance, than humane tradition.

You answer (1.) if you were not unlearned, yet there would be little advantage
in the right understanding of the signification of the said word, seeing
learned men do differ about the meaning thereof.

SECT. LXI.
I Reply: In this you give Mr. Goodwin the argument, for if the learned agree
not about the meaning of the word, much less the unlearned, viz. upon any
personal knowledge, then there can be no certainty, but humane tradition; no
nor yet the certainty of that, because there are several significations of the
same word, given out by this tradition.

You answer, 2. That the Scripture interprets it, Romans 6.4. Coll. 2.12. and
many other places.

I reply: Romans 6.4. 2 Coll. 12.
You argue thus, baptism must terminatively signify dipping, because it is
said, Romans 6 4. 2 Coll. 12. buried with him in baptism: which is as if a man
should argue thus, the word Christ must terminatively signify the burch,
because it is said, 1 Cor. 12.12. as the body is one, and has many members,
and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so also is
Christ. May not I as well argue thus also, touching this word, baptizo, that it
signifies terminatively to wash, and turn you to Luke 11.28. where it so
signifies, and when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first
washed before dinner; and whereas you seem to infer thus, baptizo is to dip, in
Mat. 28.19. Go teach all nations, baptizing them, that is, dipping them,
because it is expounded so, Romans 6.4. We are buried with him in baptism;
buried, that is, plunged under water, as a dead man is buried under the earth.
May not I also as well urge thus, baptizo must needs signify to wash, because
it is said. Mat. 3.11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost: what is that
dipped with the Holy Ghost? that is harsh; but washed, purified, made clean by the
Holy Ghost; and this was made good by the pouring out of the spirit of God upon
men, according to promise, in Isa. 44.3. and made good, Acts 2.4. Again, Mark
7.4. the same word is used for washing, when they come from the Market, except
they wash, they eat nor; compare this with Acts 22.16. therethis very Ordinance
of baptism is made use of with respect to this signification of the word for
washing, and now why tarriest thou, arise and be baptized, That liberty is
allowed by the Church to Mr. Lamb, which he denies to allow the Church
and wash away thy sins: since then there are various significations of the
word baptizo, why will you take upon you the imposition of any one of them upon
us, any more than we impose another upon you; take your own way for your
selves; wash, sprinckle, dip, whether you please, all if you please, we shall
not be offended with you for it, neither shall we separate from you, for the
exercise of your judgment herein, give us the same liberty, and come again unto
us, our right hands, our hearts, our souls are all extended forth to receive
you. You proceed:

Mr. Goodwins sixth Consideration, you affirm to be the same with his first,
and therefore for your Reader to your answer to his first consideration, for an
answer to that also.

SECT. LXII.
HOw miserably are you mistaken in this?

His sixth consideration is to this purpose, manifest and indisputable commands
of God, must take place and he obeyed, when they come in competition with such
commands as are disputable among the godly, holy, and learned men, whether they
are indeed commanded or no, as to instance, to edify, comfort, admonish,
counsel, watch over one another, these are the undoubted commands of God, and
due unto those to whom they are solemnly promised to be performed, except there
be a releasing by consent, or the providence of God otherwise or dering it,
that it is impossible to make them good unto those individual persons, to whom
they were made, but whether God commanda that children should be baptized as
well as men, or that baptism should be administered this way, or another, these
things are disputable, and dispured, amongst believers: what say you now? is
there no difference between Mr. Goodwins first and sixth consideration? Well,
that consideration is yet untouched by you; but sure I am, you are sufficiently
touched, and more then touched by it, and I trust you are not past feeling, I
wish you would seriously lay it to heart.

SECT. LXIII.
MR. Goodwins seventh consideration is to this purpose, That that text, viz.
Hebrews 6.2. so much insisted upon by you, Heb. 6.2.
and the brethren with you, does import a plurality of baptisms (though in
respect of the end of baptism to us, there is but one baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. Ephesians.
4.5.
yet in respect of variety of subjects and different forms, these may b^^ many;
and therefore (these forms not expressly declared and manifested in the
Scriptures) it is a hard and unchristian thing to call those Churches accursed
and unclean, that shall not use that particular way or form that you so much
magnify and insist upon.

To this you answer: first, Why should that be hard to Mr. Goodwin, which the
Scripture has made easy? say you, that is your interpretation, no Text
expressly, or by necessary consequence, proving what that form was: Say I.

2. As for variety of Subjects, the Scripture (say you) mentions but one, viz.
Discipled Persons; to this I have replied before, Sect. 32.

Mr. Goodwins eigth consideration, is summarily what you have said, viz. that
withdrawing upon this account, is a Schismatic practice, and a Sin of a high
nature.

To this you answer: first, Scripture schism is a sin, but that is not your
schism, your schism is commanded, not prohibited in Scripture.

But by your favor, it is sub judice, and every man's cause is right in his own
eyes, and your separation has been sufficiently argued and proved to be such a
sin as requires your repentance and reformation, whether you see it or no.

But say you, Show us a rule from Christ, to gather Churches without baptism,
then our mouth will be stopped.

I reply: What is this to infant baptism? what to dipping? the Church from whom
you have separated, was, and is, a baptized Church.

2. Show us where in all the Scriptures, baptism is made an essential part of
Church Fellowship; sure I am, in respect of Scripture evidence, you are here as
mute as fishes.

2. You add: Why should our separating from you be sinful in us, any more
than your separating from Parish-Churches sinful in you?

This we have already answered, Sect. 52. You add: You say,

3. As the fatal apostacy from the pure Ordinances of Christ, and primitive
worship was graduall, so is the recovery of the primitive purity gradual also,
etc.

This is nothing to the consideration, and therefore I have nothing to say unto
it.

Mr. Goodwins nineth consideration, that baptism with water is but a ca^^all
ceremony, so acknowledged by one of the gravest Authors of the Antipcedo
baptistical says, and therefore it ought not to make a partition wall between
the godly party of believers, etc. To this you say,

1. That though the said Author calls it a carnal ceremony, yet the Holy
Scriptures have not so styled it.

SECT. LXIV.
SUppose the Scriptures have not so called them, are they not so^ Is water any
thing else but an outward thing? is it a spiritual thing?

Is dipping, washing, sprinckling, spiritual or carnal actings? was there any
need that the Scripture should teach believers such things as these?

2. You say, Mr. ^. calls it a carnal ceremony only in respect of the
outward act, not in respect of the spiritual design.

No more does Mr. Goodwin, or any other man, and all the ceremonies of the Law
were of the same nature; had not they a spiritual design of God in them?

3. You give us for your third answer, what you do believe concerning its
giving a man right unto Church communion.

Well, I know your faith in this point, but what is this to the consideration
propounded?

Mr. Goodwin tenth consideration is thus, Ignorance in some things (among the
Saints) appertaining to the knowledge of God and Christ, rend^e^h them not
unclean one unto another; nor is it a just ground of dividing one from another
etc.

To this you grant, that ignorance in many things of that nature, is no ground
of separation of m^n from Churches, but ignorance in this point, viz. of
baptism, is such, as it just^f^eth such a separation, because (say you) I have
proved, that for unbaptized persons to join in Church Fellowship, is
disorderly.

First, you talk apace of your proving that which was yet never done, and
thereby prove indeed your own confidence, but not hing else.

2. You have said nothing in this kind, but you have had better proof to the
contrary than you brought with you.

SECT. LXV.
11. Consideration tendered by M. Goodwin.
Baptism is no constituting principle of a true Church, therefore separation
upon the account of this, or that manner of baptizing, is not warrantable,
there being nothing, but (suppose) a mistake about it, etc.

To this you say again you have proved it, but where, who can tell?

Mr. Goodwins 12th. consideration, is to this purpose; That the Scriptures
making mention of persons that are unmeet for Church Fellowship, or christian
communion; they mention fornicators, covetous, idolaters, railers, drunkards,
extortioners, disorderly walkers, but never persons of a holy and blameless
conversation, whether baptized or unbaptized, etc. You answer,

1. Paul writ to Churches who were all baptized, 1 Cor. 12.13. he says, we are
all baptized, etc.

SECT. LXVI.
BRother, take heed of handling the word of God deceitfully; where does the
Scripture say we are all baptized with water? it is true, it says we are all
baptized by one spirit into one body: take heed of Legerdemain in the things of
God: is this good arguing, we are all baptized by one spirit; ergo, we are all
baptized with water? I confess it is an inference of the same kind, and kin, as
it were of the same flesh, blood, and bones, as several the rest of your
inferences are: Do we deny that any believer mentioned in the Scriptures, as
members of Churches, were not baptized with the Spirit? Do not you judge your
holy and beloved brethren, etc. baptized with the spirit, though not baptized
as you count baptism.

2. What if it be granted that they were all baptized, would Paul have them
rejected, in case they were holy and worthy men, and durst not be baptized for
fear of offending God, their consciences being weak in that point for want of
light? would he have reckoned them among fornicators, covetous, idolaters,
railers, drunkards, extortioners.

You reply: I make little doubt but he would.

I tremble at your saying; is this like that sweet and blessed nature of the
father of mercies, that pardons the ignorances of his people, and judges of
man according to what a man has, and not according to what a man has not.
What? to number a believer with the vilest of sinners, fornicators, covetous,
idolaters, railers, drunkards, extortioners, etc. and to banish him, with them,
out of his house, from his Ordinances, and this merely, because that either he
will not be dipped and baptized again, having in his judgment and conscience,
been baptized already; or because he is ignorant that it is Gods mind it should
be so, and there durst not: Is this consistent with that great love of God,
professed in Scripture, to them that are one, in union and fellowship, with his
Son, Jesus Christ: But what is your reason of this representation of God?

1. Because Christ was so full advising the Disciples to punctuality in point
of order, 2 Coll. 16. 1 Cor. 14.40.

Reply, Let us examine your Texts.

1 Cor. 14.40. 1 Cor. 14.40. 2 Coll. 16.
Let all things be done decently and in order. 2 Coll. 16. Let no man therefore
judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new
moon, or of the sabbath days; ergo, children are not to be baptized; ergo, the
manner of baptizing must be by dipping: Ergo, if persons be not thus baptized,
and at age, they are no more fit to make members of Churches, than fornicators,
covetous, idolaters, railers, drunkards, extortioners, and evil workers: Ergo,
Jesus Christ was full advising to punctuality in order; viz. of baptism. I have
read of one Orietes, that imagined that he did see his own shape and picture
still going before him; So it seems in those paths of the Scripture where you
walk, you suppose you see the shadow of your opinion about baptism, yea the
truth (in that) shining with the majesty of God. You argue (with the
Scriptures) as the Papists (your great pattern in the mount, in more things
than in this) do, to prove their fanatic notions and practices. The text
says, give not holy things to dogs: Mat. 7.6. that is (say they) the
Scriptures to the ignorant: again, Mat. 6.11. Give us this day our daily bread;
Ergo, we must communicate in one kind. What Is your second reason, why godly
persons, scrupling baptism, after your manner, are reckoned with God, in
respect of right to churchmembership, among fornicators, covetous? etc. It is
this,

2. Because he praised the Church of Corinth, for keeping the Ordinances as he
declared them unto them. Just thus, your foresaid pattern. There are seven
Sacraments, for Christ brake and divided to the people, five Loaves, and two
Fishes. Mat. 14.19. Well, your third reason:

3. Because Order he looked upon as a beautiful thing, Coll. 2.5. Ergo, What
do you tell us of the steadfastness of your faith without you be dipped? away
with you among your companions, fornicators, covetous, idolaters, drunkards,
railers, and the rest of that cursed crew. Well, proceed.

4. Because he cautioneth the Church to take heed of Philosophers, that through
vain deceit would bring them into disorder: 2 Coll. 8.
Coll. 2.8. what need we any further witness; he that will be blind, let him
be blind; can you not see baptism by dipping, and believers unbaptized,
reckoned among the rabble of wretches in this reason also; yet a little more to
cure our dull eyes, say you,

5: Because when any disorder grew, he took such care to have them corrected,
Tit. 1.5. If this be not light sufficient to convince the world, that holy men,
not baptized, according to our way and opinion, are to be reckoned in, respect
of right to Church Membership, among dogs without, there is no hopes of
conviction. Yet again you proceed:

6. Because he says his word was not yea and nay, as fallible men's are now, 2
Cor. 1.18.

I hope now it appears clearer than the Sun, (if clearer may be) that in Paul's
judgment godly and holy persons (though one with Christ Jesus by faith) that
scruple baptism, and are not baptized after our way and manner, have no more
right to Church Membership than those that are one in communion and fellowship,
even with the Devil himself, or else Paul would pull down with his one hand,
what he built up with another.

Having killed Mr. Goodwins Argument dead, six times over, so that it lies at
his feet, like murdered Abel at his brother Cains; hark how the Drums beat,
the Trumpets sound the Coolurs are displayed, no noise but Victory, Victory, to
be heard in the Camp; see how he glories in the Triumph.

Good Reader, Do not thou think in thy conscience, Mr. Goodwin has the
wrong end of the staff in this controversy? and whether the putting this
question does not discover it? and who it is that builds upon light
conjectures, loose suppositions, presumptuous self-imaginations, M. Goodwin, or
his poor brethren of the dip, as he calls them?

SECT. LVII.
MR. Goodwins 13th. Consideration, touching the offensiveness, burthensomness,
and grievousness of water-dipping to the natural flesh, together with what
others have written hereabouts, and what you have answered, I shall leave to
men of sense that have felt it, and of reason to judge upon the whole, whether
this be according to that Gospel freedom, from such yoaks mentioned in the
Law, which the New Testament speaks of. The Law indeed chastised the Jews with
whips, but you make the Gospel (like Rehoboam) to chastise the Gentiles with
scorpions, 1 King. 12.11.
which (as you manage your conceits of the power and virtue of baptism, as if
men without it, and that at such time, and in such manner, and upon such terms
as you plead for it) is as acceptable unto God, as the whips of the Papists
upon Good-Fryday, lashing their backs until they bleed again.

Mr. Goodwins 14th. consideration, viz. that for persons to mistake about
baptism, is as venial and pardonable mistake (all things considered) as likely
can be, and therefore if punishable, it should be with the lightest punishment
that may be; therefore to inflict the heaviest curse, such as the unchurching
men is, the rendering men abominable in the sight of God, this is indeed more
than summumjus, yea summainjuria.

SECT. LXVIII.
TO this you speak several words, (as if you knew not what the consideration
said, nor whereof it affirmed) your answer seems to be to another thing, I
think your self cannot tell to what, as if (like Babels builders) you
understood not the language of the consideration, but that it spoke in an
unknown tongue: for say you, (1.) The Apostles did foresee there would be an
apostacy from the primitive practice, etc. (2.) This apostacy did fall out
accordingly, etc. (3.) Why did not the judgment of the learned stop your (Mr.
Gooodwins) mouth, and tearing your self from the national Church? etc. (4.) You
(Mr. Goodwin) plead stiffly for some things, which renders you more alone than
we, etc. What is the meaning of all this? you might as well have told us, that
Lots Wife was turned to a Pillar of Salt, which had been as savoury an answer,
as that you gave unto the consideration propounded.

SECT. LXIX.
YOU say the 15th. Consideration says nothing, but what has been said before,
and therefore you have no more to say to it: I have therefore no more to say to
you concerning it, but I believe the judicious Reader of that consideration,
and your answer, will find it like Moses Rod, devouring all that you have said
in your whole Book, to invalid the same.

SECT. LXX.
MR. Goodwins 16th. Consideration, you have summed up thus: Infant Baptism,
though per sprinckling, is as efficacious, as the baptism you plead for. (1.)
For declaring persons the professed Disciples of Christ. (2.) For obliging
persons to be the loyal Disciples of Christ. (3.) For mutter of edification and
comfort to the inner man.

To this you answer, by denying all that has been said touching those three
ends of baptism, and my reply shall only be, That it is too evident to be
denied, and too easy an answer to satisfy men in their wits, unto matter of
such palpable argumentations, and to what Mr. Goodwin has said hereabout, the
Reader may please to peruse Page 94, 95, 96. besides many other places in this
reply.

Mr. Goodwins 17th. Consideration, is indeed as (you have said) to this purpose.

SECT. LXXI.
It does not ap pear from Scriptures that any Church of Christ was commanded to
be dipped, reproved for not being dipped, therefore high presumption for any to lay
their own commands herein upon such penalties as you do, etc.

You have answered it is very true, and it is the truest answer you have yet
given.

Mr. Goodwins 18th. Consideration, viz. that it is hard to prove it sinful to
refuse not only not to be dip, but to be baptized in one form or other, (1.)
Because hard to find out a lawful administrator. (2.) The command to baptize
is given to the Apostles. (3.) They were not enjoined to baptize any person
against his will. (4.) Those words, teaching them to observe whatsoever I
command them, do not prove that the Apostles did teach believers to require
baptism of them, except it be proved that Christ did command the Apostles so to
do. (5.) Neither is it found in the Scriptures, that the Apostles did teach a
church or people to seek baptism at their hands, etc.

SECT. LXXII.
YOU answer, first, with grief of heart that such noble parts and abilities,
are so desperately engaged in so bad a cause. By this,

You seem a little to grudge, that such precious Ointment should be spent upon
the service of truth; you know who said, it were better sold and given to the
poor. But thus say you,

If I prove from Scripture that it is sinful for Disciples to remain
unbaptized, and that by the precept of Christ, then all your far-fetcht pleas
will fall to the ground. And then you fall to the work, from page the 69. to
page the 79. toyling and laboring to catch that (which at least mist of it)
you might have had granted you for asking; but you answer to what was objected,
as if (like the Disciples when Christ told them of his going up to Jerusalem to
suffer, etc. Luke 18.34.) you understood none of those sayings, but that they
are hid from you, neither know you the things that were spoken. Those that have
a blemish in their eye, (said one) the more wishly they look into any thing,
the less they see of it: the truth is, in this you answer, as if the language
of the consideration were Barbarian unto you, and you to it; and instead of
pursuing the Partridge with the Faulconers, you fly after a gilded butterflye
with children; when one thing is called for by Mr. Goodwin, another thing is
fetched by Mr. Lamb: Like that of Dabartus, writing of the building of N^mrods
Tower: Bring me (quoth one) a Trowel, quickly, quick,
One brings him up a Hammer: Hew this brick,
Another bids, and then they cleave a Tree;
Make fast this Rope, and then they let it flee.
One calls for Plancks, another Mortar lacks,
They bring the first a Stone, the last an Ax.


You go about to prove it sinful for Disciples to remain unbaptized, if you
mean Disciples, whom Christ commanded to be baptized, having all opportunities
thereunto, (as they had in the primitive times) M. Goodwin and you are of one
mind in that, but if you mean Disciples now in these days wherein we live,
you must prove that God has given them the same opportunities unto baptism,
which he gave those Disciples in the primitive times. Jesus Christ surely does
not command things to be done, and that upon penalty of his sore displeasure,
and banishment from his dwelling place, which are ultra posse, or impossible;
Jesus Christ is no such hard Master; if you will prove it incombant upon us to
be baptized (which is not by us denied) by virtue of the command of Christ, you
must then prove (and that not by a flourish of words, but evidence of
Scripture) 1. Who is the person sufficiently authorized by Jesus Christ
hereunto: Hard it is for. M. Lamb to prove his authority to baptize.
Whether you can clearly prove your commission for baptizing other men and
women; and why those men, yea and women too, whom you baptize, may not go out
and baptize others; for where do we find in the Scriptures, that those whom
John baptized, did after their baptism baptize others; as also the like querie
may be made of those converts in the Acts of the Apostles, etc.

2. If you will answer the argument of the consideration in hand, you must
prove the command of Christ, Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations,
baptizing them, etc. was a Law imposed upon you (if you will take upon you to
baptize others) as well as upon the Apostles; As also, who are those mentioned
in baptizing them, what is the antecedent, or substantive, to this relative
pronoun, them.

Again, you must prove that the Apostles did teach believers to require baptism
of them, and that Christ did command his Apostles to teach the Nations to
observe it; and that the Apostles in their ministry did teach churches, or
persons, to seek baptism at their hands, much less to threaten them for not
seeking it.

Again, you must prove, if you will speak to the consideration, or that under
consideration, that the Apostles had power, by virtue of their commission, to
make it a standing Law, for all Pastors and Teachers who were to succeed them
in the ministry, to impose the observation of the same law upon all believers,
and the rather, because (1.) water baptism seems (by the practice of the
Apostles) to be intended by God chiefly, if not only for to attend the Gospel
in its first reception by a people. (2.) In that where the work or office of
Pastors and Teachers, or their qualifications are described, there is no
mention made of any charge upon them to baptize, etc.

Again, if you consider the consideration, you must prove that those words,
Mat. 28.19. and so I am with you to the end of the world, do necessarily imply,
that baptism is to continue unto the end of the world; for as much as the
phrase to the end of the world, may mean (1.) His being with them unto the end
of their lives. (2.) That their labors should prosper and be fruitful (when
they were dead, and gone) even to the end of the world.

Again, you must prove the promise of his presence, not only to his Apostles
and successors in the administration of baptism unto the end of the world; but
that the like promise is made unto private Christians also, in their
administrations of baptism.

These things are propounded (as Mr. Goodwin says) not as intending to argue
the extinction of the Ordinance of baptism, but rather as a demonstration of
the many Labyrinths and Difficulties, which you ought to overcome and clear,
who are so confidently positive and assertive of your practice, and who
pronounce all men unworthy of christian-communion, who are not as positive and
assertive as your selves. But alas! Mountains and Rocks are not so easy
removed by Babes and Sucklings, and puffed away with a breath.

SECT. LXXIII.
THE 19. Consideration (being, as you say, the same with the 8th.) you pass
over with reference to your answer thereunto, and so do I with reference to my
reply to that answer; and if that 19th. Consideration, were nineteen times put
upon your thoughts, it would be too little for you to withstand the due weight
and import thereof.

Mr. Goodwins 20. Consideration, is to this purpose:

Peter being questioned for holding communion with Cornelius, and other
Gentiles, by the brethren of Jerusalem, he justifies it, by telling them, that
they having received the Holy Ghost as well as themselves, they had no Reason to
reject them, never making the least mention of their being baptized, and with
that account only the brethren were satisfied.

To this you answer, 1. They were baptized. I reply, How could the brethren
know that? 2. You say the communion Peter had with them, was after baptism. I
reply, How could the brethren know that still? the query still is, why did not
Peter inform them of their baptism? 1. You answer, the Scriptures silence does
not argue that there was no mention made of it.

SECT. LXXIV.
I Reply: That your silence had been better than such an answer: will you
conclude upon that whereof the Scripture is silent? You add.

2. In those days a believing person, and a baptized person, was presumed the
same. I reply, 1. How know you that? where do you find such a presumption? If
this be a verity, it must be an unwritten one also, having not so much as any
probable ifs, may-bee's why-nots for it. 2. The contrary is palpable; for, (1.)
there were believers before they were baptized, and therefore were so presumed
to be their faith and the profession thereof, being praevious to their baptism.
(2.) there were many believers spoken of by the Scriptures, of whose baptism
there is not the least mention made, viz. of the baptism of Peter, and James,
and John, Philip, and Bartholomew, etc. (3.) we read of many that were
baptized, of whose faith we have no particular assurance at all, as of those of
Iernsalem, and all Judea, and of the Regions beyond Jordan, that were baptized
of John in the Wilderness.

SECT. LXXV.
MR. Goodwins 21. Consideration, is to this purpose, viz. That Pastors and
Teachers were given by Christ, for the perfecting of the Saints in general,
whether baptized or not baptized, 2 Ephesians. 4.8.11, 12. Christ's body consisting of
Saints, ^ Ephesians. ^.10. it follows then, that Saints, whether baptized on not,
have right to fellowship, in as much as Pastors and Teachers have their calling
by, and residence in Churches, neither are they in a probable way of perfecting
them, but while incorporated with them; if so, they that will not allow the
privilege of Church Membership with them, unto Saints, deeming them
unbaptized, are sound fighters against Jesus Christ, etc. You answer,

1. Those Saints specified in the 4th. of the Ephesians, were baptized, having
one God, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, so one Baptism. I reply:
One baptism in respect of fruit and consequence, not in respect of form: For,
2. they had several baptisms in other respects, as to speak in your own
language, baptism with water, baptism with the spirit, baptism with affliction,
etc. But all these in respect of fruit and consequences, but one baptism; so
that answer vanishes into air. 2. You say, I have proved already that
unbaptized persons were reputed none of the visible body of Christ. I reply:
But where have you proved it? Sure I am, all the inhabitants of heaven and
earth, know nothing of your proof, herein; show us therefore where your proof
lies, we hear of nothing more then I have proved, I have proved, I have
proved, and I have found, I have found, I have found, but you can as well show
us the way of the bird in the air, of the fish in the sea, etc. as show us
where you have thus proved and found the things you speak of. Your chiefest
proof for the point in hand, that I have met withal, is Gal. 3.27. for as many
as have been baptized unto Christ, Gal. 3.27.
have put on Christ; hence you most confidently build, that they, and only they
that were baptized unto Christ, were judged by the Churches to have put on
Christ, this place is the Mine, from whence you dig up your treasure; here is
the place where you think you have found, you have found. But look into it
again, may not you as well argue, (as once Manes that mad heretic, as one
calls him, did) from the 10th. of John, and the 8th. ver. All that ever came
before me are Thieves and Robbers; therefore Abraham, Isaac; and Jacob, Moses
and the Prophets, that came before Christ were Thieves and Robbers; is not here
good divinity? may not you argue thus also, because the Scripture says, Mark
6.56. As many as touched him were made whole; hence I argue, that they and only
they that touched Christ, were made whole by Christ. Again, Acts 4.6. it is
said, as many as were of the kindred of the high Priest, were gathered together
at Jerusalem; hence you infer, that they and only they that were of the kindred
of the high Priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem. Do you not see that
your silver is become dross, and all your treasure is nothing but dirt and mire?

Mr. Goodwins 22. consideration imports,

First, the consideration of that intelligence, by books and writings, from too
crebile authority, touching the troublesome and turbulent deportment of those
that have thus gone a wandering after dipping and rebaptization, where their
numbers have considerably increased in Ireland, Scotland, etc. and the menacing
effects thereof.

2. The testimony of Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Musculus,
Bullinger, who in their writings take up most sad complaints against this
generation of men, as enemies to the progress of the Gospel, and by their
unchristian carriages, caused the good word of God and the Reformed Religion to
be evil spoken of, etc.

3. That Records of former, and experience of present times, have given
instances of several of the best and most considerate persons, sometimes
engaged in that way of Rebaptization, after full trial of it, have forsaken it
as not finding God and Christ in it.

4. That by frequent and credible information, there is little of the presence
of God in some of their Religious assemblies, the Scriptures being very lamely
opened, etc.

5. The several new modes of dipping pleaded for, every latter pretending to
correct the insufficiency, irregularity, and inconvenience of the former, etc.

6. The uncertainty of many men of that way who change and shift their
judgments and practices, their dividing and subdividing, even among themselves,
etc.

7. That high Antichristian-like, and imposing spirit that is amongst them,
prohibiting men Pope-like, and conjuring men (disciples of that way) not to
hear Jesus Christ himself speaking by any other mouth then theirs, as if after
they were dipped, a voice from heaven had commanded all men to hear them, as it
did (upon Christ's Baptism) to hear him, etc.

8. That persons once discipled to that way, have no ears to hear and consider
any arguments and reasons that speak against that way, etc.

9ly. and lastly, That many (given up unto that judgment and practice, upon
terms of total separation from their godly societies) decay in their graces,
lose that sweetness, meekness, love and humility that were in them formerly;
going into the water lambs, and coming out again wolves, and tigers, etc.

SECT. LXXVI.
THis 22. consideration, has such an operation upon you, as Christ's Sermon had
upon some of the Jews, when they said, ( Ioh. 10.20.) He has a Devil, and is
mad; or, as the Jews when they heard Paul speak of his being sent to the
Gentiles, ( Acts 22.22.) Away with such a fellow from the earth, it is not fit
he should live: The truth is, did I not know you, I would say, your zeal
against Mr. Goodwin seems to rise not only to anger, but even to rage, yea, to
envy it self, as if (like Esau) you now resolved your Brothers (nay, your
spiritual fathers) death, or at least, the death of his name and honor a-among
good men. I have heard of one Friar Augustine of Antwerp, that preaching to the
people against Luther, wished that Luther was there, that he might bite out his
throat with his teeth; you seem to use M. Goodwin and his reputation, in your
answer to this 22. Consideration, but even as David in his rage against the
Ammonites, putting them under sawes and harrows of tron, and under axes of
iron, making them to pass through the brick-kilne; or, as Balacks anger against
Balaam, Numbers 24 10. made him clap his hands as him, his color to change,
his tongue to stammer, his teeth to gnash, his feet to stamp, etc. what have we
here in answer, but as it were thunder, hail, tempest from your supercilious
and peevish pen? but more particularly let us observe your answer.

First, you lift Mr. Goodwin up for his old brave sayings, (Strapadolike) that
you might throw him down with the greater fall and reproach: How does Mr.
Goodwins zeal in opposing us, transport himself, making him forget his old
brave saying, wherein he certainly had the spirit of God with him, etc.

2. You charge Mr. Goodwin, that leaving his calm reasonings from Scripture, he
betakes himself to wrath, and the weapons of reflection, and presently your
self reflects upon him what ever you can pick out of his writings to disparage
him; though in this you do (like a Whifler) carry a torch in your hand to show
to others your own deformity.

3. Mr. Lamb that he might Gangrene his name to purpose, and lay his honor in
the very dust, is searching and digging the field even of Golgatha it self, to
find out the worst of rottenness and putrefaction he can, to besmear him
therewith; mark his words, He (Mr. Goodwin) shakes hands with the old enemy of
the truth, Gangraena, in many of his methods, etc.

Before I look into this Sepulcher, I shall premise concerning the Author of
Gangraena, Mr. T. E. deceased and interred therein; that, however his zeal, by
the advantage of his natural temper, and the multitude of bellows blowing it
up, even from all parts, did (indeed) transport him beyond the due lines of
Christian moderation, in writing against his brethren, differing from him about
discipline; yet, for my part, my hopes are, that though those works of his will
not be able to abide the fire, but shall be burnt; yet, that he himself shall
be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus, and that God has forgiven it unto him,
for he did it ignorantly, and presuming he did his Master good service therein,
and I could wish, that his dust might not be interrupted, but that it might
sleep in rest, and peace, and no more disturbed until it be refined and
restored.

Nevertheless, the said Sepulcher being opened by this unhappy hand, striving
(if possible) to thrust Mr. Goodwins fame and reputation into the mouth
thereof, and to bury it in everlasting reproach and contempt; I cannot but
endeavor to hold the arms of this unkind, ung^atefull, and indeed unnatural
once beloved Son and Disciple of his, to prevent the issue of his desparate
attempt.

Mr. Lamb compares Mr. G. to Mr. E. striving to make the parallel hold in five
things.

1. Did Mr. E. take up disparaging reports against honest men, differing from
himself in judgment? so does Mr. G. 2. Did Mr. E. publish those reports to
their dishonor? so does Mr. G. 3. Did Mr. Edw. charge the unworthiness of some
few, upon the generality of the men of his displeasure? so does Mr. Goodw. 4.
Did Mr. Edw. stir up the Magistrate against them? so does Mr. Goodw. 5. and
lastly, Did Mr. E. urge the writings of other men to disgrace them whom he
opposed? so does Mr. Goodwin.

I reply, first, To the two first of your particulars, yea and to the last
also, viz. the gathering and publishing the true reports, evil customs, and
practices of those men, that decline the ways of God, and the societies of the
Saints, under their pretended zeal for Gods glory, and the salvation of men's
souls, and that for the christian caution of others, either staggering and
unsettled in the truth, and recovery (if it may be) of some out of the snare of
death: these (I say) are practices of divine authority and approbation, and to
be reckoned among other the good ways of God, for the edification of the sons
of men, Mat. 16.6. Mark 12.38. Phil. 3.2. 2 Timothy 3.6. 2 Pet. 2.12, 13, 14, 15.
Jude 8.10.16. Romans 16.17.18.

To the third particular, viz. the charging of the unworthiness of some
persons, to stain the honor of the generality of men of the same way,
judgment, and practice, this is scandalously charged upon Mr. Goodwin, for he
brings you the authority of Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, and men of undoubted
credit and worth, for their piety, learning, life, and conversation, making
mention not of one, or a few, but of the generality of men of that judgment
and practice, acting very turbulently and sinfully in the places where they
lived, and several of the last quotations of Scripture, will justify that
also.

To the fourth particular, viz. That Mr. Goodwin stirred up the Magistrates in
his Water-dipping, etc. against you or any others for matters of Religion (the
public peace preserved) is so foul, false, and foolish a charge, as a man
would think, that the forehead of a whore upon the face of a man, had more
modesty than to affirm it; and certainly, had you not given and rendered your
self a very sad instance of the woeful change of your wonted Genius, from what
it was when you were amongst us, and that you are the man that have made a sad
shipwreck of that sweetness, meekness, love, and christian humility of spirit,
etc. I say, had you not been a sad example and instance herein, you (that know
Mr. Goodwins judgment, and what he has and does daily write concerning his
faith in that point) would not so boldly, capriciously, and peremptorily have
written such falcities of him, and except you quickly recover your self, we
cannot but fear the issue will be tragical. How can you revise those words of
yours, page. 92. There is this only difference between you and M. Edwards, in
your war against the truth, and people of the most high, he was your match in
rage and fury, but he wanted your keen wit, and roaring language to set it off
with; I say, how can you read them over and not look upon them as the
abhorrencie of your soul, and even melt in tears for them? but the Leopers lips
must be covered.

2. Suppose Mr. Goodwin had exceeded the rules of christianity in this kind,
and stumbled at that stone whereat others dash themselves in pieces, was it
such a worthy piece of charity to the world to be edifified by you in the
discovery thereof? by you (I say) his Son in the faith: I have heard of a
father, who complaining, that never had man so undutifull a child as he, his
son (to throw contempt enough upon him) replied, with less grace than truth, my
Grandfather had. Do not you likewife endeavor here to render Mr. G. worse than
him whom (with (indeed) very little charity also) you style an old enemy of the
truth.

3. I appeal to your conscience; do not you believe that Mr. Goodwins end in
writing this 22. consideration, as well as any of the rest? was not your
spiritual peace and interest according to his best thoughts and apprehensions,
that you might remember from whence you are fallen and repent? And is this so
great a crime, deserving from your justice so great a censure, that you should
thus stigmatize him for a man of rage, of fury, and of a roaring language to
set it off with? a man of cruel mockings, contemptuous revilings, etc.

4. Whether you do not judge it incombent as a duty upon Elders, Ministers, and
Pastors of Churches, when they perceive a danger of their Churches defection in
matters of faith and practice, together with other arguments from Scripture and
reason, to present their people and flocks, over which God has made them
Overseers, with the corrupt and wicked conversations of those persons, I mean
of the generality of those persons of the same judgment, notions, and
apprehensions, against which they argue, as being fully persuaded of the
corruption thereof, and of a dangerous tendencie to root up and destroy the
flourishing congregations and churches of the living God. Suppose some of your
people baptized (as you call it) and gathered to your self according to your
own judgment, should apostize to Popery, to Judaism, to Turcism, to Rantism,
and that with the plea of conscience, as supposing the truth to be on their
fides, would it be improper or impertment (if you be their Pastor) amongst
other arguments for their reducement, to inform them of the authenticque
histories, relating the cruelty of the Papists, the tyrany of the Turks, the
frauds of the Jews, the profaneness of the Ranters, etc. and has Mr. Goodwin
done any more.

5. How were you harrased, tortured, and perplexed in this your answer to this
22. Consideration, as if in an agony between conscience and concupiscence, one
while lifting Mr. Goodwin up above all his fellows for disposition and
conversation according to godliness, a pattern of patience, humility, meekness,
temperance, and this by 20 years experience; a man that has exceeded his
brethren of the Ministry in the promotion of holiness and close walking with
God, there being not many in his time, if any at all, that has managed the
same with more authority, life, and power; another while you write him
comparable with the old enemy of the truth, Gangraena, between whom and Mr.
Goodwin (say you) there is but this only difference, viz. that he had not so
keen a wit and roaring language to set off his rage and fury, as Mr. Edwards
had.

6ly. and lastly, Instead of answering those nine particulars mentioned in this
22 Consideration, you fall foul upon M. Goodwin, as if your pen was in an
extacie of rage, and discontent, and this must pass for an answer to them all,
and so set it pass with them that can be content to be so answered.

Mr. Goodwins 23 Consideration amounts to this, There is no substantial
argument produced to justify such a practice of separations upon such grounds,
neither do he believe ever will be.

To this you say, Whether we have not given arguments to justify it, more
than one, and that grounded upon the Scriptures and your own principles, and
indeed the principles of all the learned, I refer (say you) to the judgment of
the Reader.

SECT. LXXVII.
IF your Reader be a child in malice, and a man in understanding, Berrean, and
not a giddy-headed Galathian, able to try the spirits, to prove all things so,
as to hold fast that which is good, if his eyes are in his head; what can he
see in what you have written, but a reed shaken with the wind, a bubble in the
air, having indeed curious colors, but filled only with very breath? What can
he see, but zeal without knowledge, many good words to no good purpose, the
holy Scriptures miserably mangled and cut in pieces, like the Levites
Concubine, and scattered abroad throughout your book? What can he see, but
confidence of mastery upon the very throne; evidence of truth upon the very
dunghill: shadows of arguments exalted above the stars of God, and the truth of
arguments brought low, and (as it were) covered with worms? What can he see,
but a child of light walking in darkness, and a son of desire murdering the
honor of his aged father? What can he see, but a straggling sheep wandering away
from the flock of Christ, a prodigal son turning his back upon his fathers
family? What can he see, but your high presumption, in cutting off, and keeping
away innocent babes from Christ's benediction, in tearing up, and rending in
pieces the Churches of Christ united together by a holy covenant, in obtruding
your mere fancies for the objects of Faith, and your unscriptural conceits for
the Oracles of God, in cursing those armies of Israel, and flocks of Christ,
whom he has blessed, and in calling them common, and unclean, whom he has
cleansed. In a word, what shall he see, but that (notwithstanding all that you
have written yet) WATER-DIPPING IS NO FIRM FOOTING FOR CHVRCH-COMMVNION.

SECT. LXXVIII.
To conclude, If your Reader of what you have written to answer M. Goodwin, be
also M. Goodwins Reader of what you have pretended to answer, and a Reader of
such a Character mentioned in the last Paragraph, I need not in the least
suspect his discerning faculty, in observing your most importune weakness, in
discovering (as you call it) M. Goodwins great mistakes in the exposition of
eight chief Scriptures about Church Communion: the truth is, as in the former
part of your book, you call darkness light, so in the rear of it, you call
light darkness, and as the real darkness of that pretended light; so the
manifest light of that which you here call darkness, cannot but be evidently
discerned by him that will diligently search those Scriptures, and examine what
M. Goodwin and your self, his corrector, have offered, as the true sense and
meaning thereof, in relation to the business in controversy between you, viz.
separation from Churches, made up of holy brethren, vvalking in the right faith
of the Gospel, because of their disterence in judgment concerning baptism, 1
Bohn 2.10.
for he that loves his brother abides in the light, and there is none
occasion of stumbling in him.

FINIS.
Mr. LAMB'S POSTSCRIPT, Prescribed.
There is one thing further observable in Mr. Goodwins Answer to my brother
Allen, which I take my self bound to give the Reader notice of, lest he err
through the ignorance of it; that is, that he does with my brother Allen, just
as the six Booksellers did with him, p. 64. by leaving out the very word such,
(though I suppose through oversight) whereupon the stress of the argument
lies.

THere is one thing further observable in Mr. Goodwins Answer to my Brother
Allen; Goodwins reputation, are so precious, that nothing thereof must be lost.

Which I take my self bound to give the Reader notice of: Bound? by what
bonds? what, of nature, to rise up against your friend, your brother, your
great benefactor, your spiritual Father? or are they bonds of grace, viz. to
bear false witness against your neighbor? Maximinian the Emperor thought that
the blood of Christians was a very acceptable sacrifice unto his Gods, and in
the sixth Consul of Tolledo it was enacted, that the King of Spain should
suffer none but Roman Catholics to live in his Dominions, King Philip
accordingly having narrowly escaped shipwreck in his passage from the
Low Countries, said, he was delivered by the singular providence of God to
root out Lutheranism, and this he thought himself bound to do: and so Paul
thought he verily ought to do many things against the name of Jesus of
Nazareth. Well, consider of it; if the light that is in you be darkness, how
great is that darkness! beware of an injudicious mind; what man bound to
thrust your pen up to the feathers (as a sword to the hilt) in the blood of Mr.
G. good name, by fixing upon him a very falsehood: I still demand, by what Law
are you bound? and you answer vertually, yes, bound, and that by the Law of
charity to your honest Reader: For thus say you:

I take my self bound to give the Reader notice thereof, least he err through
the ignorance of it. I confess it is a very charitable thing to be eyes to the
blind, but a cursed thing to make the blind man go out of his way; for if your
Reader be blind in the thing you speak of, sure I am, he has but a blind guide
of you in this point, as we shall see presently: and if he be not blind, then
you endeavor very charitable to pluck out his eyes, that he may see the better
through the holes of his head. But I further demand:

What great error was your Reader like to incur by the ignorance of this great
piece of truth, whereof you do inform him? Suppose he had never known this way
of truth, (untruly so called) had it been much out of the way of his peace and
edification? I confess he had not seen so much your own nakedness, had you not
anointed his eyes with this eye salve, and therein might have been a loser: But
what is the vision? You give it out thus:

That is, that he ( M. Goodwin) does with my Brother Allen, just at the six
Booksellers did with him, viz. ( M. Goodwin.)

In your Praescript you raked the grave, to find out (if it were possible) the
worst amongst the dead, Goodwin according to his ghostly and ghastly image in
your Praescript, you ( Diogenes like) walk up and down the City of London, with
your candle in your hand, to find out a pack of very honest men, having neither
honor nor conscience among the living, that you might chain M. Goodwin with
them also, to crucify Christ with thieves, and to number him with
transgressors, was the trick of the Rulers of the Jews, to make Jesus odious to
the people: for my part, make good your charge, and I will turn separate from
M. Goodwin also, professing that he that shall deal with any man, good or bad,
as the six Booksellers did deal with M. Goodwin, is not worthy to set amongst
the Dogs of Jobs Flocks, much less amongst men of any credit or conscience; but
Solomon says, he that utters a slander is a fool. But wherein did M. G. deal
with M. A. as the six Booksellers did deal with him? You proceed:

Page 64. of his Book, by leaving out the very word, such (though, I suppose,
through over sight) whereupon the stress of the argument lies; the very word,
such. This is, I confess, a very obseveable thing, that he should not only
leave out the very word, such, but that he should leave it out just as the six
Booksellers did, is such a thing as must not be omitted, though he did it
through a mistake.

1. If M. G. did leave out the very word, such, as the six Booksellers did, if
it were through a mistake, do you think he left it out just as the six
Booksellers did? did they do it through a mistake also?

2. But did he leave out the very word, such, just as the six Booksellers did?
Yea, say you, Consider else.

Here let us consider how the six Book sellers deal with Mr. G. in leaving out
that word, such, in transcribing M. G. words, and how M. G. did with M. A. just
as they did with M. Goodwin.

M. Goodwins words out of the 335. page of his Redemption-Redeemed, speaking
against the assurance of the love of God, to a person outragiously and
desperately wicked and profane, these are his very words,

I verily believe, that in case any such assurance of the unchangeableness of
Gods love were to be found in, or could regularly be deduced from the
Scriptures, it were a just ground to any intelligent and considering man, to
question their authority, and whether they were from God or no. The six Book
sellers to render M. Goodwin an Heretic, transcribed his words out of the same
place, affirming that M. Goodwin said thus:

That in case any assurance of the unchangeableness of Gods love, were to be
found in, or regularly be deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground to
any intelligent man to question their authority, and whether they were from God
or no. Would not a man think that these six Book sellers were all brethren of
the lineage of one of those two false witnesses against Christ, Mar. 14.58. who
affirmed that they heard him say, I will destroy this Temple that is made with
hands, and within three days I will build up another made without hands, which
was neither his saying, nor meaning; his saying was, John 2.19. destroy ye;
they affirm that he said, I will destroy: his saying was, this Temple; they
affirm he said, this Temple made with hands, etc. If these Booksellers should
thus prevaricate with those with whom they trade, about men's estates, as they
have with M. Goodwin in matters relating to his good name, would any wise men
deal with them for three pence: Certain I am, however they may flatter
themselves, and may have pillows under their Elbows; and men (known by the name
of the Prophets of God too) may speak peace to them for their pretended zeal
for the truth of God, and against errors, yet the Holy Scriptures yields no
hopes, much less assurance, of salvation unto such persons, living and dying in
such wilful abuse of men without repentance; and M. Lamb charge this cursed
delinquencie upon M. Goodwin, dealing with M. Allen as these six Booksellers
did with him: But let us examine whether this be so or no. M. Allens words (as
your self has transcribed them) are these:

If one person may be admitted without baptism, why not two? if two, why not
ten? and so an hundred or a thousand, and consequently such Gospel order laid
totally aside, meaning baptism. M. Goodwin dealing with those words by way of
answer, in the 64. page of his VVater-Dipping, etc. transcribes them thus:

If one person should be admitted upon such terms (that is as you explain it,
without baptism) then why not two? if two, why not ten, and so an hundred, or a
thousand; and consequently such Gospel order laid totally aside. What injury
has M. Goodwin done here to M. Allen in the transcribing his words: Has he
dealt with him as the six Booksellers dealt with M. Goodwin: You cry out
against M. G. unmercifull pen, because it vexes with evidence and sharpness of
argument, and aptness of expression; may not he cry out against your pen for a
false and scandalous pen: Is there any one word, syllable, or tittle, or the
least Iota of difference (either by adding unto, or taking from) between M.
Goodwins transcript and M. Allens words so transcribed.

But wherein do you pretend the parallel: Thus, say you.

Mr. Goodwin answers thus; If a hundred, or a thousand, or ten thousands
should be admitted to Church Priviledges upon a manifestation of their faith,
which may be otherways done, and to far better satisfaction then by being
baptized, with an exclusion to all others who are able to give no such account
of a work of faith in them, would this be a total laying aside of Gospel Order?
My Brother Allen says, not that it would be a total laying aside of Gospel
order, but a total laying aside of such Gospel order, which he was speaking of,
namely, the great Ordinance of Baptism, as Mr. Baxter calls it, etc. 1 And
is this all that you can say to justify that loud and filthy charge, cast upon
M. Goodwin, in chaining him with those six Booksellers, namely, because he did
not answer (as you suppose) the strength of M. Allens Argument? will it not
then follow, that whosoever does not answer every word of a book, which the
Author judges to have strength in it, is as vile and unworthy, as he, or they,
that shall falsely and scandalously charge a man with untruths? and if so, must
not you come up to the chain also?

2. M. Goodwin pleads a possbility of evidencing faith, and visibility of
Saint-ship, and so a capacity of a holy fellowship, even in Gospel Order,
though baptism had not been appointed, or that there had been no such
Ordinance: M. Allen on the other hand argues, that upon the admission of any
persons, one, or more, without baptism, you take a course to destroy all such
Gospel Order, that is, as you interpret him, all Gospel Order by way of
baptism? would you have M. Goodwin say, that if there were no baptism, yet
there were a baptism; that if there were no admission by baptism, there were
admission by baptism: his work was, to prove that all Gospel Order would not be
destroyed, though there were no baptism, M. Allen says, all such Gospel Order
would be destroyed, which because M Goodwin denies not, you number him among
the six Booksellers, as if a brother with them in their iniquity.

3. If M. Allen and your self do allow of a Gospel order, though there be not
such a Gospel Order as is by baptism, as you seem to grant: (otherways why do
you thus except against M Goodwin, for charging M. Allen that he denies it?)
then I demand, why do you forsake a Church of Jesus Christ, merely and only
because they want, as you judge, this, or such Gospel order as is by baptism?
ex ore tuo, etc. God will judge you for these things.

He that should have read your book, especially knowing your former respects to
Mr. Goodwin, and his better deserts at your hands, would have thought you had
said enough, and more than enough before, by way of abuse and injury done unto
him, that you needed not thus to thrust out your sting at him in the tail
thereof, charging him with such an open broad-fac'd-falshood; but what shall I
say? Ephraim is joined unto Jdols, let him alone? No, God forbid, I rather
expect to hear him bemoaning himself in dust and ashes for his former
apostacy, and pouring out his soul unto God, saying, turn thou me and I shall
be turned, for thou art the Lord my God, surely after I was turned I repented,
and after I was instructed I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

FINIS.
Reader, if thou take no pleasure in the errors of the times, mend by thy
pen, what the Printer has marred by his press:
Page 1. line ult. for division, read venison: p. 3. l. 2. for rightly read
richly: p. 5. l. 36. for kind r. kine: p. 13. l. ult. for for r. of: p. 19. for
stewed r. slew: p. 22. l. 5 for Cain r. quoin, ibid. l. 20. for anigmatical r.
aenigmatical: p. 41. l. 19. for that thus magnify r. that you thus magnify:
p. 42. for 34. r. 42. ibid. l. 14. for plucits r. placits, ibid. l. 17. for
perficiency r. proficiency, ibid. l. 21. for truth r. tryers: p. 43. for 35. r.
44. p. 45. l. 13. for praepatium r. praeputium: p. 46 for 38. r. 46. ibid. l.
18. for exequation r. exequution, l. 47. for 39. r. 48 ibid. l. 32. for adverse
r. adversaries: p. 48. l. 2. for after r. often: p. 52. l. 37. for parish
person 1. parish parson, p. 60. l. 40. for persons are r. persons who are; p.
61. for equipolent r. equipollent: p. 68. l. 5. for and there durst not, r. and
therefore durst not: p. 71, l2 2. for at least mist of it, r. at the least
motion for it.

Thy charity will stir thee up to correct both these, and what else occurs
thine eyes; and thereby oblige,

Thine in the service of truth and love,

I. P.

These Books following are Printed for (and sold by) Henry Eversden, at the
Greyhound in Pauls-Church-yard.
I Renicum Evangelicum, an Idea of Church Discipline: by I. Rogers. An
Exposition on the whole Book of Canticles, with practical Observations: by I.
Robotham, in quarto. An Exposition on the three first Chapters of the Proverbs,
in quarto, by Mr. Francis Tailor, Minister at Canterbury. The Rich Closet of
Physical Secrets; Or, The Child-Bearers Cabinet: In quarto. Mercy in her
Exaltation: A Sermon, preached at the Funeral of M. Tailor, by M. John
Goodwin: in quarto. Lucas Redivivus; Or, The Gospel-Physician, prescribing (by
way of meditation) Divine Physic, to prevent Diseases not yet entered on the
Soul, and to cure those maladies which have already seized upon the Spirit: By
I. Anthony, late Dr. of Physic. A Comment on Ruth; together with two Sermons,
the one teaching how to live well, the other minding how to dye well: By Tho.
Fuller, Author of the Holy State. The Natural man's case stated; Or, An exact
map of the little world, man, in seventeen Sermons: By Chapter Love. The
Foundation-Doctrine of laying on of hands, vindicated and asserted, against L.
Coll. Hobson: By Tho. Tillam: in quarto. The Male of the Flock: A Sermon
Preached before the Lord Mayor, on Mal. 1. chap. Nov. 14. By Ben Agas. The
mystery of the two VVittnesses unveiled, with a Description of their Persons
and Office, their time and manner of Prophecy, their Acts and Sufferings,
Death and Resurrection: By M. I. Robotham: in octavo. A Vindication of the
Lords Prayer, against all Schismatics and Heretics; in octavo: By J Harwood.
B. D. Gods Glory in man's Happiness; together, with Gods Choice in man's
Diligence; being a Treatise of Election; By M. Francis Tailor; in octavo. The
Christians Diurnall; or, Daily duties to be practiced by every Christian: By
Dr. Morgan: in twelves. Sion and Parnassus; or, Select Poems on the Bible; By
I. Hoddessen, Gent. In octavo. The Anabaptists Meribah; or, Waters of Strife;
being an answer to Mr. Tho. Lambs Book: By M. I Price. in quarto

