The poor man, the Merchant, and the King; OR, The King's brother, his wise
Sentence for the poor Man.
To the Tune of King and poor northern Man.
IT was my chance as I did walk
a history for to read,
Solomon wise, when he reigned King,
did many a worthy deed
Many a Statute be caused ^o be made,
and this was one amongst them all,
It Is treason for a man to find out a man's loss,
and not to restore it to the right owner again.
As it chanced there was a rich Merchant,
as he was riding to the market town;
It was his fortune to lose his purse,
and in it there was an hundred pound.
Proclamation becaus'd to be made
if any man could find it plain,
Restore to him without any doubt.
and they should have twenty pound for their pain.
As it chanced there were a sill^ poor man
with ^wo sheep skins on ^is back to sell,
It was his fortune to fi^d this purse
and he took i^ up and he liked it well.
When he had took it up into his hand
he needs must see what in it he would,
The sum of money he could not u^d^^stand,
because there was n^ught in the purse but gold.
Thou horson villain then said the March^nt
I think it is thou that have found m^ purse,
Why will thou not restore it to me ag^in.
which if thou do not thou shall fare the worse
My liegh q^oth be I found such a pu^se,
and gladly to you I Will make it known,
You may have it again it is never the worse,
pay me for the finding and that is my own.
Let me see what is in it then said the M^rchant
he found an hundred pound and no more,
Thou horson villain thou have paid thy self
for in my purse there was full six score.
But before the King thou shall be brought,
I warrant you when I come before our King,
He w^ll not reward me of with naught
as you your self thought to have done.
As they were leading him toward the King,
and as ^hey were going on the way,
There they did meet with a gallant Knight
and with him was his Lady gay.
With hugging and tugging this silly poor man
his Leather skins they began to crack,
The g^^ding was wanton and leap^d^ss^^,
and cast the fair Lady quite on her b^ck.
The Lady fell down and got a great ^^ones,
no ^o^ in at all the poor man did mean,
The Lady did light upon the ground*
and a ^ub has struck out one of her ^yne.
The Kni^ht would needs upon him have been,
now stay quoth ye Merchan^ and that is a wrong,
I have an ^ction already against him
to go the King and he is sure to hang.
As they were leading him toward the King,
the poor man he liked not of being le^ doub^e
But at a sea clift he had thought to have escaped,
and to have saved both himself and them trouble.
As he was leaping at the Sea clift
thinking no harm at al, Go^ worcester,
He met two fishe^s bound to Sea
and the leap broke one of their necks in the boat.
The other would needs upon him have been,
now stay quot^ the M^rchant that is w^ang,
We have two actions alread^ against him
and to go to the King he is sure to be hanged.
As they were leading him toward the King,
and as they went to the gallery gay,
Here is such a villain then said the Merchant.
as came not before you this many a day.
It was my chance to lose my purse,
and in it was there p unds full six score,
The villain will not give me an hundred again
unless I woold give twenty more.
I have worse and that then said the Knight,
I know not what the villain did me^^,
He caused my golding to fling my Lady
and a s^ub has struck out one of her eyne.
I have worse and that then says the Fisher,
I may sigh and say alas God worcester,
He met with me and my brother was bound to the sea
and the leap broke my brothers neck in the boat.
Solomon wise he turned him about
he was not adv^sed in every thing,
Never such three actions came before me
never since I was crowned King.
Marquis his brother he was there,
I pray you good brother these three you do sea^,
I pray you good brother turn them over to me
and their causes I soon will c^ear.
The second Part to the same Tune.
With all my heart said Solomon the wise.
You may h^ve the judgment of them yet,
He turned them over t^ Marquis his brother,
unto f^iner of them I would have them be quit.
Marquis heard their j^dgements all,
and every one set up his will,
Come hither po^r man, nome hither to me,
and let me hear what thou can say for thy self.
My Leach quoth the poor man, then touching this matter
As I was bound to the market town,
It was my fortune to find this purse
and in it there was an hundred pound.
A proclamation be caused to be made
if any man could find it again,
Restore it to him without any doubt
and they should have twenty pounds for their pains.
Where is thy witness said the Marquis?
I pray you let u^ hear him soon?
Here is the M^rchant's own man,
and carries the message from town to town.
The Merchant's man then he was called,
he swore there was an hundred pound and no more;
And how his Master proffered twenty pound,
to any that would to him his purse restore.
Says Marquis this shall be my judgment straight
yea, and perhaps you will think it strange,
Thou shall follow him in the heels every day,
until thou do find such a bill of Exchange.
And then keep it to thy self and never give't him again
now God forbid then quoth the Merchant,
How should I find a hundred paund of this
that never had a hundred greats to lose.
I had rather give him twenty more,
if so betyde you would let me stay,
Pay down the mon^y then quoth the Marquis,
so may thou quietly go thy way.
Now poor man how hindrest thou this Knight?
thou must needs make him amends I win,
This is against all Laws and Kights,
the Lady lack the one of her eyes.
Have thou not a wife at home with two ey^s plain,
yea my Liege ^n honest poor woman,
And for her living does take great pains,
as any one does in all the town,
This shall be my judgment straight,
yea and perhaps you will think it strange;
The wife with two eyes and the Lady with one
and as thou hall dressed her thou shall exchange.
Now God forbid then quoth the Knight
that ever so bad should be my choice,
I had rather give him an hundred pound,
then to be troubles with his damned wife.
Pay down thy money then quoth the Marquis,
so may thou be going within a while,
The Fisher for fear he should be called,
he was run away half a quarter of a mile;
Was not there a third man then said the Marquis?
I pray let us hear what he can say?
My Liege quoth they he was here even now,
but as fast as he can he is run away.
I pray let him be called b^ck again,
if so betyde he be in the fight;
It Is never be said you came before me,
but every man shall have his right.
Now Fisher what made thee to run away?
my Liege quoth he I had a great way home;
And I thought it was time to pack away,
having spent the most of my coin.
Says this shall be thy judgment straight,
yea and perhaps you will think it strange;
Thou shall set thy beat in the same stead,
and thou shall leap at him by way of Exchange.
So may thou quit thy brothtrs death,
now God forbid then quoth the Fisher;
That ever so bad should be my chance,
I shall either be drowned or it will cause me swound
I had rather give him twenty pounds,
I am sorry my Liege that I came hither:
Pay down thy money then quoth the Marquis,
so may you be packing all fools together.
These three they could not well agree,
but each fell out with one another,
They said they would never come before our King,
as long as he was in company of Marquis's brother.
The poor man he was well content,
and well pleased in every thing;
He said he cared not how often he came
before the Majesty of our King.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Charles Tyus on London Bridge.


