AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST DESPERATION AND PRESUMPTION.

OR, A Consideration of that most Solemn Oath of the Lord God in Ezekiel. XXXIII.
11.

By CHARLES PHELPES.

For the Breach of the Daughter of my People am I broken, I am black;
astonishment has taken hold on me. Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no
Physician there? Why then is not the health of the Daughter of my People
recovered? Jer. 8. 21, 22. Cast away from you all your Transgressions, whereby
ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will
ye die, O House of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him that
dies, says the Lord God: wherefore turn, and live ye; Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.
LONDON, Printed by T. I. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at
the lower end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, 1680.

E. Libris Biblioth. Eccles. Cathedr Petribur^

bookplate

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THere are two very great and most dangerous Rocks in the Sea of this World,
which ought to be most carefully and heedfully avoided and escaped by us, that
we may at last safely arrive at that blessed Haven of Rest; I mean, Heaven and
eternal Happiness: That is to say, Desperation on the one hand, and Presumption
on the other: On one of which the most of the Sons of Men, even in the
Professed Church also, do split their souls; and thereby drown themselves in
endless and everlasting misery and sorrows. And oft-times when they are
convinced of the evil, and would endeavor to secure themselves from the danger
of the one, they fall foul upon, and make shipwreck of their souls upon the
other. Somewhat like unto our Types in former times, who by listening unto the
evil Report of the many discouraging Spies, were first greatly discouraged, and
even Despaired of ever getting to Canaan: And all the Congregation lifted up
their Voice, and cried; and the people wept that night. And all the Children of
Israel murmured against Moses, and against Aaron: And the whole Congregation
said unto them, would God that we had died in the Land of Egypt; or would God
we had died in the Wilderness, etc. Numb. 13. 28-33. and chapter 14. 1-4. But when
they were convinced of that provoking Iniquity of theirs, and confessed they
had sinned by their unbelief; Then, as is related in the same Chapter, they
fell into the other extreme of Presumption: And before the time, and against
the Commandment of the LORD, they presumed to go up unto the hill: By means
whereof, their enemies smote and discomfited them; Numb. 14. 40-45. Deuteronomy. 1.
27-32. with ver. 41-44. Now all these things happened unto them for Types, or
Ensamples, and they are written for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the
World are come; 1 Cor. 10. 10-12. To the end we should not fall, or miscarry,
after the same Example of Unbelief and Disobedience; as, Heb. 4. 11.

And as the Scriptures are excellently useful and powerful in general, to
deliver us from erring in mind or way, on the right hand, or on the left; and
to make us wise to salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus; as Isa. 30. 20,
21. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. So is this Scripture in particular (which is the subject
of the following Treatise; in which is contained the most Solemn Oath of the
Lord God;) an excellent Light and Pilot, to discover unto us, and deliver our
souls from the danger and peril of the two forementioned Rocks: And to cause
us to sail most safely and securely in the middle way: and at last to bring us
into the Bosom, or Bay of Abraham (as Luke 16. 22. with Act. 27. 39.) For,

I. The former part of it is a most powerful Antidote against the mortal and
malign Disease of Desperation; In that the Lord God swears by his life, that
he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, indefinitely considered: Is not
this Balm of Gilead, and this supremely excellent Physician there, most
virtuous and powerful to heal this deadly Distemper? Why then is not the health
of the Daughter of God's people recovered? (as Jer. 8. 21, 22.) If any say,
There are many able, conscientious, and experienced Doctors, who maintain, and
earnestly contend for, such Opinions as are inconsistent herewith, and opposite
hereto: As to say, That the greatest part of Mankind was Reprobated, or past
by, before they were Born: And that God has therefore some secret Pleasure in
their Destruction: That Christ did not taste death, by the Grace of God, for
every Man; but for the fewest of Mankind, for the Elect only: As they speak.
That God does not give that Grace to all, whereby they may be saved; etc. To
this, and all the rest of this nature that can be said, I may give answer, and
say as Elihu did to Job; God, the Almighty God, is greater than Man, then
sorry, sinful Man, Job 33. 12. And, shall any teach God knowledge, seeing he
judges those that are high? Job 21. 22. And besides, where are those Doctors,
who plead for these strange and spurious Notions, that dare swear, as the Lord
God here does, and say; As the Lord lives, these Doctrines are true and sound;
and the Lord God has pleasure in the Death of the greatest part of the wicked?
Surely, how daring and adventurous soever they are in asserting or pleading for
their diverse and strange Doctrines, there are none, that I have heard of, that
are so confident of the verity of them, as most solemnly to swear, They are the
undoubted Truths of God. Or if any should so be, whether is it meet in the
sight of God to hearken unto them, or unto the Lord God of Truth, judge ye? for
without controversy, the witness of God is greater than the witness of any
man, or men whatsoever; 1 John 5. 9, 10, 11.

And indeed, it is a matter of great and weighty moment and concernment unto
men, to know, and heartily believe, the kindness and love of God our Savior to
manward, and to the greatest sinners thereof, whilst it is called to day; and
how unwilling he is with their Destruction; To the end they may be preserved,
or delivered from Desperation: And that both,

1. Because there is in men, at sometimes however, or in some cases, to wit,
when their sins are set in order before them, and judgments are feared, or felt
by them; a too great propensity and readiness to fall thereinto: As is strongly
intimated to us herein: In that when the Lord charges the Prophet to acquaint
his people, That at what instant he should speak concerning a Nation, or
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy: If that
Nation against whom he has pronounced, turn from their evil, he will repent of
the evil that he thought to do unto them. -- Now therefore, says the Lord, Go
to, speak to the men of Judah, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,
Thus says the LORD, behold I frame evil, and devise a device against you:
Return ye now every one from his way, and make your ways and your doings good.
And they said, There is no hope, etc. Jer. 18. 5. 12. Here was nothing
propounded to cause them to make such an evil conclusion, but that which might
rationally have preserved them therefrom: yet we see how presently they cry
out, their case was hopeless. But how much sooner will men do so, when evil
Teachers insinuate into them in their corrupt and discouraging Doctrines, That
God has no cordial desire, or delight, in the salvation of the most of men,
but a secret pleasure in their endless sorrow and calamity! And also,

2. It is highly behoofful for men to be delivered from Desperation; because
when they fall thereinto, they thereby are prepared to become desperately
wicked (as, Jer. 17. 9.) and to rush themselves into any, or all iniquity and
wickedness, as the horse rusheth into the battle; to wit, without fear or
consideration: As they said, There is no hope, but we will walk after our own
devices, and we will every one do the imagination, obstinacy, or stubbornness
of his evil heart; Jer. 18. 12. So again, Thou said, there is no hope, no,
for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go; Jer. 2. 25. When men
heartily entertain despairing thoughts, and confidently believe there is no
mercy for them, they then cast off the fear of God, and all care thereto
relating; and commit all abomination with greediness; as believing they of
necessity must and can but perish in conclusion. O that therefore, those that
are Teachers of others, would take heed and beware of all such pernicious
Doctrines as tend to ingulph the souls of men in the Bottomless Pit. Again,

II. The Latter Part of this most Solemn Oath of the Lord God, is a most proper
and powerful Antidote against that other Mortal or Immortal Disease and
Distemper, to wit, Presumption: In that he therein also swears, that he has
pleasure that the wicked turn from his way, and live. Wherein he plainly gives
us to understand, That though he has no pleasure in the eternal destruction of
the wicked, yet that will be their Portion certainly, and they cannot possibly
live, if they continue in their evil ways, and turn not therefrom; while he is
in abling them thereto by his gracious aid and divine assistance: that so none
may abuse the goodness of God, and say, We shall have peace, though we walk in
the imagination of our hearts, to add Drunkenness to Thirst, etc. Deuteronomy. 29.
18-24. with Heb. 12. 15, 16-29. And the Lord, who is a God of knowledge, has
seen it needful, usually to assure men of his hatred of sin: and of the
necessity of their repenting and turning therefrom unto him, when he is
proclaiming his mercy and grace toward sinners, and his unwillingness with
their perdition; as is largely shown in the following Discourse. To the end
that none might presume of enjoying life, persisting in their sins and
abominations. And he does oftentimes give his people warning, not to hearken to
those Prophets who daubed them up with untempered mortar, and spoke smooth
things, and prophesied deceits unto them; telling them, that they spoke a
Vision of their own heart, not out of the mouth of the Lord; Jer. 14. 13-16.
and chapter 23. 9-16-18. Ezekiel. 13, etc. And the holy Spirit, by the Apostle Peter,
has expressly spoken, that as there were false Prophets among the People (of
the Jews) so there would be false Teachers amongst us (Christians) who would
privily bring in heresies of destruction, denying the Lord that bought them,
and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many would follow their
pernicious ways, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Matthew. 7. 13-15.

To the end then that none of us may be presumptuous, take we heed and beware
of such Doctrines as these are, to wit, That all that Christ died for, shall be
eternally saved. That all that belong to the Election of Grace (as they speak)
shall, when God's time comes, be converted by an irresistible power, will they,
nill they. That once in Christ, and ever in Christ. That all that live and die
in Communion with such or such a Visible Church, shall partake of eternal life
in conclusion; with other strange Doctrines of a like complexion: For they
directly tend to lead men into Presumption.

And because men are very inclinable to flatter themselves in their evil ways,
until their Iniquity be found to be hateful; and are very apt to presume that
God will be merciful to them, though they indulge themselves in their evil
courses: needful therefore it is, that those that have the lip of knowledge,
should so use it, as to speak the things which become sound Doctrine; as Tit.
2. 1, 11-15. And, as the Apostle says to Timothy, preach the Word, be instant
in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort; with all long-suffering and
Doctrine: 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2-4. that so they may be pure from the blood of all men;
as Act. 20. 21-26, 27.

I shall add no more at this present, but refer thee to the ensuing Treatise,
desiring it may be seriously considered by thee; and the Scriptures therein
quoted searched into: And that we may all of us prove all things, and hold fast
what is good; and abstain from every kind of Evil.

I desire to be Thy Servant for Jesus sake, C. P.
March 20. 1678/9.
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST DESPERATION AND PRESVMPTION.
EZEKIEL. xxxiii. Say unto them, As I live, says the LORD GOD, I have no pleasure
in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way, and live.
THese Words in general contain in them a Charge which the LORD GOD gives to
the Prophet to say, or speak to the House of Israel: Wherein let us consider,

1. The Occasion of these Words, or of this Charge given to the Prophet.

2. The Words themselves which he charges, or commands the Prophet to speak.

1. The Occasion of these Words, or of this Charge given to the Prophet: And
that is laid down and declared before, in the foregoing part of this Chapter;
where, first, By way of Parable; and then more plainly and openly the Lord
acquaints the Prophet, That he had set him a Watchman to the House of Israel:
And what his Work and Office was; with the great Danger to himself upon his
neglecting, or being unfaithful in the discharge of ^^at Office: As it is said,
Son of Man, I have set thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel: therefore thou
shall hear the Word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I say to the
wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely die: If thou do not speak to warn the
wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity: but his blood
will I require at thine hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked from his
way, to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his
iniquity: but thou have delivered thy Soul. Verse 1-7-9. Like that also, Chap.
3. 17, 18. whereto is added, Therefore, O thou Son of Man, speak unto the House
of Israel; thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins be upon
us, (namely, in the guilt and punishment of them; as Number. 15. 30, 31. Ezekiel. 18.
20. (If there be no forgiveness of them, or deliverance from them;) and we pine
away in them, how then should we live? (How should we be justified from them,
enjoy Gods Favor, or be made Partakers of Eternal Life?)

In which words, especially as compared with Verse 11. is signified to us; That
there are in men, especially when God is reproving, threatening, and judging
them, evil and hard thoughts of God, as if he had some secret Will or Pleasure
in their eternal ruin and destruction: The heart (of Man) is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked; Jer. 17. 9. From within, out of the heart
of men, proceed evil thoughts, wickedness, blasphemies, etc. Matthew. 15. 19, 20.
Mark 7. 20-23. They are then ready to conclude against themselves, that their
case is desperate, and that there is no hope for them: Jer. 2. 25. and 18. 11,
12. They are then ready to say with Cain, Our iniquities are greater than can
be forgiven: Genesis 4. 13. That God has no love toward them: Or, that there is
no forgiveness with him that he may be feared, and returned to by them: that he
has no hands: That he has so tied up himself by his Decree, that he cannot
help, save, deliver, or redeem them from that miserable condition they have
brought themselves into: Isa. 45. 9. and 50. 1-4. This is the fruit and product
of Sin, that it makes Sinners afraid of God, and even despair of his Mercy and
Goodness. Thus it was with our first Father Adam, when he had sinned, and eaten
of the Tree whereof God had commanded him he should not eat; he then said unto
God when he called him, I heard thy Voice in the Garden, and was afraid because
I was naked, and I hid my self; Genesis 3. 8-11. Yea through infirmity, good men
by listening to their own hearts, have questioned Gods love toward them, when
they have been under the afflicting hand of God. Thus it was with Asaph, Will
the Lord cast off for ever? says he, and will he be favorable no more? Is his
mercy clean gone for ever? Does his promise fail for evermore? Has God
forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? And I
said, this is mine Infirmity, etc. Psalm. 77. and Psalm. 13, etc.

1. Needful therefore it is for us to hate thoughts, our own evil and naughty
thoughts, and to love Gods Law and Doctrine: so shall we have great peace, and
nothing shall offend us: Psalm. 119. 113. with Verse 165. To wash our hearts
from wickedness, that we may be saved; and not to suffer vain thoughts to lodge
within us: for Gods thoughts are not our thoughts, nor our ways his ways: But
as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his ways higher than our ways;
and his thoughts than our thoughts: Jer. 4. 14. with Isa. 55. ver. 9. He that
trusts in his own heart is a fool: Prove. 28. 26.

2. Seeing also when God is denouncing Judgments against, or executing
Judgments upon evil Doers, they are ready to despond, and to conclude, God
delights in their Ruin and Misery: Therefore it appears that they do a very
bad work, and are very injurious to the Souls of Men, who strengthen them in
such evil and despairing thoughts: as they do, who say, The most of men were
reprobated before they were born; And that there is no possibility of their
escaping the vengeance of Eternal Fire. These discourage the hearts of men, and
hinder them from returning unto God from their Iniquity, (as Number. 13. 32. with
Deuteronomy. 1. 28.) Truly men need not be strengthened by the evil Doctrines of
others, in such hard Conceptions and wicked Imaginations of God: for their
thoughts are an abomination to the LORD: Prove. 15. 26. When God intimates, That
the end of his framing Evil, and devising a Device against them, was, not their
Ruin and Destruction, but, that they should return every one from his evil
way, and make their ways and doings good. Yet then they said, There is no hope,
but we will walk after our own devices, etc. Jer. 18. 7, 8. 11, 12. How much
rather would they so conclude, when they are strengthened in their evil
Imaginations of God, by such Doctrines as are too too rife among us, in which
men insinuate, that there is no hope for the greatest part of Mankind: 2 Pet.
2. 1. But we shall here add no more unto the Occasion of these Words we have
propounded to speak unto. But

2. We have the Words themselves to mind and consider: In which we may take
notice in general, How the Lord, by this Prophet, does Answer them; and,
contrary to their wrong and evil thoughts and sayings, gives a gracious
Discovery of himself unto them: And therein he does not simply speak good and
gracious words to them; But in and by them makes known the Graciousness of his
Heart unto them, And that he has no pleasure in their Destruction, but that
they turn from their wicked ways and doings; Jer. 18. 1-11. When none can stand
before his indignation, none is able to abide in the fierceness of his wrath;
his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him. Yet the
LORD is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he kneweth them that
trust in him: Nah. 1. 2-7. Joel 2. 1-11-13. Rev. 3. 16-19, 20.

But we shall desire to look a little particularly into the Words themselves:
wherein we hvae to consider,

1. The Person that says these Words, and charge the Prophet to acquaint
Israel herewith: [saith the LORD GOD.]

2. The Confirmation of what he says by an Oath, [As I live.]

3. The Subject Matter thus spoken and confirmed by this most excellent Person:
And that is laid down and propounded,

1. Negatively, [I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked.]

2. Affirmatively and Positively: [But that the wicked turn from his way and
live.]

1. The Person that says these words, and who Commands and Charges the Prophet
to Acquaint Israel herewith; And that is, The Lord, [Say, says the LORD GOD.]

Now as these Words contain in them a Charge given to the Prophet thus to
speak; so it shows unto us, That the Holy Prophets in former times, spoke not,
nor came in their own Name, or with their own Words; but in the Lords Name, and
with his Words: He does not Command the Prophets to say, Thus says Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel: No, but thus says the Lord God of the holy
Prophets: Rev. 22. 6. The Prophets have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord:
Jam. 5. 10. And they have spoken to us the Word of God: Hebr. 13. 7. These holy
men spoke not by the will of man, but they spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost: 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. And so the holy Apostles have delivered to us that
which also they received of the Lord: And that, not in the words which man's
wisdom teaches, bu which the Holy Ghost taught: 1 Cor. 15. 1-3. with Chap. 11.
23. and Chapter 2. 12, 13. And the things which they wrote unto us, they are the
Commandments of the Lord: 1 Cor. 14. 36, 37. Thus the Apostle John was
commanded to write to the Seven Churches in Asia; These things says, not John,
but, the Lord Jesus Christ, in those several Descriptions he there gives of
himself; as may be seen in Rev. 2. 1, 8, 12, 18. and Chapter 3. 1, 7, 14. And as
the Consideration of the Infinite Excellency of the Person that thus charge
the Prophet to say, might encourage him against all his Discouragements to
speak what he was Commanded by him to speak, and to walk in the strength of the
LORD GOD; as Psalm. 71. 16. As it is said, The LORD GOD has spoken, who can but
Prophecy? Amos. 3. 7, 8. So also it is powerful to engage us, to give most
earnest heed unto, and to believe the Words of the holy Prophets and Apostles,
because they are the Words of the Lord God: And to receive them, not as the
words of man, but as they are in truth, the word of God. And in so doing, they
will work effectually in us: 1 These. 2. 13. Ezekiel. 6. 3. Mica 6. 1.

But we may speak a little more particularly to the Person that Commands and
Charges the Prophet thus to say in his Name and Words, unto the House of Israel.

1. It is the LORD GOD that speaks so graciously concerning sinful and wicked
Ones: to wit, He who is the Creator and Former of all things; And who has
made all Nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth; and has
determined before the times appointed, and the bounds of their habitations,
that they should seek him: Genesis 2. 4, 7, 18, 21, 22. with Acts 17. 26, 28. He
who made all things at the first, and made all things very good: And who made
man in his own Image, after his own likeness. And who intended not our
destruction and ruin, but our good and welfare: He it is who thus speaks to
sinful and unworthy Ones: He has a desire to the Works of his own hands: Job.
14. 15. Psalm. 138. 8. It is he that has made us, and not we our selves: --
Enter into his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise; be
thankful unto him, and bless his Name. For the LORD is good, his mercy is
everlasting, etc. Psalm. 100. Rev. 4. 11.

2. It is the LORD GOD, who when we had sinned against him, and treacherously
departed from him, and were become enemies to him, yet did not turn an enemy to
us; but was still merciful and gracious toward vain sinful Mankind, even to
Admiration; as the Psalmist intimates, saying, LORD! what is man, that thou
take knowledge of him? the Son of man, that thou make account of him? Man
is like to vanity: Psalm. 144. 3, 4. and and 8. 4-6. with Heb. 2. 6-9. And who,
in the greatest of his love and pity, promised from the beginning, That the
Seed of the Woman should break the Head of the Serpent: Genesis 3. 14, 15. And
therein, and thereby vertually, the LORD GOD laid for a foundation (of Faith
and Hope for Mankind) a Stone, an elect, precious Cornerstone, a sure
Foundation: Isa. 28. 16. and 50. 2-5. He is the Lord, he changes not,
therefore we are not consumed: Matthew. 3. 6. with Lam. 3. 22. And who in the
fullness of the time, performed that Promise which he formerly made, in raising
up a Savior, the Savior of the world. This is he that Commands his Prophet
thus to speak unto the House of Israel. To which we may speak more afterward.

3. It is One who is abundant in truth, that charges his Prophet to speak these
gracious words; He is a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is
he: Exodus 34. 6. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. He is the Lord God of truth: Psalm. 31. 5. Whose
mouth speaks truth, and wickedness is the abomination of his Lips: All the
words of his mouth are in righteousness, there is nothing froward or perverse
in them; as Prove. 8. 4-6-8. Who has written to us excellent things in counsels
and knowledge; that he might make us know the certainty of the words of truth,
etc. Prove. 22, 20-21. We ought therefore to bow down our Ears, and hear the
Words of this most Excellent One; and firmly, and with all our hearts to
believe them: Prove. 22. 17-20. For he is not a man that he should lie: God
forbid; yea, let God be true, but every man a liar: As it is written, That thou
may be justified in thy sayings, etc. Romans 3. 3-5.

4. It is the holy LORD GOD, who gives this Command to his Prophet: As they
say, Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6. 20. He is not a
God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with him: The
foolish shall not stand in his sight: He hates (as with a respect to a love of
delight) all the workers of iniquity: Psalm. 5. 4-6. He is one that is a perfect
hater of Sin; One that loves righteousness, and hates iniquity; as Heb. 1. 8,
9. One who is Holiness it self: And though he be merciful and gracious, and
abundant in goodness, -- yet he will by no means clear the guilty: Exodus 34. 6,
7. Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy One? Says the
Prophet: -- Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity, etc. Hab. 1. 12, 13. Sin is the abominable thing which he hates: Jer.
44. 4. And therefore whatever he here speaks, or charges his Prophet to say in
his Name concerning his Graciousness toward Sinners, he speaks not at all in
favor to their sins, or to encourage them to go on and continue therein; as
afterward may be shown more largely; but in love and pity to the Souls of poor
Sinners, that they might turn from their Iniquity, that it might not be their
Ruin.

This is the Person who commands his Prophet thus to say unto the House of
Israel.

2. We have nextly to consider, the assured Confirmation he gives of the truth
of what he says, and which he assures and confirms by his Oath, [(As) I live:]
For these words are an Oath, and so often used; as the Lord says elsewhere: But
as truly [as I live] they shall not see the Land which I swear unto their
Fathers, etc. And again, Say unto them, as truly [as I live] says the LORD, as
ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do unto you, etc. Which is thus expressed
elsewhere: So I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my Rest.
Compare Number. 14. 21-23. 27, 28. with Psalm. 95. 10, 11. and Heb. 3. 10. 18. He
lifts up his hand to Heaven, and says, I live for ever; Deuteronomy. 32. 40. And thus
also men in former times did swear. As it is said, Saul swear, as the LORD
lives he shall not be slain; 1 Samuel 19. 6. And, Thou shall swear, the LORD
lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, etc. Jer. 4. 2. And in
many other places; so here we are to understand it: The Lord God assures us of
the truth of his saying, and confirms it by his Oath: Say unto them [I live]
says the LORD GOD.... Now in this Oath let us diligently mind,

1. The Oath it self. 2. The Reason and end of it.
1. The Oath it self, [I live] says the LORD GOD. He here swears to the truth
of what he says, By his life, that is to say, By himself: For so this Oath is
explicated to us: Hence whereas it is said in one place [I live] says the
Lord; It is in another thus rendered; I have sworn by [my self:] Compare Romans
14. 11. with Isa. 45. 23. So here we may understand it, because he could not
swear by a Greater, he swear by Himself, by his Life: Heb. 6. 13. As he has
Life in and of himself, and lives for ever. And here, that which he swears by,
is without Controversy, or confessedly true; and unquestionable with all but
gross Atheists: For he is the living God, and an everlasting King: Jer. 10. 10.
Indeed sometimes he swears by that which he does, or may abhor; as it is said
in one place, The LORD has sworn by the excellency of Jacob. Whereas in
another place it is said; Thus says the LORD, the God of Hosts, I abhor the
excellency of Jacob, and hate his Palaces, etc. Compare Amos 8. 7. with Chap.
6. 8. Nah. 2. 2. And when he so swears, it might be questioned by some, whether
he, in such an Oath, swears as he thinks; because he swears by that which he
says, he abhors and hates. Sometimes he swears by his right hand: As it is
said, The LORD has sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength:
Isa. 62. 8. But that may not sometimes, or in some Cases, be exerted, but cease
from acting, as it were: As the Psalmist intimates, saying, Why with-drawest
thou thine hand, even thy Right hand? pluck it out of thy Bosom: Psalm. 74. 11.
And so his Arm, the Arm of his Strength, may be sometimes, as it were, asleep,
and feeble there-through: As it is intimated, when it is said; Awake, awake,
put on strength, O Arm of the LORD, awake as in the ancient days in the
generations of old, etc. Isa. 51. 9. And when he swears by this Oath, it might
be supposed what he swears to, is not duly regarded, while his Right hand is in
his Bosom, and the Arm of his Strength asleep, and laid to rest. Sometimes he
swears by his Name: As it is said, Behold, I have sworn by my Great Name, says
the LORD: Jer. 44. 26. But of that many are too too ignorant: Who has known
his Name, or his Sons Name? Prove. 30. 4. Psalm 9. 10. And therefore when he so
swears, many might be ready to say, Alas, why should we set our hearts hereto,
or give credit unto what he swears by his Name? for we do not know what his
Name is, or what it means. Sometimes he swears by his Holiness: As it is
written, The LORD GOD has sworn by his Holiness, etc, Amos 4. 2. But such may
be his Providence, as that sometimes his holy Ones have been put to a stand,
how to reconcile his Providential Government with his Holiness: (Though yet,
without all peradventure, he is infinitely Holy; yea Holiness it self: Compare
Amos 4. 2. with Chap. 6. 8.) Thus the Prophet intimates, in his expostulation
with God, saying, Art not thou from everlasting, O Lord, my God, mine holy One?
-- Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity.
Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and hold thy
tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he: And
make men as the fishes of the Sea, as the creeping things that have no Ruler
over them? etc. Hab. 1. 12, 13, 14-17. and Chapter 2. 1-4. Thus also the Psalmist,
relates Gods Oath in this manner; Once have I sworn by my Holiness, if I lie
unto David: his Seed shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before
me. -- But thou have cast off, and abhorred: thou have been wroth with thine
Anointed. Thou have made void the Covenant of thy Servant: thou have profaned
his Crown, by casting it to the ground, etc. Psalm. 89. 34-39, etc. But now here
he swears by a most unquestionable, and undubitable Oath; he swears by himself,
by his life, which is from everlasting to everlasting: As it is said, The Angel
lifted up his hand to Heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever,
who created Heaven, and the things that therein are; etc. Rev. 10. 5, 6. he
swears by his Being, by his Eternal Power and Godhead, which he has manifested
unto all men by the Works of his Creation and Providence: as Romans 1. 20. Let
this be seriously considered by us.

2. Mind we also, the Reason and End of his Oath; and that is,

1. On his Part: For the Confirmation of the Truth of what he says, and swears
to: and so it is called by the Apostle, An Oath of Confirmation: Heb. 6. 16. to
ascertain the Truth of what is so assured and confirmed. So also the Covenant
which God made with Abraham, to wit, That in his Seed all the Families of the
earth should be blessed: And at the making whereof, he swear by himself, is
said, to be confirmed of God in Christ: Gal. 3. 15-17. and Act. 3. 25. with
Genesis 22. 16-18. As also, God is said to swear by himself, to evidence unto
others the unchangeableness of his purpose: As the Apostle says, God willing
to show more abundantly -- the immutability of his Counsel, interposed himself
by an Oath; which is also immediately called, An immutable thing: Heb. 6. 17,
18. So here we may say, The LORD swear, and will not repent: as, Ps. 110. 4. He
has herein sworn in truth, and will not turn from it: as, Psalm. 132. 11. To
assure us of the Immutability of his Counsel, he therefore swear by his life:
And we may therefore know and be confident, that his Thoughts and Pleasure are
the same toward wicked Ones now, as then they were: For he is Jehovah, he
changes not: with him is no variableness, nor shadow of turning: Mat. 3. 6.
Jam. 1. 17. He is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: Heb. 13. 8.

2. The Lord God also swears by himself, for the Confirmation of his Word, and
to show the Immutability of his Counsel, on our part; or as with respect to us;
because we are so slow to believe him on his Word: As he says concerning his
people in former times, How long will it be ere they believe me? Number. 14. 11.
So it may be extended more generally; we are too ready and apt to doubt of, or
be unbelieving concerning what he speaks unto us; and therefore, because of our
backwardness and unaptness to believe, he confirms his Saying with his Oath.
Our Savior says to his Disciples, Let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; for
whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil: or, is from, or, out of evil.
Not that he hereby condemns all swearing; but instructs his Disciples, that
Oaths, though in some Cases useful and needful, are yet out of evil: And so
amongst other things, men's unbelief, or doubting of the truth of what is
affirmed by a bare Word, occasions an Oath for the Confirmation of it. So,
warily understanding it, we may say, as with respect to Gods swearing; it is at
sometimes out of, or, from evil: Matthew. 5. 37. And so here particularly; The
House of Israel being convinced of their evil, and Judgment being threatened
against them therefore, thus they spoke, saying, If our transgressions and our
sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how then should we live? Ezekiel. 33.
10. They were ready to despond and despair of Gods mercy toward them: Now then
God thus swears unto them, because of their slowness of heart, to believe him
on his Word. Thus also it is said, An Oath of Confirmation is an end of all
strife, gainsaying, or contradiction: Heb. 6. 16. So here, God, because of
their readiness to contradict and gainsay, in their hearts at least, swears by
himself: As also to the end they might not gainsay any more, but firmly
believe the truth of that so Affirmed and Confirmed, he interposeth himself by
an Oath, Exodus 17. 15, 16. And that he might lift up their hands which hanged
down, and they might have strong Consolation, in returning to him from their
evil and wicked ways. And as God interposed himself by an Oath to Abraham, to
the end, that the Heirs of his Promise might, by this Immutable thing also,
assuredly know and believe the truth of that so confirmed; and might have
strong consolation; Heb. 6. 16-18. So here also, God has sworn by himself,
that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked: That men might give glory
to him in believing, and have solid Consolation in this great Encouragement set
before them; to the truth whereof he has as it were bound himself, or, his
soul, with the Bond of this most Indubitable Oath: as (Number. 30. 2-4. Acts 23.
12-14.)

3. We have in the next place to consider, and speak unto, the subject matter
thus Affirmed and Confirmed, by this most excellent Person: And by this
undeniable Oath: And that is laid down and propounded to us,

1. Negatively, [I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked.]

Now hereto we may speak in this Order; to wit,

1. By way of Explication, or explaining the words. 2. We shall give some
further Evidences of the Truth hereof. 3. We shall note some Instructions
here-from.
1. By way of Explication, let us enquire into, and consider these things:

1. What [Death] is that here spoken of and intended? 2. Who are [the wicked]
in the Scripture account? 3. What are we to understand by this Phrase, [no
pleasure?] 4. What time is that in which he has no Pleasure? [I have.]
1. What is [the Death] here spoken of and intended, when he says, I have no
Pleasure in [the Death] of the wicked, etc.

Now in Answer thereto, we may say, The Scripture speaks only of two Deaths in
General; As, the Wages of Sin: In one of which all lesser Deaths are contained
and comprehended: namely,

1. There is that Death which is intimately called, the first Death; which was
threatened unto the First Man, Adam, Male and Female, in case they should eat of
the forbidden Fruit: As it is said, Of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, in
dying thou shall die: Genesis 2. 17. And under the Sentence whereof, Adam and all
his Posterity fell; upon his eating of that Tree, whereof God commanded him he
should not eat: As the Apostle says, By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, and so death passed upon all men; for that, or, in whom, all have
sinned: Romans 5. 12. By Man, (even by the first public man, came Death; for in
Adam all die: 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. And this First Death had been an Eternal
Death, had not our Lord Jesus Christ, by the Grace of God, tasted it for every
man, and overcome and abolished it: 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. And he will in due time
destroy it: 1 Cor. 15. 26. It is a strange, unreasonable, and dangerous mistake
of some, who say, that Christ died not for this first Oflence, or the necessary
Branches thereof: or that he tasted not this first Death for men: For if so,
how then came he to be promised of God, before he passed the Sentence upon our
First Parents? Genesis 3. 15-19. Or how shall men be Raised out of this First
Death, but by him who was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our
Justification? By Man came the Resurrection of the Dead: for as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. To wit, Quickened and Raised out
of the First Death: 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. God has given Christ authority to
execute judgment: And by his Voice to Bring forth all Men out of their Graves,
Because he is the Son of Man: John 5. 27, 28, 29.

2. There is another and worse Death, which is several times called expressly,
The second Death: To wit, as with respect to Men; into which such will be cast
for their own personal transgressions, after they are raised out of the first
Death, and judged by Christ; who remained in their Impenitency, Unbelief, and
Disobedience, till the Day of Grace and Patience was ended, and died therein:
Mark 16. 16. 2 These. 1. 8, 9. This Death was not prepared for Men, for, or by
reason of their sinning in the first Public Man simply; but for the Devil and
his Angels: But they must go into it, and be hurt by it, who personally and
voluntarily listened to, and were led by Satan, and followed after him, and did
his Lusts, and died the first Death in such transgression: Mat. 25. 31-41-46.
Of which second Death they shall not be hurt, who overcome their spiritual
enemies: On such the second Death shall have no power: Rev. 2. 11. and Chap.
20. 6. But whosoever shall not be found written in the book of life, will be
cast into the lake of fire, which is the second death: Rev. 20. 14, 15. The
fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers,
and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: Rev 21. 7, 8.
This second Death is called, the wrath to come; because it will fully seize on
none, until they be brought out of the first Death, and judged by him who died
for all, and rose again; and whom God has ordained the Judge of quick and
dead: Mat. 3. 7. 1 These. 1. 10. Rev. 11. 18.

There are some indeed, and too many, that talk of a third Death, but in so
doing, they speak not according to the Word contained in the Law and Testimony
of God: And therefore therein, there is no light in them. And that in speaking
of a third Death, as the wages of sin, they consent not to wholesome words, may
easily appear to themselves who use this groundless Distinction: for some of
them, to prove that there is such a third Death, do, weakly enough, bring the
Scriptures which speak of the second, for the proof thereof. But it is a very
evil and dangerous thing, to make such a Distinction, where the Scripture makes
none, but plainly enough opposes and rejects it, and may do more harm than they
are aware of, who make use of it; rather, I conceive, out of ignorance and
custom, than judgment and consideration. It is good for us to hear what the
Scripture faith, and to receive that. But no more to this at present.

But now the Enquiry is, Of which of the two Deaths forementioned, are we here
to understand these words to mean? And to that we say, not of the first, which
is now abolished.

1. Because it is Gods Will and Appointment that all men should die the first
Death; (Though not that all should sleep, or abide in it: 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52.)
It is appointed to men once to die: Heb. 9. 27. I know, says Job, Thou will
bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living: To wit, the
Grave, which is called Man's long home: Job 30. 23. with Eccles. 12. 5. What man
is he that lives, and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul from the
hand of the grave? Selah. Psalm. 89. 48. with Eccles. 7. 2. and Chap. 8. 8.

2. Because the Death here spoken of, is called, [the Death of the wicked;] as
being their proper and only Death: Ezekiel. 18. 23. And therefore it appears,
hereby is meant directly and fully, the second Death, or Hellfire. For the
wicked (so abiding) shall be turned into Hell: Psalm. 9. 17. whereas in the
first Death there is no difference, but all die that, good and bad, wise, and
unwise: How dies the wise man? as the fool: Eccles. 2. 16. There is one event
to the righteous, and to the wicked, to the good, and to the clean, and to the
unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not. As is the
good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears an oath:
Eccles. 9. 1, 2-10. The most holy and righteous men generally have died this
first Death; And some of them have said, They were going the way of all the
earth: meaning thereby; they were going to die the first Death: Josh. 23. 14. 1
Kin. 2. 2. But none of them shall be hurt of the second Death: Rev. 2. 11.

3. It also plainly appears, that by the Death here spoken of, we are to
understand the second Death, directly and fully; because this Death may, while
it is called to Day, be escaped and avoided: as it is here signified in saying,
[I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way, and live.] Men may now in this day of his Grace and Patience, flee
from, and be delivered from, the wrath to come: Matthew. 3. 7. 1 These. 10. But
now, no man can by any turning from evil, or exercising himself unto, and
following after Godliness and Goodness, escape, or be delivered from the first
Death: As has been said, No man has power over the Spirit to retain the
Spirit, neither has he power in the day of death; and there is no discharge in
that war: Eccles. 8. 8. By all which it does plainly and fully appear, the
Death here spoken of and intended, is directly, and most properly and fully,
the second Death; as has been said before.

Object. If any one should object against what has been said, and say, That
though by the Death here spoken of; the first Death, as it was appointed to
fallen Man after the Promise of Christ by God, cannot be meant; yet it may mean
it of that Death, as it is judicially executed upon some for their voluntary
and personal Iniquities and Transgressions; for so it was not appointed to all
men to die it. To this I say,

Ans. 1. By way of Grant; God did not at first appoint that Men in a Personal
Consideration, or as fallen in Adam: or because of their sins of weakness and
unadvisedness simply, should die this first Death judicially. But,

2. When Men are become wicked, and have sinned with an high hand against God,
he may, notwithstanding their turning from their evils, order the first Death
to them judicially; and they may not die the common Death of all men, or not
die it, as commonly and ordinarily men die it: But in testimony of wrath for
their former personal evils, it may be executed upon them; Number. 14. 28, 29.
Isa. 22. 12-14. And sometimes for the evils of others; As upon the little Ones
in the old World: And of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. So that still, I say, By the
Death here spoken of, is meant directly and fully, the second Death. And so we
are to understand it, That God has no pleasure in the Death, that is, in the
Eternal Destruction of the wicked: Or that they should perish in that
Everlasting Fire which was prepared for the Devil and his Angels, who sinned
without a Tempter. But we shall add no more to that.

2. Who are [the wicked] in the Scripture account, in whose Death the Lord God
has no pleasure?

Answ. To that we may say; Those who are called Wicked, in Scripture, are not
such simply, as have sinned in the first Public Man, and come forth into the
World polluted and defiled, as all do who partake of the Nature of Man by an
ordinary way of Generation? For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
not one: Job. 14. 4. and 25. 4. Psalm. 51. 5. Nor are they such as have sin in
them simply; as all while here, have: Romans 7. 17. 20. 1 John 1. 8. Or that sin
through infirmity and weakness, or through unadvisedness; as all do: For there
is not a just man upon the earth that does good, and sins not: 1 Kin. 8. 46.
Eccles. 8. 20. And yet all are not therefore wicked. Good men who have
acknowledged themselves to have sinned, have yet truly acquitted themselves of
being wicked: As Job thus acknowledges, I have sinned, etc. Job 7. 20. And yet
he appealeth to God, and says, Thou know (or, it is upon thy knowledge)
that I am not wicked: Job 7. 20. And God himself says of him, That he was a
perfect and an upright man, one that feared God and eschewed evil: Job 1. 1-8.
and Chap. 2, 3. And in affirming him to be a Perfect Man, he denies him to be
Wicked; for perfect and wicked are contrary, and opposed the One to the Other:
Job 9. 22. So certainly David was guilty of many evils, and says, Mine
iniquities are more than the hairs of my head: And prays to the Lord, not to
remember against him the sins of his youth, or his transgressions, etc. Psalm.
25. 7. and 32. 4. 5. and 40. 12. And yet elsewhere he says, I have kept the
ways of the LORD, and have not [wickedly] departed from my God: Psalm. 18. 21.
But, as is usual in Scripture, the wicked are such as are opposed to the
righteous: And who they are we may a little more particularly show in what
follows: That is to say,

1. They are wicked men in Scripture account, who hate the light, which comes
to discover and reprove their evil deeds, and to save them there from; and
rebel against the light: as Joh. 3. 19, 20. with Job. 24. 6-13-17. Such as say
unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: What is
the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we
pray unto him? Job 21. 7-15. and 22. 15-17. They are such as are Servants of
Corruption, and led captive by Satan; and who stop their Ears, and harden their
hearts from Gods fear: they are like to the deaf Adder which stops her ears,
which will not hearken to the voice of Charmers, charm they never so wisely:
Psalm. 58. 3-5. They are such as hate instruction, (or, to be reformed) and cast
Gods words behind their backs: Psalm. 50. 16, 17. who will not seek after God,
or the knowledge of him; and whose ways are always grievous: Psalm. 10 2-5. Such
as contemn God, and harden their faces against him, and the fear of him: Psalm.
10. 13. with Prove. 21. 29. And hate and persecute his People, who desire to
fear his Name: Psalm. 10. 2, 3. Mat. 4. 1-3. In short, the whole World lies in
wickedness; or, in the wicked One: even all such as are not taught and led of
God: 2 These. 3. 3. with 1 John 5. 19. And indeed the word here translated,
wicked, signifies unquiet, restless, turbulent sinners; such as are like the
raging waves of the Sea, foming out their own shame, and know no quietness in
their belly. As it is said, The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast out mire and dirt: There is no peace, says my
God, to the wicked: Jude 13. and Job 20. 12-20. with Isa. 57. 20, 21. And there
are such manner of persons, not only without the Pale of the Church, but even
amongst Gods professed People: there are too many Sinners and Hypocrites in
Zion: Isa. 33. 14. As the Lord says, Among my people are found wicked men;
yea, and such as over-pass the deeds of the wicked among the Heathen: Jer. 5.
23-26-29. they may be wicked ones, that come and go from the place of the holy:
Eccl. 8. 10. As here also appears in this Prophecy of Ezekiel in many places,
and in this Chapter; a part whereof we are considering: as is signified in what
the Lord says to the Prophet, to wit, Son of Man, I have set thee a Watchman
unto the house of Israel: therefore thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and
warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely
die, if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man
shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand, etc.
Ezekiel. 33. 7, 8, 9. 14, 15, 16-19.

2. By [the wicked] also we may understand, such persons as have once received
the Grace of God to purpose, and turned unto him from their sins and Idols, to
serve the living and true God: And yet have afterward treacherously departed
from him; as a Wife treacherously departs from her Husband, and played the
Harlot with other Lovers, after they have known God, or rather been known of
him. These are also called wicked in Scripture; and are so in an higher degree,
than such as have always abidden Servants of sin, and so in the state and
fellowship, and ways of the World. So it is said of some who are called wicked,
They have left off to be wise, and to do good: Psalm. 36. 1-3. Thus the Lord
says, Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall
reprove thee: Know therefore and see, that it is an evil and bitter thing that
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the
Lord God of Hosts. -- Yet I had planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed;
how then art thou turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto me?
Jer. 2. 2, 3-13-19-21. Hos. 9. 15. So that incestuous Believer that turned to
unheard of Fornication, in having his Fathers Wife, is called, that wicked
person: 1 Cor. 5. 1-5-11-13. To which I shall not further enlarge.

Now concerning such wicked Ones, in both the forenamed Considerations, he
here says and swears, He has no pleasure in the death of them. And it is
observable, that it is not here said; He has no pleasure in the Death of you
wicked Ones; or, of some wicked Ones; or* of such wicked Ones as are Elect, or
belong to the Election of Grace: For indeed, there are no wicked ones of the
Elect, while they abide wicked; but the Elect of God are holy and beloved: Col.
3. 12. And such as unto whom there is no condemnation from God, as there is
unto all wicked Ones: Romans 8. 33, 34. with verse 1. Prove. 17. 15. And it is
therefore a very erroneous and dangerous mistake, to suppose that any wicked,
while they are such, are elected of God to Salvation. But here the Lord swears,
he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked; indefinitely considered: And as
is usually said, Indefinite Expressions are equivalent to general or universal
ones; and so he has no pleasure in the Death of any wicked ones. And though
the Lord commands and charges the Prophet to speak these words, unto the house
of Israel; yet not only of the house of Israel: for then, of what use would
they be unto the sinners of the Gentiles? When the Apostle Paul writes to
Timothy, That God will have all men to be saved. Though that be written to one
man, yet it is matter of concernment unto all, and written for the good of all,
in their respective Ages and Generations: 1 Timothy 2. 4-7. When Peter says to
the dispersed Believers, The Lord is willing that all should come to
repentance: He intends not these words concerning them only, but more largely
and extensively, without all peradventure, 2 Pet. 3. 9. And the like may be
said here: Though the Lord commanded the Prophet to say these words unto the
house of Israel, yet they are written for the sake of others also: The Lord
has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, indefinitely considered; not in
the death of any wicked Ones: for he is one with whom is no respect of persons.
And indeed, if he had any pleasure in the death of any wicked ones, it might
reasonably be conceived and concluded, That he has pleasure in the death of
the wicked in his Church; Because their wickedness is greater, and more
inexcusable than that of others: Because they have more excellent and choice
Advantages, Means, and gracious Assistances, than others have, to wash their
hearts and feet from wickedness, that they may be saved. And therefore if they
continue sinners, or treacherously depart from him, he is more highly
displeased with them, and severe toward them: As it is said, You only have I
known of all the families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for all
your iniquities: Amos 3. 2. Though indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish, will be upon every Soul of man that does evil, yet it will be upon the
Jew first, because he has much more advantage than the Gentile to be, and do
better: And to whom much is given, of them will much be required: Romans 2. 8-11.
and Chap. 3. 1, 2. Luke 12. 47, 48. When in the times of ignorance God winks;
his eyes are upon all their ways, (who have choice means of knowledge
vouchsafed to them) they are not hid from his face, neither is their iniquity
hid from his eyes: And first he will recompense their iniquity, and their sin
double, because they have defiled his land, etc. Acts 17. 30. with Jer. 16.
16-18. So that these words being directly spoken unto, though not confined unto
the house of Israel; do more powerfully ascertain, that he has no pleasure in
the death of any other: And are, as it were, a powerful Argument to evince the
truth thereof. He who has no pleasure in the everlasting Ruin and Destruction
of such as sin against the clearest Light, greatest Grace, and choicest
Advantages; to be sure he has none in their eternal Perdition, who have not
such Means and Advantages for knowing and serving him: Matthew. 11. 20-24. If he
be so compassionate toward the greatest Transgressors, and be altogether
unwilling that they should die; how can we suppose but that he is loath and
unwilling they should perish, who are not such heinous Offenders? even as the
Apostle signifies to us, that he, who was the chief of sinners, obtained mercy,
that in him first, Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering for a
Pattern, (to such as were not such great sinners) even to them that should
delay to believe on him unto life everlasting: 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. So we
may also here understand it. But what is said may suffice to the second
Inquiry; and we shall desire to proceed unto the next, namely,

3. What are we to understand by this Phrase, [no pleasure?] And to that we
say, hereby is meant and signified, That it is not at all delightful, or
well-pleasing unto him, that such as are wicked Ones should be destroyed with
an everlasting Destruction: As he is a God that has no pleasure in wickedness,
neither shall evil dwell with him: Psalm. 5. 4-6. And as he has no pleasure in
fools, or wicked ones: Eccl. 5. 4. So also, he has no delight, or pleasure in
the death of the wicked; As he here swears unto us, he has no pleasure, none
at all: That is to say,

1. He has no Revealed Pleasure in the Death of the wicked; that Revelation he
has given of his heart and mind in the holy Scriptures, declares no such will,
or well-pleasedness in him, or affection to any such thing; but the contrary
thereto: As plainly appears in that Scripture we are considering.

2. Nor has he any secret pleasure, will, or delight therein: As appears by
this Revelation of his Will which he has given forth to the Sons of Men: He
speaks thus to us, and by his Oath assures us of the truth of it, who only
perfectly knows himself, which we do not: for we cannot by searching find out
God, we cannot find out the Almighty to perfection: Job 11. 7-9. But he who is
perfect in the knowledge of himself, and all things, (as Job 36. 4.) And
perfectly knows his own Mind and Will, says, and swears, that he has no
pleasure: And his mouth herein, and in all things, speaks truth; for it is
impossible for him to lie: Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. Yea, let God be true, and
every man a liar: Romans 3. 4. And indeed, the word here translated [Pleasure]
signifies inward intention, delight, affection, well pleasedness. And oh! let
us not be faithless, but believing; let us give glory to him, in believing him
when he thus solemnly swears, I live, says the Lord God, if I will, or be
well-pleased in the Death of the wicked. That is, as it is rendered with us, and
suitable to such like manner of speakings in other places; I have no pleasure
in their death. So what is thus expressed in one place, I swear in my wrath, if
they should enter into my rest: Is thus expressed and explained in another by the
holy Spirit; He swear that they should not enter into his rest. Compare Psalm
95. 11. and Heb. 3. 11. with verse 18. Mark 8. 12. with Mat. 16. 4.

And what has been now said, may in some measure, deliver us from entertaining
a very corrupt and pernicious Gloss, which too many have put upon this
Scripture, and others that are like unto it; namely,

Some say, It is true indeed, God has no pleasure in the Death of the wicked:
That is, say they, He has no Revealed Will or Pleasure therein; his Revealed
Will is, That all men should be saved: But his Secret Pleasure, or the Will of
his good Pleasure is, that the most of men should perish, and be eternally
miserable; and therefore he reprobated them, or past them by, before they were
born; so as in conclusion, they must unavoidably have their Portion in that
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And in thus speaking,
they plainly signify, That his Revealed and Secret Will, are contrary the one
to the other.

Answ. Now for Answer thereto, and to discover a little the Evil and
Perniciousness of that Distinction, or Division rather, of the Will of God;
consider we diligently these things: To wit,

1. It savours of high Presumption, and Daringness of Spirit, to give out that
God has a Secret Will contrary to his Revealed Will: For if his Will be
Secret, how come they to know it, or to know that it is contrary to that
Revelation of his Mind and Will he has vouchsafed to us? Or why may not others
as well know that secret Will they speak of, as themselves? For in truth none
knows what his Will is, any further than it is Revealed; nor does it appertain
to any to know it: And they who would be prying there-into, intrude into things
they have not seen, being vainly puffed up with their fleshly mind: as Col. 2.
18, 19. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which
are revealed unto us, and to our Children for ever; that we may do all the
words of this Law: Deuteronomy. 29. 29. It is a very sinful and dangerous thing for
us, to be peeping into things that God has kept secret. We may remember how
severely God dealt with Fifty thousand threescore and ten men of Beth-shemesh,
because they looked into the Ark of the Lord: 1 Samuel 6. 19, 20. And that is
written for our Admonition; to the intent our hearts might not be haughty, nor
our eyes lofty: And that we should not exercise our selves in great Matters, or
in things too wonderful for us: 1 Cor. 10. 6-11. with Psalm. 131. Who has
ascended up into Heaven, or descended? Prove. 30. 4. The Angel showed his
dislike of Manoah's Question, when he asked him, What is thy Name? And said
unto him, Why ask thou thus after my Name, seeing it is Secret, or
Wonderful? Judge. 13. 18. And our Savior reproves his Apostles for their
curiosity, in demanding of him, Lord, will thou at this time restore the
Kingdom unto Israel? It is not for you, says he, to know the times, or the
seasons which the Father has put in his own power: Acts 1. 6, 7. And if it be
Reprovable to enquire into, or after, Secret Things, much more Condemnable is
it to presume to know and declare, what Gods Secret Will is: And more still, to
give out that it is contrary to his Revealed; as may be after shown. As with
respect to Secret and Wonderful things, it is good and safe for us to say, as
sometimes David does, when he is speaking of the Omniscience and Prescience of
God; Such knowledge is too wonderful, or secret for me, it is high, I cannot
attain unto it. As if he should say, It is such as is impossible for me to
comprehend, such as mine Understanding cannot reach unto: Psalm. 39. 1-6.

2. Time was, when that which is now Revealed and made known to us, was Secret
and hidden also: It was hid in God: as Isa. 48. 6. Ephesians. 3. 9. And if his
Revealed Will be contrary to his Secret; Time was when he had two Secret Wills,
one inconsistent with, or contrary to the other: One having no Pleasure in the
Death of the wicked; and the other having Pleasure in the Death of the greatest
part of Mankind. And how unworthily and wickedly do they herein speak of of
God,: yea, as it were say, There are two Gods: Whereas, the Lord our God, is
one Lord? Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5. Or that he is divided from himself; or one Secret Will
divided from the other? Whereas he is One: Gal. 3. 20. Or, in one Mind and
Will, and who can turn him? Job 23. 13. He is Jehovah, he changes not: Mal. 3.
6. Do not err, my beloved brethren; every good giving, and every perfect gift
is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning: Jam. 1. 16-18. And our Lord Jesus is
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: Heb. 13. 7, 8.

3. This wicked Distinction of the Will or Wills of God, makes him guilty of
Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, which are most hateful and abominable to him in
others; and without all doubt, he is most clear thereof himself: for it makes
him to speak one thing, and mean another: And though his Lips drop as the
Honeycomb, and his Mouth be smoother than Oil, yet war is in his heart toward
the most of men, toward whom he professes so much love: (as Psalm. 55. 21.)
Burning Lips, (such as speak kindly, and pretend fervent love:) And a wicked
heart, (which is full of hatred) are like a Potsheard covered with
silver-dross: he that hates, dissembleth with his lips, and lays up deceit
within him: when he makes his voice gracious, believe him not: for there are
seven abominations in his heart; whose hatred is covered by deceit; his
wickedness shall be showed before the whole Congregation: Prove. 26. 23-26. And
God forbid that we should suppose, that He who has pleasure in uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. And who is the most upright: Isa. 26. 7. should be guilty of
that which is so hateful and abominable to him in others. Our Lord Jesus, who
is the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the Express Character of his
Person, in seeing whom we see the Father also: Though he hated all Iniquity,
yet most severely enveighed against, and denounced Woes upon those who were
guilty of Dissimulation and Hypocrisy: Matthew. 23. And therefore, without
controversy, this is most hateful unto the Divine Majesty; and so hateful,
that an Hypocrite shall not come before him: Job 13. 16. And for such, so
remaining, the Blackness of Darkness, as it were, is reserved: Mat. 24. 51. But
now, if God were guilty hereof, (which is most abominable to conceive) then we
might also be safely guilty thereof; for we are exhorted to be followers of
God, as dear children: Ephesians. 5. 1. And our Savior instructs and commands his
Disciples to be Children of their father which is in Heaven, in loving their
enemies: Not to have a mouth full of Love, and an heart full of Hatred toward
them: But sincerely and cordially to love them; adding presently, Be ye
perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect: And then presently
cautions them that they should not be, or do as the Hypocrites: But in all
their love, and expressions of kindness toward their Enemies, and others,
should be hearty; and have their Conversation in the world, and one toward
another in simplicity, and in the sincerity of God: Mat. 5. 44-48. and Chap. 6.
1, 2. etc. with 2 Cor. 1. 12. Oh! take we heed we attribute not Lying, or
Dissimulation to him, who though he can do all things which are Acts of Power
or Potency, for he is the Almighty; yet cannot possibly Lie, or be guilty of
Hypocrisy; for that is an Act of Infirmity and Impotency: Heb. 6. 18. The four
living Creatures thus give Glory to God, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty. To assure us, that he is holily Almighty, and Almightily holy. And
such an One he was, and is to come; even from Everlasting to Everlasting: Rev.
4. 8, 9.

4. This ungodly Distinction is justly chargeable with Nonsense: for while
some speak of Gods Revealed Will; what do they mean thereby, but that it is the
Revelation of his Will, which is more hidden: or the manifesting, or making
known of his Will which is secret? Now how can that be rationally called his
Revealed Will, or the Revelation of his Will, which is disagreeing with, and
contrary to, his Secret Will? But indeed, as evil men, who have not the faith
of Christ, are unreasonable and absurd: As the Apostle gives us to understand:
2 These. 3. 3. So are also all those corrupt Notions and Distinctions which
consent not to wholesome words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Doctrine which is according to Godliness: 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.

5. This unworthy and unreasonable Distinction tends to overthrow the Faith,
and gives men ground to believe God in nothing he Asserts or Promises: For if
he has a Secret Will, and a Revealed Will, in one thing Repugnant the one to
the other, then why not in every thing? And whatever be propounded to us ftom
the Scriptures, to encourage us to believe and hope in God, may presently be
repelled and rejected with this Distinction: As to say, when with the Apostle
we say, God our Savior will have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth: 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. Yes, say some, He wills this with his
Revealed Will, but not with his Secret. And why may not others make use of this
Distinction elsewhere? As when our Savior says, He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned. May not
this Distinction of Gods two Wills be here brought in by some, as rationally as
where it is? And may they not say, This is his Revealed Will, but his Secret
Will agrees not therewith: Mark 16. 16. Or where our Savior says, This is the
Will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the Son, and believes on
him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last day: John
6. 40. Very true, may some also here say, This is his Revealed Will; but this
is not his Secret Will: And by this latter, such may perish, and not have
everlasting life* were this Distinction good and right* Whereas indeed, it is
most corrupt and pernicious, and to be abominated by us; for it makes the Pen
of the Scribe in vain: By this Tradition the Word of God is made of none
effect, as to all therein Asserted, or Assured: as Jer. 8. 8, 9. Mark 7. 9-13.

Object. If any should say: But God has engaged himself by his Oath unto the
Heirs of Promise; to wit, to all hearty Believers, that they shall be happy and
blessed for ever; to the end they might have strong consolation, who have fled
for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before them: as Heb. 6. 17, 18.

Answ. To that I say, Does not God here also bind himself with an Oath of
Confirmation, as is before said; that he has no pleasure in the Death of the
wicked? And is not his Oath as valid and authentic here as there? Yes
doubtless: and if by the force of the Distinction we are disproving and
opposing, his Oath may be frustrated in one place, why may it not also be so in
another, and in a third; and in all those places and cases wherein he has
interposed himself by his Oath? Let this be duly minded and considered by us.

6. And lastly as to this; Our Lord Jesus, who is in the Bosom of the Father,
and who knows the Father, as the Father knows him; who knows his Mind and Will,
and has declared him and it to us in these last Ages, more plainly than he was
made known in former times: He, I say, does assure us, That his Fathers Secret
Will is a Gracious Will toward the worst of men, while it is to day; And that
as he has said and sworn, That he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked:
which is, as they speak, his Revealed Will: So also his Secret Will perfectly
accords therewith; and by this also he is not willing that any should perish.
To this purpose our Lord spoke while he was on the Earth: The Son of Man, says
he, is come to save that which was lost: How think ye? If a man have an hundred
sheep, and one of them be gone astray,; does he not leave the ninety and nine,
and goes into the mountains, and seeks that which is gone astray? And if so
be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoices more of that sheep,
than of the ninety and nine which went not astray. Which Parable, our Lord in
another Evangelist speaks, concerning the Publicans and Sinners; who were, and
were looked upon to be notorious sinners. And then it is added, (as the
Application of the former;) Even so, it is not the will of your Father which is
^^^m Heaven, that one of these little Ones, (called before lost) should perish.
Or rather, as the words should be read; Even so, there is not a will before
your Father which is in the Heavens, that one of these little Ones should
perish. Which is in substance the same, as to have said, Your Father has no
secret will or pleasure in the death of lost Ones, of Publicans, of notorious
sinners. Nay, he has no secret will in their death, not only as indefinitely
and generally considered; but also, he has no pleasure in their death
individually considered: I mean, not in the death of any One of them: There is
not a Will before him that One of them should be lost. Let this be seriously
considered, Matthew. 18. 11-14. with Luke 15. 1-7-24. Now here our Savior, who
perfectly knows what his Fathers Secret Will is, and who only does so; for
none knows the Father, save the Son: Matt. 11. 27. Luke 10. 24. plainly assures
us, that Gods Secret Will, or that Will which is before him in the Heavens, is
good will toward every sinful lost Creature of Mankind: as Luke 2. 10-14. And
we are required, to hear him in all things whatsoever he speaks unto us. And,
says the Apostle Peter, It shall come to pass, that every Soul which will not
hear this Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people: Matthew. 17. 5. with
2 Pet. 1. 17. Acts 3. 22, 23. Oh! let us then give this Honor to our Lord
Jesus, and unto his Father, to hear his Word, and believe on him that sent him:
According to that Revelation he has given of his Father; and so we shall have
everlasting life, and not come into condemnation, etc. John 5. 23, 24. And in
so doing, we shall be led to reject and abominate this ungodly Distinction: and
be assured, That Gods Secret Will is as Gracious toward sinful wicked Ones, as
is his Revealed Will: Yea let me say, his Secret Will is more Gracious than is
contained in any Revelation of it: For as his Power, Wisdom, Truth, and
Holiness, are infinite and unsearchable, so as they are not fully Revealed and
manifested to us in any Revelation vouchsafed: Romans 11. 33. 1 Cor. 13. 9. So
his Merciful-kindness is greater toward poor sinners, than is expressed in any
Revelation given to us: Or then that it can be conceived, much more expressed by
finite Creatures: The Love of Christ, who is One with the Father, passes
knowledge: Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. Hence we see how the Psalmist magnifies the Mercy of
God, and says, It is great unto the Heavens: Psalm. 57. 10. In the Heavens,
Psalm 36. 1-5. Nay, It is above the Heavens, great above the Heavens: And
therefore he resolved to sing Praises unto him among the people, and among the
heathen: Psalm 108. 3, 4. And when he thus says; Thy Righteousness is like the
great Mountains, or, Mountains of God, thy Judgments are a great deep: He
presently adds thereto by way of Admiration, How excellent is thy
Loving Kindness, O God! To wit, toward the Children of Men: As if he would
intimate to us, and to our shallow Capacities, That though he could compare
Gods Righteousness and Judgments to somewhat; yet his Mercy, or
Merciful-kindness, is admirably, inconceivably, incomparably Great; so as he
knew not what to compare that unto: Psalm. 36. 6, 7. and 144. 3, 4. and 145. 8,
9. And does not our Blessed Savior speak also after such a rate, when he
says, So God loved the World, etc. John 3. 16. 1 John 4. 11. So that from what
has been said, we do and may safely conclude, That the LORD GOD has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, none at all: Not only, no Revealed
pleasure therein: But also no Secret, or hidden Will or Pleasure therein; as he
swears unto us.

And what has been said about this Third Enquiry meets with, and gives Answer
unto another evil Distinction, and Opposition of some, against the Current of
the Gospel: Namely, say some, It is true indeed, God has no delight or
pleasure in the death of the wicked, simply considered: But he has pleasure
therein Respectively; to wit, in order to the manifestation of the Glory of his
Justice.

Answer, Now to this I say briefly, If he has pleasure in their Death, or in
the Death of some of them, in order to the manifestation of the Glory of his
Righteousness, or Justice; then he has some pleasure in their Death: for as is
usually said, He that wills the End, wills the Means conducing thereto. And so
also it is in this particular, if their evil Distinction were true, as indeed
it is not: But in their so saying, they contradict this Text, and deny the
truth of Gods Oath, who swears by himself, by his life, That he has no
pleasure in the Death of the wicked. And besides, God needs not the Destruction
of any of Mankind for the Glory of his Justice; for the Glory of his
Righteousness is manifested in giving to every One according to his works: And
so in Acts of Grace and Mercy toward men, that they might Repent; and toward
such as do turn to him from their Iniquities: Gracious is the Lord and
righteous, yea our God is merciful: Ps. 116. 5. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness: 1 John 1. 9. 2 These. 1. 5. And his Mercy is magnified in
destroying implacable and impenitent sinners: As it is said, He over-threw, or
shaked off Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea: for his mercy endures for
ever. -- Who smote great Kings, for his mercy endures for ever. And slew
famous Kings, for his mercy endures for ever: Psalm. 136. 15-20. But we shall
add no more unto the Third Enquiry, but consider the next; namely,

4. When, or during what time, has he no pleasure, none at all, neither
Revealed, nor Secret, in the Death and everlasting Destruction of the wicked,
Indefinitely considered?

And to that we may say, It is plainly intimated to us in the Words as they are
rendered with us; During what time he has no Will, Pleasure, or Delight in
their Death; namely, Now, in this present Day of his Grace and Patience: As it
is here expressed, [I have] no pleasure, etc. To wit, while it is called to
Day: As the Holy Ghost says, To Day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your
hearts, as in the provocation, etc. Heb. 3. 7, 8. and Chapter 4. 7. All the time
Christ is interceding for Transgressors in Heaven; and that is, while he is
vouchsafing Gracious Means to them on Earth: Behold, now is the accepted time;
Behold, now is the day of salvation: 2 Cor. 5. 20. with Chap, 6. 1, 2.
According to what the Apostle Peter says, The Lord is long-suffering to
usward; not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance: 2 Pet. 3. 9. Indeed this time or season will not last always; his
Spirit will not always strive with men: as Genesis 6. 3. When once the Day of
Grace is fully ended, he that now swears he has no pleasure in their Death,
will swear in his wrath, that they shall not enter into his rest: as Heb. 3.
7-11, He will then have pleasure in their Destruction: As it is said, Because
ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind: when distress
and anguish comes upon you: Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: For that they
hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: They would none of my
counsel, they depised all my reproof: Therefore they shall eat of the fruit of
their own ways, and be filled with their own devices: Prove. 1. 24-26-31. Then,
He that made them will not have mercy upon them, and he that formed them, will
show them no favor: as Isa. 27. 11. And when he pleases, he can put an end to
that Day, and to men's Lives; for their times are in his Hand; to continue, or
cut off, as is good before him. The Consideration whereof is proper and
powerful to excite us all, to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call
upon him while he is near: Isa. 55. 6. To make haste, and not delay to keep
Gods Commandments: For, if he cut off, or shut up, or gather together, then who
can hinder him? No man has power over the Spirit, (his own, or God's) to
retain the Spirit, neither has he power in the day of Death: And there is no
casting of Weapons in that War; neither shall wickedness deliver them that are
given to it: Eccl. 8. 8. Now therefore in the opportune season* turn we from
our Iniquities, that we may understand his truth, For in the Grave whither we
are a going, there is no work nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom: Eccles. 9.
10. Then there will be a great Gulf fixed, so as there will be no possibility
of passing from one state to another: Whatever our hand therefore finds to do,
let us do it with our might; in the present opportunity. To this purpose, and
upon this account, our Lord thus instructs and counsels: Strive (says he, to
wit, in the present time) to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto
you, will seek to enter in; (namely when it is too late) and shall not be able.
When once the Master of the house is risen up, and shut to the door, and ye
begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto
us: And he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are, etc.
Luke 13. 24-29. Mat. 25. 10-13. But now, I say, while God is waiting that he
may be gracious unto sinners, he has no pleasure, none at all in their eternal
Ruin and Perdition: Isa. 30. 8-18. And so, surely to him that is joined to all
the living, there is hope: Eccl. 9. 4. The very end of Christ in so loving all
men, as to die for them, was, That they which live, (who are still continued in
the land of, and joined to all the living) might no longer live unto
themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose again: 2. Cor. 5. 14, 15.
Yea though Sinners and ungodly Ones have long persisted in their folly and
disobedience, yet while he is long-suffering, it is a Day of Salvation: 2 Pet.
3. 9-15. And unto such Wisdom utters her Voice, saying, How long ye simple
Ones, will ye love simplicity? and the Scorners delight in their scorning? and
Fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my reproof, etc. Prove. 1. 21, 22, 23. Isa. 50.
1, 2. Even as our Lord Jesus speaks, and says, If any man here my words, and
believe not, I judge him not. (To wit, now he does not judge him, as that is
opposed to saving: he does not say, he will never judge him, for he will
hereafter judge all, and yield Vengeance unto all that know not God, and obey
not his Gospel; who will be punished with everlasting Destruction from the
Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power: as 2 These. 1, 7, 8, 9.
Acts 10. 40, 41. But now during the Day of Gods Grace and Patience, he says, I
judge him not:) John 12. 47-49. Hence the Wisdom of God thus speaks unto men,
and unto the Sons of Adam, Indefinitely considered; and says, They that seek
me early, (to wit, while it is called to Day) shall find me: And thus exhorts
them, Now therefore, (to wit, in the opportune season) hearken unto me: for
blessed are they that observe my ways: Prove. 8. 1-4, 5. 17. 32, 33. And thus
also we have given some Answer unto this Enquiry; and have shown how long or
during what time the Lord God has no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked That
is to say, While he is exercising long-suffering toward them, and they are
joined unto all the living.

And thus we have spoken unto the Explication, or explaining of those four
things we propounded to Enquire into which we desire may be duly minded and
diligently considered: And shall now proceed on unto the next considerable; to
wit,

2. We come nextly, to give some further Evidence and Proof of the Truth of
what the Lord God here so solemnly swears to, namely, That he has no pleasure
in the Death of the wicked. Though indeed, his Word and Oath here given us, are
such Immutable Things, and Infallible Proofs, as may sufficiently assure us of
the Verity of what is so Affirmed and Confirmed. But we have not only this
Scripture speaking such gracious Words, but others also, much-what to the same
purpose. Thus it is said, Have I any pleasure at all, (either Revealed, or
Secret) in the Death of the wicked, says the Lord God? Indeed, this is
propounded by way of Question, or Interrogation: But, as is usually observed,
is a vehement Denial of that questioned about. And to put all out of doubt, he
who propounds the Question, and best, and only perfectly knows his own Will
and Pleasure, gives Answer hereto in the same Chapter, and says positively, I
have no pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the Lord God, etc. Ezekiel.
18. 23. with verse 32. And we have the two famous Apostles, the Apostle of the
Uncircumcision, and the Apostle of the Circumcision, speaking after the same
rate: The former says thus, God our Savior will have all men to be saved, and
to come to the knowledge of the truth: 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. The latter thus, The
Lord is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to repentance? 2 Pet. 3. 9. And these Scriptures considered
together, more confirm the truth of this Doctrine: And, this threefold Cord is
not quickly broken. But I shall desire to add some other Proofs and Evidences
to Assure us of the Truth hereof: Namely,

1. It appears Evidently, That God has no pleasure in the Death of the wicked,
nor of any sinful Creature of Mankind, while it is called to Day; in that,
according to his Promise, he has actually raised up a Savior, even Jesus:
This Purpose and Grace was given us in Christ Jesus, before the secular times;
but is now manifested by the appearing of our Savior, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
When the fullness of the time was come God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman,
made under the Law; to redeem them that were under the Law: Gal. 4, 4, 5. Which
was an high Act, Evidence, and Expression of the Love of God toward the Sons
of Men: As our Savior says, So God loved the World, (to wit, of Mankind) that
he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him might not
perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the World to
condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved: John 3. 16. 7.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the World to save sinners: Indefinitely considered; 1 Timothy 1. 15. In
this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son the Propitiation for
our sins; he sent the Son the Savior of the World: 1 John 4. 8, 9, 10-14. And
Jesus Christ, by the will of God his Father, came into the World, not to
destroy men's Souls, but to save them: Luke 9 55, 56. To which end, He in the
Greatness of his Love, died for all, even for all of Mankind that were dead: 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. And, God crowned him with glory and honor, that he by the
grace of God should taste death for every man: Heb. 2. 9. And, he rose again
for their justification: Romans 4. 15. and Chapter 3. 23, 24. and Chapter 5. 6-8. 12. 18.

Now herein is clearly and undoubtedly evidenced, That God has no pleasure in
the Death of any of Mankind, while it is called to Day; In that he has devised
such a Device, and done what he devised, that his Banished might not be
expelled from him: as 2 Samuel 14. 14. When Christ was born into the World, one
Angel says unto the Shepherds, Behold, I bring you glad-tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all people: for unto you (Men, and not unto the Angels, Heb.
2. 9. 16.) is born this day a Savior, etc. -- And the multitude of the
heavenly host praised God, and said, Glory to God in the highest, on earth
peace, good will toward men: Luke 2. 10, 11-14. And hereby the Apostle Paul
does prove and demonstrate, That God our Savior will have all men to be saved;
(And therefore has no pleasure in the Destruction of any of them;) Because
there is one Med^atour of God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a
Ranson, or Price of Redemption for all: 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6. And upon this
ground, the worst of sinners are exhorted and excited to turn to the Lord:
Behold, says the Lord, I have given him for a Witness to the People, (even
Christ, as delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our Justification:)
There called, The sure mercies of David: Isa. 55. 3, 4. with Acts 13. 34. And
then presently after, and upon that account, he calls Sinners to Repentance:
Seek ye the LORD, while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the man of iniquity his thoughts, and let him
return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will multiply to pardon: Isa. 55. 3, 4-6, 7. This blessed Doctrine the Apostle
preached unto the Corinthians, when they were carried away unto dumb Idols, and
were notorious sinners; to wit, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate,
Abusers of themselves with Mankind, etc. To assure them, that God has no
pleasure in their Death: And to the end they might be saved, He delivered unto
them first of all, that which he also received, How that Christ died for their
sins, according to the Scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he rose
again the third day, according to the Scriptures, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4.
with Chap. 6. 9, 10, 11. and Chap. 12. 2. Yea, the love of Christ, in dying for
All, and rising again, known and believed by his Ambassadors, did constrain
them to persuade men; and wherever they came, thus to pray in Christ's stead,
Be ye reconciled unto God: 2 Cor. 5. 11-14, 15-19, 20, 21. and Chap. 6. 1, 2.
And this is one evident and fundamental Demonstration of the truth of what God
here swears; to wit, That he has no pleasure in the Death of the wicked.
Christ is the Amen, the faithful and true Witness hereof: Rev. 1. 5. and Chap.
3. 14. And as God's commanding Moses to set a Serpent of brass upon a Pole,
that those who were stung with the fiery Serpents, for their despising the
Manna, might look unto it, and live: Did plainly evince, that it was not his
Mind or Will, that they should die of their stings: Number. 21. Even so, God has
herein more brightly manifested, That he is not willing that any should perish;
In that the Son of Man has been lifted up from the Earth for them; and lifted
up from the gates of death, etc. For so God loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son: John 3. 14, 15, 16, 17.

2. It is further evident, That God has no pleasure in the Death of the
wicked, in this; In that Christ by his Death, in the virtue whereof he is
raised again, is become the Deliverer from the wrath to come: 1 These. 1. 10.
for thereby he has obtained the forgiveness of those sins which deserve, and
bring men under the sentence of Condemnation to the wrath to come: Luke 2. 30,
31. He who descended into the lower parts of the Earth; and who is ascended up
on high, and has led captivity captive; has received gifts in the man, even
for the rebellious also; that the Lord God might dwell among them: Psalm. 68.
18. without blood shedding there is no remission of sins; to wit, without the
Bloodshedding of the Son of God: For it was not possible that the blood of
Goats and Calves should take away sin. If Righteousness could have come by the
Law, then Christ died in vain: Heb 9. 22. and Chap. 10. 1-4, 5-9. Gal. 2. 21.
And unless he who died for our sins had been raised again for our
justification; we must have remained necessarily in our sins: 1 Cor. 15. 17.
But now, he who bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree, is raised again, and
saw no corruption: Therefore in him is prepared for sinners, and in his Name
preached to them, the forgiveness of those sins from which men could not be
justified by the Law of Moses: Acts 13. 32-37-39. He has obtained eternal
Redemption, even the forgiveness of our sins by his blood, according to the
riches of Gods grace: Heb. 9. 12. with Ephesians. 1. 7. forgiveness of the greatest
sins, and sinners, while it is the Day of Gods Grace and Patience: And
therefore he says to his Apostles, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day: And that
Repentance and Forgiveness of sins should be preached in his Name, unto all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem; which had killed the Prophets, and stoned them
which were sent unto them; And were afterward the Betrayers and Murderers of
the Lord of Glory: Luke 24. 46-48. with Chap. 13. 34. Acts 7. 53. Otherwise,
indeed, I mean, If there were no Forgiveness of sins with God in Christ for
wicked Ones, he might be said to have Pleasure in their Death and Destruction:
And the House of Israel had rightly supposed what they did; as the Words may be
read in the Verse immediately preceding that which we are considering; to wit,
O thou Son of Man, speak unto the House of Israel, rightly, ye speak, saying,
If our iniquities and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them: (If there
be no Atonement for them, no Forgiveness of them; see Number. 15. 30, 31. with
verse 27, 28, 29.) How should we then live? Ezekiel. 33. 10. Or as the Psamist
says, If thou, LORD, should mark iniquities, O LORD, who shall stand? But
there is forgiveness, (or as the Septuagint renders it, There is a
propitiation) with thee, that thou may be feared. And thence incourages the
House of Israel, notwithstanding their great and manifold Transgressions, yet
to hope in his Mercy: Let Israel, says he, hope in the LORD, for with the LORD
is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption: Psalm. 130. 3, 4-7. The Lord
has proclaimed himself to be gracious and merciful, abundant in goodness --
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin:
Exodus 34. 6, 7. He has a great Name for pardoning great iniquities; Psalm. 25.
11. For he has found out a Ransom for our souls; an Atonement for our sins:
Job 33. 24. He has accepted a sacrifice, even that of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who, in the greatness of his love toward us, gave himself for us an Offering
and a Sacrifice unto God, for a sweet smelling savor: Ephesians. 5. 2. And in whom,
by means thereof, we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins: Col. 1. 14. As also, to the end we may be justified from, and receive the
forgiveness of our sins: God has put his Spirit upon him, that he might bring
forth Judgment to us, and give Repentance to us from them; namely, That Grace
and Power whereby we may Repent, that he may forgive our iniquity, and our sin:
as Jer. 36. 3. Him has God exalted with his right hand, a Prince, and a
Savior, for to give Repentance to us also, and forgiveness of sins: Acts 5.
31. and Chap. 26. 18. Isa. 42. 1. Luke 24. 46, 47, 48.

3. The truth of this also, That God has no pleasure in the Death of the
wicked; further appears, and is evident hereby: In that he is vouchsafing Means
of Grace unto them; and giving gracious Aid and Assistance in and with the
Means, to the end, that the wicked may Repent, and turn from their evil ways,
that iniquity may not be their ruin: He does not only call them to Repentance
with an outward Call; but he also stretches forth his hand, his Power and
Spirit with his Calls, that such may turn at his Reproofs: Prove. 1. 21, 22-24.
Our Lord Jesus is the true light, that lights every man that comes into the
world: John 1. 9. He is the light of the world, which lies in wickedness; or,
in the wicked One: Joh. 8. 12. with 1 John 5. 19. To open the eyes of the
blind, and to bring forth the prisoners out of prison, and them that fit in
darkness out of the prisonhouse: Isa. 42. 6, 7. To open the eyes of Jews and
Gentiles. and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God; that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
that are sanctified through faith in Christ Jesus: Acts 26. 17. 18. And he is
therefore the Light unto the Gentiles also, the light of the World, that he
might be for salvation unto All, even unto the ends of the earth; that through
him they might be saved: Isa. 49. 6. with Acts. 13. 47. And as it is the nature
and property of the Light to manifest and discover all things unto men in their
true and proper colors; For whatsoever does make manifest, is light: Ephesians. 5.
13. So our Lord Jesus Christ, does in and by his Testimony and Testimonis of
his Goodness, manifest himself, and Gods Grace in himself, to the Sons of Men;
He makes himself manifest unto them that asked not after him. And as in former
times, Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, that the stung Israelites
might look unto, and behold it, and live; Even so the Son of Man is lifted up
by the Spirit in the Gospel, that sinners may look unto and believe in him:
And, that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have everlasting
life: Romans 10. 18-20. John 3. 14-16. Hence he who is a just God and a Savior,
and there is none besides him, calls unto men, and says, Look unto me all
the ends of the earth, and be ye saved; for I am God, and there is none else:
Isa. 45. 2-1, 22, 23. with Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10. And Christ, as the Light, does
also manifest the odiousness and vileness of our sins; and what an evil and
bitter thing it is to forsake the Lord, and that his fear is not in men: as
Jer. 2. 19. And the necessity of their being turned therefrom, without which
they must all necessarily perish; as afterward we may show more largely: All
things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light; -- wherefore he
says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light: Ephesians. 5. 13, 14. And this most Excellent One, does also, as is
before said; Open the blind Eyes of the Souls of Men, to see what he is
manifesting to them: God has given him for a light of the Gentiles, to open
the blind eyes, etc. Isa. 42. 6, 7. And herein he excels the Light of this
World, for though that does manifest the things here below, yet it will not
give Sight unto those that are blind, to behold what it does manifest and
discover; it will not open the eyes of those that want their bodily sight. But
now, our Lord Jesus is the true light, the most excellent light, who gives both
light and sight: he lightens every man that comes into the world: John 1. 6-9.
And not only so, but he gives grace unto all, even that Aid and Assistance,
whereby they may turn from their evil and pernicious ways, and live. The grace
of God brings salvation, or is saving unto all men: Tit. 2. 11. The goodness of
God leads men to repentance; even such also as are not led by it, but after
their own hardness and impenitent hearts, treasure up to themselves wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God: Romans
2. 4, 5. It is true indeed, No man can turn from his iniquities, and come unto
Jesus Christ, unless it be given unto him of the Father; unless he draw him:
John 6. 44, 45. But it is as true also, that God in due time does draw all men
by Jesus Christ, even such also as refuse to return: Hos 11. 4, 5. with John
12. 31, 32. Though the Spirit that dwells in us (naturally) lusts to envy;
yet he gives more grace; That we might not follow after our own Spirit: Jam.
4. 5, 6. As Christ is exalted with Gods right hand a Prince and Savior, to
give repentance, etc. So he is faithful in giving it in due season. And there
is good reason for us to believe he is so; forasmuch as he was faithful to him
that appointed him, in that difficult work of humbling himself, and becoming
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross: Acts. 5. 30, 31. with Heb. 3.
1, 2. Isa. 50. 5-8-10. Doutbless God does not only afford outward Means, and
calls wicked Ones with an outward Call to Repentance: But he is dispensing to
them his Grace and Spirit, to enable them to turn from their Iniquities, and to
exercise themselves to Godliness; especially he does so to us, who have the
Name of Christ called upon us, and the Gospel and Scriptures continued with us:
(And to none other can I speak.) And to signify to us, that the holy Spirit
does accompany the Gospel, to work in men both to will and to do, of good
pleasure, what God requires of them: Therefore is the Gospel called, the
ministration of the Spirit: Yea it is called, the Spirit: 2 Cor. 3. 6-8. And
the words which Christ spoke unto them that did not believe, are said to be
Spirit and Life: John 6. 63, 64. And when our Lord enlarges the Commission of
his Apostles, and commands them to go into all the World, and preach the Gospel
to every Creature; to wit, of all the Nations: This is that then which he
promises to them, and assures them of; that he would go along, and work with
them; to wit, by his Spirit: Lo, says he, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world. And to assure us that he was as good as his word unto his
Apostles; it is therefore also said, They went forth, and preached every where,
the Lord working with them, etc. Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. with Mark 16. 15-20. He
therefore that rejects, rejects not man, but God, who has also given his
holy Spirit, unto the Ministers of his Word, to accompany them: 1 These. 4. 8.
And this also shows, he has no pleasure, none at all, in the death of the
wicked, while it is called to Day. But to this particular, I shall not here
further enlarge, because we shall have apt Occasion to speak somewhat further
unto this and the former particulars, in what follows.

4. That he is not willing that wicked Ones should perish, appears also, and is
evident hereby; In that our Lord Jesus Christ does, by the will of God, make
Intercession for Transgressors: Isa. 53. 12. to speak good for them, and to
turn away Gods wrath from them: (as Jer. 18. 20. with Chap. 27. 18.) He is the
Propitiation for their sins, who through Grace believe; and not for their sins
only, but also for the sins of the whole world: 1 John 2. 2. The Lamb of God,
that takes away the sin of the World: That Judgment may not speedily be
executed upon it: John 1. 29. And hereby the Apostle does prove and
demonstrate, That God will have all men to be saved: (And therefore has no
pleasure in the death of the wicked;) Because there is One Mediator between God
and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all: 1 Timothy 2. 4,
5, 6. And while he Intercedes for Sinners and Transgressors, God hears him:
And, Behold, now is the accepted time: behold, now is the Day of Salvation: 2
Cor. 6. 1, 2. He does by his powerful Intercession prevail as a Prince with God
his Father, that further Patience and Forbearance might be exercised toward
such as deserve to be cut off in their Trespasses. And this is an Evidence,
that God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance; Because he is long-suffering to them. And the Apostle exhorts the
Believers; to Account, or Reckon, that the long-suffering of our Lord is
salvation: To wit, toward them to whom it is exexercised. Their accounting his
long-suffering Salvation, does not make it so to be: But his Long-suffering
being Salvation, gives them good ground so to account it; for his
Long-suffering is a Fruit of his Love and Charity toward them to whom it is
vouchsafed: 2 Pet. 3. 9. 15. with 1 Cor. 13. 4. while God waits, he waits that
he may be gracious, even toward Rebellious Ones also: Isa. 30. 8-18. that they
might be brought unto God: 1 Pet. 3. 18. 20. As it is said concerning Gods
professed People in former times, many whereof were disobedient and rebellious:
Yea many years did thou forbear them, -- that thou might bring them again
to thy Law: Neh. 9. 29, 30. And hence also, when the Lord is said to be
Long-suffering, or slow to Anger, then very frequently, he is affirmed to be
merciful and gracious, or of great kindness. To signify to us, That his
Long-suffering is an Evidence and Expression of his Mercy, Grace, and kindness
toward the Sons of Men: Exodus 34. 6. Number. 14. 18. Neh. 9. 17. Psalm. 86. 15.
and 145. 8. Joel 2. 13. Jona. 4. 2. Romans 2. 4.

Object. But against what we are now considering, some may object, and say,
Christ would not vouchsafe to pray for the World; And then to be sure he did
not die for it: Nor is it the Will of God that the World should be saved; but
he has pleasure in their destruction: John 17. 9.

Answ. This saying of our Savior's is much abused and wrested by many, who are
Enemies to the Grace of God in Christ to Mankind; And his words are altered, to
make them serve their evil Design: For,

1. Our Savior does not say, He would not pray for the World; or, that he
never did, or will pray for it: But his words are, I pray not, (to wit, at that
present time) for the World, etc. Now that does not at all deny that he might
pray for the World at another time: As may appear in other sayings of like
nature. As where our Savior says concerning his Apostles, I speak not of you
all: John 13. 18. It would be very false from hence to infer, That he would
not, nor never did speak of them all: for other-where it is very evident he did
so: Matthew. 10. 1. John 6. 67. So also he thus speaks in another place
concerning his faithful Disciples; I do not say, that I will pray the Father
for you: John 16. 26. Now, would not those men who so pervert John 17. 9.
exceedingly blame any that should infer herefrom, and say, Our Savior never
said, he would pray for his own Disciples; Because he there says, I do not
say, that I will pray the Father for you? And indeed, such an Inference would
be most untrue, and exceedingly condemnable: for though he did not there say,
he would pray the Father for them, yet elsewhere he does so say; for in John
14. 16. he thus assures them, I will pray the Father for you, etc. And the same
we may apply to this Scripture objected, as will further appear by and by.

2. There is this good Reason why the World should then be excluded from his
Prayer in that place, because he is putting up Requests to his Father for the
then Actual Believers, and which were only proper to be petitioned for them,
and not for the World, while in that state: to wit, That they might be kept in
Gods Name: that they might be one; that they might be sanctified through the
truth: and sent into the World as Christ was; to wit, to preach the Gospel,
etc. John 17. 9-19. Now, how could our Savior pray for the World, while of the
World, in these Petitions, which were not proper to be presented for them?
Could he pray, That they might be kept in Gods Name, that were not in it? Or,
that they might be one, in their evil Ways and Designs? Or, that they might be
sent into the World to preach the Gospel, who did not believe the Gospel? No
surely. But this does no more deny that our Savior ever prayed for the World,
than Abraham's praying for his Son Ishmael, or Isaac, denies he ever prayed for
Sodom* That is to say, not in the least; for at several times, and in diverse
Petitions he prayed both for the former and the latter.

3. Nay, it evidently appears in Joh^ 17. That our Savior prayed for the
world* though not in verse 9-19. Or, the good of the World was one great thing
aimed at, and designed, in his praying for them who were chosen out of the
World: for that Prayer may be divided into four Parts. First, Our Savior prays
for himself; and therein prays not for the World, nor for the Believers
directly: John 17. 1-5. then he prays for such as were then actual Believers;
having an especial and most full Aim therein at his Apostles, and not for the
World; nor directly, and fully for such as should after believe, verse 6-19.
Nextly, he prays for future Believers, even for all such as should, after that
time, believe on him through the Apostles word, verse 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And
lastly, The end of his Prayer for the Apostles and other Believers, was, for
the good of the World. As it is said, That all may be one, as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: [That the World may
believe that thou did send me.] Which was that the Believers did believe; and
in the belief whereof they were rendered and accounted true Believers: John 17.
8. And again, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one:
[And that the World may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them.) to
wit, the sincere Believers) as thou have loved me:] John 17. 21-23. Like that,
God be merciful unto us, and bl^ss us, and cause his face to shine with us:
That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health, or salvation, among
all Nations, etc. Isal. 67. 1, 2, 3. 1 King. 8. 59, 60. So that this Objection
is wholly groundless, false, and of no force against what has been said.

5. It is also hereby evidenced, That God has no pleasure in the death of the
wicked. In that he sends his Servants to them to testify against them, and to
warn them of their sins, and of the danger they expose themselves unto thereby.
As it is said, The Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by the hand of his
Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending: Because he had compassion on his
people: 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. And in this Ezekiel 33. The Lord says, Son of Man, I
have set thee a Watch man unto the House of Israel; therefore thou shall hear
the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O
wicked man, thou shall surely die: If thou do not speak to warn the wicked
from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at thine hand: Nevertheless if thou warn the wicked of his way, to turn
from it: If he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou
have delivered thy Soul: verse 1-9. whereto he presently adds in the next verse
but one, I live, says the Lord Ged, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked; verse 11. To give us to understand, That his sending his Servants, to
warn the wicked of their evil ways, is an Evidence, that he delights not in
their destruction: But that they might take warning and live. See also Ezekiel. 3.
17-21. So that good man says, Thou testifiedst against them, who were
disobedient and rebellious; that thou might bring them again to thy Law:
Neh. 9. 26-29. And the Apostle says, We preach Christ, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus: Col. 1. 28. And when he thus sends his Servants to warn the
wicked, he does not send them alone, but accompanies them with the Light and
Influence of his blessed Spirit. Thus it is said, Many years did thou forbear
them, and (all this while) testifiedst against them by thy Spirit in the hand
of thy Prophets, etc. Neh. 9. 29, 30. And the Prophet Micah says, Truly, I am
full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to
declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to the House of Israel his sin: Micah
3. 8. with Chap. 2. 7. Zech. 7. 12. 1 These. 4. 1-8. Acts 7. 51. When the Lord
is so highly provoked against any, as to cast them off, then he threatens; He
will come on them as a thief, and they shall not know what hour he will come
upon them. He will then forbear to give them warning; but when they are secure,
when they say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as
travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape: Rev. 3. 3. 1 These.
5. 2, 3. But while he does admonish and fore-warn them of their wicked ways,
and cries unto them, O do not this abominable thing that I hate: And shows unto
them, That their continuing in the paths of darkness will be bitterness in the
end; he does evidence, that he is not willing with their Perdition, but would
that they should consider their ways and doings, and turn therefrom unto him,
who is ready to pardon them, and receive them to his mercy: Psalm. 50. 17-21. He
does fore-warn them, that they might turn from their wicked ways, and so flee
from the wrath to come: as Mat. 3. 7. 8. Heb. 11. 7.

6. That the Lord God has no pleasure in the eternal Destruction of the
Wicked, while they are joined to all the living, appears, by his Expostulations
and Pleadings with them: As, What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that
they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain?
Jer. 2. 5-8. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness?
Wherefore say my people, We have dominion, we will come no more unto thee?
Verse 29-31. Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die, O House of Israel? Ezekiel.
33. 11. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto
thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes
away: Hos. 6. 3-7. Jer 9. 7. O thou that art named the House of Jacob, is the
Spirit of the Lord straightened? are these his doings? Micah 2. 7. O my people,
what have I done unto thee? and wherewith have I wearied thee? testify against
me, etc. Micah 6. 2-5. Surely he does not thus speak, to insult over them in
their misery, or while he secretly delights in their eternal ruin: But to
signify, he is not pleased they should perish. As he says, Why will ye die, O
House of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says
the Lord God? wherefore turn and live ye: Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31, 32. The truth
hereof is also further manifested, by his pathetical and breathing Votes and
Desires concerning them: As, O that there were such an heart in them, that they
would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with
them, and with their Children for ever! Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end! Deuteronomy. 32.
28, 29. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
ways: Psalm. 81. 13, 14. O that thou had hearkened unto my Commandments! then
had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:
Isa. 48. 17, 18. Will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? Jer 13.
27. If, or, O that thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong to thy peace: Luke 19. 42. As also the truth of what the
Lord swears to, appears in that he speaks as one grieved at the very heart,
that men have turned a deaf ear to him, and scattered their ways unto
strangers, and obeyed not his Voice. As it is said by himself, Forty years
longer was I grieved with this generation, and said, it is a people that do err
in their hearts, and they have not known my ways: Psalm. 95. 10. So he speaks as
one grieved in Spirit, and says, My people would not hearken to my voice, and
Israel would none of me: Psalm. 81. 8-11. And of our Lord Jesus, who is the
Image of the Invisible God; it is said, When he beheld the City, he wept over
it, saying, If thou had known, even thou, etc. Luke 19. 41, 42. John 13. 21.
The truth hereof also is evidenced, In his slowness to Anger, and loathness to
give them up, who refused to return unto him, but were Idolaters, and bent to
backsliding from the Lord. As, How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I
delivar thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Seboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. I
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger; I will not return to destroy
Ephraim, for I am God, and not man; the holy One in the midst of thee: And I
will not enter into the City: Hos. 11. 2-8, 9. Mal. 3. 6. And lastly, As to
this particular, That he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, is
evident, and evidenced in his Readiness to Repent him of the Evil threatened by
him, and justly deserved by them, upon their turning to him: And readiness to
receive unto his Mercy great sinners, though their wickedness has been very
great, and long continued in: Though their wickedness has been like unto Sodom
and Gomorrah, and though their sins have been as Scarlet, and red like Crimson;
yea though they have spoken and done evil things as they could: As Isa. 1.
10-18. Jer. 3. 15. So the Lord says, Turn unto the Lord your God: And to move
them so to do, he adds, For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repents him of the evil: Joel 2. 12, 13. Thus he dealt
with Nineveh, when he saw their works, that they turned from their evil way,
God repented him of the evil that he said he would do unto them, and he did it
not. But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry, -- and said, I
pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying when I was yet in my Country?
Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish; for I knew that thou art a gracious God,
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the
evil: Jonah 3. 8-10. and 4. 1. 2. So when Ephraim repented, and smote upon the
thigh; the Lord says, Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a pleasant child? for
since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my
bowels are troubled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord;
Jer. 31. 18-20. How ready and forward was the Father in the Parable to be
reconciled unto, and with joy to receive and give entertainment unto his
prodigal Son, when through his necessity and indigency he though of returning,
and began so to do? When he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and
had compassion, and fell on his neck and kissed him, etc. And I say unto you,
says our Savior, That joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that repents,
more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance: Luke 15.
2-7-12-32.

Nay, when some such have not turned to him with the whole heart, but
feignedly, how ready has he been to spare them? As it is said, Nevertheless
they did flatter him with their mouths, and they lied unto him with their
tongues: for their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in
his Covenant: But he being full of compassion forgave their iniquity, and
destroyed them not. Yea many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir
up all his wrath. And the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation: Psalm 78.
34-36-38. 1 King. 21. 27-29.

Now all these things considered, and put together, do clearly evince and
evidence to us, That the Lord has no pleasure in the death of him that dies.
How can it once enter into our hearts, or be entertained by us, That he who so
expostulates with wicked Ones, and says, Why will ye die? That so pathetically
desires desires their good; that is so grieved at the heart for the hardness of
their hearts: as Mark 3. 5. That is so loath to give up such as have highly
provoked him to anger: That is so ready to repent him of the evil; and to
receive with joy and gladness such as repent and turn unto him from their
Iniquities; and to spare them who feignedly turn unto him; that they might
consider their ways, and turn their feet unto his Testimonies: That he mean
time does secretly delight in, and desire their Eternal Ruin! O my Soul, come
not thou into the Secret of them who suffer such wicked thoughts of God to
lodge within them: Unto their Assembly mine Honor be not thou united: as Genesis
49. 5, 6.

7. As also it appears, That the Lord has no pleasure in the Eternal Ruin of
the Wicked, while it is the Day of his Grace and Patience: Because he does not
delight in severely correcting here in this World. He does not willingly, or
from the heart afflict, or grieve the children of men. To crush under his feet
all the Prisoners of the earth, -- the Lord approves it not: Or, feeth it not;
to wit, with delight: Lam. 3. 33-36. He does indeed afflict, and execute
judgments in the Earth on those who contemn his Counsels: But he does not take
Pleasure therein; nor does he punish them but when their need requires it: for
he is slow to anger; and his Soul is grieved for their misery who have greatly
sinned against him: Judge. 10. 16. It is not pleasing to him now to plead with
wicked Ones in his furious Rebukes. Hence it is said, The Lord shall rise up as
in Mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the Valley of Gibeon: that he may do
his work, his strange work; (so called, because it is an unpleasant work to
him: As Job's breath is said to be strange, unpleasant, and undelightful, to
his Wife: Job 19. 13-17.) And bring to pass his Act, his strange Act: Isa. 28.
21. And therefore he does not bring to pass his strange Act, till there be a
necessity for it, as it were: And all more gracious and favorable means and
methods have proved unsuccessful and ineffectual: Hence the Lord says, I will
melt them, and try them, (to wit, throw them into the Furnace of affliction: as
Isa. 48. 10.) For how shall I do for the daughter of my people? As if he should
say, What other course can I take for the reclaiming them from their evil ways?
All those more-mild means he had been making use of, had proved in vain toward
them; and therefore he would thus proceed against them, in doing this strange
and undelightful work amongst them: Jer. 9. 7. Unto Acts of Mercy and Grace he
is very forward, and exercises himself therein preventingly without and before
men's desires: And notwithstanding their demerits, He gives liberally to all
men, and upbraideth not: John 3. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 1. 3. Jam. 1. 5. But unto Acts
of severity toward wicked Ones he is very backward, while it is to Day. And
some of his holy Servants have seemed to think him too backward and unready
thereto; and therefore have they earnestly imprecated Judgments upon great
Offenders, before he has executed them: Jer. 11. 20-23. and Chap. 18. 20-23.
And thus pleaded with him, Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and
can not look upon Iniquity, or Grievance: Wherefore look thou upon them
that deal treacherously, and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the
man that is more righteous than he? And make men as the fishes of the sea,
etc. Ha. 1. 2-4. 13-17. Ps. 35. 17. Yea when that eminent Prophet Elijah made
intercession to God against Israel, saying, They have killed thy Prophets, and
dug down thine Altars, etc. So gracious was the Lord, and so slow to anger,
that he excepts against the Prophets Charge, and, as it were pleads for them:
Romans 11. 2, 3, 4.

Now then, to Argue from the Less to the Greater, and from the Shorter to that
which is Perpetual: If God had no Pleasure to inflict tolerable and comparavely
light Afflictions upon evil men; surely then much rather we may conceive and
conclude, That he does not delight in laying upon them such Judgments and
Torments as are even intolerable, and unsupportable. And again, if it be not
pleasing to him that Sinners and evil Doers should be severely afflicted in
this life with momentany and short Afflictions; much more unwilling is he that
they should go into that everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; and therein he destroyed with everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, and from the Glory of his power. And does not the Lord himself
lead us thus to Reason? for the holy Spirit directs the Prophets thus to
Assert, and say, The Lord will not cast off for ever: But though he cause
grief, he will have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. But
what does he bring to prove and evince, that he will not cast off for ever? It
presently follows, For he does not willingly afflict, etc. As if he should say,
He who now does not from his heart, or with delight, afflict for a moment, is
more unwilling to cast off to all eternity: Lam. 3. 31, 32, 33. Thou shall
consider in thy heart, says Moses, that as a man chasteneth his Son, the Lord
thy God chasteneth thee: Deuteronomy. 8. 5. Now, how does a tenderhearted Parent
chasten his froward and stubborn Son? Surely with a great deal of loathness and
reluctance: It is not the Work of his Delight so to do. Even so our Gracious
Father, (who is so pitiful and of such tender mercies, that the most prudently
indulgent Parent here, is but evil, in comparison of him; as our Savior gives
us to understand: Matthew. 7. 11.) does not delight to afflict his Sons and
Daughters, (as all men are by Creation and Redemption: Mal. 2. 10. Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
19.) when they provoke him to anger, but is very slow and backward thereto. And
as we may be confident, and safely conclude, that no tenderhearted Parent, who
has no Pleasure to whip his Son, has much less any Pleasure to kill him, and
to bereave himself of him for ever. So likewise we may more confidently
persuade our selves, That the God and Father of all, who now chastens not
Sinners for his Pleasure; has much more no Pleasure to cast them into
Hellfire, where their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched: Heb. 12.
10. And they that will entertain and hold fast such thoughts of God as these,
That though he does not willingly afflict the Sons of Men, yet he has a secret
Delight or Pleasure in their endless and eternal Ruin and Misery; must turn
their Reason out of the Doors of their Souls, that they may keep their
unreasonable, groundless and absurd Opinion in possession. But the Apostle
tells us, That such as consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ -- they are fools, knowing nothing, (as they ought to know) but
doting about Questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, etc. And he therefore thus counsels, from such
withdraw thyself: 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.

8. And lastly, It also appears, and is hereby evidenced, That the Lord God
has no pleasure in the death of the wicked; By the Afflictions and Judgments
which he now executes and infflicts upon them: for though he does not willingly
afflict, as has been said before; yet he does afflict; Verily he is a God that
judges in the earth: He forms the Light, and creates Darkness: He makes Peace,
and creates Evil: To wit, Evil of Affliction and Judgment: Isa. 45. 7. Amos. 3.
8. And this does evince and evidence to us, That he has no delight in their
destruction, in that he makes use of such Methods for their Amendment as are
strange and grievous to him: which will yet further also appear, if we duly
consider these two things: Namely,

1. The Reason or Motive of his Afflicting and Judging them: and that is, His
love and merciful kindness toward them, toward their Immortal Souls. Indeed
we are apt to look upon Afflictions as Tokens and Testimonies of his hatred
toward us: But in so doing, we judge according to outward Appearance, and do
not judge righteous Judgment: for his love moves him to correct us, when our
need requires it; and so it does toward the righteous. And his trying them is
opposed to his hatred: Psalm. 11. 5. Hence the Apostle says, My Son, despise
not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him;
for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he
receives: Prove. 3. 11, 12. with Heb. 12. 5-7. Yea and it is out of love
toward men generally, that he does try them, and correct them for their Faults
and Follies. Hence Job breaks forth into Admiration, and says, What is man
that thou should magnify him! that thou should set thine heart upon him!
(to wit, thy love and affection:) that thou should visit him! (to wit, with
Afflictions and Corrections: as Ps. 89. 32.) every morning? and try him every
moment? Job 7. 17-19. And when the Angel and Church of Laodicea were become
lukewarm, and so loathsome and offensive to Christ, as that he threatens to
spue them out of his mouth: yet then he sends this Message to them, As many as
I love, I rebuke and chasten: Rev. 3. 15-19. And indeed, hereby also it
appears, that while he is judging men in this World, he loves them: And that
his Corrections proceed from his Love; because he signifies it to be a most
high Expression of severe Displeasure, when he threatens to cease, or forbear
taking any longer such pains with them, because they have been incorrigible
under his Afflicting-hand. To this purpose he many times speaks; as, Why should
ye* be smitten any more? Isa. 1. 5. I will not punish your Daughters when they
commit Whoredom, nor your Spouses when they commit Adultery: Hos. 4. 14.
Ephraim is joined to Idols: let him alone, ver. 17. And that he does Correct
and Chastise the Sons of Men, while it is called to Day, out of Love; and
therefore is not willing with their Perdition; will yet further appear, if we
consider,

2. The end of the Lord in his Rebuking and Judging of them; yea of his
threatenings and judgments; and that is, Their eternal good and welfare; that is
the thing ultimately designed by him therein: As Elihu says, Lo, all these
things works God oftentimes with Man, to bring back his Soul from the Pit; to
be enlightened with the light of the living. Mark well, O Job, says Elihu,
Hearken unto me, etc. Job 33. 27-29-31.

The end of the Lord in the liftings up of his hand, and threatenings, is, that
men might cease to do evil, and learn to do well; That he may repent him of the
evil threatened to them, and be gracious unto them. At what instant, says the
Lord, I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up,
and to pull down, and to destroy. If that Nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, (which is the thing designed therein by him)
I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. Now therefore go to,
speak to the men of Judah, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus
says the Lord, behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against
you: return you now every one from his evil way, and make your ways, and your
doings good: Jer. 18. 7-11. And to the same purpose, the Lord commands the same
Prophet, To take a Roll of a Book, and write therein all the words that he had
spoken unto him against Israel, and against Judah, etc. And then adds, It may
be that the House of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto
them, that they may return every man from his evil way, that I may forgive
their iniquity, and their sin: Jer. 36. 2, 3. Ezekiel. 12. 2, 3. Jonah. 3. 4-9,
10. and Chap. 4. 1, 2. Psalm. 7. 12, 13.

And so also his Design and end in executing Jugments in the Earth, while it is
called to Day, is, not the Destruction of Evildoers, but the Correction and
Amendment of them: That when his judgments are in the earth, the Inhabitants of
the world might learn righteousness: Isa. 26. 9. He therefore orders occasions
of sadness and heaviness to them, that by the sadness of their countenances
their hearts might be made better: Eccl. 7. 2, 3. And therefore, he looks
upon men; and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right,
and it profited me not, he will deliver his Soul from going down into the pit,
and his life shall see the light: Job 33. 27-30. When we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world: 1 Cor.
11. 32. And that he does aim at, and design the good of men, in his Correcting
and Punishing them, appears from what has been said immediately before:
Namely, That he does chasten them out of love: For love works no ill to
another, but designs his good and benefit: To. 13. 9. And he that charges
Parents not to withold Correction from their Children, -- but to beat them
with the Rod, and so deliver their Souls from Hell: Doubtless, he intends the
same in his Judgings of Men, while they are joined to all the living: Prove. 23.
13, 14. with Job 33. 29, 30. and Psalm. 94. 10-12.

And not only is this his Gracious End in those Chastisements and Afflictions,
which are more moderate and common to Man: But also in his more severe and
furious Judgments and Rebukes, when he causes men to sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of Death; being bound in affliction and iron: Because they rebelled
against the words of God, and contemned the Counsel of the most High, etc. And
whosoever is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord: Psalm. 107. 10-22-39-43. When none can stand before
his indignation, and none can abide in the fierceness of his anger: his fury
being poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him. Yet then the
Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, etc. Nah. 1. 2-6, 7. So the
Apostle signifies, That the heavy and spiritual Judgments executed upon the
unbelieving and disobedient Israelites, according to those Imprecations of the
Psalmist against them, were not inflicted upon them for their destruction, but
for the amendment of them, while it was the Day of Gods Grace toward them:
According as it is written, God has given them the Spirit of slumber, or
remorse, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear. And
David says, Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a
stumbling block, and a recompense unto them: Let their eyes be darkened, that
they may not see, and bow down their back always. These were most severe
Judgments, in which God, in some measure, gave them up to a Reprobate Mind: And
it might therefore be readily concluded by some, That God by inflicting these
upon them, designed their Eternal Ruin: But the Apostle gives us cause
otherwise to believe and judge; for he immediately subjoyns to the former, I
say then, have they not stumbled that they might fall? God forbid: (far be it
from us so to conceive;) but through their fall salvation is come unto the
Gentiles, for to provoke them (these Jews) to jealousy: Romans 11. 8, 9, 10, 11.
And again he says, God has concluded them all in unbelief; (taken away his
Gospel and Kingdom from them, and deprived them of those choice and spiritual
Privileges and Advantages they were formerly favored with;) that he might
have mercy upon all: That he might have mercy upon us Gentiles; for through
their unbelief and rejection, the Gospel and its Privileges were vouchsafed
unto us; And that he might this way have mercy upon them also: That through our
mercy, they might also obtain mercy. The Consideration whereof caused the
Apostle to break forth into Admiration, and say, O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! Romans 11. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. The Consideration whereof
might preserve us from being censorious, or rashly judging any, when. God is
inflicting his most severe Judgments upon them: For who has known the mind of
the Lord? or who has been his Counselor? Verse 34, 35. Yea he sometimes gives
up wicked Ones in his Church unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that
they might learn not to blaspheme: And that their Spirit might be saved in the
day of the Lord: 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5-13. with 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.

And this is not only his End in those severe and dismal Judgments, which he
executes upon them that were in his Church, and of his people professedly: But
also as with respect to such as were never joined thereto, or of the number
thereof. Hence the Psalmist thus Imprecates, as with respect to such as were
without the Pale of the Church: O my God, make them like a wheel, as the
stubble before the wind: So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them
afraid with thy storm: Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy
Name, O Lord. Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: (to wit, in their
evil Designs and Enterprises;) yea, let them be put to shame and perish: That
they may know that thou, whose Name alone is Jehovah, art the most High over
all the Earth: Ps. 83. 13-16-18. And hereby also it appears, That God is not
willing that any should perish, in that he does Afflict and Judge the Sons of
Men, though not willingly, or delightfully so: And does in all the Afflictions
and Chastisements which he is inflicting on them, and chastening them withal,
even in the greatest and more severe also; Design their purging from their
Iniquity, and Conformity to his Mind and Will: And so, their Eternal Good and
Benefit. And as is also said before, the two Particulars under this
last-mentioned Head, do mutually evidence the truth of each other: That is to
say, In that he Chastens and Corrects out of love; this shows, That his End in
all his Rebukings is good toward men: And in that his Design and End is good
and gracious toward Men, in his now Judgings of them; therein we may see, that
his Love toward them moves and prevails with him to make use of the Rod of
Correction, that he might thereby purge out of the Hearts of the Children of
Men that Folly that is bound up in them: 2 Chronicles. 33. 10, 11, 12, 13. Isa. 9.
12, 13. His judgments are as the light that goes forth: for he desires mercy
and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings: Hos. 5.
14, 15* and Chap. 6. 1-5, 6. Amos 4. 6-9-12. Jer. 4. 13, 14. Psalm. 9. 19, 20.

3. But now having, I conceive, sufficiently evidenced and demonstrated the
truth of what the Lord God here swears to; namely, That he has no pleasure,
none at all, neither Revealed nor Secret, in the Death of the wicked; in the
Eternal Destruction of him that dies; according to the Explication fore-given.
I shall now, with the Assistance of the good Spirit of God, note and infer from
what has been said, some Instructions that may be of usefulness unto us. As to
say.

1. If the Lord God has no pleasure in the Death, and Eternal misery of the
Wicked; Then we may be confident that he had no Pleasure in the Death of the
Righteous; as all Men were as they were Created of God in the first Public
Man: And, before he did eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, whereof
God commanded him he should not eat: For All were then Innocent and Righteous.
God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him: To wit,
In Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness of Truth: Genesis 1. 26, 27 with Ephesians. 4.
23, 24. Col. 3. 10. God saw every thing that he had made, and behold, it was
very good: Genesis 1. 31. This only have I found, says the Preacher, that God
made Man upright: Eccl. 7. 29. Yet some there are that say, The greatest part
of Mankind was Reprobated of God before the World had a beginning; and while
all Men were Righteous, and in the pure mass. This is so directly contrary to
what we have said, and to the whole Current of the Holy Scriptures; that
nothing can lightly be invented, or devised by the wit of man, more
blasphemously opposite thereto; and is therefore to be abominated by us: For
the righteous Lord loves righteousness: and therefore also, he loves the
righteous, his Countenance does behold the upright: Psalm. 11. 7. and 146. 8.
The righteous shall never be removed: Prove. 10. 30. Behold, says Bildad, God
will not cast away, (Reject or Reprobate, as the word signifies) a perfect man:
Job 8. 20. He will not doom them to everlasting Destruction; that is far from
him: Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? as Abraham says, Genesis 18.
25. God forbid, that we should entertain, or suffer to lodge within us, such
vain and wicked thoughts of him, who has now no pleasure in the death of the
wicked; that he should hate the righteous! And yet after this rate they speak,
who say, That he Reprobated the most of men before the Fall, for the
manifestation of the Glory of his Justice. For Reprobation in Scripture always
signifies an Act of Hatred in God toward the Persons Reprobated; a Judicial
Act of Hatred for some Iniquity committed, and continued in, by those who are
so Reprobated: Jer. 6. 16-30. Romans 1. 23, 24-28. But the naming this dreadful
and ungodly Opinion, is sufficient to discover its odiousness unto those that
give Glory to God, in believing the Truth of what he Affirms by his Word, and
Confirms by his most solemn and Indubitable Oath: And therefore I shall add no
more to that.

2. If the Lord God has no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked; Then we may
assuredly know, believe and conclude, that he has no Pleasure in the
Everlasting Destruction of such as are only necessarily polluted and defiled;
as all men since the Fall are, in partaking of the Nature of Man, Christ only
excepted, who was miraculously conceived by the Holy Spirit, and so knew no
sin: But as with respect unto all others, in partaking of the Nature of Man,
they unavoidably partake of the filth of sin; They are shapen in iniquity, and
in sin did their Mother warm them: Psalm. 51. 5. How can Man be justified with
God? Or how can he be clean that is born of a Woman? Job 14. 4. and 25. 4. Now
I say, If God has no Pleasure in the Death of them, who add rebellion to their
sin: (as Job. 34. 37.) And in whose filthiness is lewdness: as Ezekiel. 24. 13. We
may be confident he has none in their Ruin and Perdition; who could no more
prevent their being sinners in this respect, than they could prevent their
being Creatures, or the Offspring of fallen, degenerate Mankind: for they are
naturally unclean, even as the sparks fly upwards. And that he had, and has no
Pleasure in the Death of such as are necessarily unclean, appears plainly and
evidently, In that he has devised such a blessed Means, that his banished Ones
might not be banished: 2 Samuel 14. 14. And in due season, Sent forth his Son
made of a Woman, made under the Law, etc. Gal. 4. 4, 5. And, Jesus Christ, by
the Grace of God, tasted death for every man: Heb. 2. 9. And rose again for
their Justification: Romans 4. 25. As the Apostle signifies, when he says, All
have sinned; (to wit, in the First Public Man: Romans 5. 12. And as they come
into the World, come forth unclean and filthy: Romans 5. 19.) and come short of
the Glory of God: Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus: Romans 3. 23, 24. and Chap. 5. 18. And our Lord Jesus
has through death overcome and abol^shed this first Death: As we have before
said; 2 Timothy 1. 10. And will, in due season, destroy it: 1 Cor. 15. 16. And
has destroyed him that had the power of Death, that is, the Devil: Heb. 2. 9.
14. And he himself has now the keys of Hell and Death: Rev. 1. 18. And will in
the proper season raise All out of it, and no man shall perish for ever
therein: 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. And in the Eternal Judgment which follows after the
Resurrection of the Dead, no man shall perish in the Second Death for this
first sin and sinfulness simply; but for their own personal and voluntary
Iniquities committed, and continued in, till the Day of Gods Grace and Patience
was ended. This is the condemnation, (says our Savior; the cause of men's
Condemnation, or that for which men shall be condemned hereafter,) that light
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light: John 3. 19.
Romans 1. 18. and Chap. 2. 4, 5-11. 2 Cor. 5. 10. 2 These. 1. 7-9. Suitable to
what the Lord swears to, saying, I live, says the Lord God, ye shall not have
occasion any m^^e to use this Proverb in Israel: (to wit, The Fathers have
eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on edge.) Behold, all Souls
are mine, as the Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of the Son is mine. The
Soul that sins, (to wit, voluntarily and impenitently) it shall die: Ezekiel.
18. 2, 3, 4. with Jer. 31. 29, 30. And therefore, without peradventure, All
Infants, and such as have died before they come to the use of understanding,
shall be raised to the enjoyment of Eternal Life; and none such shall perish in
the Second Death. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of
the womb is his reward: Psalm. 127. 3. And according to what has been said
before; He that is now so pitiful and compassionate toward those persons, that
cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand: As that he is not
forward to execute upon them a temporal Judgment for their Fathers Iniquities,
though they were not of his Church; he has no Pleasure to doom them to the
Vengeance of eternal Fire: Considering also, That Christ has given himself a
Ransom for them, as he has done for all men: Jonah 4. 10, 11. Jer. 49. 7-11. 1 Timothy ^* 4, 5, 6. Certainly he has not: But he will have a desire to the work
of his hands, and to the Price of the precious blood of his dear Son: Job 14.
15. Ezekiel. 18. 4.

Object But against what we are now considering, some may object and say, That
before Esau was born, or had done good or evil, God hated and reprobated him:
And therefore he may hate them also in their Infancy, and reprobate them before
they were born; and hereafter destroy them for ever for the sin of their first
Parents.

Answ. To this Objection we may give several Answers, and say;

1. Suppose what is contained in this Objection were verily true, as it is
indeed very false and untrue: What ground of Comfort can they have concerning
their own Children, who die in Infancy, that make this Objection, and believe
it to be true? If they say, they are themselves hearty Believers in Christ, and
so Abraham's Seed, and Heirs of the Promise, and therefore their Children are
in the Covenant: If all this should be granted, yet may not as much at least
be, without any scruple affirmed of Isaac, the Father of Jacob and Esau; and
yet they believe the one half of his Children was hated and reprobated before
born: And why may it not be so with theirs also? See Genesis 26. 3, 4, 5. And
methinks were this considered by them, it might fill their own hearts with
continual sorrow and heaviness; unless this dismal Decree of Reprobation, they
plead for, has made them perfectly like unto the Ostrich, which is hardened
against her young ones, as though they were not hers; her labor is in vain
without fear: Because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted
to her understanding: Job 39. 13-17. But,

2. I further say, That there is nothing of truth at all in this Objection; and
therefore it is like unto the rest of their Tenets, in which they oppose the
Doctrine of the Grace of God in Christ to all Mankind: For,

1. There is no reason to believe, That God hated Esau before he was born;
seeing God gave him to Isaac, in answer to his Entreaty and Prayer: And so he
might say, as his Son Jacob did afterward concerning his Children; to wit,
That he was one that God graciously gave unto him: Genesis 33. 5. For it is said,
Isaac entreated the Lord for his Wife, because she was barren: And the Lord was
entreated of him, and Rebekah his Wife conceived: Genesis 25. 21. Now what a
Return of Prayer, and Encouragement to a like Prayer, was here, if God in
answer to his Prayer gives him two Sons; and one of them was hated and
reprobated before he was born? Our Savior says, What man is there of you,
whom if his Son ask bread, will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will
he give him a serpent? But how much beneath evil Parents, does this Objection
render our Gracious God, who infinitely exceeds in Goodness and Kindness to his
Children all earthly Parents: For here his Child Isaac begs a Boon of him, and
he gives him one piece of bread, and one stone; one fish, and one serpent or
scorpion; if this Objection would hold water: Mat. 7. 9-11.

2. There is not a word spoken of Gods hating Esau before he was born, or of
Gods hating Esau personally considered, at any time: what was spoken before the
Children were born, or had done good or evil, was this only, The elder shall
serve the younger; as may be plainly seen in Genesis 25. 23. with Romans 9. 11, 12.
Nor was this spoken of his Person, but of his Posterity: As evidently appears
in Genesis 15. 23. Two Nations are in thy Womb, and two manner of People shall be
separated from thy Bowels, etc. And though in Romans 9. 11. those words [the
Children] are put in, yet they are not the words of God, but added by the
Translators, and therefore faithfully put in a different Character.

3. This serving Jacob Nationally considered, by Esau Nationally considered,
was not looked upon, nor was out of positive hatred; or as a Curse ordered to
Esau. It was not looked upon by Isaac as a Testimony of Gods positive hatred
toward Esau; for Isaac loved him: Nay, it was a part of Esau's Blessing to
serve his Brother, Nationally considered; (for personally he never so did:) and
so signified to be; for this was a part of that Blessing wherewith his Father
Isaac blessed him: to wit, Thou shall serve thy brother: Yea and in that he did
bless him, and bless him by Faith, concerning things to come. It very plainly
appears, that Esau was not positively hated of God: Genesis 27. 39, 40. with Heb.
11. 20. Indeed, in that Oracle was signified, that Jacob Nationally considered,
should in former Ages be preferred in Choice Privileges and Advantages: they
were the Church of God, and had his Oracles committed to them, etc. Romans 3. 1,
2. and Chap. 9. 4, 5. And of them, as concerning the flesh, Christ came. But
this was no hatred of Esau, in their sense: for in Christ there was, and is
Blessing for all the Nations and Families of the earth: Genesis 22. 16-18. and Chapter
26. 3, 4. and 28. 13, 14. And any of them might have become Proselites, and so
have partaken of their Advantages also: And doubtless there were good men
descended from Esau, as Job, Eliphaz, etc. Deuteronomy. 23. 7, 8.

4. And as with respect to that saying, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I
hated: That was not spoken before these two persons were born, but long after
they were dead: And therefore also it was not spoken of their persons, but of
their Posterities, which still retained their Name: And that hatred toward Esau
spoken of, was expressed, not in excluding him, or any of that Nation out of
Heaven, in a personal consideration; but in laying his Mountains, and his
Heritage waste, for the Dragons of the Wilderness. And if this was an Act of
Hatred toward Esau, Nationally considered: Then certainly, it was an Act of
Love in God to give him formerly these Mountains, and that Heritage. And the
reason why Esau was thus hated and punished, was, because he did not serve his
Brother with these Mountains, but was an Enemy to him: Esau was hated, not
before he had done good or evil; But because of the wickedness of Esau,
Nationally considered, toward his Brother Jacob Nationally considered: As it
is said, For thy violence against thy Brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee,
and thou shall be cut off for ever. In the day that thou stoodest on the other
side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his forces, and
foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast
as one of them, etc. Compare, Mal. 1, 2, 3. with Ezekiel. 35. and Obad. 9. 16. And
the same Prophet that mentions these words; to wit, Esau have I hated;
signifies what the reason of his being hated was, to wit, because of his
wickedness: for so he says, They shall call them the Border of wickedness, and
the people against whom the Lord has indignation for ever. Esau was the People
of Gods Indignation, as he was the Border of wickedness: And is not any other
People so also? Mal. 1. 3. with ver. 4. So that by all we have said, it
evidently may appear unto any considering person, That Esau Personally
considered, was not positively hated, or reprobated of God before he was born;
nor is any other so. And I have been the longer in giving Answer to this
Objection, because it is as usually, as unreasonably urged, to prove, That Esau
was, and so others may be, Reprobated of God, hefore they have done good, or
evil: Whereas indeed, There is not the least color or ground for such a
conclusion from the Scriptures in any one place: And so, notwithstanding this
Objection, which is altogether groundless and sandy, we conclude, as we have
before said; That God has no pleasure, none at all, in the Death of those who
are only necessarily and unavoidably polluted: Nor shall any such be cast into
the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second Death;
Psalm. 9. 17. Rev. 21. 8. and Chap. 22. 15.

3. In that the Lord God has no pleasure in the Death of the wicked, while
they are joined to all the living, as he here swears: Then it appears evidently
and manifestly, That such as do die and perish eternally, are the Authors or
Procurers of their own eternal Misery and Ruin: And that their destruction is
of themselves wholly, as with respect to God: As the Lord says to some of his
professed People in former times; O Israel, thy corruption, or destruction, is
of thy self: Hos. 13. 9. It is true indeed, God is the Judge of all, and will
execute judgment upon all: Jude 15. And such as impenitently persist in their
unbelief of the Gospel, and disobedience to God, shall be destroyed with
everlasting d^struction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. He will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such
as go on still in their trespasses: Psalm. 68. 18-21. But in so doing, he will
but make them eat of the fruit of their own way: Prove. 1. 24-31. And give them
the wages of their own unrighteousness and iniquity: Romans 6. 23. Their ways and
their doings procure these things to themselves: this will be their wickedness,
even the fruit and reward thereof: as Jer. 4. 17, 18. And it may then be
Righteously said to such as eternally perish; Have ye not procured these things
unto your selves, in that ye forsook, or rejected the Lord? Their own
wickedness will correct them, and their backslidings reprove them: as Jer. 2.
17, 18, 19. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercies: Jonah
2. 8. They that love the World, and serve the Creature more than the Creator,
lose their own Souls, and bring upon themselves swift destruction* Math. 16.
26. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Who so sins against me, says Wisdom, wrongeth his own
Soul: All they that hate me love death: Prove. 8. 36. Number. 16. 38. He that
refuses instruction, to wit, Gods Instruction, despises his own Soul: Prove.
15. 32. And therefore will be destroyed, Prove. 13. 15. Such, as when the
goodness of God leads them to Repentance, do walk after their own hardness
and impenitent hearts, they treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; who will render unto
every man according to his deeds. And so, To them who are contentious, and obey
not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, he will render Indignation and wrath,
tribulation, and anguish upon every Soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile: -- for there is no respect of persons with God:
Romans 2. 1-4, 5-11. There will be no good reason, or just cause, to blame the
Almighty, as if he were the Author of their endless misery: And if any shall so
do, He will be justified in his sayings, and overcome when he is judged. Romans
3. 3, 4. And all ^^at are incensed against him shall be ashamed, when they
shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ: for then they shall know and
confess, That he had no Pleasure during the Day of his Grace, in their
Perdition, but willed that they should be saved: And therefore thus called unto
All, Look unto me, all the ends of the earth, and be ye saved: for I am a just
God, and a Savior, and there is none besides me: Isa. 45. 21, 22, 23, 24. And
specially such as continue wicked amongst Gods Professed People, will be
inexcusable in that day, and will be even speechless: Matthew. 22. 12, 13, 14.
They will not have to plead for themselves, That Christ never died for them;
for he gave his flesh for the life of the world: John 6. 51. Died for all, even
for All of Mankind that were dead, and rose again for their justification: To
the end they might have lived unto him who so dearly bought them: 2 Cor. 5. 14,
25. They will have no just cause to say, That there was no saving Grace
vouchsafed to them, that they might have been saved from their wickedness: For
this is very false, as afterward also we may show more fully: And as is
intimated in this Oath; for without question, he that so solemnly swears that
he has now no Pleasure in their Destruction, will not be wanting in giving
such Grace to them, as whereby they may escape that place of Torment: The grace
of God that brings salvation, or is saving unto all men, has appeared: Tit.
2. 11, 12. Or if they should think to excuse themselves, or extenuate their
wickedness, with saying, God had reprobated them, or past them by before they
were born: And by virtue hereof, they were left under a necessity of perishing,
and must in conclusion be unavoidably miserable. Hereby they will nothing
advantage themselves, for they do but make lies their refuge, and under
falsehood seek to hide themselves: And when God lays Judgment to the Line, and
Righteousness to the Plummet, the hail will sweep away their refuge of lies,
and the waters will overflow their hiding place: As Isa. 28. 15-17. For there
is no such dreadful and dismal Decree of Reprobation of any of Mankind, in a
Personal Consideration, as some earnestly and zealously contend for; as appears
plainly and evidently in what we have said before. Nor is the Lord now willing
that any should perish; as he has both said and sworn, and given his Son to be
a Witness of the truth hereof. And therefore this will be the Worm that will
gnaw upon them for ever, That God so loved them when fallen, as to give his
only begotten Son to be their Savior, that through him they might be saved:
That Christ by the free Love and Charity of God, and by his own Grace, tasted
Death for them, and rose again for their Justification; and ascended up on
high, and led Captivity Captive, and received gifts in the Man, even for the
Rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them: That when they came
to years of understanding, God made known the love of the truth to them, to the
end they might have been saved; and assisted them, in order thereunto, with his
Grace, and strove with them by his Spirit, to convince them of, and convert
them from their sins and vanities, to serve the living and true God: That yet,
notwithstanding all this, they rewarded him evil for good, and hatred for his
love: That they trampled under foot the precious blood of Christ, the blood of
the Covenant: And resisted and offered despite unto the Spirit of Grace: Heb.
10. 29. And despised all the riches of Gods goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering vouchsafed to them: Romans 2. 4-6. Oh! this, I say, being
reflected on, will fill them with desperate Grief, and Vexation of Spirit; That
when it was Gods will they should be saved, they would not so be: That when
Christ would have gathered them, as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, they would not be gathered. Then they will blame themselves only, and
even say, How have we hated instruction, and our heart despised reproof! we
have not obeyed the voice of our teachers, nor inclined our ears to them that
instructed us: Prove. 5. 7-13. Wisdom 5. 2-8. Then they will be ashamed, and cry
for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit; That when God called them
they did not answer; That when he spoke, they did not hear, but did evil before
his eyes, and chose that wherein he delighted not; when they might have chosen
the things that pleased him; And which would have been eternally profitable to
themselves: for if they had been wise, they should have been wise for
themselves: But having been Scorners, they alone must bear it: Isa. 65. 11-15.
Prove. 9. 12. Had their Ruin and eternal Perdition been unavoidable, it would
be more tolerable: And there would have been no good Reason for them to have
blamed themselves: But when they shall consider they wilfully sinned, and
brought upon themselves eternal Destruction, when God was not willing they
should perish; and swear, As he lives, he had no pleasure therein. Oh! this
will aggravate their misery: how can their hearts endure the thoughts hereof?
Or, how can their hands be strong? Ezekiel. 22. 13, 14. And yet thus it must needs
be: I mean, Man's Perdition will be, and appear to be, wholly of himself: And
none shall be Damned hereafter, but such as might have been saved; and yet did
not receive the love of the truth, that they might be saved: 2 These. 2. 10, 11,
12. And this is evident from what the Lord God here swears to, namely, That he
has no pleasure in the Death of the wicked.

Object. But against what has been even now said, some may object, and say, It
evidently appears, that some Persons were personally elected to salvation
before they were born, yea before the foundation of the World: Ephesians. 1. 4. And
therefore also it necessarily follows, that some were then also personally
reprobated, and must needs perish hereafter.

Answ. To this Objection I shall more briefly give Answer, because I have
elsewhere largely considered it; and showed some men's great mistake concerning
it: And therefore I shall here only say,

1. If it should be granted, that the Apostle speaks there directly of some
men's being elected to Salvation, before the Dejection, or foundation of the
World: Yet it appears evidently, that they were not chosen thereto in a
personal consideration; but as considered in Christ; and so as Believers in
him: for the words are, He has chosen us [in him] before the Dejection, or
foundation of the World, etc. Ephesians. 1. 4. After some such consideration as
Levi paid Tithes in Abraham: Heb. 7. 9. It would be most absurd and ridiculous
to suppose, that that Individual person Levi paid Tithes to Melchisedech before
he was born; but he did it in Abraham. So here no person is elected in a
personal consideration, before he is born; nor otherwise elected to Salvation
but in Christ; to wit, as considered in him, who is the Root of Election, and
the Prime Elect: That is to say, God in choosing Christ before the Dejection of
the World, did therein choose all those who should in their several Generations
through Grace believe, as Believers in him, and no otherwise. So that the same
Person who to day does not believe, and so is not in Christ, nor elected; yet
to morrow believing, is then chosen in Christ, and made of that Generation, or
Species, chosen in Christ before the Dejection of the World. He is now of the
elect Generation, who, before he believed, was not of it: as Romans 9. 24-26. 1
Pet. 2. 4, 5-9, 10. But,

2. I further say, That Ephesians. 14. speaks not of men's being chosen to salvation;
but of some men's being chosen in Christ to an excellent ministration, or
service: And to a more excellent One than any before: Nor were they chosen
thereto in a personal consideration, but as considered in Christ, and as
Trusters in him; and as first Trusters in him: as Ephesians. 1. 12. as plainly
appears by the change of the persons. In the two first Verses of Ephesians. 1. The
Apostle speaks to the believing Ephesians, and says unto them, Grace unto you,
etc. But then from verse 3. to verse 12. he speaks not of them, but changes the
persons; never says [You] but always [We] and [Vs;] to assure us, he speaks of
some others, and not of them: And having so done, then in ver. 13. he again
returns to, and speaks of them, and says, In whom ye also trusted, or
believed, after ye heard the word of truth, etc. So that all contained from
ver. 3. to v. 12. respects those that trusted in Christ before the Ephesians
were in Christ, and so, before they were chosen: And ver. 4. particularly
speaks also of the Apostles, as Believers in Christ, and Apostles, being chosen
to the ministration, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit: as 2 Cor. 3. 5-10.
That is to say in short, God before the Dejection, or Foundation of the World,
chose Christ to be the Mediator, Savior, and great Apostle; and purposed to
send him in the end of the World, actually to make peace for us, and to preach
it to us, and reserved this honor for him, That the mystery which was hid from
former Ages and Generations, should by him be opened: He then also in Christ
chose the first Trusters in him, to be Instruments in this choice Service and
Ministration, to preach the Gospel according to the revelation of the mystery:
Ephesians. 1. 8-10, 11. As the Apostle elsewhere says, We speak the wisdom of God
in a mystery, the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world, or ages,
unto our glory; to wit, for the Glory of the Apostles of the Lamb: which place
is very suitable to the other, 1 Cor. 2. 7. with Ephesians 1. 4. And this is the
proper and direct meaning of Ephesians. 1. 3, 4-12.

Now this Election does not suppose, that all others, besides the Apostles,
were reprobated to eternal Destruction; God forbid: But the very end of Gods
choosing them in Christ, to this excellent Ministration, was, That the world
there-through might be saved: Joh. 3. 17. with Chap. 17, 18. As Paul says, Now
to him that is of power to establish you according to my Gospel, and the
preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which
was kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the
Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the everlasting
God, made known [to all Nations, for the obedience of Faith:] Rom 1. 5. and
Chap. 16. 25, 26. So that this Election was intended for the good of the whole
world: And we still conclude, That God is not willing that any should perish.
And because he has no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies, it necessarily
follows, as has been showed, That their Destruction who perish, is wholly of
themselves, he has no hand therein, nor heart thereto, while it is the day of
his Grace and Patience.

4. And lastly, as to this, seeing God swears, That he has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, in the death of him that dies; as is before explained:
Then hereby we may see and know who are like to God, and Children of him; and
who they are that are not so.

1. They are not therein born of God, who privily bring in Heresies of
Destruction, or destructive Errors and Doctrines, such as tend to the perdition
of men; as those certainly do, who teach men to deny the Lord that bought them:
2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. And do not these evil Doctrines do so, which teach, That Christ
died not for all, nor tasted death by the Grace of God for every man, but only
for the Elect; as they speak: That though God with his revealed Will would have
all men to be saved, yet not so with his secret Will. That though he commands
all men every where to Repent, yet he does not vouchsafe such sufficient, or
saving Grace, whereby they may so do. In short, That there is a certain
determinate number of Mankind elected in a personal consideration, before the
World was; and these shall be brought in to believe, in due season,
irresistibly; and so preserved, that they shall not possibly fail of the Grace
of God, however they demean themselves: and all the rest are reprobated, and
must necessarily, or shall infallibly perish in conclusion; how much soever
they endeavor to fly from the wrath to come, etc.

These, and such like Doctrines; yea All such as consent not to wholesome Words,
the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the Doctrine according to Godliness,
are not of God: Nor are such of God therefore who plead for, or preach them: I
mean, therein they are not of God* as the Apostle John signifies, in that Rule
he gives the Believers, whereby they might know which Prophets are of God, and
which are not: We are of God, (says he, namely, the holy Apostles were so, in
their Word and Doctrine; for Christ gave unto them the Words which the Father
gave him: John 17. 7, 8.) He that knows God hears us: He that is not of God
hears us not: hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of error: 1
John 4. 6. with John 8. 47. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God: 2 John 9-11. And our Savior when he
denounces Woes against the Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites; the first of
all is, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men; for ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer
them that are entering to go in: Matthew, 23. 13. Oh! take we heed of diverse and
strange Doctrines, and Teachers, otherwise they will make us vain; for they
speak a Vision of their own hearts, not out of the mouth of the Lord: Heb. 13.
7, 8, 9. Jer. 23. 16.

2. As also they are not of God, nor like unto him, who practically err from
the way of truth: such as profess to know God, and yet in works deny him, being
abominable and disobedient: Tit. 1. 16. And so they are not of God, who unduly,
or sinfully use, or abuse their liberty in indifferent things, to the
scandalizing and offending others; for thereby they cause their weak Brother to
perish, for whom Christ died: Romans 14. 15. 1 Cor. 8, 9-13. As also such as
believe the Gospel and Doctrine of Christ, and yet hold the truth in
unrighteousness, and believe in vain, and receive not the love of the truth, to
be saved thereby from the pollutions of the World; but walk in crooked ways and
paths: Such give occasion to the Adversary to speak reproachfully of the
Doctrine according to Godliness, and hinder men from receiving it, or from
giving hearty and unfeigned obedience to it. They lay a stumbling block in the
way of others, and scandalize them: And woe to the World because of offenses:
But woe will be to that man especially by whom the offense comes: Romans 2.
17-24. Tit. 2. 10-12* 14. Matthew. 18. 7. hence the Apostle Peter thus exhorts
and beseeches the Believers, who had received the Gospel, and did stand in the
true Grace of God: Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul. To wit, against their
own Souls, and against the Souls of others amongst whom they lived: 1 Pet. 2.
9-11, 12. And the Apostle Paul signifies, that if the Believers did not,
without murmuring and disputings, do what God was working in them both to will
and to do of good pleasure; they would not be harmless, but would be injurious
unto, and do harm and hurt to the Souls of others also: Phil. 2. 13-15. A
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7. And bad Examples have
an evil Influence upon, and are very destructive unto many: It is very good and
requisite therefore for those who have received the form of sound words, to
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them; Ephesians. 5. 11, 12-14. To come out from amongst evil Workers, and be
separate, and touch no unclean thing; For what fellowship has righteousness
with unrighteousness? And what communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6.
14-17. How unsuitabl^ to their Principles do they act, and how unlike to God
are they, who while they profess to believe God* is not willing that any should
perish, yet strengthen the hands of evil Doers, that none does return unto God!
Hereby they even destroy, damn, and cause to perish, such whom they profess to
believe God would not have to perish: And their Iniquity appears to be a
greater than theirs who therein oppose the Doctrine of Christ; inasmuch as
they, by their evil walkings, strengthen them in their Oppositions of his
Doctrine, and give them occasion to call it a Doctrine of looseness and
licentiousness: And in that they sin more against the knowledge of their
Masters Will, which they know to be a good One toward All men; and such an one
as whereby he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked. And he that knows
his Masters Will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes: As our
Savior says, Luke 12. 47, 48. To be sure, neither vain Talkers, nor vain
Walkers are of God, but of the evil One: yea, and the vain Walkers speak with
their Feet, what the vain Talkers do with their Tongues: namely, That God has
Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked.

But they are of God who have received, and do retain the Doctrine of Christ,
and so the Lord Jesus therein: 2 John 9. And walk in him as they have received
him; And so endeavor the Good and Salvation of all, both in Word and Deed, as
much as they can: who give none offense to Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of
God; but please all men in all things, (for their good: Romans 15. 1, 2, 3.) not
seeking their own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. They
are herein Followers of Christ, and of his holy Apostles: 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32,
33, and Chap. 11. 1. Who let their light so shine before men, that they may see
their good works, and glorify their Father which is in Heaven: Matthew. 5. 13,
14-16. 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. And whose hearts desire and Prayer to God for others
is, that they may be saved. Yea who heartily pray for, and desire and
endeavor, as they have opportunity, the Good of All, even of such also as are
injurious to them: According to what our Savior says to his Disciples; I say
unto you, says he, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully use you, and persecute
you: That you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven: for he
makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the
just, and on the unjust; and is kind to the unthankful, and to the evil: Matthew.
5. 44, 45-48. with Luke 6. 27, 28-35, 36. Jesus Christ was the Son of the
Father in truth and love: 2 John 3. And he knew, as we have said before, That
God had no Will that any sinful Creature of Mankind should perish: And he
therefore came not to destroy men's Souls, but to save them: Luke 9. 55, 56. He
came to save the World; John 12. 47. And spoke unto his Enenemies, that they
might be saved: And he made intercession for transgressors, who rewarded him
evil for good, and hatred for his love: John 5. 34. Luke 23. 33, 34. Psalm. 109.
2, 3. Matthew. 23. 37. And those who are like-minded after his example, they are
certainly of God; even such as endeavor to save others from their sins, and to
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God: And to
that end also, make supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks
for all men; And lift up holy hands unto God for them, without wrath, and
doubtings; As believing God our Savior will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth: 1 Timothy 2. 1-4-6-8. Acts 26. 28, 29. And who
have their conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ: And so have it honest
in the midst of them amongst whom they live. He that does good is of God: Phil.
2. 12-15, 16. 3 John 11. Yea and that forbear to do what they may lawfully do,
if it be not expedient and profitable to others, but may cause them to perish,
whom God would not have perish. As that Godly, and God-like Apostle says,; If
meat make my Brother offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I
make my Brother to offend: 1 Cor. 8. 9-13. and Chap. 10. 23. 33. But having
spoken so largely unto what the Lord God swears to Negatively; namely, That he
has no pleasure in the death of the wicked. I shall add no more thereto: But
God enabling me, shall proceed unto the next thing to be considered by us: That
is to say,

Mind we also, what the Lord God swears to Affirmatively, to wit, [But (I have
Pleasure) that the wicked turn from his way, and live.] Which is like unto that
which he intimates concerning himself, and is Affirmed of him in other places
of holy Scripture: So the Lord says, Have I not pleasure that the wicked
should return from his ways, and live? Ezekiel. 18. 23. To this purpose also the
Apostle Paul Asserts of him, saying, God our Savior will have all men to be
saved; to wit, from their sins: 1 Timothy 2. 4. with Matthew. 1. 21. And the Apostle
Peter says, The Lord is willing that all should come to repentance: 2 Pet. 3.
9. And therefore now he commands all men ev^ry where to repent: Acts 17. 30.
Isa. 45. 21, 22.

Now then, in this Branch of the Subject Matter of what the Lord God also
swears to, there is plainly signified to us;

1. That as he has no pleasure in the death and eternal destruction of the
wicked: So also he has no Pleasure in Sin, or in men's evil, sinful, and wicked
ways; He is not a God that h^t^ pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil
dwell with him: Psalm. 5. 4, 5. He is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and
cannot look on iniquity: To wit, With approbation, or well-pleasedness: Hab. 1.
13. Sin is the most loathsome and odious thing to him that is: It is a
detestable thing: Ezekiel. 11. 18. 21. As the Lord himself signifies, saying,
Howbeit I sent unto you all my Servants the Prophets, rising early, and
sending, saying, [O do not this abominable thing that I hate!] Jer. 44. 4. Let
no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempts he any man: but every man is tempted when he is
drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. -- Do not err, my beloved Brethren,
says James 1. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Indeed, too too many there are, who take occasion by his goodness, lenity, and
forbearance, to think and conclude, That God is well-pleased with their evil
and wicked ways: According to that, These things have thou done, and I kept
silence; thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self: Psalm. 50.
16-21. Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, says the Prophet, yet ye say,
wherein have we wearied him? when ye say, every one that does evil is good in
the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them; or where is the God of
judgment? Or, as it is rendered in a former Translation, Where is the God that
punishes? Mal. 2. 17. That is to say, Because God was long-suffering toward
evil Doers, and did not presently, or severely judge them, therefore some
abused his slowness to anger, and concluded, That he was not such an Hater of
sin as indeed he is: Or, as the Preacher says, Because sentence against an
evil work is not speedily executed, therefore the heart of the Sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil: Eccl. 8. 11.

Nay indeed, because God is so slow to anger toward evil Doers, and so
bountiful toward them, in filling their houses with good things: Some holy men
of God, though they have ascribed Righteousness and Holiness to their Maker,
have yet been put to a stand, or to seek, how to reconcile such like
Providence with his Purity and Holiness; for, or at some time: So the Prophet
Jeremy says, Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet let me
talk with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?
Are all they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea
they take root; they grow, yea they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their
mouth, and far from their reins: Psalm. 73. Jer. 12. 1, 2. So another Prophet
says, Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine holy One? -- Thou art
of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity: Wherefore
look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and hold thy Tongue when the
wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he? etc. Hab. 1. 12,
13-17. and Chap. 2. 1-4. Job 10. 3.

But whatever evil use wicked men make of his Goodness and Forbearance, and how
painful or difficult soever it has been, or may be, to good men, to reconcile
these things with his Purity and Holiness; as Psalm. 73. 16. yet without all
doubt, or peradventure, he is an holy Lord God: And there is none holy as the
Lord, for there is none besides him: as 1 Samuel 2. 2. And the way of the wicked
is an abomination to him: Prove. 15. 9. He is a most perfect and eternal Hater
of sin, as plainly appears in his Word, and in many Instances of his severity,
that are therein propounded to us: He spared not the Angels that sinned, but
cast them down to Hell, delivering them into chains of darkness, to be reserved
unto judgment. And spared not the old World -- but brought in the Flood upon
the World of the ungodly: And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorah into
ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those
that after should live ungodly: 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6, 9, 10. He spared not the
natural branches, but cut them off from the good Olive Tree, because of their
unbelief: Romans 11. 17-24, Yea if his own People sin against him, he will visit
their transgressions with the Rod, and their iniquity with stripes: Psalm. 89.
30-32. If I sin against thee, says that perfect and upright man, then thou
markest me, and will not acquit me from mine iniquity: Job 10. 14, 15. Nay he
will not spare the most eminent amongst his People, but will punish them for
their Iniquity, if they sin against him; Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and
Samuel among them that call upon his Name. They called upon the Lord, and he
answered them: -- Thou answeredst them, O Lord, our God, thou wast a God that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their Inventions. Exalt the
Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill; for the Lord our God is holy: Psalm.
99. 6. 9.

Nay, when God laid upon his dear Son the Iniquities of us all: as Isa. 53. 6.
Though he was the man, his fellow, higher than all mere Creatures whatever; his
Son by Nature: And though he was beloved of him with an higher degree of Love
than all Saints and Angels in Heaven or on Earth; his beloved Son, in whom he
was well-pleased, and one whom he loved before the Foundation of the World:
Yea, and though also, he was the Holy One of God, one who knew no sin, who did
no sin, neither was Guile found in his mouth: One that never displeased his
Father at any time, but always did those things that pleased him: yet
notwithstanding all this, when he himself bare our sins in his own Body on the
Tree, he was wounded, or tormented, for our transgressions, bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him. -- Yea, it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he put him to grief: Isa. 53. 3-5, 6-10. When God made him
sin for us, who knew no sin; God spared not his own, his proper Son, but
delivered him up for us all: Romans 8. 32. And though he cried out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from
the words of my roaring? God spared him not, but brought him into the dust of
death. He did not spare him for his crying, as it were; or though he offered up
Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying and tears: as Heb. 5. 7. But
whence came this to pass, that God dealt thus with his Son? Was it because he
loved him not? No, that could not possibly be; but surely it was, because of
his infinite Purity and Holiness, and hatred of our sin, which was laid upon
him. And so much our Lord plainly signifies, when he says, O my God, I cry in
the daytime, but thou hear not, etc. -- But thou art holy, O thou that
inhabitest the Praises of Israel. As if he should say, Thou art such a perfect
Hater of Sin, that thou must punish it, wherever thou find it. Yea though
it be laid upon One who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
etc. Psalm. 22. 1, 2, 3, 14, 15. Though he was a Lamb without blemish and
without spot, yet our Iniquities being caused to meet together on him, he
suffered for them, the just for the unjust, -- being put to death in the flesh,
etc. 1 Pet. 2. 24. and Chap. 3. 18. Though he prayed, O my Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass, etc. Yet in that it did not pass from him, we may
behold most clearly, and most comfortably, Gods severity against sin: for that
was the day of the vengeance of our God; In which he took vengeance of our
Inventions, in the flesh of that most innocent and spotless One; and which Day
of Vengeance is now proclaimed in the Gospel, to comfort all that mourn: as Isa
61. 1, 2. According to what the Apostle says, what the Law could not do, in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin, or by a Sacrifice for sin, condemned sin, our sin in
the flesh; to wit, of his own dear and most innocent Son: Romans 8. 3. with 1
Pet. 3. 18. Herein then we may most plainly behold the infinite Holiness of the
Lord God; and the hatefulness and abominableness of Sin to his Majesty, even in
the Cross and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ: and that he can never be
reconciled thereto. Nor does he hate it because he has forbidden it simply;
But he therefore forbad it, because it is so detestable and loathsome to his
Infinitely Pure Nature; for he is Holiness it self, Holiness essentially: Amos
4. 2. with Chap. 6. 8.

Oh then! when we read in the Holy Scriptures, or here therefrom, of the
Graciousness of the Holy God toward us Sinners, of Mankind; And how loath he
is with our Destruction, when we have propounded, or proclaimed to us this good
News, That God swears, that as he lives, he has no pleasure in the death of
the wicked. Let us not then pervert what is right, or imagine he thus swears in
favor to men's sinful ways and doings. No, far be it from us to make such a
wicked use of such a Blessed Doctrine: For there is no meat for our lust in the
Glad-tydings of the Glorious Gospel. Let us not then say and conclude, That
because God is good to All, therefore we shall have peace, though we walk in
the imagination, or stubbornness of our heart, to add drunkenness to thirst;
for then the Lord will not spare us: But then the anger of the Lord and his
jealousy will smoke against us, etc. Deuteronomy. 29. 19-25. But let us wisely
consider, That his Goodness leads to Repentance: Rom 2. 4. And his
long-suffering is, and is to be accounted Salvation: The very end and design of
God in the very exercise thereof, is, That we might receive the love of the
truth, so as to be saved thereby from our sins and vanities: 2 Pet. 3. 9, 15.
Romans 2. 4. The grace of God which brings salvation to all men, teaches to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to serve God acceptably, with reverence
and godly fear: For our God is a consuming fire: Tit. 2. 11, 12. Heb. 12. 28,
29. Look we then unto Jesus Christ the Great and Fundamental Witness of Gods
kindness and pity to sinful Mankind; And yet also the clear Testimony of Gods
Infinite Purity and hatred of Sin: And be we saved. And to that end, wash we
our hearts from wickedness: Isa. 45. 21, 22. Jer. 4. 14. Look into the Clefts
of this Rock: Remember and consider how this holy and just One humbled himself,
and became obedient unto Death, the death of the Cross; that shameful, painful,
and accursed Death, for our sins, to the end, that we being dead to sin, might
live to righteousness. And therein we shall see the vileness and odiousness of
sin; that we may flee therefrom as from that which is most pernicious and
destructive to us.

Indeed we are all naturally very prone and apt to turn the Grace of our God
into lasciviousness, and to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, by occasion of the riches of Gods goodness displayed in the Gospel.
Hence the Apostle, when he had been largely declaring the love of God to
Sinners, in that while we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died
for the ungodly. And that God commends his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us. And that where sin abounded, there grace
abounded much more, etc. Romans 5. He then sees in needful to give Answer unto an
Objection, which he judged some would make, or did make, against that Doctrine
he had preached: Or to refute and remove an evil Inference some would draw from
his right and good Sayings; and therefore thus proceeds, What say we then?
shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Whereby he gives us to
understand, That too many would be ready thus to abuse the words of Gods Grace
fore-declared by him: But he rejects such a Conclusion with greatest
Detestation, God forbid, says he, far be it from us, or from any, thus to turn
the truth of God into a lie, as we are too forward to do. How shall we that are
dead to sin, to wit, by the Death of Christ, live any longer therein? Romans 6.
1, 2, 3. See also Romans 3. 3-8. Gal. 5. 13. But now, to the end we may not think
that what God swears to the truth of, is in favor to our sins, but in love to
our Souls: Therefore he not only swears Negatively, I live, says the Lord God,
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. But also Affirmatively, But (I
have pleasure) that the wicked turn from his way, and live. In which he plainly
intimates to us his Abhorrency of Sin, while he assures us of his love to
Sinners, and of his no-pleasure in their everlasting misery and perdition: That
none of us should wrest his Sayings to our own destruction: as 2 Pet. 3. 16.
But to this we may have further occasion to speak somewhat in what follows; and
therefore shall here add no more to it.

2. In that this is also contained in what the Lord God swears to, to wit, That
the wicked turn from his way, and live. Herein is also intimated to us, That
the wicked may tur^* while it is called to Day, from his wicked ways, and live.
He may turn therefrom possibly, and successfully. This is also implied and
supposed in this Oath: For we cannot reasonably believe, that this most
Excellent One would so solemnly swear, that he has pleasure in that which is
utterly impossible for his Creatures to do; or which he does not render or make
possible unto them: as we may afterward further show. But that such may turn,
appears,

1. In that he has opened a Door of Repentance for poor sinful wicked Ones, in
and by the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord. We were indeed Gods
banished Ones: 2 Samuel 14. 14. And no man could by any means redeem his Brother,
nor give to God a Ransom for him: Psalm. 49. 7. But God has prepared himself a
Lamb for a Burnt-Offering, and has accepted a Sacrifice; He that was in the
form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, made himself of no
reputation; without controversy, or confessedly, Great is the mystery of
godliness, God was manifest in the flesh. Gods own Son was made of a Woman, and
so became our Go^, our Kinsman and Redeemer: Thereby the Right of Redemption
appertained to him: Lev. 25: 48, 49. And He by the Charity of God, tasted death
for every man, and rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures; and
gave himself a Ransom, or Price of Redemption for all men; whereby he has
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us: And has
opened away for our being brought back to God. He has broken the Gates of
Brass, and cut the Bars of Iron asunder. Oh that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Children of Men. Psalm. 107.
15, 16. Christ once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God; being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit.
1 Pet. 3. 18. The Law opened no Door of Repentance, but it clapped the Curse upon
every one that did not perfectly and constantly keep and observe it: As the
Apostle says, As many as are of the works of the Law are under the Curse: for
it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in
the Book of the Law to do them: Gal. 3. 10. But Christ has opened a way, and
is the way by which any sinful One may come unto God: John 14. 6. He is the
Door, by which any one may enter into the Fold; because he died for All, yea
rather, is risen again, without which we had been necessarily left in our sins;
there had been no Repentance from them, nor Forgiveness of them: John 10. 9. 1
Cor. 15. 15-17. Heb. 9. 22.

And in his Name there is preached Repentance unto all Nations, even unto the
greatest and most notorious Sinners, while men are joined to all the living.
And our Lord Jesus was sent, and came, not to call the Righteous, but Sinners
to Repentance. And answerably did so, even the greatest Sinners, while he was
upon the Earth. Matthew. 9. 11-13. Mark 1. 14, 15: And sent forth his Apostles to
preach, not the Law, but the Gospel, that men might repent: Matthew. 10. 7. with
Mark 6. 12. So when he was Raised again from the Dead, he enlarged their
Commission, and commanded them to go into all the World, and preach the Gospel
to every Creature of all the Nations of Mankind, and therewith to call to
Repentance; to repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentanee: Mark
16. 15. with Luke 24. 46, 47, 48. Acts 26. 17, 18-20-23. God now commands all
men every where to repent: Because he has appointed a day in which he will
judge the World in righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, having
given, or exhibited faith unto all men, in that he has raised him from the
dead: Acts 17. 30, 31. Rev. 14. 6, 7. And upon this ground, the Wicked and
Ungodly are expressly called upon to turn from their Iniquities, because Christ,
who was delivered for their Offenses, is raised again: As it is said, Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thought, and let him return
unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: Isa. 55. 3, 4-7. with Acts 13.
34.

2. It further appears also, That the wicked may turn from their evil and
wicked ways, while it is to day; not only because they are called to
Repentance, and commanded to Repent, as is said; But also because he who thus
calls and commands them, does also enable them so to do; especially where the
Scriptures are vouchsafed, and the Gospel is plainly preached to men: The
wisdom of God does not only call unto such as have long loved simplicity,
delighted in scorning, and hated knowledge; and says, Turn ye at my reproof:
But to encourage and enable them so to do, she adds, Behold (mind and consider
this well) I will pour out my spirit unto you; (to wit, to strengthen them to
what she requires of them:) she does not call them to repentance simply, but
also stretches forth her hand, to help their Infirmity and relieve their
Impotency; Prove. 1. 22, 23, 24. In saying, That the wicked may turn from their
wicked ways, we do not suppose, nor believe, that they have any sufficiency of
themselves so to do, as of themselves; or that they have naturally any freedom
of will, or power, to turn themselves: for in them there dwells no good
thing: but they are carnal, and sold under sin; Romans 7. 14. But we are assured
from the testimony of the Lord, that he who sent his Son into the world, to be
the Savior of the world, has also exalted him to his right hand, a Prince and
Savior; for to give repentance to rebellious ones: to wit, to give unto them,
in and with his Call, that Grace and divine Assistance, whereby they may come
to repentance; Acts 5. 31. for the grace of God, that brings salvation to all
men, has appeared; Tit. 2. 11, 12. Our Lord Jesus did promise, that he would
be with his Gospel, and the declarers of it, unto the end of the world: to open
the eyes of Jews and Gentiles, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God: That they might turn from the evil of their
thoughts and ways: And faithful is he that promised, who also will do it; Mat.
28. 20. with Mar. 16. 15. 20. Act. 26. 17, 18, 23. The law of the LORD is
perfect, converting the soul; for it is the law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus; Psalm. 19. 7. with Romans 8. 2. The Gospel is the ministration of the
spirit, yea it is called, the spirit: Because is was given forth by the spirit.
And the Holy Spirit does accompany it, to make it powerful for the turning men
unto God; 2 Cor. 3. 6-8. And they that resist the Gospel, resist not man, but
God, who also has given the Preachers of it his holy Spirit, to accompany
them, and work together with them; whereby they are able Ministers. And hence
also Stephen says to the Jews, Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and
ears, ye do always resist the holy Spirit; as your fathers did, so do ye: 1
These. 4. 8. Acts 7. 51. In God's hand is power and might, and in his hand it is
-- to give strength unto all; 1 Chronicles. 29. 12. And he gives unto all men
liberally, and upbraideth not; Jam. 1. 5. with chap. 4. 5. 6.

And indeed, That the wicked may possibly turn from their wicked ways and live:
I mean, That God does give unto them sufficient Grace and Power so to do, while
he calls upon them so to do; is clearly implied in his Oath: In that he so
solemnly swears that he has pleasure that they turn from their ways and live;
as is before said: For how can he be said to have pleasure in their conversion,
who knows they cannot possibly convert themselves; and yet, though he has
power in his hand to in able them thereto, does not exert it, or give them so
much as whereby they might be converted and turned therefrom unto him? If we
should see a man ready to fall into some deep ditch or pit, in which he will
unavoidably perish; and know he cannot possibly keep himself out of it, but
must fall into it necessarily, unless some other preserve him from that
imminent danger: And some one or more of us should seriously assure the man,
That we are not pleased that he should fall into that dangerous place: Nay, we
swear most solemnly to the truth hereof also. If notwithstanding all this, we
never put forth our hand to keep him back from thus falling, no not so much as
a fingar, which might preserve him from that destruction, can it be reasonably
believed that we swear what we thought: And not rather, that we insulted over
that piteous person in that his miserable condition? So also it is here: Our
good and gracious, and infinitely wise God, knows what a sad state wicked ones
are in: That they are even at the brink of the pit of eternal ruin and
perdition; and that they have no power at all to deliver themselves: That they
cannot deliver their souls, nor say, is there not a lie in our right hands? As
Isa. 44. 20. now he interposes himself by an Oath, and swears, he has pleasure
they should be kept from that everlasting destruction: And if he now afford
them no power at all that they might be delivered therefrom, what may we think
of such an Oath, or of him who thus Swears? Can we believe he speaks as he
thinks, or thinks as he swears? No surely. Our Savior signifies, that he who
does not save life, when it is in the Power of his hand, and he has
opportunity so to do, does destroy; though he never swears he has no pleasure
in such a destruction, but that he should be saved: Mark 3. 4. See Iam. 4. 17.
Much rather may he be said so to do, who binds his soul with an Oath, That it
is his good pleasure that such an one should be cured and delivered from his
destructive distemper; and yet withholds all help from him, in order thereto,
which he might with the greatest ease reach forth unto him. Indeed, if such an
one does give the dying person a plaster to heal him, and helps him to apply
it, if then the perishing person refuses, his blood will justly be upon his own
head: But otherwise, he is to be pitied; and the swearing and potent person to
be blamed: But let all such thoughts of God, who is love it self to man-ward,
be rejected by us: He that had so much love in his heart, as to move him to
swear with his lips, That he has pleasure that the wicked should turn, does
doubtless in able them, though not force them, so to do.

If any should say (as it is frequently urged by some) That God gave men power
in Adam, in the state of Innocence, to obey his will, and keep his commands:
And therefore he may still command them to turn, though they have no power,
because they lost it themselves: But he lost not his Authority over them. To
this I say,

1. We are not now considering what Authority he has to command, but what
Affection and Good Will he signifies to be in his heart toward wicked ones by
his Oath, both negatively and positively propounded; and from thence conclude,
That he who so swears, will certainly not be wanting to afford that to wicked
ones, whereby they may be preserved from Death; and may turn from their wicked
ways and live. But

2. We utterly deny, That God ever gave wicked ones power in the first Adam, to
turn from their wicked ways and live. For,

1. There were no wicked ones in Adam before he fell: for God made man
righteous, to wit, Adam, and all in him; Eccl. 7. 29. God made man in his own
Image, in the Image of God created he him; male and female created he them:
Genesis 1. 26, 27. Nor did any, nor could any sin while in Adam's loins, before he
sinned: For by that one man sin entered into the world, etc. Romans 5. 12-18.

2. When Adam had eaten of the forbidden fruit, he had no power to convert
himself; which he would have had, had God given him power so to do: The first
Adam was indeed made a living soul; and so might and should have convayed life
to his Posterity, had he abode in that honorable state in which he was created
of God: But he was not made a Quickening spirit to Quicken himself, or his
offspring when he was fallen from God, and become dead thereby: It is the last
Adam and not the first, that was made a quickening spirit; 1 Cor. 15. 45. And
how ridiculous is it to suppose, That God gave sinners power in the first Adam
to repent, when they were not sinners, and so needed no repentance; and
divested them of it, when they had sinned, and so needed it: and yet still
commands them to repent, when he gives them no power so to do, nor ever did,
when they needed repentance: as the Objectors themselves believe.

3. Nor is any man in Scripture ever called wicked, because he sinned in the
first Adam, or was necessarily polluted from him simply; as has been formerly
said: What Adam himself might be, we dispute not: but none of his posterity
were so, upon the account of that sin and sinfulness, of which they unavoidably
partook: But men are so called and reckoned, because of their own personal and
voluntary transgressions. And therefore to be sure, the wicked had never power
given them in the first Public man, to repent and turn from their wickedness;
so that this is but a lying and groundless Refuge. And if God does not now give
them power to repent, he never gave them power to repent; but when once they
become wicked, such must perish unavo^dably who do perish; because they never
had power given to them to turn from their wickedness and live: and yet still
God swears he has pleasure that they should turn and live. Would to God those
persons who thus object, would seriously consider these things; That they might
not speak thus wickedly for God, and talk so deceitfully for him, as Job 13. 6,
7, 8.

Nay, That God does give power to wicked ones also to repent, while it is the
day of his Grace and Patience, is not only strongly and undeniably intimated in
this Oath we are now considering: but also very plainly and evidently assured
us in another Oath, which God swear to out Father Abraham; mentioned thus by
Zacharias, who was filled with the Holy Ghost when he spoke: The Oath, says
he, which he swear to our father Abraham, That he would grant, or give, unto
us; That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear; in holiness and righteousness, before him all the days of our
lives: Luke 1. 73, 74, 75.

Now in this Oath, There are two things mainly contained, and which are
necessary to our turning to God from our iniquities, to serve the living and
true God; and which God swear to Abraham in that Oath: Genesis 22. 16 18. referred
to by Zacharias, to wit,

1. That he would in and by Christ. that Horn of Salvation, deliver us out of
the hands, or power, of our enemies. This is contained in that Oath, Genesis 22.
17. Thy seed, to wit, Christ, (for of him it is principally meant, Gal. 3. 16.)
shall possess the gate of his enemies: to wit, their power and strength; as
Matthew. 16. 18. And for this purpose has the Son of God been now manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil: 1 John 3. 8. And he has bound
the strong man, Matthew. 12. 29. he has through death destroyed him that had the
power of death: that is, the Devil: Heb. 2. 9, 14, 15. he has spoiled
principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in himself: Col. 2. 15. he has divested our spiritual enemies of their power,
and he possesses the power over us: Joh. 12. 30, 31. And worthy is the Lamb,
that was slain, to receive power and riches and wisdom, and strength, etc. Rev.
5. 11, 12. Matthew. 28. 18. so that we are not now necessarily under the power of
Satan, or any of the enemies of our souls: For Christ has broken the head of
the Serpent, spoiled his Plot, and divested him of his principality and power
over us* And the Tidings hereof are Glad-tidings of great joy unto all people:
Hence all people are called upon to clap hands: Because God, the great God and
our Savior Jesus Christ, is gone up with a shout, (in token of Mastery and
Triumph: Exodus 32. 18.) The LORD with the sound of a Trumpet: Sing praises to
our God, sing praises, sing praises to our King sing praises: for God is the
King of all the earth, etc. Psalm. 47. 1-7. O sing unto the LORD a new song, for
he has done mavelous things; his right hand, and his holy arm, has gotten
him the victory. -- Make a joyful noise unto the LORD, all the earth: Make a
loud noise, and rejoice and sing praise. Sing unto the LORD with the hatp, with
the harp and the voice of a Psalm, etc. Psalm. 98. 1-4-6. with Psalm. 68. 18.
Satan is not now our Lord, as other-wise he would have been, but Christ is Lord
of all: Acts 10. 36. for to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived,
that he might Lord it over the quick and dead: Romans 14. 9. So that that part of
the Oath is now actually fulfilled by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ; who has abolished death; and so saved us before he called us; even
delivered us out of the hands of our enemies: 2 Timothy 1. 10. with. ver. 9, And
who therefore died for all, and rose again, That they which live (in their
several ages and generations) might no longer live unto themselves, but unto
him who died for them, and rose again: 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. But

2. God moreover swear, or there was further contained in that Oath which he
swear to our father Abraham, That he would give, or grant, unto us: Namely,
That he would Gran^ unto us that Grace, power, aid and assistance, whereby we,
being delivered, as aforesaid, might serve him. See Romans 15. 5. Ephesians. 3. 16.
Rev. 11. 3. He not only swear that we should be delivered out of the power of
them that hated us: but also, that he would give, or grant, unto us that
whereby we migbt, not must, serve him. And indeed, this is needful to our being
converted unto him, and that we should serve him acceptably; namely, that grace
be given unto us: as Heb. 12. 28. And therefore also God swear, that he would
grant unto us: which part of his Oath, as mentioned by Zacharias, respects that
in Genesis 22. 18. to wit, And in thy seed (namely, Christ, as is said) shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed: In which Branch of the Oath, these two
things are contained:

1. That he would give, or grant, unto us, in Christ, as in a Treasury, all
grace and blessing: even in him who died for All, and rose again from the dead
for their Justification; and obtained a complete victory over all our enemies:
suitable to that, Thou have ascended up on high (even thou Lord Jesus, who
did descend into the lower parts of the Earth;) thou have led captivity
captive, thou have received gifts in the man, or for men; yea for the
rebellious also, that the Lord God migbt dwell among them: Psalm. 68. 10, 18.
And he is full of Grace and Truth, that out of his fullness we might receive:
Joh. 1. 14. In him it has pleased all the fullness to dwell: In him dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: And in him are we complete, who is the
head of all principality and power: Col. 1. 18, 19 and Chapter 2. 9, 10. This is
the record, that God has given to us (mankind) eternal life, and this life is
in his Son: 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12. And in that he has received Gifts of Grace
and Blessing, even for the wicked and rebellious ones also, we need not fear,
or doubt, but that he, who had so great love toward the worst of men, as to
die for them while they were ungodly and wicked ones: Romans 5. 6. will also give
grace unto them in due season preventingly, to turn them from the evil of their
ways and doings: for he is good and upright, therefore will he teach sinners in
the way; Psalm. 25. 8. Isa. 42. 1, 6, 7. But yet further,

2. There is also contained in this Branch of the Oath, which God swear to
Abraham, That in his seed, to wit, in Christ, sinful ones should be blessed;
that is, that grace should be given unto them, in and by Chrst, to turn them
from their sinful ways; or as here Zacharias explains it, That be would grant
unto them. And so also the Apostle Peter explicates this branch of the
Covenant, or Oath -- made to Abraham, saying to the Jews, ye are the children
of -- the Covenant which God made with our fathers, namely, with -- Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: saying unto Abraham (to wit, in Genesis 22. 18) And in thy seed
shall all the kindreds -- of the earth be -- blessed. But what is meant by, or
contained in that Covenant, or Oath? The Apostle shows us in the next words,
namely, That he would grant unto all, however where the Gospel and Scriptures
are vouchsafed, Grace and Power, that they may repent and turn from their
Iniquities: for so much the Apostle plainly signifies in what immediately
follows, saying, unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him
to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities. Which
evidently shows unto us what is contained in that Oath, as also it is explained
by Zacharias, as is said: That is, that God therein swear, That he would grant
that grace and blessing, to turn them preventingly, that they might turn
thereby, and so receive further and following grace and blessing: Act. 3. 25,
26. Jam. 4. 5, 6. Yea, let this also be considered, That the Apostle propounds
this as a further Argument, to move and persuade them, who had crucified the
Lord of Glory, to repent; whereto he had exhorted them: Act. 3. 19. Repent,
says he, and be converted: And using other Motives to enforce that Exhortation
in ver. 19-24. he then, I say, to excite and prevail with them to repent,
assures them, That God had sworn to Abraham, That he would give them grace so
to do: and now sent Christ in the Gospel to bless them, in turning them by his
grace: ver. 25, 26. Let the scope of the place be considered.

If any should say, That though it should be granted, That God did in that Oath
swear, That he would grant grace and power for turning; yet this must not be so
extended, as to reach unto all: For Zacharias says, That he would grant unto
[us] etc. To this I answer,

Ans. That the oath respects all, however all to whom the Gospel should be
plainly preached, and who are within the pale of the Church; as they speak: And
we can speak to none other: for it is thus made, In thy seed shall [all the
nations of the earth be blessed.] Genesis 22. 18. and 26. 4. [All the families of
the earth,] Genesis 28. 14. [All the kindreds of the earth,] Act. 3. 25. And Peter
says not, [unto you, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, etc.] But, unto you [first,] etc. First unto the Jews, to turn every one
of them: and secondly, to the Gentiles, to turn every one of them: According to
that saying, Delivering thee from the people (to wit, of Israel) and the
Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee: To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God: that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, etc. In pursuance whereof, says the Apostle, I showed
first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and through-out all the Coasts
of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God,
and do works meet for repentance: Act. 3. 26. with Chap. 26. 17, 18, 20-23. So
that by what has been noted from the Scriptures, it does very plainlyappear,
That while God gives the wicked space of repentance, and calls them thereto, he
also gives unto them, yea he has sworn, that he will give unto them,
sufficient grace: whereby they may turn from their evil ways and live. And I
have the longer insisted upon the evidencing the truth hereof, because there
are many zealous ones, who affirm, That God does indeed call all to repentance
with an outward call; but they deny that he gives sufficient, or saving grace,
unto all so called thus to do: And so they render his Commandments, which are
easy, Matthew. 11. 30. to be grievous, yea impossible to be observed by the most
of men: and as if he required them to make brick without straw: Whereas, his
commandments are not grievous: 1 John 5. 3. He is no hard or austere Master,
to reap where he has not sown, or gather where he has not strown: Though some
wicked and slothful servants render him so to do, or represent him so to be:
Matthew. 25. 24-28. But I shall speak no more unto this particular.

3. As the wicked may possibly turn from their evil ways, so also they may turn
therefrom hopefully and successfully: They may turn and live: For he who calls
and enables them to repent, is, A God pardoning iniquity and sin and
transgression: Exodus 34 5, 6. Psalm. 25. 11. If thou, LORD, should mark in
quities, says the Psalmist, O LORD, who shall stand? But there is forgiveness
with thee, that thou may be feared; Pal. 130. 3, 4. Yea, with him is
plenteous redemption, even forgiveness of sins: because he has found out an
Atonement: Psalm. 130. 7. with Ephesians. 1. 7. Job 33. 24. Because Jesus Christ died
for All, and rose again* and saw no corruption: therefore through him is
preached, unto them that do not belive, the forgiveness of sins. And by him all
that believe, are justified from all things, from which men could not be
justified by the law of Moses: Acts 13. 37, 38, 39. And God having accepted his
sacrifice (Heb. 9. 22. Job 33. 24.) is a God of Pardons: Neh. 9. 17. And sets
this before wicked ones, That he will assuredly forgive them, upon their
sincere turning to him: As he says, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
man of iniquity his thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will multiply to pardon: For my
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways; says the LORD:
for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your
ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts: Isa. 55. 6, 7, 8, 9. If the wicked
will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes,
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die:
All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him; in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. Again, when the
wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed, and does
that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive: because he
considers and turns away from all his transgressions that he has
committed, he shall surely live, he shall not dye: Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22-26, 27.
Again, the Lord says, When I say to the wicked, Thou shall surely die, if he
turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right -- none of his sins
that he has committed, shall be mentioned unto him, he has done that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live: Ezekiel. 33. 14-16, 19. Thus also he
assured Solomon, when he answered his Prayer made at the Dedication of the
Temple, which was a Type of Christ; Joh. 2. 21. If, says he, my people upon
whom my name is called, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face,
and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will
forgive their sin, etc. 2 Chronicles. 7. 12-14-16. Nay, thus the Lord speaks unto
them whom he calls Rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah, and whose hands
were fu^l of blood: Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc. Come now, and
let us reason together, says the LORD, though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be white as snow: though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: Isa.
1. 4* 6-10, 15-16-19. 1 Kings 8. 47-49. Though evil ones have played the Harlot
with many Lovers, and spoken and done evil things as they could: yet in
returning unto him, he will take away all their Iniquities, and receive them
graciously; he will heal all their Backslidings, and will love them freely;
Jer. 3. Hos. 14. 1-4. And so much is also signified in this Oath of the Lords
we are speaking unto, namely, That wicked ones may turn successfully; for he
does not only swear, That he has pleasure that they should turn, But, That
they should turn from their evil ways and live; to wit, Be forgiven their sins,
and received into his favor, in whose Favor is Life; Hose. 14. 2. Psalm. 30.
5. In returning and rest they shall be saved, though formerly they have been
rebellious People, lying Children, Children that would not hear the Law of the
Lord; as Isa. 30. 8, 9, 10, 11-15-18. But I shall add no more to this
Observation, only I shall desire to add somewhat briefly, by way of usefulness
therefrom: As to say,

1. In that the wicked may, while it is called to day, possibly and succesfully
turn from their evil ways. We may learn from hence, as is before said, That the
Lord God has no pleasure in their Eternal Ruin and Destruction: for therefore
he commands and inables them to turn from that, in continuing wherein they will
wrong and destroy their own Souls. And hereby the Lord himself does signify to
us, That he is not willing the wicked should perish: In that he encourages and
capacitates them to turn from their pernicious ways: But if the Wicked will
turn, says he, from all his sins that he has committed, -- and do that which
is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his
Transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him; in
his Righteousness that he has done he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all
that the Wicked should die? says the Lord GOD, Ezekiel. 18. 21-23. plainly giving
us to understand, That it is hereby manifested that he has no pleasure in
their Death: In that he makes it possible to them to turn from the way of
Death, and propounds such Encouragements and Motives to prevail with them so to
do.

2. In that the wicked ones may possibly and successfully, even with
Encouragement, turn from their destructive ways; herein appears, and hereby we
may behold, That the ways of the LORD are equal and righteous, in the
Administration of his Government. Thus the Lord evinceth, and evidenceth the
Equalness and Righteousness of his ways unto the Jews, who charged them with
Injustice; or Inequality: Ye say, the way of the LORD is not equal: Hear now, O
House of Israel, is not my way equal? Are not your ways unequal? -- When the
wicked turns away from his wickedness that he has committed, and does that
which is lawful and right, he shall save his Soul alive: Because he considers
and turns away from all his Transgressions that he has committed, he shall
surely live, he shall not die. Yet says the House of Israel, the way of the
LORD is not equal: O House of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways
unequal? Ezekiel. 18. 21-25-27-29. and chapter 33. 14-17-20. If he should doom them to
the vengeance of Eternal Fire, for not doing what they cannot do, and he gives
them not Grace to do: or if they should turn from their evil ways, and yet not
be forgiven, and received graciously; his ways would not appear to be Just and
Equal: whereas the Justice and Equalness of them herein clearly appears, in
that he so impowers and encourages them to forsake their unrighteous ways and
thoughts: As has been said before.

3. We may from hence also learn, That those who continue in their sinful and
wicked ways, and will not turn therefrom, until sin be finished, and brings
forth Death, will have none to blame for it but themselves; or however, they
will have no just cause to blame God for it: Jam. 1. 13-15. But their sin will
appear to be inexcusable; and therefore also their Judgment will be very severe
and terrible. They will be inexcusable, who are not led to repentance; seeing
the goodness of God leads them there-unto: as, Romans 2. 1, 2, 3-5. If they had
this to plead for themselves, That they could not turn themselves from their
iniquity and vanities, and God gave them no grace so to do; this would be a
good excuse for themselves. But this Plea will not avai^ them, because one part
is false: For though we have no power of our selves to turn our selves, yet God
gives more grace (that we might not follow our own spirit, or obey it in the
lusts thereof:) Wherefore he says, God resists the proud (who receive not,
or receive not to purpose; that more grace, so as to be saved thereby;) but
gives grace (to wit, following and more abundant grace) to the humble: Jam. 4.
5, 6. with 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. But to this somewhat has been spoken
before, and therefore I shall add no more to it.

4. Seeing the wicked may turn from their evil ways and live, and it is Gods
good will and pleasure they should so do; whereto also he is inabling them by
his grace and spirit: Let such then be encouraged, moved, and prevailed withal,
to repent and turn from all their transgressions. As Samuel says unto the
people of Israel, Ye have done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside from
following the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart: and turn ye not
aside, for then should ye go after vain things; which cannot proflt, nor
deliver, because they are vain: 1 Samuel 12. 20, 21. Though you have played the
Harlot with many Lovers, and though your tongue and your doings have been
against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory; yet in returning to him
from your ransgressions, he will have mercy upon you. O then say as they did,
when they were called to repentance, and put your words into Act: Behold, we
come unto thee, for thou art the LORD our God: Jer. 3. 22-25. But to this also
we may speak somewhat further; and therefore shall not enlarge to it here.

3. And Lastly, From the Affirmative Branch of the Oath of the Lord GOD, in
which he swears, That he has pleasure that the wicked turn from his way, and
live, We may note, That the wicked must turn or perish: There is an absolute
necessity for their turning, that they may live; for without holiness no man
shall see the Lord: Heb. 12. 14. If they will still do wickedly, they will be
consumed, as, 1 Samuel 12. 25. Or as our Savior says, Except they repent, they
will all perish; Luke 13. 3, 5. Though God has manifested his love to manward,
and manifested himself to be Love and Charity it self, in sending his Son the
Savior of the World; yet he sent him not, nor did he come to save men in their
sins, but from their sins: 1 John 4. 8-14. with 1 Timothy 1. 15. Christ once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God: 1
Pet. 3. 18. he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works: Gal. 1. 4.
Tit. 2. 14. And if we could have been happy, or lived, abiding in our sins,
what, needed Christ to die for All, and rise again? And God has exalted him
with, and to, his right hand, a Prince and Savior, for to give repentance and
forgiveness of sins; not to give forgiveness before or without repentance: But
to give the former, that they might receive, and be made partakers of the
latter: Act. 5. 31. and Chapter 26. 18. Jer. 36. 3. And though God daily loadeth us
with his benefits, and be a God of Salvation, even the Savior of all men, yet
he will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such as go on
still in their trespasses. His hand will find out all his enemies, his right
hand will find out them that hate him: And he will make them as a fiery oven in
the time of his anger: Psalm. 68. 18-21. and 21. 8, 9. If the wicked man turn
not, he will whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow and made it ready; be has
also prepared for him the Instruments of Death, etc. Psalm. 7. 11-13. And he who
now assures us, That he has no pleasure, none at all, neither revealed, nor
secret, in the death of the wicked; he at the same time, assures us, That he
has pleasure that they turn from their sinful ways, and live: And thus speaks
unto the wicked, Repent and turn from all your transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be, your ruin: (plainly intimating to us, That if they turn not,
iniquity will be their ruin.) Cast away from you all your transgressions,
whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for
why will ye die, O house of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies; says the Lord GOD: wherefore turn, and live ye: Ezekiel. 18. 23-30,
32. The wicked may live, there is life prepared for mankind in Christ; 1 John
5. 11. And by the Gospel life and immortality is brought to light, and shined
forth: 2 Timothy 1. 10. And the Bread of God is he which comes down from heaven,
and gives life unto, or quickens, the World; to wit, preventingly: Joh. 6.
32, 33. But still, if men as thus prevented, do not repent and believe the
Gospel, they have no life in them, Joh. 6. 51-53. But he who now is their
Savior, will hereafter in flaming fire yield vengeance to them that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7-10.
Notwithstanding all God has done for sinners, and made known to them, yet if
the wicked turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die
in his iniquity: Ezekiel. 3. 19. and Chapter 33. 9, 11. God is not indeed willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance; and he is as willing
with the latter, as unwilling with the former: 2 Pet. 3. 9. And if they do not
come to repentance, they must go into perdition: (as Rev. 17. 8.) for though
God does create the fruit of his lips peace, peace, to him that is far off (far
off from righteousness: as, Isa. 46. 12.) yet, There is no peace, says my God,
to the wicked; Jsa. 57. 19, 21. There is no other way for wicked ones to flee
from the wrath to come, but by repentance unto salvation, not to be repented
of, Matthew. 3. 7, 8. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God: Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind: nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God: Namely, Abiding such, and not
being washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God: 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. and Chapter 6. 7,
8. Ephesians. 5. 3-7. Col. 3. 5, 6. Rev. 21. 8, 27. and Chap. 22. 15. Consider we
seriously, that he who so solemnly swears, That he has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked: swears also, That he has pleasure that the wicked turn
from his way, and live; or otherwise the wicked will certainly die: And God
will swear in his wrath, That they shall not enter into his Rest, unless a
separation be made between them and their sins, they will die in their sins,
and they and them will perish together for ever: Ezekiel. 24. 6-13, 14.

1. Oh then, as the Use of all we have been saying, give me leave to say, Turn
ye, turn ye, for why will ye die?

Why will we die, may some say? We have no power of our selves to turn; and God
does not give us power so to do: And therefore we cannot turn, but must
necessarily perish in our sins.

Ans. To this Answer has been given before abundantly, in which we have
sufficiently showed the falsness of what is here objected: And do therefore
refer to what has been forewritten.

But to fortify their Objection, these persons may say, There are many sober
and zealous Divines, who have been great searchers into the holy Scriptures;
and they assure us, That God does not give sufficient grace unto all, whereby
they may turn from their evil ways. And the number of these diligent searchers
is also very considerable; they are five, who so assure us, to one sober
Minister that speaks otherwise: and therefore we have most reason to believe
them.

Answ. If it should be granted what these Objectors affirm, That there are five
to one who thus Teach; yet it is not good for us to have our faith standing in
men's wisdom, or number, or appearing zeal and holiness, but in the power of
God; even in the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God to salvation, to
every one that believes: 1 Cor. 2. 1-5. with Romans 1. 16. We are directed to
have recourse to the law, and to the testimony: And if any man or number of men
speak not according to this Word, be we well assured, it is because there is no
light in them; Isa. 8. 20. Let these Objectors remember former things, Moses by
Gods Command, sends forth twelve men to search the land of Canaan, and to bring
a true account of it: they, after they had made a diligent search, return
again, and agree herein, That the land was a good land, flowing with milk and
honey: But then as to the possessing of it, they disagree, ten of the twelve
propound such difficulties, that they discouraged the hearts of their brethren:
Deuteronomy. 1. 28. They tell the People, That the Cities of the inhabitants of the
land were walled, and very great; and there they saw the children of Anak: And
they said, we be not able to go up, etc. The other two sav, We are well able to
overcome all difficulties; and yet they were no free-willers, for their meaning
was, as they afterward explained it, that God was with them, to enable them.
Did the people of Israel well in hearkening to those discouraging spies, or
searchers, who, for ought is said of them, might be otherwise sober persons,
because they were five to one odds? I trow not, for they smarted most severely
for so doing; as may be seen in Numb. 13. and Chapter 14. And surely we are
instructed to behold Israel after the flesh, whose miscarriages are written for
our admonition and warning; 1 Cor. 10. 1-6-11-18. Take we heed then of such
discouraging searchers, how great soever their number be, or how zealous, holy,
or sober soever they appear to be: Hearken not to the words of these Prophets,
who tell you, That though God swears, he has pleasure that the wicked should
turn and live; yet he gives the most of them no true saving, or effectual grace
so to do; for herein they speak a vision of their own heart, not out of the
mouth of the LORD. It was a right saying which dropped from the pen of a zealous
Opposer of the grace of God in Christ to all mankind, I mean Mr. Perkins, in
his Golden Chain, touching Free Will, Page 915. [When, says he, God in the
Gospel commands men to repent, and to belive, at the same time he enableth them
both to will or desire to believe and repent; as also actually to repent and
believe.]

2. Let me say again, Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die?

Why will we die? May others say. Why we have committed that unpardonable sin,
the sin against the Holy Ghost, spoken of in Matthew. 12. 31, 32. Mark 3. 28, 29.
Luke 12. 10. or, We have been guilty of that great iniquity of falling away and
sinning wilfully, after the knowledge of the truth was received by us;
mentiened, Heb. 6. 4-6. and Chapter 10. 26-29. or, We have sinned that sin unto
death, in 1 John 5. 16. And therefore our case is hopeless, and it is
impossible we should be recovered again; yea we are not to be prayed for: and
therefore though God give grace to others, he will give none to us; but our
state and condition is desperate, and there is no hope at all for us.

Ans. Now in answer hereto, and for the sakes of some who conclude their case
to be wholly hopeless, and utterly remediless, when it is not so, I shall
desire, with what brevity I may, to consider, and speak something to those
several Scriptures forementioned: viz.

1. As to that Sin, or Blasphemy, against the Holy Ghost, set down in Mat. 12.
31, 32, etc. Mind we these things, to wit,

1. The nature of this heinous sin: And that is, It is a sinning against the
evident and convincing Demonstration of the Holy Spirit, in his glorifying
Christ; as may be seen in the Evangelists, however in Matthew and Mark. Thus it
is expressed in the former, Whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man
(namely, as I conceive, against him, as one that had no form nor comeliness;
who appeared as a worm, and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the
people; and so spoke against him through ignorance, and as carried an end by
the common stream of others) it shall be forgiven him: But whosoever speaks
(or blasphemeth, Luke 12. 10.) against the Holy Ghost (that is to say, against
the clear evidence and demonstration of the Holy Spirit, in his bearing witness
of Christ) it shall not be forgiven him, etc. Now, that this is the nature of
this Sin, or Blasphemy, does plainly appear by the occasion of our Savior's
thus speaking; which was this, Our Savior had wrought a very great miracle in
healing one that was possessed with a Devil, blind and dumb; Matthew. 12. 22.
whereat all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the Son of David?
They were by this miraculous cure convinced that he was the Messiah, But when
the Pharisees (and some Scribes, Mark 3. 22.) beard it, they said (as persons
that would not see, when Gods hand was so highly lifted up) This fellow does
not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub, etc. Now upon this occasion our Savior
speaks the words fore-expressed, and so shows what the heinous nature of their
sin was; namely, an attributing that to the work of the Devil, which was
evidently wrought by the spirit (and finger, Luke 11. 20.) of God: The which is
also clearly signified by St. Mark, thus, He that shall blaspheme against the
Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation.
Which words Christ spoke unto them, Because they said, he has an unclean
spirit; Mark 3. 28-30. And in this their blasphemy they acted, or spoke worse
than the Egyptian Magicians, Exodus 8. 19. And hereby also they scattered abroad
others from Christ, who were gathering to him by these mighty works wrought by
the Holy Spirit. See Matthew. 12. 30, 31. and Luke 11. 23. And so this may be
called the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, as the Holy Ghost signifies, as
often it does, the miraculous works, or extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit;
Joh. 7. 39. Act. 10. 44, 46. and Chapter 19. 1. 6, etc.

2. Consider we this heinous sin, as to the continuance of it: This Blasphemy,
which our Savior declares to be unpardonable, is not one word, or act, only,
against the Holy Spirit, but a persisting therein, until this sin be finished:
And therefore in St. Matthew, and Luke, this sin is expressed in the
Present-tense, [whosoever speaks, Matthew. 12. 32. or Blasphemeth, Luke 12.
10.] And words of the Present time usually denote the duration or continuance
of any act; as, B^lieveth, comes, eats, abides, follows, etc. Joh. 3. 15,
16, 18. and chapter 6. 35. 37, 54-58. and chapter 8. 12. 1 John 3. 6. And this may
further appear more evidently, in that this Blasphemy is expressed in Mark 3. 29.
in the Future time, He that shall blaspheme, etc. to wit, shall go on so to do,
till this sin has brought forth Death: And this will yet further appear, if we
diligently consider that our Savior prayed for these Blasphemers also, when he
was upon the Cross, Luke 23. 33, 34. And when raised again, was sent to bless
them, in turning away every one of them from his iniquities; Act. 2. 22, 23-8.
and chapter 3. 13-15, 19, 26. 1 Timothy 1. 13-16. with Act. 26. 10, 11. So that what
our Savior speaks of this Blasphemy, is no discouragement unto any man's
returning from his wicked ways, nor denial of a possibility so to do hopefully,
while it is the day of God's grace and patience; though it be a powerful
Antidote to preserve and deter men from this heinous sin.

2. In the next place consider we also what the Apostle says in Heb. 6. 4-6.
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, etc. If they shall
fall away, to renew them again to repentance, etc. Likewhereto is that other
Scripture in the same Epistle; namely, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29.

Now for our better understanding hereof, mind we these things.

1. From whence, or after what, they fell away; and that is, as it is expressed
in Heb. 10. 26. after the knowledge, or acknowledgment, of the truth received:
And after they were sanctified thereby, ver. 29. And as it appears in this Heb.
6. 4, 5. they fell from an high degree of Christianity, and after they had
received true and excellent operations of the Spirit, answering unto, as has
been observed by some, the forenamed Principles in ver. 1. 2. As to say,

1. They were once enlightened, as chapter 10. 32. that is, by the Holy Spirit their
eyes were opened, and they were convinced of the vileness of their Sins, and
vanity of their Idols; and so had effected in them Repentance from dead works,
as ver. 1. with Heb. 9. 14. Act. 26. 18-20-23.

2. They had tasted of the heavenly gift: That is to say, as answering to the
second Principle in ver. 1. they were made partakers of Faith toward God, and
so of that Faith, which is of the operation of God, Col. 2. 12. by which they
had discerned and proved the graciousness of the heavenly gift, even of our
Lord Jesus, as, 1 Pet. 2. 3, 4. of his flesh, which was given for the life of
the world, and of his precious blood, which is the Blood of the new Covenant,
and Testament, shed for the remission of our sins, Joh. 6. 33-58. Matthew. 26.
28. whereby they were inlivened and quickened.

3. And were made partakers of the Holy Ghost: This Answers to the Doctrine of
Baptisms, in ver. 2. and shows that these, by the several mediums of Baptism,
were, by the powerful operation of the Holy Spirit, Baptized into the death of
Christ; as Romans 6. 3. And were also risen again with him, by the faith of the
operation of God, who raised Christ from the dead, as Col. 2. 12. Phil. 3. 10.
And also they were endued with the Excellent and Spiritual gifts of the Holy
Spirit, whereby they were enabled to praise and serve God acceptably, and to be
profitable unto Men and Brethren: Yea, they might be made partakers of some
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 4-12-23.

4. And have tasted the good Word of God: which Answers unto the fourth
Principle in ver. 2. to wit, the Doctrine of the laying on of hands: In which
Doctrine is taught us, That God had graciously promised to hear the Prayers
presented in the Name of Christ, and to give gracious returns thereto: And
that, where two or three were gathered together in Christ's name, he would be
in the midst of them; namely, in such Assemblings, Matthew. 18. 19, 20. Of this
good Word of God, in the performance of his gracious Promises, they had tasted:
They had proved his Graciousness and Faithfulness in hearing their Prayers, and
granting their Requests, and in manifesting his Presence with them, and
Blessing upon them, in their watching at his gates, and waiting at the posts of
his doors; as Prove 8. 34, 35* Heb. 10. 19-23-25. Which laid great engagements
upon them, to cleave unto the Lord with purpose of heart; and to call upon him
as long as they lived, as Psalm. 116. 1-7.

5, and 6. Have tasted of the Powers of the world to come: which Answer unto
the two last Principles in ver. 2. to wit, the Resurrection of the Dead, and
eternal Judgment; which follows after the Resurrection of the Dead. And of the
Powers, in the Doctrine of both, these had tasted also, namely, proved, and in
some measure experimented, the mighty Power of God, exerted in the
Resurrection, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. in quickening them to a lively hope; in raising
them to seek after, and mind the things above, Col. 3. 1, 2. In giving them
some knowledge of the terror of the Lord, in the day of Wrath, against
impenitent ones, 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. And of the Glory to be revealed on them
that, in a patient continuance in well-doing, seek for immortal Honor and
Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. 1 Pet. 5. 1. To which I shall no further enlarge. [See
Mr. Thomas Moore Senior, in his Explicit Declaration of the Testimony of
Christ, Page 585 -- 591.]

But by what has been said, it appears, they were eminent Believers, and fell
from an high degree of Christianity; higher than most attain unto who fill
themselves with needless fears, as if they were guilty of the grand Miscarriage
of these; and so in an hopeless condition.

2. Consider we nextly, the Depth of their Fall; and so the abominable
hainousness of their Transgression; and that is such as in which they were
guilty of high Apostasy, and revolt; or there was in them an evil heart of
unbelief, in Apostatizing from the living God; as Heb. 3. 12, 13. And their
Apostasy was first more inward and particular; and then more open and general.

1. More inward and particular; and so it is thus expressed by the Apostle, they
crucify [to themselves] the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6. 6. That is, by an evil
heart of unbelief they inwardly look upon Christ as an Impostor and Deceiver,
as an Accursed one, (as, 1 Cor. 12. 3.) from whom they expect no salvation; and
on his Gospel as a cheat and imposture: or as the Apostle in Heb. 10. 29.
expresses it, they tread under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, a profane; polluted thing: Thus they
account it in their evil and revolting hearts, and so inwardly turn from him
that speaks; Heb. 12. 25.

2. More outwardly and generally to others, [they put him to an open shame,]
namely they disgrace and vilify him publicly, and unto others, and make him a
public example, as the same word is rendered in Matthew. 1. 19. or they render
him to others as an infamous and accursed person, as one that was such a
Malefactor and Deceiver, as that he justly suffered that shameful, painful,
and accursed Death for his own Demerit; and hereby, (as we have noted before on
Matthew. 12. 30, 31.) they scatter others abroad from Christ, who were gatheted
unto him; and so are highly injurious to their souls. And this same expression
here rendered, they put him to an open shame, is made use of by the Septuagint
in Numb. 25. 4. where we read, [hang them up before the Lord, etc.] They read
it, [make them a public example, or put them to an open shame, etc.] And so
answerably in Heb. 10. 29. it is said, they offer despite unto, or rail upon,
the Spirit of Grace; even the Gospel of Christ, (as answering unto Moses Law,
ver. 28.) and so, the holy Spirit; for the Gospel was with the holy Spirit sent
down from heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 12. And so they railed upon, and reviled Christ,
who is the sum and subject matter of the Gospel, and of whom the Spirit of
Grace bears witness: And one Branch of, or step unto this heinous iniquity and
revolt is, the forsaking of the public Assemblies of Christians; Heb. 10. 25,
26-29. By the greatness and depth then of their Fall and Revolt, many who
wrongfully charge themselves with this transgression, may assuredly know they
are not guilty of it; for then others might know it as well as they.

3. When the Apostle says, It is impossible to renew them, etc. he speaks not
as to God, but as to themselves, in their ministration of the Gospel, whether
by word or writing: And so these words are the reason of what the Apostle had
been fore-saying, in ver. 1. viz. Therefore leaving the principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection; not laying again the
foundation, etc. -- For it is impossible, etc. As if he should say, It will be
a needless business for us, to be always declaring and insisting upon the first
principles of the Oracles of God, as with respect to these Apostates; for that
way they will not be renewed again to repentance: and so not by their preaching
or writing always these things. And therefore they would proceed on in speaking
of, or propounding in Writing, the more high and mysterious things of the
Gospel, for the sakes of those believers who still held fast to the Lord. But
yet, the things which were unpossible with men, are possible with God: Luke 18.
27. And therefore, while these Apostates were joined to all the living, the
Believers might pray for them, That God would fill their faces with shame, that
they might seek his name; as Psalm. 83. 15, 16. and 69. 22, 23. with Romans 11.
8-11, 32, 33. But to this we shall have apt occasion to speak further in the
next Scripture, which is now in order to be considered by us: Namely,

3. For as to 1 John 5. 16. many conceive that the Apostle there forbids that
such as sin the sin unto death, should be prayed for.

Ans. 1. Suppose God should have said in that Scripture, to wit, 1 John 5. 16.
Pray not for that person that sins the sin unto death; might not such an one
have been prayed for any more, had there been such a prohibition? We may see
that God commands Jeremiah once, and a second time, thus, Pray not thou for
this people, neither lift up cry, nor prayer for them, neither make
intercession to me, for I will not hear thee; Jer. 7. 16. and Chapter 11. 14. And
yet the Prophet, knowing that God was gracious and merciful, prays for them
again; Chapter 14. 7, 8, 9. Then the Lord a third time says to the Prophet, Pray
not for this people for their good; Chapter 14. 11, 12. But notwithstanding all
this, the Prophet again lifts up his heart with his hands to God in the heavens
for them; Jer. 14. 19, 20-22. And surely God is as gracious to sinners now, and
to the chief of sinners, as he was then; yea, in these last days, his grace
has been more largely expressed, and more brightly manifested, than in former
times, in that he has sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might
live through him: 1 John 4. 8, 9, 10-14. But,

2. That Scripture we are now considering, 1 John 5. 16. is by many much
mistaken; for the Apostle there does not forbid us to pray for the person that
sins unto death. It is not there said, There is a sin unto death: I do not
say that he shall pray for [him;] but, [for, or, concerning it;] to wit, the
sin: On which God may take vengeance as long as the person guilty thereof
lived; yea and after his death long: and yet the soul of that sinning person
may be saved in the day of the Lord. God said to Eli, yea he swear unto the
house of Eli, that his, and their iniquity should not be purged with sacrifice,
nor offering for ever; 1 Samuel 3. 13, 14. And it was punished long after Eli*s
death, 1 King. 2. 27. And the same may be said of the sins of Manasses, 2 King.
24. 3, 4. and yet their souls were surely saved. See also 2 Samuel 12. 10. Psalm.
99. 8. Isa. 22. 12, 14. Act. 8. 22, 23. So that, though the sin might not be
prayed for, yet the person so sinning, might (notwithstanding any thing there
said) while he was joined to all the living; for so long there is hope for men:
Eccl. 9. 4. Nay,

3. The Apostle John does not forbid the believers to pray for, or concerning
the sin unto death; for the words are not [I do say that he shall not pray for
it,] but [I do not say that he shall pray for it: That is, he does not direct
or enjoin it, upon them so to do; which, notwithstanding any thing there said,
may yet be done: 1 John 5. 16. Joh. 16. 26.

Now what has been said to this Objection, is not said, That men might
continue in sin, that grace may abound: God forbid. But to the end, That such
as conclude against themselves that there is no hope for them, might not be
discouraged from turning from their evil ways unto God: For when God says, in
any place of Scripture, to the wicked, Thou shall surely die; if he turn from
his sin, etc. he shall surely live, he shall not die: Ezekiel. 33. 11-13-16. Nay,
when the Lord said unto Jeremiah, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, my
mind could not be toward this people, etc. Jer. 15. 1-3. and Chapter 16. And, The
sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a Diamond,
etc. -- for ye have kindled a fire in mine anger, which shall burn for ever:
Chap. 17. 1, 2, 3. Yet after all this, he thus commands the Prophet, Now
therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, saying, Behold, I frame evil, and devise a device against you;
return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings
good: Jer. 18. 1-6-8-11. Oh then! however you have sinned, do not say as Cain
did, that your iniquity is greater than that it may be forgiven: Genesis 4. 13. Do
not so dishonor the Father of Mercies, as to conclude he cannot redeem you
from your iniquities, or deliver you from your transgressions; as, Isa. 50. 1,
2, 3, 4. but return unto him, and he will return unto you: Mal. 3. 7. And
consider thereto, that God has reserved this to himself as his Prerogative, To
show mercy to such sinners as unto whom men cannot lawfully show mercy. They
say, if a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's,
shall he return unto her again? Shall not that land be greatly polluted? But
thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return again unto me, says
the LORD: Jer. 3. 1. Oh then! though thou art in the belly of hell, as it were,
yet cry unto the God of Mercy. Though thou say thou art cast out of his
sight, yet look again toward his holy Temple: And when thy soul faints within
thee, then remember the LORD, and let thy prayer come in unto him, into his
holy Temple; even Christ, in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily: and who came into the world to save sinners, sinners indefinitely, and
the chief and most notorious sinners: Jonah 2. 2-4-7, 8. with Col. 2. 9, 10.
and 1 Timothy 1. 13-15. And him that comes unto him (in this day of grace) he
will in no wise cast out; whatever he has been or done: Joh. 6. 37. Matthew.
11. 27, 28.

3. Let me proceed on and say, Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die? Why will
we die? May another generation say. Why, the pleasures of sin are so sweet and
delightful to us, that we know not how, on that Account, to turn from them.
Stolen waters are sweet, and bread of secrecies is pleasant. We cannot deny
but that God calls us to repentance, and therewith inables us to turn from
our iniquities. But the ways of sin are so grateful and pleasing, that it is as
the cutting off our right hand, or the plucking out of our right eye; to bid
adieu thereto, and turn our backs thereon. Can the Ethiopian change his skin?
Or the Leopard his spots? Then may we also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil: Jer. 13. 23.

Answ. Now to this generation I might say many things, but having much exceeded
mine intention at first already, shall therefore be the briefer; and propound
to these Objectors that saying of the Apostle, Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye
then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed; for the end, or reward, of
those things is death. Here the Apostle propounds three weighty Considerations
to take men off from their sinful courses, namely, They are unfruitful,
shameful, and eternally hurtful and pernicious.

1. What fruit had ye then? Even when you did commit sin, and were servants of
it: And so, what fruit have you now therein, who sow to the flesh, and serve
sin? What fruit? may you say. We have said already, Sin is most sweet and
delightful to us: Well, but yet let me say to you,

1. Though the ways of sin are delightful, or, as the Apostle expresses it,
though you count it pleasure to riot in the daytime; 2 Pet. 2. 13. yet sin is
not delightful and satisfactory to the whole man: It may appear so to the Body,
and to the Brutish and Sensual Appetite; but not so to the Superior Eaculties
of the Soul, which are not delighted with these low and carnal things: 1 John
2. 16. They will not satisfy men's souls, -- for they are the stumbling blocks
of their iniquity; Ezekiel. 7. 19. The most noble part of man (as Psalm. 22. 20.)
is not delighted herewith, but contrariwise sadned, and filled with horror and
dread thereby, while men's Consciences are not so seared, as to be past feeling;
and when they consider and lay these things to heart. To this purpose speaks
the holy Scripture; Though wickedness, says Zophar, be sweet in his mouth,
though he hide it under his tongue; though he spare it, and forsake it not, but
keep it still in the midst of his palate: yet his meat in his bowels is turned,
it is the gall of Aspes within him. (That is, Wickedness is the very
quintessence of bitterness to his soul, how sweet soever it be, o^ appear to
be, in his mouth.) Surely he shall not know, or feel, quietness in his belly;
to wit, in the spirit of his mind: Job. 20. 12, 13, 14-20. The wicked man
travelleth with pain all his days, and the number of years is hidden to the
oppressor; a sound of fears is in his ears: In prosperity, or peace, the
destroyer shall come upon him. -- Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid,
they shall prevail against him, as a King ready to the battle; because he
stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself against the
Almighty: Joh. 15. 20-25, etc. And though such may appear very merry and
jocund, yet as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of
fools: Eccl. 2. 2. and Chap. 7. 6. Nay even in their laughter the heart is
sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness; however to the soul. Their
soul within them shall mourn, Prove* 14. 13. with Joh 14. 22. How often do terrors
make them afraid on every side, and even drive them to their feet? as Job 18.
11. and Chapter 20. 23-25. How does their heart smite them! 2 Samuel 24 10. And how
are they pricked in their reins, when God is reproving them, and setting their
sins in order before them! Now how can any considerate and sober-minded person
call, or count that truly delightful, which does so wound and torment the most
excellent part of him, and tends to its great disquietment and disturbance!
This is like the pleasing a finger for displeasing the whole body; or rather
like a man in a Consumption, who takes delight in nourishing the excrement of
his hair, and is hugely pleased with the great length of it, while mean time
this tends to the discomfort and destruction of his vital parts. Did those
persons who thus speak, but seriously commune with their heart upon their bed;
as Psalm. 4. 2-4. they would soon find that they are in a great distemper, who
count wickedness sweet. They call evil good, and good evil; put darkness for
light, and light for darkness: put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter: for
the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt: There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked; Isa. 5* 20. and
Chapter 57. 20, 21. And are not sinners therefore rightly called fools in
Scripture? And is not their folly herein manifest, in that they labor so much
to gratify the vile and mortal sheath of their body, while thereby they rust
and canker the precious and immortal sword of their spirit? (as, Dan. 7. 15.)

2. If the ways of sin and iniquity were never so delightful in themselves (as
in truth they are not) yet in as much as they are most hateful and abominable
unto him, in whom thou live and movest, and have thy being; and who has so
loved thee, as not to spare his only begotten Son; but has delivered him up
for thee, and for all mankind; and raised him again: and through him is so rich
in goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering toward thee: they should be
loathed and detested by thee. Remember him who said, How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. What! will thou reward him evil
for good, and hatred for his love? If thou shall so do, know, evil will never
depart from thy house: Psalm. 109. 3-5. with Prove. 17. 13. It is true indeed,
fury is not in him; but who would therefore be so unreasonable and
disingenious, as to set the briars and thorns against him in battle? He will go
through them, he will burn them up together: as Isa. 27. 4. Would thou deal
thus with a gracious Prince or Governor? (as Mal. 1. 8.) Would thou rebel
against such an one, who has always obliged thee by his goodness, because it
is pleasing and delightful to thee so to do? And say, I will provoke him to
anger, who is so good to me; because it pleases me so to do? Would not this be
an high aggravation of thine iniquity toward an Earthly Ruler or Parent? Is
this thy kindness to thy Friend? 2 Samuel 16. 17. But God is greater than man,
infinitely greater. Thou have thy being from him, and continual dependence upon
him; he is thy God, in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways:
and should thou not then glorify him? as Dan. 5. 23. Considering also, That
he is not, he will not, he cannot be reconciled unto iniquity, nor be
well-pleased with the workers thereof: Psalm. 5. 4, 5. And mind we this well,
that though he love his creatures, and is not willing that any of mankind
should perish; Tit. 3. 4. yet he can sooner hate his creatures, even the most
excellent of them also, than love the Devils creature, to wit, Sin: As may be
seen in the Angels that sinned, and kept not their principallity, but left
their propor habitation, Jude 6. and in the natural Branches; and in many other
instances of his severity mentioned in the holy Scriptures. He may hate his
creatures for their wickedness, whom he loved before, and love them no more; as
Hos. 9. 15. But he can never possibly love sin, but hates that with a perfect,
and perpetual hatred: Hab. 1. 13. Heb. 6. 18. Jam. 1. 13. Do we then provoke
the Lord to Jealousy? Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10. 22.

3. If thou art so taken with pleasure and sweetness, that thou pursuest and
pleadest for sin, and know not how to part with it, when it is not indeed,
but in appearance only, delightful and pleasurable; and not so much as
appearingly so to the most noble part of man: why do thou not abandon those
really unfruitful works of darkness; and come unto and walk in the ways of
holiness and righteousness? For the ways of wisdom are indeed ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3. 16, 17. My son, says
Wisdom, eat thou honey, because it is good, and the honey comb, which is sweet
upon thy palate: so shall the knowledge of wisdom be [unto thy soul, when thou
have found it,] etc. Prove. 24. 4. 13, 14. Where let us diligently consider,

1. It shall be so [to thy soul] to thine Inner man especially, to thy most
noble, excellent, and supreme part, in which thou art preferred before, and art
above, all bruit creatures; and even equal to the Angels: For God gives to the
man that is good before him wisdom, and knowledge, and joy; but to the sinner he
gives travel, etc. Eccl. 2. 26. This is the Argument our Lord propounds unto
the Drudges of Sin and Satan, to engage them to depart from evil, and to come
unto, and follow him: Come unto me, says he, all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest: take my yoke upon you, and learn of me. -- And
ye shall find rest to your souls; Matthew. 11. 27, 28. Jer. 6. 16. And though
such shall meet with outward trouble and tribulation in the world in the world,
yet they shall have a merry heart, and therewith a continual feast; Prove. 15.
15. Joh. 16. 33. Their soul shall dwell at ease, whatever outward disquietness
they meet withal; Psalm. 25. 12-14. And even then when, as need is, they are in
heaviness through manifold temptations, yet they greatly rejoice: Their heart
shall rejoice in Christ, and their joy none takes away from them: 1 Pet. 1.
6-8. Romans 15. 13. And is it not better to have a cheerful merry spirit, and a
sad countenance, than outward pleasure and vexation of spirit? Yes doubtless;
Eccl. 7. 3. The spirit of a man (when it is whole and at ease) w^ll sustain his
infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14. And

2. The knowledge of wisdom will be sweet to thy soul [when thou have found it]
not while thou art a stranger to it; for a stranger does not intermeddle with
this joy: Prove. 14. 10. Thou may say, Did I indeed perceive greater delight
and pleasure in the way of wisdom and goodness than in the ways of folly and
iniquity, I would then embrace the former, and depart from, and relinquish the
latter: but it is not so with me. I answer, No, it is very true indeed, how
should thou perceive the sweetness of honey, while thy mouth is full of the
gall of asps? How should thou know what pleasure is in wisdoms ways, whilst
thou remainest a stranger and enemy thereto? But instead of listening to thine
own deceived, deceitful, and desperately wicked heart, hearken what God the
Lord says unto thee; for his mouth speaks truth, and wickedness is the
abomination of his lips: He tells thee that in hearkening diligently unto him,
thy soul shall delight it self in fatness; Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. and mind well what
account the holy on^^ of God have given of the sweetness of the ways of
uprightness, who have walked therein: and they will teach thee and tell thee,
that a day in his courts is better than a thousand elsewhere: that, Blessed are
the undefiled in the way: that, Great peace have they which love God's law, and
nothing shall offend them. Oh then! Taste and see that the LORD is gracious:
Blessed is the man that trusts in him: Psalm. 34. 8 Come, eat of wisdoms
bread, and drink of the wine she has mingled: forsake the foolish and live,
and go in the way of understanding: for he that comes unto Christ, the bread
of life, shall never hunger; and he that believes on him shall never thirst:
Prove. 9. 1-6. with Joh. 4. 14. and Chap. 6. 32-35. Thus says the LORD, stand
ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and
walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls: Jer. 6. 16.

2. But not only are the ways of sin and wickedness unfruitful, but also they
are shameful in themselves, and unto them who judge righteous judgment: And
that consideration might somewhat take men off from continuing therein: Ephesians. 5.
11, 12. Indeed through men's continuance in them, and hardening their hearts from
Gods fear, they make themselves in an high degree shameless; the unjust knows
no shame: Jer. 6. 15. and Chapter 8. 12. Zeph. 3. 5. Yea some there are, that glory
in their shame: Pnil. 3. 19. But however, sin is a loathsome, shameful thing;
and when God reproves sinners, and sets their sins in order before them, they
shall then see and be ashamed thereof: Psalm. 50. 21. with Isa. 26. 11. Ezekiel.
43. 10, 11. Yea indeed persons, who walk in evil ways, do signify them to be
shameful, in that they walk in them in the dark: And the light is unto them as
the shadow of death: Job. 24. 13-17. Joh. 3. 20. And even such as walk in
crooked ways themselves will laugh at, and shame their companions in evil, for
committing the same wickedness which their own heart knows they themselves are
guilty of: Romans 2. 1, 2, 3. which shows unto us, that they, when they consider
things, cannot but acknowledge, that wickedness is a filthy detestable thing:
Prove. 13. 5. And the consideration thereof is very powerful to cause men to
relinquish that whereof they are ashamed, Shame has this effect upon many men
too frequently, as with respect to that which is not shameful, but truly
honorable, and highly valuable; how many turn their backs upon Christ, and his
Gospel ways, and people, because of the reproach of men! Isa. 51. 7, 8. Mark 8.
38. yea such like effect it had like to have had upon some pillars in the
Church, as to their making mention of Gods righteousness: Hence the Prophet
says, I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me: And again, The word of the
LORD was made a reproach unto me, and a derision daily: Then I said I will not
make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name, etc. Jer. 20. 7, 8, 9. 10.
Psalm. 39. 1, 2, 3. But would men but come to the light, by which all things
that are reproved are made manifest, in their right and proper colors; and
would they thereby commune with their own hearts upon their beds, and be still;
how would the loathsomness and shamefulness of iniquity appear to them, so as
to cause them to loath themselves in their own sight, and even to abhor
themselves, and repent in dust and ashes: that they have so often, and so much
polluted themselves with that filthy nasty thing: Ephesians. 5. 11-13-15, etc. Ezekiel.
20. 43.

3. Yea not only are the ways of impiety and profaneness unfruitful and
shameful, but also destructive and deadly; yea endlesly and eternally so, if
still continued in: the end of those things is death; Romans 6. 21, 23. And
therefore were sin at present never so delightful and pleasurable (as in truth
it is not, as has been shown;) yet seeing it will be bitterness in the end,
and that without end; who would for the enjoyment of the pleasures of sin,
which are but for a season, be cast into the lake hereafter, where their worm
dies not, and their fire is not quenched: Mark 9. 43-48. Know thou not
this, says Job, that the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the
hypocrite is but for a moment; Job. 20. 4, 5. But the doleful and dismal reward
of wickedness will be eternal, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power; 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. The smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor night, etc. Rev.
14. 9-11. He that despised Moses law, died without mercy under two or three
witnesses; of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be counted
worthy, who has trodden under-foot the Son of God, etc? Why, what sorer
punishment shall such an one undergo, than to die without mercy? He shall live
without mercy in endless torment, and that is unconceivably greater Punishment
than to die without mercy; Heb. 10. 28-31. Now consider this, ye that forget
God! Is it not the greatest folly and madness imaginable, for the enjoyment of
the seeming sweetness of a moment, to deprive ones self of the real pleasure;
and to undergo the unmixed torture and torment of Eternity? What man in his
right mind, would buy imaginary contentment and delight at so dear a rate!
Surely, Did men seriously ponder this, that the things that are seen, and
sensibly enjoyed,, are temporal; but the things that are not seen, both the
glory and wrath, to be revealed, are eternal: it would imbitter that which
appears so sweet and grateful to them; and cause them to give no rest to their
eyes, nor slumber to their eyelids, until they turned themselves unto God from
their vanities, to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son from
heaven, whom he raised from the dead: even Jesus, who is the deliverer from the
wrath to come: as, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9, 10.

And though through thy custom in sin it be very difficult, yea impossible for
thee to leave thine evils, in any strength of thine own; and like to the making
a Blackamore white: yet the grace of God is sufficient for thee, which he
affords, while he calls upon thee to turn unto him. And therefore though he
says in one place, Can the Ethiopian change his skin? Or the Leopard his
spots? Then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. Yet presently
after he says unto the same persons, Will thou not be made clean? When shall
it once be? Jer. 13. 23. with ver. 27: To signify to us, that though with them
it is impossible, yet with God all things are possible; as, Matthew. 19. 26. Mark
12. 27.

4. Let me yet add and say, Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die? Why will we
die? may other Excuse makers say. It is not our will so to ^o, but we are
unwilling to perish for ever bereafter; nor do we resolve or purpose to
continue always in a course of sin and iniquity; but it is our intention and
resolution to flee therefrom hereafter: but there is time enough for that yet,
we are young, or we are strong and healthful, and the evil day shall not yet
overtake or prevent us: We know not yet how to be serious, Old Age is the most
proper season for that; and when that comes, we are then fully minded to leave
the ways we now walk in, and to exercise our selves to godliness, and to apply
our hearts unto, and earnestly pursue those things which belong to our eternal
peace and welfare.

Now to these persons I may answer and say,

1. How know thou that thou shall live to Old age? Thy times are not in
thine own, but in Gods; and when he pleases, he can, and will set his heart
upon thee, and gather unto himself thy spirit and thy breath, and then thou
must perish, and shall turn again unto dust: as Job 34. 14, 15. for no man has
power over the spirit, to retain the spirit, neither has he power in the day
of death; and there is no discharge in that war: neither shall wickedness
deliver those that are given to it: Eccl. 8. 8. It is appointed to men once to
die, and after that the Judgdment. But when that once will be, is hidden from
the eyes of all living. It is laid up with God, Heb. 9. 27. and therefore it is
most dangerous to delay the time: for in the grave whither thou go, there is
no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom: Eccl. 9. 10. Thou have
certainly seen some others removed out of the Land of the Living, in the prime
and flower of their age, that were as likely to have lived to Old Age, as those
that are lest behind: for some die in their full strength, being wholly at ease
and quiet; whose breasts are full of milk, and their bones are moistened with
marrow: Job 21. 22-24. And why then may not thou also be cut off before thou
arrivest at Old Age? For all Flesh is as grass, and all the goodliness thereof
as the flower of the field. Nay indeed, when men put off their conversion and
turning to the Lord, upon this presumption, That they shall be here long
continued, and that hereafter will be time enough: God is many times thereby
provoked to cut them off before their time. If that servant, says our Savior,
shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to beat
the Men Servants and Maidens, and to eat and drink with the drunken: The Lord
of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for him, and at an hour
when he is not aware; and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
portion with the unbelievers; Luke 12. 45, 46. When they shall say peace and
safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them as travail upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape: 1 Thessalonians 5. 1, 2, 3. Oh then! Boast not thy
self of to morrowday; for thou know not what a day may bring forth; or what
will be on the morrow: for what is our life? It is even a vapor that appears
for a little time, and then vanishes away; Prove. 27. 1. with Jam. 4. 14-17.
And if thou art cut off, and die in thy sins, thy state and condition will be
miserable for ever. Awake then thou that sleep, arise from the dead: and
Christ will give thee light. Childhood and youth are vanity, yea every man at
his best estate is altogether vanity. Oh then! seek the Lord, while he may be
found; and call upon him while he is near at hand; Eccl. 11. 10. and Chapter 12. 1.
Psalm. 39. 5, 11. Do not so number thy days, as to apply thine heart to folly
and vanity; but beg of God to teach thee rightly to number thy days, that thou
may cause thine heart to come to wisdom: Psalm. 90. 11, 12.

2. If thy days should be prolonged, and thou should be here continued, it
will hereafter be more difficult and hard for thee to turn from thine evil
ways, and to apply thine heart to sound wisdom, than now it is; as has been
said before. Indeed with God all things are possible, but by thy continuing in
evil, thou will be more averse from turning unto God, than now thou art; thine
heart will he hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; Heb. 3. 12. And when
the evil days come, and years draw nigh, in which thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them: Thine afflictions and infirmities will be so many, and
frequent, and thy natural powers will be so impaired and weakened, that thou will be more and more indisposed thereby for what is of eternal concernment to
thee: Remember therefore thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure
in them: while the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars, be not
darkened; nor the Clouds return after the Rain, etc. Eccl. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4-7.
Exodus 6. 9.

3. But why will thou not now turn from thine iniquities unto God? Is it
because the ways of sin are so delightful, that thou can not leave them yet?
This has been spoken to before, and shown to be a mere mistake. Certainly, it
can be no real good, or desirable thing, to be in slavery and bondage; and it
is the most miserable and dreadful bondage of all, to be the servant and vassal
of Sin and Corruption; and to be led captive by Satan, the Murderer of Mankind,
at his pleasure, Joh. 8. 32-34. 2 Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Is it
because Sin and Satan have so greatly obliged thee, that thou can not
therefore forsake them, or be unkind to them? If thou so think, thou art
strangely deluded and bewitched: A Debtor indeed thou art, but not to the
flesh, or carnal mind, to live after the flesh. It has laid no such
engagements upon thee, that thou should yield up thy Mind, or Members to the
service thereof; nor can thou reasonably expect any such reward therefrom,
or advantage thereby, as might cause thee to undertake, or continue in, its
Service and Vassallage: for if thou live after the flesh, thou shall die:
Romans 8. 12, 13. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man
sows, that also shall he reap: for he that sows to the flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption: Gal. 6. 7, 8. But thou art indeed a Debtor to God and
Christ: Christ has given himself a ransom for thee and for all men; 1 Timothy 2.
6. And thou art not thine own, for thou art bought with a price: therefore thou
ought to glorify God both in thy body and spirit, which are Gods: Namely,
To live to him who died for thee, and rose again: 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. with 2 Cor.
5. 14, 15. for to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the quick and dead: Romans 14. 9. Or art thou yet unwilling
to forsake Sin and Satan, Because thou have bound thy self by a vow, or
covenant, to be their servant? If this be thine inward thought, thou art herein
also deceived; for thou have entered into a solemn Vow, to forsake the world,
the flesh, and the Devil. Or if since, thou have made a covenant with death and
hell? as, Isa. 28. 15-18. It is infinitely better for thee to break and disanul
it, than to keep it; and the sooner thou do so, the better. Or is it the
difficulty, or appearing uneasiness of Christ's yoke, that causes thee to bear
Satan's, and discourages thee from taking his upon thee? If this be the stick
with thee, it proceeds only from thine ignorance and unacquaintedness with
Christ's yoke, for his yoke is indeed easy, sweet, and gracious; and his
Burden is light: as has also been before said: Matthew. 11. 28-30. Oh let
nothing whatsoever hinder thee, or be an impediment to thy turning from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; but to day, while it
is yet called to day, hear Gods voice, and harden not thine heart.

5. And lastly, Once more let me say, Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die?
Why will we die, may too many erroneous ones say? Alas our states were
determined of God, before we were born: And if we belong to the election of
Grace, we shall not, we cannot die eternally; but when Gods time comes he will
overcome us, and turn us from our sins unto himself, by an irresistible and
invincible Power: And if not, but we be reprobated, there is then no hope for
us, but we must die, and perish for ever hereafter, let us do what we can; and
it is but a vain thing for us to strive against God's Decree, for in so doing,
we do but labor in vain, and spend our strength for naught, and in vain.

Answ. Now to these who thus reason with unprofitable and pernicious talk,
there has, in several places, been so much spoken, as may discover their great
and dangerous mistake: But yet, because they are strengthened herein by many
zealous and popular ones, I shall desire to say somewhat again; though it be
but what has been already spoken: And so,

1. If there were any truth in their Sayings, then indeed there would be no
good reason to propound such an Inquiry, or to demand of the most of wicked
ones, and say, Why will ye die? For if there were such a dismal and dreadful
Decree, as many zealous ones plead for, there were then no possibility of their
Avoiding Eternal Destruction, who were Reprobated, or past by, before they were
born. But surely herein also they attribute folly to the Almighty (as Job 1.
22.) or render his Demand unsavory, who is infinite in wisdom, when he says
to the wicked ones, Why will ye die? For they, or most of them, might readily
and truly reply, were this Opinion Orthodox, we cannot possibly avoid death; we
are doomed thereto by thy Decree: And why then do thou ask us such an
unreasonable Question? But be that will reprove God, and attribute folly unto
him, who charged his Angels with folly, let him answer it; Job. 40. 2. But,

2. There is no truth at all in this fatal Decree, some speak of and contend
for: There is no man elected to eternal salvation, in a personal consideration,
before he was born, nor until he be in Christ, and so is become a New Creature:
2 Cor. 5. 17. There is no condemnation to Gods Elect: but he that believes not
is condemned already, because he has not believed on the name of the only
begotten Son of God, Romans 8. 1, 33, 34. with Joh. 3. 18, 19, 36. Gods elect are
holy and beloved; and not such as are the servants of sin and corruption, Col.
3. 12. Gods elect can hardly be deceived, Matthew. 24. 24. But all men, while
they abide in their natural estate, are already deceived; and may be easily
further deceived by the evil one: Tit. 3. 3. Rev. 12. 9. Therefore no
unbelivers, unholy, and deceived ones, while such, are of the number of Gods
elect; nor is any one reprobated to eternal destruction, before he was born, or
as he comes into the world: nor while the day of Gods grace and patience is
continued to him; as has been said before: Ecccl. 9. 4. but during that time
it is Gods good will that all should be saved and come to the knowledge of the
truth, that they may be saved: 1 Timothy 2. 4 6. 2 Pet. 3. 9, 15. And those who at
present are not, may hereafter be made of the chosen generation; and so be of
the number of Gods elect, while it is called to day: as it is said with respect
unto both Jews and Gentiles: I will call them my people which were not my
peopie, and her beloved that was not beloved: And it shall come to pass, that
in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there shall ye
be called (to wit, be) the children of the living God: Romans 9. 24, 25, 26. To
the same purpose also the Apostle Peter speaks, saying, Ye are an elect
generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People; -- which in
time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which had not
obtained mercy, but have now obtained mercy: 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10. And not only may
those who are not at present of the Elect Generation, be made of it, through
the grace of God: But also our Savior shows how such shall certainly so be,
when he says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation; but is passed out of death into life: Joh. 5. 24. with Romans 8.
33, 34.

3. And though God does exert and put forth a mighty power in the Gospel, to
convert the Soul unto himself; yet he does not ordinarily, if ever, put it
forth irresistably, for the saving of the Soul: Now in this day, It is God tha^
works in Men both to will and to do, o^ good pleasure: But yet to signify to
us, That he does not work irresistably, it is presently added; Do all things
without Murmuring, or Anger, and Disputings: That ^^ may be blameless and
harmless, etc. Phil. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. And we read of many that have resisted
the Truth, to wit, Christ in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 3. 8. That have resisted the
Holy Ghost, Act. 7. 51. That have refused to return, when God drew them with
the Cords of a Man, with Bands of Love, Hose. 11. 4, 5. That were not gathered,
when Christ would have gathered them, Matthew. 23. 37. That would not come unto
Christ, that they might have Life, though Christ spoke unto them that they
might be saved, Joh. 5. 34, 39, 40. And indeed, the pleading for this
irresistible Power, does tend to render the Gospel, and the Preaching of it,
foolishness, and makes the Requirings, Exhortations, and the Cautions thereof,
useless things: and leaves no room for Obedience, or Disobedience; nor for
Rewards or Punishments: And therefore such an Apprehension, or Misapprehension,
rather, is to be abhorred and abominated by us: for it opens a wide Gap to
all Spiritual Slothfulness, yea, to all Profaneness and Licenciousness
whatsoever: And makes them that heartily entertain it desperate, or careless,
in seeking after the things which belong to their Eternal Peace and Welfare:
Because they conclude, That when Gods time comes, he will overcome, and bring
them to believe, if they be of the Elect number, will they, nill they: And
otherwise, there is but one Decree for them all (as Dan. 2. 9.) They must
notwithstanding all their Endeavors to the contrary, receive this from Gods
Hand, to wit, lie down in dreadful and endless Misery and Sorrow hereafter. Oh
reject we and abominate all such Instructions or Doctrines, which cause to err
from the words of knowledge, Prove. 19. 27. And consider we, That while God
calls Men, he enables them to turn unto him from their evil ways; but does not
so force them, but that still they may and ought to comply with that Grace
given: or they may possibly reject the Grace of God, or receive it in vain,
even ineffectually and unprofitably, 2. Cor. 6. 1.

And though the Apostle Paul was converted in an extraordinary way, or after an
unusal manner; yet it appears that he was not converted irresistably, in that
he says, I was not disobedient to the Heavenly Vision: He does not say, nor
intimate, as many do, That he could not possibly have so been; but the contrary
is rather signified in his so saying, Act. 26. 19. As also plainly appears in
that Caution and Warning our Lord sets before him at the very time of his
Conversion, in saying unto him, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: It is hard
for thee to kick against the Pricks, Act. 9. 4, 5. And though he was so
extraordinarily, not irresistably converted; yet still he passed the time of
his sojourning in fear: And did not conclude he could not fail of, or fall
from, the Grace of God: But he kept under his Body, and brought it into
subjection, lest that by any means, when he had preached to others, he himself
should be a Reprobate, or cast away, 1 Cor 9. 26, 27. and Chap 11. 32. Phil. 3.
8. 11-14.

Oh then! Let no Man deceive you with vain Words or idle Dreams, and Visions of
their own Heart: but set your Hearts unto those words confirmed with the Oath
of the unchangeable God, the only living and true God, which we have been
somewhat largely considering; and which he commands his Prophet to speak unto
the house of Israel: Namely, say unto them, (As) I live, says the LORD GOD, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way, and live: Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

18 April 1679.
THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. In the Text, for 21. 11; p. 52. l. 25. r. in; p. 83. l. 17. add they;
l. 21. dele Comma; p. 90. l. 12. r. 1-5; p. 91. l. 13. r. thought; p. 92. l.
15. dele desires; p. 106. l. 9. r. when; p. 114. l. 18. r. 2; p. 137. l. 17. r.
unsuitably; l. 19. de. Comma; p. 149. l. 14. r. hear; p. 154. l. 8. r. Goel; p.
160. l. 15. r. preserve; p. 196. l. 9. r. enlivened; p. 204. l. 17. r. was; p.
208. l. 24. r. Appetite.


