The VIRTUES of COFFEE, CHOCOLETTE, and THEE or TEA, Experimentally known in
this our Climate.
Of COFFEE.
THE Nature, Places and Manner of its Growth, and what it is, I shall not
insist upon to acquaint you, as being too tedious, and for that it has been
already by several set forth; but I have Observed, that in those Parts where
they drink it at all times, as at Meals and otherwise, the Inhabitants are not
subject to the Stone, Scurvey, Gout, Dropsy, nor many other Diseases which are
incident to us here; it being moderately warm, attenuating and dry, so that
many crudities and crude Humors by the common use of this Drink are very much
Corrected. And I find by Experience, that it has taken also its good Effects
in these our parts and Climate; for it being drank at any time, dries up moist
and waterish Humors, expels Wind, moderately binding and cleansing, it
helps those that have the Dropsy by its drying quality, and is most
excellent against that common Distemper: For by the constant drinking thereof
it Cured a Learned Bishop of this Kingdom, who had been before left off as
Incurable by some of the most ablest Physicians of England, (by drinking
thereof, as he was advised, with Sugar Candy;) it strengthens much the Liver,
helps the Jaundies, it is good against the Corruption of the Blood, it
refreshes the Heart and vitals, it helps Swooning, palpitation and weakness
of the Heart, and dizziness in the Head, it strengthens the Stomach, helps
the want of Appetite, Concoction, and pains in the Stomach; in the Brain it
helps all cold, moist and drowsy distempers, as the Lethargy, Apoplexy, etc.
the Steam is good for Rheums in the Eyes, and for pains and noise in the Ears,
or dullness of Hearing; it is good against all moist Rheums, if the matter or
Phlegm be thick, then sweeten it with Sugar Candy; it is good against
Hypochondriack Winds, and the pains of the Spleen; it purges by Urine, (a good
Drink for those that are troubled with the Stone in the Reins or the Bladder;)
it is experimentally good to prevent Miscarriage; it is good against the Gout,
Sciatica, and for all Rheums and rheumatick Pains in the whole Body. Are any
Surfeited with Drunkenness or Gluttony? let this be their common Drink. Do any
eat much Fruit? let them drink much of this; in the Spring time when Humors do
increase make good use of this: As to the time of drinking it, at any time of
the Day, unless within two or three Hours before going to Bed, for it hinders
Sleep, but its Operation will not last above two or three Hours; you may not
fear any hurt by the due and moderate Use of it.

Of CHOCOLETTE.
IT IS a great Cordial both for Aged people, Middle-aged and Young; it
nourishes the Child in the Womb; it is a great Corroborator, and it does not
only warm and comfort the Coats of the Stomach, but it does nourish and restore
Nature where it is debilitated and depraved; it is Hot and Moist in the second
Degree, and by that Heat which is Moderate it does in an Extraordinary manner
help Digestion by its warm and strengthening Quality; if a Man or Woman has eat
a full Meal, and are out of order for want of Digestion, let them take a Cup or
two of this, and it shall by that Digestive faculty which is inherent in it
carry it off without any more trouble. It has been by the use of a Gentleman
well experienced both in Physic and Surgery most admirable for inward
Bruises, being given in place of Mummie, Sperma-ceti, Irish- Slate, etc. who
was by the taking of it himself simply, as usually prepared in ordinary Houses,
Cured, when having two of his Ribs broken, being at the same time above Fifty
Years of age; and further he says, that the Virtues of the same Nut is a most
Sovereign Medicine or rather Diet for all kind of Weak and Decayed Bodies, of
what Age or Sex soever; it has many other Virtues which for brevities sake are
omitted. For any man that does Travel upon the Road, (as such there are that
cannot eat in the morning,) let them but drink a Dish or two of this, and they
may Travel by the strength of it many Miles. All which things are sufficiently
known, and can be proved by many who now live in the City of London, to their
own Experience, for above these Thirty Years.

Of THEE, or TEA.
IT IS an Herb that grows in China and Japonia, it is moderately Hot and
binding; this wholesome Herb preserves in perfect Health till very Old age, it
makes the Body active and lusty, it helps Headache and heaviness thereof,
Lippitude, Distillatious, and difficulty of Breathing, weakness of the
Ventricle, pains of the Bowels, Lassitude, it is also good for the Stone, and
for any sharp Rheums whatsoever.

The Reader may take notice, that there are many who pretend Skill, and do
prepare both Coffee and Chocolette, but either for want of Judgment in
compounding, buying of bad Commodities, or not being at the Charge for doing it
well, do vend that which is false made up, and so the Operation has not its
proper Effect, which brings it under a disreputation. But if any man has
occasion for that which is good indeed, and really and truly prepared and
compounded, let them repair to Samuel Price in Christ-Church Hospital, near
Newgate-street, and they may be furnished with that which is Pure, and fit for
use, of either Sort, upon his Word.

With Allowance.


