Some of the Quakers CONTRADICTIONS which they writ, etc. as suited the Times
and their own Interests; by which 'twill appear, that the Highest Pretenders,
are the Greatest Deceivers.
Section I.
1. OUR giving forth Papers or printed Books, it is from the immediate Eternal
Spirit of GOD.

2. You might AS WELL have condemned the Scriptures to the Fire, as our Queries.

3. You are now answered from the Mouth of the LORD G. Fox and Rich.
Hubberthorn, Truth's Defense, p. 2, 104, 107. printed 1653.
.

4. If ever you own the Prophets, Christ or the Apostles, you will own our
Writings, which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power G. F. Answ. to the
Westmoreland Pet. p. 30. 1653.
.

5. Que. Do you (i. e. Quakers) esteem your Speakings, to be of as great
Authority as any Chapter in the Bible? G. W. answers, That which is spoken from
the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and
Chapters are, and GREATER G. Whitehead 's Ser. Apol. p. 49.
.

1. WE are grossly abused, and our Intention and Principle, which NEVER was, to
bring our Books in comparison with the Scriptures. [ Is not this a gross
Untruth? compare it with their former Writings.]

2. We prefer the Bible before all the Books extant in the World G. W. Quakers
Plainness, etc. p. 71. 1674.
; [ and yet formerly reproved John Chandler ( at a Meeting at the Bull and
Mouth) for having given the Scriptures Preference before their Books: And is
not this a plain Contradiction?]

Section II.
1. THE Scriptures are not the Word of GOD G. Fox, etc. Firebrand, etc. p. 159.
2d Part. 1678.
.

2. The Scripture is not the Word of GOD, as thou blasphemously affirmed G. F.
Great Mystery, p. 240. 1659.
.

3. How can, or dare any to say without the highest Blasphemy, that the
Scripture is the Word of GOD G. Bishop, Mean Tekel, etc. p. 22. 1659.
?

4. The Letter (i. e. the Scripture) is a Declaration of the Word, the Husk G.
F. Way to the Kingdom, p. 8. 1655.
.

5. The Letter [ i. e. the Scripture] is Dust and Death G. F. etc. Brief
Discovery, p. 9. 1653.
.

6. That which is written is the Letter, which is Death and kills G. W.
Ishmael, etc. p. 10.
.

7. Thou art one of them that fouls with thy Feet, Ezekiel. 34.18. that has
nothing but Husk which is fit for nothing but Swine G. Fox, etc. Truth's Def.
p. 53. 1653.
.

8. The Quakers do not call the Letter the Rule; and the four Books of Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John the NEW TESTAMENT and Gospel, as thou and thy Generation do
G. W. and Chr. Atkinson, David's Enemies, etc. p. 7. 1655.
.

9. But they frequently called them Earthly Letter, and Carnal Letter G.F. etc.
Truth's Def. p. 14, 28, 56, 60.
.

1. WE say Holy Writ is the declared Fundamental Law of Heaven W. Penn, Engl.
Present Int. p. 36. 1675.
.

2. We believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and NEW TESTAMENT were given
forth by Divine Inspiration G. W. Innocence, etc. p. 31. 1693.
.

3. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and NEW TESTAMENT are of Divine Authority,
as being given by Inspiration from GOD Quakers Vind. etc. p. 4. 1693. signed by
G. W. and 30 more.
:

4. That they [ i. e. Quakers] say, the Holy Scripture is Carnal, Dust, Death,
and kills, etc. -- We do, in the holy Fear of Almighty GOD, and in behalf of
the said People, declare and testify, That all these, and all other his
Accusations of the same Kind, or depending thereupon, are utterly false, wicked
and malicious, and never so believed, so said, nor so affirmed by us Charitable
Essay, etc. p. 8. 1693. signed by G.W. and 12 more of their Preachers.
. [ Now my Request to G. W. and the rest of the Subscribers, is this, That they
would view the Quotations on the other Side; and if they find that they
formerly called the Scriptures Carnal, Dust, Death, etc. as they have done,
that they would be so honest as to take shame to themselves, and acknowledge
their Error therein, and that they have wrongfully accused Fra. Bugg for those
Citations.]

^ OF GOD, and calls it Blasphemy in any to say so; yet, it is to be observed,
he gives that very Style to his own Writings, as in his Vials of Wrath, etc.
printed 1654. where he says -- And to you all this is THE WORD OF GOD, p. 7.
and in p. 9. and p. 12. are the same word. And in the Way to the Kingdom, etc.
1655. p. 14. he has them again, viz. This is THE WORD OF GOD. And in his
several Papers, etc. 1671. p. 62. he has the same over again. And I believe I
could quote above 100 more Sentences of the like Import out of their former
Writings, but here are enough at present. And as to their denial of the Charge,
that they should say the Holy Scripture is Dust, etc. their Evasion or Quibble,
I suppose, lies in these words, viz. Holy Scriptures, because in those Days
they did not call the Scriptures Holy; but on the contrary, called them EARTHLY
LETTER, CARNAL LETTER, DVST, etc. as beforementioned.]

Section III.
1. WE have thousands at our Meetings, and none of us [ Quakers] dare speak a
word, but as eternally moved of the LORD A true Account, etc. p. 18. 1663.
. [ Never was a greater Untruth than this printed and published to the World by
any Mortals whatsoever.]

2. They are Conjurers and Diviners, and their Preaching from Conjuration that
is not spoken from the Mouth of the LORD G. F. Saul 's Errand, etc. p. 7. 1654.
.

3. All you that speak, and not from the Mouth of the LORD, are false Prophets
G. F. Answ. to the West Pet. p. 25. 1653.
.

4. How can you be Ministers of the Spirit, if you be not Infallible G. F.
Great Mystery, p. 33, 82, 96, 107, 267.
?

5. And how can you but delude People, if you be not infallible G. F. Great
Mystery, p. 33, 82, 96, 107, 267.
?

6. Thou say, The holiest Man that is, cannot give an infallible Character
of another Man. G. F. answers, Have not thou, in this, showed thy self to be no
Minister of Christ, or of the Spirit, that cannot give an infallible Character
of another Man? How can thou see an holy Man from an unholy Man, that cannot
give an infallible Character of any Man's State G. F. Great Mystery, p. 33, 82,
96, 107, 267.


7. Thou being not infallible, thou art not in the Spirit, and so art not a
Minister. But George Fox says, The Quakers are the ONLY Ministers of Christ G.
F. Great Mystery, p. 33, 82, 96, 107, 267.
.

1. WE are most horribly abused in saying, that we pretend all our Ministers to
be infallible W. Pen 's Rebuke to 21 Divines, p. 22. 1674.
. [ And yet but the very Year before the said W. P. writ thus] viz.

2. Our Ministry is of GOD, it stands in the Power of the living spiritual Gift
of GOD Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 43. 1673.
. And G. Fox exhorted the Parliament, in the Year 1659, in these words, viz.

3. Let none have the Name of a Minister, but such who are able to satisfy all
Doubts, and all Questions; and for to convince and stop the Mouths of all
Gainsayers and Opposers G. F. to the Parl, etc. p. 6. 1659.
. [ Then infallible to be sure.]

4. The LORD has given his powerful Ministry (meaning themselves) the Gift of
the Holy Ghost, as it was in the Apostles Days E. B 's Works, p. 196.
. [ And, pray, were not the Apostles Infallible?]

5. And thou, and you all, that speak, and write, and not from GOD, IMMEDIATELY
and INFALLIBLY, as the Apostles did, and Prophets, and Christ, -- you are all
under the Curse, G.F. Great Mist. p. 98.
etc.

Thou can not know the Scripture, but by the SAME DEGREE of the Spirit the
Prophets and Apostles had p. 213.
. [ I think here is not only enough to show their Contradiction, but also, that
they were not abused in saying, they pretend all their Ministry to be
infallible.]

Section IV.
1. THE Quakers -- can discern who are Saints, and who are Devils, and who are
Apostates, without speaking ever a word G. F 's Great Mystery, p. 89.
.

2. We need none to give us Discerning and Judgment, Christ has furnished us
already, and does on ALL Occasions Judas and the Jews, etc. p. 58. 1673.
.

[But did they discern the two German Cheats, (who pretended themselves to be
of great Parentage, and whom they hugged, embraced, and provided for, and
gloried in, as two of their Proselytes) till their Wickedness broke forth, and
till they accused each other of many vile Practices Anno 1670.
? Nay, they could not discern several of their own Ministers, who, whilst such,
were guilty of Whoredom and the like, till they themselves, or others, made a
Discovery of them. Endless would it be to repeat their want of discerning in
these and the like Matters; but here are enough to show they have not that
discerning they so vainly and nauseously boast of.]

Section V.
1. THE Quakers are in the Truth, and NONE but they. -- Come Protestants,
Presbyterians, Independants, Baptists, Fifth-Monarchy-men, Seventh-day
Sabbath-men, and Family of Love; the Quaker denies you ALL The Quakers
Challenge, etc. p. 2, 3. 1668.
.

2. The Tabernacle of GOD is with you; and His Dewlling Place is among you; and
ONLY among you is GOD known E. B 's Works, p. 64.
.

3. All that ever own GOD and Salvation, shall own us Ibid. p. 318.
.

4. And John Stubs In his Sermon at Devonshire- House, 1670.
declared, That none could truly call GOD Father but Friends, [ i. e. the
Quakers, whom after he had highly extolled, further said] I know thousands of
Friends that are free from Sin. [This being a notorious Untruth, I reproved him
for it in private. But I must confess, I never found him, nor any of their
Ministers, ever contradict themselves, in that high Character they give of
themselves: So that this Section is not in two Columns.]

Section VI.
1. WE [ i. e. Quakers] are of One Mind, and Soul E. B 's Works, p. 462.
.

[Witness the great Differences, and Divisions, that are among them, both in
England, and beyond-Seas: And if to be so divided, be to be of one Mind and
Soul, then indeed they are the People that are so.]

Section VII.
1. THE Priests of the World are Conjurers, Thieves and Robbers, Antichrists,
Witches, Devils, Scarlet-colour'd Beasts; really they are Bloodhounds See G.
Fox, etc. A brief Discovery, etc. p. 7, 8, 9, 10. for much more of this, Ann.
1653.
.

2. The Light condemns thee [ i. e. Mr. Bennet a Minister] and ALL thy
Generation eternally -- Thou dead Beast, thou polluted Beast, thou Sorcerer --
O thou dark Beast and Conjurer See more of this in E. Bur. Works, p. 29, 30, 31.
.

3. Scarlet-colored Beast, painted Beast -- Brazen-faced thou art, for thou
art a Beast, thou blind Sot, thou dark Sot, etc See G. Fox 's Truth's Defense,
etc. p 81, 82. for more of this kind.
.

4. Behold your Priest, fallible errable Priest, scoffing independent Priest,
ungodly Priest, Mountebank Priest, taunting Priest, stingy Priest, mercenary
John Faldo, a Quack, a religious Bone-setter, the Priests break-neck Mr. Faldo
's Answ. and Vindication of 21 Divines, against W. Penn, p. 93. Ann. 1675.
.

5. The idle gormondizing Priests of England -- No sort of People have been so
universally through Ages, the Bane of Soul and Body of the Universe, as that
abominable Tribe, for whom the Theater of GOD's most dreadful Vengeance, is
reserved to act their eternal Tragedy upon, etc W. Penn Guide Mistaken, etc. p.
18. 1668.
.

6. Old cankered Apostate, unruly Beast, Impostor or Renegade, Libertine,
Ranting Spirit, Son of Belial. [ See more of this Nature in W. Penn, etc.
Alexander, etc. p. 3, 7, 12. 1673. in answer to Mr. Mucklowe a Quaker.] Hear
also what Geo. Whitehead calls him, and some other dissenting Quakers, viz.
Wolves, Dogs, Devils incarnate, and the like, in his Preface to Judgment fixed,
1682.

MEN that are angry for GOD, passionate for Christ; that call Names for
Religion, and persecute for Faith, may tell us they are Christians if they
will; but no body would know them to be such by their Fruits; to be sure [
says W. Penn, and so say I] they are no Christians of Christ's making W. Penn
's Address to Prot. etc. p. 242. 1679.
.

Section VIII.
1. LET all those Abby-lands, Glebe-lands, that are given to the Priests, be
given to the poor of the Nation G. Fox to the Parl. of the Com. W. etc. p. 8.
1659.
.

2. Slay Baal, Baal must be slain; All the HIRELINGS MUST BE TURNED OUT OF THE
KINGDOM, who have pretended that GOD sent them -- G. F. News out of the North,
etc. p. 31. 1655.


3. Away with Cap-men and Coif-men, as they are called --.

4. Away with all these Counselors, that will not tell Men the Law without 20
s. or 10 s or 30 s Ibid. p. 5.
.

5. Let all those Fines that belong to Lords of Manors be given to poor
People, for Lords have enough Idem, p. 8.
.

6. If you query, how you should do with the Impropriators? Sell all the
Glebe-lands -- and all the late King's Parks, and his Rents -- to give to the
Impropriators G.F. Papers to the Parliament about Tithes, p. 63, 65. 1659.
.

7. You should have sold all the Colleges and their Lands, and give them to the
Poor Idem. p. 65.
.

1. FAR be it from me, to solicit any thing in diminution of the just Rights
of the Church of England; let her rest protected where she is A Persuasive to
Moderation, Presace, 1686.
.

2. I believe your own Consciences tell you, that we are a harmless People, and
would do you no harm, nor hurt, but wish your good G. F. For the King and
Council, etc. p. 2. 1660.
.

3. Has the like been done to any People, as is done to us, who are an
Innocent People, and thy Friends Idem, p. 5.
?

Section IX.
A Quaker said, he had a Command immediately from Heaven, to take away the
Priest's Hourglass: which being complained of, Geo. Fox makes this Answer,
viz. And for any being moved of the LORD to take away your Hourglass from you,
by the Eternal Power it is owned G. F. Great Mystery, p. 77.
.

1. HE that takes what is none of his, as to things without, the things of
this World, is a Thief, and truly so judged and accounted of Wounds of an
Enemy, p. 13. 1656. Miles Halhead, Tho. Salthouse.
.

2. We testify, if any Person whatsoever shall act or speak any thing that is
evil, under a pretense of a Motion from the Spirit of GOD, we utterly deny that
Motion to be of GOD The Quakers Paper, Aug. 10. 1670.
.

[ And was not the taking away the Hourglass that was another's, an Evil in it
self? and yet you see G. Fox (when one of his Friends pretended a Motion for
it) had the confidence to own and justify it, and that in the Name of the LORD.]

Section X.
1. THat is no Command from GOD to me, which he commands to another; neither
did any of the Saints which we read of in Scripture, act by a Command which was
to another, not having the Command to themselves E. Bur. Works, p. 47.
.

2. You are in the Witchcraft, who observe Commands from without from the
Letter Idem, p. 105.
.

3. None are to observe any thing, nor teach to be observed, but what Christ
(manifested in their Bodies of Flesh) does command them A. Defense, etc. p. 16.
1659.
.

BUT when some of their own Friends pleaded for the Liberty of their
Consciences, in not obeying G. F. etc. Impositions and unscriptural ORDERS,
then they writ thus, viz. 1. It is the Root of Ranterism, to assert that
nothing is a Duty incumbent upon thee, but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty
W. P 's Brief Exam. p. 3. 1681.
.

2. Holy Writ is the declared fundamental Law of Heaven W. P 's Eng. Int. p.
36. 1675.
. [ Surely did the Quakers really believe that Holy Writ is the declared
fundamental Law, etc. they would never be so wicked as to enjoin G. F 's
unscriptural Orders upon their own People as they do.]

Section XI.
KEEP close to the LORD, and to the measure of himself made manifest in your
own Hearts, for unto THAT you were directed to in the beginning, and in it is
your Safety and Presorvation to the End E. Bur. etc. An Epist. 1662.
.

BUT when the dissenting Quakers insisted on their own Doctrine of not being
imposed upon in things not evil in themselves, then they writ, viz. The Enemy
is at work to scatter the Minds of Friends by that loose Plea, What have thou
to do with me? leave me to my freedom, and to the GRACE OF GOD in my self W.P.
Br. Exam. p. 11.
, etc.

Section XII.
UPON a Rumor that the Quakers Meetings were to be broken, they writ, viz. 1.
These Tidings do not trouble us, neither are we thereby moved, no not to BEG of
any Man the countrary E. Bur. Declarat. of Suff. p. 33. 1659.
.

2. And to any outward Authority we cannot SEEK Idem, p. 40.
.

1. WE DESIRE and REQUEST, that you would enact, or provide, that in place or
in stead of an Oath, as the Cases may require, our Yea and Nay may be accepted
The Case of Oaths to the King and Parliament, p. 6. 1673.
.

2. Have a due regard to our suffering Condition, we BESEECH you Treatise of
Oaths to the King and Parl. p. 16.
.

Section XIII.
1. WE submit to all Laws and Ordinances of Man that relate to the payment of
Tribute, Taxations, Customs, Excise, Subsidy-money, and all things of this
Nature, as becomes Saints to Superiors; and concerning these things, no Man
can justly accuse the People called Quakers Controversy with the Bishops, p.
23. 1663.
.

2. We have always paid our Taxes, and other Dues and Duties, more than any
People, according to our Abilities Declarat. by G. Fox, G. Whitehead,
Broad-sheet, 1670.
.

[ But do they not refuse payment of Tithes to the Ministers and Impropriators?
Nay, they say, Truth allows no payment of Tithes at ALL under the New Covenant
T. Elwood 's Antidoce, etc. p. 16. 1680.
. And do they not refuse paying toward the Trained-Bands, Trophymoney, and the
like? And are not these enjoined by the Laws and Ordinances of Men? And pray
what are those other Dues and Duties, they say, they pay more than any People?]

Section XIV.
1. THOU art without in the World, in the Church of the Pharisees, who had the
CHIEFEST SEATS in the Assemblies, and so art an Enemy to Christ.

2. Your praying in the Synagogue Christ did deny, and we also deny the same G.
F. and R. H. Truth's Defense, etc. p. 14, 17. 1653.
.

[1. Have not the Quakers Ministers the CHIEFEST SEATS in their Assemblies now,
and so are Enemies to Christ by their own Judgment?

2. And do not the Quakers pray in their Synagogues now, and so are to be
denied by their own Rule?]

Section XV.
1. YOU that talk of a natural Light, and a spiritual Light, produce one
Scripture that speaks of a natural Light.

2. The Light is but ONE, which is Christ G. F 's Way to the Kingdom, p. 3, 17.
1655.
.

1. THE Light is Carnal, the Letter [i. e. the Scripture G. F 's News, etc. p.
14. 1655.
.]

2. I wrote not as from Man, whose Light is ONLY Natural and Carnal, and does
ONLY make manifest Carnal Transgressions of a Carnal Law E. Bur. Works, p. 16.
1655.
.

Section XVI.
1. ARE these People [i.e. Quakers] so simple that they will not go to Law? Is
not the Law open? Answer, If thou observed Christ's Words, thou would not call
them Simple for not going to Law with their Adversaries; for did he not say, If
any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy
Cloak also? And although the Law is open, yet they are not free to go to it Will.
Caton 's Moderate Enquirer Rosolved, etc. printed in 8o. 1658. p. 33. and
reprinted in 4o. 1671. p. 22.
.

2. It is laid upon us by the Spirit of Christ, not to sue any Man at the Law
An Account from the Children of Light, p. 19. 1660. R. Hubberthorn and J. N.
.

[ Let their fining and imprisoning several Quakers of George Keith 's Friends
in Pensilvania See the Trials of Peter Boss, G. Keith, T. Bud, and Will.
Bradford, Quakers, 1692.
, with their Indicting Mr. Bugg at the Sessionshouse in the Old-Bailey, 1693;
and their Arresting and Imprisoning John Andrew, February last, (one of their
own Friends) with many more that might be named, bear Witness against them: So
that it is manifest, notwithstanding their printed Doctrine of not suing any
Man at the Law; yet when it is for their worldly Interests, they will act quite
contrary.]

Section XVII.
1. THE Lord gave thee [Oliver Cromwell] the Necks of Princes to tread upon,
and their Dominions to inherit.

2. If thou [Rich. Cromwell] choose the LORD for thy Counselor -- then shall
thou prosper, and thy Name shall be greater than was thy Father's; and the
numberless Number of this now distressed People [i. e. the Quakers] will be
unto thee a Strength, and stand by thee in thy Day of Trouble, and DEFEND thee
and thy JUST GOVERNMENT.

3. We know the LORD showed Favor to him [i.e. O. Cromwell] and gave him
Strength, Wisdom, Valor, and a right Spirit, and he was called of GOD into
that great Work E. Bur. Works, p. 552, 573, 574.
.

1. THE Men and Ministers which E. B. reprehended, were those very Persecutors
and Usurpers over Conscience in O. P's Days.

2. Bug has at unawares run his own Head against a Wall, and at once justified
those Magistrates and Governors, and consequently the USURPATION of that
Government The Quakers Vindication, p. 3. against F. Bug; signed by G.
Whitehead and 34 more, 1693. given to the then Parliam.
. [ Pray read the other Column over again, and see if the Quakers did not
justify those very Magistrates and Governors, and the USURPATION of that
Government, which they endeavor to make the Parliament and others believe they
did and do now condemn; and is not this great Fallacy and Hypocrisy?]

Section XVIII.
GIVE Honor to whom Honor is due; but to a proud heady high-minded Man, there
is no Honor due, tho he may be great in the World, and in Place to Rule W.
Smith 's Primmer, p. 43. 1668.
. [Is not this strange Doctrine to teach Youth? is it not the way to make them
rebellious against their Superiors?]

BUT when King Charles came into Power, then G. F. could say, viz. I honor all
Men, (whether Good or Bad, he makes no Exception) much more the King G. F 's
Trial, etc. p. 8. 1664.
.

Section XIX.
OH! what a Sincerity was once in the Nation! what a dirty nasty thing it would
have been to have heard talk of a House of LORDS among them G. Fox to the
Council of Officers, etc. p. 7. 1659.
!

[ But did not the Quakers talk of a House of Lords, yea and solicit them too
in 1693, that an Act might be passed that their solemn Affirmation might be
accepted instead of an Oath? to which the House of Lords consented,
notwithstanding their dirty and nasty Language concerning them?]

Section XX.
IT was through Ignorance that the People subjected themselves to Hereditary
Governors -- or to the Government standing in a single Person successively --
and our Nation has been under the Bonds of Slavery in this respect E. Bur.
Advice to the Parliament, 1659. but this Paper is left out in his Works, 1672.
, etc.

AND when the Times were turned G. F. said, 1. If I could take any Oath at all,
I could take that Oath G. Fox 's Trial, etc. p. 10. 1664.
, ( viz. the Oath of Allegiance) which Oath does bind to the King, his Heirs
and Successors; and if this be not contradicting and temporizing, what is? And
in their Case of Oaths, 1673, p. 6. they say,

2. Our Hearts and Hands could Seal to the Substance, both of the Oaths of
ALLEGIANCE and Supremacy.

Section XXI.
1. ALL Kings and Emperors have sprung up in the Night since the Days of the
Apostles among the Antichrists.

2. There was no King owned among the true Christians, but ONLY amongst the
Apostates since Christ's Time.

3. They were all Traitors against Christ, that desired an Earthly King. -- The
true Christians will not have any more Kings among them but Christ See G. Fox
's Papers he writ to the Presbyterians, (who then were endeavoring the King's
Restoration) p. 8, 5, 1659.
.

1. WE love, own, and honor the King A Declar. June 5. 1660. p. 4. by G. Fox
and 12 more.
, etc.

2. I honor all Men, much more the King G. F 's Trial, etc. p. 8.
.

3. If thou (viz. King Charles) take some speedy Course for the Repealing those
cruel Laws -- happily thou may be a Moses to stand betwixt GOD and thy People
A Vis. to the King, 1662. signed by Josiah Coal, p. 7.
.

Section XXII.
1. COME answer me, you Papists, Whence came your Creeds, but from factious and
corrupted Councils, dyed in the Blood of those that refused Conformity William
Penn 's Truth Exalted, etc. p. 5. 1671.
? etc.

2. Whether in case they could not be conformed to, they would allow a
TOLERATION were they POWERFUL? Whether in case they should say YES, we ought to
believe them, since it is one of their most Sacred Maxims, not to keep Faith
with Heretics, as was seen in the Case of those of the Alpine Valleys, Jo.
Hus, etc. and in that they have in all Ages, brought so great a Deluge of Blood
upon the European World?

3. Whether it be the Interest of the English Nation to subject her self to a
POPISH YOKE? Considering the incomparably bloody Massacres of that sort of Men
in several Reigns W. Penn 's Caveat against Popery, etc. p. 37, 38. 1670.
.

4. The Papal Interest is a Combination against good Sense, Reason, and
Conscience; and to introduce a blind Obedience, without, if not against,
Conviction; and that Principle which introduces Implicit Faith, and blind
Obedience in Religion, will also introduce Implicit Faith and blind Obedience
in Government; So that it is no more in the one than in the other, but the Will
and Power of the Superior that shall be the Rule and Bond of our Subjection.
This is that fatal Mischief Popery brings with it to Civil Society, and for
which such Societies ought to be aware of it, and all that are Friends to it W.
P 's Eng. Int. in Choice of Parl. Men, p. 4. 1678/9.
.

5. Consider the Nature and Disposition of the Spirit of the Church of Rome,
how it is not changed, but the self-same that ever it was, viz. a Spirit of
Murder and Cruelty -- I say this ought to be considered, even the Cruelty of
that Spirit, and what Danger there is to give way to the Exaltation of that
Spirit, and to embrace it in the least, whereby to give Occasion to get into
the Power and JVDGMENT-SEAT; for if it does, then Fire and Faggot, Killing and
burning about Religion will openly appear again See much more of this kind in
E. B 's Works, p. 810.
.

1. I Must also tell him, (i. e. the Church-of-England-man) I cannot admire his
Wisdom, Manners, or Justice, in his Reflections upon the Roman Catholics,
after the Assurances of so great an ONE has given him and his Friends of their
Security and Protection The Pensilvanians Defense of the D. of Buck. Book, p.
26. 1685.
.

2. One thing I must say, Roman Catholics have been Loyal in England and
Holland -- and who knows not, that they (i.e. Church-of-England) were such as
hardly knew how to pray without the Liturgy, that attempted to exclude the
Presumptive Heir to the Crown, upon the Score of his Religion A Reply, etc. by
G. C. [i.e. Gulielmus Calamus, Anglice William Penn] p. 22, 23. 1685.
?

3. I say, the Dissenters were invited to the Share they had in opposition to
Popery by Churchmen Animadversions on the Apology, p. 3. 1687.
.

4. Violence and Tyranny are no natural Consequences of Popery Good Advice to
the Church of England, p. 42. 1687.
.

5. Let me ask them (viz. Church of England) one Question, Have they not often
charged them [i. e. the Papists] with those Doctrines, viz. not keeping Faith
with Heretics? Or, that They are not obliged, or do not account that of any
Value or Tie to them that they promise to us Advice to Protestant Dissenters,
p. 56. 1688.
? etc.

6. We have been taught to entertain very hard Thoughts of their Religion; and
as we learned to speak, we stammer'd out, no Papist, no Popery: Whence sprung
this Aversion? mainly, I am sure, from this Apprehension, that Blood and
Cruelty attended it.

7. Let her cease to be angry, (i. e. the Church of England) and rebuke her
Sons very unmannerly sitting in Judgment upon, and censuring the King's
Proceedings Reasons, etc. p. 5, 6. printed 1687. (and approved) by Quakers.
, etc.

8. We pray God to bless the King and his Royal Family The Quakers Address to
K. James, April 1687.
, etc.

9. We cannot but with grateful Hearts both admire and acknowledge the
Providence of GOD, that made the King's retiring into our Country, [viz.
Scotland] give a happy Turn to his Affairs, to the Defeating and Disappointing
the Designs of his Enemies. -- We do justly conceive our selves obliged to
praise GOD for his Goodness, in carrying him through and over all his Troubles The
Scotch Quakers Address, June 1687.
.

Section XXIII.
1. WE directed all People to the Spirit of the Lord GOD in them, and if that
led them to fight, I had nothing against it. [This was spoken before a Court by
one of their Ministers, and recorded in their Book of Outland-Letters.]

2. We have chosen the Son of GOD to be our King, and he has chosen us to be
his People, and he might command thousands and ten thousands of his Servants at
this Day to fight in his [i.e. Christ's] CAUSE E. Bur. To the present distract.
Nation, etc. p. 8. 1659. but this is left out in his Works.
.

3. To thee, Oliver Cromwell, thus says the LORD, I had chosen thee -- to
execute my Wrath upon my Enemies, and gave them to thy Sword, with which I
FOUGHT, and many have I cut down by MY SWORD IN THY HAND G. Roff.
Righteousness, etc. p. 11. 1656.
.

4. If you had made Inquisition for Blood, and to demand all the Inquisitions
in the whole Christendom, whereby the Innocent Blood has been shed, then all
the People with one Consent would have said, These be the Men that are gone out
for GOD's CAUSE, page 3. Thousands of US [i. e. Quakers] went in the Front of
you, and were with you in the greatest Heat, p. 6. And if ever you Soldiers
and true Officers come again into the Power of GOD which has been lost, never
set up your Standard until you come to Rome, and it be a top of Rome, then
there let your Standard stand G. Fox, To the Council and Officers of the Army,
and Soldiers, etc. 1659.
, p. 8.

5. Let thy Soldiers go forth with a free willing Heart, that thou [Oliver
Cromwell] may rock Nations as a Cradle, p. 37.

6. The LORD gave thee the Neck of Princes to tread upon, and their Dominions
to inherit, p. 4. dated May 1657. And as for thy Father, the late Protector,
[O.C.] -- we know the LORD showed Favor to him, and gave him Strength, Wisdom,
and Valor, and a Right Spirit, and he was CALLED OF GOD into that great Work
G. Fox and E. Bur. Counsel and Advice, etc. to Oliv. and Rich. Cromwell,
printed 1659.
, etc. p. 53.

[See abundance more about Fighting in E. Bur. Works From p. 536, to 540.
, and the Books quoted; but when the Government was settled upon King Charles,
then they writ against all Wars and Fightings.]

1. ALL bloody Principles and Practices, we (as to our own Particulars) do
utterly deny, with all outward Wars and Strife, and fighting with outward
Weapons for ANY END (mark) or under any Pretense whatsoever. -- And we do
certainly know, and so testify to the World, that the Spirit of Christ, which
leads us into all Truth, will never move us to fight, and war against any Man
with outward Weapons, neither for the Kingdom of Christ, nor for the Kingdoms
of this World. -- So those that use any Weapon to fight for Christ, or for the
Establishing of his Kingdom or Government, both the Spirit, Principle and
Practice in that, we deny A Declaration from the Harmless and Innocent People
of God called Quakers, signed by G. Fox and 11 more, 1660. p. 2, 3.
.

2. It is not lawful (in the Administration of the Gospel) to fight against, or
go to War with carnal Weapons in ANY WISE. -- In the Administration of the
Gospel, it is on ALL OCCASIONS WHATSOEVER, unlawful to go to War, and fight
with any Man with carnal Weapons Quakers Plea, etc. 1661. p. 4, 5.
.

3. It is not lawful for such who are come to the pure Administration of the
Gospel, to DEFEND themselves by Arms R. Barcklay 's Apol. p. 407.
.

4. We cannot strive with Weapons of War, nor with any carnal Weapons of War,
either fight to defend or offend The Quakers Remonst. 1665. p. 14.
: [ and yet would have defended R. Crom. and his Just Government.]

I Shall now draw to a Conclusion, with a few of their own Words lately
printed, viz. And this know for certain, that the way to recover the Deceived,
is to lay open the DECEIVERS. [Tho. Elwood against G. Keith, p. 72. 1694.]

And tho this Saying of theirs may be a Warrant sufficient for some others to
UNMASK and DETECT them, yet I do hereby assure the Reader, it was never a
Warrant sufficient for me: For tho I was made to bear, and suffer their corrupt
Doctrines and Practices many Years in secret, yet I durst not dare to make them
public, till I believed I was called thereto, by the LORD of Life and Glory;
whose Servant I am, whose Will I have done, and whose Reward I have received;
for which my Soul does bless, praise and magnify His NAME, who alone is worthy,
says

London, October. 21. 1695. [^ged 67 last August.] J. P.

LONDON, Printed 1696. and are to be sold by J. Gwillim in Bishopsgate-street,
and S. Clark in George-Yard, Booksellers.

This following is a Copy of a Letter which was sent Jan. 5. 1696. to the
Persons hereafter named, (with a printed Paper of their Contradictions, which
are sold by S. Clark in George-Yard, and J. Gwillim in Bishopsgate-street).
William Penn, George Whitehead, Thomas Green, and the rest of your Ministers.
OFTEN, and many a time, have I been sent amongst you, with Line upon Line, and
Precept upon Precept Most of which have I ordered ( in the Account of my Life,
etc.) to be printed this Year 1696, but the said Book not to be made public
till after my Death.
. But to this Day you have stopped your Ears, and hardened your Hearts against
whatever I was made to say unto you; and not only rejected those Messages, but
in a most gross and vile manner vilified and abused the Messenger Who has been
made willing to spare for neither PAINS or COST, so he might but discharge a
good Conscience toward GOD, toward you, and toward all Men.
, both with your Tongues and Pens; and likewise much violence done to his
Person, [even by your own Disciples] who, seeing it pleased you, did frequently
pull him down [and that in your sight] and several times thrust him out of the
Meetings Tho he had not spoken one word, nor given any sort of Provocation.
; and not long since three or four of your Friends thrust him out of the Yard,
all along into the Street, not without reproaching him to the rude Rabble Only
for giving away a few Papers.
; and Thomas Cox (Vintner) [was so zealous for you] that he pursued him out of
several Streets 19 May last.
and abused and defamed him to the People. I say, these things considered, with
your Friends not being permitted to receive any Books or Papers from me, but
charged to tear them, which they did, put me on serious Thoughts, whether I
might not send you a few of these enclosed Papers, rather than farther to
expose my self (at this time) to the Rage and Fury of you and your Friends; and
finding no necessity laid upon me to the contrary [at present] I have freedom
thus to send them.

Your CONTRADICTIONS are placed in two Columns; and tho you have not hearkened
to what I have been made to deliver to you, yet it may be you will give ear to
what your own Preachers have writ, (as is mentioned in the said Paper) the
which if you do, you may plainly see they were not, nor are not, acted by the
Good Spirit of the ever Blessed JESUS Who is my only and alone LORD, Lawgiver,
and Savior.
, but by an Erring, Fallible, Deceivable, and Temporizing Spirit; which ought
to be disowned, and testified against, by all that are called thereto, as has
been,

Your true-hearted Friend without flattery, John Pennyman.

WHerein you have erred, be not ashamed to confess, and return; for however you
are filled with confidence of your selves, you are fully seen to others: You
have lost your Glory, it cannot be hid: The SUBSTANCE is departed, tho the
Shadows remain: Therefore let Humility, and unfeigned Repentance, be found
amongst you; that Glory may be given to HIM who is the Searcher of all Hearts.

Fret not at Instruments, neither look so much at them as at that Righteous
HAND that is turned against you: For it is certainly so, that those who once
knew the Way of the LORD, and afterward gave way to the Spirit of Evil,
Deceit, Hypocrisy, and Formality; such are more to be testified against, than
the very Heathen, or open Profane; false Brethren are most perilous, and
Hypocrites most odious in the sight of GOD and all good Men.

The LORD is no respecter of Persons, whose Will is that hidden Things should
come to light, not to cast off, but if possible to save.

The AX therefore is to be laid to the Root of every corrupt Tree, that the
Chaff from the Wheat may be separated.

This latter Part was formerly [and now is] writ in that Spirit, that can [with
delight] love, and forgive Enemies; but hates Iniquity and Hypocrisy in dearest
Friends.

POSTSCRIPT.
Here are a few of the [Legion of] scurrilous Names and Curses (with other
Abuses) you have vented forth against an Innocent and Sober Man, and one who
would not willingly wrong you, nor any Man living, viz.

GRinning Dog, whifling Cur, barking Dog W. G. Jasper Bat, in their Sermons.
. The Devil's Agent, the Devil's Emissary James Parks in his Sermons.
The Devil's Drudg An ancient Quaker.
. The chief of the Devils One of your Hearers.
The Devil's Porter, setting open the Gates of Hell, etc In a Letter, G. F.
supposed to be the Author.
. Vassal of Hell, and Bondstave of the Devil, etc In another Letter from C. P.
Thou cursed Serpent, thou art cursed for ever Anthony Tomkins another of your
Ministers, [uttered this Curse upon J.P's saying (after Hallelujab Fisher had
done his Sermon at the Bull Meeting) December. 15. 1676. viz. It is good for
every one to have Salt in themselves].
. I am moved of the Eternal GOD to pronounce Woes and Judgments against him,
etc Charles Marshal in his Sermon at the same Place, April 1673.
. GOD's Power will choke thee. This G. W. also declared in the Name of the LORD
George Whitehead at Gracechurch-street Meeting, from the Preaching-place.
. Without natural Affection. Wolf, Dog, Betraying Judas, Devil-Incarnate, etc
G. W. Book, Judgment fixed, etc. Preface.
. Devil-driven, dungy-God, Judas, Atheist, etc Your Book entitled, Righteous
Judgment, signed by To. Sandeland, another of your Ministers, and recommended
by G. W. 1682.
. Runagade, Vagabond, creeping Judas, etc Your Book, Judas and the Jews, etc.
1673.
. Ignorant Novice; and at another time laid violent Hands upon him, Francis
Camfield, [and this he did without the least provocation, save that J. P. was
going to stand on the Form whereon he sat; and the other time when he did stand
up, but had not spoken one word.]
. Unclean, nasty Spirit, etc Ambrose Rigg in his Sermon, Nov. 23. 1680.
. Instigated by the Devil in the Spirit that would murder Christ; broken and
discomposed in his Mind and Understanding, etc Your Paper printed Aug. 10.
1670. [against J. P. for his causing your Books to be thrown down, near the
place where he burnt a little Waste-paper, at the Exchange].
. [And the very next Day, ( viz. July 29. 1670.) after their Books were thrown
down at the Exchange, G. W. writ to him thus; Thou have brought a great
Reproach and Suffering upon Friends, by this thy mad and wicked Action, unto
which the Devil instigated and led thee, for thou have undertaken (as the
Persecutors used to do) to burn OUR BOOKS, etc.] Crazed, crackt-brain'd,
distracted, etc These Appellations you and your Friends gave him several Years
together, [tho it is certainly true he never had a better Understanding given
him, in all his Life, notwithstanding you thus most infamously scandalized him].
. And at one of the last Meetings he was at at Ratcliff, after James Parks had
much invey'd against him in his Sermon, calling him the Devil's Agent, the
Devil's Emissary, (after his usual manner) [he (J. P.) stood up with an intent
to have spoken one Verse of Scripture; but before he had spoken six Words] one
of your Friends pulled him down with great violence, and told the People, he
was one of the wickedest of Men, that he was a Limb of the Devil, and deserved
to be whipped at the Cart's Arss, etc Henry Sutton (Master of a Ship) Dec. 11.
1692.
. And notwithstanding these and all other your Revilings, etc. yet he did not
in the least revile again, it being not for any Evil, but for Well-doing that
he was thus defamed and abused by you, which made him bear all patiently,
committing himself to HIM that judges righteously; who as HE has already, in
a great measure, so assuredly HE will more and more clear up his Innocence.

I thought I should have ended here, but find I may not omit what follows, viz.
One of your Ministers thrust his Stick with that Violence into his Side, [tho
it did not pierce the Flesh] that forced him off the Step whereon he stood, and
presently after struck him on the Face J. B. did this standing on your
Preaching-place, at the Bull, etc. 1680. [without the least provocation, but
only for his saying, viz. He that loves not his Friend, cannot be said to love
his Enemy].
.

Another of your Ministers, altogether a Stranger to him, told the People (in
his Sermon) that he was a Companion of one W. B. who, it seems, had been one of
your Ministers; but, as he said, was turned a common Cheat, and that he would
have ravished a Woman James Holliday, at a yearly Meeting at
Gracechurch-street; who being told of this his A buse and false Accusation, and
that it was expected he should publicly acknowledge the Wrong done therein, he
replied, That unless the LORD required it of him, he would not do it.
.

After this two other of your Friends, from the same place, affirmed, that he
was conversant and intimate with one John Tailor a Ranter, who, they said, had
hanged himself, being guilty (as some of your Ministers declared) of most
horrid Wickedness, as Blasphemy, Whoredom, Drunkenness, and the like Thomas
Ruddiard and William Briggins from the said Preaching-place, August 24. 1681.
; when as he never was in company with the said J. T. but was wholly a Stranger
to him, as he then declared.

But why is it (may some of you say) that these things are thus revived, and
brought upon us now? One Reason chiefly is, that if possible, at length, you
may come to see, and be made sensible, that it is not the Spirit of Christ, (for
He Blessed, but did not Curse; He was reviled, and did not revile) but the Spirit
of Antichrist, that has bewitched and seduced you from the Simplicity and
Innocence of Christ's Spirit, by which all the Holy Men of old were, and all
the Holy Men are, at this Day, acted and guided. O that yet you would consider
your Ways, and be wise, that so you may no longer be deceived your selves, nor
any longer deceive others, with your Pretenses of being the ONLY Ministers of
Christ, and of being guided by His Spirit, unto which you are as yet Strangers.
O reject not, O despise not the Counsel herein given you, lest hereafter it be
required at your hands.

J. P.
Newyears Day, 1696. Note, The words within these Marks [ ] in this Postscript,
were added since this Letter was sent.
I Little thought that the abovesaid Abuses should ever have come to be
printed, (especially in my Lifetime) for I locked them up, chiefly, in my own
Breast, as a great Treasure, rejoicing in the Secret of my Soul, that the LORD
counted me worthy to suffer, and to have all manner of Evil spoke against me
[falsly] for his Name sake. But the time being come, that they are no longer to
be hid, they are thus made public.

^^is following is chiefly intended for, and recommended to the serious perusal
of the People called Quakers, whom it nearly concerns.
E^^RY Dispensation has but its Season, wherein the Light of it is to shine;
but afterward it must be put out, and be buried in the Dark. And when this is
out of date, Persons are to be valued no more by it; but the highest in this
Light and Worship, will be laid as even with the Meanest, as the highest and
strictest Jews were (when their Dispensation fell) with the lowest Gentiles.

Little did Israel think they could have been so deceived about the coming of
the Messiah; little did they think the Messiah could have laid their Laws and
Ordinances so flat at His coming as he did. It is impossible for the Eye of
that Wisdom [ by which the Jews and the Quakers have judged, viz. only by
outward appearance] to pierce into the various Ways and Appearances of GOD.

Nothing is darker than the foregoing Glory, when a new One succeeds; none are
farther from espying GOD in a new Discovery, than (many of) those that had the
clearest sight of HIM in the Old.

Look to your selves in time, lest this strange Catastrophe overtake you
unawares.

Dispensations, and the Fight under Dispensations, is not yet ended. We must
contend, and remain strange a while longer: There is a Gulf as yet between us,
that we cannot meet. Ye cannot know me, if it were so that I knew you: You will
prosecute me with Hatred, tho I should woo you with the greatest and entirest
Love.

J. P.


