To the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR: The Right Worshipful the ALDERMEN:
With the Commonalty of the City of LONDON, in their Common Hall assembled: THO.
PLAYER Senior, Chamberleyn of London.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
I Have by the good providence of God over me, and your extraordinary kindness,
served You in the Office of CHAMBERLEYN for above one and twenty years.

And now I am going to appear before the Righteous Judge of all the Earth, to
give an account, not only of my whole life, but of the particular management of
my self in that great Employment you so long since called me to, and have
continued me so long in. I find through the grace of God, great joy and peace
in my mind, for having endeavored to my utmost to Serve you with all
faithfulness and integrity; and my Joy is increased by Your continued
acceptance of my upright and sincere Services.

If I have any troublesome or disturbing thoughts in the last minutes of my
life, they arise only because I am not capable of Serving any longer so good
Masters as you have been to me.

I have not expressions large enough to set forth the grateful sense I have of
Your long love: For as I have been a careful and affectionate Father to the
Orphans of this City, so have I found You most affectionate Masters unto me,
always encouraging my weak abilities in the work You set me about.

When I first entered upon the Chambers Employment, I found Your Cash very low,
and your Credit much lower, and this made my days and nights a burden to me.

God Almighty will witness for me, the sorrows that I then endured, upon the
consideration of the deplorable state of the Chamber of LONDON, and the hazards
I then run, in engaging my whole Credit, taking up money upon my own Bond, to
save some of your Orphans from ruin.

But God was pleased in a little time to recover Your Reputation; and that
Reputation lasted till the destruction of your City by the late dreadful Fire,
when I was with some difficulty carried forth from the dismal Flames that were
ready to seize this Hall.

I was then forced to use all the honest arts I had to encourage Your Orphans,
and others to whom You owed money, who then feared their Portions would have
been buried and lost in the rubbish of Your wasted City.

That difficulty also I have seen overcome, and I have lived some years to see
Your City and Your Chamber rise up together more beautiful then before.

And now I have beheld this, what can I desire more in this World, but that as
You have accepted my poor past Services, so You will accept my hearty and
unfeigned Thanks, together with my most ardent Prayers that You may still be a
glorious City, and that your past miseries and desolations, may be the last
that you may ever see.

And if the testimony of your dying Chamberleyn may have any credit with You,
That my Son (who has been a Freeman of this City near 32 years) of whose
honest and industrious assisting of me in my declining years I have had great
experience, and of whose faithfulness and ability I go out of the world with
great confidence) may stand fair before You in his Election to succeed in my
Office; Which I surrender to You from whom I first received it.

Given under my Hand this thirteenth day of November, 1672.

