A Copy of Verses Made and set forth by THOMAS PRIEST BELL-MAN.
To all my worthy Masters and Mistrisses of the Ward of St. Giles's
Cripplegate without, and within the Freedom.
depiction of Thomas Priest, town crier

Simon and Jude.
THis morning in all Churches far and near,
Two Heavenly Lamps do gloriously appear,
Simon and Jude both Apostolical
Planters of Christ's Word Evangelical.
Both Preachers and Proclaimers of glad news
To ignorant Infidels and faithless Jews.
Who after many godly Functions done
They both received one faith by Martyrdom.
All Saints.
THis day presents to us the communion
Of all the Saints in a most perfect union,
For not one Angel in the Heavenly quire
Nor human Soul that unto Heaven aspire,
But part has in this day solemnity
In praise to God for their integrity,
Lord who heavens mansions did on them bestow
Look down on us that yet remain below.
For Christmas Day.
THe Son of God our blessed Savior he
Into the world did come to set us free,
And to rodeem us from the bonds of sin
Which until then our Parents lived in:
By him we were Redeemed, and let us then
Return him thanks that was both God and man;
He ransomed such, at such a mighty price
As he himself became a sacrifice,
And spared not for our eternal good
To part with Life and lose his precious blood.
St. Stephen.
T. Steven was the first that lead the Van
and dyed for Christ! O blessed Christian,
^^^se loss was gain, whose death did life beget,
^^w among the Saints in Heaven does set
^^^n this blessed Martyr came to dye
their Remission he to Heaven did cry,
^ho were his Persecutors and did want
Soul saving-grace, for they were ignorant
And knew not what they did, then let us take
Pattern by him who died for Christ's sake.
ST. John the Evangelist Christ loved well
The holly Scriptures often does us tell,
Let us like John our Savior's Love engage,
That we may never taste his Fathers rage,
But with St. John who did the rest excel
Amongst the Saints for evermore may dwell.
Newyears Day.
MY Masters all good morning and good Cheer,
And welcome to the first of the New year,
Which is a preface to the cheerful Spring,
When all things will be blithe and flourishing,
The Earth will shortly deck her self a new,
And sweetly flourishing her Primrose Hue,
Lord with thy Spring of Grace our Souls so cheer,
We there may feel the Fleece of a New year.
GOd not so much delights in any place
As in a Soul that's in a state of Grace,
As in a Safer there the Lord does sit
And gives his presence to illustereth it,
Not Horeb was so holy to the Lord
As is a soul obedient to his word:
As to his Temple there he does retire
And feels it with a non-consuming fire,
Lord grant each Christians heart may be possessed
With his glad presence every soul so blessed.
GOd not so much abhors any place
As he does a Soul that's not in a state of grace
As Hell to him so loathsome is the sight
And gives it over to the Prince of night,
For into it the Lord will never enter
Till it repents on purpose to persever,
Then he is ready, willing to embrace it
And will return all favors lost to grace it.
The Belmans Good Counsel,
TRust no man, nor no gift refuse
In Talk and Diet, Temperance use
Foolls and their follies always shun
And Quarrels, lest thou be undone:
Hear all thou can, if thou be wise
And slip no opportunities.
Confer with few, keep truth with all
Contend neither with great nor small.
Of costly diet sparing be,
Interest to pay is bad for thee:
Thy Land engage not, and beware
Of Surety-ship, for that is a snare:
Take no man's word, for many know
Words are but wind and away they blow;
Love those in whom thou see good wits,
For thou may learn of them by fits.
In company be sociable
For that is good and commendable.
If humors pass the bounds of reason
Break off, and choose some other season,
Learn Tongues, converse with strangers, so
Of Foreign parts thou may much know:
Flatter no man though never so great,
Still keep good clothes and wear them neat.
If possible keep out of debt,
Light by thy credit never set,
Study how by degrees to rise
Refuse no kindness if you're wise.
Thy secrets keep from one whose tongue
Is for his mouth an inch too long.
Offer not any one thing twice
If once refused, is my advice.
Take notice of men's dispositions
Observe their good and bad Conditions,
Let thy Expenses be but small,
Thy carriage courteous unto all.
Be circumspect and wary still
Gluttons and Drunkards do not fill.
THe Rich young gallant to himself does say,
O what a happy time do I enjoy,
I want no Riches, I abound in Friends,
Courted I am as all my Fame extends,
I always feast on High and Curious Fare,
Content I have without the least of Care,
But one thing troubles and displeases me,
By Death that one day we must parted be.
BUt my young Gallant if from Heaven a voice
Should speak to thee, and put thee to his choice,
To live One Twenty of six hundred years
Chained in a Jayle with miseries and tears,
And the rest in thy present happy State,
Or else the first in pleasure without Debate,
The Twenty years in Chains would I endure,
To purchase the five hundred eighty sore.
The Belmans Advice.
IF you desire your Houses to see,
With Doors and Windows safe to be,
And quiet sleep for to enjoy,
Not fearing Fire that will destroy,
Your Belman says the safest way
Spare your sleep and fall to Pray
That God may so preserve and keep
Both you and yours may safely sleep.
JOseph the Darling of Old Jacob's Heart,
Went to seek his Brethren in a void Desert,
But when he found them they did Churlish prove,
And took away his Partial Coat of love,
Sold him a Slave, then dipped in a Kidds blood
His Coat, because it should not be understood
But some Beast had killed him, said Jacob you have
Brought my Gray head with sorrow to the Grave.
When Ahasuerus was the Persian King,
Haman great troubles on the Jews did bring
And sought to murder them all in one day
Because that Mordecay would not obey,
And honor him when he went through the Gate
Of Ahasuerus in great Pomp and State,
Therefore the Jews must dye there is no hope,
Yet Mordecay survived, Haman dyed by a Rope.
BE mindful of your Servant who takes care
That Thieves by no means for you lay a snare,
Nor can break open houses in the Night,
For why the Belman puts them to the flight,
Through Storms and Frost at midnight still he goes
To serve his Masters, Villains to oppose.
IN this our Age Treason do much abound,
And Traitors almost had beset us round,
But by the Wisdom of our God above,
Who is the Author and the Spring of love,
The Popish Plotters he has all confounded,
And in their trenches they themselves are drowned and Snows
THrough Winds or Rains, through bitter Frosts
Behold my Masters all your Belman goes,
When it is so dark he cannot his hand discern,
Does he not then his Money dearly yearn,
And since to serve you all he is so free,
I hope at Christmas you will Noble be.
THou glorious God that Heaven and Earth have made
Grant us thy Servants thy protecting aid,
That in this time of Danger we may find
Our God is merciful though men unkind,
And let not Plotters by Conspiracyes,
Destroy our Church so glorious in thine Eyes.
THus to conclude till the next year I shall
Pray for your happiness my Masters all,
Desiring God to have you all in mind,
And that your Servant may your Bounty find,
I Will study how to please my Masters well,
My Tongue shall ring your praise, and e'ke my Bell.
Printed by Hen. Brugis. 1681.


