REASONS humbly Offered against the Establishing the present East India Company
by Act of Parliament, exclusive of others, and confirming their Charters.
I. BEcause that all the Subjects of England have an equal Right to Trade to
the East Indies by the Laws of the Land, and which the Honorable House of
Commons have lately Declared and Asserted.

II. Because that the Establishing this Company would give away that Right to a
few Men only, which belongs to all the Subjects of England; and thereby exclude
all the rest from it for 21 Years.

III. Because that this Honorable House have in two Sessions o^ Parliament
made two Solemn Addresses to have this Company Dissolved, it is humbly su^posed,
Their being Established contrary to their said Addresses, cannot be thought
Merit sufficient to recommend them to such an Establishment.

IV. Because it would be so great a Service to the Dutch, to have a Company
Established on so ill a Foundation; which would be so much less able to contest
with them in that Trade, than a New Company founded on a National Bottom, with
a clear Stock of Two Millions; that the Dutch might afford to furnish the
Money, which is proposed to be advanced for.

V. Because that the confirming this Companies Charter, would give them such
Powers as are not fit to be trusted in any Subjects; much less in those who
have already so much abused them, and by color thereof have been guilty of
such Arbitrary Proceedings, as well on the Lives, Liberties and Estates of
their Fellow Subjects, as to the Natives of India: and for some of which, they
have been justly Censured in Parliament.

VI. Because that it would countenance by a Law, one of the greatest Cheats
that ever yet was practiced; and that only to serve the Private Ends of a few
Men, who have been the Promoters of it; and by their Arts and Tricks have
procured New Subscriptions to be made to their Old Stock, which they knew was
worth nothing: and the better to Decoy in others, have given Security, to some
to make their 90 l. worth 100 l. in 6 Months time.

VII. Because this Proposal is not made by the Company, or with their Consent,
nor so much as a General Court called, to propose it to them; but is managed
and promoted by those Security-Men, who now want the Credit of an Act of
Parliament: to make them a saving Bargain, by raising the Stock: that so they
may either Sell out, or not have it put upon them with so great a Loss.

VIII. Because there is no assurance, that this Proposal will be complied with;
for many of the Adventurers are so far from approving of it, that they
publicly express their dislike thereof. So that if it should be offered by the
House, it may not perhaps be accepted.

IX. Because it would Establish in a few Men of the Old Company, the greatest
part of all that Trade, and give them, and such only as they please, the whole
Power and Management of it; as they have had for several Years past, and have
now lately secured to themselves by their New Charter; by reducing the Votes
from 500 l. to 1000 l. and having ten Votes for 10000 l. which the New
Subscribers would now gladly retrieve; and to that end have made Regulations,
which the Governing-Men will not agree to: and the New Subscribers and the Old
disagreeing about their New Regulations, if any of them them should get into
the Committee at the Election in April next, they may perhaps be too nice in
examining into the Particulars of the large Articles expended for Secret
Service, and discover the miserable state of the Companys condition; which
would occasion the Stock to fall, unless it can be thus Supported.

X. Because, that at the Return of the two Ships, which were sent to the
East Indies by particular Men last year, the true state of the Companies
Condition will then appear; and the fear of the consequence of having the truth
thereof discovered, which they know is so bad, is the great Reason, That they
are now so Solicitous to obtain an Establishment by Act of Parliament.

XI. Because no other Reasons are given by those who promote the Confirming
this Company, for so doing; but only their Lending 60000 l. without Interest to
be advanced in three Years, and be Re-paid out of their own Customs: Which by a
reasonable Computation cannot be supposed to amount to near so much as they
have Paid for Secret Service, but is nevertheless more than they can perform,
unless their Friends the Dutch help them to it, or that they procure others to
Lend it for them: a Practice with which they have been well acquainted, when
they have pretended to make Loans to Their Majesty's; and have lately given by
their Emissaries, 1 or 2 per Cent. more than the King Paid, to procure the
Money to be lent in their Members Names, by those who otherwise would have lent
it to the Government themselves without any such Compensation, so that the
Public has had no Advantage by their pretended Loans.

XII. Because that this is not a raising of Money for the Crown, but only a
Borrowing of it, by anticipating the Revenue which is already Granted.

XIV. Because, that if the Honorable House of Commons should incline (which
it is humbly hoped they will not) to Confirm this Company, with an Exclusion of
the Right of all the Subjects of England, whom this Honorable House
represents; only for their Lending 600000 l. If the same Method were to be
taken in Raising Money on other Foreign Trades of this Kingdom, several
Millions might be Raised thereby; and there are Persons who would make
Proposals for the East India Trade to be Settled in a New Company, far more
Considerable and Advantageous to the Public, than what are now made for the
Old Company.


