Josephus Redivivus: OR, INNOCENCE Violated and Vindicated.

IN A SERMON PREACHED On the Public Day of Thanksgiving, In Wandsworth in
SURREY; By the Vicar there.

On Thursday May the 24th, 1660.

(...). LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel, for Humphry Robinson, at the three
Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

The PREFACE.
THere needs no Key to unlock the sense of these few leaves: let but our hearts
be open in thank-fulness to God, for a mercy both miraculous and unexp^cted;
and such as our Fathers never knew, to declare unto us.

It was joyful news which the Brethren brought to their aged Father, that
Joseph was alive, and ruled over all the land: They once scorned the motion
Genesis 45. 26.
(as we may see by what follows) that Joseph should rule over them: Yet now
they proclaim it, and sensible of the happiness of it, they tell it with great
gladness. Such a Triplicity of Change, could receive its motion from no lower
Orb, then the high Hand of Divine Providence.

Jacob sat mourning, and would not be comforted, because his Joseph was not.
The Brethren were snared in the setters which their own ambition had created;
and could not tell whether imprisonment, famine, or what sadder judgment,
should close the Tragoedy wherein themselves had been the principal Actors.
Joseph is amongst strangers, where some entertained him; and, conquered by his
Virtues, courted him, even in the midst of his affliction. Yet there wanted not
malice to have betrayed his life, or to have made him wretched, because he
would not be persuaded to be wicked.

But in a sudden revolution of Affairs, The spirit of Jacob their Father was
revived. The Brethren's feared, and Deserved Captivity, was (for the
strangeness of the Change, as to men in a Dream) turned into the possession of
an Assured Liberty. Joseph ruled, who before was despised: Genesis 45. Verse. 7.
being sent to preserve a posterity in the earth, and to save their lives by a
great deliverance.

Thus the former Object of their envy, becomes (under God) the only ground of
their security: They had been most miserable, if Joseph had not ruled over them.

The first Act of this Pious Prince, appeared in his Duty to his Father; like a
Religious King, who holds the common Concernments of the Common Parent, his
Country, more regardfully then all his own particular Interests. And, as the
chief means to preserve his Country in safety, his Zeal is, to keep his
Brethren in Unity: See that you fall not out by the way.

The Jealousy of Differences amongst them, did arise from the Diversity of
their dis-affection toward him: He was now safe, and they in a way to be
happy, and have the chiefest advantage from his safety, if tbey did not ruin
and undo all again, by falling out by the way.

Surely if Joseph would forget, it were very impious for the offending Brethren
to remember, foment, or enlarge former Differences.

What if Reuben suffered for the present, and was even distracted under the
bitterness of his Brethrens cruelty to their Innocent Joseph?

He and his more loyal party did suffer indeed, and that very deeply; which I
suppose their very Persecutors well not deny. Yet let the suffering party
confess, That Joseph suffered most: And (now he may revenge) he pleads
Reconciliation first.

It were great pity that so pure a spirit should be attempted to be poisoned
with the angry counsels of any discontented parties, who will not be satisfied,
except they may be as Unchristian as their Adversaries, whom they condemn to be
Vncharitabl^. Thou that judge another, will thou fall into the same
condemnation?

Let Them talk up themselves to be the Godly Party, let us act Godliness: they
have censured the loyal Party, to be a loose Party: GOD has now put an
Opportunity into our hands to silence their slanders, and convince them of rash
judgments. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another: if any man have
a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave Colos 3. 13. 1 Pet. 3. 16
you, so also do ye. By this means they which speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, may be ashamed, that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

But we have suffered, and found no mercy: It Is true, many have known sorrow:
neither shall I argue the ground of it with some men, who make most noise; lest
it should appear to be the disturbance of affected Interests, rather then
suffering with Joseph, or for the Truth in its undefiled constitutions.

To these passionate Overturners, I would recommend the consideration of that
mixed Dialogue, Dispeream ni ultus fuero: Dispeream ni melius persuasero. The
one would perish, rather then not be revenged: The other was afraid that he
should perish, if he did not discharge his Duty, by endeavoring to dispossess
him of so unclean a spirit.

My Prayer is, That God would preserve our Joseph, that the sweetness of his
natural temper, so adorned and empowered with supernatural Grace, may not be
disturbed with any violent impression of discontented complaints; but that all
may find warmth and comfort from the Beams of that Majesty which God has
graciously given once more to shine in this land: and that led by his most
Christian Example, we, moving in our inferior Orbs and several places, may not
continue in our still angry distance one with another, but meet in the spirit
of love and meekness.

Let the joy that our Joseph is yet alive, silence animosities, unite us in
thank-ful obedience unto God, loyalty to his Majesty, and love one to another.
So shall we honor God in the King, bless God for him, prosper under him: Let
all loyal Subjects say,

AMEN.
Josephus Redivivus: OR, Innocence violated and vindicated.
Genesis 37. 8. His Brethren said unto him, Shall thou indeed reign over us?
shall thou indeed have dominion over us?
IF we consider these words singly by themselves, we may look upon them as of
acceptance and congratulation; wishing it might be so, yet in some doubt
whether it would be so or no; Shall thou indeed?

Or of admiration, Shall thou! who art but young, and as one single person,
come to that dignity to be King, and reign over us, who are older in years, and
many in number, and will keep the rule in our own hands, in a Popular State and
Community, rather then One reign over Many: how can this be, indeed, that Thou
reign over us; Thou one, over us many?

But the Context will admit of neither of these acceptations of the words, but
render them in a far other sense, viz. of scorn and detestation; Thou? what,
Thou? whom we hate; and therefore hate, because of the claim thou seem to
make of dominion over us, and that as if it were by the disposing of Divine
Providence. Thou indeed? no indeed, thou shall not reign over us.

Like the unthankful subjects, Luke 19. 14. But his Citizens hated him, and
sent a messenger after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us.
Why would they not? verse. 13. And he called his ten servants, and delivered
them ten pounds, and said unto them, Occupy till I come.

By his noble bounty, they had got the possession of the money, the ten pound
was in their hands, which they were loath to part withal, and had ill improved.
They were afraid of an account, and therefore Nolumus hunc, etc. we will not
have this man, etc. Yea, it is said, verse. 12, 14. That when this their Lord was
gone into a far Country, they took advantage of that his absence, and sent a
message after him with this unthankful, undutiful vote and resolution, to make
him afraid of returning into his Country again, that they would no more admit
him to any rule or reign over them.

Where also observe, That the cause they give for this refusal (whatsoever
otherwise might be the matter) was neither Law nor Reason, but their own will,
condemning Royal Authority in such a Court where Reason was not to be heard.

So in this Text, which is a Type of that grand Rebellion, even against Christ
himself. Joseph's Brethren, blinded with malice, and over-byast with
self-interest and respect, rose up against Joseph, even after they perceived
that Gods pleasure was to advance him over them, they would not endure it; and
therefore came with this Expostulation, or rather Exprobation, Shall thou
indeed? ye know the story, that they were thus incensed by occasion of a dream,
by which in those days God often revealed his will to men; or else this dream
would have past by unregarded as a fable: but because dreams were then of such
esteem, this dream gave them to understand what Gods good pleasure was
concerning Joseph: and yet so mad they were, that they opposed it, casting this
scorn upon him, before he came to his reign over them, Thou? what Thou indeed?

Malice, Ambition and Covetousness, do so far Observe.
possess men with the spirit of Rebellion, that they will even act against
their own Conscience, and known will and determination of God himself.

I shall go no further then the Example in the Text, to confirm unto us this
truth: Joseph was to be advanced to dominion, his Brethren to be subject and
bow unto him; this was revealed to be the will of God by a Dream: In those
days of great credit to manifest GOD's Will; his Brethren repine; and observe
how they plot against it.

There were three several parties or factions appearing in this business:

One was very cruel; root and branch, totally destroy him, kill him, and so out
of fear of him.

The other were a little (though not much more moderate) they were for
banishment; sell him into Egypt, into a far Country; let them be but rid of
him, and they care not what becomes of him.

A third party there was (but a small one) and prevailed not, which labored by
all means to preserve and deliver him out of their hands, that so he might be
safe. These were the three parties, and principal actors in this sad intended
Tragedy, if Gods Providence had not prevented.

Behold the first of these parties in verses 19, 20. And they said one to
another, Behold, this Dreamer comes. Verse. 20. Come now, therefore, and let us
slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast has
devoured him: and we will see what will become of his dreams.

Who comes? their brother by nature, but by Gods Providence ordered to be
their Ruler. Wherefore comes he? to visit them, and see whether they were well,
verse. 14. From whence came he? from his and their Father, who loved him more
then all his Children, and sent him unto them, verse. 13. He received kindness
from a stranger; when he was in a solitary, and even lost condition, a certain
man found him wandering in the fields, verse. 15. but his own Brethren, (whom he
wandringly in the simplicity of his heart, sought, that he might comfort)
consulted as soon as they had got him amongst them, to kill him.

The man or Angel, (whether it was, I shall not dispute) told Joseph that he
should find his Brethren in Dothan, verse. 17. He found it true indeed, to his
sorrow: Dothan, i. e. defectio, falling away; they fell away from their love to
him, as to their Brother; from their duty to him as to their King, for they
said, Let us kill him.

They in the parable, seeing the heir, said, Let us kill him, and the
inheritance shall be ours: These men are not far short of it: Let us kill him,
and see what will become of his dreams, verse. 20. so shall not he rule, but we
shall keep the dominion to our selves, and then what will become of his dreams?

Yea, as a sign of their malicious hearts, their tongues spare no reviling or
scorn; This Dreamer: They might have called him their Brother, according to
nature; their Ruler, according to Gods institution: but froward hearts,
appeared in froward language; This Dreamer: Did they not here fight against
God? if Joseph dreamt, it was of God: did he dream they should all bow unto
him? if it were of man, they need not so fear that it would come to pass, as to
use this wicked means to prevent it: if of God, they were sadly given over thus
to fight against God.

As their malice rose high, so it became universal, and so bold, as to propound
this murder, even in a whole Council. It Is not one or two sneaking Traitors in
a Corner; but as if the mischief were plotted even before it was propounded,
they feared no opposition; they do not make it a Question to be put to the
Vote, Shall we? but presently determine, Let us kill him.

Adeo horribilia Monstra existunt: What strange Luther in loc.
Monsters are here found in Jacobs Family? not enemies or strangers, but sons
and Brethren conspire the murder of their Brother Joseph, whom their Father
loved best: Why thus? but because God had appointed, that not a Tyrant, or a
Stranger, but one of their own Brethren should rule over them; and so they rose
against their own happiness.

But let these alone a while: they were not so wicked as they would have been:
they conspired, but Gods Goodness and Providence prevented, that they did not
kill their Ruler and their Brother.

Another Party is not for murder, but for banishment: Verse. 26, 27. And Judah
said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal
his blood? Verse. 27. Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not
our hand be upon him, for he is our brother, and our flesh: and his brethren
were content.

This is Judahs counsel, a little more moderate, and truly but a little, in
that it is an hard choice, either to be killed, or to be forced into a foreign
Country, amongst Strangers, without Friends, maintenance, to live upon the
benevolence of men of a contrary Religon: yea, it is a great aggravation, that
Joseph should suffer this; The beloved of his Father, that had been tenderly
brought up, yea, and had dominion and rule more then in his view; for him to be
thus baffled from all, and cast into so sad a condition, and that by his own
then Brethren, and future Subjects; tell me whether Ages do often parallel this
Example?

His other Brethren would have taken away his natural life by killing him:
Judah juggles him into a far Country, and so deprives him of his civil life:
but observe the ground of Judah's advice, v. 26. What profit is it if we slay
him? this was the main wheel which set all on motion: What shall we get by it?
if they had gone on in blood, they would have been but a scandal and scorn to
other Nations; it would have been a burden to the Conscience, and all to no
purpose: If get by it, then let Nations be offended, Religion blemished,
Conscience wounded; there is something to be got: but if nothing to be got,
we'll be content with his banishment. Here Judah sellet^ Joseph, and Judas
Iscariot sold Christ; their names were alike, and so was their fact: says this
Judah, What profit? and says Iscariot, Quid dabitis? What will you give? Auri
sacra fames? to what black designs will not profit hale man unto?

Joseph then is sold by Judah's advice, but ^ot without the Providence of God,
who knew that it would be safer for Joseph, and more conducible to the bringing
him to the honor God determined for him, that he should be among strangers,
yea, Egyptians, then at home amongst his own Brethren or Subjects in his own
Country. It were to be wished (however Judah was here carried to this seeming
moderation) that all guilty of the sin, would take notice of the Doctrine; What
profit is it if we slay our brother?

Let me propound the Apostles Question to such guilty Consciences, What fruit
have ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? the end is death.

Does not Judah condemn himself, whilst he betrays his brother? Let not our
hand be upon him; he is our brother and our flesh.

If it be so unnatural for one hand to wound the other, because the same flesh;
the danger is greater, and the unkindness more unpardonable, which strikes at
the head, that Treasury of all helps conducible to the Government and Comfort
of man. But it is mortal, without a miracle, and extraordinary Providence, to
sever the Head from the Body, to send it to one Country whilst the Body
continues in another: and this was the case of Joseph.

Men may undergo banishment from a threefold occasion:

First, the Malefactor is banished by the just sentence of the Law passing upon
him, by the Authority of a lawful Magistrate. This was not Joseph's condition;
himself being their appointed Lord, no Malefactor: they his Subjects, no
competent Judges.

Secondly, when a man is treacherously betrayed, and for filthy lucre, or any
other sinister end, bought and sold to be transported into another Nation, and
so with the loss of his freedom, to become little better then a bondsman, in a
foreign Country. Or,

Thirdly, when (according to the Proverb) his own Country is made too hot for
him: such Conspiracies are hatched, such unkindnesses multiplied, and dangers
threatened, that without apparent hazard, there is no abode for him in his
native soil, but he must seek safety abroad, though with never so great a loss.

Joseph felt the burden of both these banishments: he was traitorously
chaffer'd away into Egypt, yea, with such prevalency of malice, that his
Brethren would rather have given money with him, then not to have been rid of
him; and so many injuries, affronts, threatenings, daily assaulted him, that,
take him out of the pit, where they had put him, and surely he would (without
their selling) having an opportunity of escape, be any where, rather in Egypt,
then amongst his own Brethren.

Thus was Joseph banished by his own brethren. P. Mart. in loc.


I read that Adrian the Emperor, called before him ten Grandees, Rabbis of
great note amongst the Jews, and asked them what the punishment in their Law
was, for them who should betray or deprive an innocent person of his liberty,
contriving him into Thraldom, Death, or Banishment: They answer him, That such
a sin was capital, (i. e.) to be punished with death. The Emperor commanded
these ten to be presently executed. Insimulans quod hujus Criminis tenerentur,
accusing them as guilty of this crime. He insisted in no particular; which gave
men occasion diversely to interpret the meaning: The Christians alluded to
Christ, whom the Nation of the Jews had thus wickedly handled: But the Jews,
not willing that Christ's Innocence should be so cleared, and their cruelty so
revenged, confessed, That this was a judgment of God upon them, for their
unnatural dealing with Joseph: Et ne absurda videantur dicere, that they might
give some countenance to this evasion, they fell into as gross an Absurdity,
Post tot tempora animas december fratrum Josephi migrasse in istos december Rabinos,
and ideo sic illos esse punitos: after so long time, the souls of those ten
Brethren of Joseph, passed into the bodies of these ten Rabbis, and therefore
they were thus punished.

Let the Story be what it will, the Moral is easiy, true, and will be certain.
God is the Protector of the Innocent, and sooner or later will visit for the
afflictions of Joseph.

I must add a little of a third Party interested in this great business. We
have heard of them who were for Destruction, Let us kill him: and of those who
were for Banishment, and prevailed. The third is a sober more conscientious and
ingenuous party, fearing God, who endeavored his preservation and deliverance:
This Party see Genesis 37. 21, 22, 29, 30. And Reuben heard it, and he delivered
him out of their hands, and said, Let us not kill him. And Reuben said unto
them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and
lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him
to his father again: Verse. 29, 30. And Reuben returned unto the pit, and
behold, Joseph was not in the pit: and he rent his clothes. And he returned to
his brethren, and said, The Child is not; and I, whither shall I go?

There is no Time so bad, or Age so cruel, but some are to be found to appear
in a righteous Cause, opposing (as much as in them lies) the violence and
injustice of others: Let us kill him, say they: Shed no blood, says Reuben;
who though he prevailed not in the particular he endeavored, yet it stopped the
madness of the Rest, and was (under God) the means that Joseph was preserved.

Division is in it self a bitter and poisonous root; yet Gods Wisdom makes it
physical, for the preservation of his servants. If Reuben had not dissented,
what could have become of Joseph? It Is the way to Destruction, yet sometimes
the Method of Gods Providence makes use of it to preservation. How far would
the Sons of Adam have gone on in their Genesis 11.
wicked Attempts, if God had not confounded their Language? How should St. Paul
have escaped the Act. 23.
hands of his Persecutors, if there had not arose a dissension between the
Pharisees and Sadduces, and the Multitude divided?

The Church of God has been the safer, when the storm raised against it,
increased the higher. Many Errors striving against the truth, has been the
security of the truth, which would have fallen under the danger of a single
Error. We have seen the experience in our days, and we hope to find the
comfortable consequence, and issue of it.

Methinks I hear some object, That this Party Object.
was a loose Party: had Joseph no better Abettors then Reuben, to appear on his
behalf? If the Cause be like the Patron, we could find so much to lay to his
charge, as would much disgrace the Cause. And this is not the last time that
loyalty has been blemished with looseness (which is but a weak disguise for
Rebellion.)

But yet, that we may not be too censorious, we must as well take notice of his
natural Piety, as of his carnal Impiety; let his loyalty to his Brother, plead
some excuse for his disloyalty to his Father. However (if we must enter into
comparison) their Unnatural Cruelty will look as black as his Carnal
Uncleanness. However, Joseph's Enemies have no great Cause to stand upon their
own Integrity, or censure Reuben's Folly, when deep dissimulation shall cloth
their cruelty with hypocrisy: we find verse. 35. All his sons and daughters
rose up to comfort mournful Jacob, for his absent Joseph; feignedly to comfort
him, for the sorrow they had wilfully brought upon him; but he refused to be
comforted. The wound was too great to be healed with a few good words, and
plausible Declarations; they could not cheat the old man into an approbation of
their cruelty, since themselves had brought upon him that sorrow which they
endeavored to daub over with the untempered mortar of their hypocrisy.

It Is probable, that if all his Sons, then Reuben was in the Company; but a
true Mourner, amongst many Dissemblers.

Thus these great men have brought all into a Confusion: their Father in
mourning; Reuben in Verse. 30.
distraction what to do, or whither to go; Joseph is in Egypt, and themselves
driven to shifts and streights, to bear up against the desolation they had
brought upon themselves and their Country.

Having thus seen foolish men opposing, let us consider Gods truth and wisdom,
carrying on his own purpose, notwithstanding the counter-working of all his
Enemies. Their Scorn proved a true Prophecy: Shall thou indeed? Yea indeed; He
shall reign over them.

What GOD determines, Man cannot hinder.

Christ will protect his Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. God has said, David shall be King of Israel: Saul must^rs up his
Armies, consults with his Allies; lays snares in every corner to entrap David:
and by the treachery and help of Doeg, murdered all the Priests of the Lord,
who wished prosperity to David.

All these plots and cruelties could not long keep the Scepter out of David's
hands; Saul was killed, and David when he was thirty years old began to 2 Samuel
5. 4.
reign, and reigned forty years over Israel. So let thine enemies perish O
Lord; and so let the Crown be settled, flourish and continue upon the head of
thine Anointed.

We have in this Transaction seen much of Man, but more of God. Man will not
have Joseph to reign over them; but God has appointed it should be so; and
after, and against all men's devices, it was so.

But so remarkable are the steps of Divine Providence, not only in carrying on
this great work, but in settling Joseph in his power, that he is blind indeed,
who sees it not to be the work of the Lord, and in whose eyes it is not
miraculous. His Brethren force Joseph into Banishment, they live to see him
reign over them; they outlive their own shame, beholding Joseph's glory, and
yet to their unspeakable advantage: What would have become of them, if their
plots had taken? who should have nourished them, their Wives, their little
ones, in the Famine, if their fury had been executed, their designs prospered,
and they killed Joseph? We may well say what Joseph to them, Ye thought evil
against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass as it is this day, to
save much people alive: The Evil was of Man, both actually and intentionally;
but the wisdom of God turned it to a real Good, both to them who contrived the
Evil, and also to the benefit of the whole Country.

Thus we have seen their parting: sad for Joseph, if God had not miraculously
preserved him in a strange Country, and given him favor and acceptance
amongst strangers, and they of a strange Religion, making his wisdom, Piety,
and Patience the more famous by his sufferings: But more sad for his Brethren,
because sinful, if God had not spared them to return to their Loyalty; so to
make some amends for their former Impiety.

Let us now behold their meeting, after many storms and troubles: and we shall
find that to be as full of submission, peace and comfort; as was their parting,
of scorn, disloyalty and treachery.

Vide Chapter 50. 18-19. And his Brethren also went, and fell down before his
face, and they said, Behold, we be thy servants. And Joseph said unto them,
Fear not: for am I in the place of God?

We were thy Brethren; but Gods Providence has exalted thee now above us: by
our wickedness we have forfeited that Relation: therefore they fell down before
his face; that was an acknowledgement of his Sovereignty: Behold, we be tby
servants; and this was the profession of their Loyalty.

But withal, observe Joseph's gracious, but most seasonable Reply, Fear not: for
am I in the place of God? What wrong soever was done to his own Person, he was
most ready to pardon; yea, so to pardon, that he would have them banish all
fear: Nothing of harm, danger, or revenge, should proceed from him (how justly
soever he might) to them. He so freely forgave, as that he would have no cause
to remain, no not of fear. But he could pardon no further then a King can
pardon rebellious Subjects: for wherein they had violated the Law of GOD,
broken the Rule of Obedience and Charity, grounded on that Law; Am I in the
place of God? Such sins, and so far as they are done against God, there must be
for them, Repentance, humbling themselves, and begging pardon of God.

Thus have I briefly presented unto you, three very remarkable Examples. The
one sets forth unto us the violence of Man's Nature, when it is blinded with
Malice, Covetousness, or Ambition.

The other is a clear instance of Gods providence; first, infatuating the
counsels of the wicked, by dividing their counsels; and secondly, miraculously
bringing his own Determinations to pass, against all opposition; not only to
the amazement, but also to the benefit of all, who will not continue wilfully
blind and obstinate.

The other is a Gracious Lord, and a kind Brother, pardoning the rebellions of
his Subjects, and unkindness of his Brethren, when indeed he had advantage over
them, and power in his hands, to have been sufficiently revenged on them.

There is nothing in this History, but was perfectly performed, partly in
Canaan, partly in Egypt, above three thousand years since. If Antiquity makes
the weaker impression hereof, upon our spirits, I leave you to draw down the
Story to a Modern Application: Change but one Name, and we have seen with our
Eyes, and heard with our Ears, more lively acted what our Fathers have declared
unto us: God give Grace, even to the best of us, to repent of our mis-doings:
to be truly thankful to God for his miraculous Providence. Let Reuben rejoice:
for what he could not do, the Lord has put to his Hand, and has effected it;
and Joseph is safe. Let Judah be glad: not that he was so wicked to banish
Joseph, but that God was so gracious to turn his evil Designs to so happy a
Success, and blessed an End. Let the Brethren who conspired together to slay
him, repent; if God peradventure will forgive the wicked thoughts of their
hearts.

Let us all lift up our fainting Spirits, and let the News have the same
operation with us, as it had with old Jacob, Genesis 45. 28. The spirit of Jacob
their Father revived: And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet
alive: I will go and see him before I die. The Oil was wasted, and the Lamp was
even extinct: Gods Comforts are most seasonable: Jacob's heart fainted, the Oil
of gladness is here poured in, and our hearts also are revived. It is enough;
what would we now more? Our Joseph is alive, we have clear evidences of it; God
grant we may see him before we die.

After all these distempers, when Reuben had acted against Judah; and the rest
of the brethren against both: They settle, live in love; pardoning each other;
flourish under Joseph's Authority, who forgave them all. And so, as a signal of
Gods favor and being reconciled unto them, they (all together) became the
Twelve famous Patriarchs, and Planters of Religion in the whole world. If we
may hold Parallel in this, as in the former particulars, we may say, It Is good
for us that we have been afflicted.

FINIS.

