Elizabeth Rones SHORT ANSWER TO ELLINOR JAMES's LONG PREAMBLE, OR VINDICATION
OF THE NEW TEST, etc.
THe Book called Mistress James's Vindication,
Does seem to me but her great Indignation
Against the Romans, and Dissenters too:
She for the Church of England makes ado,
Calling her Christ's Spouse, yet she is mistaken,
Christ's Spouse is she that is by Her forsaken:
In every form the Innocent are his,
They Are such as truly give him Kiss for Kiss.
The New Church and Calvin's are alike,
When they get up, they do their Brethren strike;
They both are Persecutors, and I find,
Such silly Formalists are very blind
To things of God; for none of them can tell
What is in Truth, either in Heaven or Hell;
Or God, or Devil, they all court the Letter,
And yet I see their evil does them fetter,
They would have Liberty, but cannot love
Their Neigbour as themselves, but still do move,
That they may have Dominion over others;
That is the Daughters trick, and eke the Mothers
Though at each other they do chide and baul,
No Barrel the better Herring amongst them all.
Our Gracious King does keep the Peace,
And yet their wrath and malice does not cease.
Leave of debate, and learn to live in Love,
Then you will know what is the God above,
And eke his Son, whom you do seem to Honor,
Yet never come to fight under his Banner;
Against the evil Nature in your selves,
And so you run upon the sands and shelves;
Of vain contention, and vain jangling, for
I see you all the ways of Truth abhor.
You saw that Conscience is no perfect guide,
And therein I do find that you backslide;
For that does never guide us to do evil,
He that denies the Truth, he is a Devil.
You like Goliath think to run me down;
But I have little David (though you frown)
Can smite you with his stone, that is the truth,
Though you have been a Warrior from your Youth:
I matter not your Spear, nor yet your Shield,
I know the power I have shall make you yield;
With your own Sword I make no doubt to tame ye,
Though your proud Doctors at your Church do blame me.
I plead for Truth, and for true innocence,
That keeps the Conscience void of all offense
To God or Man, that loves you every one,
And would have all build on the Corner Stone;
The Rock of Ages, and not harm each other,
But have respect to Charity our Mother;
And do your duty also to your King,
That you may come and ALLELUJAH'S Sing.
LONDON, Printed for D. K. in the Year 1687.


