Propositions Made by the Sachems of the three Maquas Castles, to the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commanalty of the City of Albany, and Military Officers of the
said City, and County in the City-Hall, February 25th. 1689/90. Peiter Schuyler
Mayor, with ten more Gentlemen, then present Interpreted by Arnout and Hille.
The Names of the Sachims, Sinnonguiness Speaker, Rode, Sagoddiockquisax,
Oguedagoa. Tosoquatho, Odagurasse, Anharenda, Jagogthera.
Brethren,
WE are Sorry and extremely Grieved for the Murder lately committed by the
French upon our Brethren of Shennechtady, we esteem this Evil, as if done to
our selves, being all in one Covenant-Chain; But what they have done is by way
of stealth, by way of Robbery unawares; our Brethren of New England will be
sorry to hear of this sad Disaster, but we must not be discouraged. [They give
a Belt of Wampom, according to their custom, to wipe off the Tears.

2. Brethren, We lament and condole the Death of so many of our Brethren so
basely Murdered at Shennechtady; we cannot account it a great Victory, for it
is done by way of Deceit. He (meaning the Governor of Canada) comes to our
Country by his Messengers at Onnondage, and speaks of Peace, with the whole
House quite hither: but War is in his heart, as you find by woeful experience,
but what shall we say? it is the same as he did at Cadarachqui, and the
Sinnakes Country. This is the third time that he has done so; he has broke
open the Jewel of our House on both ends, the one end at Sinnondowanne, and the
other here, But we hope to be Revenged. There is one hundred of our young men
out still, who will pursue them to their Doors at Cannida; nay, the French
shall not be able to cut a stick of Wood, we will lay so close Seige to them;
We do now gather the Dead together in order to their Interment. A manner of
speaking amongst. [They do give a Belt of Wampom

3. We are come here from our Castles with Tears in our Eyes to Bemoan the
Murder committed by the perfideous French at Shennechtady, our young Indians
are gone out in Pursuit of them, and while we are now busy in burying the Dead
that were Murdered there, we may have bad news that our people that are gone
out, may be killed also; the same that is befallen you, may befall us: We do
therefore come and bury our Brethren at Shennechtady. [They give a Belt of
Wampom, according to their custom.

4 Great is the Mischief that is befallen us, it is come from the Heavens upon
us, we are taught by our Forefathers, when any sad Accident or Disaster does
befall any of the Covenant, to go with all convenient speed to Bemoan their
Death; [They give a Belt of Wampom, which they call a Belt of Vigilance, that
is, not to have too much thoughts on what is done that cannot be Remedied, but
to be watchful for the future; and they give Eye-water to make the Brethren
sharp-sighted.

5 We come to the house where we usually do Renew the Covenant, which House we
find defiled with Blood, this is known to all the five Nations, and we are now
come to wipe off the Blood and keep the House clean, and therefore pray that
Corlaer and all they that are in Office here in Albany, naming the Mayor whom
they call Peiter, Mr. Vessels, and Mr. Livingstone may use all means and Direct
all Affairs to be Revenged of the Enemy that has done us this Evil [They give
a Belt of Wampom.

6 Brethren: Do not be Discouraged, this is but a beginning of the War, we are
strong enough, the whole house have their Eyes fixed upon you, and they only
stay your motion, and will be ready to do whatever shall be Resolved upon by
our Brethren, our Covenant is a firm Covenant it is a Silver Chain and cannot
be broke, it must not be broke; we are Resolute and will Continue the War, we
will not leave off, if there were but Thirty Men of us left, we will proceed,
therefore pray take good heart, do not pack up and go away, if the Enemy should
hear that, it would much encourage them, we are of the Race of the Bear, and a
Bear does not yield as long as there is a drop of Blood in its body we must all
be so; [They give a Belt of Wampom.

7. Brethren, Be Content, Look up to the Heavens; from thence the Judgment is
come now upon us, Be not Discouraged, the same hand that has Chastized us can
heal us; The Sun which now has been Cloudy, and sent us this Disaster, will
shine again, and with its pleasant Beams comfort us, Be Encouraged; [with many
Repetitions. And they give a Bear-skin.

8 We were Engaged in a Bloody War with the French, about three years ago, and
were Encouraged to Proceed, and no sooner were we well Entered, and got several
Prisoners, but a Cessation came, and Corlaer hindered us to proceed, and
Demanded the Prisoners from us; we were Obedient and did deliver them, and laid
down the Hatchet, which if we might have gone forward, then the French would
not have been in that Capacity to do so much mischief as they do; But now we
must dye; such Obstructions will Ruin us; if we might have had our wills, we
would have prevented their Planting, Sowing and Reaping, and brought them low
and mean; Nevertheless let us be steadfast, and not take such measures again,
let us go on briskly with the War. [They give a Bear-skin,

9 We Recommend the Brethren to keep good Watch, and if any Enemies come, take
care that Messengers be more speedily sent to us then lately was done, we would
not advise the Brethren quite to Desert Sennechtady, but to make a Fort there,
the Enemy would be too glorious to see it quite Desolate, and the Town here is
not well Fortified, the Stockadoes are so short, the Indians can jump over them
like a Dog. [They give a Bear-skin.

10 This mischief is done at Sennechtady, and it cannot be helped, but as soon
as any Enemy comes, let nothing hinder your speedy sending to us the News by
Posts, and Fyring great Guns, that all may be Alarmed; and our Advise is that
you get all the River Indians who are under your Subjection to come and live
near unto you, to be ready on all occasions, and send word to New England of
all what is done here; undoubtedly they will awake and lend us their helping
hand; let us not be Discouraged, The French are not so many as People talk off;
if we but mind our buisiness, They can be subdued, with the assistance of our
Neighbors of New England, whose interest it is to drive on this War as much as
ours, that it may be speedily ended.

We desire that the Brethren may Recommend the Smiths not to be too dear in
Repairing our Arms, since Money is so scarce, and we only go to Warring and not
to Hunting; we shall take care to warn the Sinnakes and the Nations living
above us to be in Readiness; for we being one they hearken to us, and tell them
of New England that we shall take care that the upper Nations be Ready for our
Security and Assistance, and Let them be Ready also with Ships and great Guns
by Water, and we will Plague him by Land: We are Resolved not to go out a
Hunting, but to mind the War, for the sooner the French be fallen upon the
better, before they get Men and Provisions from France, as their usual Custom
is. [They give a Bear-Skin.

ANSWER upon the Maquas Sachims Propositions; by the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commonalty of the City of Albany, and Military Officers of the said City and
County: At the City-Hall, Febr. 26th. 1689/90
Interpreted by Arnout, etc.
Brethren,
YOur coming here according to the Custom of your Ancestors, to Condole the
death of your Brethren Murdered at Shennechtady is very acceptable, whereby
your Inclination toward us is Demonstrated; we must acknowledge that they did
not keep so good Watch as they ought, considering what a false and deceitful
Enemy they had to deal withal, but that which made them so secure, was, the
great Trust which they Reposed in the forty Maquass who came here, and Tendered
their Service to go and be the Out-watch, and to spy the Enemy: To which end
Powder and Lead was given them as they desired; we were about Hiring Christians
to send thither, but were unhappily diverted by the said Company of Maquass,
who promised to have four Posts ready, two to go to their own Country, and two
to come hither if any Enemy should appear. For the Brethren did assure us, that
no French could come here without being Discovered; and then would all fall
into our hands: We are likewise mindful, how that the five Nations last Fall,
when the Gentlemen of New England were here did Declare how they would
Encompass the French of Canada, that they could not break out this Winter,
without being Discovered and Fallen upon: We did likewise propose by our
Messengers, Arnout, and Robert Sanders at the General Meeting of Onnondage to
have Three or Four Hundred Men sent hither to be ready on all occasions, but
see none.

Now Brethren, this Evil is done and cannot be called back again, and the only
means to prevent the like for the future, is to keep good Watch, and to have
good courage to oppose and resist the Enemy. We are no ways Discomfited for
this misfortune. It is the fortune of War, we do not fear to be even with the
French in a short time; we have already sent Letters to all our Neighbors of
New England, Virginia and Maryland, the Subjects of the great King of England,
and acquainted them of the Evil done here by the French, and how requisite it
is, that Ships be fitted out with all convenient speed, to go to Quebeck, and
to press the business the more, we do now send persons to New York and
New England, a purpose to lay open the Case before them. And to persuade them
to Rig out Vessels not only to hinder Succor coming from France, but to take
Quebeck it self: as also to send more Men hither, that we may then send Men
along with you to annoy the Enemy in their Country In the mean time we
recommend the Brethren to send for two hundred Men from the upper Nations, to
join with you, to keep the French in continual Alarm, and do them what mischief
imaginable; and Onnondages and Sinnekes must go down the River of Cadarachqui,
and meet one another about Mont Royal, and annoy the Enemy there: we shall in
the mean while Fortify the Town, and put our selves in a good posture of
Defense, that we may not be Surprised, as they of Shennechtady were; and make
all Preparations to oppose the Enemy.

The Brethren see that we are in War with France, now there is no time to speak
of Peace. The French as you well observe have fallen on both ends of the Chain,
but not broke it. Let us keep the Covenant so much the faster, which never has
had the least crack since the very first the Christians came here: They strove
to lull us as all asleep, by their Messengers at Onnondage, speaking of Peace,
and then they were upon the way, hither to commit this Murder.

The Brethren need not fear for a Cessation to hinder us to pursue the Enemy,
for as we told you before, the KING that ordered that, was a Papist, and a
great Friend of the French; But our present Great KING will pursue the War to
the outmost: Therefore we must all prepare for War. It will therefore be very
requisite that the Brethren for their better Security come and Plant this
Summer at Shinnechtady upon the Land that cannot be cultivated this year, that
we may be near to one another upon any occasion. Concerning the Proposition of
the Shackkook Indians, it is concluded on some days ago, to propose to the
Shackkook Indians the Planting on Mart Gerritse Island hard by the Town, and
the River Indians that live below shall also come together to be ready on all
occasions.

We must Insist and Recommend you to persuade them of Oneyde to send the Priest
hither, for you have seen how dangerous it is to have such persons among you,
who informs the Enemy of all your doings, and discovers all our Designs, we
shall secure him that he Run not away, and when the Owner demands him, and
these Troubles are over, shall be Delivered, for he can do more harm in Oneyde
than an hundred men.

We think it Convenient that one or two of the Sachims stay here, and that a
Sachim of each Nation be here to assist in the management of the Affairs of the
War. There was given them six Belts or Wampom, some Duffils, Tobacco, and some
Bags with Provision.

After the Proposition was answered, they gave a Shout according to their
Custom, which signified Amen, that they would continue the War to the utmost.

After the said Answer was made, The Maquas Sachems said after they had
Repeated our Answer. We are glad to see that you are not Discouraged, A mistake
can be made by the best and wisest of men, and we must see now to Pursue the
War with all Vigor, we have an hundred men out in Pursuit of the Enemy still,
who are good Skouts; in the mean time, we expect all the Sachims of the Upper
Nations to Consult with us, who will come to Condole the Death of our Brethren
Murdered at Shennechtady: You need not fear our being Ready, we are soon
fitted out, our Ax is in our hand. But take care for your selves to be in
Readiness. The Ships that must do the principal work are long a Fi^ting out and
Rigging; we do not Design to go out with a small Troop as Skouts, but as soon
as the Nations come together; we will go with a whole Army to Ruin the
Country. The Buisiness must be soon brought to a Period; therefore send in all
haste to New England, for we nor you cannot live long in this Condition; we
must order it so, that the French be in a continual Fear and Alarm, and that is
the way to be in Peace here.

Concerning the Shakkook Indians in our Opinion they lie well where they are,
as a good Watch, They are our Children, we will take care that they do their
Duty, but as for the Indians that live below the Town, Them we mean must be
sent for up, and got to Plant and live together, to be always in Readiness upon
occasion.

This is a true Copy Examined By Robert Livingston.

EXAMINATION of three French Prisoners taken by the Maquase, and brought to
Sennechtady, who were Examined by Pieter Schuyler, Mayor of the City of Albany;
Dom. Goduridus Delius, and some other Gentlemen, that went from Albany a
purpose, and Report as follows: March 3d. 1689/90.
1. THat about the middle of January, they went from Mont-Royal, being about
Three Hundred Men, French and Indians, to wit an hundred and sixty French,
among which only nineteen Soldiers taken out of diverse Companies, the Rest
all Boss-lopers, them that frequent the Woods, and Inhabitants, and an hundred
and forty Praying Indians and others, with positive Orders to Murder and
Destroy all People they met withal at Shennechtady, except such as begged for
quarters, as also to burn the Place, and take with them those that they could
carry along: after said Company had Marched some days from Canada, some French
and Indians that were sick and Timorous, Returned; so that the Party were two
hundred and fifty that did the the Exploit at Shennechtady, by the Indians
called Ochques.

2 After Enquiry of the Particulars of the Murder, they Confessed, that four or
five French had Murdered the Minister of the said Village called Pieter
Tossemaker, first shooting him through the Legs, and then hewed him with their
Swords most barbarously, and being asked if they had Express Orders to deal so
Cruelly, said, That their Order was to do what was done.

3 Being enquired concerning the Prisoners, they carried along with them, said,
they were well Treated by the way, and within four or five days Journey of
Canada, some of our Prisoners went with the Indians, and the Remainder with the
French, but that we need not doubt of their good Entertainment at Canada, since
they will be Delivered to the Jesuits to be instructed in their Religion.

4 That they had eat about twenty or thirty of the Horses they carried along
with them, and intended to carry seven with them to Canada.

5 That nevertheless Provisions begun to grow scarce in their Army, and
therefore two men were Dispatched upon Scates, who go Twenty five Leagues in a
day to Cause Provisions be sent them from Mont Royal.

6 That the ten Prisoners, whereof these now Examined were three, were taken by
our Indians about two of the Clock in the Afternoon, being at the same fire
that the body of the Army went from in the Morning, attending some sick persons
who could not March so fast as the Rest. 7. That the manner of keeping their
Scouts out a nights both in Coming and going was thirty men who Marched
constantly Round the Army all night, about a Musket shot off, but near
Shennechtady, the number of the said Scouts was Doubled.

8 That by the Tract they Trapann'd some Maquase Squaws near Shennechtady, whom
they Compelled to give an account of the Condition of the Place, and kept said
Indian Women till they had Committed the Massacre; when they were within some
Miles of Shennechtady, the Officers had a Consultation about falling upon
Albany; one Monsieur de Tallie who had been formerly here did Press hard to
Attaque it, but because their Orders was Expressly for Shennechtady the Design
on Albany was put by.

9 That they had lost but one only French man at Shennechtady, and one sore
wounded:

The said Prisoners being Examined about the Affairs of Canada do say,

I. That last Summer eight or nine Ships arrived at Quebek, whereof two were
Men of War, who brought store of Ammunition and Provisions, with which Ships
the Earl of Frontinak came for Governor, and Monsieur Callier Governor of
Mont Royal, and the Indian Prisoners, but brought no Soldiers, and that the
Marquess de Denonville late Governor went away with said Ships.

II. That they expect for certain that Twelve Men of War will come this Summer
with Two thousand Men, and two Years Provisions for Canada.

3 The Governor Frontenak upon his Voyage to Canada met with a French Ship
Laden with B^sket, bound for the North-west Passage, carried the same along
with him to Canada, and sent her Loading with great store of Pork and Meal come
from France up to Mont Royal.

IV That Provisions were not dealer at Canada now than formerly, a Minot of
Meal being sold for a French Crown, adding that the Damage done by the Indians
to their Corn in Canada was inconsiderable.

V. Governor Frontenak came to Mont Royal about the middle of September, which
Place he has Fortified with a Ditch ten foot deep, and twelve foot wide, round
about the Town, except at the River side, where he has built of Stone right
out where the Guard is kept.

VI. That he had brought twelve small Morter-peices and some small Canon from
France with him, which Morter-peices a man can easily carry, one of the said
Prisoners having tried it himself.

VII. The Governor Frontenak had caused to be made one hundred and twenty
Batoes, that is flat bottomed Boats, fit to carry eight or nine men, with
Provisions and Ammunition; as also one hundred Bark Cannoes at Mont Royal: the
first were all made, and the latter the greatest part ready: and that it was
much discoursed among the French of light Ladders to storm the Fort at Albany;
all which together with the Morter-pieces, are making ready to come early in
the Spring with fifteen hundred men to Ataque Albany by the French called Fort
D' Orange.

VIII. That Governor Frontenak went in the Month of November to Quebeck, and
was designed to return to Mont Royal in the Winter, or at longest early in the
Spring, to accomplish their Design upon Albany.

IX. That for that purpose Monsieur d' Lute was to go as soon as possible in
the Spring, with fifty Soldiers to Ottowawa, to bring down the Indians to Mont
Royal.

X. For the present, there are six Companies of Soldiers at Mont Royal of
fifty men each, besides six or seven hundred Burgers and Inhabitants.

XI. The Kings Soldiers at Canada are computed to be fifteen or sixteen
hundred men, and the said quantity of Burgers and Inhabitants, who are fit to
carry Arms, besides their Indians.

XII. That said Soldiers are divided in the following Towns and Forts, Viz.
Quebek, Mont Royal, Chambly, Troy River, Sorel, and twenty four Towns and Forts
more.

XIII. They say that it was divulged at Mont Royal, that four hundred men were
gone from Quebek under command of Mons. Pirneuffe, and Monsieur Courtimanche,
being all Bosse-lopers Inhabitants and Indians. (And no Soldiers) toward
Kinnebek River, to take a certain English Fort, and that another Company, but
not so numerous, under the Conduct of Mons. Artel were gone toward the
Province of New York to do mischief there.

XIV. That the French King was pleased to give Cadarachqui to Governor
Frontenak as a Gift, who was very much displeased at his Arrival, when he heard
that it was Deserted, and that Governor de Denonville had given Orders to
demolish it, The Garrison that lay there, being eighty men, were come home,
eight were drowned most of the Ammunition being thrown in the Water; and among
the rest four or five hundred small Arms, and have sunk the Canon about twenty
Leagues from Mont Royal.

A true Copy, Examined by Robert Livingston.
Memorandum, The French Murdered sixty Men, Women and Children at
Shennechtady, and carried twenty seven Men and Boys Prisoners to Canada.



Boston Printed by S. Green. Sold by Benjamin Harris at the London
Coffee-House. 1690.


