A Speech made before the King's most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the Second, on
the Shore where he Landed at Dover. By Mr. John Reading B. D. who presented his
Majesty with a Bible, the Gift of the Inhabitants there, May 25th. 1660.
Dread Sovereign!
1. BE pleased to know that your Majesty's loyal Subjects, the Mayor, Jurates,
and Commons of this your Town and Port of Dover, seriously minding the
admirable work of God's Mercy in your Majesty's Deliverances, Preservations and
restitution unto your long afflicted People, cannot but enquire for some
Remonstrance of their due thankfulness to God, and Declaration of their Joy of
your Majesty's peaceable, and safe Return into your Kingdoms.

2. Nor can they find any means in their power here so to accommodate, As the
presentation of your Majesty with this holy Book, commanding our Allegiance and
faithful Obedience to our Sovereign Lord, God's immediate Vicegerent over us
on Earth.

3. And if we may light our Taper to this Sun, we must say it is God's eternal
will, in the fullness of time revealed for Man's salvation: The golden Pot of
Heavenly Manna fitting every age, and palate, wherewith God having fed his
Israel for a time, said of this selected Homer, of the same (sufficient for
every man to salvation) recondatur posteris.

4. Nor may we be diffident of your Majesty's gracious acceptance hereof,
considering your invincible love of truth (according to the estimate thereof,
by the Prince after God's own heart) better then thousands of gold and silver;
it is the Treasure hid in the Lord's field, the inestimable riches of his mercy
in Christ our Life, and that through which we shall prolong our days in the
Land; the royal Ornament of holy Princes, which they carry as the Symbolum of
God's presence with them and blessing on them.

5. No more shall we add concerning this tabernacle of God's testimony, whose
beauty, and riches are within, but our hearty prayer to the Almighty, that it
may be our happy auspicium Regni to your sacred Majesty, and as the Arc at
Obed Edom's house, a blessing, causing all to prosper, and the good Lord God
say Amen, and let all God's people present say Amen, Amen.

In reditum exoptatissimum Regiae Majestatis Sacratissimae apud Dubrenses.

Votum pro Rege, Lege, and Grege.

(...) Vocat Aristoteles.
Carolus secundus Vivat Rex;
Rediviva jam tandem currat Lex.
Exultent vere Protestants,
Exulent nec non very Recusantes.
Exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici Regis.
(...). Rex viva Lex.
Vivida Lex noster Rex, nostri Spiritus oris,
Luminibus lux, cujus and est absentia morte,
Pejor. Juda Leo juvenis sit, simus and Agni;
Dumque lupi, and Vulpes stupidi metuunt, fugiuntque
Pastor adest noster: Deus en mirand^ peregit,
Fit caput Angelli summum lapis ipse r^^^ctus:
Nam sua sceptra tenet Rex noster, legifer Ille,
Cujus and Herculei scymni ira rebellibus est par:
Sed sua conspicuum comitas sibi ducet honorem;
Vnde timete Deum verum Regemque coletis.
VIVAT REX.
Sic obtestatur Majestatis vestrae perenni. servorum humilimus, R. B.
Regis ad exemplum totis componitur orbis.
Qualis Rex, talis Grex.


Englished. Upon the most desired return of the Kings most Sacred Majesty at
Dover.

An humble Suit, or Supplication,
For King, and Law, and the whole Nation.
The King is Law's life Aristotle cries.
Stopped be that mouth which Royal Law defies.
May Charles the second King, live long and Reign;
The Laws concur at length revived again:
Let Protestants rejoice from bondage free,
Let non-conformists each Exiled be.
Let God Arise, and the King's Enemies
Scattered shall be with their Hyprocrisies.
The King is a living Law.
Our King's a lively Law, our Nostrils breath,
Light of our Eyes, whose absence worse then death.
Judah's a Lions Whelp, let us Lambs be;
Since Wolves, and Foxes shamed, Fear, and Flee;
Our Shepheard's come, great wonders God has done,
What was dispis'd is now the head Corner stone:
For He the Scepter bears our Lawgiver,
Whose wrath's a Lion fell to the bad liver:
Yet his free Mercy will Him Glory bring,
Hence fear ye God, and honor ye the King.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
So prays the most humble of your Majesty's continual Subjects, Rich.
Bradshaw.

Printed in the year 1660.


