royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
BY THE KING. A PROCLAMATION, Anent the late Horrid ATTEMPT made upon the
High Street of Edinburgh.
Edinburgh, the fourteenth day of July, one thousand six hundred and sixty
eight.
CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To (...) heralds, Pursevants, Macers, Messengers at
Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally specially
constitute, Greeting. Forasmuch, as upon the eleventh of this instant, the most
Reverend Father in GOD, James Archbishop of St. Andrews, and the right Reverend
Father in GOD, Andrew Bishop of Orkney, were publicly assaulted in the
high street of Edinburgh by a most desperate Villain, who having shaken off all
fear of GOD, and respect to Man, did design to kill and murder them, and the
Bishop of Orkney was cruelly wounded by the discharge of a Pistol, to the
hazard of his life. By the which barbarous and inhumane attempt, not only the
sacred Order of Bishops, and safety of the persons of the Officers and
Ministers of Religion (which amongst Turks and Heathens, as amongst Christians,
has been in all ages held inviolable, and in a special manner are secured by Our
Laws) are in the highest measure invaded and violated; but Our Authority and
Government most scandalously affronted and injured, and all Laws, Divine and
Humane, most wickedly infringed, to the great reproach of the true Religion and
Faith, of which we are Defender, and dishonor of this Our Church and Kingdom.
And we being, upon all accounts, most highly concerned to express Our
detestation of the said villainous attempt of paricide and murder upon innocent
persons, the Governors of the Church, without any imaginable cause or
provocation, but for their loyalty and affection to Us, and zeal for Our
service; And considering how much it imports the honor of the established
Religion, and of Our Government, the preservation of the Authority of Our Laws,
and in special Our Acts of Parliament, anent invading and pursuing Our Privy
Councillors, and doing violence to the persons of Churchmen, and the
preventing of the overturning of the very being of Humane-societies, that
Assassinates be exemplarly punished. And in order thereto, that all possible
and exact endeavors be gone about for discovering and apprehending the said
Villain; Therefore, We, with advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, command
and charge all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailies of Regalities and their Deputes,
Magistrates of Burghs within their respective Bounds and Jurisdictions, and
Officers of Our standing Forces, to search, seek, take and apprehend the person
guilty of the said horrid crime, and to imprison him till he be brought to
Justice. As also, We command and charge all and sundry Our Subjects of this Our
Kingdom, that they use their utmost endeavors for detecting, discovering and
apprehending the foresaid Assassinate: And for their further encouragement
therein, We do declare and give assurance, that whosoever shall so discover him
that he may be apprehended, shall not only be indemnified and pardoned, albeit
they were accessory to, and art and part of the foresaid crime, and shall never
be called nor accused therefore in time coming; but shall likewayes have paid
to them the sum of two thousand Merks, Scots money; and the person who shall
apprehend the committer of the foresaid crime, and deliver him to sure Ward and
Firmance, shall have instantly the sum of five thousand Merks paid and
delivered to him. Likeas do We prohibit and discharge all Our Subjects of this
Kingdom, upon any color or pretext whatsoever, to resset, harbor, correspond
with, or supply the said person: Certifying all such who shall contraveen this
Our Proclamation, that they shall be holden and repute guilty of the foresaid
crime, and accordingly proceeded against with all rigor. And ordains these
presents to be printed, and published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh and
other places needful, that none pretend ignorance.

Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti Concilii.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, 1668.


