AN ^PISTLE Concerning BAPTISM.

^^^asionally written upon the sight of two Treatises published by THOMAS
JAMES, ^^^cher of a Presbyterian Congregation at Ashford in Kent: Who has
reflected upon the Baptized Christians.

WILLIAM RVSSEL, Medicinae Doctor, Academiae Cantabrigiensis, Lover of
Primitive Christianity.

(...) for the old Paths, where is the good Way, and walk therein, and ye shall
(...) rest for your Souls,

Jer. 6.16. London, Printed in the Year 1696.

(...) those Inhabitants of Ashford, and the adjacent Parishes, who attend upon
the Ministry of Mr. Thomas James.
THE Occasion of my writing this Epistle to you at this time, arises from the
Consideration of two Books written by T. J. The one entitled, Spira's Despair
revived. The other called, A Vindication of that Part of it which is ^^ed by
the Anabaptists, etc. which is a pretended An^^o a Book written by J. W. in
Answer to his first (...) etc. the latter of which he dedicates to you.

(...) which Book he brings you in as Parties with him, in ^^deracy against
that People; as making you to have ^^^al, if not a greater Interest than him,
in that Pa^^^^ar he has raised against them.

(...) seeing it has pleased God (by his good Providence) to put it into the
Hearts of our King, and both ^^^^s of Parliament, to give us the free Exercise
of our ^^^^on by Law, (which we esteem as a great Mercy) (...) a wonder to me
to read such scurrilous and re^^^^ful Language, against those of our
Persuasion; and ^^^ore, for that it proceeds from one who is himself a ^^^^er
from the established Religion of the Land, and ^^^^ther of a Presbyterian
Congregation. And to find ^^^^ublishing to the World, that the Inhabitants of
Ashford and diverse other Parishes, did join issue with him in ^^^^ng; it seems
to bespeak but little Sense of the Good^^^^ God, and of our Rulers, in the
Liberty you enjoy. (...) whereas those Ministers that are of the Episcopal
^^^^ision, do give us civil Treatment, and do not con^^^^ themselves to disturb
our Peace and Quiet, much less ^^^^oach and abuse us: I was considering what
should move Mr. Thomas James to act as he has done: And at last I concluded it
must certainly proceed from that very Spirit and Principle of the first Founder
of your Sect, Mr. John Calvin, who burnt the Books of Servetus, a Learned
Baptist; and afterward persuaded the Magistrates of Geneva to burn him alive.
Which Sentence was execute^ upon him, as Castellio testifies (who was a
Contemporary with him) in these words; Michael Servetus was burn alive for his
Opinion, at Geneva, Anno 1553, upon the 27th day of October.

And yet, as one well observes, Mr. Calvin did acknowledge this of him, That he
was a Learned and a Charitable Man.

Notwithstanding this, he wrote a Book to justify, the^ putting him to death,
as a Man whose Books were full (...) Errors. Which Book was sufficiently
confuted by t^^ Learned Castellio; where he also shows that the Reason (...)
Calvin procured his Death, was this, lest the excelle^^ Parts and Learning of
Servetus should have eclipsed (...) Glory of Calvin, and prevented him from
being the (...) of a Party. And yet Castellio was not a Baptist.

Now if Mr. James should have imbibed the same per^^cuting Principles, it is no
wonder to find so much Ranc^^ of Spirit appear in him against the Baptists in
our Day as he has expressed in these two Treatises. I speak (...) this, as if
I meant to accuse the whole Party; for (...) know that diverse of them are
meliorated, and have manifested themselves to be Men of better and more
peacea^^^ Principles. But seeing there are some young Men of another mind, I
thought it not amiss to give you a Cau^^^^ against it, remembering what an
honest old Presbyter^^^ Minister said once to some others of his Brethren,
(...) met to ordain three young Ministers who had decla^^^ themselves for this
persecuting Principle; says he, (...) will have no hand in their Ordination,
for there (...) Firebrands enough in the World already; and ((...) please God)
I will have no hand in sending more, (...) such as they are enough to set the
World in a Fla^^ wherever they come.

And I fear your young Man may be of that number (...) pray let me ask you a
few civil Questions; which I de^^^ you to propound to him, and do you demand of
him ^^ticular and distinct Answers thereunto.

1. Whether Mr. James does not believe the Episcopal Church of England to be a
true Church? and their Teachers to be true Ministers? 2. Whether he does not
own their Baptism and Ordination to be true and valid? 3. Whether he does not
think it lawful for you to go to their public Worship, and attend upon their
Ministry in their Parochial Assemblies; rather than suffer Imprisonment, and
the loss of your Estates? And if this be so, Then, 4. what can be the Motive to
excite Thomas ^^mes to keep up a Separation from the established Church (...)
England, now in a Time of Peace? unless it be to get (...) better livelihood
for himself, than he could otherwise ^^ain. 5. Whether the fear of losing some
of his Auditors, or ^^ing hindered from an increase of their Number, by which
his Income might be diminished, might not be ^^e great Motive which excited him
to such a foolish way (...) scribbling against the Baptists? 6. Whether it does
not therefore highly concern you, (...) make a diligent Enquiry into the Word
of God, and ex^^ne his Doctrines thereby, that you may see whether ^^y agree
with the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles ^^d Primitive Christians, lest
you should be cheated, both (...) your Money and of your Souls?
Now, Sirs, if a prejudicate Opinion does not interpose, (...) ^oubt not but it
may be said of you as of those in Acts ^^.48. (...), you are disposed to
eternal Life: ^^ed then there will be some hope, you will give credit to ^^e
Authority of God, in the Gospel of his dear Son, ^^d be willing to learn what
may be taught you.

Had not Mr. James opposed us in the Point of Holy Baptism, I had not concerned
my self with him, believing he (...) sufficiently confuted about his Calumnies
against our friends at Ashford by another hand.

I shall therefore (for the sake of Truth) use my endeavor to elucidate the
Point in controversy, that you may ^^re a more clear and distinct knowledge of
it.

Neither you nor your Teacher, ought to think it below (...) to be instructed
in any Gospel Truth, but receive it (...) meekness and humility; and be
thankful to them that (...) take the pains to do it.

For Apollos, who was a great Preacher, and a Man mighty in the Holy
Scriptures, did not disdain that a Woman should instruct him in the Way of God
more perfectly, Acts 18.24, 25, 26.

And for your better understanding the Point in Controversy, I shall do these
three things.

I. Show you, that Baptism is to be administered by Dipping, Plunging, or
overwhelming the Person in Water. II. That true penitent Believers are the
right Subject of Baptism. III. That the Ordinance of Baptism is now in being
and is to continue to the End of this World.
I. I shall show that Baptism must be administered by Dipping, etc. if we
consider these four things.

1. The Etymology, or Signification of the Word, the Holy Spirit uses to
express it by. 2. Those Metaphors used in Holy Scripture, to represent it to
our Understanding. 3. From the Practice of the first Baptizers. 4. From the
grand Commission of our Savior, Mat. 28.19.
1. From the Etymology, or Signification of the Word.

The word Baptism, is from the Greek (...), to dipped. Baptisma, a Dipping; from
(...), Bapto, to dip, plunge or drown. It implies the washing of the whole
Body (...) even such a washing as is used in Bucks, where Linen i^ plunged and
dipped. For the native and proper signification of it, is to dip into Water, or
to plunge under Water, see Leigh's Critica Sacra.

It is a Metaphor taken from the use of the Dyers Vat (...) and is such a
Dipping, by which the Cloth put into it is dyed, and not a bare washing only;
from whence comes Baptism.

Zepperus de Sacramentis says, (...), Baptism; (...) vocis notationem
attendere velimus, vocabulum Baptismi mersionem significat in aquam, etc. If we
will attend to the Notation of the word Baptism, it signifies to dip into Water
(...) or the Act it self of Dipping and Washing. From hence therefore, and from
the Etymology of the Word it self, i^ does appear what was the Custom of
administering Baptism from the beginning. Whereas now (says he) we ^^^^ther use
Rantism ( viz. Sprinkling) in the stead of Baptism, which is Dipping.

Alstedius in his Lexicon Theologicum, printed Anno 1612. (...) 310. says
thus, (...), and (...), Tingere, lavare, inficere: unde deductum aliud ver^^^^
(...), intingere, immergere, maxim quidem aqua. (...) (...) tantum significat
immergere; non lavare, nisi (...) unsequenti.

From whence it may plainly be seen, that this Learned ^^^^hor does assert,
That Baptism is to dip, plunge, or (...) whelm the Person baptized in Water:
And that its ^^^^per signification is to dip, or dye, and not to wash, but
^^^^y by Consequence. For which he cites for his Autho^^^^, both Plutarch and
Nazianzen; as may be seen at large (...) the Book it self.

Besides this is so well known, that every Schoolboy in (...) Greek-Grammar
can tell you, that (...), bapto, is ^^^^re rendered mergo, immergo, to dip, to
plunge or overwhelm.

^lso in a Greek Lexicon, published and recommended to (...) for the increase
of Knowledge, by Joseph Caryll, George Cokayne, Ralph Vening, William Dell,
Matthew Barker, William Adderly, Matthew Mead, and Henry Jessey,


^^ey tell us, that the signification of (...), is to dip, ^^^^ge, or drown.
And in the Passive Voice, (...), (...) to be plunged, or overwhelmed. And that
(...), (...) to plunge, to overwhelm, to baptize, to dip. And in (...) Passive
Voice, (...), to be plunged, to be baptized, or dipped.

In Clavis Graecae Linguae, printed at London, Anno 1640. (...) is thus
rendered; (...), mergo, tingo, to dip, (...) dye. (...), Idem, the same.

(...), and (...), mersio, to drown; and there^^^^ (...), is often rendered, to
dip into, to drown. (...) from thence the Latins use mersus, a mergo, drowned,
^^^^ered, or over whelmed with Water. And therefore it ^^^sed in the New
Testament, for that Holy Ordinance of Baptism; it being performed by dipping
the whole Body of the Person baptized under Water.

The Learned Robertson, (my singular good Friend) in his Thesaurus Graecae
Linguae, says, Baptizo, mergo. (...), Intingo, mergo, to dye, to dip, plunge,
etc. Hence (says he) is Baptizo, which signifies the same. As also Baptismos,
Baptisma, etc. But the Greek word (...), Rantizo, (he says) is aspergo, to
sprinkle.

(...), Rontismos, Aspersio, Sprinkling. So that you may ea^^ly (...) is as
much difference betwint these two Greek (...) Baptismos and Rantismos in Greek,
as there is betwixt these (...) words, Dipping and Sprinkling in English; and
therefore surely, not to be conceived to be sy^^^imous, so as to signity the
same thing.

I now presume, from what has been said, that if the word (...), and its
Derivatives, are used in all places in the New Testament, where this Ordinance
of Baptism is spoken of: Then it will follow, by an unavoidable Consequence,
that Dipping is the right manner of Baptizing and that Sprinkling is not
Baptizing.

That it is so, will evidently appear from an Enumeration of Particulars. I
will instance in some of the principal, when I come to show you what was the
Practice of the first Baptizers. But of that in its proper place.

I now come to treat of the second Particular under this Head, viz. Dipping the
Persons baptized into Water, appears to be the right way of administering this
Ordinance if we consider the Metaphors used in Holy Scripture (...) express it
by.

There are two I shall chiefly insist upon: 1. A Burial 2. A Resurrection.

We are to consider, that our Lord Jesus Christ has no^ burdened us under the
Gospel, with a multitude of Ceremonies, as it was in that Economy of the Jews
under the Legal Dispensation: But only with some few, and those very
significant; this being a more spiritual Dispensation.

As therefore the Holy Supper of our Lord in the breaking of the Bread,
signifies the breaking of his Body; and the pouring out of the Wine, the
shedding of his most precious Blood; and both of these in conjunction his Death
1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as you eat this Bread, and drive this Cup, ye do
show forth the Lord's Death till he come. Even so Holy Baptism does show forth
his Burial and direction; Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him baptism
into Death; that like as Christ was raised up from Dead to the Glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk ^^^ess of Life.

^ow consider the Metaphor: when Men are dead, we (...) them by covering the
whole Body under Ground, (...) not by scattering or sprinkling a little Dust or
Earth (...) their Faces only.

^prinkling (you know) has no resemblance to Bu^^^; but dipping or plunging
the whole Body under Wa^^^ is a most express and lively representation thereof.

But perhaps Humane Testimonies will please you and (...) Pastor, better than
Divine. And therefore I shall (...) you the Opinion of some Learned Bishops to
corroborate what I say, who may be supposed to understand (...) Original as
well as Mr. James.

The late Archbishop of Canterhury, Dr. John Tillotson, ^^^h, in his Sermon
upon 2 Timothy 2.19. Anciently those ^ho were baptized, put off their Garments,
which signified the putting off the Body of Sin; and were immersed and buried
in the Water, to represent the Death of Sin; and then did rise up again out of
the Water, to signify their entrance upon a new Life; and to these Customs the
Apostle alludes Romans 6.4.

Also Dr. Fowler, the present Bishop of Gloucester, in his ^ook of the Scope of
the Christian Religion, interprets this saying of the great Apostle, Romans 6.4.
as follows;

Christians being plunged into the Water in Baptism, signifies their
undertaking and obliging themselves in a Spiritual Sense to die, and be buried
with Jesus Christ, (which Death and Burial consist in an utter renouncing and
forsaking of all their Sins) that so answerably to his Resurrection, they may
live a holy and godly Life.

Moreover, Dr. Jer. Tailor, late Bishop of Down, in his Doctor Dubitantium,
lib. 3. cap. 4. says thus:

The Custom of the Ancient Church was not Sprinkling, but Immersion, in
pursuance of the Sense of the word (...), both in the Commandment and Example
of our Blessed Savior.

And this (says he) agrees with the Mystery of the Sacrament it self; for we
are buried with him in Baptism, says the Apostle. The old Man is buried and
drowned i^ the Immersion under Water: and when the baptized Person is lifted up
from the Water, it represents the Resurrection of the new Man to newness of
Life.

To this I shall only add that other Divine Testimony o^ the Apostle Paul, Col.
2.12. Buried with him in Baptism wherein also ye are risen with him through the
Faith of the Operation of God, who has raised him from the Dead. And shall now
proceed to the third Particular, viz.

3. It does appear that Dipping is the right way of Baptizing, from the
Practice of the first Baptizers.

The first mention of this Ordinance of Holy Baptism, we have in Mat. 3.1.
where John the Dipper is mentioned. And in ver. 6. it is written, And were
baptized of him in Jordan confessing their Sins. The Greek word there is (...);
which is in English, They were dipped, plunged, or overwhelmed: For it is from
the word (...), to dip, etc. as I have already showed.

In the 7th Verse, the word is (...), which signify the same.

In the 11th Verse (...), to dip, etc.

In Verse the 13th (...), to be dipped.

The Word is used again in ver. 14.

And the same also in the Passive Voice, is used in ver. 16. where it is said,
And Jesus, when he was baptized, etc. And the following words do make that
Sense evident; for when he was dipped by John in the River of Jordan, it is
said, He went up straightway out of the Water: Which implies, beyond
contradiction, That he was in the River, and over whelmed with the Water,
according to the proper and native signification of the word (...). And if you
will read the 5th and 6th Verses of this Chapter, you will find there
Multitudes thus baptized by John the Baptist, (or Dipper) for it is said, Then
went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round about Joran,
and were baptized of him in Jordan. The same is also testified in that parallel
place, Mark 1.4, 5. and the same Greek words used there as in Mat. 3. which I
have above recited. And in Mark 1.9. Jesus was baptized of John in Jordan. The
Greek is (...), into Jordan. Now what Sense would this be? Jesus was sprinkled
into Jordan. But to say, Jesus was dipped into the River of Jordan, is good
Sense, as well as a great Truth. Diodate, upon Mat. 3.6. says, They were
plunged in the ^^der. And the Assembly in their Annotations, say, Dipping in
Jordan. But because they are noted by Mr. Wells (...) his Answer, I shall
forbear reciting them, and proceed (...) other Authors.

Cajetan says, Christ was baptized, not by Sprinkling, but (...) Dipping him
into the Water. And Piscator, on John 3.23. (...) Baptism was administered by
dipping the whole Body in ^^^er.

Mr. Mede on Titus 3.5. says, There was no such thing as Sprinkling used in
Baptism in the Apostles Time, nor many Ages after them.

It is also the Observation of that late Learned and Pious ^^^aister of Christ,
Mr. John Gosnold, in his Book entitled, (...); That Mr. John Calvin, up and
down in his Works, does often (with many others in our Days) confess, That the
Ancient manner of Baptism in the Primitive Times was, by dipping the whole Body
under Water. And also confesses that the Church has assumed this Liberty to
her self, of using Sprinkling in the room thereof.

The same Author also observes, That the Translators themselves never so much
as once in all the New Testament renders it by Sprinkling. There is another
Word for that, which they constantly translate to sprinkle, to wit, (...),
Rantizo; whereby it is evident, Rantism is not Baptism, Sprinkling is not
Dipping.

Besides, in all the Places that I have met with, where nothing of the stress
of this Controversy depends, our Translators have every where rendered (...),
etc. to dip. for instance, in Rev. 19.13. He had his Vesture dipped in Blood. and
in Mat. 26.23. He that dippeth his Hand with me in the Dish. Luke 16.24. That
he may dip the Tip of his Finger in later. And in John 13.26. it is twice used,
(...), dipped; (...), and when he had dipped, Jesus answered, He it is to whom
I shall give a Sop, when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped the Sop, he
gave it to Judas ^^eariot, etc.

Moreover, if we will but consider the Places where this Holy Ordinance was
administered by the first Baptizers, it will greatly elucidate this Truth.

For it was not practiced in the Temple, nor in their Synagogues, nor yet in
private Houses, in which it might have been done more commodiously, if
sprinkling a (...) Drops of Water upon their Faces would have sufficed.

But they baptized in the River of Jordan, and other Places where there was
much Water; because plunging the whole Body under Water did require it.

In John 3.23. And John also ((...)) was dipping in Enon, near to Salim,
because there was (...) Water there; and they came and were ((...)) dipped. Now
here we have the Reason given, why J^^^ baptized in this place, i. e. Because
there was much Water. But if he had not plunged them into the Water, but on^^
sprinkled them with a few Drops thereof, this Reason (...) been without
Foundation. For as Cornelius a Lapide (...) serves, A very little Water would
have served to have sprinkled Thousands. But their manner of baptizing being to
dip the whole Body under Water, therefore much Water was necessary thereunto,
without which (...) Act of Baptizing could not be performed.

Now although T. J. has trampled upon our Reasons offered in justification of
this Practice, I hope he will not make so bold with the Spirit's Testimony, as
to contradict the Reason he has given in the Text under Consideration.

Thus you see that John, who was the first Baptizers and sent of God to dip
Persons in Water, as the beginning of the Gospel, and to prepare Christ's Way
before him (...) Joh. 1.33. He that sent me ((...)) to dip, plunge, (...)
overwhelm in Water, meaning God the Father. Where ever there is mention made of
his Baptizing, the same Words are used, either Bapto, or its derivatives.

If we observe what is said of our Savior's Baptizing (tho Jesus himself did
not baptize (in his own Person) but by his Disciples) in every place the same
Word (...) used; as John 3.22. (...). Also John 4.1, 2. (...), and (...); which
all signify to dip, to be dipped, etc.

To proceed to the Practice of the Apostles, and chief Ministers of the Gospel,
after our Lord's Resurrection we shall find the same Word used (as above) in
every place, where there is mention made of their Baptizing.

The first Instance is in Acts 2.41. Then they that gladly ^^^ved his Word,
were baptized, the word is (...).

In Acts 8.12. it is also from the same word (...), (...) were dipped, both Men
and Women.

And in Acts 8.38, 39. (...), And he dipped him.

It is here to be observed, that the Administrator Phi^^^ as well as the
Eunuch, went both down into the Water, which had been needless, if Sprinkling
would have ser^^d the ^^rn); And when they came there, it is said, He ^^^^zed
him, i. e. dipped him. And then it is further said, ^^^y came up out of the Water;
not from the Side, or Surface (...) it, as Mr. James would insinuate, by
distinguishing be^^een from and out of; for here it is said expressly, they
(...) up out of the Water.

Also in Acts 10.48. (...), to be dipped, etc.

To be short, There is, you see, an Account that John the ^^ptist, Christ (by
his Disciples) when upon Earth, and (...) Apostles after his Resurrection, did
all of them practice (...) Holy Ordinance of Baptism by dipping, or plunging
(...) Persons baptized into the Water.

I will add to this the Testimony of Mr. Dan. Rogers; None of old were wont to
be sprinkled; And (says he) I confess my self unconvinced by demonstration of
Scripture for Infants sprinkling. And further, in his Treatise of the two
Sacraments, Part 1. Chap. 5. he has these words, It ought to be the Church's
Part to cleave to the Institution, which is Dipping. And that he betrays the
Church, whose Officer he is, to a disordered Error, if he cleave not to the
Institution, which is to dip.

And this leads me to the 4th Particular, namely, That (...) will appear that
Dipping is the right way of Baptizing, (...) we consider that grand Commission
of our Savior, Mat. 28.19. the Greek word is (...), from (...) to dip. And
being given here by way of Precept, it is Dipping them. But seeing I have
already explained the signification of the Greek words by which Baptism is
signified, even to tediousness, both to my self and you, I shall insist no
longer upon it.

As also, because I am of Opinion that the Gospel of Matthew was written in
Hebrew, according to Jerome's Testimony, and the Opinion (I think) of most
Learned Men. I shall therefore give you the words, so far as they concern our
Purpose, under this Head, as they are in that Language, in which I am sure it
was spoken, if not written; It is (...) vetabelu Otam; and dip ye them. The
Root is Tabal, which is the third Person Singular in the Preterperfect Tense,
and signifies, he dipped: And is so rendered in many places in Holy Scripture;
particularly in 2 Kings 5.15. where speaking of Naaman the Syrian, it is said,
He dipped himself in Jordan seven times, and was clean.

In Mat. 3.6. you have the same Word again in the Passive Voice, which must be
rendered in English, and were dipped of him in Jordan. And in Ver. 16. you have
the same Root again, as it is there applied to our Savior; And Jesus, when he
was dipped, went up straightway out of the Water.

Also in John 3.22, 23. the same Word is used. And in John 4.1, 2. it is the
same in that Hebrew New Testament of Mr. Robertson's, who was certainly one of
the most Learned Hebricians our Age has afforded.

I might add to this the Testimony of the Dutch Translators, who call John the
Baptist, Johannes de Dooper, John the Dipper; and in this Commission de selve
dopende, dipping them. And if our Translators had generally (where that Word
had occurred) turned it into English, as they have into Dutch, they had saved
me and others the trouble.

Now if all this will not suffice, I know not what will. However I will make
Mr. James one generous Offer; That if he can show me where our Translators have
in any one place rendered Baptizo to sprinkle; or e contra, have rendered Rantizo
to dip, in the New Testament, I will grant him the Cause. And I do hope, if he
cannot do it, he will own that we are in the right.

O, what a Tyrant Custom is! that dares stand up and contradict a thing that is
so evident in it self, so agreeable to the Reason of the Ordinance, to the
Etymology of the Word, (and that from the Pens of our Adversaries) and to the
use of the Phrase and Expression in Holy Scripture, to the Commission of our
Lord, to the Doctrine and Practice of the first Baptizers, both before and
after our Savior's Resurrection, and the manner of planting the Primitive
Churches.

Notwithstanding all this (I say) Custom in a wrong ^ay, makes Men bold to
oppose the right Way, although ^^ey acknowledge it is the best.

In things civil and indifferent, I can be content that ^^stom should be my
Guide, but not in the Matter of ^^dinances, and things Sacred; the Rule of
which lies in (...) Institution, (which we are strictly to observe) and is
(...) in the Power of our Liberty or Choice, either to use (...) refuse: For
that Blessing which attends the Use there^^^^ is annexed unto our Conformity to
the Rule and Insti^^^ion; see Mat. 28.20.

But to proceed to the second General Head.

II. That true Penitent Believers are the right Subject of Baptism.

I shall make it good by doing these three things.

1st. By examining who John the Baptist (who was the (...) Baptizer) did admit
to his Baptism.

2ly, Who our Savior commanded to be baptized, in (...) grand Commission Mat.
28.

^ly, Who it was practiced upon by the Apostles and first ^^^isters of Christ,
pursuant to that Commission. And (...) these in their Order.

1st, Therefore let us examine who they were that John (...) admit to his
Baptism.

The first Syllable we read of its being practiced, is in (...). 3. by John the
Dipper, (so called by the Evangelist, (...) Eminentiae, as being the Beginner
of that Holy Ordinance) where we have an Account, in Ver. 2. what Do^^^ne he
preached before he baptized, Repent ye, for the ^^^^dom of Heaven is at hand.
And in ver. 5. Then went out (...) Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region
round a^^^ Jordan. Ver. 6. (...); (...) were plunged (of him) into Jordan,
confessing their Sins. (...) Hebrew word also, is Vaitabelu, and were dipped,
etc.

Upon this I shall observe some things, and so pass it.

1. That those he baptized were Adult Persons, (and (...) Infants) for they
went out to him.

2. That they were penitent Persons, such that confes^^^ their Sins.

3. That no others were admitted to his Baptism.

For, in ver. 7. it is said, But when he saw many of the P^^risees and Sadduces
come to his Baptism, he said unto the^, (...) Generation of Vipers, who has
warned you to flee from (...) Wrath to come? Bring forth therefore Fruits meet
for Repent.

4. That no Birth-Privileges will entitle any Person (...) that Holy Ordinance
without Repentance.

For the Baptist tells them, in ver. 9. Think not to (...) within your selves,
We have Abraham to our Father. (...) (in ver. 10.) now also the Ax is laid to
the Root of the Tr^^ therefore every Tree ( i. e. every Person) which brings
(...) forth good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire.

And to inform them more fully of the Nature of (...) Commission, and the
Qualifications of the Subjects, (...) further says, I indeed baptize you with
Water (unto, or (...) the Original has it) upon Repentance.

Which agrees most exactly with the Design of Jo^^ Ministry, he being to make
ready a People prepared (...) the Lord; Repentance being a necessary
Qualification without which they could not be admitted thereunto.

But some may query, How I prove they were to believe as well as repent?

I answer, in the words of the Apostle Paul, Acts 19.^^. John verily did
baptize with the Baptism of Repentance, say^^ unto the People, That they should
believe on him which sho^^^ come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.

From all which it appears, beyond dispute, That (...) little Infants were the
Subjects of John's Baptism. For, 1. They could not come from Jerusalem to the
River^^ Jordan, and desire to be baptized. 2. Nor could they confess their
Sins. 3. Nor yet be able to understand his Preaching, with (...) Nature and
Design of his Baptism. 4. Nor, lastly, could they be expected to bring fo^^^
Fruits worthy amendment of Life.


All which agrees only to Adult Persons; they can ^^pent, they can believe in
Christ, they can confess th^^ sinful Deeds, and come to tender themselves for
Baptism (as all those did whom John baptized) which things ^^tle Infants are
not capable to perform: Therefore Petent Believers (and not Infants) were the
right and o^ proper Subject of John's Baptism.

2ly, I shall consider the grand Commission of our Lord, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, ^^ing, All Power is given to me in Heaven
and in Earth. Go (...) therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
Name of (...) Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching (...) to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: ^^^o, I am with you always,
even unto the End of the World. ^^em.

That the Gospel of Matthew was written in Hebrew, (...) I have touched above)
I find it to be the Opinion of ^^^ers Men, eminently Learned: And among others,
Hie^^^, in the Life of this Evangelist, says, M^tthaeus qui (...) Levi ex
publicano Apostolos, primus in Judaea propter eos qui (...) Circumcisione
credidernt Evangelium Christi, Hebraicis literis ^^^bisque composuit. And
further notes, In quo animadverten^^^, quod ubicumque Evangelista sive ex
persona sua, sive ex ^^^^ona Domini Salvatoris, veteris Scripturae testimoniis
utitur, (...) sequatur Septuaginta translatorum autoritatem, sed Hebraicis.
Here you see he tells us, That the Gospel of Christ (...) Matthew, for the sake
of those of the Circumcision (...) believed, was written in Hebrew Words, and
Hebrew ^^^ters. And that he everywhere, in his Quotations out (...) the Old
Testament, followed the Hebrew, and not the ^^^p^uagint Translation.

In Mr. William Robertson's Hebrew New Testament, I (...) these words between
the 18th and 19th Verses, which do not find in any Greek Copy.

(...)

And as my Father has sent me, even so also I send you. Go (...) therefore,
etc.

I pray observe in what a solemn manner our Savior be^^^^s this Commission.

1. By declaring his own Authority; All Power in Heaven (...) Earth is given to
me. 2. The Fullness of that Authority he gave to his Apo^^^es; As the Father
has sent me, even so also I send you.
He then comes to give forth the Commission it self, as in (...) 19th and 20th
Verses.

The first thing in this Commission is this, Christ commands them to make
Disciples by their Ministry. The Word that is translated Teach, is in the
Hebrew (...) Velamedu, it signifies to make Disciples by teaching; for the Root
is Lamad, he learned. And from thence is formed the Heemantique Noun Talmid, a
Scholar or Disciple, one that has learned.

The plain meaning therefore is, That they were first to make Disciples by
their Ministry, and after that to baptize them.

If we also examine the Greek Copy, we shall find it to agree with the Hebrew;
(...). That word upon which the whole Stress of the Argument depends, is
Matheteusate, which signifies, to make Disciples. The Learned render Mathetes,
a Scholar, a Disciple; and Matheteuo, to be a Scholar, or Disciple. And upon
this word in this place, the Greek Lexicon renders it, to make Disciples.

But if Mr. James will not believe our Lexicographers, I can give him the
Opinion of all the Translators of the New Testament for it, who have rendered it
so in a multitude of Places; and so far as I have found, in every place where
the word is used, except only in this Commission, and here, (for some Reason
best known to themselves) instead of Disciples, they have only rendered it
Teach. And that which is most remarkable, they have five times in this Chapter
rendered it Disciples, till they came to the 19th Verse, and there only it must
be rendered teach; as in ver. 7, 8, 9, 13, and 16. And in John 4.1, 2. Jesus
made and baptized more Disciples than John, but his Disciples; in both which
the same word is used.

And I pray observe the Order of the words, They were first made Disciples, and
afterward baptized; as a prerequisite to fit them for that Holy Ordinance.

Also in Acts 11.26. The Disciples are called Christians. And ver. 20, 21. it is
said, how the same Persons came to be Disciples, The Lord Jesus was first
preached to them; upon this, a great Number believed, and turned to the Lord.
And thus they were made Disciples, according to Christ's Commission.

Besides, in Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.
This place is parallel in Time with Mat. 28.19. And whereas in Matthew is
required Discipling, there is required in Mark Believing, and both before
Baptism; It Is therefore plain, they must be believing Disciples. And Faith
comes by hearing; and therefore the Apostles were, 1. To preach to them; as in
Mark 16.15. Preach the Gospel to every Creature. 2. By their Preaching to make
them Disciples. 3. Being so made, to baptize them.


This is the genuine Sense of our Lord's Commission, Mat. 28.19.

Say some, they own they must first be made Disciples, and afterward baptized.
But then they ask this Question, How do we know that little Infants are not
made Disciples, by some secret Teaching of God?

And supposing this to be true, of those who are born of believing Parents,
they conclude they may be baptized.

I answer; For Argument's sake, I will for once appose with them; that not only
the Infants of Belevers, but all Infants, so soon as they are born into the
World, are made Disciples by some secret Teaching of God, (but how we shall
prove either of our Suppositions, I know not); Nevertheless I deny that they
are therefore to be baptized by virtue of this Commission. And low any mortal
Man can know of this secret Work upon their Souls without Revelation. I cannot
imagine.

But pray consider a few things, and it will set the Truth ^e contend for in a
clear Light. As, 1. it was Christ the Son of God who gave this Commission. And
Jesus came and spoke. 2. Who did he give it unto? Not to his Father to make
Disciples of little Infants, by some secret Teaching of his, but to his
Apostles that were Men, to make Disciples by their Ministry; He spoke unto them.


The Conclusion is natural; which I shall form into this short Syllogism.

If little Infants are not capable to be made Disciples by the Ministry of Men;

Then they cannot possibly be the Subjects of Baptism intended in this
Commission.

But little Infants are not capable to be made Disciples by the Ministry of Men;

Ergo, They cannot possibly be the Subjects of Baptism intended in this
Commission.

The Major is undeniable, the Minor I thus prove.

If little Infants have no knowledge to discern between Good and Evil, then they
are not capable to be made Disciples by the Ministry of Men.

But they have no knowledge to discern between Good and Evil;

Ergo; They are not capable to be made Disciples by the Ministry of Men.

The Minor only is questionable, which I prove by Divine Authority, Deuteronomy. 1.39.
Moreover your little Ones -- and your Children, which in that Day had no
knowledge between Good and Evil.

So that the first Argument is made good, viz. That little Infants cannot
possibly be the Subjects of Baptism intended in this Commission.

Whereas some of our Antagonists say, the word them relates to all Nations: As
they confute themselves, by refusing to baptize Turks and Jews, before they own
Christ; so that they cannot extend it universally: Even so it appears, the word
them, has no reference unto all Nations, if they will but mind the Grammar of
the Text.

For (...), them, is of the Masculine Gender, (but (...), all Nations, is of
the Neuter) and agrees with (...), Disciples; and must have reference to them,
as the only Persons fitted for Holy Baptism.

But to proceed,

3ly, I shall show you who it was practiced upon by the Apostles, and first
Ministers of Christ, pursuant to the grand Commission.

We find all along in the History of the Acts of the Apostles, that Baptism was
practiced upon grown Persons, that there Disciples of Christ, having gladly
received their ^^eaching, repented of their Sins, and believed the Go^^el,
which Infants are not capable to perform.

Acts 2.38. Repent, and he baptized. Ver. 41. Then they (...) gladly received
his Word, were baptized. Ver. 44. And (...) that believed were together.

Acts 8.12. When they believed Philip, preaching the things ^^urning the
Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, (...) were baptized, both Men and
Women, not little Infants. (...) ver. 36. After Philip had preached Jesus to
the Eunuch, according to Christ's Commission) they came unto a certain Water;
and he asked Philip, What did hinder him to be baptized? Philip answers, If
thou believe wirh all thine heart, (...) may. And he answered, I believe
that Jesus Christ is (...) Son of God. And upon that Profession of his Faith,
he (...) immediately baptized. So that we may learn hence, ^^at Faith is a
pre-requisite of Baptism; for Philip re^^es Faith of the Eunuch, before he
would baptize (...).

So in the Jaylor's Case, Acts 16.31. Paul requires of (...), to believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ. And in ver. 33, 34. is said, he was baptized, believing in
God, etc.

Acts 18.8. Crispus believed on the Lord; and many of the ^^inthians hearing,
believed, and were baptized. If these testimonies are not sufficient, I know
not what will.

I could in this place produce diverse Testimonies from (...) learned (were it
needful) to prove that no Infants ^ere baptized for about two hundred Years
from Christ. (...) Dr. Barlow's Testimony: There is (says he) no just Evidence
of Infant Baptism, till about two hundred Years after Christ.

The Learned Curcellaeus affirms, That the Custom of baptizing Infants, was
brought in without the Commandment of Christ, and did not begin before the
third Century.

Grotius, on Mat. 19.13. gives this Account; That according to the Rule of
Scripture, and agreeing with Reason it self, the most part of the Greeks in all
Ages, even unto this Day, retain a Custom of delaying Infant Baptism, till they
themselves can give a Confession of their Faith. And it is certain that
Nazianzen, though the Son of a Christian Bishop, who lived about the fourth
Century, and was bred up in the Christian Religion, was not baptized till he
was about thirty Years of Age.

The same is also true of Chrysostom, Hierom, Ambrose, Augustine, and others.

And as the Learned Dr. Dia. Veil observes, it does manifestly appear, That the
wisest of our Fathers in Christ, did not come to Baptism, until they were come
to a strong and confirmed Age and Wit. So that (it is plain) they were not
baptized in their Infancy. Yea, further he says, I could never read of so much
as one of the Ancient Fathers, for six hundred Years after Christ, that was
baptized in his Infancy.

Ludovicus Vives affirms in his Treatise de Civitate Dei, Lib. 1. cap. 27.
Neminem olim consuevisse baptizari nisi adulta aetate, and qui per se peteret
baptisnum, and intelligeret quid sit baptizari. None of old Time were wont to
be baptized but in a grown Age, and who desired it themselves, and understood
what it was to be baptized.

Erasmus in his Annotations on the E^istle to the Romans, affirms, That
baptizing of Children was not in use in Paul's Time.

And Dr. Field, in his learned Treatise of the Church, page 729. affirms, That
many very anciently, who were born of Christian Parents, put off their Baptism
a long Time; insomuch as some were elected Bishops before they were baptized.
As we read (says he) of A^^brose, etc.

The Learned Bossuet, speaking of the manner of administering Baptism, says, We
never read in the Scripture, that any were baptized otherwise than by
Immersion, And we are able to prove, from the Acts of Councils and ancient
Rituals, that everywhere in the whole Church throughout the World, for the
space of 1300 Years, Baptism was never administered but by Dipping, except only
in Cases of Necessity.

And Bellarmine says, Infant Baptism is called an Apostolical Tradition not
written, because it is not found written in any Apostolical Book. Tom. 1. lib.
4. cap. 2.

Where by the way I shall note, That if a Man of his Parts and Learning could
not find it there, I believe others will have as little Success in their search
after it: And it had been his Interest to have proved it from Scripture as much
as any, because (...) say a greater stress upon (...) than (...), and these of
his Religion; for they assert it to be necessary (...) ^^ation.

Let Mr. Ja^^. know, we do not bring the Testimonies of Hur^ he Writers,
because we think the Holy Scriptures (...) to justify our Cause. For I may say
with Tertullian, Lib. contra Hermogenem, Adoro Scripturae ple^itudi^^, etc. I
adore the Fuluess of the Scripture, let ^^^gexes show that it is written.

But to satisfy the World that we are not singular in our Judgments about these
Matters, as also to obviate an Objection of your Pastor, who tells us in his
last Trease, Page 20, That at the rate some Baptists write and (...) report the
Words of the Learned, they would per^^^ swade silly People, all the Learned Men
were almost (...) Anabaptists, and (...), self-condemned, being (...) as they
are in Opinion, though of a contrary Practice.

I answer, That although they are of a contrary Practice, I hope that can be no
Bar to us from reciting their words in favor of our Opinion; For, Firmum est
(...) prohationis, quod ab ipso adversario sumitur, ut veritas, (...) ipsis
inimicis veritatis probetur. It is a forcible kind of Proof, which is taken
from the Adversary himself, when ^e Truth is proved from them that oppose the
Truth. and I have herein followed the Counsel of Lactantius, (...) 1. c. 6. Eos
suorum Testimoui^^ revincere, etc. To convince them by their own Testimonies,
which is the strongest Conviction that may be.

As it is truly said by Chrysostom, Tunc illos maxim revin^^us, cum suorum, in
eos, dicta retorquemus. We do most ^rcibly convince them, when we can retort
their own ^yings against them.

And therefore as Lactantius, de vera sapientia, cap. 12. faith, Satis firmum
Testimonium, ad probandum veritatem, quod ab ipsis perhibetur inimieis. That is
a sound Argument for the proving of the Truth, which is setched from the
Enemies of the Truth.

Yea, suppose it were but weak in it self, yet it has great weight against him
that brings it. For, as the Roman Orator observes in the like Case; Tuum
Testimonium, quod, in alienare, leve est; in tua, quoniam contra te est,
gravissinum esse debet. Thy Testimony, which is but light and frivolous in
another Man's Cause, yet is weighty in thine own, when it is against thy self.

Now I fancy that the Reason why Mr. James would not have us urge the
Testimonies of the Learned, for fear of showing how contradictory some of their
Opinions have been to their Practices, is, lest in so doing he also should be
found to be (...), condemned of himself; and that in many places of his Book,
particularly, when he brings a Poet to prove, that Christ was not baptized by
Dipping.

And in Page 20. he says, I would fain know who can prove our Lord Jesus
Christ was dipped, or plunged, in his Baptism; or any of those baptized Ones
spoken of in the New Testament, were so dipped, or plunged?

I will give you the Opinion of some Learned Men upon it in this very Place,
although I have said sufficient to it elsewhere; and then show you how Mr. James
is condemned by his own Pen.

Now if any one (says Maldonate) ask why the Evangelists use the Word of
Ascending? etc. It was because Christ ascended, or went up out of the Water, in
the which he had been dipped or drowned.

Lucas Brugensis, says upon the Place, Matthew. 3.16 Christ descended into the
River (after the manner o^ others that were baptized) as deep as his Thighs, o^
his Navel, for the rest of his Body was dipped by Joh^ and not sprinkled only
with Water.

And the Learned Cajetan tells us upon the Place, Christ ascended out of the
Water; therefore Christ was baptized by John, not by Sprinkling, nor by pouring
Wate^ upon him, but by Immersion, that is, by dipping o^ plunging in the Water.
Many more Testimonies might be brought from Men, (...) use Rantism instead of
Baptism, but that I have al^^ exceeded my first Intention. But I shall now show
(...) that Mr. James (like the rest of those I have quo^^) has contradicted
himself: For in the same 20th (...) of his Book, where he vapors so mightily,
and ^enges us to prove, that Christ, or any others, were ^^ized by Dipping, as
you have seen above; yet pre^^y he tells us, That Baptism was often performed by
^ping, I gainsay not. And in the very next Page he (...), I do not produce
these Testimonies, as tho I would ^^tain that our Lord Jesus was not dipped. It
seems (...) Conscience began to check him whilst he was writ^^^.

And again, in Page 25. Who speaks against the Anti^ity of Dipping? I thought
Mr. James had. But he goes (...), Dipping there might be in Christ's Time, and
that the (...) way of Baptizing. Very well, then it seems we pra^^^^ the most
Ancient, and the best Way of Baptizing, Mr. James's Acknowledgment: And himself
does pra^^^^ the contrary, and therefore must needs be self-con^^ed, as
practicing the worst Way; especially if he (...) consider, That there is
neither Precept nor Precedent (...) Infant-Sprinkling in all the Word of God.

But to close this Head I am upon: If this be true, that (...) of the Apostles,
nor first Ministers of the Gospel, (...) ever practice the Sprinkling, of
Infants; there must (...) some good Reason why they did it not: And the best
(...) think of is, because Christ had not commanded them (...) do. But on the
contrary, had commanded them to ^^ize Penitent Believers, which were Persons of
grown ^^^s; to which Command they were obedient.

And we have great Reason to account them saithful: (...) the Apostle Paul
protests, before an Assembly of Mi^ers, Acts 20.20. He had kept back nothing
that was ^^able to them. And in ver. 26. he says, I have not shun^^ to declare
to you all the Counsel of God. If there^^ the Sprinkling of Infants had been
profitable for (...), or a part of the Counsel of God concerning the ^^ches, we
had certainly heard of it in some of Paul's ^^eches or Epistles: But not one
Word being mentioned about it, we may safely conclude, it was wholly unknown to
those Times, (both as to Subjects and Manner) it ^^ing a Practice both
unprofitable and vain, as being b^^ upon Humane Authority only, having no
Foundation (...) the Word of God: In vain do they worship me, teaching (...)
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, Mat. 15.9.

I will offer an Argument or two, to prove that Infan^

Sprinkling is not of Divine Authority.

The Sprinkling of Infants, is either from Heaven, (...) of Men.

But it is not from Heaven: Ergo, It is of Men.

If it be from Heaven, the Holy Scriptures have so^^ where revealed it so to be.

But it is no where so revealed in the Holy Scripture (...) Ergo, It is not
from Heaven.

If it be any where so revealed in the Holy Scripture you, or some other, are
able to show it.

But you, nor no other are able to show it: Ergo, It (...) not any where so
revealed in the Holy Scriptures.

If Mr. James should tell you he can show it so to b^ let him give you an
Instance where it is written, as al^^ (...) gician ought to do, (the Minor
being an Universal Negative) or let him for ever be silent upon this Subject^
For it is written, Rev. 22.18. If any Man shall add (...) these things, God
shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this Book.

I cannot well go off of this Head, without taking ^^^tice of a pernicious
Notion which some of the Learned have espoused.

They will allow us that we are in the right, as to wh^^^ we assert about the
practice of the Primitive Churche^ but tell us, that their Ceremonies may be
lawfully u^^ also, which they ground upon this following Supposition^ That it
is lawful for Men to bring in things indifferent into the Church, and join them
with the Worship (...) God.

And as this refers to the Point of Baptism, I will bri^ly relate what past
some Years ago, betwixt Dr. Bail^^ late Bishop of Lincoln, and my self. It was
upon (...) Occasion; A Namesake of mine being taken up upon a (...), and
committed to Ailesbury Goal, for not having child sprinkled, I went to his
Lordship (after (...) Months confinement) to desire his Discharge; ^old him, my
Friend was not a Member of any ^^te Congregation, but only doubted of the (...)
of Infant Baptism, which I supposed his ^^hip thought he might do, and yet be a
good ^^ian.

(...) told me, Yes, for he had tumblings and tossings ^^^out it in his own
Mind in his younger Days, but now (...) was satisfied.

(...) desired then to know the Grounds of his Lordship's ^^^stion.

(...) said, The Apostle Paul, in Romans 13. and the be^^ing. exhorted the
Christians to submit to the ^^gher Powers, etc. And also the Apostle Peter
said, (...) vour selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the ^^^^d's sake, etc.
Now (says he) you must know (...) the Convocation met and concluded, that
Infants ^ould be baptized; and the King and Parliament en^^^ed it: And
forasmuch as we are required to be obe^ent to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's sake. therefore we ought to do it.

(...) answered; My Lord, If the Convocation had so con^^d, and the King and
Parliament so enacted, That (...) should have been baptized in the King's Name,
or ^he Name of the King and Parliament as Legislators, I ^ere those People
might have complied with it.

(...) answered, "That would have been odd.

(...) replied, As odd as it is, if they had complied with it, (...)
Controversy had been at end.

He said, That is true; But why cannot they comply (...) with it now?

My Lord, They have got a Notion in their Heads, that (...) not in the Power of
any Man, or number of Men in (...) World, to alter the Nature of Institutions,
so as to (...) that Divine that is in it self Humane, or that Hu^^e that is in
it self Divine.

The Bishop replied; They are right in that, for none (...) alter the Nature of
things but God alone.

Why then, my Lord, forasmuch as you do not baptized Infants in the Name of the
King, or King and Parliament as an Humane Institution, but in the Name of the
Father Son, and Holy Spirit, as a Divine Institution, they cannot comply with
it.

Well (says he) there is never a Word of God against it: It is no where said
in the Scriptures ye shall not baptize Infants.

I replied;

My Lord, I shall only put your Lordship in mind of the Notes of a Learned Man
upon that of Lev. 10.1, 2. concerning Nadab and Abihu, Sons of Aaron, Priests
of the Lord; who offered strange Fire before the Lord, which the Lord commanded
them not. He says, It is not sufficient to say about instituted Worship, It is
nowhere forbidden: For it was nowhere said before this time; (...) shall not
offer up strange Fire upon mine Altar. But because there was a Divine Precept,
what Fire they should off^^ what Perfume they should mix with their Sacrifices,
an^^ the manner of its Composition: And they not observing that Divine Precept;
but offering strange Fire, which th^^ Lord commanded them not, they were
destroyed by (...) from his Presence. His Lordship only gave me this Answer; He
would speak to his Official, to be kind to (...) Friend that was in Prison,
etc. but wholly waved (...) Matter in Controversy; and so I took my leave, and
departed.

I mention not this, as if I thought this Learned M^^ singular in this Point;
for it is too manifest, that m^^ others are of the same Sentiments, without
which the could not satisfy their Consciences in the Practi^^ of Infant
sprinkling, and other things which they (...) practice without either Precept
or Precedent from (...) Word of God.

There are many things very ridiculous, that have (...) Degrees been brought
into the Church; of which it is (...) where said in the Holy Scriptures, they
shall not (...) done. And that about this very Ordinance as well as (...) other
Matters.

As for instance;

1. Where is it forbidden to baptize Bells? This (...) (...) practiced by the
Popish Priests, and that very lately. (...). Where is it forbidden to use the
Sign of the Cross Baptism? as the Popish Priests do thrice, and the Epi^^ once.

Where is it forbidden to use Cream and Spittle, as (...) Papists do, to anoint
the Childrens Eyes, Nostrils, (...) Ears, in their Practice of Baptism?

(...) Where is it forbidden to put Salt in the Child's ^^th, as they also do?
and give this Reason for it, (...) his Words may be with Grace, seasoned with
Salt.

And where is it forbidden to baptize your Cattle? (...) yet how ridiculous
would it be so to do? But perhaps (...) James may pretend Scripture for it,
from his Inter^^tion of 1 Corinthians. 10.2. For all their Cattle (of ^ich they
left not a Hoof behind) were under the Cloud, (...) all passed through the Sea;
and were all baptized unto Moses, (...) the Cloud and in the Sea. The Word is
(...), ^ich he leaves to Mr. Wells to interpret. And I pray ask (...) if this
Word, as here used in the passive Form, may (...) be read thus; And they were
all overwhelmed unto (...), as they must needs be when the Cloud covered them,
(...) the Waters were a Wall to them on the Right Hand ^^on the left. So that
you see here is the same Ground ^onclude, their Cattle were all baptized as
well as their (...) Children: But if the Word had been translated ^^^^whelmed,
who could have dreamt of a Baptism from (...) Place?

But Mr. James will have it that there was a Multitude (...) Children baptized
by Moses, and that it was done by ^^inkling also, through the dropping of the
Cloud, and (...) dashing of the Waters; and that many learned Men ^^^bt not of
it; but has not quoted one of them. I am (...) the Dutch Translators, who were
Presbyterians, read (...) thus; End all in Mosen Gedoopt Zin; And they were
^^^^dipt unto Moses: And all learned Men do tell us, when (...) speak as
Scholars, that (...), is mergo, immergo; (...) how it comes to lose its
Signification in this one (...), I cannot imagine.

But I pray ask Mr. James these few things;

1. Who told him there was Water in that Cloud? For the Epistle of Jude ver.
12. we read of Clouds without Water: and we must remember that this Cloud (...)
Miracle.

2. If it had Water, who told him that it droppe^ the Children of Israel
whilst they past through (...) Sea? His ipse dixit will not do where the
Scri^^ silent.

3. How came he to know that the Waters dash^ them? I cannot suppose that he
was present to (...) And if it be nowhere written, it is but an impr^^ Guess.

But to leave off these trisling Fancies of Mr. James us see how it is written,
Exodus 14.21. The L^^d the Sea dry Land, and the Waters were divided.

Ver. 22. And the Children of Israel went into the midst Sea upon the dry
Ground, and the Waters were a Wall unto on their Right Hand and on their Left.

Ver. 29. And they walked upon dry Land in the midst Sea.

Chap. 15.8. The Waters were gathered together Flood stood upright as an Heap,
and the Depths were co^^^ in the Heart of the Sea.

Psalm 106.9. He rebuked the Red Sea also, and it wa^^ed up; so he led them
through the Depths as through the ^^^derness.

Thus you see here is not one Word of Sprinkling of dashing the Water upon
them. As to the Cloud was no common Cloud, but a Cloud that did const^ attend
them in their passage through the Wilderness: Exodus 13.21, 22. And the Lord
went before them by D^^^ Pillar of a Cloud, etc. He took not away the Pillar of
Cloud by day, nor the Pillar of Fire by night, from (...) the People. See also
Numb. 14.14. Now if the W^^^ were a Wall on each side, and the Cloud covered
the then they must need be overwhelmed. Psalm 105. He spread a Cloud for a
Covering, and Fire to give Light (...) Night. But not one Word of this Cloud's
having Wat^^ it, nor of its dropping upon them. What Cause have to be cautious,
how you admit any thing for Truth upon Credit of your Teacher; who can allow
himself the ^^berty to talk at this loose Rate about sacred thi^ Besides, if
this he to be understood of Baptism as an O^ (...) according to the Use of the
Word in the New (...) then I affirm (according to Mr. James's (...) if their
Infants were baptized, all their Cattle ^^wise baptized: But I hope he will be
ashamed (...) at such an Exposition; for besides all other Ab^^^ that attend
it, Moses is hereby made the first ^^^er, and not John the Baptist. But I shall
leave this, (...) to the third and last general Head.

That the Ordinance of Baptism is now in being, (...) is to continue to the End
of the World.

(...) 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things what^^ have commanded you;
and lo, I am with you always, even (...) End of the World.

(...) this Ordinance of Baptism in Water, being one ^^e things he has
commanded, as in the Words ^^^ing; then the Apostles were to teach all the
suc^^^ Churches to observe it, they being to teach them ^^^e all things he had
commanded them; and to (...) also the Promise of Christ's Presence is annexed
until (...) of the World: The Ordinance it self is therefore ^^^inue till that
time.

(...) ^^des, it was the Care of the Apostles, not only to (...) that present
Age the Will of Christ, but also to (...) it continued to succeeding Ages: see
2 Timothy 2.2. (...) Charge here to Timothy is, The things which thou have (...)
of me among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to faith^^, who shall be able
to teach others also. And our Lord (...) to those faithful ones in Thyatyra,
Rev. 2.24, 25. (...) put upon you none other Burden; But that which ye have
(...), hold fast till I come.

(...) seeing we differ not about its Duration, (although (...) about the
Subjects, and the right Manner of ad^^ring the same) I shall add no more upon
this Head. (...) been concerned with another sort of People, I should (...)
thought my self obliged to have insisted more largely (...) it.

(...) beseech you consider what I have said; for it is in (...) Love to your
Precious Souls; that you may no longer be deceived by false Teachers who handle
(...) of God deceitfully: But that you may come to (...) the true Doctrine of
the Gospel, and embrace (...) which was once delivered to the Saints; wh^^
first spoken by the Lord himself, and confirm (...) and Wonders, and diverse
Miracles and Gifts o^ Spirit, according to his own Will.

For there is but one Lawgiver to the Chur^^ him who is able to save and to
destroy: He^ all things whatsoever he has said unto you. Footsteps of the
primitive and Apostolic Chur^^ that is the right Path, and the good old Way;
(...) in, and ye shall find rest for your Souls. Com^ the Word that Christ has
spoken, that shall the last Day. The Lord help every one of joy the Light of
the Glorious Gospel, to be fo^^ thereunto, that so we may receive that blesled
Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into thy Lord.

FINIS.

