PROPOSALS Concerning the Printing of a CHRONOLOGICAL HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE First Volume is Britannia Antiqua Illustrata, or the Antiquities of
Ancient Britain, Derived from the Phoenicians; wherein the Original Trade of
this Island is discovered, the names of Places, Offices, Dignities, as likewise
the Idolatry, Language, and Customs, of the Primitive Inhabitants are clearly
demonstrated from that Nation, many old Monuments illustrated, and the commerce
with that People, as well as the Greeks, plainly set forth: Collected out of
approved Greek and Latin Authors. Together with a Chronological History of this
Kingdom, from the first Traditional beginning until the year of our Lord 800
when the name of Britain was changed into England. Faithfully Collected out of
the best Authors, and disposed in a better Method than hitherto has been done,
with the Antiquities of the Saxons as well as Phoenicians, Greeks, and Romans.

This First Volume is published and is ready to be delivered to all those that
are pleased to subscribe to the two next Volumes intended to be published.

The Second Volume is Anglia, being a Continuation of the History from the year
800. to the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; wherein shall be shown the First
establishment of Monarchy by the Saxons, their good Government evid^n^^d by
their own Records, with the Revolutions of State by the Danes and Normans.
Moreover shall be added in its proper place, an Account of that part of the
Holy War in which England was concerned; with many other things of great use
and benefit, that have hitherto been Omitted in all our English Chronicles.

The Third Volume is Britannia Magna, beginning at the Reign of King James and
ending at the time of the most happy Restoration of his present Majesty King
Charles the Second.

THE performance of this work cannot be effected without great Labor and
Charge, therefore the Author Aylett Sammes of Christ's College in Cambridg,
since of the Inner Temple, does hereby request the Assistance of all such
Gentlemen as are lovers of History, and desire to have the Mistakes of our late
Chronicles Rectified to Subscribe to the same; and to receive the First Volume
(upon their Subscribing to the other two) at 14 s. bound, and to pay 16 s. a
piece for the other two Volumes unbound, when they shall be ready to be
delivered.

Whosoever procures six subscribers that will Receive the parts as they shall
be published and pay the prices above mentioned for them, shall have a book of
each Volume in quiers presented him gratis.

We whose names are here underwritten do promise to receive the first part
at 14 s. bound and do hereby Subscribe for the other two parts at the prices
above mentioned if we approve of them when we see them printed

wit. our hands Dated the (...) 1677

