The Sad and Dreadful Accident OF THE BURNING OF A Rich Turkey Ship BY
LIGHTNING, IN THE ROAD of GRAVESEND: On Thursday the 23d. of June, 1687.
AS the Season for some months past has been extraordinary, beyond the Memory
of Man, for the Violence of the Winds, so the Element of Fire has produced so
prodigious effect on the Watery Region, as to show Mankind which of the Elements
has predominancy over the other, making the demonstration on a floating World
in the River of Thames, which the following account will show the particulars,
viz.

That the Honorable the TURKEY-COMPANY, having (with no less Diligence then
great Expense,) fitted forth diverse Ships this Season for the Ottoman-Trade;
which as to the Glory as well as profit of the Nation, Exports the English
Manufacture of Cloth, etc. and having Freighted the Ship Palestine, of about
140 Tonns, Captain Sammon Commander; with near 300 Bayls of Cloth and other
Merchantdise, and Bound her to the Port of Scandaroone, the extremest part of
the Streights: She this Week Tyded down the River to the Road of Gravesend, the
usual stoppage for their clearing out from the Custom-House; and having
received her Dockets for her Discharge, designed to set forwards on her Voyage
as on Saturday the 25th. Instant; but behold the Providence of the Almighty, to
disappoint many times with unusual methods what Man directs, sent a dreadful
Fiery-Messenger to lay an Imbargo on her Voyage.

For on Thursday the 23d. of this instant June, between the hours of 7 and 8 at
Night the Heavens were over-cast, and on a sudden, by the Eastward, a mighty
flash of Lightning broke through the Sky, followed by a great Clap of Thunder,
and a shower of Rain, and as it were, a Fire-ball, fastne'd or lodged among the
Sails and Shrouds of the Ship Palestine aforesaid, and inflamed with that
impetuosity, that it caught hold of the Rigging thereof, which being new
Tarred, in a wonderful swift manner run down to the Deck or Hull of the Ship
with such Fury, that the Mariners were not able to withstand the Flames, some
leaping into the River to save their Lives, which so furiously fastened upon the
Ship, being new Pitched and Rozen'd, that the Industry of Man, though they had
all the assistance possible from other Ships in the Road, could not quench or
extinguish the least part of her, until she burnt to the Waters Edge, whereby
all her Cargo, (there being 300 Bayls of Rich Cloth, and other rich Merchandise
aboard her, was entirely lost, the Damage of the whole being computed to the
value of 20000 l. or upwards; The account of which we have received in a Letter
from the same place, as also, had it confirmed by the Merchants on the
Exchange, who have also received the bad Tidings thereof.

FINIS.

