The Countess of Roscommon's CASE.
IN the 35th year of King Charles II. Thomas Walcott was indicted for
High Treason, in Compassing the Death of the King by Assassination; and being
tried before Sir Francis Pemberton and others, he was thereof convicted; And
the Judgment, or rather the Minutes of the Judgment that was entered on the top
of the Indictment (it being the Course and Practice to enter over every
Prisoner's Name in the Indictment in a compendious manner the Prisoner's Plea,
the Verdict of the Jury, and the Judgment of the Court thereupon) is thus
Recorded: Ponit se (which is the Plea) culpabil cat. null. (which is the Verdict
of the Jury) and then follows the Judgment, thus: Considerat. est quod
ducatur ad Gaolam Domini Regis de Newgate unde venit; and ibidem super bigam
ponatur; and abinde usque ad Furcas de Tyburne trahatur, and ibidem per collum
suspendatur, and vivens ad Terram prosternatur. Et quod secreta membra ejus
Amputentur, and interiora sua extra ventrem suam capiantur (ipsoque vivente)
comburantur, and quod caput ejus Amputetur. Quodque corpus ejus in quatuor
parts dividatur, and quod caput and quarteria illa ponantur ubi Dominus Rex ea
Assignare voluerit.

But in the Record drawn up hereupon (which contains and recites at large the
whole Proceedings against the Prisoner; which Record is certified into the
King's Bench on a Writ of Error); the Judgment is thus entered; Ideo Considerat.
est per Cur. hic, quod proedictus Thomas Walcott Ducatur ad Gaolam Domini Regis
de Newgate unde venit; and ibidem super Bigam ponatur; and abinde usque ad
Furcas de Tyburne trahatur, and ibidem per collum suspendatur, and vivens ad
terram prosternatur. Et. quod secreta membin^ ejus Amputentur and interiora sua
extra ventrem suam capiantur, and in ^nem ponantur, and ibidem comburantur, and
quod caput ejus Amp tetur. Quodque corpus ejus in quatuor parts dividatur, and
caput and quarteria illa ponantur ubi Dominus Rex ea Assignare voluerit.

So that the only variance between the Minutes of the Judgment given by the
Court, and the Judgment certified into the King's Bench on the Writ of Error,
is, that in the first, those words (ipso vivente) are inserted, and part of the
Judgment; but in the latter they are left out.

In Easter-Term last was twelvemonth, John Walcott, the Son and Heir of
Thomas, obtained a Writ of Error to Reverse his Father's Attainder as
Erroneous, and the Exception that was taken and insisted upon, to reverse the
Attainder, was this, That the words (ipso vivente) are omitted, and no part of
the Judgment. But the Court being informed that the Countess of Roscommon
(whose Husband had a Grant from the Crown, of Mr. Walcott's Estate, in
consideration of a just Debt) was interested under the Attainder; they gave
time to hear her Council in Affirmance of this Attainder.

On this Point the Cause hung until this present Trinity Term; and on Friday
the 13th of June instant, the Court gave Judgment for reversing the Attainder,
for this Reason only, because the words (ipso vivente) were omitted, and not
part of the Judgment certified on the Writ of Error; notwithstanding that it
was much insisted upon by the Countess's Council, that these words are not
material; and that it is impossible in Nature for the Man to be alive after his
Heart and Bowels are taken out of his Body: Nor would the Court amend and
rectify the Record certified on the Writ of Error, by the Minutes of the
Judgment entered on the Indictment; though it plainly appeared to them, by the
Minutes of the Judgment entered on the Indictment, which was produced in Court,
that Judgment was given by the Court that his Bowels should be burnt while he
was alive: but the words (ipso vivente) were either unwarrantably, or by
mistake, left out by the Clerk, who drew up the Record of Attainder by those
Minutes.


