RULES AND ORDERS FOR THE COURT Of Common PLEAS At Westminster, Made and
published by the Judges of the said Court, in the Term of St. Michael, in the
year One thousand six hundred fifty four.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop in St.
Dunstans Churchyard Fleetstreet, 1654.

RULES and ORDERS FOR THE COMMON BENCH, Of the Term of St. Michael, In the
year 1654.
1. FOr the reducing of Attorneys, and Officers, to their due attendance.

2. For the reformation of abuses of Sheriffs, and Bailiffs.

3. For discovery, and punishment of abuses in general.

4. For the constant preservation of ORDER in the Court.

5. For settling a constant course of practice, pleadings, and proceedings,
especially where there has been variety of opinion, or practice.

Concerning Attorneys and Officers.
THat all Officers, and Attorneys of the Court, be admitted of some Innes of
Court, or Chancerie, by the beginning of Hillarie term Next, or

RULES and ORDERS FOR THE COMMON BENCH, To begin from the (...) day of (...) In
the year 1654.
1. FOr the reducing of Attorneys, and Officers, to their due attendance.

2. For the reformation of abuses of Sheriffs, and Bailiffs.

3. For discovery, and punishment of abuses in general.

4. For the constant preservation of ORDER in the Court.

5. For settling a constant course of practice, pleadings, and proceedings,
especially where there has been variety of opinion, or practice.

Concerning Attorneys and Officers.
THat all Officers, and Attorneys of the Court, be admitted of some Innes of
Court, or Chancerie, by the beginning of Hillarie term Next, or in the same
Term wherein they are admitted Officers or Attorneys; and be in Commons one
week in every Term, and take Chambers there, or in case that cannot be
conveniently, yet to take chambers, or dwellings in some convenient place, and
leave notice with the Butler where their chambers or habitations are; under
pain of being put out of the Roll of Attorneys.

2. That all Officers, and Attorneys of this Court, appear in person in this
Court, upon, or before the fourteenth day of Michaelmas Term, and upon or
before the seventh day of every other Term, upon pain of ten shillings for the
first default, twenty shillings for the second default, and putting out of the
Roll for the third default. The appearance to be entered with the Clerk of the
warrants, and the defaulters to be delivered to the Court upon oath (if
required) within three days after the time required for appearance.

3. That every Sheriff have his Deputy in Court to return and receive Writs,
and that each Deputy yearly before Hillarie Term have his name and the place
of his residence in Londo or Westminster, set and continued up in tables in the
office of Clerk of the warrants.

4. That the Clerks of Assize their Deputies or Assistants do personally appear
with their Posteas on the first day of Easter, and Michaelmas Term; and the
Deputy Sheriffs, and all other Officers of the Court do personally appear by
the Essoyn day of every second return of every Term; And continue there during
the residue of the Term without some just cause to the contrary allowed by the
Court.

5. That for the future Common Solicitors be not admitted to practice in this
Court unless they are admitted Attorneys of either Bench; provided that it
extend not to the managing of evidence at a trial, nor to Private Sollicitors,
or servants of Corporations, or other persons in the cases of their Masters.

6. That none be admitted an Attorney of this Court for the time to come, unless
he has practiced as a Common Solicitor in this Court by the space of five
years now last past; or has served, or shall have served by the space of five
years as a Clerk to some Judge, Sergeant at Law, practicing Counselor,
Attorney, Clark or Officer of one of the Courts at Westminster, unless his
Master dye or give over his practice, and be also upon examination found of
good ability and honesty for such employment; and that sufficient proof (to be
put into writing) be made of such service to the Prothonotary upon a desire of
Admittance, and filed with the Clerk of the warrants without Fee.

7. That no person practice in another name, nor that any Attorney knowingly
permit another to practice in his name, upon pain of being put out of the Roll,
excepting in warrants of Attorney for common recoverys.

8. That Attorneys dismissed by one Court from their practice for misdemeanour,
be not (after certificate) admitted to practice in another Court, It being
contrary to the intent of the Law.

9. That no under Sheriff or Bailiff of Sheriffs or Liberties be admitted
during such their employment to practice as Attorneys, under pain of expulsion
from the employment of an Attorney, and not to be readmitted.

10. That such Attorneys as have not been attending their employment in this
Court by the space of one year last past, unless hindered by sickness, be
not allowed their privilege of Attorneys.

11. That for the prevention of maintenance and broccage, no Attorney be
Lessee in an ejectment, nor bail for a defendant in this Court in any Action.

Concerning Sheriffs and Bailiffs.
THat for the prevention and remedy of delays and abuses in Sheriffs, under
Sheriffs, Bailiffs of liberties and their Deputies, and other Bailiffs of
Sheriffs etc. in execution of process and writs, that if it shall appear that
any such Officer shall wilfully delay the execution or return of any Process or
Execution, or shall take or require any undue Fees for the same, or shall give
notice to the defendant, thereby to frustrate the Execution of any Process or
Writ, or having leavied money, shall detain it in their hands after the time
of the return of their Writs, besides the ordinary course of Amerciaments (the
contempt or misdemeanour appearing) an Attachment, Informarion, Commitment, or
Fine to be, as the case requires. And this as well in the case of a late
Sheriff, or person before mentioned, as of them at present in Office.

And whereas Sheriffs have taken immoderate and excessive Fees for Execution of
Writs of Possession, or restitution of possession, contrary to Law; It is
declared that such immoderate Fees ought not to be taken; and in case such
shall be taken, the Court to proceed to punish the same according to law, upon
complaint thereof made.

That to reform abuses by blank Warrants granted by Sheriffs, whereby persons
are arrested, and driven to extorted Compositions for their liberties without
process of Law; that no Warrants be granted out to any Officer to arrest or
attach any person before a Writ first come to the Sheriff.

Concerning the Reformation and punishment of abuses in general.
ORdered, That a Jury of able and credible Officers, Clerks, and Atturneys,
once in three years be impannelled, and sworn to enquire,

1. Of the points usually inquirable by the Writ (viz.) falsities, contempts,
misprisions and offenses.

2. Of such who have been admitted Attourneys or Clerks, and are notoriously
unfit, their names to be presented to the Court, and they to be punished or
removed, as the case shall require.

Of new or exacted Fees, and of those that have taken them, under whatsoever
pretense, and to prepare and present a table of the due and just Fees, that the
same may be fixed and continue in every office; and likewise for the Fleet.

And that some persons be Enjoined and sworn to give evidence (videlicet) some
Clerks of the Court and some Attorneys in every County, not excluding others.

Concerning the better preservation of Order among the Officers and Clerks, and
observation of breach of Orders and Misdemeanors.
THat the Court do once every year in Michaelmas Term nominate twelve or more
able and credible practisers in the Court to continue for the year ensuing, for
these purposes hereafter limited.

That they or any six of them Examine such persons as shall desire to be
admitted Attorneys, and appoint convenient times and places for the same: and
in order thereunto, that such persons as shall desire to be admitted Attorneys,
first attend the prothonotary with his proof of service, then to repair to the
persons appointed to examine Attorneys, and being approved, to be presented to
the Court with the assignation of his approbation, and then to be sworn in
open court, unless some just exception be against him.

That they give information to the Court from time to time, of Breaches of
Orders, and miscarriages of Officers, Attorneys, and Clerks.

That a settled course of practice and proceedings be settled, especially in
those cases where there has been uncertainty and that the inconveniences in
process, proceedings, and pleadings may be regulated unto a due course. In
Order whereunto these several things are Ordered and directed according to the
method of Proceedings.
1. Concerning the Entering of Records and the persons by whom.
THat no Rolls be delivered to be entered, but only to Clerks, or such
Atturnies as have entered for the space of four years last past, for themselves.

That a table be set up of the Names of the Officers and Clerks that are to be
admitted unto the Rolls of the Treasury: and that such and no others be
admitted thereunto, and that they may resort there as well for their Occasions,
as for their Learning and Instruction, during the Term, and also twice in every
week from a month after the Term, and that every such Clerk duly attend as
well the prothonotaries Office in the Term time as for the Entering of
Judgments upon Summons given by the prthonoters respectively.

For the prevention of the unundue issuig of Judicial writs, and falsifying of
Records. It is Ordered,
That all Executions, and all other Writs Issuing out of the prothonotaries
offices be duly signed by the respective prothonotaries before the same be
sealed, and that no Exemplification of any common Recovery or other Record
which ought to be examined and signed by the prothonotary, be sealed before the
same have been signed by the Prothonotary. Nor that any exemplification
(excepting exemplifications of Fines and common Recoveries of the present or
next precedent Term) be sealed before they be first signed and examined by the
Clerk of the Treasury.

And because the intermedling and dealing of Clerks in more then one
prothonotaries Office at one time, has been an occasion of disorder and
uncertainty in proceedings; It is likewise Ordered, that every prothonotaries
Clerk do apply himself from henceforth to one prothonotaries office only, and
do give his attendance and make his Entries in that prothonotaries Office.

2. Concerning Rolls and Records, and their Entries and Bringing in.
That the whole proceeding of any Cause after Appearance be carried on in the
Office of that prothonotary where it was first entered or declaration delivered.

That no Rolls be carried into the Country, under pain that the offender be
excluded from Entering any more Rolls afterward as a Clerk.

That the Common Rolls of every Term, except Easter, be brought in to the
prothonotary fairly entered, and docketted at least ten days before the Essoigne
day of the succeeding Term, under pain of ten shillings for every Roll
wanting. And that no Rolls be delivered to such person after any such offense
the second time, without special Order.

That the respective Prothonotaries before the third day of the then next
Term, do give in the Names of the Defaulters and Defaults unto the Court in
writing.

That the Rolls brought into the Prothonotary be delivered over to the Clerk of
the Warrants the day before the Essoigne day of the ensuing Term, together
with a Note of the Rolls that are wanting, the same Note to be subscribed by
the Clerk of the Warrants, and redelivered to the Prothonotary.

That the Clerk of the Warrants within five days after Receipt of the Rolls
from the Prothonotary, to deliver over the Common Rolls to the Clerk of the
Essoignes, taking the like Note from the Clerk of the Essoygnes of the Rolls
wanting.

that the Clerk of the Essoignes bind up the Rolls; viz. the first part before
the appearance day of the second return, the second part before the Essoigne
day of the third Return, the third part before the Essoign day of the next
Term.

That the Rolls of Easter Term be brought to the Prothonotary on or before the
first day of Trinity Term, Delivered to the Clerk of the Warrants within six
days, to the Clerk of the Essoign within five days after, to be bound up before
the Essoigne day of Michaelmas Term, each party subscribing the like Notes,
and the penalties the same as before.

Concerning Original Suits and process, where laid.
That Actions upon the case, trespass, for goods, assault or Imprisonment
arising in any English County be, laid in their proper Counties, unless they
arise where Justices of Nisi prius seldom come. And because trespass, or
trover, for goods, Battery, Imprisonment, and slander must needs be notorious
in what County they arise; the Attorney knowingly laying them out of the proper
County (unless in the Cases before expressed, or for such other causes as
shall be allowed by a Judge of the Court, and duly made appear to be true) be
severely punished.

That although the declaration be delivered seven days before the last day of
the next precedent Term, or after, yet before plea upon Oath made, the Visne
may be changed upon motion, in the said transitory actions, the next Term
after: And the Defendant to plead to the new Action as he should have done in
the other, without delay.

That the Visne may be changed, (upon Oath) as before, though the Defendant
come in by Exigent.

Concerning Process, and serving thereof.
That according to the provision of the statute of the one and thirtith year of
Queen Elizabeth, All Attorneys that sue out process of Exigent be careful
that writs of Proclamation be delivered, and the Sheriff do take care duly to
execute the same.

That according to the statute of the twenty third year of Henry the sixth, a
prisoner taken upon a Capias in process, be not discharged till he has given
bond to appear, unless the plaintiff or his Attorney shall consent to take an
appearance without Bail. And in such case the warrant of Attorney to appear, to
be subscribed or accepted by the Defendants Attorney, and such warrant not to be
revoked, and an Attachment to be granted against the Bailiff offending herein,
or against the Attorney refusing to appear or procure an appearance, having so
Subscribed or Accepted.

And forasmuch as diverse Sheriffs, Bailiffs of Liberties, and their Bailiffs
respectively have of late time contrary to law, and against former Orders of
this Court, discharged persons taken upon Outlaries without Supersedias; It is
hereby Declared, that such dealing is an abuse; and that all such who have or
shall discharge such persons without Supersedias, shall be severely punished.
And that no Sheriff, Undersheriff, their Deputies or Bailiffs, may from
henceforth discharge or set at Liberty any person or persons arrested upon any
Capias utlagat until he receive a Supersedias according to Law from the
Officer or Officers thereunto appointed.

Concerning a Habeas Corpus to Sheriffs and Goalers.
That a Habeas Corpus cum Causa ad faciendum and recipiendum, directed to any
Sheriff (other then London and Middlesex) not to be returneable immediate e, or
in the vacation time, but at a day certain in Court in the Term.

That such Habeas Corpus to the Sherriff of London or Middlesex may be granted
in Term or vacation time returnable Immediate.

That in case of Habeas Corpus returnable immediate, the Sheriff ought to make
his return the same day that the writ is delivered, and to bring the Body
imediately, as is required by the writ, without permitting him to wander abroad
by color or pretense thereof.

That where a writ of Habeas Corpus is directed to a Sheriff, Warden of the
Fleet, Marshal or Jailer, the prisoner is to be brought in custody according to
the writ at the day limited, without being permitted to wander abroad in the
mean time, upon pretense of such writ.

That a Habeas Corpus ad respondendum may be granted to the Warden of the
Fleet, or to the keeper of an inferour prison of a liberty or franchize, where
a Capias is returned in Court, Non est inventus; such writ to recite shortly
the Capias, and to be returnable at a day certain in Court, and to be a good
cause of Deteiner, as well as where a Capias ad respondendum comes to a Sheriff.

That a Habeas Corpus ad satisfaciendum may be Granted to the Warden of the
Fleet, or to such inferior Jailer returnable in Court at a day certain, and
the Number Roll of the Judgment to be endorsed upon the writ by the Attorney who
sues it out; and such writs to be a Cause of deteiner.

That if upon a Habeas Corpus the prisoner be returned charged with process
out of the upper Bench or Exchequer, and out of the Common Pleas, the Prisoner
may be committed with those Causes.

That if upon a Habeas Corpus cum Causa the prisoner be returned charged with a
process out of the Common Bench, though returnable at a day to come, the
prisoner may be committed with his Cause.

That if upon a Habeas Corpus, or Cepi Corpus, the party be returned in custody
and Baylable, and special Bail requirable, the Bail not to be taken
absolutely without consent of the plaintiff or his Attorney, and if taken de
been esse, the prisoner not to be discharged till the Bail be assented unto,
or the plaintiff overruled in Court to accept the same upon Examination.

That upon every Commitment by a Judge out of Court, the prosecutor of the
Habeas Corpus is to have one of the prothonotaries Clerks present at the
turning over of the prisoner, that the Commitment may be duly entered and filed.

Concerning Habeas Corpus to Inferior Courts and Procedendo.
That Writs of Habeas Corpus, directed to the inferior Courts of London,
Westminster, Southwark, and other Courts within five miles of London, may be
returnable immediate. And if the Defendant intends to be bailed, then upon,
or within four days after allowance of the Writ Notice, is to be given in
writing of the Names and addition of the Bail, the time when, and the Judge
before whom the same is intended to be put in, to the Plaintiff or his Attorney,
or him that caused the plaint to be entered; or if none can be found, then
notice of the Premises to be left in writing with the chief Clark of the
inferior Court, or his Deputy by the party that tenders the Bail, or his
Attorney, and Oath made thereof; otherwise the Bail not to be taken. And a
procedendo granted if desired, before Bail accepted.

That if no Bail in such cases be put in within eight days after the Habeas
Corpus allowed, in those Courts when it is returnable immediate a procedendo may
be granted by any Judge of this Court, if desired before Bail taken.

And if Bail be taken in the absence of the plaintiff or his Attorney, the
same is to be taken de been esse, and if no exception be taken within twenty
days after notice given to the plaintiff or his Attorney of the names of the
Bail, and before whom taken, then upon Oath made of such notice, the Bail to
be delivered out to be filed.

That if Bail upon a Habeas Corpus be taken before a Judge at his chamber,
and not assented unto, if not filed within four days after the twenty days, a
procedendo may be granted upon certificate that it is not filed.

That in Term time the plaintiff in the inferior Court may speed the
defendant to put in, or to file his Bail by rules given in the Bill of Pleas;
and if not filed according to rules, upon certificate thereof, a procedendo to
be granted.

That all writs of Habeas Corpus returnable in Court, be returnable at aday
certain.

That upon Bail taken of a person in custody, the Judges Clerk to deliver the
Bail to the prothonotary, to be filed, if assented unto; and to that end the
prothonotaries Fees to be deposited, but the prisoner not to be discharged,
until the Bail be assented unto, or overruled in open Court.

Concerning special Bail.
That if the defendant appear upon the summons, Attachment, or distress or by
Supersedias quia improvide, or does truly render himself upon the exigent, no
bail is requireable.

That in all causes of removal, be it by Habeas Corpus, Privilege, or
Certiorari, special bail ought to be given.

That in causes where the Defendant comes in by Cepi corpus, be it debt,
detinue, trespass, for goods, Action upon the case (except slander) if the debt
or damages amount to twenty pound, special bail is to be given, except it be
against an Heyr, Executor, or Administrator.

That in Covenant because the damages are uncertain, til declaration, Bail at
discretion.

That in battery, conspiracy, false imprisonment, no special bail of course
without special motion and order.

That in slander no special bail, except in slander of Title, wherein to be
left to the discretion of the Judges.

That in privilege, other then for Fees and disbursements as an Attorney in
this Court, bail at discretion of the Court. In such case wherein a suit by a
common person, especial bail is not requisite.

That if bail be given upon reversal of an Outlary, or removable by Habeas
Corpus, the original to be shown upon tendering of the declaration, otherwise
the bail not liable; unless the party or his Attorney will voluntarily
appear, or take a declaration, without showing of it.

That in case of a removal out of an inferior Court or reversal, the new
original to agree in the nature of the Action, the sum in demand, and the
County, otherwise the bail not liable: but if the party will voluntarily
appear to such varying original, to be good as to the party: but if upon a
cause removed by Habeas Corpus, out of the Courts of Canterbury, Southampton,
Hull, Lichfield, or Poole, which are Counties where the Judges of Nisip^rius
seldom come, if the Action be transitory, it must be laid in the County of
Kent, Southampton, York, Stafford, or Dorset, where the Town and County lies,
and the recognizance to be taken accordingly.

That the principal rendering himself at any time after bail put in, and
before or upon the day of appearance of the scire facias returned, scire feci,
or of the second scire facias returned nihil, or in case there shall be an
Action of debt brought upon the recognizance against the bail, then if the
principal shall render himself, upon or before the process returned served,
no further proceedings to be against the bail.

Concerning Appearances, and Entries thereof.
That Appearances be duly entered with the Prothonotaries or Phillizers of this
Court respectively, with whom the same ought to be entered: but if special bail
be requirable in the case, the plaintiff not to be concluded by such
appearances, if he insist upon it.

That where an appearance is upon the original writ, if the defendants
appearance be not entered of Record, the defendants Attorney to give his hand
to the plaintiffs Attornie upon the delivery of the declaration, that he
appears thereunto.

That any Attorney of either bench accepting a warrant to appear, or
subscribing a process, declaration, or warrant to appear, be compelled to cause
appearance, or be liable to an attachment, or put out of the Roll, as the case
requires; and the party not to be received to countermand such appearance
after his Reteyner.

That no person without Rule of Court, order of the Judge or Prothonotary; and
notice to the adverse party or his Attorney, change or shift his Attorney; and
such Attorney newly coming in, to take notice at his peril of the Rules
whereunto the former Attorney was liable, had he continued.

That a Reteyner of an Attorney of the Common pleas, by an Attorney of the
Upper Bench, and e Converso, be a sufficient excuse to the Attorney so
retained, acting according to such reteyner, and the Attorney so retaining it
without warrant from the party, to be subject to the punishment.

That if a Capias be returned in Court non est inventus, against a prisoner in
the Fleet, he is compellable to appear upon a Habeas Corpus ad respondendum,
as well at the suit of a stranger, as at his suite whereupon he is imprisoned,
and to answer to a declaration according to the rule of the Court, or that
judgment be entered against him.

That he that reverseth an outlary have an Attorney of Record present, who
must undertake an appearance to a new original. And such Attorney shall be
compelled to appear; and that the defendant or his Attorney give notice to the
plaintiff or his Attorney, of such reversal the same term, or in the vacation
next after it.

Concerning Imparlances.
That for as much as some Inconveniences do sometimes happen to plaintiff,
by entering their declaration in special Actions. It is therefore ordered that
the plaintiff in such special Actions shall have libe^ty to enter the
Imparlances the Term following, entering the same of the first Term with an
Incipitur, as it has been usual in Quare Impedits: but that all other
imparlances be duly entered before any Issues, or demurrers, or judgments
thereupon be entered.

That if the defendant appear the first Term, and give no Rules to declare,
the defendants Attorney may the second Term be compelled to accept of a
declaration with Imparlance, and the declaration may be entered as of that Term,
with an Imparlance over to the next Term, or in the first Term with an
Incipitur, as before, as the case shall require.

That if the plaintiff declare not the second Term, though the defendant give
no rules, yet a non Suite may be entered at the end of the Second Term upon a
continuance over by him entered by dies datus, but not the third Term, or after.

That upon a mere real Action, or a bare clausum fregit, an Imparlance of
Course. But in Dower after view had, if the day to appear be upon the first
return of any Hillary or Trinity Term, no Imparlance without consent or rule of
Court.

That in Ejectment or any personal action, If the apperance be the first
return of Hillary or Trinity Term, no Imparlance without consent or special
rule in such causes, other then in London or Middlesex. If the appearance be
before Crastin' Martin' or mense Pasc. no Imparlance without consent, or
special rule. But if upon or after those returns, an Imparlance of Course.

In London or Middlesex if the appearance be before Crastin' Ascen', or before
the last return of any other Term no Imparlance without a special rule or
consent; but the defendant to plead as of that Term within fourteen days after
the end of the Term upon rule given to answer: but if of Crastin' Ascen' or
the last return, then an Imparlance of course.

That no Judgment by nihil dicit be entered until there be a rule to plead,
first given in that Prothonotaries office, where the cause is entered, and the
day by such rule be past, and that such rules be only given in the Bills of
pleas or other remembrances for that purpose, only to be in the custody of the
secondary of the respective prothonotaries, during the time limited for giving
of rules, to the intent that all persons concerned may have recourse to the
said secondary, and to see the same Gratis; and that Clerks who usually enter
for Attorneys, may give rules for answer in the said remembrances in all their
own causes wherein there has been Imparlances, except in Ejectments, so as
they enter the same rules in the office without carrying any of the said
remembrances out of any of the said offices; and that the secondary set down
upon the remembrances the day wherein such rules are given, and that no rules
to declare or answer be given after three days exclusive after the end of any
Term, and such rule to be out at four days inclusive of the day wherein the
same is given.

That in all actions except Replevin (after rules to declare are out, yet) if
the plaintiff or his known Attorney or Clerk be to be found, a Nonsuite for want
of a declaration not to be entered, unless the Plaintiffs Attorney or known
Clerk be first called to for a declaration.

That if the Plaintiffs Attorney or Clerk be called to for a declaration, and
delivers it not to the Defendant or his Attorney sometime during that Term,
then the rule being out, the Defendants Attorney may enter a Nonsuit.

That if the Plaintiffs Attorney being called to for a declaration, cannot
afterward find the Defendants Attorney or Clerk to save a Nonsuit, he may
deliver a declaration into the prothonotaries office where the rules are given.

That when a Deed, Will, or Letters of Administration are to be shown in a
declaration, the Attorney of the Plaintiff delivering a declaration with a
subscription, that the Defendant shall not be compelled to plead till the same
be shown; no Judgment by Nihil dicit be entered against the Defendant till the
same shown; nor any Nonsuit upon the Plaintiff if he show the same before the
end of the next Term.

If the Defendant be committed to prison by Process out of this Court, or
Habeas Corpus, the prisoner entering his appearance with the Prothonotary in
case of a plaint, or in case of attachment of privilege; or with the Filizer
in case of other process, and giving rules to declare, the Plaintiff not
declaring before the end of the next Term after the commitment, the defendant
in reference thereunto to be discharged of his Imprisonment by Supersedias in
the end of the next Term, and Liberty for the Plaintiff to declare upon that
appearance the next Term after that at the furthest.

That if a writ be returnable 5. Pasc. or the last return of any Term, the
Defendant, giving rule, and calling for a declaration, if it be not delivered
according to the former directions, four days or more before the Essoigne day
of the ensuing Term, may enter a Nonsuit, though above sixteen days after the
preceding Term.

That the Plaintiff having declared and given rules for answer, the Defendant
is to deliver his plea in writing to the Plaintiffs Attorney, or known Clerk.

That if there be no such Attorney or Clerk to be found, or being found,
refuses to accept it, then the plea may be left in the office to save a
Judgment.

That in any case where a Plea or Declaration is left in the office, no Nonsuit
for want of a Declaration, or judgment for want of a Plea be Entered.

That in cases of popular actions, Informations, or real or mixed actions,
except ejectment, no judgment to be entered by default, or nihil dicit, without
motion in Court.

That upon Null tiel Record pleaded, and no difficulty or variance appearing,
Judgment be entered after rule, without motion by the Plaintiff.

That after any Imparlance of three Terms, without any calling for answer, no
Judgment to be entered without a Terms notice.

Concerning Declarations.
For avoiding of long and unnecessary repetitions of the Original Writ in
Actions upon the Case, and personal Actions upon penal Statutes. That
Declarations in Actions of Trespass upon the Case, or personal Actions upon
any general Statute; namely, Hue and Cry, Monopolies, and for suits in the
Admiralty, and such like, other then debt, repeat not the Original writ but
only the nature of the action. viz. A.B. was attached to answer C. D. in a plea
of trespass upon the Case, or in a plea of trespass and contempt, against the
form of the statute.

For the avoiding of the Common Bar and new assignment. The declaration upon
an Original, or Bill Quare clausum fregit, may mention the place certainly, and
so prevent the use and necessity of the Common bar and new assignment.

That unnecessary length of declarations be reformed. And in order thereunto,

That in actions of covenant not to repeat more of the deed then is necessary
for the assignment of the breach, and not to repeat the Covenant in the
conclusion.

That in actions of slander, long preambles be forborne, and no more inducement
then what is necessary for the maintenance of the accord, when it requires a
special Inducement or Colloquium.

That in actions upon general statutes the declaration not to repeat the
statute, but to conclude against the form of the statute in such case made and
provided: as in case of debt, upon the statute of the second year of Edward the
sixth, For Tithes; the thirty second of Henry the eighth, for Maintenance. 21
Jacobi for Monopoly.

That actions of debt upon a Judgment had in the Courts at Westminister, to
recite only the Judgment. But if a Judgment had by, or against an Executor or
Administrators debt, thereupon to repeat the Declaration and Judgment.

That before the declaration actually entered, the Plaintiff may mend his
Declaration, paying costs, or giving an Imparlance, at the Plaintiffs election,
by the Order of a Judge of the Court, or Prothonotary: But after it is entered,
if the amendment be but a small matter that does not deface the Roll, yet that
before issue or demurrer entered it be amendable by rule of Court upon costs and
liberty to plead, with a new or further Imparlance.

To cause care in examination of the Declaration. That if the Plaintiffs
Attorney or Clerk deliver a Copy to the Defendants Attorney or Clerk,
materially varying from the Original declaration, the disadvantage thereof not
to be cast upon the Defendant, but on the Plaintiff, whose Attorney is paid for
it.

Concerning Pleading.
The Common Bar and new assignment to be forborne, where the declaration
contains the certainty equivalent to a new assignment.

That pleadings be succint, without unnecessary repetitions.

That in the pleading of an Outlawry the mesne process be not repeated, but
the exigent, and Utlary joined to the commencing of the suit.

That in pleading a general statute, the statute be not recited, As the statute
of twenty one Jacobi of Limitations.

Concerning Demurrers.
That according to the statute of the twenty seventh of Elizabeth upon
Demurrers, the causes be specially assigned, and not involved with general
unapplyed expressions of double, negative, pregnant, uncertain, wanting form,
and the like; but to show specially wherein that the other party may (as the
case shall require) either join in demurrer, or amend, paying costs; or
discontinue his Action.

That it be declared, that matters of form, as well on the part of him that
demurres, as of him that joins in all parts of the pleading, are discharged;
unless such as are specially assigned upon the Demurrer.

Concerning Trials, and notice of Trials and Inquiries.
That notice of Trials or Inquiries in London or Middlesex, the Defendant
dwelling within forty miles of London, be eight days exclusive of the day
wherein notice is given.

That if the Defendant live above forty miles distant from London, notice of
such Trials and Inquiries in London or Middlesex be fourteen days exclusive of
the day of notice.

That in all Issues to be tried by Nisi prins in London or Middlesex upon a
record of a precedent Term, the copy of the Issue be brought to the Clerk of
the Treasury, for the engrossing of the Record, four days at the least before
the day of Trial of such Issue; and that all Causes to be tried in London or
Middlesex be entered into the Marshals Book four days before the day of trial.

That eight days notice exclusive be given upon trials in the Country, and
upon writs of enquiry of damages in writs of dower and wast, and all other
inquiries of damages.

That if the Plaintiff give notice of a trial, and he proceed not, the
Plaintiff not to take it down to trial again without new notice to be given, as
is before expressed, unless by consent or Rule of Court.

But in London or Middlesex, if notice be given of a trial for one sitting, and
the Plaintiff be not provided to proceed: Then if he give notice before the
sitting that he will try it the next sitting, that to be held convenient notice.

That in case of such warning, and no proceeding, the Defendant upon motion to
have his cost of his former attendance, to be taxed by the Prothonotary;
unless the Plaiatiff give the Defendant warning in convenient time that he
would not proceed; or show cause to be allowed by the Court in excuse of such
Costs.

That no Record of nisi prius be signed before the issue be entered upon the
Roll.

That if the Plaintiff give notice for a trial, and proceed not, the Defendant
may take it by proviso according to law, giving notice eight or fourteen days,
as the case requires, as aforesaid.

That in London or Middlesex, if no warning for a Trial, then the Defendant not
to take it by proviso, to try it the same Term; but afterward he may take it
by proviso according to Law, giving eight or fourteen days notice as the case
requires.

That if notice be given to the Attorney of the adverse party of a trial upon
an issue joined, it be taken to be good notice: And oath made of want of notice
to the Attorney, to turn the proof of notice given to the party upon him that
brought it down to Trial in that case.

That if an issue be joined above a year since in any case, then one Terms
notice to be given of the trial.

Concerning Trials at Bar.
That for the remedy of excessive charges of Trials at the Bar, especially
whilst the Jury lies out, it is ordered that a Jury lying out one night after
a privy verdict delivered, there be allowed for the whole diet of each Jury man
that night no more then three shillings four pence a piece, and for two Cryers
to each of them, no more then two shillings ordinary, besides the charge of the
Jurours Lodging.

That after a verdict delivered in Court, the Jury and Officers to be paid
their charges and fees in the Inner Treasury, without going to the Taverns or
Victualling houses for that cause.

Concerning special verdicts at the Bar, or by Nisi prius.
That in finding special verdicts where the points are single and not
complicated, and no special conclusion, the Council (if required) do subscribe
the points in question, and agree to amend omissions or mistakes in the mesne
Conveyance, according to the truth, to bring the point in question to Judgment.

That unnecessary finding of deeds in haec verba, where the question rests not
upon them, but are only derivatioin of title, to be spared; and found shortly,
according to the substance they bear in reference to the Deed, as Feoffment,
Lease, Grant, etc.

Concerning new Trials.
That where a verdict finds entire damages where damages are the principal,
and part not actionable, though judgment be arrested, yet by rule of Court a
venire fac' de novo may issue as upon an Ill verdict, and upon the new trial
the party may sever his damages.

Concerning Judgment.
That in a judgment by non sum informatus, or nihil dicit, in Eject' fir me,
the Capiatur be entered upon the first judgment.

That upon a cause removed by Habeas Corpus out of an Inferior Court, having
Jurisdiction of the cause, if Judgment be given for the Plaintiff, the costs
below to be considered and cast into the judgment; if for the Defendant, the
charge of putting in bail.

That the principal in any bond or bill obligatory do not for the time to come
give warrant to appear for, or confess judgment against his surety: and that
after the two and twentieth of January next, no judgment be confessed for, or
given against the surety upon any such warrant given by the principal.

That sixteen days be allowed for the signing of Judgments after every Term,
except Easter Term, upon causes depending in the erme precedent.

And lastly, it is declared by the Justices of this Court, that as the Court
does expect that all the Rules and Orders before mentioned be duly observed; so
it is further Ordered, that all other former Orders and Rules yet in force not
hereby altered, suspended or adnulled, be likewise Observed and put in
execution according to the true intent and meaning of the same.

OL. St JOHN. EDW. ATKINS. MATTHEW HALE. HUGH WINDHAM.


FINIS.
The Oath to be taken by every Attorney of the Common Pleas, before their
admittance, to be administered openly in Court.
YOu shall do no falsehood or deceit, nor consent to any to be done within the
Court: And if you shall know of any to be done, you shall give knowledge
thereof to the Lord Chief Justice, or other of his brethren, Justices of this
place, that it may be reformed. You shall delay no man for lucre or Malice.
You shall increase no fees, but you shall be contented with the old fees
accustomed. You shall plead no foreign Plea, nor sue no foreign Suits
unlawfully, to the hurt of any man; but such as shall stand with the Order of
law, and your own conscience. You shall seal all such process as you sue out
of this Court, with the seal thereof: and see the fees paid for the same. You
shall not wittingly nor willingly sue, or procure to be sued any false suit,
nor give aid or consent to the same, upon pain to be expulsed from this Court
for ever. And further, You shall truly use and demean you self in the office of
an Attorney within the Court, according to your learning and discretion.

So help you God.

