border with historiated images of medical procedures, which surround the text
central depiction of J. Russell, flanked on either side by images of chemical
apparatus depiction of man wearing a truss A Rupture cured
depiction of removal of tobacco pipe from victim's tongue Tobacco pipe 4
inches long struck in to the tongue lay there 9 days was dumb an the while yet
Cured.
depiction of removal of cataract from blind man Couching a Catract of one that
had been blind 30 years
depiction of removal of a nasal polyp from male sufferer The Polypus.
depiction of trepanning the scull Trepaning the scull
depiction of ocular surgery A Carnosity Cutting off the Eye
depiction of repair of anal fistula Fistula in the Fundament.
depiction of repair of a hernia (...)-Rupture Cutting
depiction of an obstetrical procedure Tympany tapping
depiction of the removal of a massive wen A Great Wenn Cutting off
depiction of the repair of a harelip A Hare-lip.
depiction of a cancerous breast being removed from a woman A Cancerated breast
cutting off and cured.

J. Russell, Professor of Physic, and Oculist. Grays Inn in Holbourn.
THese Pictures present what I have Cured by Manual Operations; Besides such
Variety of other Cures on the Sick, Lame, and Blind,) by Medicinal
Applications) that without boasting, I may truly say, few has yet performed the
like; yet some are to disingenuous, as to undervalue that they never did,
cannot mend, or ever see done.

There is above 100 Diseases of the Eyes and few understands their Cure, which
causes so many Blind that a good Oculist might have prevented; for its not
enough to say he is a Linguist (if he have not studied to be an Oculist) that
will not serve the Patient, who cries, give me Ease and Sight, or else I am for
ever blind.

Those that are troubled with distempered Eyes, if they come in time may have
Cure; I have cured many that have been blind 20 or 30 Years, 2 of them born
Blind.

Many Ocular Diseases are Cured by a Medicinal Application, some by Manual
Operation. In Couching of Cataracts, if they err little more than an hairs
breadth, the Sight is for ever lost, that might have been preserved by a
dextrous Hard: Some in Couching of Cataracts have distorted the Pupil of the
Eye, rent and tore the Wea or Grape-Coat, made a confused mixture of the
Aqueous, Vitreous or Albugineous Humors; rent and broke the Christalline in
sunder, leaving such an Inflammation on the Adnata, by their tedious turning
and twisting their Instrument in the Eye, that the Inflammation is a long while
a Curing. with extreme Pains of the Head, and los. of Sight for ever. Many
mistake the Ocular Ulcer for a common Speck; who by their Waters and Powders,
Corrode the Adnata and Cornea asunder; giving such vent to the Humors in the
Eye, that the Eye sinks presently, never to be restored: Some by applying
Corrosives to Ocular Ulcers, have dilated them over the whole Cornea, which if
ever Cured, leaves an incurable Cicatrix or Scar, with perpetual loss of Sight.

Several mistake the Cicatrix or Sear, for a supersinous thin Film, and have
applied Corrosives to eat it away, which has caused an Ulcer where none was:
Many by applying Corrosives to a Fistula Lachrymalis, have eaten away the
Lachrymalis Glandules leaving for ever a continual flowing of Tears. Some have
so exasperated the Cancer in the Eye, that they have left it without either
hopes of Recovery, or Palliating, but have miserably perished: Several mistake
pockey Pustules on the Eyelid, and Venereal Ulcers, thinking to Cure them by
common Medicines; (which will never do)

Although I mention but a few Diseases here, yet my practice is in General on
all Distempers both inward and outward that can afflict the Bodies of Men,
Women and Children. For having such proper Medicines so friendly to the Spirit
of Life, that is most probable to Cure all curable Distempers; therefore let
none be afraid to come to me because of the long continuance of their
Distemper, for I have Cured many that have been given over by others as
uncurable.

I should have forborne Publishing Papers if I had not been Reported Dead, etc.

Drawing Teeth with a Touch.


