Boston, April 10. 1729. Reverend Sir,
THE New England CHRONOLOGY staying for the Remarkables of Your Place, and the
Composer being unwilling to send it to the Press without them, that so the Work
may be as complete as possible -- You are therefore earnestly desired to send
your Communications as soon as may be, on the following Heads,

WHEN your Town was granted and settled, what its original Indian Name, to what
County first laid, and if there has been any Alteration, what and when it was.

2. WHAT the Number of Original Shares and Settlers, and from whence they
chiefly came, and what your present Number of Families.

3. WHEN the Church was first Gathered, and what their first and present Number
of Males.

4. WHETHER you are yet divided into Precincts, How many, when, and what their
Names, both ancient Indian and present English.

5. WHO have been your Teaching or Ruling Elders, and when called, ordained,
removed and dyed, at what Age, and Where.

6. WHETHER you have a Grammar School and when first set up.

7. HOW many of your Town have taken their first Degree at College, whether
Cambridge or New Haven, how many at each, and what their Names.

8. THE Decease of other Gentlemen of Note among you, such as Counselors,
Assistants, Justices, Graduates etc.

9. WHETHER any have Deceased among you of 100 Years of Age or upward, whether
English or Indians, when, and what their Names.

10. THOSE who have been remarkable for a great Increase of Posterity, their
Names, Age, when they Died, and the Number of their Offspring then of each
Generation.

11. WHAT remarkable Works have been among you, as the Building Meeting Houses,
Great Bridges etc. and when.

12. THE remarkable Providence that have befallen your Town or the People in
it, from the Beginning to the present Time, as Earthquakes, Tempests,
Inundations, extraordinary Floods, Droughts, Fires, Epidemical Sicknesses,
awful Deaths, or any other strange Occurrences, as far as can be recollected.

You are desired to be as Precise as possible in the Dates, both as to Year,
Month and Day, of all your Articles, as well as Certain in the Facts related;
that so the Public may depend on the Truth and Accuracy of these Collections.

IN doing which you will oblige the PUBLIC, as well as

The Composer Thomas Prince.


