A DIALOGUE BETWEEN THOMAS SWEET-SCENTED, WILLIAM ORONOCO, Planters, both Men
of good Understanding, and Justice LOVE-COUNTRY, who can speak for himself.
RECOMMENDED To the Reading of the Planters.

By a sincere Lover of VIRGINIA.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM PARKS. M,DCC,XXXII.

A DIALOGUE, etc.
Tom. HOW do you, how do you, Neighbor? Well, how goes the World?


Will. I am pretty well I thank you, only troubled a good deal in Mind.


Tom. Why what is the Matter, Man?


Will. Matter! Matter enough: I have been at the Warehouse, to have some of my
Tobacco inspected.


Tom. Ah! Well, pray how is it? I want sadly to know a little: How do you like
these new Officers?


Will. By my Troth, Tommas, I cannot tell what to say to it; I am really
nonplust.


Tom. Prithee tell me how it fared with you: Let me hear a little.


Will. Hear a little! You shall hear a great deal, if you go to that. Can any
Body say, that it is not very hard upon a poor Man, to have Part of his Labor
burnt by these Inspectors, because, forsooth they don't like our Tobacco? when
at the same time, for aught I can see, they are no better Judges of it than any
of us.


Tom. It Is very hard indeed Neighbor: For my Part, I cannot by any manner of
Means approve this new Law.


Will. Approve it! No, who can? For they tell me, that if our Tobacco is not
800, they will not pay us for the Cask.


Tom. How so?


Will. You may depend upon what I tell you, and something worse: For, when I
was at the Warehouse, Neighbor Seconds brought Two Hogsheads of Tobacco to be
viewed, which, to please these Men, he had made above 800: But so it fell out,
the Tobacco not having been well handled in the Curing, by pressing it hard to
make it that Weight, it turned black, (as you know Tobacco will do that is not
well looked after;) and what do you think these unmerciful Officers said to him
-- Why truly, that it was such black Stuff, unless he would pick it, they must
burn it all.


Tom. What, and so if our Tobacco is not 800, they will not pay us for the Cask;
and if, to make it that Weight, it turns black under the Press, which, as you
say, all Tobacco will do that is'nt well handled, they will burn it, will they?
Things are come to a fine Pass indeed.


Will. Burn it! Ay, up it goes in a Funk, unless you will pick it; I must say for
them, they will suffer a poor Man to do That. But there is another Circumstance
harder than what you have heard: If our Casks are not exactly of such a Gauge, be
our Tobacco never so good, they will not pass it: What think you of that? This
seems to me to exceed all the rest.


Tom. No, there is nothing new in that, do you see: There has been for some Years
a Law ord'ring us not to make our Hogsheads above such a Size.


Will. Indeed! Well that is what I never knew before: One of our Neighbors,
sometime since, did say that is the Truth on it, that we must make them so and
so, and luckily I did, but I never knew there was a Law for it; and till this
Year, I am sure we never minded it; every Body made their Casks as big as they
pleased.


Tom. That cannot be denied, but we --


Will. What then, this that I thought so very hard, is come to Nothing?


Tom. Not to be charged to this new Law, it being --


Will. It signifies Nothing to talk of it then.


Tom. Nothing, do you call it? I always thought we were obliged to con --


Will. Alas, I mean it is not material, not worth Noticing in this Case, in this
new Law, where there are so many other Things that pinch us.


Tom. There I agree with you: I wish with all my Heart Will, I could but once
understand what our Assembly meant by making such a Law.


Will. Find that out if you can: 'Twould puzzle a Philosopher, I believe; (...)
they say he is a mighty Man for this Law, (...) Law; and I must confess I have
heard other Gentlemen say so, particularly, that it is a good Law for the poor
Planters; but, for my Life, I cannot see in what.


Tom. We have lost the Justice, he is turned out of the Road to a Plantation on
the Left Hand.


Will. I am sorry for it, he is a right honest Man; and if we could have got
him into Talk, would have told us all. However, let us stay here, perhaps he may
come this Way anon.


Tom. Then, as we were saying, -- oh -- Notwithstanding what so many Folks say,
I cannot discover One good Thing in the Law.


Will. Folks say! Why Man, though some Folks say as I told you, there are other
Folks that say quite contrary: I am sure I have heard a great many Speeches
against it at the Race-Grounds, and at the County-Courts, when the Courts were
over, and Men were got together in the Ordinary, speaking their Thoughts
freely, without any Liking to it, nay, they have publicly cursed it: And sure
we cannot all of us be mistaken. -- Why, pray is it not a clear Case, don't we
see our Tobacco burnt by the Humor of the Inspectors? Who can bear such Usage?


Tom. Far and softly, Will: Don't fly into Passion; that avails naught, you
know; for, bear it we must: What can we do? Nothing but quietly submit:


Will. Quietly submit! Have thou lived to these Years to be so tame a Creature,
as to cry out on such an Occasion, What can we do? -- Yes, Yes, something might
be done, if we could but confide in one another.


Tom. As how, pray? What would thy wise Head propose, ha?


Will. My wise Head! Why, my wife Head tells me, that there are a Power of
People in some of the Upper Counties, and abundance in the Northern Neck, that
complain as heavily against this Law as we do; and certainly, it is as easy as
it is to jump over a Fence-Rail, for us to get together, and think of something
or other that might be done, to force --


Tom. A pretty Fellow indeed! To force! To force what? Art thou such an Oaf as
to talk after this Rate? To force! Force your self headlong into Rebellion, be
hanged, lose your Land, and ruin your Family, rather than submit to a Law, the
Great Ones and the Rich Ones must submit to as well as we; a Law, whatever at
present we may think of it, was undoubtedly designed by our Burgesses for the
Good of the Country.


Will. But hark you Tom: What did you talk of Rebellion for, and all that? No,
I ask your Pardon there, I did not mean That neither.


Tom. Not mean, No verily I believe thee: Though whatever you meant, would have
signified but little; your Meaning woudn't have procured you a Pardon, woudn't
have saved you from the Gallows: And I must needs say, all our Disturbances are
owing to such Wiseacres as you. You pretend to fly in the Face of the
Government? I charge you on my Friendship to talk no more in this Strain.


Will. Indeed Tom, I did not consider -- But Tom, the Justice is coming.


Tom. Ay, Young Man, if he should hear what you have been talking of, I woudn't
be in your Coat for --


Will. Pray Tom, be pacified; and since you have declared your self my Friend,
advise me seriously how to behave.


Tom. Behave! If you are really One of the impatient Crew, and cannot wait the
Event of this new Regulation, send your Grievances to the Assembly; they say
they are to meet in May.


Will. In May! That Is a good one indeed: In May! If we carry our Tobacco to the
Warehouse, Part of it will be burnt before May comes; and if we don't, by what
I can learn, no Body will buy it of us.


Tom. Why then you must be contented, that is all that I know, I am sure, I Am
resolved to be so: I am as uneasy, it may be, as some others are, but not quite
so fierce; for though I cannot tell how, in what, nor when, I comfort my self with
the Hopes that this Law will help us, that it was not made in vain.


Will. Say no more, here is the Justice.


Justice. Good Day to you, Neighbors.


Will. The like to your Worship.


Tom. The same to you; Sir, -- Let me speak, Will.


Will. Do so then, since you are so fond on it.


Justice. What News do you hear? All the Discourse now, I suppose, is about our
new Law: Pray how goes Tobacco at the Warehouses?


Will. Go, Master! Some of it goes into the Fire.


Justice. Thrown into the Fire, say thou? I am very glad to hear it,
exceedingly rejoiced.


Tom. But why, Master, are you so glad?


Will. Ah, Master, why so rej --


Tom. Be quiet, cannot you. What makes you so glad, Sir?


Justice. It Is a certain Sign the Inspectors are honest Men, and do their Duty.


Tom. Their Duty! It Is very hard upon us in the mean Time.


Justice. No such Thing, I promise you: In the first Place, don't you know good
Tobacco as well as they?


Tom. To be sure we do.


Will. To be sure we do.


Justice. Then why do you carry such Tobacco to them, that you know they must
burn? But however, since I have happened with you, and we are entered upon the
Subject, if you are willing to be informed, and are resolved to govern your
selves accordingly, be patient, speak one at a Time, and you will both of you be
made easy, never fear.


Will. We shall do as you desire, Sir, and think our selves much obliged to you.


Tom. We want, may it please your Worship, to hear what may be said on the Side
of this same Law, and what Good it will do us poor Planters; for we are
strangely pestered with odd Notions about it.


Justice. I don't wonder at it; the best Things are the most liable to be
abused: Though it astonishes me, that so plain a Law as this is, should have so
many Enemies. A Law, not only the best that ever was made for the Country, for
our Trade in general, but the best for the poor Planters.


Tom. Your Worship said, for the poor Planters?


Justice. I did so; and that You may comprehend me the better, tell me the
Parts of it You dislike, and I Will explain their Meaning to You.


Tom. Dislike!


Will. Dislike! Dislike! Sir.


Justice. Ay, tell me what you grumble at.


Tom. Grumble at!


Will. Burning, Tom.


Tom. Grumble at! Why, Sir, don't they burn our Tobacco; and is not that enough
to make any Man grumble?


Justice. I own they do burn Tobacco, and this Year they will burn a great deal
of Tobacco; for a worse Year for Tobacco we have not had these 20 Years: But
what then? If they burn Yours, they will as readily burn mine, and some of every
Man's they will burn, if we don't sort it carefully before we carry it to them.
And now let me ask you a Question, answer me honestly? Is the Tobacco the
Inspectors burn, fit for any thing else? Can either of you say, it is fit for
any Market? If not, then such Trash ought to be destroyed.


Tom. Why Master, since you have put it so very home to us, we must own, the
Tobacco they burn, is not good for much; but then, as bad as it is, we always
got something for it, and so, I don't doubt, we should this Year, were we at
Liberty; which, we confess, has been a very indefferent Year for Tobacco.


Justice. Therefore pray consider: The Accounts we have had for several Years
past, from every Port in Great Britain our Tobacco is carried to, are full of
Complaints, that we make more than all Europe can consume, and a great Part of
it such Trash, as no Purchaser will meddle with.


Tom. If this be true, Why then, Master, don't they stint us?


Justice. Stint you! It has been tried, and found ineffectual: And no wonder;
for though it lessened the Quantity, it did not mend the Quality; there was Trash
still in Proportion to clog the Markets; and so there would be, reduce the
Number of Plants as low as you please: Let us be restrained never so much, we
find Ways to make it up, and you own you can fell all.


Tom. I do: But Burning, Master! That Is the terrible Article.


Justice. Not a Bit; it is no such terrible Thing. Is Not the Country almost
ruined? And let me tell you, this very Year our Ruin had been completed, had
not this excellent Law interposed, which destroys all bad Tobacco, and suffers
none but good to be exported to the Markets in Europe.


Tom. But spare me, Sir: What have we, who sell our Tobacco in the Country, to
do with the Markets Abroad?


Justice. If you don't send any Home, you must know all of it goes Home; and
that a great many of us ship our Tobacco on our own Venture to the Markets:
Thousands of Hogsheads are every Year consigned upon Freight to the Merchants
in London, Glascow, Bristol, and other Ports: And can you be such a Simpleton,
as not to consider, that the better the Markets are in Europe, the more Money
you will sell your Tobacco for here: Or, that when all Trash is destroyed, and
our Staple gets a Reputation, the Price for it will advance, and in all
Likelihood the Consumption of it increase.


Will. There seems to be some Sense in that, Master; the better the Commodity,
the better it will sell, to be sure.


Justice. Thou have hit it, Will: The Lowness of the Markets, I have been long
since convinced, is not altogether occasioned by the Quantity: Therefore, if
under the Direction of this Law, we lessen the Quantity, and mend the Quality,
by destroying the Trash, we drive the right Nail.


Tom. Do you in Earnest conceit so, Master?


Justice. No less, my Word for it: If, when your Tobacco is well culled, you
get as much for 800 that is Clean and Neat, as you could do before this Law for
1200 Tag-rag and Bob-tail, what Injury or Injustice pray will this Law do you?
The naked Truth, Tom, is this, Bad Tobacco destroyed, stamps a Value upon the
remaining Good, which will for ever be depreciated by a Mixture.


Tom. I grant it, Sir; but I fear we must wait some Time to see all this come
to pass.


Justice. If you were to wait, you would be no Loser at the Long Run; but there
is no Room for such Fears: Have but Patience, and this very Year you will see it
come to pass. Send 2000 Weight of Tobacco to the Warehouse, if the Inspectors
pass but 1200 of it, I will engage to give you more, in Money or Goods, for the
1200, than you could sell the 2000 for.


Will. Engage to give us more! Will you so?


Justice. Yes, though I am no Dealer, only to show you what you may do.


Tom. But, Sir, after we have been at the Trouble, and perhaps some Expense, in
carrying our Tobacco to the Inspectors, that they should have Authority to burn
it, That is what galls us.


Justice. A pretty Business indeed! Don't both of you boast that you know good
Tobacco as well as they? Is it not, therefore, unreasonable to complain of what
you may prevent, by carefully Sorting of it before you carry it to them? And
then, the devious and designing Men would not have that Handle for Clamor and
Noise, nor would it be so much in their Power to raise foolish Stories against
the Law, because they see Tobacco burnt, that a right honest Man, tender of the
Welfare of his Country, would not offer to Sale.


Tom. What your Worship says is very right.


Justice. A Man with half an Eye might see it: It Is your Impatience that spoils
all: You eagerly catch up every idle Story that artful Men, for private
Interest, propagate among you; and then you impute them to the Law: When,
lack-a-day, the Sense and Meaning of the Law is no way concerned; all your
Uneasiness arise from their wicked Insinuations. Let me tell you, it is much
easier to raise a Dust than to lay it.


Will. It Is but too true, I have seen enough of that, Master.


Justice. What, you begin to be convinced, do you? Let us then next reflect
upon the great Advantage of these Inspectors Notes, which they give you for
your Tobacco after they have passed it; Notes full as good as so much ready
Money, the same as so much Cash, and as such will be received in Payment at any
Store, for what Goods you want: Your Tobacco you may parcel out, into as many
of them as you please, so as to be able to pay this Man 50 Pounds of Tobacco,
another 100, and another 200; in short, make Payment of any Debt: And thus,
according to the Price of Tobacco, these Notes will answer 10, 20, 30, or 40
Shillings in Money, in any Part of the Neck you live in:


Tom. We were told that we were to have Notes, but never dreamt of this good
Account they are like to turn to; that Thing of Burning was always uppermost.


Justice. Did thou never read the Law?


Tom. Not I, Sir.


Justice. Have you, Neighbor?


Will. No truly, I cannot say I have.


Justice. Has it been read to you?


Will. No.


Tom. No.


Justice. I thought as much; clever Fellows indeed! you have been finding Fault
with a Law you never read, never heard read, a Law you know nothing of, but
from the Reports of lawless Mouths, who meant, by what they said, to impose
upon you.


Tom. As I am inclined to think what your Worship has told us is the Truth, I
must acknowledge the Imposition.


Justice. Imposition with a Witness. But as I was saying, by Virtue of these
Inspectors Notes, I dare to promise you Goods much cheaper than hitherto you
have had them: So that by this Law, you will not only get more Money for your
Tobacco, but you will pay less for your Goods.


Tom. Ah Master, that is rare News indeed: But how, Sir, how is that to be?


Justice. Every Man must say, that knows any thing of your way of Dealing in
these Upper parts of the Country, nay, the Storekeepers will own it, that they
were always obliged to be very sharp in the Sale of their Goods, on the Score
of the Badness of the Tobacco they were generally paid in, and the Risque they
run of being Losers by it at Home; and therefore they valued their Goods,
raising the per Cent. upon them, not from the prime Cost, but by the Quality of
the Tobacco: Insomuch, that when you have had the Name of selling your Tobacco
for 10, 12, 15 Shillings per Hundred, in Reality you had not above 4, 5, or 6
Shillings.


Will. What have we been thus used?


Justice. Yes, marry have you: I have known in a scarce Year, one of these
Gentlemen give 3l. 2s. 6d. per Hundred for Tobacco, in Goods, the first Cost of
which Goods was not above 20 s. if so much.


Tom. If so, we have paid through the Nose.


Justice. Yes; but it was with Tobacco not fit to be put there.


Tom. But Sir, the Season is far advanced, and I don't hear that any Price is
set upon Inspected Tobacco, or, that many Goods are in the Stores.


Justice. The Ships are very late in this Year, they came out late; those that
failed the first, have had long Passages; they are but just arrived, and few
Goods are yet imported: But assure your selves, in a little Time the Face of
Affairs will be much changed for the better.


Will. We should rejoice to see it.


Justice. Rest satisfied: Rome was not built in a Day: Laws are never made to
oppress People, but to relieve them: And this very Law against which there is
so much Cavil, is calculated to redress all our Grievances in Trade. The
Clamours that oppose it, only show how corrupt Men are, nothing else.


Tom. Indeed! -- Well, but Master, woudn't a Stint do all these fine Things as
well; and then, mayhaps, the Country would be easy.


Justice. A Stint, Noodle! Tom. you are enough to provoke me: Are we not now
under a Stint? And let me tell you, the most indulgent Stint that could be
proposed for us.


Tom. How Is that, Sir! Clear that same Indulgence, if you please.


Justice. It wants no Clearing, it speaks its self: But if I must tell you my
Story over again, and beat into your Head by Repetition, you shall have it. You
remember, before this Law, we were limited by an Act of Assembly to 6000 Plants
per Taxable, and some were for reducing us lower, to a less Number; but did
that, or will such a Method, remedy the Mischiefs the Country lay under?


Tom. I cannot say it did.


Justice. Say it did! No, it would not do: And therefore I tell you again, we
must mend our Staple, as well as lesson the Quantity. But answer me faithfully,
Did you make more Tobacco under a Stint, than what, by this Law, in a
favorable Year, you may get passed by the Inspectors? If you did, then this
Law lessons the Quantity, and mends the Quality: If you did not, you have no
Reason to complain.


Tom. I cannot say any thing to it one Way nor the other; but by your Leave, Sir,
under the Stint Law, I could sell all that I made, and that I cannot do now:
There Is the Grievance.


Justice. For my Part, I must think, if any Law may be called grievous, it is
that which cuts us short in the Management of our own Land.


Tom. Nay, but Sir, where is the Difference between cutting a Man short in his
Labor, and in the Fruit of his Labor; these Laws considered together, the
Stint appears the more favorable of the Two, for by That I reap some Advantage
from all my Labor.


Justice. If you were the only Person concerned in making of Tobacco, and
carried on the whole Trade by your self, it would then be cruel, not to say
unjust, to restrain you either Way; because, the Consequence of your Management
would advantage no other Man, neither would it injure any other; but when the
Public is taken into the Account, it is quite another Argument; and as the whole
Country is engaged in the same Trade, every Man in the Country will be more or
less affected by the Contrivances of unfair Dealers. This was the Reason why
the Assembly, the Guardians of our Trade and Property, entered into these
Measures, to prevent, if possible, in this general Commerce, all Fraud and
Deceit, by making every Man honest.


Tom. This is what our Assembly meant, it is Sir? In troth, I think they are
honest Gentlemen.


Justice. But let me answer the Bounce you made of Advantage from all your
Labor, by which, you declare the Stint the more favorable Law: Don't you
know, that the Reward of your Labor depends upon the Profit you make at the
Winding up of the Bottom? For Instance, suppose now you had 100 Bushels of
Wheat in the Ear, in several Stacks in your Yard, which you might sell for 2
Shillings the Bushel; and that by the Accident of Fire, half of it was
destroyed. Now, only suppose the like Misfortune had befallen every Man in the
Country, and that the Price of Wheat by this Casualty advanced, as no Doubt it
would, and you could sell the remaining 50 Bushels at 4 Shillings; what is
become of the Produce of all your Labor, as you term it? Have you any Reason
on the Account of Interest to bewail Burning?


Tom. No, I think not.


Justice. The Case is the same in Tobacco, with this Difference, Tobacco is
made better by Part of it (the Trash) being destroyed; and for that one Reason,
will fetch a better Price: So that, to the extraordinary Labor you are at, in
making more Tobacco than you are allowed to sell, be pleased to place the
Advantage you will reap by mending the Quality; and rest assured you will be well
paid for your Pains.

What, perhaps you are resolved not to be convinced.


Will. Sir, we are not obstinate; but you must needs think, we have been
strangely prepossest. For, notwithstanding it is so very plain, to show you the
Roguery of some that shall be nameless, 'twas confidently buzzed about, as if,
by this Law, the Rich intended to ruin the Poor.


Justice. None but the worst of Villains could suggest such a Reflection: No
such Thing, upon my Honor: Consider the Persons concerned in making this Law;
Are they not all of them Gentlemen of Probity and great Integrity? And have
they not, by this very Act of theirs, sufficiently testified their Regard for
the Public, and their tender Concern for the poor Planters?


Tom. Well, for my Part, I am resolved never to quarrel for the future with
what I don't understand: And whenever they din any idle Reports against Laws in
my Ears, that are beyond my Capacity, if your Worship will give me Leave, I Will
wait on your Worship with them.


Justice. Do so and welcome, either of you: Don't suffer your selves to be
debauched by never a He that wears a Head: It Is the Duty of every Magistrate,
as the Laws are the Peoples Direction in moral Actions, to give them all the
Light they can, into the Intent and Meaning of them.


Will. We thank you, Master.


Justice. Have you done with Objections?


Will. Tommas has said nothing, Sir, about the Charge of the Warehouses, and
the Inspectors Salaries.


Justice. What of them, pray?


Tom. Nay, it may be, this is a Rout about Nothing too: But the Thing Will.
means, is the Charge the Country is put to on those Two Accounts, the Houses,
and Officers Salaries.


Justice. The Country put to! Why the Whole is defrayed out of the Money paid
by the Shippers, for Passing their Tobacco.


Tom. But we poor Men don't ship any Tobacco.


Justice. Then you are not concerned in it one Way nor the other; it rests upon
the Merchants. But, if Charges and Expenses are drawn in to make the Cry the
louder, let what follows make a thankful Impression upon your Minds, to the
Assembly; who, by this Law, have released us from the Tax we paid, under the
Stint-Law, to Tellers, for Counting our Plants; from the One Shilling per
Hogshead we paid to Rolling-houses; and from the Expense of Receivers.


Tom. These Things were nothing to us.


Justice. If you did not pay them, they did who purchased your Tobacco; and if
they are relieved from these Charges, and are to be paid by the Captains of the
Ships, 4 s. per Hogshead, for the Trouble and Expense of Shipping their Tobacco
themselves, cannot they for this Reason afford to give you the better Price?


Tom. Cry-mercy: But, Sir, the Shipping of the Tobbacco occasions great
Murmurings; they say the Country is not able to do it.


Justice. Willing Minds would go a great Way toward it: In the Lower Parts of
the Country, where the Rivers are broad, and the Navigation difficult, they may
not be able; but toward the Heads of the Rivers it might be done: But this
Complaint is Nothing; for, if the Public are not in a Condition to comply with
That Clause of the Law, they may depend upon Relief, when the Assembly meet;
who, without any Question, will make such Alterations and Amendments, as they
find, in the Execution of it, are wanting, to make all Parties concerned in it,
easy. And we shall deserve to be branded for the maddest People on the Face of
the whole Earth, not to acquiesce; but by malicious and ignorant random
Judgments, endeavor to defeat such good Purposes.


Tom. These Hopes, Master, as much a Convert as I am to (...), do administer
more Comfort; for, who can be discontented, (...) knows what the Assembly aimed
at by this Law, and that they will leave no Stone unturned, to secure to us the
good Things contained in it; most especially, more Money for our Tobacco, and
less for our Goods; that we may not pay away so much as we receive.


Will. There are one or two Particulars more I must trouble your Worship with,
that I have heard discoursed of, as Grievances.


Justice. Well, let me hear them; make Dispatch; it grows late,


Tom. Why one is, That though they are at no Charge for Rolling-Houses, they say
they are strangely hampered, having no Place to lay the Goods in, they import:
Indeed this is no Concern of ours who buy our Goods in the Country. Then they
cry, that many of them had Wharfs and Landing Places, which are become useless.


Justice. As to convenient Places for lodging their Goods, Are not the former
Storehouses still in Being, where they may put their Goods? No Man that imports
Goods, is destitute of Friends that live on the River, where so many Wharfs and
Landing Places, you say, are become useless, but he may have the Benefit of the
most commodious in Situation near his Dwelling, to lodge his Goods, since the
Captains of the Ships are so obliging to put them or. Shore wherever they are
desired. As to their Uselesness on other Accounts, it is of no Weight; if it
does deprive some People of any Profit they were formerly to them, it is a
private Stake, and must be given up to the Good of the Public. This is all you
have to say. I presume?


Tom. Yes, Master, we thank you; we had been sadly on it, if we had not had the
good Fortune to meet with your Worship.


Justice. Since you esteem it so, I am glad, for your Sakes, that we were so
fortunate.


Tom. Ay, Master, it is very lucky for Neighbor Will.


Will. Hush, Tom, Hush.


Justice. Why for Will, more than for your self?


Will. Nothing in the universal World, only Tommas, now your Worship has made
him light-heel'd, now your Worship has made it out that it is a good Law for the
poor Planters, has a Mind to be jocose.


Justice. Upon my Conscience it is a good Law for every Body: I have not told
you half the good Things contained in it; I have confined my self, for your
better Information, to the Trade in the Country; when alas, if I was to launch
out, into the Effects of it Abroad, it is impossible to say when I should have
done.


Tom. Indeed, Sir!


Will. Indeed, Sir!


Tom. We are obliged to your Worship, for this seasonable Instruction: We shall
expect to find what your Worship has told us* and in the mean Time, shall do
our Endeavors to reconcile our Neighbors to so beneficial a Law.


Justice. Do so: But before we part, since we have conversed (...) much on this
Subject, and I have taken so much Pains (...) I cannot think of leaving you
without a Word or two of (...) which, on all Occasions, remember to put in
Practice. (...) become honest Men, minding only your own Business: (...) honor
the King, and meddle not with those that are (...) Noise and Violence: Submit
your selves to every Law: (...) Race-grounds, those Schools of Gaming and
Drunkenness (...) go near the County-Courts, unless Business calls you thither
(...) when it does, return Home as soon as it is done: Make (...) your
principal Employment, this coming Summer, to look well to your Crops,
especially your Tobacco, which ought to be tended with the same Care that
Annuals are in a Garden: And, since you are indulged the Privilege of making as
much Tobacco as you can, make it as good as you can. The Inspectors don't take
Pleasure in burning of Tobacco; it is what the Law requires of them, and they
are under the Obligation of an Oath, a very great Penalty, to destroy all that
is bad.


Will. But, Master, out of Spite and Malice they may burn ones Tobacco, and I
don't see how we can help it.


Justice. Prove that, and you have your Remedy against them; and you may be
assured, such a One would be turned out of his Office, with Infamy.


Tom. But then, they may be more nice in Transfer-Tobacco, on Account of the
Penalty, if, upon a second View, it is not found good; and most of That belongs
to poor Planters.


Justice. The Inspectors are bound by Oath, to take Care of the Goodness of the
Crop-Tobacco, as well as the Transfer; and, I don't question, they perform
their Duty in both: But the Cause why the Transfer-Tobacco is more found Fault
with, is, Many more are concerned in That than the Other; and, as it is
generally carried to the Warehouse in Parcels, People think it hard to see so
much of each Parcel rejected, as is often done, and as this Year it deserves:
But, at the same Time, they should consider, that the Crop-Tobacco undergoes as
strict an Examination, and has as much in Proportion, condemned to the Fire.
The Truth is, The great Noise that is made, about the Strictness used in
Transfer-Tobacco, proceeds from a malicious Insinuation, as if the Inspectors
only regarded their own Interest, lest the Transfer-Tobacco should be refused,
and turned upon their Hands by the Public Creditors, if found faulty; but I
can see no manner of Reason to apprehend any ill Consequence to any Planter,
from this Observation.


Tom. If we are under no Hardship from hence, I must say, No Man living, and
dealing in Tobacco, has any Fault to find with this Law.


Justice. Well, let me end with you: And, if under this Regulation, we send
Home more good Tobacco than can be consumed, fear not, my Lads, with this
Method we may expect a Stint; there is no other Way to recover our Trade,
which, This Year, had it not been for This Law, would have demolished us all.
God be with you. Farewell.


Tom. Good Night, Sir: We are much obliged to you. --


Will. Huzza! God bless the King, the Governor, Council, and House of Burgesses.


Tom. It Is high Time for us to part too: Good by to you, Will.


Will. Adieu: The Justice is a good Man; he gave us very good Advice: But I
must go to see a Race sometimes, for all that.


Tom. Well, Well: Good Night to you.


FINIS.

