By His EXCELLENCY JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General and Governor in
Chief, in and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New
England. A PROCLAMATION.


WHEREAS a Scheme for emitting Bills or Notes by John Colman, Esquire and others,
was laid before the Great and General Court or Assembly of this His Majesty's
Province, in their Session held at Boston, the Fifth Day of December 1739, and
by the Report of a Committee appointed by said Court was represented, if
carried on, to have a great Tendency to endamage His Majesty's good Subjects as
to their Properties;

And whereas Application has been very lately made to Me and His Majesty's
Council by a great Number of Men of the most considerable Estates and Business*
praying that some proper Method may be taken to prevent the Inhabitants of this
Province being imposed upon by the said Scheme; and it being very apparent that
these Bills or Notes promise nothing of any determinate Value, and cannot have
any general certain or established Credit;

Wherefore,

I Have thought fit, by and with the Advice of His Majesty's Council, to issue
this Proclamation, hereby giving Notice and Warning to all His Majesty's good
Subjects of the Danger they are in, and cautioning them against receiving or
passing the said Notes, as tending to defraud Men of their Substance, and to
disturb the Peace and good Order of the People, and to give great Interruption,
and bring much Confusion into their Trade and Business.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston. the Seventeenth Day of July 1740. In
the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord GEORGE the Second by the
Grace of GOD of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING Defender of the Faith,
etc. J. BELCHER.
By Order of His Excellency the Governor, with the Advice of the Council, J.
Willard, Secr.

GOD save the KING.
WHereas the Committee of the Great and General Court or Assembly at their
Sessions begun and held at Boston Dec. 5th 1739, Reported that the Bills
proposed to be emitted by John Colman, Esquire and others, would tend to endamage
the Properties of His Majesty's good Subjects of this Province; and whereas a
large Number of the principal Men of Estates and Business have petitioned His
Excellency the Governor and Council to take such Measures as they in their
Wisdom should think proper to prevent People's being imposed upon by the said
Scheme commonly called the Land Scheme or Bank; whereupon the Governor and
Council have issued a Proclamation warning and cautioning People against the
said Bills: And we the Subscribers being abundantly persuaded that the said
Scheme, if carried on, will be of pernicious Consequence; and being willing and
desirous to do what in us lies to prevent the said Imposition, hereby Agree,
Declare and Promise, that we will not, directly or indirectly by our selves or
any for us, receive or take any Bills emitted on the said Scheme, commonly
called the Land Bank. And we hereby caution and advise all Persons whatsoever
who are indebted to us, or deal with us, that they refuse the said Bills and do
not take any of them in Expectation of our receiving them at their Hands, we
being determined not to take the said Bills for any Debts due, nor for any
Goods, or on any Consideration whatever.

John Osborne Edward Hutchinson John Alford Samuel Wells Benjamin Lynde Joshua
Winslow James Bowdoin Peter Fanueil James Smith Charles Apthorp John Erving
Hugh Hall John Jekyl Benjamin Fanueil James Bouteneau John Gooch Henry Caswell
Edward Tyng Nath. Cunningham William Spikeman William Lambert Andrew Oliver
Thomas Oxnard Samuel Sewall Thomas Gunter Edmund Quincy Josiah Quincy Joseph
Gerrish John Barrel William Bowdoin Francis Boreland John Fayerweather Thomas
Hutchinson Thomas Hubbard Thomas Hancock John Wendell William Coffin Harrison
Gray Timothy Emerson Isaac Winslow Joseph Green Isaac Walker Edward Jackson
Ebenezer Holmes William Clark William Sheaffe Thomas Green John Spooner Joseph
Dowse Robert Temple Joseph Brandon Rufus Green Samuel Demming Thomas Palmer
Stephen Bouteneau John Green Benjamin Green Byfield Lyde Nath Shower Benjamin
Hallowell Peter Kenwood Thomas Child's Thomas Perkins Charles Paxton Samuel
Wentwort Robert Lightfoot James Gould Ralph Inman John Homans Thomas Lechmere
William Winslow Joseph Lee Benjamin Bourn Jacob Griggs Richard Clark Henry
Laughton John Cutler John Dennie John Simpson Jonathan Simpson James Pitts
Stephen Greenleafe Joshua Cheever Thomas Jackson Samuel Gardner Thomas Gardner
Thomas Lee Benjamin Clark Joseph Green John Turner, jun. William Tyler Samuel
Bridgham Habijah Savage Jonathan Armitage James Allen William Bolean Nathanael
Vial John Winslow John Gibbins John Tyler Nathanael Balston William Douglas
Thomas Austin William Wire Andrew Hall Benjamin Pollard John Trail John Hill
Joseph Fitch Francis Johonnet Thomas Lambert Joseph Gooch David Le Galley
Jeremiah Green Isaac Gridley Benjamin Bagnall William Lance Josh. Henshaw, jun.
David W^ar James Russell Andrew Newell Robert Lewis John Minot Samuel Carry John
Austin Richard Sutton John Jones Cornelius Waldo James Day Thomas Hawden Henry
Withered John Barret Norton Quincy Zech. Johonnet Hopestill Foster John Grant
Charles Deming.

It is hoped, That Masters and Mistresses of Family's will caution their
Servants from taking in exchange or otherwise, any of said Bills if offered
them, as such a thing may serve to give 'em an entrance into Credit, which
would prove of dangerous consequence.

