A SERIOUS and AFFECTIONATE ADDRESS TO MANKIND, Concerning GOD and RELIGION;
With respect to their present State AND Final SALVATION.

HAGGAI i. 7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts -- Consider your Ways.

[ This ADDRESS is said to have been wrote by the Rev Mr. JAMES HERVEY.]

LONDON: Printed. 1759.

BOSTON; NEW ENGLAND: Reprinted by FOUL and DRAPER, and to be Sold at their
Printing-Office, in Marlboro-street.

This plain and affectionate Address is humbly and earnestly recommended to the
serious attention of all into whose hands it may come; beseeching them neither
to condemn it, nor throw it aside, until they have duly considered the matter
it contains; and compared it with the Truth of GOD's sacred word, the only rule
by which they are to be finally accepted of GOD to everlasting Life, or
condemned by Him to everlasting Punishment.

A SERIOUS ADDRESS, etc.
MY dear fellow Beings, permit me, though a stranger, with all disinterested
love and benevolence to address myself to you, concerning your precious souls
and everlasting state; and let not pride, prejudice, sloth, or unbelief, hinder
your serious attention and regard to those great concerns which are now
presented unto you, by one that has nothing herein in view but the honor of
his Almighty Lord and Redeemer, and your present happiness and eternal
advantage. -- Whatever has been your former negligence and disregard to these
things, for once sit down and seriously consider,

(1) That you are a creature endowed with a reasonable and immortal soul, of
unspeakable value and importance: made by GOD, the greatest and best of Beings,
on purpose to know, love and obey him, and be happy in his favor; and that you
will be judged by him, at the great tribunal, to everlasting joy or misery,
according to your present behavior toward him. -- These things are abundantly
evident by the light of reason, and testified by the truth of GOD in his holy
word. Ezekiel. xviii. 4, 20. Psalm xxxvi. 1 -- 10. Matt. xxv. 14 -- 45. Romans ii. 3
-- 9. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5 -- 9.

(2) Consider that you, and all mankind, by sin are fallen from GOD; and are
possessed of a sinful, corrupted Nature, which strongly inclines you to evil,
and indisposes you to that which is holy, spiritual and good. Romans vii. 14 --
24.

The Scripture every where represents the natural state of mankind, as
alienated from the life of GOD, through the ignorance that is in them, Ephesians.
iv. 18. -- Being enemies to GOD in their minds by evil works, Colos. i. 21. --
Children of disobedience and wrath, Colos. ii. 6. Ephesians. ii. 1, 2. -- Governed by
a worldly, f^^shly inclination, contrary to the holiness of GOD, and his pure
and spiritual Law, Romans viii. 7. -- That the (...) of man is continually evil
from his Youth, Genes. ^iii. 21. ^om whence, as from a corrupt fountain,
proceeds evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, malice, thests, covetousness,
wickedness, deceit, laciviousness, envy, blasph^m^ pride, foolishness, etc. as
our Lord declares, Mark vii. 2 (...) Romans i. 29 -- 32. -- And no doubt a little
recollected (...) ^ble you to discern, that you often feel these and other
(...) working in your own nature. For the All-seeing GOD, who knows the true
state of every man, says, that this is naturally the unhappy condition of all
men, Rom iii. 9 -- 19. Isa. liii. 6. Genesis vi. 3 -- 12. Job xv. 14 -- 16. 1 John
v. 19.

(3) Let it be very seriously considered, that by reason of these sins, and
this sinful state, you are become very odious in the sight of GOD's infinite
Majesty and Holiness: that you are thereby fallen under his most righteous
anger, and awful curse and condemnation; and without some special mercy and
favor shown you from GOD, are sinking into everlasting misery and destruction.

The word of GOD declares, that the wages of sin is death and damnation. Romans
vi. 23. Ezekiel. xviii. 20. That the face of the Lord is against them that do
evil, Psalm xxxiv. 16. That he is angry with them every day, Psalm vii. 11. And
his very soul hates them, Ps. ix. 5 And though they are rendered stupidly
blind and insensible by sin, they lie under his heavy wrath and holy curse in
all that they are, have, and do, Deuteronomy. xxviii. 15 -- 20. chapter xxix. 18 -- 32.
Jerem. xi. 3 -- 8. Gal. iii. 20. The unbelieving and unholy are every where
represented in Scripture as in a lost state and condition; being without an
interest in Christ's saving mercy -- without GOD's special acceptance -- being
condemned already -- And having no good and warrantable hope, (while they
continue in this state) of GOD's present ^avour, or future salvation, Luke xix.
10. John iii. 18, 30. 2 Cor. v. 14. Ephesians. ii. 11, 12. -- Howsoever person may
foolishly flatter and deceive themselves, the eternal GOD has declared that if
they die in this their natural, sinful state, and condition, they shall
certainly perish everlastingly from his presence, and sink into the endless and
rem^diless ^^^ors and miseries of Hell, Job xi. 20. Prove. x. 28. (...) xviii.
20. John iii. 6 -- 8. Romans ii. 2 -- 12. 2 The^^^onians, i. 7 -- 9.

The lively and affecting knowled^ (...) this your great Misery by sin, is
exceeding (...) you from your fatal security, and cause you (...) and speed to
(...) refuge to that salvation (...) you in the Lord Christ Jesus, the blessed
Rede^ (...) And, O! most heartily thank GOD, that however (...) been, however
bad your state is, there is yet hop^ (...) Christ Jesus. -- But above all
things take heed of (...) great Redeemer, of delaying your return to GOD, (...)
faith and humble repentance, and of deceiving your^ (...) false expectations of
heaven and happiness; for not (...) more common than these damning
self-delusions, Rev. iii. 17, 18. 2 Timothy ii. 25. Isa. l. 11. Jerem. vii. 4 --
14. Job xv. 31. -- Beg of GOD, therefore, his holy Spirit, to open your
understandings to discern your true state, and be willing to know it yourself;
since this is the first step to your recovery and happiness, 1 Kings viii. 39.
Matt. ix. 39. Acts ii. 37. John xvi. 8, 9.

That you may know whether you are restored to GOD's favor, through faith and
repentance, and are interested in the saving mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ --
or whether you are yet in this lost and damnable state and condition, attend to
the description which GOD has given of all such as he will finally reject, and
banish from his heavenly kingdom.

1 st, All that are unmindful of GOD, their Maker, Preserver, and Redeemer; and
that chiefly love, desire, and seek after the pleasures and gains of this life,
and the contents of the flesh, more than GOD and his favor, Christ and heaven,
Psalm lxxiii. 27. Matt. x. 37. Romans viii. 5 -- 8 1. Cor. vi. 10. Phil. iii. 19.
1 John ii. 15.

2 d, All that indulge themselves in intemperance or uncleanness, that are
drunkards, gluttonous, lascivious, whoremongers, adultererers; or that defile
themselves by any secret or unnatural lust. 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Gal. v. 19 -- 21.
Ephesians. v. 5, 6. Phil. iii. 19. Col. iii. 5, 6. Rev. xxi. 8.

3 d, All that are malicious and revengeful; unmerciful and uncharitable; that
are strangers to a kind, loving, and forgiving (...) cvii. 7. -- 16. Matt. vi.
15. chapter (...) 28 -- 31. 1 Cor. xiii. 1 -- 7. 1 John (...)

(...) are prevailingly proud and self-conceited; (...) angers to a meek and
humble spirit; that love (...) the praise and esteem of mankind more than (...)
and approbation of GOD. Psalm xix 21. (...) Malac. iv. 1. John v. 24. Romans ^^
29, 30. (...) 2. James iv. 4.

(...) All that are false, insincere, and unjust in their con^ (...) and
dealings with others; and that allow themselves in the practice of lying or
fraud. Prove. xix. 9. Psalm v, 6. Romans i. 18.29. 1 Cor. ix. 10. Rev. xxi 8.27.

6 th, All that neglect the great duty of praying to GOD: that live without
seriously and frequently calling upon his name, and seeking his mercy and grace
in Christ Jesus. Psalm xiv. 2 -- 4. x. 4. Jerem. x. 25. Zephan. i. 4 -- 6.
Psalm lxxiv. 27 -- 28.

7 th, All that slight and disesteem the sacred word of GOD; that do not
cordially believe it, and seriously consider it, that they may know the mind
and will of GOD, in order to practice it. Psalm cxix 155. Prove. xiii, 13. chapter
i. 25 -- 30. John viii. 47. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10 -- 12. Hebr. xii. 25.

8 th, All that indulge themselves in the love and practice of any known sin,
against the dictates of their consciences, and in opposition to the Will and
Authority of GOD made known in his word. Matt. vii. 22 -- 27. Psalm cxix 3, 6.
Prove. x. 29. Romans ii. 8, 9. Jam. ii. 10.11. 1 John iii. 6, 10. chapter v. 18.

9 th, All that do not sincerely love and heartily believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the only Hope and Savior of sinners; that slight and reject his
great salvation, or deny him the glory and honor due to his great and holy
Name; that entertain the foolish and presumptuous conceit of a sufficiency of
merit or power in themselves to obtain heaven and happiness; and were never
thoroughly convinced of their absolute need of the Lord Jesus to be their
Savior, not of their own lost, condemned, and help^ (...) John iii. 18. chapter
viii. 24. Matt. xxii. (...) 16. Luke xvii. 46. Romans x. 1 -- 3. G^ (...) v. 4,
5. (...) 4, 7. 1 John ii. 23.

All these ^s of persons GOD, in his word, (...) in an unp^ned, damnable state.

(4) With the most humble thankfulness of (...) ano^ ^archable mercy and
goodness in Christ (...) member, That he does most freely promise and g^ (...)
^don, life, and eternal salvation to every one, who, (...) ^cing all other
dependencies, trust in his mercy and grace in Jesus Christ; sincerely repenting
of their sins, and yielding themselves in cordial and dutiful subjection to his
just authority, and gracious government.

The Scriptures assure us that GOD is in Christ Jesus reconciling the world
unto himself, pardoning their trespasses, 2. Cor. v. 17. -- That though all
have sinned and come short of the glory of GOD, yet, if they repent and
believe, they shall be justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, by faith in his blood, etc. Romans iii. 20. -- 27. --
That all manner of sins and trespasses shall be freely and fully forgiven unto
men, upon their sincere faith and repentance, in whatsoever they have offended,
Mark iii. 28 -- 30. -- That the Lord Jesus Christ is able and willing to save
unto the uttermost all that come unto GOD by Him, Heb. vii. 25. And that by him
all that believe are justified from all things which might condemn them, Acts
xiii. 39. Romans v. 16 -- 20. Psalm cxxxvii. 8. And in Him they shall receive all
spiritual, heavenly blessings, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
complete Redemption, 1 Cor. i. 29. Ephesians. i. 3 -- 12. -- There is no mind so
darkened by ignorance and sin but he will enlighten. No heart so hardened by
guilt but he will soften. No lusts or evil propensities so old, strong, or
inveterate, but he will heal and subdue. -- No sins so numerous and aggravated,
but he will pardon, to those that humbly and earnestly apply themselves to him,
and wait with constancy for his salvation. 1 Timothy 1. 12 -- 16. Matt. iv. 23. 1
Cor. vi. 9 -- 11. Isa. lv. 7 -- 9.

(5) That a great and holy change, effected by the power (...), must pass upon
the mind, disposition, (...) ^t hope to escape the damnation of hell, (...)
^ssings of salvation by Jesus Christ.

(...) and Savior of Men declares, That except ye be (...) ^d become as little
children, i. e. humble and (...) ^e shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven
(...) 2, 3 -- With the greatest solem^ ^ys (who (...) ^n the kingdom of heaven
to sinners, (...) knows (...) ^ecessary for their admission there) "(...),
verily, (...) unto you, Except a man be born (...) ^nnot see the kingdom of
GOD." John iii. 3. -- (...) of its great necessity and importance repeats it
again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD. ver. 6. -- And he gives this
convincing reason of the indispensible necessity of this great change in every
man, to fit him for heaven, namely, Because that which is born of the flesh is
flesh. Mankind deriving from their sinful parents only a fleshly, sinful
nature, are unfit for the service and enjoyment of an holy GOD; and therefore
as men do not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles, or corrupt trees
bring forth good fruit; so they must be born again, of GOD's holy Spirit, to an
holy and spiritual life, before they can bring forth the spiritual fruits of
true righteousness and goodness. Matt. vii. 16 -- 19. John iii. 7. 2 Cor. v. 14
-- 17.

This important change in a sinner's nature is described, by being renewed in
the spirit of their minds, -- putting on the new man, after the image of GOD,
in righteousness and holiness -- putting off the old man, with its deceitful
lusts, Ephesians. iv. 22 -- 24. -- Walking in newness of life, Romans vi. 4. -- Serving
GOD, in newness of spirit, Romans vii. 6. -- No longer living according to the
lusts of men, but to the will of GOD, 1 Pet. iv. 6. -- It is being created
again in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. ii. 10. As it is a spiritual life
derived from Christ Jesus, and continually maintained by Him, in the same
manner as the body receives life and influence perpetually from the Head, Ephesians
iv. 15, 16. Colos. ii. 19. And the branches of the vine produce fruit by virtue
dervied from the root, John xv. 1 -- 5. -- So that (...) ^e Christian, not only
receives a new, spiritual life from (...) lord Jesus, but it is maintained and
increased, ONLY by con^nt supplies of grace and strength derived from him by
faith, in the use of GOD's ap^ted means, Phil. iv. 13. Call. iii. 20. John i. 16.

(6) The means (...) which the sinners of men receive these inestimable
blessing of forgiveness of sins, spiritual and eternal life and salvat^ (...)
is by faith in Christ Jesus, receiving them as the free gift of GOD's grace
through him, Romans v. 18. ch^ viii. 32. 1 Cor. ii. 12.

By faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, sinners are pardoned, justified, and
entitled to the heavenly inheritance, Acts xxvi. 15 -- 18. Romans v. 1, 2, 10.
chapter iv. 3 -- 16. -- By faith in Christ Jesus they receive the promise of GOD's
holy Spirit to enable them for all good works, Gal. iii. 21. -- And Christ
dwells in the hearts of believers by faith, to maintain the life of holiness in
them, Ephesians. iii. 16, 17. 1 Pet. ii. 4.5 -- And by God's grace they are saved
through faith in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. ii. 8. John x. 9. Acts xviii. 30, 31.

And all this great salvation and happiness is most freely offered to, and
surely bestowed upon every one, who being sensible of their own guilt, misery,
and helplessness, are truly willing to receive Christ Jesus as their Lord and
only Savior, without respect to merit or worthiness in themselves. Matt. xi.
28, 29. Luke xiv. 17 -- 24. 2 Cor. v. 20. Isa. lv. 1 -- 8. Rev. iii 18. chapter
xxii. 17. -- As the design of the great GOD in the redemption of sinners by the
Lord Jesus Christ is to display the exceeding riches of his own grace and
mercy, Ephesians. ii. 4 -- 7. So there is nothing more contrary to the glory of GOD,
to the real state of fallen man, and to his salvation by Jesus Christ, than the
conceit of merit or sufficiency in himself. Romans iii. 19 -- 28. chapter xi 6. Gal.
iii. 10.^4. -- Men must see themselves to be condemned criminals before GOD,
lost, indigent and helpless creatures in themselves; before they can receive
the Lord Christ Jesus, as the gospel requires or enjoy the blessing of his
salvation. Rev. iii (...), 18. 2 Cor. v. 14. Luke xix. 10. chapter ^i^. 9 -- 14.

And (...) what do you say, to all this free and wonderful lo^ (...) mercy of
GOD, to this amazing grace and salvation by (...) Christ? -- Can the great and
blessed GOD and Redeem^ of men do more for your salvation and happiness than he
has done, and is ready to do, if you diligently seek his mercy? and must you
not sink into doub^ damnation if after all this you persist in obstinate
unbelief, and (...) ^r the lusts of the flesh, and the service of sin and
Satan, before God's blessed and holy service, and great salvation? -- By (...)
of GOD that made you, by the bowels of Jesus C^ died for you, by all the tender
respect you owe to y^ (...) perishing, precious and immortal souls, trifle not
with ^l Damnation and Salvation. Use the reason of a man, stand still and
seriously consider.

1. That unchangeable, everlasting joy or misery is just before you. Death may
put an end to your present state of being the very next day or hour. --
Consider what apprehensions all men have, and you yourself will have GOD and
religion, of heaven and hell, in a dying hour, unless you are desperately
hardened and forsaken of GOD; and choose now as you would wish you had chosen
when you come to die.

2. Consider what great and sure happiness GOD will bestow upon you, if you
cordially accept of his mercy in Christ Jesus, and yield yourself unreservedly
to his blessed service. He will bind himself to you in an everlasting covenant
to be a GOD, a Father, and a Friend unto you, for time and eternity; your
almighty preserver, and constant benefactor, 2 Cor. vi. 16 -- 18. Romans viii. 14
-- 17. -- To bless you with all needful good here, and endless happiness with
himself in the life to come. Psalm lxxxiv. 11. Romans viii. 32.

3. Consider what exquisite self-torturing vexation must seize upon your guilty
spirit at death, and for ever rend it with horror and despair, if through
negligence, infidelity, or any sinful affection, you miss of this great
salvation and happiness, so plainly set before you, and freely offered unto
you! -- Must you not sink into dreadful damnation, beyond what Heathens, Jews,
or Devils themselves shall endure, who never had so much mercy and goodness
made known to them? -- O! who can conceive the unspeakable anguish of a (...)
that finds himself everlastingly cut off from the wonderful, ^aving Mercy of
Christ, the great Redeemer of Men; and eternally banished from the blessed and
glorious presence and enjoyment of GOD his Maker, to share with devils and
damned spirits for ever, in remediless darkness, misery, and despair! -- O make
not such a bitter curse of your immortality, which is capable of the highest
blessedness.

Sirs, let me again entreat you with all tender love seriously to consider
these things, at least once a day: Let not foolish prejudices, vain companions,
or senseless diversions stifle and drown your sober thoughts. Try, resolvedly
and thoroughly try the blessed service of GOD your Maker, through faith in your
Redeemer; and then if you find any thing that will be really better for you
than GOD, and Christ, and Religion, cast these off, and choose at your pleasure
-- But O, sink not into hell by false conceits, until you have once made the
happy experiment -- Murder not your own souls by senseless delays, which are
capable of everlasting felicity. -- If you can trifle with God and heaven, and
sport with hell and damnation n^w, think not that you shall do so when you feel
the fiery indignation of your offended Judge: or that it will be as easy for
you to endure the tortures of the damned, as it is now to read of them -- O! be
wise in time.

But if your consciences are convinced of the reasonableness and necessity of
repentance, faith, and dutiful obedience to GOD, sure you will not neglect the
present practice of them; sure you dare not desperately despise the great
Salvation of Christ wilfully sin on still, and post to misery and destruction
with your eyes open.

If you are concerned to know what you should do to be saved? you have answer
to this inquiry from GOD's own word, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved? Acts xvi. 31. Renounce all dependence upon your own wisdom,
power, and goodness; cordially and entirely resign yourself to him, and trust
in him for all salvation and happiness, 1 Cor. i. 30, 31. Acts iv. 12. And he
will heal your sinful nature, and pardon your manifold offenses, Acts v. 31. --
And then be di^igent and constant in ^e of ^se means which the wisdom and
goodness of GOD h^ (...) for your recovery; -- by which he is used to bestow ^l
mercy and ^avour to those that seek him; but e^ (...) your salvation from them,
but from GOD alone the (...)

1st. Get o^ (...) ^d seriously consider your own ways how evil, v^ foolish
they have been, 1 (...) viii. 47, 49. Ps. cxix. 59. Jer. viii. 6. -- 2d, H^
read diligently the word of God: especially read those (...) which are most
suited to your state, and you can be^ ^and: This blessed Book was inspired for
your instruction and salvation. Ps. xix 7. -- cxix. 9. Jam. ^ 18, 21. 1 Pet. i.
23. -- Attend with constancy where the gospel of salvation is preached with
most faithfulness, and success. Romans x 15 -- 17 1 Cor. 1.18 -- 24 -- 3d, Be
frequent, fervent, and constant in humble prayer to GOD for his mercy and grace
in Christ Jesus, Amos v. 4, 5. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26.37 Acts viii. 22. Jam. i 5. --
4th, Be faithful to conscience in avoiding those evils, and attending to those
duties which you are acquainted with. Isa. lv. 7. Prove. xiv. 16. Ezekiel. xiv. 7,
8. Hosea v. 4. -- 5th, Avoid all unnecessary converse with the evil and
profane; and associate yourself with the pious and good. Pro. ix. 6. chapter xiii
20. Acts ii. 40. 1 Cor. xv. 33. -- 6th, But especially be often looking up to
the Lord Jesus Christ, by faith in his precious blood and intercession, for
mercy and salvation Isa. xlv. 2. John iii. 14 -- 16 -- 7th, Lastly, never rest
satisfied nor leave off diligently seeking, until, by the grace of GOD, you
find the power of an subdued in you, and you have attained a comfortable
assurance of his forgiving mercy, according to his gracious promises in Christ
Jesus. Matt. xv. 22 -- 28 Luke xi. 5 -- 13. chapter xviii. 1 -- 8. Hosea vi. 3.

This do, and you shall be blessed and happy, now and for ever.

AMEN.

