CANADA SUBJECTED. -- A New Song. --
BRAVE Soldiers all, both far and near,
Lay by your Swords and never fear:
For now the Battle being over,
The thundering Cannon cease to roar.
Lay by the Trumpet and the Drum;
For joyful Days at last are come,
And CANADA is all our own,
And subject to great GEORGE's Throne.
The Savages lay down their Arms.
The French do cease to raise Alarms.
Now CANADA is fallen down
Before the Troops of GEORGE's Crown.
Great was the Day of our Success,
When Heaven our Hosts was pleased to bless.
When proud Quebec and Montreal
A Prey to English Troops did fall.
Let martial Music sound no more;
We have no Foes upon the Shore:
But now we joyfully will sing,
And drink a Health to GEORGE our King.
We'll beat our Swords into Plough-shares,
And into Pruning Hooks our Spears;
And bloody Fighting we'll deny,
And follow honest Husbandry.
Rejoice, O Youth! the rising Age,
May you not need in War 't engage;
May every Thing succeed so well,
That Peace with you may ever dwell!
Behold the bloody Sons of Gaul!
Rejoice with Trembling at their Fall.
The Blood which cruelly they shed
Has fallen on their own guilty Heads.
Some Time ago their Joy was loud,
And CANADA grew very proud;
While we were mourning in Distress,
With Widows and the Fatherless.
We Have took their Towns, and so possess
Their Pastures and the Wilderness.
Triumphant News spreads through the Land,
That we have got the Upper-hand.
Ye holy Prophets now rejoice,
And ye GOD's Saints that hear his Voice;
Because the Lord has saved you
From Insults of the Popish Crew.
With them was found the Blood of Slain,
And on their Robes there was a Stain;
They drunken were with Christian Blood,
Which flowed down like as a Flood.
Hail, happy Day! -- the blushing Morn
With Pleasure may our Souls adorn,
When proud Montreal became a Prey;
We'll ever bless the glorious Day!
O! when will come the happy Hour,
Which will destroy all Babel's Power!
When will the blessed Morning come,
When Babylon receives her Doom! --
The Time in Haste is coming on,
The End of haughty Babylon:
The joyful Cry shall quickly be,
"She Is like a Stone sunk in the Sea!"
The Time will come, when Pope and Fry'r
Shall both be roasted in the Fire;
When the proud Antichristian Whore
Will sink, and never (...) more.

