Mr. Moody's DISCOURSE TO LITTLE CHILDREN.

The Third Edition.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND, in Queen Street. M,DCC^^III.

Some imperfect Notes of a SERMON Preached to some Children in York, July 25th
1721. after Catechizing. By their MINISTER.
From MARK ix. 36, 37. And he took a Child, and set him in the midst of them:
and when he had taken him in his Arms, he said unto them, Whosoever shall
receive one of such Children in my Name, receives me; and whosoever shall
receive me, receives not me, but him that sent me.


A Great deal might be said from this Text; that concerns Parents, and other
grown Persons; but I shall only take Notice of that which concerns Children.
Note here, (1) The Lord Jesus Christ observes (...) Children: He takes Notice
of them, and (...) his Eye always upon them. (2) He has a great Love for good
Children. The Child spoken of in the Text, was doubtless a good Child.

DOCT. Christ takes Notice of little Children, and loves them dearly, if they
be good Children.

Your Parents don't love you a thousandth Part so much (nor you yourselves) as
Christ does, if you be good Children.

First Proposition. Jesus Christ takes Notice of all little Children. He
observed you, before you came hither, and as you were in coming: And he takes
Notice of you now while you are here. If any of you are weary, and want to be
gone Home, or to get out to Play, Christ observes it. He minds who are affected
with the Sermon, and who are not; who they are that are careless, and don't
mind what is said; and especially if any are so wicked as to play, while they
should be hearing. He takes Notice how you behave yourselves at Home: Whether
you are dutiful to your Parents, and loving to your Brothers and Sisters; or
whether you be disobedient and fretful, rude, or quarrelsome. He minds what you
say and do when you are Abroad, and as you are going to School. He sees how you
spend the Saturday Night, whether you are willing to say your Catechism; and on
Sabbath Day Morning, how you spend your Time, whether you get alone, and read
and think and pray; or are idle, and do nothing, or play, which is worse; and
what you do all Day. You read (Mal. 3.16) The LORD hearkened and heard, and a
Book of Remembrance was written before him. He sets down in his Book, all that
you say, and do, and think, when you are alone, and when in Company, and
wherever you are. It appears that Jesus Christ takes Notice of all Children.

First, Because he is every where present. As David speaks in the Beginning of
the Hundred and thirty-ninth Psalm; O Lord thou have searched me, and known me.
Thou know my down sitting and mine up-rising; thou understandest my Tho'ts
afar off. Thou compassest my Path, and my lying down; and art acquainted with
all my Ways. For there is not a Word in my Tongue, but O Lord, thou know it
altogether. Thou have beset me behind and before, and laid thine Hand upon me.
Such Knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.
Whither shall I go from thy Presence? Or whither shall I flee from thy Spirit?
If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: If I make my Bed in Hell, behold
thou art there. If I take the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost
Parts of the Sea, even there shall thy Hand lead me, and thy right Hand shall
hold me. If I say, Surely the Darkness shall cover me, even the Night shall be
Light about me. Yea, the Darkness hides not from thee; but the Night shines
as the Day; the Darkness and the Light are both alike to thee. -- Children, I
see you now sitting before me: Your Parents that are at Home, don't see you:
But Christ sees you always; for he is every where. The Angels cannot be every
where; they cannot be in two Places at once; but Christ can. He knows your
Tho'ts. He knew a Thousand Years ago, what you would be thinking of now. He
knew how many Times you would wish in your Hearts, O that God's Spirit would
help the Minister in preaching! O that I might get some Good to Day! and the
like. And he sets down your Tho'ts in his Book. -- He knows all the Words you
speak, good and bad; and from what Heart they come. You cannot understand how he
can be every where at once; but he is so, he is all over the World, here and at
Boston, and at the farthest Part of the Sea; we must believe it. He is in
Heaven, and in Hell, at the same Time; in the Dark, as well as in the Light. He
sees all the Sins, that you commit in secret, and sets them all down. Yet if
you believe in Christ, and are truly sorry for your Sins, they will be all
blotted out: But your good Tho'ts, Words, and Actions will be set down, and
never blotted out. There is Room enough in his Book, to set down all the good
Things done by you; more Room than there would be in this great Bible, if it
were all clean Paper.

Good Children, you are Christ's Disciples, his Scholars; and he knows that you
love him. It may be your Parents don't know that you love Jesus Christ; but he
knows it. When you pray alone, you may say as Peter did, Lord thou know all
Things, thou know that I love thee. And if Christ knows all Things, then be
sure he always observes little Children. In the ninth of Matthew, and the
fourth Verse* it is said, Jesus knowing their Tho'ts said, Why think ye Evil in
your Hearts? He observes every particular Child. There was one Nathanael, once*
that used to go alone, under a Tree to pray; and Christ saw him, and told him
of it. He did not then think, Christ could see him, but he did. Some of you
love to get alone among the Bushes to pray; and you did not think it may be,
that Christ see you; but he did. Christ can say, I saw you John, you Sarah,
whatever your Name is. I tell you so in his Name; and that is all one as if he
told you so. He saw you there last Night, in such a Place alone, and this
Morning in such a Place alone.

Secondly, Little Children are committed to him to keep; and therefore he takes
Notice of them. In some Places there is a Shepherd appointed to keep the Sheep.
Christ is the good Shepherd. Your godly Parents are the Sheep, and you are the
Lambs. The Devil is the Wolf, that goes to carry you away by his Temptations;
but if you love Christ, he will watch over you, to keep you from Satan's
Temptations. All the Angels in Heaven could not keep you; but Christ can. And
he does keep you from a (...) any Harms. You are Christ's own little Lambs, and
you are now in his (...) when you come to Meeting, and he is (...) you with his
Word: He brought you here (...) Purpose to feed you. How sweet will this be to
them that love Christ? You are some of those other Sheep that were not of that
Fold of the Jews, which Christ says, He must bring in. A Shepherd will look
after his Sheep. That is spoken of Christ, in the fortieth of Isaiah, and the
eleventh: He shall feed his Flock, like a Shepherd; he shall gather the Lambs
in his Arms, and carry them in his Bosom, and shall gently lead those that are
with Young. If there be a Lamb that is left behind, or one that is Weak, or
Lame, or Sick, and cannot go, the Shepherd will look after it: So Christ will
pity and help you, when you have Souls sick and wounded by Sin, and cannot help
yourselves. When the Wolf comes, the Shepherd frights him away: So Christ will
fright away the Devil, when he comes to tempt you, if you commit yourselves to
him, and cry to him, believing and repenting. He has led your good Parents all
along; and so he will do you that are good Children.

Thirdly, If Christ did not take Notice of little Children, how could he judge
them at the last Day, as he must do? It Is said, God shall judge the Secrets of
Men by Jesus Christ. And John in the Revelation, saw the Dead, small and great
stand before God; and the Books were opened, and the Dead were judged out of
those Things which were written in the Books, according to their Deeds. Now how
could he judge the World, if he did not know the Thoughts, Words and Actions of
all? How could he sentence wicked Children to Hell, and good Children to
Heaven, if he had not taken Notice of them all along their Lives? You read in
the twelfth of Ecclesiastes, and the fourteenth, God shall bring every Work
into Judgment, with every secret Thing, whether it be Good or whether it be
Evil.

The Use of the Doctrine, is for Warning to Children. First, Be dutiful
Children. Be dutiful to God; be dutiful to your Parents. Be diligent* at the
Work you are set about. Love and mind your Book; take all Opportunities to
read. Do all the Good you can. Be quick and faithful, when you are sent of an
Errand. Be sure don't fail to pray alone, Morning and Evening, every Day. Hear
what your Savior says, in Matthew; Thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy
Closet, and pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which sees
in secret, shall reward thee openly. Think often about Jesus Christ. It is he
that is spoken of in Isaiah; To us a Son is born, to us a Child is given, his
Name shall be called Wonderful, Councellor, the Mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace. Believe that he always sees you If you can find a
Place to Sin in, so dark or secret, that Christ cannot see you, you may venture
to do what you will there, but indeed there is no such Place in all the World.
Always remember you must have Help from him, to do every Duty, and to keep you
from Sin. Don't dare to do any Thing alone that is bad, any more than you would
here, when we are all looking on you. If you do, Christ will say to you in the
Day of, Judgment, What! were you more afraid of Men, than of Me your Judge? If
your Parents will bear with you in your Wickedness, Christ will not. -- Come to
Meeting always when you can; but if you happen to stay at Home, remember that
Christ sees you all Day long. If I were to stay at Home with you, would you
play? But Christ is always there. You cannot think one evil Thought, but Christ
will know it, and all the World will know it in the Day of Judgment. But if you
repent and believe in Christ, all your Sins will be blotted out, and all the
World shall know what good Children you have been. All the Good that ever you
did, or said, or thought, will be read before all Angels and Men.

The second Proposition is, That Christ loves good Children dearly.

Question. Who are good Children?

Answer. These are some of the Marks of good Children: They are afraid to Sin
alone, and in the Dark, as much as if every Body were looking upon them. Such
are careful of what they speak, and what they think. Good Children are glad
when Sabbath comes, that they may go to Meeting, and hear God's Word. They
don't dare to disobey or mutter at their Parents, even, though they forbear to
correct them for it. They fear God, who will punish wicked Children in Hell.
They say with themselves, I had rather my Parents, or any Body, should be angry
with me, than God should. It Is the Fear of God, that keeps them from Evil. Some
Parents will not correct their Children, when they do wickedly; but God will take
such Children into his own Hands. Good Children think of this, and are afraid,
They think about their Souls, when they are alone; and are afraid sometimes
that they have no Grace; they think their Hearts are so wicked, that there
cannot be any Grace there. They are sorry for their Sins; sorry that they have
offended God and Christ, and grieved the Holy Spirit. They love to think about
Jesus Christ. They think of him a Thousand Times; as they are lying down, and
rising up, and going about from one Place to another. Think about their Parents
or Brothers or Sisters that are dead and gone; think where they are now. They
desire to know Jesus Christ, more than any Thing. His Love is better to them
than all the World. -- Wicked Children don't love such Things. They don't
really believe there is a God and Christ, a Heaven and a Hell; nor don't love
to think of them: But good Children do. These play sometimes, a little; and
there is no hurt in it; but they are often thinking of Christ, while they are
at their Play.

Another Question is, How does it appear, that Jesus Christ loves good
Children, and why does he love them?

I Answer, First, It is because his Father gave them to him. If a Father gives
his little Child a Lamb, he will be very choice of that Lamb: So Christ loves
little Children, the Lambs that his Father gave him.

Secondly, Christ loves good Children because there are so few of them. Of all
the Children that are here, it may be, there are not above two or three in a
Seat, that are Good: And will not Christ love them, think you? It may be, there
are not above twenty good-Children in all this Town; and surely Christ loves
them. It may be, all the Children in the Family are wicked, but you: And will
not Christ love you then? Men prize Gold, because there is but little of it; so
does Jesus Christ value his Jewels: Luke the twelfth, and the fortieth, Fear
not Little Flock; it is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

Thirdly, Jesus loves good Children dearly, because they cost him dear. If a
Man buys a Creature at a dear Rate, he will set much by it. Good Children cost
Jesus Christ more than all this World. He bought them with his precious Blood.
All the Gold and Silver in the World, would not have purchased one of Christ's
Lambs.

Fourthly, He loves little Children that are good, because they are like him;
his Image is stamped upon them. Parents love their Children, that are like
them, and act like them: So does Jesus Christ.

Again, He loves them because they are related to him. They are his Children.
He says concerning them, Here am I, and the Children that God has given me,
Some of you have no Father on Earth; but if you be good Children, Christ is
your Father. -- You are his Sister, his Spouse. Never any Man loved a Spouse,
so as Christ loves good Children. Paul says to the Corinthians, I have espoused
you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. -- And as I told you before, he is the good
Shepherd, and you are the Lambs of his Flock.

Sixthly, Good Children do what pleases Christ; and therefore he loves them.
They are often thinking with themselves, Will this or that be pleasing to
Christ? and if they think it will, they do it; or else, they will not. Wicked
Children don't care whether they please Christ or no; if they can but please
themselves, and their wicked Companions. But good Children are of another Mind:
They go alone, and pray, Morning and Evening, because Christ has bid them do
so; they do it to please him. As Christ always did those Things that pleased
his Father so to his Children; and will not he love them then?

Seventhly, and lastly, Christ loves little Children, because he will love
them. He says to his Disciples, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.
They are as bad by Nature, as others; but he loves them freely. When my Father
and my Mother forsake me (says David) then the Lord will take me up. And in the
sixteenth of Ezekiel, the Lord says to his People, When thou wast in thy Blood,
cast out to the loathing of thy Person, I said unto thee, Live: Yea, I said
unto thee, when thou wast in thy Blood, Live: And the Time was the Time of
Love. He might have loved others, and have left you to perish in your Sins.

Use First. If Christ loves good Children, then surely he hates wicked
Children. Poor wicked Child, do think that Jesus Christ loves thee! No, he
hates the Wicked. And if you live and die wicked, you will find at last that he
hates you as bad as he does the Devil. You serve the Devil; you do as he bids
you; you are his Child, and Christ is angry with you for doing his Works. He
may send Indians to kill you. He threatens to kill wicked Children with Death.
As the Wolf comes and catches and carries away the Lambs; so God may send the
Indians to carry you away. God sent two She-Bears once to tare forty and two
Children in Pieces, because they mocked an old bald-headed Minister. Sometimes,
it may be you mock Folks. You may be carried away by the Indians, and die in
the Woods; and the Ravens of the Valley may pick out your Eyes, and the young
Eagles may eat them. So it was with a Child at Cape-Neddick: and so it may
again.

Use Second. If the worst Children that are, will leave their wicked Ways, and
become good Children, then Christ will love them. He will forget and forgive
all their Sins. Though they remember their Sins, and bemoan themselves, yet he
will forget and forgive. He will say, as in Jeremy thirty first and eighteenth,
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus: Thou have chastised me, and
I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke; Turn thou me, and I
shall be turned; for thou art the LORD my GOD. Surely after that I was turned,
I repented; after that I was instructed, I smote upon my Thigh: I was ashamed,
yea, even confounded, because I did bear the Reproach of my Youth. Is Ephraim
my dear Son? is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still: therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I will
surely have Mercy on him, says the Lord. So Christ will speak of you, if you
become good Children. He will say, It is my dear Child, I will surely have
Mercy on him. This I tell you to encourage you. Though you have been very wicked,
yet if you return to him, he will receive you into the Arms of his Love.

Use third, of Caution. It Is dangerous delaying to become good Children. If you
put it off one Fortnight, or one Day longer, God may cut you off, or give you
up; and hear none of your Cries, when you come to be in Distress. There was a
little Boy at Hampton, that was at play with the Children, and he told them,
They must be good Children, because if they were not good now they were
Children, they might never be good; for they might never live to grow up. And
within a few Days after he died.

USE fourth for Direction. You must pray to God and Christ, to make you good
Children, to teach you to love, and fear, and serve him. And do you think if
you do earnestly seek to him, that he will not do it for you! Your Parents will
be glad of it: and will not Christ rejoice in it? Ask Counsel of your Parents
and Neighbors, how you shall do to be good Children: And desire them to pray
for you. You must mourn for your Sins, and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.
You must believe, that he always sees you. You must believe, that he is able
and willing to save you, and you must depend upon him for Grace, and Glory, and
all that you want. Remember what you have heard, and say within your selves,
Christ always sees me. It is the Devil that tempts you to forget Christ, and to
Sin against him. Think of dying in a short Time. Little Elizabeth Banks and
Richard Banks are dead and gone: you don't know, how soon you may be called to
go after them. -- Don't please your selves with childish Vanities, with fine
Clothes, and the like. But get the Wedding Garment of Christ's Righteousness:
and come to his Supper. You may come to the Lord's Supper, if you are not above
thirteen or fourteen Years old: some have done so -- Think how dreadful it will
be to go to Hell. You cannot bear to hold your Hand in the Fire one Minute: and
how will you bear to lie in a Lake of Fire and Brimstone for ever? -- When you
are tempted to neglect praying alone, say, No, I cannot, I must not. It may be,
there may be some Child here, that has a Thousand Prayers set down to his
Account. And if you will begin now, your Prayers will be set down too. -- Own
the Covenant, and so give up your selves to Christ.

Use the fifth, for Encouragement. Though it be a very hard Thing to be good
Children, yet Christ can make it easy, and he will do so. Wisdom's Ways are
Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. Christ has said, I love
those that love me; and they that seek me early, shall find me. You Will say, I
find more Comfort in reading, praying, and thinking about CHRIST, than ever I
did in playing and sinning. The Service of CHRIST is more Pleasant, even for
the present, than the Service of the Devil. And it is easier to turn to God
now, than it will be when you are grown older. The longer you live in Sin, the
harder your Hearts will grow, and the less Mind you will have to repent. You
must come to Christ presently, or it may be too late for ever. If your Parents
see you begin to be concerned, and to seek God, they will pray for you, and
encourage you. And good Children will be helpful to you. A little Boy not above
four Years old, was found teaching his Sister what he knew about God and
Christ, and heavenly Things. You are older than that, and therefore, it is high
Time for you to seek the Lord. If you once begin, all God's People will pray
for you. God has promised to pour out his Spirit on his People, and his
Blessing on their Offspring. God will rain down his Grace upon you. He has
said, All thy Children shall be taught of GOD; and great shall be the Peace of
thy Children. Christ is praying for you now in Heaven.

But for your Terror, let me tell you, that if you don't speedily turn to the
Lord, it will not be long before you will be burning and roaring in Hell: Then
you will think of what you now hear, and will think of it for ever. Christ is
angry with you every Day. Can you bear to go to Hell? Your Hearts are harder
than Iron if you can think of it without trembling. I am persuaded some of you
will be gone for ever in a few Weeks, if you are not converted. Some of you I Am
afraid, are grown dead ripe in Sin already: And when you come to stand before,
the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, I will witness against you; and your Parents will
witness against you. And what will you do, when you come to be bound Hand and
Foot, and flung into the Mouth of the burning bottomless Pit? You Will cry but, O
I cannot go down there! but go you must, and lie there forever.

USE last, Of Comfort to good Children; and to wicked Children too, that will
now begin to be good. Some of you have good Parents now in Heaven. And if you
are good, Christ loves you, and will send his blessed Angels to look after you.
Christ says, that good Children's Angels always behold the Face of his Father
which is in Heaven. You will have the Good of every Thing, Mercies will do you
Good, and Afflictions will do you Good. -- You shall live with CHRIST, and lie
in his Bosom forever: When Christ comes again, and that will be quickly, then
he will own you before all the World, and tell of your Love to him, and of all
your good Tho'ts, your good Words and Deeds; and when the World is set all on a
light Fire (as the Bible tells us it shall be at CHRIST's coming) He will take
you up to be with him, and with the good Angels, and with your good Parents,
and with all good People, for ever and ever.

AMEN.
A few Lines Recommended by a Father to his CHILDREN.
UNTO the LORD, in Morning I,
In JESUS's Name, will pray and cry,
For his sweet Grace, which he will give,
That to his Glory I may live.
At Evening too, and Noon each Day,
Will not forget to Praise and Pray;
And in Ejaculations near,
Will often unto my God repair.
His precious Word I Will daily read,
And on his Promises will feed.
Through Grace, with Sin I Will freely part,
And to my Savior yield my Heart.
With God all Day, and in his Fear
Will walk, and prove myself sincere.
On CHRIST, my Surety, I depend,
For Strength, which He from Heaven will send.
That I to him these Vows may pay,
And never from him go astray.
His Merit likewise I must-plead,
For Pardon, which I daily need.
May I be found in CHRIST at length,
Who is my Righteousness and Strength.

