THE AMERICAN MOCK-BIRD, OR SONGSTER's DELIGHT: BEING A choice Collection of
entire new Songs, as they are now sung by the best Singers at all the public
Places of Diversion in ENGLAND.

NEW YORK: Printed by S. Brown, and sold by Gar^at Noel, Bookseller, next Door
to the Merchant's Coffee-House, 1764.

THE American Mock-Bird, OR SONGSTER's DELIGHT,
SONG I: ALL in the WRONG,
By Mr. Garrick.
YE Critics above, and ye critics below,
Ye Finer-spun Critics who keep the Mid-row,
Oh tarry one Moment, I Will sing you a Song.
Shall prove that like us you are all in the wrong,
Sing tantara rara, all wrong all,
Sing tantara rara all wrong.
Ye Poets, who mount on the famed winged Seed,
Of Prancing, and Wineing, and Kicking take Heed.
For when by those Horne^s the Critics, he is stung.
You are all thrown in the Dire, -- and are all in the wrong.
Sing tantara rara, etc.

Ye Actors who act, what those writers have writ,
Pray stick to your Poet, and spare your own wit,
For when with your own, you unbridle your Tongue,
I Will hold ten to one -- you are all in the wrong.
Sing tantara rara, etc.

Ye Knaves who make News for the foolish to read,
Who print daily Slanders the Hungry to feed:
For a While you mislead 'em the News hunting Throng,
But the Pillory proves -- you are all in the wrong.
Sing tantara rara, etc.

Ye grave Politicians, so deep and so Wise, --
With your Hums, and your Shrugs, and your uplifted Eyes,
The Road that you travel is tedlous and long,
But I pray you jog on -- you are all in the wrong.
Sing tantara rara, etc.

Ye happy fond Husbands, and fond happy Wives,
Let never S^^picion imbitter your Lives;
Let your Prudence be stou^, and your Faith be as strong,
Who watch, or who catch -- they are all in the wrong.
Sing tantara rara, etc.

Ye unmaried Folks be not bought; or be sold,
Let Age avoid Youth, and the young ones the old;
For they would soon get together, the young with the young,
And then my wife old ones -- you're all in the wrong.
Sing tantara rara, etc.

Ye Soldiers and Sailors, who bravely have fought,
Who Honor and Glory, and Laurels have bought,
Let your Foes but appear, you will be at 'em ding dong,
And if they come near you -- they are all in the wrong.
Sing tantara rara, etc.

Ye Judges of Taste to ou^ Labors be kind.
Our Errors are many, pray wink or be blind,
Still find your Way hither, to glad us each Night,
And our Note we will change to -- you are all in the right.
Sing tantara rara, right all right all,
Sing tantara rara all right.
SONG II. Song in THOMAS and SALLY,
1.
WHEN late I wandered over the Plain,
Fro^^ Nymph to Nymph I strove in vain,
My wild Defires to rally.
But now they are of themselves come Home,
And strange! No longer wish ^o Roam;
They center all in Sally.
2.
Yet she unkind one, damps my Joy,
And cries I court but to destroy,
Can Love with Ruin tally?
By those dear Lips, those Eyes I swear,
I would all Deaths, all Torments bear,
Rather than injure Sally.
3.
Come then, oh! come, thou sweeter far
Than Violets, and Roses are,
Or Lillies of the Valley:
O follow Love and quit your Fear,
He'il guide you in those Arms, my Dear
And make me blessed in Sally.
SONG III. STREPHON and PHAEBE.
1.
YOUNG Strephon long doated on Phaebe the Fair.
Whose Heart, of his Anguish did secretly share,
But fearing his Passion would changeable prove,
She prudently checked the soft Dictates of Love.
2.
The Beauties you fancy, the fair One would say,
Are Charms for a Moment and doomed to decay.
Love founded so slightly, can never prove true,
The Bloom disappears, the Passion dies too.
3.
O wrong not your Beauty, replied the fond Swain,
It Is lasting Impression will ever remain,
Though Age like the Winter may blast thy fair Prime,
Yet Virtue still blooming gains Vigor by Time.
4.
The Strongth of my Eyes with your Charms will decline,
Nor gaze at a Face that is younger than thine,
While this faithful Heart ever true to my Vow.
Preserves thy dear Image as bright as it is now.
5.
Then banish dear Phaebe each Doubt and each Fear,
That makes fancied Evils like real appear,
The swift flying Moments with Ardour improve,
And grant the reward that is due to my Love.
Kind Phaebe assenting believed the fond Youth
Who proved that his Passion was founded on Truth,
Though envious Age may her Beauty impair,
Her Virtue and Honor will ever be fair.
SONG IV.
SEE how the sickening Year declines,
The watery Sun scarce gilds the Day!
Bleak Winter frowns; all Nature pines,
Joy darts not one enlivening Ray,
MARIA 's gone, and Pleasures flow away.
Fly swift ye winged hours, and bring,
MARIA, with the op^ning Spring,
With her young Hope and Joy shall come,
Which in her Presence only bloom.
For, as the fragrant Breath of Spring;
The genial Airs, which bless the Morn,
New Life to drooping Nature bring,
So shall MARIA 's wished return,
Sooth the soft Flames, which my fond Bosom burn,
Fly Swift ye winged Hours, and bring,
MARIA, with the opening Spring,
With her young Hope and Joy shall come,
Which in her Presence only bloom.
SONG V. DELIA FAIR, A new Song,
(1)
SWELL the Song in Strains sublime,
Let Majestic Numbers flow,
Verse and Harmon^ combine,
To hail celestial Charms below:
Warbling Birds now tune your Lays,
Echoes join in Delia's Praise,
All assist me to declare,
The Charms of lovely Delia fair
2
Lovely as the rising Morn,
In the vernal Season gay,
Nobler Graces will adorn.
When youth and Beauty shall decay,
Smiles of Innocence and Love,
Wores that Angels might approve
Comely Dress and Pleasing Ai,
All Charms unite in Delia Fair.
3
When the blooming Maid appears,
Gladsome Nature smiles around,
Music Strikes the ravished Ears,
And most delightful Scenes abound,
But when absent shady Bowers,
Purling Streams and fragrant Flowers,
All a gloomy Aspect wear,
Till crowned with Lovely Delia Fair.
4
Aid me then ye Powers above,
Teach me Some peculiar art,
How to banish fruitless Love,
Or Captivate my Delia's Heart,
Blessed with this angelic, Prize,
Other Wishes need not rise,
But that both at last may share,
The Joys that wait for Delia Fair,
SONG VI. CLOE's WAY.
by a YOUNG LADY;
1.
PHILANDER long had loosely roved,
The Tyrant of the Fair,
He flattered figh'd and swore he loved,
Yet all was but an Air, an Air,
Yet all was but an Air,
Too many a tender Female Heart,
Was taken in the Snare,
But glorying in his faithless Art
He left them with an Air, an Air,
He left them with an Air,
3
At length the God of Love enraged,
At his insulted Sway,
Against his Studied Airs ^^gag'd,
Young Cloe's artless Way, her way,
Young Cloe's artless Way.
4
Her Cheeks no Rose's blushing Dye,
No Lily's Snow display:
No Lightning Flashes from her Eye,
But she has such away, away,
But she has such away.
5
No brilliancy pointed Wit,
Her easy Words convey:
What could his captious Fancy hit,
'Twas some thing in her Way, her Way,
'Twas something in her way,
6
Those Charms of Face and Mind had failed
To make his Heart obey:
But now it blindly yields assailed.
By Cloe's artless Way, her Way,
By Cloe's artless Way,
SONG VII. WOMAN: a new Song sung by Mr. LOW.
1.
NO longer let whimsical songsters compare,
The Merits of Wine, with the Charms of the Fair,
I appeal to the Men to determine between,
A Tun-bellied Bacchus, and Beauty's fair Queen,
2.
The Pleasures of drinking henceforth I resign,
For, though there is Mirth, thore is Madness in Wine,
Then let not false Sparkles our Senses beguil,
It Is the Mention of Chloe, that makes the Glass smile
3
Her Beauties with Raptures my Senses inspire.
And the more I behold her, the more I admire I
But the Cha^ms of her Temper and Mind I adore,
These Virtues shall bless me, when Beauty's no more,
4
How happy our Days, when with Love we engage?
It Is the Transport of Youth, it is the Comfort of Age.
But what are the Joys of the Bottle or Bowl?
Wine tick^es the Taste, Love enraptures the Soul,
5.
A Sot as he riots in Liquor will cry,
The longer I drink, the more thirsty am I;
From this fair Confession, it is plain my good Friend,
You're a Toper eternal, and drink to no End.
6.
Your big-bellied Bottle may ravish your Eye,
But how foolish you will look, when your Bottle is dry?
From Woman, dear Woman, sweet Pleasures must spring,
Nay, the Stoics must own it, -- she is the best Thing.
7.
Yet some Praises to Wine we may justly afford;
For a Time, it will make one as great as a Lord;
But Woman forever gives transport to Man,
And I Will Love the dear Sex -- aye as long as I can.
SONG. VIII. The MUTUAL SYMPTOMS.
Wrote by a Lady.
1.
AH! Who in all these happy Plains
With Colin can compare,
A Youth esteemed by all the Swain,
Beloved by all the Fair,
I think he is free from artful Wiles,
For often with tearful Eye.
He fond -- ly looks at me and smiles,
He does I know not why
He does I know not why.
2.
He pressed my Hand -- I blushed and sighed,
Yet hope he did not see,
And then to speak, he vainly tried,
But gently sighed like me,
Methinks this wary Heart should know,
If Colin feigned the Sigh,
Yet where he is named it Flutters so,
It does -- I know not why.
3.
Say gentle God whose mighty Laws,
Prevail over Nymphs and Swains,
O show my Heart the secret Cause,
Of Colin's tender Pain,
Say rather why this Heart entreats,
The Cause of Colin's Woe?
And why it Flutters why it beats,
Alas! too well I know.
SONG IX. The PRIDE of MAY.
1.
NOW gaily blooms each Field and Grove,
In all the Pride of May,
Now sweetly sounds the Voice of Love,
In every Heaven taught Lay
2.
Cynthia, let us obey the Power,
That lights these sacred Fires,
Here Nature; seize the happy Hour,
Nor baulk, what she inspires,
3.
For Love, impassioned Youth was made,
For Joy, its Powers designed:
Too soon will tasteless age invade,
And Care possess the Mind.
4.
Let Wisdom then our Hearts engage,
When past the Sense of Joy:
Now every hour, we'll live an Age,
In Bliss that never can cloy.
SONG X. PLATONIC LOVE.
1.
IN vain my Love, you bid me strive,
To keep -- a fa -- mish'd Flame -- a -- live,
Un fed -- the strong -- est Flame wont burn
And Love grows cold -- without -- re -- turn
2.
The Prude perverse, or withered Maid,
Whose every Bud of Hopes decayed,
May slatter her Despair to prove,
The Illusions of Platonic Love.
3.
Hear not their Lore! it is all a Cheat!
But haste! that Wisdom comes not late.
When barren Winter strips the Plain,
We look for Summer's Fruits in vain.
4.
In prudence then you must afford.
Something beyound a Look, or Word,
Else on it self, my Love will prey,
And die insensibly away.
SONG XI. The COMPLAINT.
1.
YE verdant Woods, ye crystal Streams,
On whose e -- namell'd Side,
I often enjoyed Sols parting Beams,
When Damon was my Guide;
No more your Shades or Mur-murs please,
Poor Sylvia's love sick Mind;
No rural Scenes can give me ease
Since Damon proves unkind.
2.
Come duskey Eve, and veil the Sky,
With Clouds of Sable hue,
Whither ye Herbs, ye fl^wre^s Die,
Unchear'd with balmy Dew:
Ye wild y wrabling Birds no more,
Your Song can sooth my Mind;
My Hours of Joy, alas, are over,
Since Damon pro^es unkind.
3.
I Will hide me, to some dreary Grove,
For sighing Sorrow made,
Where naught but plaintive Strains of Love,
Sound through the gloomy Shade,
Where the sad Turtles melting Grief,
With Philomela's joined,
Alone Shall yield my Heart relief,
Since Damon proves unkind.
4.
Be warned by Sylvia's Fate ye Maids,
And shun the soft Deceit!
Though Love's own Eloquence persuades,
It Is all a dangerous Cheat,
Fly! quickly fly faithless Swain,
His b^ffled Arts despise,
So Shall you live, exempt from Pain
While hapless Sylvia dies.
SONG XII. The WAY to Keep HIM.
1
YE fair possessed of eve'ry Charm,
To captivate the Will;
Whose Smiles can Rage it self disarm,
Whose Frown^, at once can kill,
Say will you deign the Verse to hear,
Where Flattery bears no Part;
An honest verse, that flows Sincere.
And candid from the Heart.
2.
Great is your Power, but greater yet
Mankind it might engage.
If us ^e all can make a Net,
Ye all could make Cage:
Each Nymph a thousand Hearts may take,
For who is to Beauty B^ind,
But to what End a Prisoner make.
Unless we have Strength to bind.
3.
Attend the Counsel often told,
Too often told in vain;
Learn that best Art, the Art to hold,
And lock the Lovers Chain:
Gamesters to little purpose win,
Who loose again as fast.
Though beauty may the Charm begin,
It Is Sweetness make it last.
SONG XIII. DAMON and CINTHIA.
DAMON. 1.
TURN dearest, Cinthia, turn -- and see,
A Youth who dies for Love of thee,
Reflect with Pity on my Pain,
Nor let me longer plead in vain,
Can thou behold me pine and grieve,
Yet know it is godlike to relieve.
CINTHIA. 2.
Nay prithee spare me gentle Youth.
Can Damon doubt of Cinthia's Truth,
Be gone -- I told thee once before.
My Heart was thine what would thou more,
I will not thus be teased and pressed.
It Is Time alone must do the rest:
DAMON. 3.
Oh! Think that Sentence too severe.
I love -- and Love's a Slave to Fear;
Should some more wealthy Rival come,
'Twou'd quickly fix poor Damon's Doom.
Who then might tend his paultry Sheep,
And over his willow Garland weep.
CINTHIA. 4.
I swear by all the Powers above,
But first and chiefly by mighty Love;
It Is not the tinsel Pride of State;
Or being what the World calls great,
That ever shall debauch my Heart,
To act so base so vile a Part,
DAMON, 5.
Then let us in chaste Hymen's Bands
This Instant join our willing Hands,
Content beneath the humble Shed,
We'll toil to earn our Babies Bread;
With mutual Kindness bear, Love's Yoke.
And pity greater finer Folk.
SONG XIV. AN Ode to LOVE,
1.
PARENTS Divine of Heaven -- ly Lore,
Propi -- tious to thy Vo -- try prove,
Thy sacred Influence impart -- impart, --
And teach me to disclose my Heart.
2.
That it is fond Languishings displayed,
May gently move the pitying Maid,
And musick's Love taught Powers reveal,
What Fear forbids my Tongue to tell.
3.
O let that pure, that living Fire,
Which warms my Soul with soft Desire,
In artless genuine Truth expressed,
Rise equal Ardours in her Breast.
4.
Creep softly through each tender Part,
And melt to Sympathy her Heart,
So shall the grateful Muse repay.
Thy power which first attun'd her Lay.
SONG XV. STREPHON of the HILL:
1.
LET others Damond's Praise rehearse,
Or Co -- lin's at their Will;
I mean to Sing in rustic Verse,
Young Strephon of the Hill.
2.
As once I set beneath a Shade,
Beside a purling Rill;
Who shoul'd my Sollitude invade,
But Strephon of the Hill,
3.
He tapt my Shoulder, snatched a Kiss,
I could not take it ill;
For nothing sure is done amiss,
By Strephon of the Hill.
4.
Consent O Lovely Maid he cried,
Nor aim thy Swain to kill;
Consent this Day to be the Bride,
Of Strephon of the Hill.
5.
Observe the Doves on yonder Spray,
See how they sit and Bill;
So sweet your Time shall pass away,
With Strephon of the Hill.
6.
We went to Church with hearty Glee,
O love propitious still,
May every Nymph be blessed like me,
With Strephon of the Hill.
SONG XVI. NANCY CROW.
1.
AH! whence this impotence of Mind,
Sure Beauty properly defi^^^,
To Learning is a Foe:
Newton and Pope neglected lie,
Belinda can no more supply,
The Place of Nancy Crow.
2.
Let Those who would the explore,
Of modern Wit: or ancient Lore,
To Foreign Climates go!
To me let none propose this Task,
No Proof of Nature's Force I ask,
But Charming Nancy Crow.
3.
Through the smooth Surface of a Stream,
When brightened by the Morning Beam,
We see the Sands below;
Thus in her Face as smooth, as clear,
(Enlightened by her Eves) appear,
The Thoughts of Nancy Crow.
4.
Had Nature, now too careless grown,
Each Year the Seeds of beauty sown,
Sure Time would not be slow;
Since Fourteen Summers could produce,
A Plant so fair, so fit for use,
As charming Nancy Crow.
5.
Alas! said Flora with a Tear,
No more my Roses must appear,
No more my Lillys blow;
For oh! their boasted red, and while,
Their softness, fragrance, all unite,
In lovely Nancy Crow.
6.
Let those whom coarser Nerves sustain,
Over Hills, and Dales, through rough and plain,
Pu^fue the bounding D^e;
It Is mine to chase a spright^^ Fair,
Like Daphne crowned w^^^ golden Hair,
Coy temping Nancy Crow.
SONG XVII. The CHARMING BRIDE.
1.
NOW the happy Knot is tied,
Betsey is my charming Bride,
Ring the Bells and fill the Bowl,
Revel all without Control,
Revel all without Control,
Who so fair as lovely Bett?
Who so blessed as Collinet?
Who so fair as lovely Bett?
Who so blessed as Collinet?
2.
Now adieu to Maiden Arts,
Angeling for unguarded Hearts,
Welcome Hymen's la^^ing Joys
Lisping wanton Girls and Boys,
Lisping, etc. -- etc. --
Girls as fair as levely Bett,
Boys as sweet as Collinet,
Girls a^ etc. -- etc.
3.
Tho, ripe Sheaves of yellow Corn,
Now my Plentious Barn adorn,
Though I Have decked my Myrtle Bowers,
With the fairest sweetest Flowers
With the etc. -- etc. --
Riper fairer sweeter yet,
Are the Charms of lovely Bett,
Riper fair etc. -- etc. --
4.
Though on Sundays I was seen
Dressed like any May Day Queen,
Though six Sweet-hearts daily strove,
To deserve, thy Betty's Love,
To deserve, etc. -- etc. --
Them I quit without Regret,
All my Joy's in Collinet,
Them I quit, etc. -- etc. --
5.
Strike up then the rustic Lay,
Crown with Sports our Bridal day,
May each Lad a Mistress find,
Like my Betsey fair and kind,
Like my etc. -- etc. --
And each Lass, a Husband (...)
Fond and true as Collinet,
And each etc. -- etc. --
6.
Ring the Bells and fill the B^^^l,
Revel all without Control,
May the Sun never rise never set,
But with Joy to happy Bett,
But with Joy to happy Bett
May the Sun never rise never set,
But with Joy to happy Bett,
But with Joy to happy Bett
And her faithful Collinet.
SONG XVIII.
LOV's a gentle generous Passion,
Source of all sublime Delights,
Which with mutual Inclination,
Two fond Hearts in one unites.
What are Titles Pomp or Rich^
If compared with true Conter,
That False Joy which now b^^^^^
When obtained we may repen^,
Lawless Passions bring Vexation,
But a chaste and constant Love,
Is a glorious Emulation,
Of the blissful State above,
SONG XIX. COLIN and PHILLIS.
COLIN. HARK! Hark! over the Plains what glad^ umults we hear!
How gay all the Nymphs and the S^^^^erds appear!
With Myrtles and Roses new dec^'d are (...) Bowers,
And every Bush bears a Garland of Flower^
I cannot, for my Life, what it means, understand;
There Is some Rural Festival surely at Ha^^^
Nor Harvest nor Sheep shearing, now can^^ake Place --
But Phillis will tell me the Truth of the Case.

PHILLIS. The Truth, honest Lad! -- Why you surely hou'd know,
What Rites are prepared in the Village below;
Where gallant young Thyrsis, so famed and adored,
Weds Daphne, the Sister of CORIN, our Lord,
That Daphne, whose Beauty, Good Nature and ^ase,
All Fancies can strike, and all Judments can please:
That CORIN but Praise must the Matter ^ive over,
You know what He is, and I need say to more.

COLIN. Young Thyrsis too claims, all that Horo^r can lend;
His Countrymen's Glory, their Champion and Friend;
Though such slight Memorials scarce speak (...) Deserts;
And trust me, His Name is engraved o^^^eir Hearts.

PHILLIS. But hence to the Bridal, behold how they throng;
Each Shepherd conducting his Sweethea^^ along:
The joyous Occasion, all Nature inspire,
With tender Affections, and cheerful Des^^es.

DUETTO
Ye Powers that over Conjugal Union or side,
All gracious look down on the Bridegroom and Bride:
That Beauty, and Virtue, and Valor may shine,
In a Race, like themselves, with n^^^^nd to the Line,
Let Honor and Glory, and Riches, (...) Praise.
Unceasing attend them through numer^^ Days:
And while in a Palace Fate fix^s their Lot,
Oh! may they live easy as those in a Cot
SEMI CHORUS of NYMPHS.
While the Dancers are (...) the Wreaths of Flowers
about the Bri^eg^^om and Bride.
Fast the b^^^ming Vi^gin ^^e,
No (...) b^^ea^h the Roses ^^e.
SEMI CHORUS of SWAINS.
R^u^d the H^^o ^wi^tly move!
Glory bind to facred Love
GRAND CHORUS as the Dance concludes.
B^ess'd for ever man they be!
Ever Bound, yet ever Free.
SNOG XX. LIBERTY.
To the Tune of "HEARTS OF OAK."
COME cheer up, my Lads, to our Country be firm,
A King of the Ocean we'll weather each S^orm;
In egrit^ cal^s oat^^ Fair Liberty see,
"Waves her Flag over our Heads, and her Words are,
"BE FREE
CHORUS.
Hearts of O^k are we ^ill, for we are Sons of those Men,
Who a^w^^s were ready,
Steady, Boys, stead^,
To fight for our Freedom again and again.
To King GEORGE, as true Subej^ts, we loyal bow down,
And hope we man call MAGNA CHARTA our own:
Let the rest of the World slavish Worship decree,
English Genius has ordered her Sons should be free.
CHORUS, etc.

Poor Esau his Birthright gave up for a Bribe,
But Englishmen scorn the mean Soul selling Tribe;
Beyond Life our Birthright of Freedom we prize.
Which in Death we'll defend, and a^jure an EXCISE.
CHORUS, etc.

On our Brows while we lawrell'd crowned Liberty wear,
All that Englishmen ought, we as Englishmen dare;
Though Tempests and Terrors around us we see,
Bribes nor Fears cannot prevail over the Heart which is Free.
CHORUS, etc.

With Loyalty, Liberty let us entwine,
Our Blood shall for both flow as free as our Wine;
Let u^ser an Example, what all Men should be,
And a Toa^^ give the World -- Here Is to those dare be Free.
CHORUS, etc.

SONG XXI. The RURAL BRIDE.
Sung by Miss Wright.
MY Sheperd so handsome and gay,
Made Love to me just at Sixteen,
In Words that were charming and pretty;
I listened to what he might say;
When met on the Mead or the Green,
He kissed, and how pleased was his Betty!
He brought me the Turt^e Dove's Nest;
My Lambkin with Flowerets he decked:
And braded my Locks that are jetty:
Sweet Lillies he placed on my Preast,
He gave me a Trush that was speck'd,
And hoped it would sing like his Betty.
But once as we walked through the Grove;
As blithe as each Linnet was there,
We met both young Nancy and Hetty:
The former had once been his Love,
The other came in for her Share;
But all is now centered in Betty.
Tomorrow our Wedding will be;
The Church-Path with Roses is strown,
Where nothing is wanton or petty;
Our Lives shall glide gentle and free,
Care never shall see us with a Frown;
My Shepherd brings Smiles to his Betty.
SONG XXII. A favorite SONG.
THE World my Dear Myra, is full of Deceit,
And Friendship's a Jewel we seldom can meet,
How strange does it seem that in searching around,
This Source of Content is so rare to be found,
Oh Friendship thou Balm and rich sweetner of Life,
Kind Parent of Ease and Composer of Strife,
Without thee alas, what are Riches and Power
But empty delusions the Joy of an Hour,
How much to be prized and esteemed is a Friend
On whom we may always and safely depend,
Our Joys when extended will always Increase,
And Griefs when divided are hushed into Peace
When Fortune is Smiling what Crowds will appear,
Their Kindness, to offer and Friendship sincere,
Yet change but the Prospect and point our Distress,
No longer to court you, they eagerly press.
SONG XXIII. HYMEN, A new occasional INTERLUDER,
Sung by Mr. ARNE,
HOW pleasing, dear Wedlock, appear thy Domains!
How soft are thy Fetters, how easy thy Chains!
No Pleasure on Earth is so perfect as thine,
Thy Joys with the Virtuous are almost divine;
For Friendship and Love here together unite
The Raptures of Sense with supernal Delight.
Hymen awake! -- The God of Love attend!
What Cause propitious brings my dearest Friend!
Joy and Pleasure, great and free,
Fill my Breast at Sight of thee!
Tell me, gentle God of Love,
Why you visit Hymen's Grove?
Dreadful War, the human Foe,
Leaves to Peace the World below;
Discord quits the frighted Land,
Banished by the Victor's Hand.
See around in every Grove,
Mirth, Tranquillity, and Love;
Take thy Torch and Golden Carriage,
Now Is the Reign of Love and Marriage.
Love rewards the Soldier best;
Hymen makes the Virgin blessed;
Then, O Venus, haste away,
For it is Hymen's Holiday.
Hymen, the sacred Rites of Love prepare!
I will -- But first, O Queen, for whom declare!
For one divinely sent Mankind to please,
Formed to command with Dignity and Ease;
Of Manners pleasing, God like where he can,
A Prince! a Hero, and a worthy Man.
What but lovely blooming Youth,
Graced with all the Charms of Truth,
Fair with matchless Elegance,
Can the Hero recompense.
Who around the spacious Earth,
Bright with Beauty, great by Birth.
Should, but she, such Merit share,
Who Is as virtuous as she is fair?
Jove smiles Approval from above,
And gratulates connubial Love;
Auspicious Fate the Union wills,
And in the Pair sweet Hope instills.
The Fire I Have kindled! light thy Torch again:
It Is done; and now we'll form the Marriage Chain:
Bless, O Jove, the Pair we join,
And with Friendship Love entwine;
Realize their fancied Hope,
And to Rapture give full Scope;
That they soon may feel with Pleasure,
Joys parental without Measure.
Nymphs and Shepherds, quick advance!
Join the festive Song and Dance!
He the Kind, and She the Fair,
Blessing thus the happy Pair.
We consign the bright Pair,
O Great Jove! to thy Care:
Deck them with Honor's glorious Crown,
And make immortal Joys their own.
SONG. XXIV. The BRITISH MUSE,
Sung by Mr. Low.
1.
ON the white Clifts of Albion, see Fame where she stands,
And her shrill swelling Notes, reach the neighboring lands,
Of the Natives Free born and their Conq^st she sings,
The happiest of Men with the greatest of Kings.
2.
GEORGE the third she proclaims, his vast Glory repeats,
His undismaid Legions, invi^cible Fleets;
Whom nor Castles or Rocks can Honor retard,
Since even Death for their King they will scorn disregard.
3.
O! but see a Cloud burst, and an Angel appears,
It Is Peace, lovely Virgin, disolved in Tears;
Say, Fame, cr^^'d the Maid, is it not Time to give over,
With Sieges and Famine, Explosions and Go^e?
4.
His Just Rights to assert, has the King amply triy'd,
Nor his Wisdom, or Strength, can Opponents abide,
Then no longer in Rage let dread Thunders be hurled,
But leave him to me, and give Ease to the World.
5.
It Is done, and Great GEORGE is to Mercy inclined,
The blessed Word is gone forth, for the good of Mankind,
It Is the Act of a Briton to beat, then to spare;
And our King is a Briton, deny it who dare.
6.
To Hodgson and Keppel let Bumpers then smile,
And to all our brave Troops, who have taken Belleisle,
May they meet just Reward, and with Courage advance,
Still to humble the Pride and the Power of France.
7
Charge your Glasses Lip high, and drink Health to the King,
To the Duke, and the Princess, and make the Air R^ng;
May the Days of Great GEORGE be all happy and long,
And the Mr Secretary P -- tt,
Man still be right, who yet never was wrong,
SONG XXV. The ABSENT LOVER.
sung by Mr. Tenducci.
COME ye Hours with Joy replete,
When I may sigh at Cael^^'s Feet.
Cease, ye feathered Choirs, your Strains,
Your cheerful Notes augment my Pains;
Or with me in Anguish mourn,
Till the lovely Nymph return.
Not on Beauty's transient P^e^sure,
Which no real Joys impart;
Nor on Heaps of sordid Treasure,
Did I fix my youthful Heart.
'Twas not Chloe's perfect Feature,
Did the sickle Wanderer bind;
Nor her Form, the Boast of Nature;
'Twas alone, her spotless Mind.
Not on Beauty's, etc.

Take ye Swains the real Blessing
That will Joys for Life ensure,
The virtuous M^od alone possessing
Will your lasting Bliss secure.
Not on Beauty's, etc.

SONG, XXVI. A new SONG,
Sung by Mr. Low, at Vauxhall,
SEE Royal Charlotte come!
Sound Trumpet, beat the Drum!
Britons rejoice:
Whilst Bells me -- lo -- dious ring,
We'll all in cho -- rus sing,
God save Third George our King,
And bless his Choice.
With George we'll Charlotte join;
From their united Line
May Princes spring!
Whose godlike Acts may claim,
The sweetest Voice of Fame;
Thence each deserve the Name,
Of Patroit King.
O may the Royal Pair,
Whilst they in Glory share,
In Love increase!
To them fill Bumpers round;
Ye Skies, their Healths resound!
And may these joys be crowned
With lasting Peace.
SONG XXVII. The PHOENIX. A new Song.
A MANDA's fair by all confessed,
Her Skin soft snow -- y white;
As Down that clothes the Turtles Breast.
Her Eyes like Diamonds bright,
Yet farther still the Nymph ex -- cells,
In each celestial Grace,
That 'midst the Heart's soft Lab' -- rinth dwells,
or in the Soul takes Place.
How much superior Beauty was,
The coldest Bosom's find;
But with resistless Force it draws,
to Sense and Virtue joined.
The Casket where to outward show,
The Artest's Hand is seen,
Is doubly valued, when we know,
It holds a Gem within.
SONG XXVIII. PHYLLIS.
By J. Cunningham,
I SAID, -- On the Banks by the Stream
I Have pip'd for the Shepherds too long:
'Oh grant me, ye Muses a Theme
'where Glory may brighten my Song."
But Pan bade me stick to my Strain,
Nor Lessons too lofty rehearse;
Ambition befits not a Swain,
And Phyllis loves pastoral Verse.
The Rose, though a beautiful red,
Looks faded to Phyllis's Bloom;
The Breeze, from the Bean-flower Bed,
To her Breath's but a feeble perfume;
The Dew-drop so limpid and Gay,
That loose on the violet lies,
(though brightened by Phaebus's Ray)
Wants Lusture compared to her Eyes.
A Lilly I plucked in full Pride,
Its Freshness with here is to compare;
And folishly thought (till I tried)
The Flow'ret was equally fair.
How, Corydon, could you, mistake?
Your Fault be with Sorrow confessed!
You said the white Swans on the Lake.
For softness might rival her Breast.
While thus I went on in her Praise,
My Phyllis passed sportive along;
Ye Poets I covet no Bays,
She smiled -- -a Reward for my Song!
I find the God Pan in the Right,
No Fame is like the Fair-one's Applause,
And Cupid must Crown with Delight
The Shepherd that sings in his Cause.
SONG XXIX. A Fvourite SONG.
YE Shepherds attend to my Strain,
Attend to my Woe and Despair;
Your Sorrows will lessen my Pain,
And your Pity alleviate my Care:
Then I Will throw, all distressed and forlorn,
My Pipe and my Numbers aside;
For the Sun that enlightened this Morn,
Saw Delia, gay Corydon's Bride.
For him the bright Goddess of Dawn
Enlivened with Crimson the Skies,
And for him over the sad dusky Lawn
The Shad^s of pale Eve will arise:
On Damon no Comfort must shine,
While, Corydon, Joy wai^s on thee;
And the Night which to Bliss you consign,
Brings Anguish and Horror to me.
Ah Delia! my foolish fond Heart
Your Beauties unknowingly stole;
And without the Resources of Art,
Unheeding you conquered my Soul:
Your Charms were the Joy of my Sight,
Over each Feature my raptured Eye run;
You was fair, and I gazed with Delight!
You smiled, and my Heart was undone
So pleasing, so sweet was the Pain,
And my Mind could no Danger foresee,
That with Transport I bowed to the Chain,
And never once wished to be free:
Too late my passed Error I prove,
For alas! now I feel to my Cost,
That when Damon submitted to Love,
His Peace and his Pleasures were lost.
But Shepherds, let Delia never know
The Pangs I am doomed to endure,
Lest a Drop from her bright Eyes should flow,
For Sorrows she never must care:
Better Thousands, like Damon distressed,
In Silence those Sorrows should bear,
Than a Sigh swell my Delia's soft Breast,
Or her Cheek feel the Weight of a Tear.
Ye Woods and ye Meadows adieu,
My Flocks are dispe^s'd on the Plain;
My Woes now, young Shepherds, ye view,
Then attend to the Close of my Strain.
When Love first your Bosom alarms,
The to pleasing Poison, ah shun!
She was sair, and I gazed on her Charms!
She smiled, and my Heart was undone.
SONG XXX. On a sensible, but ordinary Lady,
SAY, why must the Poet's soft Lays
To Beauty be always confined?
Or why not the Tribute of Praise
Be paid to the Charms of the Mind?
Why need we observe (what all know)
That Beauty will quickly decay;
Like Flowers, which as soon as they blow,
Droop, wither, and then fade away?
Though not blessed with that ravishing Form
Which blooming Lucinda can boast,
Shall we treat Celia's Friendship with Scorn?
Shall we hate her because she is no Toast?
No, surely, for all must revere
The Charms of her Temper and Mind;
Her Judgment so solid, yet clear,
Her Taste so correct and refined.
Ye Swains then be prudent and wise,
Nor listen to Beauty's false Voice;
A Happiness pure if ye prize,
Let Merit alone claim your Choice.
SONG XXXI. A new SONG,
sung by Mr. Tenducci.
IN vain to keep my Heart you strive,
And seek your own uncoing,
It Is Kindness keeps the Flame alive,
But Ri -- gour proves its Ruin;
Would you the To ver should re-turn.
Be courte-ous and comply-ing,
No Heart did ever with rapture burn,
That met with cold de -- nying.
Come prithee leave this prudish Air,
Give over this Affectation;
Hypocrisy with all the Fair,
Is now quite out of Fashion;
While Love and Youth are in their Prime,
Enjoy these fleeting Treasure,
The envious Hand or creeping Time,
Destroys all Joy and Pleasure.
Kind Nature every Charm supplies,
And all her Gifts discloses,
With Love inflames thy sparkling Eves,
And paints thy Cheeks with Roses;
And shall those Roses fade away,
Their fragrance yet untasted?
Shall all thy Charms through Time decay,
And Nature's Gifts be wasted?
Behold the Birds in yonder Grove,
In h^^py Pairs combining,
The Season hail of Joy and Love,
In sweetest Concert joining;
But if they find a Mate too coy,
And proffered Bliss rejected.
To kinder Females soon they fly,
And leave her quite neglected.
SONG XXXII. A SONG. Inscribed to Liberty:
THE Court were all met,
And the Judges were set,
And the Jury were sworn on the Bock, Sirs:
When against Robert W --,
The Charge was made good,
That he W -- s's Papers had took, Sirs.
Then the Sons of the Law,
With a Hem and a Ha,
Would have proved that the Thing was no Sin, Sirs:
But after much Pain,
They found 'twas in vain,
For the Jury would not take it in, Sirs.
Then the worthy Chief Justice,
In whom our Trust is,
Summed the Evidence up in a Speech, Sirs;
And made it appear,
In a Manner most clear,
That the Deed of the Peace was a Breach, Sirs:
Till the Jury returned.
Lord! how all of us burned
With Impatience to know the Event, Sirs!
But the Moment the Law
Gave us Leave to Huzza,
In a Body to W -- s's we went, Sirs.
And there all rej^cing,
Each raising his Voice in
A Manner he never did before Sirs;
To W --,P --, and G -- n,
And-I hope it is no Sin --
But I wish of such Men we had more, Sirs.
SONG XXXIII. On the Prince and Princess of BRUNSWICK'S Departure. To the AIR
of "IN INFANCY, etc."
WHEN Flora, with her plighted Love,
From Thames's Bark withdrew,
She sent a Lo^k to Richmond's Grove,
And breathed a Sigh over Kew:
Often with that Breath the Woodbine-Flow'r,
The Roses, bloomed more sweet;
Now, conscious of the parting Hour,
They wither at her Feet.
No more, with Song of Nymps and Swains,
The sprightly Morn shall rise;
Love far retreats from Richmond Plains
To reign in Flora's Eyes:
Thames, plantive like Euphrates, mourns
His Eden's desert Sh^re,
No Zephyrs blow, no Spring returns,
When Flora smiles no more.
Yet her the Muse still fondly roves,
At Corfeu's solemn K^ell;
Where often the Genius of the Groves
Thus sings from Merlin's Cell: --
-- Go, happy Nymph, though doomed to shine
No more on Albion's Sphere;
New Regions feel thy Ray divine,
New Edens flourish there.
SONG XXXIV.
by Mr. SMART
WHERE shall CELIA fly for Shelter,
In what secret Grove or Cave;
Sights and Sonnets sent to melt her,
From the Young, the Gay, the Brave.
Though with prudish Airs she starch her,
Still she longs, and still she burns:
Cupid shoots, like Hayman's Archer.
Wheresoe'er the Damsel turns.
Virtue, Youth, good Sense, and Beauty,
If Discretion guide us not,
Sometimes are the Ruffian's Booty,
Sometimes are the Booby's Lot:
Now they are purchased by the Trader,
Now commanded by the Peer;
Now some subtle mean Invader,
Wins the Heart, or gains the Ear.
O Discretion! you are a Jewel,
Or our Grand-Mammas Mistake;
Stinting Flame by bating Fuel,
Always careful and awake:
Would you keep your Pearls from Tramplers,
Weigh the License, weigh the Bands;
Mark my Song upon your Samplers,
Wear it on your Knots and Fans.
SONG XXXV. The DRUNKEN WIFE o Galloway, A SCOTS Sang.
DOWN in yon Meadow a Couple did tar -- ry,
The Wife she drank nathing but Wine and Ca -- na -- ry;
To her Friends he complained of her right air -- ly,
Oh! Gin my Wife wad drink hoo ly and fairly,
She Is drunken her Stockings, sae has she her Shoon,
And she has drunken her bonny new Gown;
She Is drunken her Sark, that covered her airly,
Oh! Gin my Wife, etc.
First she drank Crummy, and then she drank garrie;
Syne she has drunken my bonny gray Marie,
That carried me through the Dub and the lairie,
Oh! Gin my Wife, etc.
Wad she drink but her ain Things, I wad na much care,
But when she drinks my Claithes that I canna well spare,
When I Am wi' my Gossips, it angers me fairly,
Oh! Gin my Wife, etc.
My Sunday's Coat she has laid it a wad,
The best blue Bonnet ever was o my Head;
At Kirk and at Market I Am covered but barely,
Oh! Gin my Wife, etc.
The very gray Mittons that g^id o my Hands,
To her Neighbor's Wife she has laid them in Pawns,
My bane headed Staff that I loo'd so dearly,
Oh! Gin my Wife, etc.
When there is any Siller she maun keep the Purse,
Gin I seek but a Bawbie she will scauld and she will curse;
She lives like a Queen, I scrimpit, and sparely,
Oh! Gin my Wife, etc.
I never was inclined to wrangling or Strife,
Nor wad I refuse her what is needful for Life;
Ee'r we come to War I Am ay for a Parley,
Oh! Gin my Wife, etc.
A Pint w^' her Kimmers I wad her allow,
But when she sits down she drinks till she is Fow;
And when she is sow, she is unco camstairie,
Oh! Gin my Wife. etc.
When she ga's to the Cas'ay she roars and she rants,
Has no Dread of Neighbor's nor minds the House Wants;
Roars some foolish lilt like up thy Heart Charlie,
Oh! Gin my Wife, etc.
And when she comes Hame she lays on the Lads;
She ca's the Lasses both Limmers and Jades;
And me my sell naught b^t auld Cuckold Carlie.
Oh! gin my Wife wad drink holy and fairly.
SONG XXXVI. In What we must all come to.
TO Dance, and to Dress, and to flaunt it about,
To run to Park, Play, to Assembly and Rout,
To wander for ever in whim's giddy Maze,
And one poor Hair torture a Million of Ways;
To put, at the Glass, every Feature to School
And practice their Art on each Fop and each Fool,
Of one Thing to think, and another to tell;
These these, are the Manners of each giddy Belle.
To smile and to simper, white Teeth to display;
The Time in gay Follies to trifle away;
Against every Virtue the Bosom to Steel,
And only of Dress the Auxie^ies feel;
To be at Eve's Ear, the infidious Decoy,
The Pleasure never taste, yet the Mischief enjoy,
To boast of soft Raptures they never can know,
These, these are the Manners of each giddy Beau.
XXXVII.
Sung by Miss Brown, at Sadlers Wells.
MY Da -- die was gone to the Mar -- ket two Mile,
My Mammy was gone to the Millers the while,
My Mammy was gone to the Millers the While,
In came my dear Joh -- ney and this was his Say -- ing,
Lay by your Wheel Bet -- sy, come hi -- there a May -- ing.
Lay by your Wheel, Bet -- sy, come hi -- her a May -- ing,
I answered him no it 'twas a Folly to ask,
My Mammy had set me to spinning a Task,
Quoth he, cut the tether, dear, set the Cow straying;
We'll tie her up safely, whilst we are a Maying.
His Method I took then, how could I forbear?
I loved him too well to think falsely he would swear;
He pressed my Lips gently, the Fool fell to playing,
The Time ran so sweetly we did not go a Maying,
My Daddy never asked me a Word where I Would been,
My Mammy I told I Would the Cow to fetch in;
She said she was sure I Would been somewhere delaying,
But never suspected that I Would been a Maying.
If Johnny proves true, as I think that he will,
The Market I Will bless' and Ill honor the Mill,
That kept my old Daddy and Mammy so staying,
When I was persuaded by Johenny a Maying.
SONG XXXVIII. To the HEROES of the BRITISH NATION.
A LADY, possessed of a handsome Estate,
With a Pedigree pleasing, though not very great;
With a Person so handsome 'twill pass in a Crowd;
With a Tongue, though it is glib, not improperly loud!
With each Quallification would suit in a Wife,
Will be glad to engage with a Hero for Life;
Though her Virtue's too dear to be fondly betrayed,
With Submission she would choose -- not to die an old Maid.
Be the Hero possessed with Goodnature and Sense,
And of Courage enough for the Fair one's Defense:
Not a Coxcomb in Dress, nor in Politics loud,
Of his Person not vain, of his Merit not proud:
Then of Women and Wine be must wholly be free,
Or else I declare he is no Husband for me.
If his Birth is genteel, (not too low in Extraction)
If polite in Address, it is a full Satisfaction.
Should his Fortune be small, no Objection to me,
If his Principles answer in every Degree.
If such Heroes there are, he that merits it most,
Must answer me quickly by return of the post.
Then away to old Hymen -- in Raptures we run,
To be happy for ever, or for ever be undone.
SONG XXXIX. BELL^ISLE MARCH, or the REVIEW, As sung at Marybone Gardens.
ALL hail to the King,
That in Youth's ear-ly Spring,
Such a promise of Glo -- ry dis^plays,
May his Race still extend,
Freedom's Cause to defend,
And the Fame of Old Eng-land to raise.
May our Edwards of old,
And our Har -- ry's so bold,
In his Is -- sue a gain and a gain be renewed,
That our Sons on the Main,
May their Empires main-tain,
And Commerce in Safe -- ty pur -- su'd.
With many a Scar,
Behold from the War,
The brave Legions of Britain advance;
From Minden they come,
Swell the Fife, beat the Drum;
From Minden, the Terror of France,
See the brave hardy Crew,
As they pass in Review,
How they smile on their King's Royal Train,
When these their Looks say,
Call us forth, we obey,
And we'll fight all our Battles again.
From the East to the West,
British Valor, confessed,
Stands first on the Records of Fame;
Let Williamsdorf's Plain,
And the Borders of Spain,
British Faith, British Courage proclaim;
From the dangerous Sword,
Of Oppression restored,
Fair Freedom again shall display
In Safety her Wings,
For Protection while Kings.
Grateful Homage to Britain shall pay.
The Feats that were done,
By Philip's mad Son,
Were but Tristes to Glories like these;
For Ambition he fought.
And the Lust only sought
Of his blood-thirsty Rage to appease:
But Britons, more brave,
Draw the sword but to save,
From such Tyrants, the Rights of Mankind;
And the Weapon again,
When their End they obtain,
Is in Peace to the Scabbard consigned.
A full flowing Glass
Now to Granby we'll pass.
And to each valiant Leader beside;
Nor forget the brave Crew,
That with ^^earts firm and true,
For their Country all danger defied,
Let the Drum beat a Charge,
And the Nation at large
Rend the wide-vaulted Sky with their song,
Till echo the Sound
From her Grotto rebound,
And the loud Gratulation prolong.
SONG XL. A new SONG.
SINCE Time shall steal each tempting Rose,
Each Lilly that thy Cheeks disclose,
That lovely languish from thine Eyes,
And all thy Smiles and Gaities,
For present bliss by Heaven designed,
Oh hasten Fair one, to be kind!
For when thy jetty Curls grow Gray,
That now adown thy shoulders play.
When laughing Swains sorfake thy Shrine,
Nor call thee Angel, nor divine;
Then Fair ^^e, will thou change thy Mind.
And wish, too late, thou had been kind.
SONG XLI. On seeing the NORTH BRITON burnt, A SCOTS Epigrim.
AH mickle in the Power and Force that lies,
In Numbers, and their hidden Que^^ies.
In cursed fifteen was many a lov^l ^^^an,
Hung, gibe^^^d, and qu^^^^^d to a Man
From thrice (...)
Returned the (...)
Cursed Forty (...)
And by thy (...) Brion burn.
SONG XLII. An ODE,
MY Be^sy flies me like a Fawn,
Who scuds across the pathless Lawn,
Seeking her Dam, with causless Fear,
Of every whispering Blast of Air;
She trembles in her Heart and Knees,
If Leaves but stir with gentlest Breese;
Or lurking Lizards chance to Shake,
The rustling Shrubs, or move the Brake,
I seek thee not, O cruel Fair!
Like savage Beast, thine Heart to tear!
Come, Betsy, follow me, no more prove Coy,
But Dove-like taste the Sweets of nuptial Joy,
SONG XLIII. FEMALE ADVICE,
PUR -- SU -- ING Beau-ty Men de-scry,
The distant Shore and long to prove
Still ^icher in va -- ri -- e -- ty,
The Treasures of the Land of Love,
We Women like weak Indians trade,
Inviting from cut golden Coast,
The wandering Rovers to our Land;
But she who trades with them is lost
With humble Vows they first begin,
Stealing unseen into the Heart;
But by Possession settled in
They quickly act another Part.
For Beads and Baubles we resign,
In Ignorence our shining Store,
Discover Nature's richest Mine,
And yet the Tyrants will have more.
Ye Fair take Heed, to forbear to try,
How Men can Court, or you be won;
For Love is but Discovery;
When that is made, the Pleasure's done.
SONG XLIV. What Is LITTLE is PRETTY
NATURE's fairest Charms we see
Centur'd in Epitome;
Little Stars the brightest Bla^e,
Small the Gem of purest Rays;
Nature's favorite Child, the Rose,
In Miniature, how beauteous blows?
And breathes the sweet unrivali'd Note
From Philomela's slender Throat;
Thus in Human Race we find
Thee small of Body great in Mind;
No Volumes writes immortal Gray,
Short but honied every Lay,
The Drops how loath to fall away!
The Macedonian glorious Elf
Conquered all Things-but himself,
And Prussia's gallant Imp of Fame
Fills the wide World, a deathless Name!
And Child of Beauty, Queen of Grace,
My little Delia's smirking Face,
From the bright Conquest's of her Eye.
In Fame, with either Chief may vie.
SONG XLV.
By Signora GALLY
WHEN first I saw thee graceful move,
A^! me What
When first I saw,
Ah! me what meant my throb -- bing Breast;
Say soft Con -- fu -- sion,
Meant my throb -- bing Breast;
Say, soft Con -- fu -- sion,
Art thou Love, if Love thou art,
Then farewell Rest,
Art thou Love: If Love thou art,
Then fare well Rest.
With gentle Smiles ass^age the Pain,
Those gentle Smiles did first crea^e;
And, though you cannot love again,
In Pity, ah! forbear to have.
SONG XLVI. From St. GELA^^.
ONE Day behind my Lad^'s Back
My Lord attack^d her Maid;
And stole a Kiss, which she repaid,
And gave him Smack for Smack.
Pert with such Freedoms, pray, said she,
Who kisses with the greaten Gl^e;
Is it my Lady? is i^^l?
'I is you no doubt, he made Reply.
Why, in good Faith, it must be true.
Resumed the wanton Dame;
For Tom and J^hn, and Chaplain too,
All say the same.
SONG XLVII: The VIRGIN UNMASKED,
IT is I be -- lieve,
Next Hollantide Eve,
A Twelvemonth since first I be -- began,
To hold up my Head,
In Love to be Read,
And to construe the Looks of a Man,
And con -- strue the Looks of a Man,
Young Damon I saw,
^e k^ss'd me, Oh la!
I vow through my Bos^m it ran;
My Lips he so pros'd,
It Is true I pro^est,
I thought him a Duce of a Man,
Philander the gay,
I met at the Play,
My Heart beat a furious Ratan;
Because you must know,
I some Time ago,
Had Hopes of his being the Man,
Brisk Strephon come next,
But then I was vexed,
He played with Mi^s Phill^'s Fan;
I own to be su^e
I could not endure
To see myself rob^'d of a Man.
My Mother and Aunts,
Sti^l watching my Haunts,
Obstruct me as much as they can;
But what do I care,
I vow and declar^,
I Will fit myself soon with a Man.
SONG XLIX. The HAPPY SHEPHERD.
YES, Phillis, we'll trip over the Meads,
And hasten away to the Pain;
Where Shepherds at^end with their Reeds,
To welcome my Love and her Swain,
The Lark is exalted in Air,
The Linnet sings perched on the spray,
Our Lambs stand in Need of our Care,
Then let us not lengthen Delays,
The Pleasure I feel with my Dear,
While gamesome young Lambs are at Sport
Exceeds the Delight of a Peer,
That shines wi^h such Grand^er at Court.
When Collin and Strephon go by,
They form a Disguise for a While;
They see how I Am blessed with a Sigh,
But Envy forbids them to Smile.
Let great Folks of Liberty Prate,
TO enjoy it take infinite Pains,
But Liberty's primitive State,
Is only enjoyed on the Plains.
With Phillis I rove to and fro,
With her my gay Minutes are spent;
'Twas Phillis first taught me to know,
That Happiness flows from Content.
SONG L. The LOVER 's RESOLUTION,
I Own I love; but then my Heart,
A servile Awe disdains:
If Cupid cannot Peace impart,
I Will shun his treacherous Chains:
No beauteous Nymph shall joy inspire,
In spite of Reason's Ru^e^;
I le^ve the Star^s of wild Desire,
To Madmen and ^o Fools
When Pleasure's Path but ends in Woe,
Who'd tread t^' aluri^g Wa^;
Who Would not all her Cha^ms forego,
And dread her fa^al Sway:
To Virtu^'s happy Fields repair,
Wh^^e pure ^^^ten^ment reigns;
Where constant Joy excludes Despair,
Where s^^ing peace remains.
Can Love to Reason then submit,
(^ome amorous vou^h exclaims)
O^es, his Love their ^^rded Heat,
At he^ civiner Flames.
This ^^^xim then at once receive,
And m^ts truth confide,
Lov^'s Pa^hs can ^e'er your Feet deceive,
When Reason is your Guide.
SONG LI. LOVE at FIRST SIGHT.
THE Sur's gav Metal, shining Gold,
In many Sh^pes is shown;
The Form though varied, in the Mould,
The Standard Worth's ^il known.
So I, my Fair to please and gain,
Would many Changes pr^ve;
Thr^ugh all a cons^ant Heart maintain;
That Heart should all be Love.
She replies,

The Knot once tv'd, t^o of^ we find,
A change soon foll^w in the Mind.
O^ each ^oung sighing Lover,
The Nymph be^^v^d, once made a Wife,
Finds all her Pleasure turned to S^rife,
And Spouse an arrant Rover.
SONG LII. A New Favorite SONG.
NOW the Wood land Choirists sings,
Beauty takes her radiant Sphere:
Love adorns the smiling Spring;
Love and Beau^y gild the Year,
Seize the Minutes as they fly,
Jocund Hours, and festive round:
Innocence, with Virgin Eye,
Comes with rural Chaplets crowned,
Awful Virtue keeps her State,
In the Cot, or on the Throne:
Liberty enjoins her Mate,
As fair Honor holds the Zone:
Love and Beauty on the Wing,
Sweep the Globe, and conquer all:
Poet, Hero, Sage, and King,
At their Shrine submissive fall.
Where should Honor love to dwell,
But in Freedom's happy Isle?
Virtue here enjoys a Cell,
More than in Tyrant's Smile.
Where should Beauty fix her reign,
But on Love, that Power defies?
Innocence shall crown the Scence.
Where Ambition droop^ and dies.
SONG LIII.
Tune Go, happy Flower.
MY conquered Heart I freely yield,
And Celia now is Fate;
My Mind, so late with Frolic filled,
Contemns the fickle State,
Then swiftly, Time, ^our Pinions move,
Ye laz^ Minutes fly!
Propitious prove, O God of Love,
Or let thy Vot'ry die.
SONG LIVE. PEGGY; a New Song.
TO the Wood Ro-bin-red breast is fl^wn,
The dai -- ry he A-fits no more;
The Vi -- olets and Cows -- lips are blown,
The Cuckow's heard every Field over.
Through the Grove swells the Black-bird's strong Note,
In concert with softer ton'd Trush;
The Lark stretches wide his sh^ill Throat,
And Linnets are heard in each Bush.
The Hawthrons are powdered with May,
The Meadows arrayed are in green;
The Ewes with their Lambs are at Play.
Ah Nature! -- how lovely the Scene!
Yet alas! what the beauties of Spring,
For my ease, ah too soon are they come!
They bear the Commands of the King,
To march after Bagpipe and Drum.
And Donald, my darling, must go,
It may be for ever we part;
But, when that sad Tale I shall know,
That Moment breaks Peggy's poor Heart.
SONG LV, On the Reduction of MARTINICO.
WHAT Nation shall da^e with Old England compare,
Our Achievements our Courage have shown;
Let us Dance, let us Sing, and Huz -- za for our King,
Mar -- ti -- nico, my Boys, is our own.
Let us Dance, let us Sing, and Huz za for our King,
Mar -- ti -- ni -- co, my Boys is our own.
Bold Monckton, whose So^l no^ a Fear can control,
And Ro^ney of Spirit so great,
Have convinced, the proud Slaves, that we Lords of the waves
When we please can determine their Fate.
Chorus. Have convinced, etc,

Every warm British Pill was sent forth with such Skill,
As must Fame ^ve lasting produce ye.
They kept out a good Look, yet in Hurry we took,
Their Tobago, Cape Vincent, St. Lucia.
Chorus. They kept out, etc.

Dela ouche was sincere, when he flew to St. Pierre,
With Design to take Care of the Pelf,
Though courageous and stout, yet he could not hold out,
All for Reasons best known to himself.
Chorus. Though courageous, etc.

Had you seen our bold Tars, who despise Wounds and Scars,
Aloft on each Emi^ence soa^;
With our Cannon yare ho! you would confess it I know,
That you never saw Lions before.
Chorus. With our Cannon, etc.

Now to Spain we'll proceed, she shall smart for each Deed,
That like France would our Ru^^ endeavor;
Heavens bless our bold Train, both on Land and the Main,
And King George and Queen Charlotte for ever.
Chorus. Heavens bless, etc.

SONG LVI. CONTENT.
By J. Cunningham.
OVER Moorlands and Mountains rude, barren and bare,
A wi^der'd and wea^ied I roam,
A gentle young Shepherdess sees my Despair,
And leads me over Lawns to her H^me.
Yel^ow ^^ea^^, ^r^m rich Cere^, her C^^^age ^ad crowned,
Green Rushes were shrewd on her ^lo^r,
Her Cal^^ne ^^weet W^^doi^^es crept^^y antonly round,
And deck^^ the Sea Seat^ a^ her D^or.
We s^^ ou^selves down to a cooling Repast,
Fresh Fruits! and she c^l^'d me the best:
Whilst, thrown from my Guard by some Glances she cast,
Love slily stole into my breast.
I told my soft Wishes -- she swea^ly replied
(Ye Virgins, her V^ice was divine!)
I Have rich Ones r^jected, and great Ones denied,
Yet take me fond Shep^er^ -- I Am thine.
Her Air was so Modest, her Aspect so Meek,
So simple, yet sweet were her Charms,
I kissed the ripe Roses that glowed on her Cheek,
And locked the love'd Maid in my Arms.
Now j^cund together we tend a few Sheep;
And, if -- on the banks by the Stream,
Reclined on her B^s^m I si^k into Sleep,
Her Image still softens my Dream.
Together we range over the slow-rising Hills,
Delighted with Pastoral Views.
Or rest on the Rock whence the Streamlet distills,
And mark out new Themes for my Muse.
To Pomp or proud Titles she never did Aspire;
The Damsel's of humble Descent!
The Cottager. Peace, is well known for her Sire,
And Shepherds have named her Content.
SONG LVII. PEGGY WIN. A NEW SONG.
THE Poets, in Conscience, have teas'd us too long,
With Phillis, and Chloe in e -- very Song;
Quite tired of such Nonse^se, new Themes I be -- gin,
And sing of the beau -- ties of sweet Peg -- gy Win.
They tell us of Venus, and Juno of old,
But one was a J^^t, and the other a Scold;
To s^^n naughty Goddesses nothing Akin
Is gentle, and modest, and sweet Peggy Win.
A Thousand Times Cupid has strove to ensnare,
And make me an amo^us Slave to the Fair;
But never could get me entrapp'd in his Gin,
Till baited at last with my dear Peggy Win.
That Zephyrs are soft and are sweet I must own,
And Lillies and Roses are pretty when blown;
But matched with her Breath, or compared with her Skin,
Believe me, they are nothing to dear Peggy Win.
Should Fortune think proper to better my Fa^e,
And make me a Lord, with a noble E^tate;
For all her fine Favors I Would not give a Pin,
Unless she would bestow on me sweet Peggy Win.
All Charms she possesses, Shape! Features! and Size!
And then such a tempting dear Look with her Eyes;
Well! Heaven forgive us, if wishing's a Sin.
When we gaze on the Beauties of sweet Peggy Win.
SONG LVIII.
Sung by Mr. DEARLE,
ON Pleasure's smooth Wings, how old Time steals away
Ere Love's fatal Flame leads the Shepherd astray!
My Days, O ye Swans were a round of De-light
From the cool of the Morn to the still-ness, of Night;
No Care found a Place in my Cottage, or Breast
But Health and Content all the Year was my Guest.
No Care found a Place in my Cot-tage, or Breast
But Health and Content all the Year was my Guest.
It Was then no fair Phillis my Heart could ensnare
With Voice or with Feature, Dress or with Air:
So kindly young Cupid had pointed the Dart,
That I gathered the Sweets, but I missed of the Smart,
I toy'd for a While, then I roved like a ^ee;
But still all my Song was, I Will ever be free.
'Twas then every Object fresh Raptures did yield:
If I strayed through the Garden, or traver^'d the Field.
Ten thousand gay Scenes were displayed to my Sight;
If the Nightingale sung. I could listen all Night;
With my Reed I could pipe to the Tune of the Stream,
And wake to new Life from a rapturous Dream,
But now, since for Hebe in secret I sigh,
Alas what a Change! and how wretched am I!
Adieu to the Charms of the Valley and Glade!
Their sweets now all sicken, their Colors all fade:
No Muse I find in soft Philomel's Strain,
And the Brook over the Pebbles now murmurs in vain.
They say that she is kind, but no kindness I see;
On others she smiles, but she frowns upon me:
Then teach me, bright Venus, Persuasion's soft art,
Or aid me, by Reason, to ransom my Heart,
To crown my Desire, or to banish my Pain,
Give Love to the Nymph, or give ease to the Swan.
SONG LIX. Sung at the Musicial Entertainment, given at the Queen's Palace.
LET Harmony reign,
And let Pleasure abound;
While in sparkling Champain,
This Health goes round:
The King may his Birth Day successively smile,
With joy on himself, and with Peace to his Isle!
All while be his Moments and bear on their Wing,
In the brightness of Summer the softness of Spring!
May she, who bestowed him on Briton this Morn,
Live long, his mild Sway to applaud and adorn!
May each Royal Guest, that around him is seen,
Embrace as a Sister, whom Love made his Queen!
Then let Harmony reign,
Then let Pleasure abound;
While in sparkling Champain,
These Wishes go round!
SONG LX. The PATROIT KING, or GEORGE the third.
THree Georges now, for Britain's Welfare born,
The latest Times our Annals will adorn.
The first, though viewed with Party's envious Eyes,
Contending Factions own, was good and wise.
Though a long Reign, brave, Mild, and just approved,
We style the Second George-the Well-belov'd.
Behold a young Youth now Mounts the British throne,
Whom every Royal Virtue calls her own!
Proceed, great Prince, a Patroit King complete,
And George the Third henceforth be George the Great:
SONG LXI. A SMILE
SAY, Lovely Polly, have you never seen,
(It Is by the Way of a Smile I mean;)
The Farmer's Wife, upon a festive Night,
To grace her Board her Christmas Candle Light;
Upon some Pedestal advance it high,
With a sew taper rush Lights standing by,
Which dimly mimic its superior ray,
And in a Sort of envy soon decay?
So, when you visit any Public place,
And there display the beauties of your Face,
All other Females round you faintly shine,
Lost is their luster in your Blaze divine.
SONG LXII.
WAnton Cupid, sooth my anguish.
Powerful Cupid, now befriend me!
Straight thy aid vouchsafe to lend me!
Soon a Parent's pity move!
Son of Venus, Step between us,
Give me Freedom and my love!
SONG LXIII.
Sung by Mr ANDREWS at Sadlers-Wells
BOUND out on a Cruise, no Tar would refuse,
I Have stowed in completely my Store,
Two Hundred bold Men, I Command once again,
And shall shortly fall down to the Nore, the Nore,
Shall shortly fall down to the Nore,
I Have Room for a Score or two, Enter Boys quick,
A Pound to a Shilling we'll make the Dogs sick,
I Have Room for a Score or two, Enter Boys quick,
A Pound to a Shilling we'll make the Dogs sick,
In Days of Queen Bess,-we now are no less,
Spain's vaunting ARMADA we beat,
And at it poor France, strait fell into a Tra^ce,
That she has'nt recovered of yet.
I^ puffs only rich, of her treasure she is rid.
We'll deal she same Cards, to the Dons of Madrid.
Midst Fire and Smoke, when we give 'em a stroke,
The ^awney Bravado's shall fly,
Nor Priest, Bell, or Book, shall secure 'em good Luck,
As sure as they face us, they die.
Saints, Wasers, and Rags, shall be blown into Air,
When once we have brought but our Bull Dogs to bear.
Safe Anchored my Boys, in Port of our Joys,
Snug under the Guard of our Guns,
Their Convents we'll strip, and Freight the rich Ship,
With the Plunder of Priests, and of Nuns.
Then speed the new Terrible well, and Huzza.
And send her safe in the pround PANAMA.
SONG LXIV. A new SONG
WHEN the Nymphs were contending for Beauty and Fame,
Fair Sylva stood foremost in right of her Claim,
When to Crown the high Transp^ts dear Conquest excites,
At Court she was envied and toasted at Whi^e's.
But how shall I whisper this fair one's sad Case?
A cruel Disease has spoiled her sweet Face;
Her Vermillion is changed to a dull settled red,
And all the gay Graces of beauty are fled.
Yet take Heed all ye Fair how you triumph in Vain,
For Sylvia, though altered from pretty to plain,
Is row more engaging since Reason took Place,
Than when She possessed the Perfections of Face.
Convinced She no more can coquet it and teaze,
Instead of tormenting -- She studies to please;
Makes truth and Discretion the Guides of her Life,
And though spoiled for a Tossed, She Is well formed for a Wif^
SONG LXV. A SONG for the MALL.
YE foplings, and prigs, and ye would-be smart things,
Who move in wide commerce's round,
Pray tell me, from whence this absurdity Springs,
All Orders of Rank to confound?
What means the Bag-wig, and the Soldier-like Air,
On the Trademan obsequious and meek?
Sure Sabbaths were meant for retirement and Prayer,
To amend the past Faults of the Week.
The Youth, to whom Battles and Dangers belong,
May call a fierce look to his aid;
Lace, bluster, and Oaths, and a Sword an Ell long,
Are samples he gives of his Trade:
But you, on whom London indulgently Smiles,
And whom counters should guard from all lil^,
Should slily invade with humility's Wiles,
Lest Splendour deter us from Bills.
Old Gresham, whose Statue adorns the Exchange,
Displays the grave Cit to our View,
And silently frowns at a Conduct so strange,
So remote from your In^'rests and you:
Then learn from his Gesture, grave, decent, and Plain,
To copy Fair Prudence's R^les;
For frugality's Ga^b will conceal your vast Gain,
And secure ye the Plunder of Fools.
The ease of a Court, and the Air of a Camp,
Are Graces no Cit can procure;
Monsieur Jourdain Still plods in the Spital-fields tramp
Nor can Heart the grown aukwardness Cure:
Thus if, Apes of the Fashion^ St. James's you crowd,
And Press onwards, in Spite of all S^ops,
The Mall you may fill, and be airy and loud,
But, trust me, you will ^e'er fill your Shops,
SONG LXVI.
ATtend all ye fair, and I Will tell ye the Art
To bind every Fancy with ease in your Chain^
To hold in soft Fetters the congugal Heart,
And banish from Hymen his Doubts and his Pains.
When Juno accepted the Cestus of Love,
At first She was Handsome; She charming became;
With skill the soft Passion it taught her to move,
To kindle at once, and to keep up the Flame.
It Is this gives the Eves all their magic and Fire;
The Voice melting Accents Impassions the Kiss;
Confess the sweet smiles that awaken desire.
And plants round the fair each incentive to bliss.
Thence flows the gay Chat more than Reason that charms;
The Eloquent Blush, that can Beauty improve;
The fond sigh, the fond Vow, the soft touch that alarms.
The tender disdain, the renewal of Love.
Ye fair take the Cestus, and practice its Art;
The Mind unaccomplish'd mere Features are vain,
Exert your sweet Power, you conquer each Heart,
And the Loves, Joys, and Grace shall walk in your Train:
SONG LXVII. A new SONG.
WELL -- Gentlemen, since you will needs have a Song,
The subject to this Present Club shall belong;
I Will show that no Folks are so happy as those,
Who are still Free and Easy while under the Rose.
Derry Down, Down, Derry Down.

It Is a maxim with us, That each Drink as he will;
He may toss off his Bottle, or sip up his Gill:
He may stay, if he likes it; if not -- why he goes:
So Free, and so Easy, we are under the Rose
Derry Down, etc.

Of this Thing, or that Thing, we freely debate;
And Sometimes we settle the Affairs of the State:
Then wh^tever is Spoken let no one disclose,
But Remember -- What Is said, is said under the Rose.
Derry Down, etc.

Our Mirth to disturb, and our Peace to invade,
We will never allow any quarre son^e Blade;
With a Kick on the Breech and a tweak by the Nose
We at once will expel him from under the Rose.
Derry Down, etc.

Then let this be our Toast, if the President please,
"May each Member for ever have Freedom and Ease;"
May our Wives too, and Sweethearts, (to come to a Close)
Be, like us, Free and Easy -- but under the Rose.
Derry Down etc.

SONG LXVIII. A new SONG.
THOUGH Strephons Heart from Loves A -- larms,
Dear Ce -- lia long was free,
Dear Ce -- lia long was free,
Now touched by thy re-fist-less Charms,
It sighs and Pants for thee,
It sighs and Pants for thee,
For when Bright Virtue shines Confessed,
With sweet Discretion Joined,
When Mildness sways the Peaceful Breast,
And Wisdom guides the Mind.
When Charms like these Dear Maid Inspire,
Our Eyes the form Approve,
They move the Soul with Chaste desire,
And Kindle Virtuous Love.
With this Pure Flame his Bosom glows
For thee! Alone i^ Burns,
While Hopes and Fears like Friends and Fee^.
Revive and kill by Turns.
Since then Dear Nymph thou first could raise.
This Passion in his Breast,
It Is Thou alone can give him Eas^,
And make him truly Blessed.
SONG LXIX. Advice to PHILLIS.
HOW sweet are the Roses of June,
The Pink and the Jessamine Gay,
But stripped of their Blossoms how soon,
How sudden those Sweets will decay,
Just such is the Maid in her Prime,
Adorned with the Bloom of Fifteen,
But robbed of her Beauty by Time,
No Traces of Youth can be seen.
Then Phillis be wise whilst you may,
To Damond's Addresses prove kind,
Relent or believe what I say,
Too late you will alter your Mind,
When next the fond Youth shall declare,
The Passion that glows in his Breast,
With him to the Altar repair,
Nor longer refuse to be blessed.
SONG LXX
By a young LADY.
REflections that makes Mortals w^^^,
Give, me the greatest Pain;
The Doubts that in my Breast arise;
Of meeting thee again.
Absence, for ever Foe to Love,
The thought distracts my Mind.
Lest you a fairer Nvmph approve,
And she like me be kind.
Then to my humble ^o^t re^^^'d,
To search and with for Peace,
No more with mor^al Charms I Am fired,
But wan my kind Re ease.
Secluded far from Human Sight,
Attend my fleecy Care.
But till my Eves are sealed in Night,
Thou shall partake my Prayer.
My Cottage on a Rising Ground,
Near to a friendly Snade
A ruin shall my Prospect Bound,
With Greens that never fade.
Some murmuring Brooks within my view,
That not too Lifeless flow.
Whilst I the Paths of truth Pursue,
Both Time and Chance will show.
But if thou bring'st thy Heart again,
Untained and sincere,
I Will Laugh at my present Pain,
And banish every Fear.
Then like a Ship the Tempest tossed,
I Will bless the friendly Snore,
Forget the Dangers that are past,
But Venture out no more.
SONG LXXI. The BLEEDING HEART.
WHARE is he gone whom I adore,
The go^like Man I see no more,
Yet with at R^^t, his tyrant Charms,
Beat in my Breast, will new A^arms.
Honor assist, the Danger share,
E^se I Am lost with all m^ Care;
Tear his Idea from my Breast,
Though with it I am more than blessed.
My Reason too prepare your Arms,
Lean ^e should with greater Charms,
Love's ^^^al deep im^ris^n'd Dart,
Draw from my tender bleeding Heart.
SONG IXXII. The RESPECTFUL LOVER.
LET others more ^^^ward behave,
With easy f^miliar Air,
For my P^^t, I cannot believe
That B^skness and Brass win the Fair
Of her I adore, every Glance
A tender Confusion inspires;
Her Charms so m^jes^ie at once
Invi^e, and yet awe my Desires.
How often, in vain, the whole Day
My Fassion to speak have I strove,
Then taken some round about Way
To tell her how ardent my Love?
How I foncled and fl^ter'd the Rose
To day in her Breast that she wore;
She certainly c^uld not suppose
I ever once thought on the Flower.
I threatened to pluck off its Head,
Attempted its Leaves to de^r^^;
For when a feigned Struggle we made,
Her B^^om I touched by the by.
Alo^e when I gaze on her Cha^ms,
How sa^n wo^^^ I ravisn a K^^?
How sain casp her Shape to my Arms?
But I dread she would take it amits.
Though mode^ perhaps to a Fault,
Though bathful and awkward my Air;
Ye^ my Heart with tr^e P^ssion is Fraught,
And I will not submit to Despair.
SONG LXXIII. ROSABEL.
MY Love my Rosabel.
Oh say wha^ Magic Spell.
Does in each Feature dwell,
O^ that dear Face,

Sure Copid in Dit use,
Lu^ks in those speaking Eyes;
It Is he each Part supp^e^,
With winning Grace.

When my blessed E^es I raise,
On all thy Charm^ to gaze,
My Soul lost in a Maze,
Ap^ears to F^y

O'erpower'd with keen Delight,
My strength forsakes me quite
Clouds Swim before my Sight,
I ^aint I die,

Let others Joy and Peace,
In Wealth and Honor Place,
My Joy my Happiness,
Center in thee:

While thus each happy Hour,
I love the more and m^^e,
The Word and all its Power.
Is Dirt to me.

SONG LXXIV. CHLOE.
Tune, The Bi^k, of I^ver^^a.
TO thee, my fair, the Muses sing;
To thee the grate^ul Tribute bring;
Kindl^ accept my so ^m^ La^s,
That yield Instruction more than Praise.
Fair Summer, and hor ^mi^ing Train,
Even now forsakes the naked Plain;
The blooming glories of the Year,
No more, my Chloe, now appear;
No more the Lilly Charms the Eye;
No Ro^es blush with scarlet Dye;
They with their Seasons pass away,
Sad Embl^ms of our own Decay:
For blooming Youth must shortly yield,
To wasling A^e, the varying Field;
Each lovely Charm, each sprightly Joy.
Voracious Time will soon destroy.
Ah mournful Thought! where shall he find
Some sweet Supporter of the Mind?
Where shall the sovereign Blam be found,
With power to heal the bleeding Wound?
Virtue the sacred Cure supplies;
She ever lives though Beauty dies;
The lovely Soul which Virtue warms
Can please with everlasting Charms.
Even thou, ah me! delightful Maid,
And all thy beauty's Charms must fade;
But not my Love, while still I find
A brighter glory in thy Mind.
'I is that which makes thee heavenly fair;
That Glory Time can never impair:
While that continues I shall be
Blessed in my Love, and true to thee.
Then let us taste, my charming Chloe,
Each pure Delight, each virtuous Joy;
And seize the Moments kindly given,
To bless our Love, by bounteous Heaven,
Let Innocence crown every Day,
And drive each gloomy Thought away:
Virtue, dear Fav'^ice of the Sky,
Nor scorns to live, nor fears to die.
SONG LXXV. CUPID's REVENGE,
ON the Slope of a shady Mountain,
As I walked musing the other Day;
In Shape a Baby beside a Fountain,
Love on Verdure Sleeping lay,
Intent I viewed the beauteous Creature,
Ah me 'twas rashly tempting Fate,
Methought I spied in every Feature,
The Scornful Nymph I Would sworn to hate.
His Crimson Lips like Rubies glowing,
On his Cheeks Rose with Li^lie^ strove;
I drapt a Tear and sighed unknowing.
He waked -- a Breath awakens Love.
With Anger pale aloft he bounded,
And rising aimed a vengeful Dart,
At once the twaning Bow String sounded,
The Shaft unerring pierced my Heart,
Go seek thy Silvia, kneel before her,
Still sue he cried that scornful Breast,
While Life's in thee, thou shall adore her,
For having dared to break my Rest.
SONG LXXVI.
LET sweet MAY her Flowerets boast,
And JUNE her ripened Rose;
Which Poets may compare to Nanny:
But be mine the happy Toast,
Where Sense with Beauty glows,
And every Charm combines in FANNY.
Northern Shepherds often have sung,
Their Lyres they often have strung,
In Praise of some fair blooming Annie:
But be mine the pleasing Lay,
When soon the Priest shall say,
Honor and love the charming FANNY.
SONG LXXVII.
WHen pleasing Cares disturb the youthful Breast,
When ardent Signs speak forth the Heart's Desire,
When Hopes and Fears consume the Hours of Rest,
Then Venus sets the Lover's Soul on Fire.
Then would I scorn the Wealth which many choose,
And look on ga^ plumed honor with Disdain;
The inspired Mind a nobler Aim pursues,
And Venus's Slave submits to Venus's Chain.
Should Fame, or Power, or Wisdom, plead, to move
A Lover's Mind, with all their specious Show,
While Venus sooths me with the Smiles of Love,
Like Paris, ever at her Shri^e I bow.
While CELIA here rolls her love darting Eyes,
Here let me kneel, no other Boon I claim;
Beneath the Sun the Phoenix burns and dies,
Beneath her Charms I burn with grateful Flame.
But spare, O CELIA! spare my tender Heart;
Love, too much Love, is all thy Suppliant's Crime;
Wound not my Breast with such a cruel Smart,
Nor blast with killing Scorn my youthful Prime.
Sweet are thy Smiles, O fair-one; and bestow
New Life, beneath the Sunshine of thine Eyes;
Deadly the Shaft of Scorn form Cupid's Bow,
And when it strikes the hapless Lover dies.
The Merchant dreads the Rage of Winter-seas,
And fearful Cares surround the Tyrant's crown;
The Mother hears of War with trembling knees;
I know no danger but in CELIA'S Frown.
A Lover prays, O CELIA! lend thine Ear,
Be kind as beautiful; then shall I joy
A sweeter Music than proud Arts to hear,
And for the fairest Form my verse employ.
SONG LXXVIII.
A Wake, my Lyre! thy sadly pleasing Strain
Shall sooth my Anguish, while thy Numbers flow,
Awake, my Lyre! it fits thee to complain,
In Sounds according with thy Maller's woe.
Like CELIA'S, sweet thy Voice, my tuneful Lyre,
And Y^^u^ns and Maids a te^d thine amorous Lay;
Like CELIA, still you seed her Lover's Fire,
But yield no Hope his Torment to allay.
In vain great Hermes destined thee to charm.
In vain the Muses taught their Bard to sing;
The Powers of Love the Powers of Art disarm,
And all thy Magic can no comfort bring.
Phoebus in vain would wake thy joyful Sound,
To calm the tumults of a Lover's Br^a^;
The God of Love each captive be^se h^^n bound
In cruel Chains, nor gives his Victim rest.
Yet shall thy sad solemn M^sic say
How much! s^ffer, and how much I love;
Perhaps fair CELIA may thy ^ong repay
With pity, where her Charms destructive prove.
SONG LXXIX. The EXTACY of LOVE.
Sung by Miss CATLEY, at MARYBONE-GARDENS.
WHILST on thy dear B^som lying,
Celia who can speak my bli^s;
Who the T^ansp^rts I Am ^^jo^ing,
When thy ba^my Lips I kits:
Every Lock with Love inspires me,
Every ^ouch my B^som warms;
Every me^ting Murmur fi^es me,
Every Joy is in your Arms.
SONG LXXX.
Sung by Miss SMITH at MARYBONE-GARDENS^
LAST Holiday Eve how gaily were seen,
The Lads and the Lasses abroad on the Green;
Young Colin came to me and sat by my Side,
And whispered me often, he wished me his Bride.
Oh! P^oeoe (said he) would you pity my Pain,
Nor treat my fond Passion with Slights and Disdain;
But believe that my Tongue and my Heart are allied;
Then kindly consent to become my sweet Bride.
Behold my Distress, and relieve my sad Heart;
Believe me sincere, and a Stranger to Art:
No Offer can draw my fixed Passions aside,
If now you will promise to make me your Bride.
I thought as I Would teased my poor Swain a long while,
Instead of a Frown, I should now wear a Smile;
Well, Collin, said I, since you will not be denied,
In short, I Will consent to be none but your Bride.
SONG LXXXI. The FAER DIVISION.
WHEN Beauty appears,
In it is Graces and Airs
All bright as an Angle new dropped from the Skies,
At Distance I gaze;
And am awed by my Fears,
So strangely you dazzel my Eyes.
But when without Art
Your kind thoughts you impart,
When your Love runs in Blushes through every Vein,
When it darts from your Eyes,
When it pants in your Heart,
Then I know you're a Woman again.
There Is a Passion and Pride,
In our Sex the replied
And thus might gratify both I would do;
Still an Angel appear,
To each Lover beside,
But Still be a Woman to You.
SONG LXXXII. POWER of WINE.
WITH Roses and with Myrt'es crowned,
I Truimph; let the Glass go round.
Jovial Bacchus, ever gay,
Come, and crown the happy Day;
From my Breast drive every Care;
Banish Sorrow and Despair:
Let social Mirth, and decent Joy,
This delightful Hour employ.
Haste, attend us, Wit refined,
Thou sweet Enlivener of the Mind!
And while the copious Bumper's crowned,
Bid the free jovial Laugn go round.
Come, Goodnature, show thy Face
With open Smiles and sweetest Grace;
For ever gay: come, lovely Youth!
With honest Freedom, candid Truth;
Come; for without thee Mirth's a Pain;
And Wit without thee flows in vain:
Chase Melancholy far away;
Bid all be cheerful, Sweet, and Gay.
See the fragrant Rosy Wine
Purpled deep with Charms divine;
Showing, though the crystal Glass,
The Beauties of my lovely Lass.
For Chloe be the Bumper crowned,
While Love and Friendship bear it round.
Her let every Muse declare,
Gentle, modest, good and fair.
By Wine the Miser generous grows;
By Wine the Poet's Breast overflows;
Wine fires the Warrior's Soul with Rage,
Wine gives the Bloom of Youth to Age.
Bright Wine can make the Coward bold;
Wine fills the Heart with Joys untold;
Wine can tame the Fierce and Wild;
Wine can make the Savage mild;
On us each social Joy bestows,
And kindly softens all our Woes.
Then let us be Happy while we may,
Despising Care, forgetting Sorrow;
Enjoy the pleasures of today,
Nor fear what Ills may come tomorrow.
SONG LXXXIII. AMINTA. A new SONG.
ON a Bank beside a Willow,
Heaven her Covering Earth her Pillow,
Sad Aminta sighed alone,
From the chearless Dawn of Morning,
Till the Dews of Night returning,
Singing thus she made her Moan,
Hopes are banished,
Joys are vanished,
Damon my beloved is gone.
Time I dare thee to discover,
Such a Youth and such a Lover,
On so true so kind was he,
Damon was the Pride of Nature,
Damon lived alone for me,
Fondly toying,
Never cloying,
Who so lived and loved as me.
When asunder, ever mourning,
How we blessed the Hour returning,
Sweetest converse to bestore,
But vain Thoughts off former Pleasures.
Vain are those of Ship-wreck'd Treasures,
All my Joys of Life are over.
To befriend me,
Death Oh: end me,
Love and Damon are no more.
SONG LXXXIV. A Pastoral BALLAD.
HOW vain are the Efforts of Art?
How vain are the smooth studied Lay?
Every Language but that of the Heart,
Must fail in my Phyllida's Praise.
How modest, yet free, is her Air?
Her Words with what softness they flow?
She has filled every Heart with Despair;
She has made every Shepherd my Foe.
For since she appeared on our Plains,
On me she has lavished her Smiles;
I Am the Envy of all the young Swains,
To supplant me they are fruitful in Wiles
But let me their Passions despise,
Their Proceedings I never will mind,
If my Phillis approve with her Eyes,
If my Phillis continue but kind.
I watch every Glance of her Eyes,
Every Blush that but dawns on her Cheeks;
How I tremble if ever the sighs!
How I Am raptured if ever she speaks!
If she talks, it is Heaven to hear;
If she Smiles, it is Heaven to see;
How soft, how engaging, how dear,
How all over Heaven to me!
My Fields, and my Orchards are small,
Yet planted, and cultured with Care;
My Groves they are lofty and tall,
And a Sweetness is found in the Air.
She admires the Increase of my Fields,
She admires the still Gloom of the Woods,
The Sweetness the healthful Air yields,
And she likes the wild Fall of the floods.
We have wandered along the green hills,
Through the plains ever vernal with flowers,
Through the lawns ever gleaming with rills,
By the banks ever shady with bowers;
There my charmer still ^ais'd such wild strains,
As wantonly melt in the throat,
Resounding through Woods, and through plains,
Sweet Echoes prolonged each breathed Note.
We stray at the Dew of the Dawn,
Through Field; where the west wind has flown,
Collecting the Flowers on the Lawn,
By the Warmth of the Gale newly blown.
What Beauty is found in their Dies,
While attended by Health thus we rove,
And I see in my Phyllida's Eyes,
Content, soft Associate of Love?
Already our Flocks jointly feed.
They never are separate seen.
Together they Sport on the Mead,
And crop the soft Herbs of the Green:
And hence all the Shepherds foresee,
That Phillis will quickly be mine;
Oh! Thought full of Transport to me,
For the Day how I eagerly pine.
SONG IXXXV. A Scotch SONG.
SWEET Annie slowly left the Shore
Where Damon clim'd the Vessel's Side,
Alas! my Heart knows home no more,
Since Damon's tossed along the Tide
Yet shall my Heart still faithful prove,
For faithful ever is my Swain;
Absent, he thinks on Annie's Love,
And foreign Beauties charm in vain.
His Gold let wealthy Strephon show,
And the smooth Arts of Flattery try,
And praise the Polish of my Brow,
And praise the Luster of mine Eye.
What though, to distant Regions born,
My Lover rides the awful Deep?
I Will wait, and hope for his return,
And all my Heart for Damon keep.
No more, false Corydon, no more
For Annie frame the luring Lay;
Your Damon would be troubled sore,
Did you his Confidence betray.
Your luring Lays are all in vain,
Your false Designs disgrace your Art;
But melting sweet is Damon's Strain,
His Strain bespeaks the faithful Heart.
O smile, ye Skies, around my Love;
Gen^ly, ye prosp^rous Breezes, blow;
Far off, ye savage Storms remove,
Nor cloud my future Days with Woe,
Full long, alas! will be his Stay;
But let me not at Fate repine:
I Will keep my Heart, and wait the Day,
When Damon shall again be mine.
SONG LXXXVI.
A new SONG.
SEE how Saphira'mid the Crowd appears!
Around her all the Loves and Graces play;
Thus, over the lowly Weeds the Lilly rears
Its virgin Head, with snowy Beauty gay:
Too much, bright Maid! the distant prospect warms;
Then what is the present Influence of thy Charms?
So from thy rosy portals of the Morn,
Clothed in sweet Majesty, do we behold
The rising Sun the happy Earth adorn,
While Heaven's pure azure flames with living Gold;
And from the Splendour of his Morning rays,
We guess the force of his Meridian Blaze.
SONG LXXXVII:
Tune, The MAN That Is CONTENTED.
A Whimsical lover's a prey to each Care;
He Is lost to himself, while he lives to the Fair;
He dreams all the Day, and he wakes all the Night;
His Sorrow is lasting, and short his Delight.
The sparking Charms of the full-flowing Bowl
Inspire us with Friendship, and brighten the Soul;
Then pox on all Care! come, fill up the Glass,
And round the blythe Circle, my Boys, let it pass.
Let my pretty Molly go round for the Toast;
I Am pleased if she is Mine, and the same if she is lost:
As long as she loves me, I know she will be true;
And if she should alter -- why! so will I too.
Should she be Inconstant, why should I be Sad?
It Is Time to grow wiser, and not to go Mad;
If generous and good, she will value true Love;
And the loss of a Jilt is a blessing, by Jove.
The loss of a Mistress shall never destroy
The blissful Tranquillity which I enjoy:
Whatever may happen, I Will wisely prepare
Indifference, that Sovereign cure of all care.
SONG LXXXVIII. A Favorite SONG.
GODDESS, forsake thy favorite Shades,
The sacred Mount, the Aonian Glades,
And hither wing thy Way:
Thy Voice unheard, has ceased too long,
Whilst A**** demands the Song,
Whilst C**** claims the Lay.
Now Hymen bids thee strike the Lyre,
With cheerful Accents swell the Quire,
Which Nuptial Tapers guide:
Where Mirth and sportive Dance resound,
And smiling Damsels have around,
To hail the welcome Bride.
The Roman Eagle over her Head,
With Azure Crest and Plumage spread.
Displays his conscious State:
Triumphant over the Rival Band,
Who vainly hoped and strove to stand,
Against superior Fate.
With unknown gentle Flames inspired,
Her Lover's Form the Nymph admired
But more his generous Mind:
Then to the soft persuasive Art
Of native Eloquence, her Heart,
A willing Prize resigned.
Hence may the Years auspicious flow,
And on each blissful Hour bestow
Peace, Harmony, and Love:
Hence may a numerous happy Race
Their Parents bright Example trace,
And every Joy improve.
SONG LXXXIX. WILL SHIM.
NO more I shall dread the Disaster,
A Lover complete never to find.
My Heart has at last found a Master,
Will Shim is the Man to my Mind,
A Sundays he does look so clever,
His Hat laced with Gold round the Brim?
How happy shall I be whenever,
I wed my accomplished Will Shim.
To him when he shines in his Glory,
The bright Sun at Noonday is dim^
Not all the famed Heroes in Story,
Can vie with my gallant Will Shim.
To see him so spruce and so shining,
The Men all with Envy look grim,
The Maidens cannot view without pining,
The Charms of my gallant Will Shim,
They Are blessed if they can get but nigh him,
To touch of his Garment the Rim.
All fain from my Love would decoy him,
All die for my gallant Will Shim.
Dick Simmons to fight once defied him
But Will soon his Jacket did Trim:
And 'while with the Cudgle he plied him,
Crowds clapped my accomplished Will Shim.
Last Tuesday he came to my Dairy,
And helped me the Milk Bowls to skim,
We chatted: -- I never am weary;
Of chatting with gallant Will Shim.
Tight dressed in span new Leather Breeches,
He looked so genteel and so slim,
Had I of fair India the Riches:
I Would share them with gallant Will Shim:
A Song while he sweetly did warble,
My Senses in Raptures did swim,
'Twould warm a Heart colder than Marble,
The Voice of my gallant Will Shim.
He pres^'d so to Kiss me I let him,
I hate to be prudish, and prim:
And Oh! I could half Way have met him
And hugged my accomplished Will Shim.
All Virtues in bright William center,
He Is free from all Vice and all Whim:
Through Land and through Sea at a Venture,
I Would follow my gallant Will Shim.
I Will trifle no longer and tarry,
Will, soon shall be mine every Limb:
Next Sunday I fairly will marry,
My dear my accomplished Will Shim,
SONG XC. A PASTORAL BALLAD.
HOW could you deceive me, my fair?
How tell me you Openness loved?
How persuade me my sad pensive Air
Was by you not disdained, but approved
And yet the Delusion had power
For to charm my whole Senses away;
I gazed on you Hour after Hour,
And to please framed the rude Rural lay.
While my Soul was all melted in Love,
While each Nerve and each Pulse wildly beat,
You a Passion as strong seemed to move;
Who ever could have dreamed 'twas Deceit,
When I fault'ring attemped to speak,
My Confusion was cor'd with a Smile,
You strove my fond Silence to break;
Yet this was all meant to b^gui^e,
How often have we carelessly strayed,
While the Moon feebly Lighted the vale,
And under the cool evening Shade,
Prolonged the soft amorous tale?
Then the Wind could not shake the light leaf,
Nor the River roll loudly along,
Nor the Nightingale breathe out her Grief
But you fearfully clasped me more strong.
Those Days are still fresh in my View,
When I searched where the Voilet blows,
And tore from the Spot where it grew,
The Briar, or wild spreading Ro^:
You was pleased with the Trifles I culled,
And urged to repeat the fond Task,
And still, though I frequently pulled,
You, frequent delighted, would ask.
Now far other Transports are mine,
Far other Employments I find;
No more I your Garland entwine,
You often have refu^'d it, unkind:
Each Moment I pour forth my Fears,
Tales of Woe to the Woods I impart,
Which, though often interrupted by Tears,
Yet mournfully sooth my sad Heart.
Now I see that Unfaithfulness reigns,
That a fond constant Nymph is a Dream;
Deceit is found roving the Plains,
And winding along every Stream:
Of the Change, ah, ye Shepherds, beware,
Nor trust the Allurements of Art;
Believe not the false smiling Air,
Since the Tongue's not allied to the Heart!
Farewell to the Flocks I have sed!
Farewell to the Flowers I have reared!
Farewell to the sweet-breathing Mead,
Where so often with you I Have appeared!
I fly, yet I love you, my Fair;
Perhaps you will repent when I Am gone;
My Bosom shall nourish Despair,
And I Will sigh that all Pleasure is flown.
SONG XCI. KITTY.
KITTY, think, though every Grace,
Sparkles in thy charming Face,
Though thy fine complexion shows,
Lilies blending with the Rose,
Though thy Features gaily shine,
Though thy Form's almost Divine;
Yet should thou, (which kind Heaven avert)
With an unrelenting Heart,
Clothed with cruel killing Airs,
Laugh at all thy Lovers Prayers,
Kitty now so mild, so good,
Should become an arrant Prude,
Peevish as three score and ten,
Scorn of Virgins Jest of Men,
Think not, fair One, that your Slave,
Vainly means in Verse to rave;
Friendship only bids me say,
Love and Beauty have their Day.
SONG XCII. Answer to the Foregoing.
HAPPY Bard, who without Fear.
Durst approach sweet Kitty's Ear;
Gaily indolent could say,
"Love and beauty have their Day.
Though I Have studied to obtain,
Freedom from vile Envy's Pain,
Yet it rises in my Breast,
When I think that you are so blessed,
As to talk to her with Ease,
Gentle as soft Vesper's Breeze,
Yet alas indeed so fair,
As to load my Heart with Care;
Whi^st I, love sick wander over
Scenes I Jovial trod before.
But if (as I suspect) it is true,
Fond, disembling Swain, that you,
Under Friendship's sober name,
Slily hide an amrous Flame,
Envy flies, and I poor Elf,
Pity one wretched like my self.
SONG XCIII. WHAT MEDICINE.
WHAT Medicine can soften the Bosom's keen Smart,
What Le^he can banish the Pain,
What Cure can be met with to sooth the fond Heart,
That Is broke, broke by a faithless young Swain.
In hopes to forget him how vainly I try,
The Sports of the Wake and the Green,
When Colin is dancing I say with a Sigh,
It Was here first my Damon was seen.
When to the pale Moon the soft Nightingales moan
In Accents so piercing and clear,
You sing not so sweetly I cry with a Groan,
As when my dear Damon was here.
A Garland of Willow my Temples shall shade,
And pluck it ye Nymphs from yon Grove,
For there to her cost was poor Laura betrayed,
And Damon pretended to Love.
SONG XCIV. ROSY WINE.
THE wanton God who pierces Heart,
D^ps in Gall his pointed Darts,
But the Nymph disdains to pine,
Who baths the Wound with rosy Wine,
Rosy Wine, rosy Wine,
Who baths the Wound with rosy Wine,
Farewell, Farewell Lovers when they are cloyed,
If I am scorned because enjoyed
Sure the squeamish Fops are tree,
To rid me of dull company,
Sure they are free, sure they are free,
To rid me of dull company.
They have their Charms while mine can please,
I love them much but more my Ease
Jealous fears me never molost,
Nor faithless Vows shall break my rest.
Why, why, why should they ever give me Pain,
Who to give me joy disdain,
All I ask of Mortal Man,
Is but to love me while he can.
SONG XCV. FAIR NANNY
SO brightly sweet fair Nanny's Eyes,
Their rising Beams display,
That like the Sons of India,
We e'em dread the coming Day,
For if her morning Rays,
With such un -- u -- sual Vigor stream,
How will the wondering World,
Withsland her full meridian Beam.
If now she innocently kill,
With an unaiming Dart,
Who shall resist her when with Skill,
She levels at the Heart.
Since with each smile the pretty Nymph,
Now captivates the Sense,
What when her Beauty's at the height,
Will be its Influence
SONG XCVI.
YOU tell me, dear Tom like a faint Hearted Toad,
You're spris'd I Am so cheerful when going abroad,
That, for your Part, you would have, if you were in my Case,
A composed pensive Mind, and a grave serious Face,
Derry Down, etc.

No Doubt, you're a Gentleman prudant and cool,
And I cannot deny but I Have often played the Fool;
Yet here I maintain that my System's the best;
For a Phiz of Solemnity, Sir, I detest,
I Am always so jocular, happen what will,
I scarce seem to know what is good from what is Ill;
Yet now you imagine I should be sedate,
Since I Am wholly uncertain of what may be my Fate.
But why should Anxiety vex us, my Friend?
What the Devil care I how the Sisters intend:
If I Am knocked of the Head, to new Regions I Will go
And be as merry there as I can you well know.
SONG XCVII. DEAR CLOE.
DEAR Cloe come give me sweet Kisses,
For sweeter no Girl ever gave,
But why in the midst of my Blis-ses,
Do you ask me how ma -- ny I Would have,
I am not to be stinted in pleasure,
Then prithee dear Clo -- e be kind,
For since I love thee be -- yond measure,
To numbers I Will never be confind.
Count the Bees that on Hybla are playing,
Count the Flowers that enamel the Fields,
Count the Flocks that on Tempe are straying,
Or the grain that rich Sicily yields
Count how many Stars are in Heaven,
Go number the Sands on the Shore,
And when so many Kisses you have given,
I still shall be asking for more,
To a Heart full of Love let me hold thee,
A Heart which dear Cloe is thine,
In my Arms I Would for ever enfold thee
And twist round thy Neck like a Vine,
What Joy can be greater then this is,
My life on thy Lips shall be spent,
But the Wretch who can number his kistes,
Will always with few be content.
SONG XCVIII. The HYPOCRITE
YE Amorous Youths whose tune -- full Lays,
Replete with Love and sprightly Wit,
Each Nymph be-deck with la -- vish Praise,
But ne -- ver Sing the Hy -- po -- crite.
A mom^nt cease while I rehearse,
In artless strains but faintly Write,
My hapless Loves in Plaintive Verse,
I mean to sing the Hypocrite.
Could Words express each blooming Charm,
Or Pencil from the Favorite,
Each Heart I would with Love alarm,
For this bewitching Hypocrite.
Were I to paint an Angel sair,
And could complete Ferfection hit,
I Would give the World a Picture rare,
The Copy of this Hypocrite.
In tender sighs I breathed my Flame,
My Vows to Heaven I did submit,
That I no more might hear her Name.
If e're I played the Hypocrite.
But now no more her Eyes I see,
With looks of Love expressive Writ,
She Vows she will be ever free,
No longer play the Hypocrite.
SONG XCIX. A DAWN of HOPP
A dawn of hope my Soul revives,
And ba -- nish -- es Despair,
If yet my dearest Damon lives,
If yet my dearest Damon lives,
Make him ye Gods your care,
If yet my dearest Damon lives,
Make him ye Gods your care.
Make him ye Gods your care.
Dispell those gloomy shades of Night,
My tender Grief remove,
O se^d some chearing Ray of Light,
And guide me to my Love.
Thus in secret friendly Shade.
The pensive Daelia mourned.
While courteous Echo lent her Aid.
And sigh for sigh returned.
When ^^dden Damon's well known Face,
Each rising fear disarmed,
He eager springs to her Embrace,
She sicks into his Arms.
SONG C. LOVELY NANCY.
HOW can you lovely Nancy thus cru-el-ly slight
A Swain who is wretched when banished your sight.
Who for your sake alone thinks Life worth his Care,
But which soon if you frown on must end in Despair.
If you meant thus to tortur Oh! why did your Eyes,
Once express so much Softness and sweetly Suprise,
By their L^stre i^flam'd I c^u'd not believe,
As they shed such mild Influence, they ever would deceive.
But alas! like the Pilgrims bewildered in Night.
Who perceives a fa^se Splendour at Distance invite,
Overjoyed he ha^tes on pursues and dies,
A like ruin attends me if away Nancy flies.
O forget not the Raptures you felt in my Arms,
When you called me dear Angel and unvell'd all your charms
When you vowed lasting Love and swore with a Kiss,
That in my fond embraces was centered all Bliss.
Fairest but most obdurate corsider that Woe,
Will like sickness neglected more desperate grow,
That your Heart may relent I implore the kind Powers,
Since I Am constant as your Sex be not fickle as ours.
SONG CI.
By Mr. TRAVERS.
WHEN Vernal Airs perfume the Fields,
And pleasing Views the Landscape yields,
And Pretty Birds wi^h warbling Notes,
In Raptures swell their little Throats,
When Shepherds pass the pleasing Hours,
Under the Trees on fragrant flowers,
And every one does take his Lass,
And gay^y Dances and gally Dances on the Grass.
Then, then let me wander through the Fields,
Where Nature all her beauty yields,
Where Sheep do feed, fat Oxen low,
And Reapers do the Harvest Mow.
And where the pretty, pretty little Lambs,
Forsake their Food, to meet their D^ms,
Or where the fragrant Flowers do spring,
And where the Nightingale does Sing.
SONG CII. My fond SHEPHERDS.
MY fond Shepherds of late were so blessed,
Their fiar Nymphs where so Happy and Gay,
That each Night they went safely to Rest,
And they merrily Sung through the Day,
But ah! what a Scene must appear,
Must the sweet rural Pastime be over,
Shall the Tabor, the Tabor no more Strike the Ear,
Shall the Dance on the Green be no more.
Will the Flocks from their Pas^ure be led,
Mu^t the Herds go wild straying abroad,
Shall the Looms be all stopped in each Shed,
And the Ships be all Moored in each Road,
Must the Arts be all scattered around,
And shall Commerce grow Sick of it is Tide,
Must Religion expire on the Ground,
And shall Virtue sink down by her Side.
SONG CIII.
Sung by Mr. JAGGER.
IN Infancy our Hopes and Fears,
Were to each other known,
No fordid Inc're^t then appears,
Affection Rules alore, Affection Rules alone;
As Friendship ripened with our Youth,
The Fruit was gathered there,
Bright wisdom and fair Blooming 'Truth,
Subsides ev'sy Care, Subsided every Care.
Ah! happy more than happy Stute,
Where Hea^^ are twined in on^^
Yet ^ew (to ri^^^ is our ^^te)
May wear the ^^^der Crown.
By one rude touch the R^ses sall;
And all their Beauty's fade;
In Vain we ^^gh, in Vain we Call,
Too (...) is H^^an Aid.
SONG CIV. JAMIE GAY.
AS Jamie Gay gang'd blyth his way,
A long the Banks of Tweed;
A bonny Lass as ever was,
Came tripping over the Mead.
The hearty Swain untaught to feign,
The boxom Nymph surveyed,
And full of glee as Lad could be,
Bespoke the pretty Maid.
Dear Lassy tell, why by thine sell,
Thou lonely wanderest here,
My Ews she Cried are straying wide,
Can tell me Laddy where.
To Town I'se hie, he made reply,
Some Muckle Sport to see,
But you are so sweet, so Trim, so near,
I'se Seek thy Ews with thee.
She gin her Hand, nor made a stand.
But liked the Youth's Intent,
Over Hill and Dale, over Plain and Vale,
Right merrily they went.
The Birds Sung sweet, the Pair to greet,
And Flowerets bloomed around,
And as they walked, of Love they talked,
And Lovers Joys when Crowned.
And now the Sun had Rose to Noon,
The Zeolth of his Power,
When to the Shade, their Steps they made,
To pass the Mid day Hour.
The bouny Lad, rowed in his Plad,
The Lass whom scorned to frown,
She soon forgot the Ews the sought,
And he to gang to Town.
SONG CV. The CHARMS of SYLVIA
ALL Nature blooms when you appear,
The Fields their Richest Liv'rys weat,
Oaks, Elms and Pines blessed by your View,
Shoot out fresh Green, and Bud a new:
The various Seasons you supply,
And when you're gone, they Fade and Die:
The various Seasons you supply,
And when you're gone, they Fade and Die.
Sweet Philomel in mournful Strains,
To you appeals, to you Complains;
The towering Lark on Rising Wing,
Warbling attempts your praise to Sing,
He cuts the yiedling Air, and Flys
To Heaven, to type our future Joys.
SONG CVI. A NEW SONG
NATURE gave all Creatures Arms,
Faithful guards from hostile Harms,
Jaws the Lion brood defend,
Horrid Jaws that wide distend;
Horns the Bull resistless Force,
Solid Hoofs the vig'rou Horse,
Nimble Feet the fearful Hare,
Wings to fly the Birds of Air, Wings to fly
Wings to fly the Birds of Air, Wings to fly,
Wings to fly the Birds of Air.
To the Fox did Wiles ordain,
The crastiell of the Sylvan train;
T^^sks she gave the grunting Swine,
Quilts the fretful Porcupine;
Fins to Swim the watery kind,
Man the Virtues of the Mind;
Nature lavishing her store,
What for Woman had she more.
Helpless Woman! to be fair,
Beauty fell to Woman's share,
Beauty that nor wants or fears
Swords, or Flames, or Shields or Spears,
Beauty stronger aid affords,
Stronger far than Shields or Swords,
Stronger far than Swords or Shields,
Man himself to Beauty yields.
SONG CVII. NANCY
'TWAS underneath a May blown Bush
Where Violets Bloom, and sweet,
Primroses, with Voice melodeous as a Trush,
Young JOHNNY sung Collecting Pofies;
Those to the Breast must be conveyed,
Of her who sways my warmest Fancy,
The tender Hashing Blooming Maid,
My smiling Mild good Natured NANCY.
I know that some her Youth will Jear,
And call me wittless Auff and Zani,
But I from constant Heart declare.
I never will wed except my NANNY;
I envy them nor Pomp nor Dress,
Nor Conquest gained over Hearts of many,
The study of my Life's to bless
And please my dear my grateful NANNY.
How much unlike my Fair to those,
Whose wanton Charms are f^ee to any,
I Would give the World could I disclose,
A sistieth Part the worth of NANNY.
Let Bucks and Bloods in burnt Champaign,
Toast Lucy Charl^^te Poll and FANNY,
At Notions so absurd and Vain,
I smile and Clasp my blumeless NANNY.
SONG CVIII. The WISH
Set by Mr. Battishill at Vauxhall.
GRANT me ye Powers a calm Repose,
Exempt from Noise, and Strife and Pride,
Where I may pity human Woes,
And tast^ the Pleasures you provide,
And taste the Pleasures you provide.
Unenvied by the Proud and Great,
My Hours shall sweetly glide away;
While Conscious of my still Retreat,
Cheerful I hail the opening Day.
And if I may select the Maid
From all the softer Sex below;
May Stella be alone conveyed,
Whose Beauties bid my Bosom glow.
At length when Life is in decline,
Celestial Ma^sions let me View;
With out a groan my Breath resign,
And Peaceful bid the World adieu.
SONG CIX. The HIGHLAND QUEEN.
NO more my Song shall be ye Swains,
Of purling Streams or Flowery Plains,
More pleasing Beauties now inspire,
And Phoebus deigns the warbling Lyre,
Divinely aided, thus I mean To Celebrate,
To Celebrate my Highland Queen.
In her sweet Innocence I find,
With beauty truth and Freedom joined
Strict Honor fills her spotless Soul,
And gives a Luster to the whole,
A matchless Shape and lovely m^in,
All center in Highland Queen.
No sudden Rush no trifling Joy,
Her settled calm of Mind destroy,
From Pride and Affectation free,
A like she Smiles on you and me,
The brightest Nymph that trips the Green,
I do pronounce my Highland Queen.
How blessed that Youth whom gentle fate,
Has disten'd to so fair a Ma^e,
With all those wondrous Gifts in store,
While each returning Day brings more,
No Man more happy can be be seen,
Possessing thee my Highland Queen.
SONG CX. MYRTILLA
YE cheerful Virgins have ye seen my fair,
Myrtilla pass the Green,
To Rose or Jess'mine Row'r,
To Rose or Jess'mine Bower;
Where dose she seek the Woodbine Shade,
For sure ye know the blooming Maid,
Sweet as the May born Flower,
Sweet, Sweet as the May born Flower.
Her Cheeks are like the Maiden Rose,
Joined with the Lillies as it Blows,
Where each in sweetress vie,
Like Dew-drops glist'ning in the Morn,
When Phoebus Gilds the Flow'ring Thorn,
Health sparkles in her Eye.
Her Song is like the Linnet's Lay,
That warbles che^^^ul on the Spray,
To hall the vernal Beam.
Her ^eart is b^yther than her Song,
Her Passions gently move along,
Like the smooth gliding Stream.
SONG CXI. The FLIRTATION
YE dear pretty Ladies
Who now in your Gay Days
So merrily take your Diversion
Sure there is no Sporting,
Compared to Courting,
And having a little Flirtation.
For what signifies
All the Charms of your Eyes,
Your Wit and your good Education,
Your Dressing so neat,
And your looking so sweet,
Where it not for a little Flirtation.
The Antiquated Prude,
She will swear those are rude,
That enjoy but the least Recreation
Was she in her Prime,
She would think it no Crime,
To partake in a little Flirtation.
In Church or in Street,
Or where ever you meet.
The Object of your Inclination,
Oh! i^ it not pleasure,
Beyond any Measure.
To have a Dear little Flirtation.
What though now you call,
An Assembly or Sall,
A pleasant and sweet Recreation,
How soon would you treat it,
As dull and insipid,
Had you not a little Flirtation.
There Is you and there is you,
And there is you madam too,
And there is you in your sly Situation,
Though you all lock so shy,
Yet you cannot deny,
That you're fond of a little Flirtation.
But Ladies beware,
Of your Hearts pray take care,
Nor attend to each fond Declaration,
Though they swear they shall Die,
Yet believe me they Lie,
They mean only a little Flirtation.
SONG CXII. The CORNER.
Sung by Mr. Atkins
YOUNG Fanny once all pensive sat,
I could not guess the Matter;
My Fancy ran on this and that.
And Fain I Would have been at her,
Fain, fain I Would have been at her,
With Joy I Viewed the many Charms,
That brightly did adorn her.
And thought I Would have her in my Arms,
If I Would got her in a Corner,
I Would have her in my Arms,
If I Would got her If I Would got her,
If I Would got her in a Corner.
Fair Maid, I cried, so Young you seem,
You surely han't been married?
The Wise say Love's an idle Dream,
Perhaps you have there miscarried?
From Wedlock I Am at present Free,
Replied the beauteous Mourner;
Hah! hah! thought I, 'twill do for me,
When I get you in a Corner.
My Dear, I cried, you give me Grief,
Come change your Pain to Laughter;
If I don't give you some Relief,
Then trust me never after;
What ever the Cause, believe but this,
You cannot seem forlorner;
And then I gave the Fair a Kiss,
And coaxt her in a Corner.
What there was done you would have me sing,
But faith it cannot be granted;
I Found a Husband was the Thing,
The Thing the Damsel wanted;
So odd, I told her, was my Way,
If wedded I might scorn her,
And ever since we Kiss and Play,
When I get her in a Corner.
SONG CXIII. COLIN
Sung by Miss Falkner at Marybon-Garden.
OH! pity Colin! cruel Fair
Think on his Sighs and Tears
His Sighs regardless as the Air,
And without Hope his Fears;
Oh! Colin was once the happiest Swain,
That ever in Albion dwelt,
He laughed at Love, and mocked at Pain,
Love's Pangs he never had felt.
The Neighboring Nymphs had often tried,
With Love to lure the Swain,
But he as often their Suit denied,
For Love returned Disdain,
But ah! how changed his former State,
With folded Arms he walks,
Upbraids the Gods and curses Fate,
And like a Madman talks.
Nor can soft Musick's Flattering Charm,
Give now the least Delight,
No more the Bowl his Bosom warm,
Or Rural sports invite.
Relent fair Maid, ever Colin Dies,
Let him not Mourn in vain,
His hopeless Love, regardless Pangs,
And unrewarded Pain,
Oh! think Myrtillo, on his Grief,
And on your cruel Hate,
Reward his Love, and bring Relief,
Before it is too Late.
SONG CXIV.
Sung by Mr. Beard.
WE HAVE Fought; we have Conquered,
An England once more;
Shall flourish in Fame as she flourished before,
Our Fears all are fled, with our Enemies slain,
Could they Rise up a new we would, slay them again,
Could they Rise up a new we would, slay them again.
His Monarch to serve or to do himself Right,
No Englishman yet ever Flinch'd from the Fight,
For why Neighbors all we are free as the King:
It Is that makes us brave and it is that us Sing.
Our Prince too for this may be thankful to Fate,
It is in our Freedom he finds himself Great,
No Force can be wanting nor meaner Court Arts,
He is Master of all who will Reign in our Hearts.
Should Rebels within or should Foes from without,
Bring the Crown on his Head or his Honor in doubt;
We are ready still ready and boldly foretell,
That Conquest shall ever with Liberty dwell.
And now bring us forth as the Crown of our Labor,
Much Wine and good Cheer with the Pipe and the Tabor,
Let our Nymphs all be kind and our Shepherds be gay;
For England, old England is happy to Day.
SONG CXV. LOVE's true OBJECT.
WHILE Youthful Bards in Lyrick Lays,
A Brilliant Train of Beauties praise,
And each, and each prefers his own;
Be mine the Task to sing the Fair,
Whose Charms engage bevond compare,
The lovely, lovely BETSY STONE.
For Beauty Venus was Renowned,
And dignity Saturnia Crowned,
In sense Minerva shone;
But would you in one Object find,
Those great perfections all combind,
Observe my BETSY STONE.
Not rich Arabias fragrant Dews,
Nor sweets that Primroses Beds diffuse,
By vernal Zephirs blown;
Not all the Flowrets of the Field,
Can such reviving Odours yield,
As charming BETSY STONE,
While some in Quest of sordid Gain,
In Vessels cross the Brainy Main,
To distant Climes unknown;
I Would give up India's precious Store,
With fertile Peru's Golden Ore,
To purchase BETSY STONE.
Though other Charmers may Impart,
True bliss to Man, my constant Heart,
Is fixed on her alone;
To her I Will every thought apply,
Oh! many I live, ye Gods! and die,
With lovely BETSY STONE
SONG CXVI. The LASS with the DELICATE Air.
Sung by Mr. LOW.
YOUNG MOLLY who lives at the Foot of the Hill.
Whose Fame every Virgin with envy does fill
Of Beauty is blessed with so ample a Share,
That Men call her the Lass with the delicate Air.
Of Beauty is blessed with so ampel a Snare,
That Men call her the Lass with the delicate Air.
One Evening last May as I traversed the Grove,
In thoughtless Retirement not dreaming of Love,
I chanced to espy the gay Nymph I declare,
And really she would got a most delicate Air.
By a murmuring Brook on a green mossy Bed,
A Chaplet composing the fair one was laid,
Surpised and transported I could not forbear,
With Raptures to gaze on her delicate Air.
For that Moment young Cupid selected a Dart,
And Pierced without pity my innocent Heart,
And from thence how to gain the dear Maid was my Care,
For a Captive I fell to her delicate Air.
When she saw me she blushed and complained I was rude,
And begged of all Things that I would not intrude
I answered I could not tell how I came there,
But laid all the Blame on her delicate Air.
Said her Heart was the Prize which I sought to obtain.
And hoped that she would give it to ease my fond Pain.
She neither rejected nor granted my Prayer,
But fired all my Sou! with her delicate Air.
A thousand Times since I Have repeated my Suit,
But still the T^rmentor affects to be mate.
Then tell me ye Swains who have conquered the Fa^r,
How to win the dear Lass with the delicate Air.
SONG CXVII. A HUNTING SONG.
THE Sun from the East tips the Mountains with Gold,
And the Meadows all spangled with Dew-drops behold,
Hear the Lark's early Mattin proclaims the new Day,
And the Horns cheerful Summons rebuke our delay
With the Sports of the Field there is no Pleasure can vie,
While jocound we follow the Hounds in full Cry.
Let the Drudge of the Town make Riches his Sport,
And the Slave of the State hunt the Smiles of the Court,
No Care nor Ambition our Patience annoy,
But Innocence still gives it rest to our Joy.
Cho: With the Sports etc.

Mankind are all Hunters in various degree,
The Priest hunts a Living, the Lawers a Fee,
The Doctor a Patient, the Courtier a Place,
Though often (like us) they are flung out with Disgrace.
Cho: With the Sports etc.

The Cit hunts a Plumb, while the Soldiers hunts Fame,
The Poet a Dinner, the Patroit a Name;
And the artful Coquet though she seem, to refuse,
Yet in spite of her Airs she her Lover pursues.
Cho: With the Sports etc.

Let the Bold and the Busy hunt Glory and Wealth,
All the Blessings we ask is the Blessing of Health;
With Hounds and with Horns to the Woodlands to roam,
And when tired abroad, find Contentment at home.
Cho: With the Sports etc.

SONG CXVIII. The Ecchoing Horn in THOMAS and SALLY
THE Ecchoing Horn calls the Sportsmen abroad:
To Horse my brave Boys and a way.
The Morning is up and the Cry of the Hounds.
Upbraids our too tedicus Delay;
What Pleasures we seel in pursuing the Fox,
Over Hill and over Valley he fles;
Then follow, we'll scon overtake him,
Huzza! the Traitor is seized on and Dies;
He Dies the Traitor is seized on and Dies;
Then follow, we'll soon overtake him,
Huzza! the Traitor is seized on and Dies.
Triumphant returning at Night with the Spoil,
Like Bacchanals shouting and Gay;
How sweet with a Bottle and Lass to refresh,
And lose the Fatigues of the Day;
With Sport, Love, and Wine fickle Fortune defy,
Dull Wisdom all Happiness sours;
Since Life is no more than a Passage at best,
Let Us strew the Way over with Flow're
With Flowers Let Us strew etc.
SONG CXIX. Flat BOTTOMED BOATS.
Sung by Mr. Green at Sadlers Wells,
OUR Glory, renowned on the Ocean and Shore,
To Ages for Aye shall be told,
Hawke, How and Boscawen, Wolf, Amhurst and Moore,
In the List of fair Fame be entoll'd;
In Praise of such Leaders then Open your Throats,
And Laugh at the French Flat Bottomed Boats.
While Barrington swept off the Table Basterre,
At Minden we got the odd trick;
Skew'd Conflans a Trump or two made him look queer,
And won all they had at Quebeck;
Then Sing and be Jolly Boys open your Throats,
And Laugh at the French etc.
We Are Ignorant what may betide us this Year,
But certain of this we are all;
Her Course how she will let kind Providence fleer,
For Freedom we'll Fight and we'll fall;
For King George and Prince George then open your Throats,
And Laugh at the French etc:
Like Grevhounds half slarv'd they squint at our Food.
And fain from our Beef would be fed:
You're welcome Monsieurs, if you will wade to it in Blood,
I see you are far better Bred,
Poltroons! how they run! then open your Throats,
And Laugh at the French etc.
SONG CXX. The KENNEL RAKER.
THOUGH I sweep to and through old Iron to find,
Brass Pins Rusly Nails they are all to my mind,
Yet I wear a sound Heart true to George our King,
Though Ragged and poor with clear Concience can sing,
Though I sweep to and through yet I Would have you to know,
There are sweepers in high Life as well as in low.
The Statesman he sweeps in his Coffers the blunt,
That should pay the poor Soldiers that Honors does hunt,
The Action though dirty, he cares not a Straw,
So he get's but the ready, the Rabble may jaw,
Though I sweep etc.
I Am told that the Parson (for I never go,
To hear a Man Preach, what he never sticks to,)
It Is all for the Sweepings he tip's ye the cant,
You might Preach by your selves, else depend Sirs upon it,
Though I sweep etc.
One sweep's you from this Life, you cannot tell where,
And to what place you go too the Doctor don't care,
So he brings in his Bill your long Purses to broach.
Then he Laugh's in his Sleve, as he Rides in his Coach.
Though I sweep etc.
Your Counsel may plead but pray what is it for,
His Eye's on your sob whilst he chatters the Law,
Tongue padding he Rakes you and sweeps you quite clear.
Of what is better than Iron you need not to fear,
Though I sweep etc.
But honesty's best in what Station we are,
For our Grand Sweeper Death we can better prepare,
Your Statesmen your Parson your Physic and Law,
When Death takes a Sweep are no more than a Straw,
Though I Sweep etc.
SONG CXXI. A new HUNTING SONG.
THE Morning is charming, all Nature is gay,
Away, my brave Boys, to your Horses away;
For the Prime of your Pleasure, and questing the Hare,
We have not so much as a Moment to spare.
Hark! the lively toned Horn, how melodious it sounds,
How melodious it sounds, To the musical Song,
To the musical Song of the merry-mouth'd Hounds.
In yon Stubble Field we shall find her below;
Sono! cries the Huntsman Hark to him Soho!
See, see where she goes and the Hounds have a View;
Such Harmony, Handel himself never knew;
Cho.
Gates Hedges and Ditches to us are no Bounds,
But the World is our own while we follow the Hounds.
Hold, Hold it is a double; hark, hey! Bowler, hey!
If a thousand gainsay it a thousand shall lie;
His Beauty surpasing his Truth has been tried,
At the Head of the Pack an infallible Guide;
Cho.
At his Cry the wide Welking with Thunder resounds
The Darking of Hunters the Glory of Hounds.
Over Highlands and Lowlands and Woodlands we fly,
Our Horses full speed and our Hounds in full cry
So matched in their Mouths and so even they run,
Like the turn of the Spheres and the Race with the Sur
Cho.
Health Joy and Fericity dance in the Rounds,
And bless the gay Circle of Hunters and Hounds.
The old Hounds push Forward a very sure Sign
That the Hare though a stout one begins to decline,
A Chase of two Hours or more she has led,
She Is down, look about ye, they have her, where dead;
Cho.
How glorious a Death to be honored with Sounds
Of Horns, and a Shout to the Chorus of Hounds.
Here Is a Health to all Hunters, and long be their Lives,
May they never be crossed by their Sweethearts or Wives;
May they rule their own Passions, and ever at Rest.
As the most happy Men, be they also the best:
Cho.
And free from the Care, which the many surrounds
Be happy at last, when they see no more Hounds.
SONG CXXII. A NEW SONG, Sung by Mrs. C^bber.
YE fair marrie'd Dames who so often deplore,
That a Lover once blessed is a Lover no more,
No more, no more, is a Lover no more;
Attend to my Counsel nor blush to be taught,
That Prudence must cherish what Beauty has caught
Attend to my Counsel nor blush to be taught
That Prudence must cherish what Beauty has caught.
Use the Man that you wed like you favorite Guittar,
Though Music in both they are both apt to Jar,
How tuneful and soft from a delicate Touch,
Not handled too roughly nor played on too much.
The Linnet and Sparrow will feed from your Hand,
Grow fond by your kindness and come at Command,
Exert with your Husband the same happy Skill,
For Hearts like your Birds may be tamed to your will.
Be gay and good humored complying and kind,
Turn the chief of your Care from your Face to your Mind,
It Is there that the Wife may her Conquest improve,
And Hymen will rivet the Fetters of Love.
SONG CXXIII. The VIRGINS COMPLAINT.
A Virgin like me sure was never so distress't,
Oh! how shall I tell what I feel in my Breast,
I must though ashamed for I Am sadly afraid,
I Am doomed against my will to die an Old Maid, a Maid,
A Maid, I Am doomed against my will to die an Old Maid.
I have done all I can and who could do more,
A Husband to gain Sparks I Have had three or four,
Have Danced Laughed and Sung and went smartly Arrayed,
Yet I fear after all I shall die an Old Maid.
To Assembly's, the Park, and the Play I often went,
But alas naught was there yet could give me content,
The Fops all around me soft silly Things said,
But I found for all that I might die an Old Maid.
So fond were they all of themselves and fine Clothes,
Of Gaming and Raking of trifling and Shows,
That a Wifes but a Cipher when her Fortune is paid,
And if this is called Marriage let me die an Old Maid.
Our young King Oh! bless him who sits on the Throne,
To all his good Subjects a Pattern has shown,
Since George and sair Charlotte have Hymen obeyed,
Sure for shame we shant see in this Isle an Old Maid.
A Peace he has signed let each Virgin Rejoice,
All Join in Petition with Hearis Hand and Voice,
Which granted due Homage will truly be paid.
That Old England throughout there may not live an Old Maid.
Let him tax but Single, Rich, Poor, High, and low,
The Soldier, the Sailor, the Clown, and the Beaux,
What ever's their Station Profession or Trade,
It Will be hard in one Year if there is left an Old Maid.
To all those brave Heroes who have ventured their Lives,
Let him give the best Fortunes and all the best Wives,
Then the Fools who with Time and themselves have long played
May be glad if at last they can catch an Old Maid.
SONG CXXIV. Sung by Mr. Low in the Character of Colonel Bully, The PROVOKED
WIFE.
YE Subjects of Bacchus who laughed at dull thinking
And place all your Wisd^m in Whoring and Drinking,
Pursue your Delights and behold with Emotion
Your Deity smiles and approves your Devotion
Drink, drink then and laugh at the folly's of Life
Forget all your Sorrows Death Devil and Wife
Here Is a G^^^ to Confusion may order decline
And every Distinction be drowned in good Wine.
May all Things be now, as in days of Old Adam
When the Beasts too got Drunk, with Master and Madam
May Pimps, Bawds, and Bullys like Birds of a Feather
Drink, Laugh. Sing, and Play, and be happy together
For such as live Sober poor pitiful Elves
May they Guzzel small Beer, and dispute by themselves.
Here Is Glass etc.

Our Motto shall be Drawer bring the other Fiask,
Our Arms jo^ly Bacchus, bestriding his Cask;
And he that shall flinch or these Orders think much on
May dye and be Damned with a blot in his Scutcheon
While each jolly Toper, with six Bottles more
Supported shall stand, till he falls on the Floor.
Here Is a Glass etc.

SONG CXXV. The ORIGIN of ENGLISH LIBERTY.
ONCE the Gods of the Greeks, at Ambrosial Feast,
Large Bowls of rich Nectar were Quaffing,
Merry Momus a mong them was sat as a Guest,
Homer says the Celestials loved Laughing,
Octaves on each in the Synod the Humorist Droll'd,
So none could his Jokes disapprove,
He Sung Reparteed and some smart Story's told,
And at last thus began upon Jove,
And at last thus began upon Jove.
Sire, Atlas who long has the Universe bore,
Grows greviously tired of la^e,
He says that Mankind are much worse than before,
So he begs to be eased of t^eir weight;
Jove knowing the Earth on poor Atias was Hurled,
From his Shoulders commanded the Ball,
Gave his Daughter Attraction the charge of the World,
And she hung it up high in his Hall.
Miss pleased with the Present reviewed the G^^^e round,
To see what each Climate was worth,
Like a Diamond the whole with an Atmosphere bound,
And she variously Planted the Earth:
With Silver, Gold, Jewels, she India endowed,
France, and Spain, she taught Vineyards to rear.
What suited each Clime on each Clime she bestowed,
And Freedom she found flourished here.
Four Cardinal Virtues she lest this Isle,
As Guardians to Cherish the Root,
The Blossoms of Liberty gayly did smile,
And Englishmen fed on the Fruit:
Thus fed and thus bred from a Bounty so rare,
O preserve it as free as 'twas give'n,
We will while we have Breath, nay we'll grasp it in Death.
Then return it untainted to Heaven.
SONG CXXVI. WOMAN for MAN.
Addressed to the Batchelors.
WINE. Wine we allow the brisk Fountain of Mirth,
It frights away Care, and gives Jolli^y Birth;
Yet while we thus freely great Bacchus approve,
Lets pay the glad Tribute to Venus and Love,
For do what you will nay or say what you can;
Who loves not a Woman the Wretch is no Man,
For do what you will nay or say what you can;
Who loves not a Woman the Wretch is no Man.
To the Charms of that Sex let us cheerful resign
Our Youth and our Vigor, they are better than Wine;
There Is Merit I own, in a gay sparkling Glass,
But can it compare with a lovely kind Lass?
No, it cannot compare, you may say what you can,
Who presers not a Woman the Wretch is no Man.
CHO. No, it cannot, etc.

The Enchantments of Beauty what Force can repel,
The Eyes powerful Magic, the Bosom's soft Spell,
The Look so endearing, the kind melting Kiss!
The Enjovments of Love, are all Raptures and Bliss,
Then who Woman refuse rejects Nature's Plan,
He may say what he will but the Wretch is no Man.
CHO. Then who Woman, etc.

May Scandal, Misfortune and direful Disgrace,
Be the Portion of all, the Effeminate Race;
Like Britain what Nation on Earth can they find
Whose Nymphs are so fair so inviting and kind?
Then who Women refuse, or reject Nature's Plan,
May they suffer like Brutes, nor be pitied by Man.
CHO. Then who Women, etc.

From a striking Example Moral shall spring,
Who'd act like a Man, let him copy his King;
Like George in his Youth, the gay spring tide of Life,
Let every good Fellow, now take him a Wife,
When by Hymen you're blessed, rest securely for then,
You Will have nothing to do, but to prove yourselves Men.
CHO. When by Hymen, etc.

SONG CXXVII. MAY the Mother of LOVE.
THE Virgin when softened by May,
Attend to the Village's Vows,
The Birds fondly bill on the Spray,
And Poplars Embrace with their Boughs;
On IDA bright VENUS may reign,
Adored for her Beauty above,
We Shepherds that dwell on the plain,
Hail May as the Mother of Love.
From the West as it wantonly blows,
Fond Zephyr Caresses the Vine,
The Be steals a Kiss from the Rose,
And Willows and Woodbines entwine:
The Pinks by the Rivulets side,
That Border the vernal Alcove,
Bend downward and kiss the soft Tide,
For May is the Mother of Love.
May tinges the Butterflies Wing,
He Flutters in Bridal Array,
If the Larks and the Linnets now Sing,
Their M^sick is taught them by May:
The Stock Dove recluse with her Mate,
Conceals her fond Bliss in the Grove,
And murmuring seems to Repeat,
That May is the Mother of Love.
The Goddess will Visit ye soon,
Ye Virgins be sportive and Gay,
Get your Pipes oh! ye Shepherds in Tune,
For Music must welcome the May:
Would DAMON have PHILLIS prove kind,
And all his keen Auguish remove,
Let him tell her soft Tales and he will find,
That May is the Mother of Love.
SONG CXXVIII. The LOVERS WISH.
THE Blooming Spring makes Joy appear,
The pleasant Month of May is near,
The pleasant Month of May is near?
When I and Betsy may again;
Wander over each Hill and Plain,
Wander over each Hill and Plain.
And daily find new Paths to tread,
(By Love and Incocence be led)
Over flowery Meads or verdant Hills,
Near murmuring Brooks or cooling Rills:
Or to some pleasing soft retreat,
Where Sylphs or Fairias nightly meet,
Where zephyr's fan the Air around,
And Birds with warbling notes are found.
Or if the Sun with intense power,
Shall force us to some shady Bower,
Where the giantick woodbines grow,
And the more fragrant Vi'lets blow.
There dearest Betsy thou shall prove,
That I no other Nymph do love,
In rural Scenes no Joy I see,
My Betsy is all Joy to me.
SONG CXXIX. A BACCHANALIAN SONG.
Set by Mr. Moze.
OLD Care begone thou churlish guest,
Here Is none but flowing Bowl's,
You Are only made for selfish Churls,
Be gone we are none but Souls,
Ana-Creon bids thee quite the shrine,
Nor dare approach his School;
For Wine inspire's the Soul of Man,
Then who would drink by rule, by rule,
Then who would drink by rule.
No turbid Thoughts perplex the Brain,
We Cy^ic rules dec^^^e,
Give me your Joyous drinking Blades,
And Cellars stored with Wine.
With Grapes my Temple^ wr^^ath all round,
An Hogs-head striding over,
A Rummer filled with generous Wine,
Ye Gods I ask no more.
In truimph then Oh! how I Would Quaff,
Amidst each toping Son,
I should like Bacchus self appear,
Astride the Jolly Tun.
Ye learned Asses rail your fill,
Your maxims we despise,
If shunning Wine is Wisdom called,
Oh! let me never be wise.
The difference View 'twixt sons of Care,
And Lads of rosy Hue,
Your sober Joy's are still the same,
But drinking's ever new.
Go on and level us with Breast,
Great Bacchus we adore,
And free as Air we'll drink and sing,
Till Time shall be no more.
SONG CXXX. DAMON and FLORELLA.
DAMON. CAST, my Love, thine Eves around,
See the sportive Lambkins play;
Nature gavly decks the Ground,
All in Honor of the May:
Like the Sparrow and the Dove,
Listen to the Voice of Love.

FLORELLA, Damon, thou have found me long
I ist'ning to thy soothing ^ale,
And t^y soft persuasive Song,
Often held me in the Dale:
Take oh! Damon, while I live,
All which Virtue ought to give.

DAMON, Not the Verdure of the Grove,
Nor the Garden's fairest Flowers.
Nor the Meads where Lovers rove,
Tempted by the vernal Hours,
Can delight thy Damon's Eye.
If Florella is not by.

FLORELLA, Not the Wa^er's gentle Fall,
By the Bank with Poplars crowned,
Not the feathered Songsters all,
Nor the Flute's melodious Sound,
Can delight Florella's Ear,
If her Damon is not near.

BOTH. Let us love, and let us live
Like the cheerful Season gay,
Banish Care, and let us give
Tribute to the fragrant May:
Like the Sparrow and the Dove,
Listen to the Voice of Love.

SONG CXXXI. EXCUSE for a LOVE SLIP.
WHAT means that tender Sigh my Dear,
Why silent drops that Crystal Tear
What Jealous Fears disturb thy Breast,
Where Love and Peace Delight to Rest
What though thy Jockey has been seen,
With Molly sporting on the Green
'Twas but an artfull Trick to prove,
The matchless Force of J^n^y's Love.
It Is true a Nosegay I addressed
To grace the wi^ty Daphne's Breast,
But 'twas at her Desire to try
If Damon cast a Jealous Eye,
Those Flowers will fade by Morning Dawn
Neglected scattered over the Lawn,
But in thy fragrant Bosom lives
A sweet Persume that never dies.
SONG CXXXII. The STOCKING.
SILVIA whose Eyes kill sure as any Gun,
Set Basking in the Sun,
One Stocking off the other on,
The Reason why the Fair was minded,
To repair a breach her fragrant Foot had made,
The lusty Damon, by her Side,
With Joy the Fair one eyed,
And thus he Sung or said.
O Nymph of every Grace,
Nice in Finger nice in Face,
Behold thy Lover pale and shocking;
And worn as thin as any Stocking,
Pity the Pain thy Lover feels,
And darn a Heart that is out at Heels,
Then fondly take thy Lovers part,
And kindly Garter up my Heart.
SONG CXXXIII. A new SONG JESSY.
THOUGH Kitty and Lucy are fair,
And beautiful Jenny bears Sway;
Yet none of them all can compare
With Jessy, my Queen of the May.
Her Breath like the Violet so sweet,
Her Face is as fair as the Day;
The Swains of the Village greet
My Jessy, the Queen of the May:
Her looks are as mild as a Dove,
Her Eyes dart a soft killing Ray;
My Jessy, I Am destined to love,
She shall ever be Queen of the May.
When she comes to the Dance on the Green,
Not one of the Nymphs are so Gay:
Youth, Beauty, and Modesty's seen
In Jessy, my Queen of the May.
To Music her Notes I prefer,
In Raptures I jo^n in the Lay!
But lost! in attend to her;
My Song is -- ^he Queen of the May.
If over the Meadows we rove
Where Lambkins so wantonly play,
Not a Word can I talk but of Love
To Jessy, my Queen of the May.
If ever I prove false to my Maid,
May the Birds cease to sing on each Spray;
For Virtue and Truth are displayed
In Jessy, my Queen of the May.
SONG CXXXIV.
Sung, by GILBERT COOPER.
DEAR Chloe, what means this Disdain,
Which bla^^s each Endeavor to please?
Though Forty, I Am free from all Pain;
Save love, I am free from Disease.
No Graces my Mansion have fled,
No Muses have broken my lyre;
The love^ Fro^ick still round my Bed,
And Laughter is cheered at my Fire.
To none have I ever been cold.
All Beauties in vogue I Am among;
I Have Appetite even for the old,
And Spirit enough for the young.
Believe me, sweet Girl, I speak true,
Or else put my love to the Test;
Some other have doubted like you.
Like them do you bless and be blessed.
SONG CXXXV.
WHILE Poets tune their monthly Lays,
And snatch at thee instead of Bays,
Stoop down to hear my Strain;
My hobling Muse attempts thy Praise,
'Twixt Prose and Verse she sings or says,
O B -- y, ease my Pain.
That Vermil Cheek, that ruby Lip,
Those Snowy Pi^lows, even the tip
Of that sost Ear so charm me;
Not Venus, were her Goddes-Ship
From Heaven to take another Trip,
Could half so much alarm me.
With all their Elegance and Ease,
Your sighing Fellows never can please,
Scorn the dull Men of Merit;
Their solemn Courtship only teize,
The Golden now then B -- y seize,
And bless a Lad of Spirit.
I Will talk of Operas and Plays,
Of Laces, Fans, and Negligees,
Of Lap-Dogs and of Ladies;
At Ranelagh we'll thread the Maze,
And chequer Life ten thousands ways,
Our Days shall be gay Days.
My Fortune is not large, it is true,
But yours tacked to it, you know, will do,
And sure we'll spend it freely;
On second thoughts, faith, thus to woo
May seem a little odd to you,
But hang the Mouth that is mealy.
Amongst Country Girls and Country Swans,
Let puling Lovers pipe their Strains,
Till Marian's Breast high swells;
Such Conquests are not worth the Pains.
Nor such the Tourd Address, that gains
The Heart of loftier Belles.
On musty Greek let Parsons pore,
Or Thumb their Bibles over and over,
Can they be framed for loving?
Close-fetter'd to their clafick Lore,
Ulysses like, they beed no more
The Svren-voice, though moving.
They all a down a River's side,
Where Little Fishes they do glide,
May Sing their Songs of Sion,
On couch of moss with dazies pied,
Stretched out, all Luxury deride,
Give me a Bed lie on.
Full eight long Stanzas having Wrote,
(A thousand such not worth a Groat)
My Pegasus grows jaded;
Each cranny of my Brain I Have sought,
Nor find one single lurking Thought
By Phoebus left unaided.
Yet sure before your Eyes I Have set,
That on Love's Score you're in my Debt,
Ah! can you longer doubt me?
Then take, O take my Lovely B -- t,
Thy beft, thy second Colinet,
Or he must live without thee.
SONG CXXXVI. A new SONG.
Sung by Mr. VERNON, at Vauxhall.
WHEN Fanny to Woman is growing a Pace,
The Rose-bud beginning to Blow in her Face,
For Mamma's wise Precepts she cares not a Jot,
Her Heart pants for something she cannot tell what.
No sooner the Wanton her Freedom obtains,
Than among the gay Youths a Tyrant she Reig^s,
And, finding her Beauty such Power has got,
Her Heart pants for something but cannot tell what;
Though all Day in Splendour she flaunts it about,
At Court, Park, and Play, the Ridotto, and Rout,
Though flattered and envied, yet Pines at her Lot,
Her Heart pants for something but cannot tell what.
A touch of the Hand or a Glance of the Eye,
From him she likes best makes ber ready to Die,
Not knowing it is Cupid his Arrow has Shot,
Her Heart pants for something but cannot tell what.
Ye fair take advice and be blessed while you may,
Each Look, Word, and Action, your Wishes betray,
Give E^se to your Hearts by the Conj^gal Knot,
Though they pant ever so much you will soon know for what.
SONG CXXXVII. A new SONG.
FROM Lincoln to London rode forth our young Squire,
To bring down a Wise, whom the Swains might admire;
But in spite of whatever the Mortal could say,
The Goddess objected the length of the way.
To give up the Op'ra. the Park, and the Ball,
For to view the Stag's Horns in an old Country-Hall;
To have neither China nor India to see!
Nor a Lace Man to plague in a Morning not she.
To forsake the dear Play House. Quin, Garrick, and Clive,
Who by dint of mere Humor had kept her alive;
To forego the full Box, for his lo^e^^me abode,
O Heavens! she should Faint, she should Die on the Road.
To forget the gay Fashions and gestures of France,
And to leave dear Auguste in the midst of the Dance,
And Harlequin too! 'twas in vain to require it;
And she wondered how Folks had the Face to desire it.
She might yield to resign the sweet Singers of Ruckholt,
Were the Citizen Matron seduces her Cuckold;
But Ranelagh soon would her Footsteps recall,
And the Music, the Lamps, and the glare of Vauxhall.
To be sure she could breathe no where else than in Town.
Thus she talked like a Wit, and he looked like a Clown
But the while Honest Harry despaired to succeed,
A Coach with a Coronet trall'd her to Tweed.
SONG CXXXVIII The ROSE BUD.
SEE, Daphne, see, Florelio cried,
And learn the sad Effects of Pride;
Yon sheltered Rose, how safe concealed
How quickly bla^ted, when revealed.
The Sun with warm attractive Rays
Tempts it to wanton in the Blaze;
A Gale succeeds from Eastern Skies,
And all its blushing radiance Dies.
So you my Fair, of Charms divine;
Will quit the Plains too fond to shine
Where Fame's Transporting Rays allure,
Though here more happy, more secure.
The Breath of some neglected Maid
Shall make you sigh you left the Shade;
A breath to Beauty's Bloom unkind,
As, to the Rose, an Eastern Wind.
The Nymph replied You first, my Swain,
Confine your Sonnets to the plain;
One envious Tongue alike disarms,
You, of your Wit, me of my Charms.
What is, unknown, the Poet's skill?
Or, what, unheard, the tuneful Thrill!
What, unadmi'd, a charming mien,
Or what the Rose's blush, unseen.
SONG CXXXIX.
SYLVAN and CYNTHIA: SWEET Summer is coming, the Peach T^ees in Bloon
The Lay lock's arrayed, for its Leaves are just come
Then, Cynthia, remember your Swain's usual Lay;
Consent, be united, for life's but a Day.

CYNTHIA. Fly hence, O false Sylvan, to Mira the gay,
To her repeat all the fine Things that you say,
With Joy she may hear you, and list' to your Lay,
For love like to Life is with you but a Day.

SYLVAN. Unjustly, dear Cynthia, your Sylvan. you blame,
I continue still constant, does Cynthia, the same?
Though to Dor^la's Co^tage your Fl^ck did once stray
Was the Sheep then in Fault, or my Cynthia, I pray.

CYNTHIA. Accuse me not, Sylvan, nor strive to beguile;
With a Frown I demand it and banish a ^mile,
To ^da's sweet Mountains your ^l^^^s you may le^d
With Mi^a who credits what ever you plead.

SYLVAN. Not so, my dear Cynthia, with you I will stray;
You add to all Pleasure, and brighten the Day;
Without thee unhappy must Sylvan, ^^ma^n,
Oh! tell me, you will have me, and ri^ me o^ Pain.

CYNTHIA. Then, Sylvan, be happy, though in Fetters remain;
I Will free you from Bondage, but not ^^^n your Chain;
Then there is my Hand, to the church lead the Way,
Be easy and cheerful I Will ever obey.

BOTH. Come, come, all ye N^mp^s, with your Shepherd repair,
With Garlands of Myrt^e to Crown the ford Pair;
May happiness grow as our Love does increase,
And Hymen supply us w^^^ Plenty and Peace.

SONG CXL. A PASTORAL SONG.
COME, dear Pastor^, come away!
And Hai^ the c^enful Spring;
Now s^agrant B^^si^ns crown the May,
And W^oes win Love Notes ring:
Now P^oebus to the West decends,
And shads a fainter Ray;
And, as our rural Labor ends,
We bl^^s the closing Day.
In yonder artless Maple Bower,
With blooming Woodbines twined;
Let us enjoy the E^^^ang Hour,
On Earth's soft, ^^^p reclined:
Or where you Poplash verdant Boughs
The Cr^stal ^urrent shade;
O deign, fair Nymph, to hear the Vows
My faithful Heat has made.
Within this Breast no s^ft Deceit,
No artful Flau'ry 'bides
But Truth, scarce known among the Great,
Over every Thought presive^:
On Pride's false Grave I lo^k with Sc^rn,
And all its plit^ring Train;
Be mine the P^easares which adorn
This ever peaceful Plain.
Come then, my fair, and with thy Love
Each ^ising Care subdue;
Thy Presence can each Grief remove,
And every Joy renew:
The ^ily sades, the Rose grows Faint,
Their tra^sient B^oom is vain;
But lasting Truth and Virtue Paint
Pastora of the Plain.
SONG CXLI. LOVE IN LOW LIFE.
YOUNG Jockey he couried sweet Mo^gy so fair,
The Lass she was lovely, the Swain deb^^air;
They hugged and they cuddel'd, and ta^^^ with their Eyes,
And looked, as all Lovers do, wonderful wi^e.
A Fortnight was spent e're dear Moggy came to,
For Maidens a Decenc^ keep when they woo;
At length she consented, and made him a Vo^^,
And Jockey, he gave for a Jointer, his Cow.
They pannel'd their Dobbins, and rode to the Fair,
Still kisting and fondling until they came there;
They called on the Parson, and by him were wed,
And M^ggy she took her d^ar Jockey to Bed.
They staid there a Week, as the Neighbors all say,
And none were so happy, and gamesome as they;
Then home they returned, but returned most unkind,
For Jockey rode on and left ^^ggy behind.
Surprised at this Treatment, she cried, Gaffer Jock,
Pray what is the Reason that M^ggy you mock;
Quoth he, Goase, come on, why you now are my Bride,
And when Volk are wed, they set Fooling aside.
He took home his M^ggy, good Conduct to learn,
Who brushed up the House, whele he thatched the old Barn;
They laid in a Stock, for the Cares that ^^sue,
And now live as Man and W^^e usually do.
SONG CXLII.
SWEET as th'enamele'd Meads appear
When Flora crow^s the p^rpled Year
With every pleasing Hue:
So sweet nay sweeter even than these
That vest the Lilly and the Rose
The Smiles of lovely Sue.
Blessed fair! in whom we see combin^^d
Such matchless Beauties with a Mind
Corfessedl^, akid!
In Heaven such Angels are no doubt
Their Clothing g^^rious all without
All Purity within.
SONG CXLIII. A NEW SONG. Sung at Mr. Low^, at MARYBONE ^A^DENS.
AMONG all the Arts, which to please we pursue,
Our furest Success still attends on what is NEW;
It Is Novelty pleases alike one and all,
From the High to the Low, the Great and the Small:
To your Services bound, to your Preasures still true,
We humbly now offer you something that is NEW.
To obtain this great Point, though often we try,
Our flower-drest Sonnets soon Languish and Die;
The soft Arts of Love and the Heroes due Praise
Have long been worn out and unfir for our Lays;
Yet still as your Pleasure is all we have in view.
What we offer at present we hope will be NEW.
Ye Wits and ye Critics, ye Belles and ye Beaus,
Ye Lovers of Wine, and ye Lovers of Cloatins;
Ye Love^s of Women, of T^^tle and Wit,
To each and to all our Song is now writ:
To please all alike we endeavor to do,
And that you will agree would be NEW, very NEW.
When the Wits cease to censure this unthinking Age;
When Cri^cs in praise of the Moderns engage;
When F^^^ cease admiring their Dress and their Parts;
When Belles cease their ogling, and angling for Bearts;
When the Poper his Bottle shall cease to pursue.
You all will agree this is NEW, very NEW.
When the Laughter shall coase to be pleased with a Joke,
When the courage of Braggarts shall cease to be Smoke;
When Misers forget their old H^ards to increase;
When Party and Rave through the Nation shall cease;
When all ma^tied Folks to each other are true.
You will readily cry this is NEW, very NEW.
When Gamesters grow Honest, and quit Card, and Dice;
When Prudes shall cease calling of We^ching a Vice;
When Tathers shall cease at each other to rail,
And Truth, Honest Truth, shall over Scandal prevail:
When all this shall happen, I doubt not but you
Will strait clap your Hands, and allow this is NEW.
SONG CXLIV. To Miss. POLLY JOHNSON.
OH! Polly throw by that contemptible Air,
Which you would studiously seem to despise;
Nor injure a Face so amazingly fair,
With a Pair of such merciless Eyes.
When you hear of Dis^resses you never think to cure,
With Mildness a Lover reject;
Politeness, sweet Ma^d, will entide him sure,
To be treated with common Respect.
How cruel the study to Teize and Perplex
A Slave whom your Beauty secures;
And use him below all the rest of his Sex,
If he calls you the Pa^rest of yours.
What Beam of a true and lasting Content
Can that Bosom expect to enjoy,
Whose Pleasure cons^^is in a With to Torment,
And whose Pride is Hope to destroy.
Good Nature, my Dear, the most beautiful Face
With a Luster divine can improve;
Bestow e'^^ a Charm to the Cheek of a Grace,
And a Dart to the Eye of a Love.
But, trust me, the Maid who from this can depart,
Through a Passion from Triumph alone;
Will find, while she Tortures an innocent Heart.
That she only debases her own.
SONG CXLV. COLMA, A Song from the Original of Ossan The SON of FIN^AE.
IT IS Night; and, on the Hill of Storms
Alone does Colma stray;
While round her shriek fantastic Forms
Of Ghost, that hate the Day.
Over Rocks the Torrent roars amain,
The Whirlwind's Voice is high:
To save her from the Wind and Rain,
No friendly Shelter nigh.
Rise, Moon! kind Stars! appear a while,
And guide me to the Place;
Where rest my Love, overcome with Toil,
And wearied with the Chase.
Some light! direct me, helpless Maid!
Where, si^ting on the Ground,
His Bow unstrung is near him laid,
His panting Dogs around.
Else by the Rock, the Stream beside,
I here must sit me down;
While howls the Wind, and roars the Tide,
My Lover's call to drown.
Ah! why, my Salgar! this delay?
Where stray thy lingering Feet?
Did thou not promise in the Day
Thy love at Night to meet.
Here is the Rock, and here the Tree,
Thine own appointed Spot;
Thy Promise can thou break with me?
And is my Love forgot.
For thee I Would dare my Brother's Pride;
My Father's House would fly;
For thee forsake m^ Mother's Side;
With thee to live and die.
Be hushed, ye Wind! how loud ye brawl!
Stream! stand a moment still,
Perhaps my Love may hear me call,
Upon the Neighboring Hill.
Ho! Salgar! Salgar! mend thy Pace;
To Colma haste away.
It Is I, and this the appointed Place:
Ah! wherefore this delay.
Kind Moon! thou giv'st a friendly Light;
And lo! the Glassy Stream,
And the gray Rocks, through dusky Night
Reflect thy Silver Beam.
Yet I descry not Salgar's From:
No Dogs before him run.
Shall I not perish by the Storm,
Before Tomorrow's Sun.
But what behold I, on the Heath?
My love! my Brother! laid
O speak, my Friends! nor hold your Breat,
TO Aff^ight a trembe^ing Maid.
They answer not they Sleep they are Dead,
Alas! the horrid Sight.
Here lie their angry Swords, still red
And Bleeding from the Fight.
Ah! whe^efore lies, by Salgar slain,
My Brother, Bleeding here?
Why Salgar murdered, on the Plain,
By one to me so near.
Friends of my Choice! how loved were both!
Who now your Fame shall raise?
Who sing my Lover's p^ighted Troth;
My Brother's Song of Praise
Of Thousands lovely, Salgar's Face
Was love jest to the ^ight:
Re^own'd my Brother for the Cha^e.
And terrible in Fight.
Sons of my love! Speak, once again
Ah no! -- to De^ta a Prey,
Silent they are, and must remain;
For cold their Breasts of Clay.
But are their fleeting Spirits fled
Across the Plan so ^^on?
Or shun the Shadows of the Dead
The G^impses, of the Moon.
Speak, where on R^ck or Mountain grave,
Still c^^sh your Souls of Fire,
Or reco ci^'d, in some dark Cave
Your peaceful Ghosts retire.
Ah! where her Friends shall Colma find,
Hark -- No -- he^'re silent still
No muttering Answers brings the Wind;
No Whisper over the Hill.
Fearless, yet over whelmed with Grief,
(...) sit all Night in ^ears;
Hope ess of Comfort or Re^ief,
When Mor^ing Light appears.
Yet, raise, ye Friends of those the Dead;
On this sad Spot their Tomb;
But close not up their narrow bed,
Till hapless Colma come,
For why behind them should we stay,
Whose Lite is now a Dream?
Together here our Corses lay,
Beside the Murmuring Stream.
So shall my shivering Ghost be seen,
Lamenting over the Slain;
As Homeward hies the Hunter keen,
Benighted on the Plain.
Yet shall he, fearless pass along,
And lend his Listening Ear:
For Sweet, though sad, shall be my Song,
For Friends I loved so Dear.
SONG CXLVI. DIANA. A CANTATA.
THE Sun was now descended to the Main,
When chaste Diana, and her virgin Train,
Espied, within the Covert of a Grove,
The Little Cupids and the God of Love
All fast a Sleep stretched on the mossy Ground:
Surprised, a while the Goddess gazed,
Then gently thus her Accents raised:
"Fell Tyrants of each tender Breast
Sleep on, and let Mankind have Rest:
For On, soon as your Eyes unclose.
Adieu to all the World's Repose.
Hush -- softly tread, and Silence keep;
The wanton Gods are all asleep;
Let Us Break their Darts and Bows,
So in our Turn
We'll make them Mourn,
And give the World Repose.
It Is done: for scarce the Goddess spoke,
But lo! their Darts and Bows are broke;
Their Quivers hang in Triumph high,
When thus the Nymphs express their Joy:
Our Victory's great,
Our Glory's complete,
No longer shall we be alarmed,
Then sing and Rejoice,
With one Heart and Voice,
For Cupid at length is disarmed,
Ye Nymphs and ye Swains,
Who dwell on these Plains,
And have by fond Passions been harmed,
Secute of your Hearts
Now laugh at his Darts,
For Cupid at ^ength is disarmed.
Roused with the Noise, the God in wild affright
Awakes; but Oh! what Objects shock his Sight!
His dreaded Arms in scatrer'd Shivers thrown;
O cruel Goddess -- but I scorn to Moan.
Revenge be mine -- still one unbroken Dart
Remains -- He said, and lanc'd it through her Heart.
Beware how you the God of Love provoke;
Ah! what avail a Thousands Arrows Broke,
If one remains to Waft
The dire Heart-Wounding Shaft!
Ah! what avail a Thousands Arrows broke
If one remains to Waft the fatal Stroke.
SONG CXLVII.
TO Peace and Love, in Courts but seldom seen,
This Smiling Day has sacred been:
And may they here, united reign,
While Winter chills, or Summer warms the Plain.
May SHE, whose D^ty is her Joy,
Still, still on Tasks of Love her Hours employ
To cheer her King, to charm her Friend:
On his and Bri^a^n's Hope, with Heasure tend.
That lovely, that unfolding Rose,
With care to watch, and cherish, as he Grows;
While, with a Mother's soft S^rprize,
She sees, in him renewed, his Parent Rise.
SONG CXLVIII.
Sung by Miss Thomas.
HEAR me gallant Sailor hear me,
While your Country has a Foe,
He is mine too, never fear me,
I may weep but you shall go.
Though this flowery Season woes you,
To the peaceful sports of May,
And Love sighs so long to loose you,
Love to Glory shall give way.
Can the Sons of Britain fail her,
While her Daughters are so true,
Your soft Courage must avail her,
We love Honor loving you.
War and Danger now invite us,
Blow ye Winds auspicious blow
Every Gale will most delight us,
That can wast us to the Foe.
SONG CXLIX.
Sung by Sigra Galli.
THE Shepherd's plain life,
Without Guilt without strife,
Can only true Blessing impart,
As Nature, directs,
That Bliss he expects,
From Health and Contentment of Heart.
Vain Grandeur and Power,
Those Joys of an Hour,
Though Mortals are Toiling to find,
Can Titles or Show,
Contentment bestow,
All Happiness dwells in the Mind.
Behold the gay Rose,
How lovely it Grows,
Secure in the Depth of the Vale,
Yon Oak that on high,
Aspires to the Sky
Both Lightning and Tempests assail.
SONG CL.
Sung by Mr. Wilder.
ADIEU for a whise to the Town and its Trade,
Adieu to the Meadows and Rake,
Our Country my Boys calls aloud for our Aid,
And shall we that Country forsake.
It ^ever was known, that true Hearts like our own,
From hardships or Hazards would Flinch
Let our Foes then unite: we will show them in Fight,
What BRITONS can do at a Pinch.
A Slave may he be who will not agree,
To join with his Neighbors and sing,
That the Brave and the Free such BRITONS are we,
Live but for their Country and King.
SONG CLI.
Sung by Miss Young.
THOSE best Sons of Britain bold open and brave,
Who dare the loud Tempest and stem the rough Wave,
Theirs is the Sound Bottom on which to rely,
And theirs the firm Heart that will conquer or Die.
It Is our Country that calls us her Voice we obey,
When she wants our Aid shall a Sailor say nay,
With the Foes of Old England our Rulers may cope,
While a Sword we can brandish or handle a Rope.
Dare the Coxcomb in Heart dare the capering Slave,
Despise us plain Fellows whom Freedom make brave,
For Britain shall find us both Body and Soul,
As true to her cause as the Steel to its Pole.
Huzza, Huzza gallant Hearts let the Triflers behold
S^en Englithmen now as they fled from of old,
From the Mistress we own from the Monarch we serve.
No distance no Danger shall ever make us swerve.
Let Landmen delight in Deceit and Grimace,
Attempt at your Throat while they laugh in your Face.
Too honest for Art and too gallant for Guile,
We from where we hate as we love where we Smile.
SONG CLII. Sung in the Mask of Alfred
WHEN Britain first, at Heaven's Command,
This was the Charter of the Land,
Rule Brittannia, Brittannia, rule the Waves,
For Britons never will be Slaves.
The Nations, not so blessed as thee,
Must, in their Turns to Tyrants fall;
While thou shall flourish great and free,
The Dread and envy of them all.
Still more majestic shall thou rise,
More dreadful from each foreign Stroke;
As the loud Blast that tears, the Skies,
Serves but to root thy native Oak.
Thee haughty Tyrants never shall tame,
All their Attempts to bend thee down,
Will but arouse thy generous Flame;
But work their Woe, and thy Renown.
To thee belongs the rural Reign,
Thy Cities shall with Commerce shine;
All thine shall be the subject Main,
And every Shore it circles thine.
The Muses, still with Freedom found,
Shall to thy happy Coast repair;
Blessed Isle with matchless Beauty crowned,
And many Hearts to guard the Fair.
SONG CLIII.
IF those who live in Shepherds Bower,
Press not the gay and stately Bed;
The new mow'n Have and breathing Flower,
A softer Couch beneath them spread,
If those who sit at Shepherd's Board,
Sooth not their Taste by wanton Art,
They take what Nature's Gifts afford;
And take it with a cheerful Heart.
If those who drain the Shepherds Bowl,
No high and sparking Wines can boast,
With wholesome Cups they cheer the Soul,
And crown them with the Villiage Toast,
If those who join in Shepherd's Sport
Dancing on the daisi'd Ground;
Have not the Splender of a Court
Yet Love adorns the merry Round.
SONG CLIV.
Set by Mr. Howard, Sung by Mr. Beard, at Ranelagh.
HE that a Cuckold is let it not grieve him,
For in his Wants there is one to relieve him;
He may sleep quietly when his Wife's waking,
And may be free from Care, void of Pains taking:
And his Condition is not to be scorned,
Caesar and Pompey were both of them horned.
The Captain upon the Sea, prays for fair Weather,
While his Wife and Mate sail both together;
Star-gazing on her Back, at the Moon's Motion,
While the poor Cuckold is at his Devotion;
Yet his Condition is not to be scorned,
Caesar and Pompey, were both of them horned.
The Merchant upon the Sea searching for Treasure,
What though his Merchandise be out of Measure;
Yet if he kiss a Girl, while he is ranging,
His Wife repays him a Bill of Exchange, in.
But his Condition is not to be scorned,
Caesar and Pompey, were both of them horned.
The greatest Lawyer that ever was sent us,
Often returns his Wife, non est inventus;
And though he never so wife in his Place is,
She will still find that a Flaw in his Case is;
Yet his Condition is not to be scorned,
Caesar and Pompey, were both of them horned.
The greatest Statesman, that ever was applauded,
Need not to laugh at a Citizen horned;
For if it is true, as in ancient Relations,
The City Dames, still obey the Court Fashions;
Yet his Condition is not to be scorned,
Caesar and Pompey, were both of them horned.
While the poor Parson with Zeal is expounding,
Telling the People their Sins are abounding;
Some one, perhaps, pays his Tyhes to his Wife,
Heedles of Rules for Amencment of Life;
Yet his Condition is not to be scorned,
Caesar and Pompey, were both of them horned.
You that are Cuckolds, let this be your Comfort,
There are few others between this and Rumsor^;
Brethern all in a Row, shake H^nds together,
And never disdain to wear the Bull's Feather;
For your Condition is not to be scorned,
Caesar and Pompey, were both of them horned
SONG CLV
Sung by Miss Formantel, at R^nelagh.
ONE Midsummer Morning when (...),
The Bi^os (...) S^^g, and the (...),
When Earth seemed to answer the (...),
And a^l I rings proclaimid it the (...);
My M^t^^^ (...), Nancy, came past to the (...)
It the Corn be not ground, you may Rod if you (...),
The Freedom to use my Tongue, pleased me, no doubt,
A Woman alas! would be nothing without:
I went toward the Mill without any Delay,
And conn'd over the Words I determin^d to say;
But when I came near i^, I found it stock still,
Bless my Stars now! cried I, huff them rarely I will.
The Miller to Market that Instant was gone,
The Work it was left to the Care of his Son;
Now though I can scold well as any one can,
I thought 'twould be wrong to scold the young Man;
I said, I Am surpised you can use me so ill,
I must have my Corn ground, I must and I will.
Sweet Maid, cried the Youth, the Fault is not mine,
No Corn in the Town I Would grind sooner then thine;
There Is no one more ready in pleasing the Fair,
The Mill shall go merrily round I declare,
But hark how the Birds sing, and see how they bill,
I must have a Kiss first, I must and I will.
My Corn being done, I toward home bent my Way,
He whispered he would something of Moment to say;
Insisted to hand me along the green Mead,
And there swore he loved me indeed, and indeed;
And that he would be constant, and true to me still,
And since that Time I Have like'd him, and like him I will.
I often say, Mother, the Miller I Will huff,
She laughs, and cries, go Girl, ay plague him enough;
And scarce a Day passes but by her Desire,
I ge^ a sly Kiss from the Youth I admire,
It Wedloch he wishes, his Wish I Will fulfill,
And I Will answer, O yes, with a hearty good Will.
SONG CLVI.
Set by Mr. Worgan. Sung by Miss Stevenson.
I MET in our Village a Swain the other Day,
He stopped me, and begged me a Moment to stay;
Then Blash'd, and in Language I never heard before,
He talked much of Love, and some Pains that he bore.
But what was his Meaning I know not, I vow;
Yet, alas! my poor Heart felt, I cannot tell how.
Each Morning the Jessamine, Vi'let and Rose,
He brings me, with every sweet Flower that grows,
The sweetest, and gayest he picks from the rest,
And beg, me to wear the fine Things in my Breast:
But what is his Meaning, I know not, I ^aw;
Yet, alas! my poor Heart feels I cannot tell how.
At my feet the young Shepherd for ever I see,
Protesting he never loved and but me;
He gazes with Transport and ^^sses me too,
And swears that he will ever be constant and true;
But what is his Meaning, I know not, I vow;
Yet, alas! my poor Heart feels, I cannot tell how.
I often see the Tears streaming fast from his Eyes,
And hear him, poor Youth, breathe a thousand of Sighs;
He tells me no Nymph in the World is like me,
Nor Shepherd alive so unhappy as He:
But what is his Meaning I know not, I vow;
Yet, alas! my poor Heart feels, I cannot tell how.
Why does the dear Shepherd to me thus complain,
And say, that my Eyes are the Cause of his Pain;
Indeed ever since his sad Fate I deplore,
And I wish I knew how he might suffer no more.
I Will do all I can to relieve him I vow,
If he will be so kind, as to teach me, but how.
SONG CLVII.
Set by Dr. Arne. The Words by Mr. Prior.
AS Chloe came into the Room the other Day,
I peevish began, where so long could you stay?
In your Lite-time you never regaroed ^^ur Hour,
You promised at two, but, look Child! it is your:
A Lady's Watch needs neither Figures or Wheels,
It Is enough that it is loaded with Baubles and Seals;
A Temper so heedless no Mortal can bear;
Thus far I went on with a resolute Air.
Lord, bless me! says she, let a Body but speak.
Here Is an ugly hard R^se bud sall'n into my Neck;
It has hurt me, and vexed me, to such a Degree,
Look here! for you never belive me, pray see!
On the left Side my Breast what a Mark it has made;
So saying, her Bosom she careless displayed:
That Scene of Delight, I with Wonder surveyed,
And forgot every Word I designed to have said.
SONG CLVIII.
CUPID, the sl^est Rogue alive,
One Day was plundering of a Hive;
But as with too much eager haste,
He strove the liquid Sweets to taste;
A Be surpised the heedless Boy,
And robbed him of the expected Joy.
Soon as the Urchin felt the Smart,
Of the envenomed, angry Dart,
He kicked, he slung, he spurned the Ground;
He blowed and then he chafed the Wound:
He brow'd and chafed the Wound in vain!
His madness but increased the Pain.
St^ait to his Mother's Lap he hies,
With swelling Cheeks and Blubbered Eyes
Cried she what does my Cupid ail?
^e sobb'd and told his m^umful Tal^.
A little B^rd they call a Be,
With Yellow Wings, has Murdered me.
And are you not, replied his Mother,
For all the World just such another?
When ever you aim a poi^^^us Dart,
Against some poor, unguarded Heart;
How little is the Archer found^
And yet how deep his Arrows wound.
SONG CLIX.
BOast not mistaken Swain thy Art,
To please my partial Eyes;
The Charms that have subdued my Heart,
Another may despise.
Thy Face is to my Humor made,
Another it may fright:
Perhaps by some fond Whim betrayed,
In oddness I Delight.
Vain youth to your Coufusion know,
It Is to my Loves Excess;
You all your fancied Beauties owe,
Which sade as that grows less.
For your own Sake if not for mine,
You should preserve my Fire;
Since you my Swain no more will shine,
When I no more admire.
By me indeed you are allowed,
The Wonder of your Kind,
But be not of my Jad^ment proud,
Whom Love has rendered blind.
SONG CLIX. A new SONG.
DID you see ever a Shepherd ye Nymphs pass this Way,
Crowned with My^th^t, and all the gay Verdure of May
It Is my Strephen O bring him once mote to my Eyes,
From his Lucy in search of new P^easure he flies;
All Day have I trave^l'd, and toil ever the Plains,
In pursuit of a Rebel that is scarce worth the Pains.
Take Care, Maids, take Cate when he flatters and swears,
How ye trust your owe Eyes, or believe your own Ears,
Like the Rose bud in June every Hand ne^ll invite,
But wound the fond Heart like Thorn out of sight,
And trust me who ever my false Shepherd detains,
She will find him a Conquest that is scarce worth the Pains.
Three Months at my Feet did He languish and sigh,
Ee'r he gained a kind look, or a tender Reply;
Love, Honor and Truth, were the Themes that he sung,
And He swore that his Soul was akin to his Tongue,
T^^ soon I believed and replied to his Strains:
And resigned him too frankly my Heert for his Pains.
The Trisle once gained, like a Child at his Play,
Soon the wanton grew weary, and threw it away;
Now clov'd with my Love from my Arms does he fly,
In search of some other as silly as I;
But, trust me who ever my false Shepherd detains,
She will find him a Conquest that is scarce worth the Pains.
Beware then ye Nymphs how ye sooth the fond Flame,
And believe in good Time all the Sex are the same;
Like Strephon from Beauty to Beauty they will range,
Like him will they flatter, dissemble, and change;
For do what we can still this Maxim remains,
That a Man when we have got him is scarce worth the Pains.
SONG CLXI.
WHAT means that Throb said I my Heart,
When fore'd from Mersey Banks to part,
A brighter Lass in Town you will find;
Than geotle Peggy left hehind,
Go mid' the Ci^c^es of the Fair;
Go and forget your fondness there,
Chloe at once the Prize will win;
From Peggy's lowly chape and Mein.
My fluttering Heart replied in vain,
You hope the Fair will cure my Pain,
The painted Face and gaudy Gown;
Will make me sad and hate the Town,
When Peggy talked or lightly played,
How fast the Summer Suns decayed?
Can Chloe's Wit or artful Smile:
The livelong Day like her beguile.
If Fate commands you far away,
Ah! let me here with Peggy stay.
At your return a constant Guest;
I Will take my Mansion in your Breast:
Won by his Promise I grew kind,
And left my foolish Heart behind;
Should Peggy holds it fast in Chains,
I Will let her keep it for her Pains.
SONG CLXII. FAIR HEBE.
FAIR Hebe I left with a Cautious Design,
To escape the Joint Power of Beauty and Wine;
But found my self burn, when I came to depart,
With the Wine in my Head, and with Love in my Heart.
I repaired to my Reason, entreated its And,
Who pa^s'd on my Case and each Circumstance weighed,
Then gravely pronounced, in return to my Prayer,
That Hebe was fairest, of all that was sair.
That Is a Truch, replied, I, I Have no need to be taught,
I came for your Counsel, where to find out a Faust;
If that is all, quoth Reason, re urn as you came,
For to find Fault with Hebe, would forfeit my Name.
What Hopes then, alas! of Relief from my Pain,
While, she drives like a Tempest through each throbbing Vein:
Since my Senses surpised in her Favor take Arms,
And Reason but serves me to Point out her Charms.
SONG CLXII. The INTRIGUE.
MAKE haste, and away mine only Dear;
Make haste and away, away,
For, all at the Gate, your true Lover does w^i^^;
And I Prithee make no delay.
O how sha'l I steal away my Love?
O how shall I steal away;
My Daddy is near, and I dare not for Fear,
Pray come then another Day.
O this is the only Day my Love,
O this is the only Day!
I Will draw him aside, while you throw the Gates wide;
And then you may steal away.
Then Prithee, make no delay, dear Boy!
Then Prithee, make no delay:
We'll serve him a Prick, for I Will slip in the Nick;
And to my true Love away.
O Cupid befriend this Loving Pair,
O Cupid befriend 'em, I pray!
May their Stratagem take, for thine own sweet Sake
And Amen! let all true Lovers say.
SONG CLXIII. HAPPY MYRTILLO.
ON a Grassy Pillow,
The Youthful M^rtillo!
Transported was laid,
In his Arms a Creature,
Whose Every Feature;
For Conquest was made:
To his Side he C^^sp'd her,
And Fondly Grasped her,
While she cried Oh! Dear!
Oh! Dear My^ti^^o!
Had I known your will Oh!
I Would never come hear.
Streams gently Flowing,
And Zephyr blooming, and Zephyr etc.
Ambrosial Breeze;
A Swain admiring,
And all Conspiriog, and all etc
The Charmer to please:
The dear Nymph Complying,
No more denying, no more etc.
A ^^ien^ Grove;
Oh! blessed Myrtillo!
You may if you will O, you etc.
Be happy as Jove.
Now the Devil's in it
If such a Minuse, if such etc.
The Shepherd could lose;
No, no, no Myrtillo
Has better skill O, has etc.
His Moments to Choose:
The delightful Treasure,
Of Lov, and Pleasure, of Love etc.
He bold'^ seized!
And like Myrtillo;
He had his Fill O, he had etc.
Of what he pleased.
SONG CLXIV.
A Merry Lard by this Light,
We Laugh at our own undoing,
And Labor with all our Might,
For Slavery and Ruin.
New F^ctions we daily raise,
New Maxims we have ever i^stilling,
And him ^^at to Day we Praise,
To Morrow's a Ro^ue and a Villain.
The cunning Politician,
Whose (...) is to gull the People,
Begins ^is Cant of ^edition,
With Felks ^^^e a c^^^^e of the Steeple,
The Populace this A^arms,
They Bluster, they ^^unce, and they Vapor,
The Nations up in Arms,
And the Dev^^^ ^^^ins to Caper
The Statemen rail at each other,
And tickel the Mob with a ^tory,
They make a most damnab^e Pother,
Of National Interest and Glory.
Their Hearts they are bi^er as Gall,
Th^^ their Tongues are s^eeter than Honey.
They don'^ care a Figg for us all,
But only to finger our Money.
If my Friend be an honest Lad,
I never ask his Religion,
Distirctions make us all Mad,
And ought to be had in Derision.
They Christen us sories and Whigs,
When the best ot^em both is an Evil,
But we'll be no Party Prigs.
Let sach Godfathers go to the D -- I.
Too long have they had their Ends,
In setting u^^ one against the other,
And sow^og, such Strife among Friends,
That Brother hated Brother,
But we'll for the future be wise,
Grow ^^ciable, honest and hearty,
We'll all their Arts despise,
And Laugh at the Name of a Party.
SONG CLXV. The MIDSUMMER WIS^,
Set to M^sick by Mr. Ca^ey.
(...) me some s^ft and C^^^^ng Bre^ze,
(...) (...) inf^^'s Shad^ kind Retreat:
W^^^^ (...) Scenes, wide spre^^ing Trees,
^^^pil the ^aging D^g Star's Hear^,
Where ^^^ted G^^s^ and M^sly Beds,
Afford a r^tal calm R^p se^
Where Woodbires hang their dewey Heads,
And Fragrant sweets around diselese.
Old oozy Thames, that flows fast by,
Along the smiling Valley plays;
His glassy Surface chears the Eye,
And through the flowery Meadow strays.
His fertile Banks, with Herbage green,
His Vales with Golden Plenty swell:
Where ever his purer Stream is seen,
The Gods of Health and Pleasure dwell.
Let me thy clear, thy yielding Wave,
With naked Arm once more divide:
In thee my glowing Bosom Love,
And stem thy gently rolling Tide.
Lay me, with damask Roses crowned,
Beneath some Oziers dusky Shade:
Where Water Lillies paint the Ground,
And bubbling Springs refresh the Glace.
Let chaste Clarinda too be there,
With azure Mantle lightly Dressed:
Ye Nymphs, bind up her silken Hair,
Ye Ziphyrs, fan her painted Breast.
Oh! haste away, fair Maid, and bring,
The Muse, the kindly Friend to Love;
To thee alone the Muse shall sing,
And warble through the vocal Grove.
SONG CLXVI.
A BALLAD, by Mr Carey.
THOUGH cruel you seem to my Pain,
And hate me because I am true,
Yet Phillis you love a false Swain,
Who has other Nymphs in his View;
Enjoyments a Trisle to him,
To me what a Heaven would it be,
To him but a Woman you seem,
But ah, you're an Angel to me.
Those Lips which he touches in haste,
To them I for ever could grow,
Still clinging around that dear Waste,
Which he Spans as beside him you go,
That Hand like a Lilly so White,
Which over his Shoulders you lay;
My Bosom could warm it all Night,
My Lips they could press it all Day.
Were I like a Monarch to reign,
Were Graces my ^^bjects to be.
I Would leave 'em and fl^ to the Plains,
To dwell in a Cottage with thee,
But if I must feel your D^fdain,
If Tears cannot Cruelty drown,
O let me not Live in this Pain,
But give me my Death in a Frown.
SONG CLXVII.
SAD Musidora all in woe,
A silent Grotto seeks,
No more herself on Plains, does show,
But sighing thus she speaks;
Why was I born of a high Degree?
An humble Shepher^^is,
Had been ma^h Happier far for me,
Than all (...) gaudy Dress.
A semtuous Palace full of Joy,
^o ^e a Dangeon is,
And all that Mir^h does me a^noy,
Wh^^h other count for Blits:
Then lo^d in Grief the I vely Maid,
Retired from all the Throng,
And on a Bank recli^'d her Head,
While Tears ran trickling down.
SONG CIXVIII.
A SONG Set by Mr. Carey
SAW you the N^mph whom I adore:
Saw you the Goddess of my Heart,
And can you bid me Love ao more,
Or can you think I feel no Smart.
So many Charms around her shi^e,
Who can the Sweet Temptation fly,
Spite of her Scorn, she is so Divine,
That I m^st love her, though I Die.
SONG CLXIX. The KIND INCONSTANT.
Set to Music by Mr. Arne.
WHY Cloe still those Jealous Heart,
And why that falling Tear,
The Heart that to a Thousand beats
To one may be sincere;
To sweeten Autumns milder Reign,
The sultry Summers glows.
And chilling Dews and beating Rain.
Give freshness to the Rose.
So I my Cloe to endear,
To meauer Beauties ^^ray.
And call December to my Year,
To brighten up the May,
Then weep not that my Hearts inclined
To every Face that is new,
I wander to return more kind,
And change but to be true.
SONG CLXX. DAMON
Sung by Miss Thomas.
SURE Damon is the (...) Swain,
That ever trod the Lea;
His l^^nest Heart never gave me ^ain,
It ever dwells with me:
When ever I wander in the Grove,
He Is always in my Mind;
I think on all our former Love,
Damon the dear the kind.
When Evening comes we two repair,
To some cool, peaceful Shade,
There breath in private all our Care,
And toy upon the Glade,
If for my Share of Happiness,
Kind Heaven would him bestow,
With other Blessings, great or less,
Let all Mankind over flow.
SONG CLXXI. A TOUCH on the TIMES.
Set to Music by Mr. Arne.
COME Listen and Laugh at the Times,
Since Folly was never so ripe,
For every Man laughs at those Rhyme,
That gives his own Follies a Wipe,
We live in a kind of Disguise,
We Flatter we Lie and protest,
While each of us craftily try,
On others to fasten the Jest.
The Virgin, when first she is wooed,
Returns every Sigh with Disdain,
And while by her Lover pursued,
Can laugh at his Folly and Pain;
But when from her Innocence won,
And doomed for her Virtue to mourn.
When she feels herself lost and undone,
He laughs at the Fool in his Turn.
The Fools who at Law do contend,
Can laugh at each others Distress,
And while the dire Suit does depend,
Never think how their Substance grows less,
Till hampered by tedious Expense,
Alcho' to Compound they are loath.
The Lawyers sit Laughing at both.
But while we perceive it the Fashion,
For each Fool to Laugh at each other,
Let us strive with a generous Compassion,
To correct not contemn one another;
We all have some Follies to hide,
Which known, would dishonor the best,
And Life, when it is thoroughly tried,
Like Friendship, will seem but a Jest.
SONG CLXXII. Solicitude A PASTORAL.
Set to Music by Mr. Thomas.
WHY will you my Passion reprove,
Why term it a Folly to grieve,
E're I tell you the Charms of my Love,
She is fairer than you can believe;
With her Mien she enamours the Brave,
With her Wit she engages the Free:
With her Modesty pleases the Grave,
She is every way pleasing to me.
When Paridel tries in the Dance,
Some Favor with Phillis to find,
O, how, with one trivial Glance,
Might she ruin the peace of my Mind, Might she etc.
In Ringlets he dresses his Hair.
And his Crook is bestudded around,
And his Pipe Oh! may Phillis beware
Of a Magic there is in the Sound, Of a Magic etc.
Let his Crook be with Hyacinths bound,
So Phillis the Trophy despise;
Let his Forehead with Laurets be crowned,
So they Shine not in Phillis's Eyes, So they etc.
The Languge that flows from the Heart,
Is a Stranger to Paridel's Tongue,
Yet may she beware of his Art,
Or sure I must envy the Song, Or Sure etc.
SONG CLXXIII. The TEMPEST of WAR.
LET the Tempest of War,
Be heard from afar,
While the Trumpets, and Cannons, Alarms.
Let the Valleys around with Echo resound,
And a terrible Claspin of Arms.
Let Rivers of Blood run down in a Flood,
While Mortals are Gasping for Breath,
Let the Brave if they will.
By Honor and Skill,
Seek Glory and Conquest in Death.
To live safe and retire,
Is all my desire,
With my Flocks and my Cloe possessed:
For with them we obtain
True Peace, without Pain,
And a lasting Enjoyment of Rest.
In a Cottage, or Cell where Shepherds do dwell,
In Innocence Freedom and Ease:
We lead peaceable Lives who are blessed with good Wives,
That study their Husbands to please;
What Blessings below can Heaven Bestow,
Excelling, such quiet as this,
No Affliction come here no Grief interfere,
To lessen our Measure of Bliss.
SONG CLXXIV.
MY Banks they are furnished with (...),
Whose Murmur invites one to sleep;
My Grottos are shaded with Trees,
And my Hills are white-over with Sheep:
I seldom have met with a Loss,
Such Health do my Mountain bestow;
My Fountains all bordered with Moss,
Where the Hare bells and Violets grow.
I Have found out a Gift for m^ Fair,
I Have found where the Wood-Pidgeons Breed;
But let me that Plunder forbear,
She Will say 'twas a barbarous Deed,
He never could be true, she averd,
Who could rob a poor Bird of its Young,
And I loved her the more when I heard,
Such Tenderness fall from her Tongue.
But where does my Phillida stray;
And where are her Grots and her Bowers
Are the Groves and the Valleys as gay,
And the Shepherds, as gentle as ours:
The Groves may perhaps be as fair,
The Face of the Valleys as fine,
The Swains may in Manners compare,
But their Love is not equal to mine.
SONG CLXXV. VANITY OF LIFE.
LIFE how Vain esteemed a Blessing,
Worthy Mortals hope to Share;
Proves to ev'ey Man Possessing.
Full of Sorrow full of Care,
What if Furtune ever befriend,
Yes till the busy Friend prevails;
Or should adverse Fate attend,
Ye ever with it Sorrow dwells.
See the Beau in Chariot lolling,
All without a Gaudy Scene;
Take him on his Pillow rolling,
Slave to Tyrant Thought within,
Grant the fawning Courtier Favor,
Give him all his Hopes pursue;
Still you hear him Craving ever,
Still he Pines for something new.
Fill the Misers Bags with Treasure
Spread the Hero's Glory round,
Fears outweighs the Scale of Pleasure
Envy tramples Honor down,
Places, Titles, Pomp and Riches,
Sweets, embittered are by Pain,
Thus Experence daily teaches,
Life and it is Joys are vain.
SONG CLXXVI. A new SONG.
TO Fanny Fair I would impart,
The Cause of all my Woe,
That Beauty which has won my Heart;
She scarcely seems to know,
Unskilled in Arts of Woman kind,
Without Designs she Charms;
How can the Sparkling Eye be Blind,
Which every Bosom Warms.
Which every Bosom Warms.
She knows her Power it is all Deceit
Her Conscious Blushing shows,
That Blushing to the Eye more sweet
Than opening Budding Rose,
But the delicious Fragrant Rose,
That Charms the Sense so much,
Upon a Thorny Brier grows,
And Wounds when ever you touch
And Wounds etc.
So when I first beheld the Fair,
With Raptures I was blessed,
But when I would approach too near
^^ce I lost all Rest,
^enchanting Sight the sweet furprize
Prepair'd me for my Doom,
And one cold Look from those bright Eyes
Would lay me in my Tomb,
Would lay me etc.
SONG CLXXVII. DISAPPOINTMENT A PASTOWAL.
YE Shepherds give Ear to my Lay,
And take no more He^d of my Sho^p,
They have nothing to do but to Stray;
I have nothing to do but to Weep,
Yet do not my Foll^ reprove,
She was fair and my ^as^ion begun,
She smiled and I could not but Love,
She was faithless and I am undone.
The Sweets of a Dew sprink'ed Rose,
The Sound of a murmuring Stream,
The Peace which from Solitude flows,
Henceforth shall be Coridon's Theme,
High Transports are shown to the Sight,
But we are not to find them our own,
Fate never bestowed such Delight,
As I with my Phillis had known.
Ye Woods spread your Branches a Pace,
To your deepest Recesses I Fly,
I would hide with the Bea^ls of the Chase,
I would vanish from every Lie,
Yet my Reed shall resou^d through the Grove,
With the same sad Complaint it begun,
How she smiled and I could not but love,
Was faithless and I am undone.
SONG CLXXVIII. Sung at Vauxhall.
SURE Sally is the loveliest Lass,
That ever gave Shepherd Glee:
Not May Day in it is Mo^ning Dress,
Is half so fair as she:
Let Poets paint the Paphian Queen,
And fancied Forms adone;
Ye Bards had ye my Sally seen,
You Would think on those no more.
No more ye'd prate of Hybla's Hill,
Where B^es their Honey sip.
Did ye but know the Sweets that dwell
On (...) ^^ve-taught Lip:
But, ah! take Fl^^d ye tuneful Swains,
The ripe Temp^^ion shu^;
Or else like me you will wear her Chains,
Like me you will be uncone.
Once in my Cot secure I slept,
And ^ark like hai^'d the Morn;
More i^or^i^e than the Kid I kept,
I wantoned over the Lawn:
To every Maid Love tales I told,
And did my Truth aver;
Yet ever the parting Kiss was cold
I laughed at Love and her.
But now the glomy Grove I seek,
Where Love-^orn Shepherds stray;
There to she Winds my Grief I speak,
And sigh my Soul away:
Naught but Despair my Fancy paints,
No Dawn of Hope I see:
For Sally's pleased with my Complaints,
And Laughts at Love and me.
Since these my poor neglected Lambs,
So late my only Care,
Have lost their tender fleecy Dams,
And strayed I know not where:
Alas! my Ews, in vain ^e bleat;
My Lambkins lost, adieu;
No more we on the Plains shall meet,
For lost's your Shepherd too.
SONG CLXXIX.
YOU tell me I Am Handsome, I know not how true,
And Easy and Cha^ty, and good H^mour'd too.
That my ^^ps are as red as the Rose-bud in June,
And my Voice, like the Nightingale's sweetly in Tune;
All this has been told me by twenty before,
But he that would win me must Flatter me more.
But he that would win me must Flatter me more.
It Beauty from Virtue ^eceive no Supply,
Or Pra^tle from Prudence, how wanting am I?
My Ease and good Humor short Raptures will bring;
My Voice, like the Nightingale's knows but a Spring;
For Charms such as these then ^our Praises give over,
To love me for Life, you must love me still more.
To love me, etc.
Then talk not to me of a Shape or an Air,
For Chloe the wanton can ^ivial me there;
It Is Virtue alone that makes Beauty lock gay,
And brightens good Humor as Sunshine the Day:
For that, if you love me, your Flame may be true,
And I, in my Turn, may be taught to love too.
And I, in my Turn, may be taught to love too.
SONG CLXXX. To DELIA.
Set by Mr. Arne.
^OFT pleasing Pains, ^^known before,
My beating Bosom ^eels,
When I behold the bliss^ul Lower
Where dearest Delia dwells,
That Way I daily drive my Flock;
Ah! happy, happy Vale!
Th^re look, and wish; and while I look
My Sighs increase the Gale.
My Sighs increase the Gale.
Sometimes at Midnight I do stray
Beneath inclement Skies,
And there my true Devotion pay
To D^lia's sleep-seal'd E^e^,
So pious Pilgrims nigh^y roam,
With tedious Travel faint,
To kiss alone the Clay-cold Tomb
Of some loved sav'rite Saint.
Of some, etc.
O tell, ye Shades, that fold my Fair,
And all my Bliss contain,
Ah! why should ye those Blessings share,
For which I sigh in vain:
But let me not at Fate repine,
And thus my Griefs impart;
She Is not your Tenant; -- she is mine:
Her Mansion is my Heart.
Her Mansion is my Heart.
SONG CLXXXI. A new SCOTCH SONG
SAW ye John a coming, quoth she;
Saw ye John a coming,
Wi his Blue Bonnet on his Head,
And his Doggy running,
Wi his Blue Bonnet on his Head,
And his Doggy running,
Saw ye John a coming, quoth she;
Saw ye John a coming.
Oh! how weel I Loo him, quoth she,
Oh! how weel I Loo him,
For he is a bonny Lad,
Aw a weel doing,
For he is a bonny Lad,
And a weel doing,
Oh! etc.
If ye donna see him Father,
If ye donna see him,
Ise gird my Coat about my Waist
And Ise gang wi him,
Ise gird my Coat about my Waist
And Ise gang wi him,
If ye etc.
Fee him Father, fee him, quoth she,
Fee him Father, fee him,
For a the Work about the House
Gangs forward when I see him,
For a the Work about the House
Gangs forward when I see him,
Fee him etc.
What Mun I do wi him quoth he
What Mun I do wi him him,
He Is near a Sark unteel his Back,
Nor ha I ean to gi him,
He Is near a Sark unteel his Back,
Nor ha I ean to give him,
What Mun etc.
He Will muck the Byer Trash ith Barn,
And Lig wi me at Even,
I ha two Sarks within my Kest,
The best othem I se gi him
I ha two Sarks within my Kest,
The best othem I se gi him
And I will make his Bed at Even
And Lig dawn wi him.
SONG CLXXXII. The MAIDENS CASE
Sung by Miss Thomas.
AT the Foot of a Hill in a neat lonely Cot,
To die an old Maid I Am afraid is my Lot;
Not a Man but my Father ever seen in the Place,
Think how hard my Condition and pity my Case.
Think how hard my Condition and pity my Case.
Young Willy. the Pride of the Plains, I adore;
He Is Handsome, good Humored, his Ri^nes in Store;
But I Am a poor Damsel, of Parentage base;
Think how hard my Condition, and pity my Case.
Think how hard, etc.
My Mother once caught us alone in the Dark,
She chil me, and forced me away from my Spark;
Then talked much of Sorrow, of Shame, and Disgrace,
Think how hard my Condition, and pity my Case.
Think how hard, etc.
Such a strange Alteration has seized me of late,
Like a Turtle I mourn all the Day for my Mate;
At Night in my Dreams his blessed Image I trace,
Think how hard my Condition and pity my Case.
Think how hard, etc.
When ever I think of him, I sigh and look pale;
My Mother she asks me, what is it I ail?
My rural Companions all look in my Face,
And in friendly Compassion they pity my Case.
And in friendly, etc.
Oh Hymen! be kind, and give Ear to my Sighs.
Restore my young Shepherd once more to my Eyes;
The dear nuptial Moment with Joy I Will embrace,
And Maidens shall envy, not pity my Case.
And Maidens shall envy, not pity my Case.
SONG CLXXXIII. NOTHING NEW,
YOU may talk as you will of new Modes and new Fashions,
Which whimsical Fancies have ever in view;
You may laugh at new Fo^^e^ and rail at new Passions,
But look all around you and nothing is new.
Nothing nothing nothing is new.
That Virgins are whimsical, fickle and coy,
A^^ecting to shun what they ^o^^^y p^ri^e,
Coquetting, yet sighing for conjugal Joy;
Confess, O! ye Lovers, is this Folly new?
Confess, confess is this Folly new?
That Ladies are Rakes, and turn Gamesters, that is worse,
And have naught but Intrigue, and Diversion in View,
With Loss of ch^ir Virtue re^^eining their Purse,
Is a Nations disgrace, and I wish it were new.
I wish I wish I wish i^ were new.
That Frenchmen are Robbers and Bravos in War,
But, drub'd it to Mann^r, their I s^le^ (...)
That they sculk into H^les from the b^^^ (...) Tar,
And lower their ^opsais, i^ not a^a^ll ^^w.
Not new not new is not at all new.
That the Hero of P^^ssia victoriousl^ (...),
From Corquest, to Conquest, ever thou^^^^ with sew,
That Vienna is faithless to all her Am^^,
Let England proclaim, who has proved i^ not new.
Not new not new who has proved it not new.
Let Britons unite and be wise as they are brave,
And bid to Contention and Faction adieu;
Then Glory shall crown them as ^ords of the Wave,
And their Conquests of Old, be s^rpass'd by the new.
Surpassed surpassed surpassed by the new.
SONG CLXXXIV.
Set by Mr. Arne, Sung at Ranelagh.
YE true horest Britons, who love your own Land,
Whese S^tes were so b^ave, so Victorious and free,
Who always beat France when they tock her in Hand,
Come join, honest Britons, in Chorus with me;
Come join, honest Britons, in Chorus with me.
Let us sing our own Treasures Old England's good Cheer,
The P^ofits and Pleasures of stout British Beer;
Your Wine-(...) D^^m^sipping Fellows, retreat,
But your (...) ^^^ons can never be beat.
But you^, etc.
The French with their Vineyards are meagre and pale,
They drink of the Squeezings of half ripened Fruit;
But we who have Hop-grounds to mellow our Ale;
Are rosy and plump, and have Freedom to Boot:
Let us sing, etc.
Should the French dare invade us thus armed with our Poles'
We'll bang their bare Ribs make their Lanthorn Jaws ring;
For your Beef-eating, Beer-drinking Britons are Souls;
Who will shed their last Drop for their Country and King.
Let us sing, etc.
SONG CLXXXV. The JOVIAL FELLOW.
SINCE Life is a Bubble,
It Is Folly to trouble,
Our Brains with what damps every Pleasure,
Then banish dull Thinking,
It Is Love Joy and Drinking,
Alone can make Life and Treasure.
Since our Time is so short,
We'll grasp every Sport,
And still let us be frolic and Gay
Why should we incumber,
With Cares our vain Slumber,
It Is Wisdom to live whilst we may.
Here Is Gold-Misers stiffle
And hoard the gay Triffle,
But we'll make the Slave do it is Duty
It orly Dispences,
True bliss to our Senses,
When it purchasses Nectar and Beauty.
Then push round the Glass,
The soft melting La^^,
Succeeds it to make you more blessed,
Our Joys shall be common.
In wealth Wine and Woman,
Each Pleasure of Life is possessed.
SONG CLXXXVI.
WHEN first we see the Ruddy,
Sun rise from an Eastern Hill;
We look upon him with Delight,
And safely gaze our fill.
But when with Noontide Rays he shines,
The glating Light we shun,
It hurts our feeble Eyes to View,
The Sun's Meridian.
Thus when in wrapping Gown you rise
To face the Morning's Cold,
It Is perfect Rapture to approach
You Are Heaven to behold.
But when at Midday gayly dressed
In Gold and Gems you shine,
The Splender of the Sun is fair;
Less dangerous than thine.
He must be more than Man that dare,
To view a Face so Bright,
For he will loose both Eyes and Heart.
With the too Glorious Sight.
SONG CLXXXVII.
Sung by Mis, Young.
WHERE the Primrose decks thee well,
Where the Moon eyed fairest dwell,
Near the Solitary Thorn;
There I hail the gray e^'d Morn,
Where the Brook slow winding glides,
Round the Mountains steril sides,
There my Vagrant Footsteps stray,
Till the servant Noon of Day.
Over the spreading Lawn, and Vale,
Through the Copse I chant my Tale;
Nor the Shady Thicket leave,
Till bright Vesper brings the Eve,
While the Village Milk maid Sings,
While the solemn Curfew rings,
While the Plowman whistles home,
Ah! how pensive do I roam.
SONG CLXXXVIII. The WIT and BEAU.
WITH every Grace young Strephon,
Chose his Person to adorn,
That by the Beauties of his Face;
In Sylvias Love he might find Place,
And wondered at her Scorn.
With Bows and Smiles he did his Part,
But Oh! 'twas all in vain,
A Youth less fi^e a Youth of Art,
Had talked himself into her Heart,
And would not out again.
With Change of Habits Strephon pressed,
And urged her to Admire;
His Love alone the other dressed,
As Verse or Frose became it best,
And moved her soft Desire.
This found his Courtship Strephon ends,
Or makes it to his Glass;
There in himself now seeks Amends,
Convinced that where a wit Pretends,
A Beau is but an Ass.
SONG CLXXXIX.
PHILLIS we don't grieve that Nature,
Forming you has done her Part,
And in every single Feature,
S^ew'd the utmost of her Art.
But in this it is pretended,
All the cruel Grievance ^ies,
That your Heart should be defended,
While you wound us with your Eyes.
Love's a senseless Inclination,
Where no Mercy's to be found,
But is just where kind Compassion,
Gives us Balm to Heal the Wound.
Persian's paying solemn Duty,
To the rising Sun inclined,
Never would adore his Beauty,
But in hopes to make him kind.
SONG CXC. HIGH-LIFE below STAIRS.
COME here, fellow Servants, and lislen to me,
I Will show you how those of superior Degree,
Are only Dependents, no better than we.
Are only Dependents, no better than we.
Both high and low in this do agree.
It Is here, fellow Servant, and there, fellow Servant, and all in a ^ivery.
It Is here, fellow Servant, and there, fellow Servant, and all in a Livery, all
in a Livery.
See yonder fine Spark in Embroidery dre^l,
Who bows to the Great, and it the^^ smile, is blessed;
What is he, in faith. but a Servant at best.
Cho. Both High, etc.

Nature made all alike, no Distinction she craves,
So we laugh at the great World, i^s Fools and its ^naves;
For we are all Servants, but they are all S^aves.
Both high, etc.

The fat shining Glatton looks up to his Shelf,
The wrinkled lean Miser bows down to his Pelf,
And the C^rl-pa^ed Beau (...) a Slave to himself.
Both high, etc.

The gay sparkling Belle, who the whole Town Alarms,
And with Eyes, Lips, and Neck, sets the Smarts all in Arms,
Is a Vassal herself, a mere Drudge to her Charms.
Both high, etc.

Then we'll drink like our Betters, and laugh, sing, and love;
And when sick of one Place, to another we'll move,
For with Little and Great, the best Joy is to rove.
Both high, etc.

SONG. CXCI. A favorite SONG.
COME Damon come Oh! haste away,
Now youthful Spring appears.
And Phoebus with refulgent Ray,
Relenting Nature Cheers:
Verdant Nature the Fields and Bowers,
By genial Warmth bestor'd.
Whilst soft refreshing verdant Showr's,
Their friendly Aid afford.
As when worn down with Toils and Cares,
We gentle Sleep require,
Indulgent Sleep our Wants repairs,
And does new Life inspire,
So Winter's Frosts are chased away,
By Sols enlivening Po^^
Which kindly over all Nature strays,
Revives each Plant and Flower.
The Primrose sweet and Cowslips too,
Bedecks the lovely Green,
Where e're we turn and take a View,
Kind Nature's Smiles are seen:
In wanton Pla^ the sportive Lambs,
On Meadows frisk it over,
Or feeding with their bleeting Dams,
There choicest Grass explore.
The whistling Thrash with pleasing Note,
Now welcomes in the Morn,
And gaily swells his tuneful Throat,
This Season to adorn:
Soon as the Sun begins to rise,
The warbling Larks repair,
And soaring mount to distant Skies,
And sport in Fields of Air.
Midst lonely Woods and silent Bowr's,
When Sol in West retreats,
In Plaintive Notes poor Philomel,
Her Evening I'ale repeats,
Then we'll together every Day,
Over Flowery Meadows rove,
Or whilst soft gentle Zephrus play,
Frequent the shady Grove,
There we will tell sweet Tales of Love,
There Cupid's Force I Will own,
Invoke each gentle Power above,
My Bliss with thee to crown,
As from each Harm, the artful Swains,
Secure their fleecy Care,
So will kind Heaven while Life remains,
Preserve a faithful Pair.
SONG CXCII. It Is TIME enough YE^.
A Term full as long as the Siege of old T^^^.
To win a sweet Girl I my Time did employ.
Often urged her the Day of our Marriage to set,
As often she answered, it is Time enough yet.
Time enough yet, etc.

I told her, at last, that her Passions were wrong,
And more, that I scorned to be fooled with so long,
She burst out laughing at seeing me fr^t,
And humming a Tune, cried, it is Time enough yet.
Time enough yet, etc.

Determined by her, to be laughed at no more,
I flew from her Presence, and bounc'd out of Door,
Resolved of her Usage the better to get,
Or on her my Eyes again never to set.
Never to set, etc.

To me the next Morning her Maid came in haste,
And begged, for Love sake, I Would forget what was past,
Declared her young Lady did nothing but fret;
I told her I Would think on it, 'twas Time enough yet.
Time enough yet, etc.

She next in a Letter, as long as my Arm,
Declared, from her Soul, she intended no Harm,
And begged I the Day for our Marriage would set,
I wrote her an Answer, it is Time enough yet,
Time enough yet, etc.

But that was scarce gone when a Message was sent,
To show in my Heart I began to relent,
I begged I might see her; together we met,
We kissed and were Friends again, so we are yet.
So we are yet, etc.

SONG CXCIII.
SINCE we went out a Maying, too late can I find,
Young Harry has run Day and Night in my Mind;
He Is grown so bewitching as never before:
For I find that I love him each Time more and more.
For I find that I love him each Time more and more.
Each Morning his Face with what Pleasure I see,
Not my own at the Glass is so handsome to me:
I am so vexed I could cry, when his Visit is over,
Nor help, if I would, but must love more and more,
Nor help, if I would, etc.
He Would have me to sing to him all the Day long,
And says mine is as sweet as the Nightingale's Song;
Such Praises as these I had never before,
I Am sure that he loves me, though him I love more.
I Am sure that he loves me, etc.
When my Mother was gone, with Love in his Look,
He begged for one Kiss, but how many he took!
I asked why so sice, who was never so before?
He blushed, and then promised to do so no more.
He blushed, and then promised, etc.
How I wished the dear Shepherd, for Life, was all mine!
I should have no Occasion to Chide or to Pine;
Then Harry my Lips may with Kisses run over,
And I Will try, if it can be, to love him still more;
And I Will try, if it can be, to love him still more.
SONG CXCIV. Sung at Vauxhall.
FROM sweet bewitching Tricks of Love,
Young Men, your Hearts secure,
Lest from the Paths of Sense you rove,
In Dotage premature.
In Dotage premature.
Look at each Lass through Wisdom's Glass,
Nor trust the naked Eye:
Gallants, beware, look sharp, take care;
The Blind eat many a Fly.
The Blind eat many a Fly.
Not only on their Hands and N^cks
The borrowed white you will find;
Some Belles, when Interest directs;
Can even paint the Mind.
Can even paint the Mind.
Joy and Distress they can express;
Their very Tears can lie.
Gallant beware, etc.
There Is not a Spinster in the Re^^^^
But all Mankind can cheat,
Down to the Cottage from the Helm,
The learned, the brave, the great.
The learned, the brave, the great.
With lovely Looks, and golden Hooks,
T'entangle us they try.
Gallants beware, etc.
Could we with Ink the Ocean fill;
Was Earth of Parchment made;
Was every single Stick a Quill,
Each Man a Scribe by Trade.
Each Man a Scribe by Trade.
To write the Tricks of half the Sex
Would suck that Ocean dry:
Gallants beware, look sharp, take care;
The Blind eat many a Fly.
The Blind eat many a Fly.
SONG CXCV. The ACCIDENT,
AS the other Day Milking I sat in the Vale,
Young Damon came up to address his soft Tale,
So sudden I started up and gave him a Frown,
For he frighted my Cow and my Milk was kicked down.
Oh! bless me! says I, what the Duce can you mean,
To come thus upon one unthought unseen,
I never approve of the Love you pretend,
For as Mischief begins, perhaps Mischief may end.
I little thought now he would his Passion advance,
But pretty Excuses made up the Mischance,
He begged a kind Kiss which I granted I vow,
And I laid my own self, the whole Fault on the Cow,
How many Ways Love can the Bosoom invade,
His Art proved to strong for an innocent Maid,
He hinted that Wedlock was what he would be at,
But I thought it was best to say nothing to that,
I flutter all over when ever he comes nigh,
For if he should press I shall surely comply,
And never shall be angry, my Heart itself tells,
Though he flings down my Milk -- or does any thing else.
SONG CXCVI.
WHEN Trees did bud and Fields were green,
And Flowers were fair to see,
When Mary was scarce fifteen,
And Love laughed in her Eye.
Blithe Jockey's Looks her Heart did move,
To speak her Mind thus free,
Gang down the Burn my gentle Love,
And soon I Will follow thee.
Now Jockey did each Lad surpass,
That dwells on this Burn Side,
And Mary was a bouny Lass,
Just meet to be a Bride,
Her Cheeks were rosy red and white,
Her Eyes were azure blue,
Her Looks were like Aurora bright,
Her Lips like dropping Dew.
What passed I guess was harmless Play
And nothing sure unmeet,
For ganging Home I heard them say,
They tik'd a Walk so sweet.
His Cheek to hers he fondly laid,
She cried sweet Love be true,
And when a Wife as now a Maid,
To Death I Will follow you.
SONG CXCVII. JENNY.
NO Lass on famed Hiberrigs Plains,
Where Beauty all triumphant reigns,
Dear Jenny can cut vie.
Her a^^less Charms no Muse can tell,
Nor can the rising Sun excel,
The Radiance of her Eyes,
Unnumber'd Graces round her move,
At once inspiring awe and Love,
How Heavenly is her Smile,
W^^ what bewitching Mein,
Not to be told or safely seen,
She can the Hours beguile.
Good Nature Cheerfulness and Ease,
Improve the fair ones Power to please
Which no vain Pride destroys,
While meaner Beauties gain by Arts,
Of vulgar Growth the Coxcombs Hearts
The Scorns the worthless Toys,
Behold my Muse and tell the fair,
No tincel Charms can ever ensnare,
A Heart that is worth the Pains,
A short lived Flame indeed may raise,
Which rapid as it grows decays,
And scarce a Day remains.
But would you fix the constant Love,
Of Swains who Worth and Sense approve,
Pursue my Jenny's Plan,
No other Way you can succeed,
For though you may the Fopling lead,
You Will never secure the Man.
SONG CXCVIII.
A LEXIS, a pretty young Swain,
To court me comes many a Mile;
I bid him make haste back again,
Though I wished him to stay a great While:
With all by which Love is expressed,
He studies my Heart to beguile;
I wish him Success I protest,
But I tell him he will wait a great While.
He brought me a Nosegay Today,
And vowed 'twas more Pleasure than Toil;
I took it I safely can say,
And I let him not ask a great While;
He begged me to grant him a Kiss,
So earnest he made me to Smile,
Have done, I cried, fie, it is amiss,
But I wished it to last a great While.
He tells me I ought to be kind,
That Time all my Beauties will soil;
I cross him, though quite of his Mind,
For I love him to talk a great While:
I think such sweet Things he has said,
My Coyness at last he will spoil;
And when he once asks me to wed,
Oh! I Will not live a Maid a great While.
SONG CXCIX. The HONEY MOON.
AS May in all her youthful Dress,
So gay my Love did once appear;
A Spring of Charms adorned her Face,
The Rose and Lilly flourished there:
Thus, while the Enjoyment was young,
Each Night new Pleasures did create;
Ambrosial Words dropped from her Tongue,
And amorous Cupid, round did wait.
But, as the Sun to West declines,
The eastern Sky does colder grow,
And all his radiant Looks resigns
To the pale Moon, that rules below;
So Love, while in her blooming Hour,
My Chloe was all kind and gay;
But when Possession nip'd that Flower,
Her Charms, like Autumn, dropped away.
SONG CC. The ROVER.
IN all the Sex some Charms I find;
I love to try all Womankind,
The Fair, the Smart, the Witty.
The Fair, the Smart, the Witty
In Cupid's Fetters, most severe,
I languish'd out a long, long Year,
The Slave of wanton Kitty.
The Slave of wanton Kitty.
At length I broke the galling Chain,
And swore that Love was endless Pain,
One constant Scene of Folly.
One constant, etc.
I vowed no more to wear the Yoke:
But soon I felt a second Stroke,
And sighed for blue-ey'd Molly.
And sighed, etc.
With Tresses next of flaxen Hue,
Young Jenny did my Soul subdue,
That lives in yonder Valley.
That lives, etc.
Then Cupid threw another Snare,
And caught me in the curling Hair
Of little tempting Sally.
Of little, etc.
Adorned with Charms, though blithe and young,
My roving Heart from Bondage sprung,
This Heart of yielding Mettle,
This Heart of yielding Mettle.
And now it wanders here and there,
By Turns the Prize of brown and fair,
But never more will settle.
But never more will settle.
SONG CCI. The SHEPHERDESS.
I SEEK my Shepherd gone astray,
He left our Cot the other Day,
Tell me ye gentle Nymphs and Swain^,
Passed the dear Rebel through your Plains^
Oh! whither, whither, must I roam,
To find and charm the Wanderer Home?
Sports he upon the shaven Green,
Or joys he in the Mountain Scene,
Leads he his Flocks along the Mead,
Or does he seek the cooler Shade?
Oh! teach a wretched Nymph the W^^
To find her Love gone astray.
To paint, ye Maids, my truant Swain
A manly Softness crowns his Mien;
Adonis was not half so fair;
And when he talks it is Heaven to hear
But oh! the soothing Poison shun,
To listen, is to be undone.
He Will swear no Time shall quench his Flame,
To me the Perjured swore the same;
Too fondly loving to be Wise,
Who gave my Heart an easy Prize;
And when he turned his Siren Voice,
Listened, and was undone by Choice.
But sated now he shuns the Kiss,
He counted once his greatest Bliss;
Whilst I with fiercer Passions burn,
And pant and die for his Return.
Oh! whither, whither shall I rove
Again to find my straying Love?
SONG CCII. The MEN will ROMANCE.
WHEN I entered my Teens, and threw Playthings aside,
I conceived myself Woman, and fit for a Bride,
By the Men I was flattered, my Pride to enhance,
For the Maids will believe, and the Men will romance.
They swore that my Eyes the bright Di'mond excelled,
Such a Face and such Tresses, sure never were beheld!
That to gaze on my Neck was all Rapture and Trance!
Oh! the Maids will believe, and the Men will romance.
Young Polydore saw me one Night at the Ball,
And swore to my Charms he a Conquest must fall;
On his Knees he entreated my Hand for a Dance,
Ah! the Maids will believe, and the Men will romance.
He conducted me home, when the Pastime was over;
And declared he never saw so much Beauty before,
He ogled and sighed, as he saw me advance.
Ah! the Maids will believe, and the Men will romance.
Then Day after Day I his Company had,
At length he declared all his Flame to my Dad;
But my Father loved Money, and would not advance,
And replied to my Lover, young Men will romance.
But though my Papa would not give us a Shilling,
My Polydore swore he to wed me was willing;
So to Church we both went, and at Night had a Dance,
And believe me my Polydore did not romance.
SONG CCIII.
Set by Mr. Howard.
YOUNG Roger of the Mill, one Morning very soon,
Put on his best Apparel, his Horse and clouted Shoon,
And he a wooing went to bonny buxom Nell;
Adzooks, cries he, could fancy me? I like the wondrous well, I like thee
wondrous well.
My Horses I have dressed, and given them Corn and Hay,
Put on my best Apparel; and, having come this Way,
Let Us sit and chat a While with thee, my bonny Nell:
Adzooks, cries he, could fancy me? I like thy Person well, I like thy
Person well.
Young Roger, your mistaken, the Damsel then replied;
I am not in such Haste to be a Plowman's Bride:
Know, I then live in hopes to wed a Farmer's Son:
If it be so, says Hodge, I Will go; sweet Mistress, I have done; sweet Mistress,
I have done.
Your Horses you have dressed, as I have heard you say:
Put on your best Apparel; and having come this Way,
Come sit and chat a While: O no indeed, not I;
I Will neither wait, nor chat, nor prate; I Have other Fish to fry, I Have other
Fish to fry.
Go take your Farmer's Son, with all my honest Heart,
What though my Name be Roger, that goes to Plow and Cart,
I need not tarry long, e're I do gain a Wife;
There Is buxom Joan, it is well known, she loves me as her Life, she loves me
as her Life.
Pray what of buxom Joan? cannot I please you as well?
For she has never a Penny, and I am bouncing Nell,
And I have fifty Shillings. The Money made him smiler
O then, my dear, I Will draw a Chair, and chat with thee a While, and chat with
thee a While.
Within an Half-hour's Space, these two a Bargain struck;
I hope then with the Money they both may have good Luck:
I Have forty Shillings more, with which a Cow we'll buy;
We'll join our Hands in Wedlock's Bands; then who but you and I; then who but
you and I?
SONG CCIV.
NOW the Snow-drops lift their Heads,
Cowslips rise from dewy Beds;
Silver Lillies paint the Grove,
Welcome May, and welcome Love.
Now the Be, with pliant Wings,
Flowery Spoils, unwearied brings;
Spoils, that Nymphs, and Swains approve,
Soft as May, and sweet as Love.
Whilst a down the slopy Hills,
Trickle of the purling Rills;
Balmy Sweets perfume the Grove,
May unbends the Soul to Love.
Long the Icy Maid denies,
Nor regards her Shepherd's Sighs;
Now your fond Petitions move.
May's the Season formed for Love.
On the Fair that decks our Isle,
May each Grace, each Virtue smile;
And our happy Shepherds prove,
Days of Ease, and Nights of Love.
SONG CCV. A BALLAD in the Modern Taste.
Set by Mr. Arne.
ONE Morning young Roger accosted me thus,
Come here, pretty Maiden, and give me a Buss;
Law Fellow, said I, mind your Plough and your Cart
Yes, I thank you for nothing, with all my Heart.
Well, then to be besure, he grew civil enough,
He gave me a Box with a Paper of Souff;
I took it, I own, yet had still so much Art.
To cry, thank you for nothing, with all my Heart.
He said, if so be, he might make me his Wife,
Good Friends, I was never so dashed in my Life;
Yet could not help laughing to see the Fool start.
When I thanked him for nothing with all my Heart.
Soon after, however, he gained my Consent,
And with him one Sunday to Chapel I went,
But said 'twas my goodness, more than his Desert,
Not to thank him for nothing with all my Heart.
The Parson cried, Child, you must after me say,
And then talked of Honor, and Love and Obey;
But faith, when his Reverence came to that Part,
There I thank him for nothing with all my Heart.
At Night our Sr^k Neighbors the Stocking would threw
I must not tell l^a^es, but I know what I know;
Young Roger concesses I cured all his Smart,
And I marked him for something with all my Heart.
SONG CCVI.
LOVE, then Bare of soft Content
Love, thou in auspicious Guest;
Say, say, oh! why thy Shaft was sent
To this once my peaceful Breast:
Sweet as first I thought the Passion,
Fancy still new Joys could see;
But now how sad an Alteration,
Damon flies from Love and me.
Thus Sylvia in the conscious Grove,
All sweetly plantive mourned,
When Damon chanced that Way to rove,
And to the Nymph returned:
He sighed Repentance at her Feet,
She smiled upon the Swain;
And each fond Heart responsive beat
To Love and Joy again.
SONG CCVII.
PREACH not to me your musty Rules,
Ye Drones that mould in idle Cell;
The Heart is wiser than the Schools,
The Senses always reason well:
If short my Span, I less can spare,
To pass one single Pleasure by;
An Hour is long, if lost in Care,
They only live, who Life enjoy.
SONG CCVIII.
HOW blithe was I each Morn to see,
My Swain come over the Hill;
He leaped the Brook, and flew to me,
I met him with good Will:
I neither wanted Ewe nor Lamb,
When his Flocks near me lay;
He gathered in my Sheep at Night,
And cheered me all the Day.
Oh! the Broom, the bonny Broom,
Where lost was my Repose,
I with I was with my dear Swain
With his Pipe and my Ewes.
He tuned his Pipe and Reed so sweet,
The Birds stood listening by;
The fleecy Flock stood still and gazed,
Charmed with his Melody:
While thus we spent our Time by Turns,
Betwixt our Flocks and Play,
I envied not the fairest Dame,
Though ever so rich and gay.
Oh! the Broom, etc.
He did oblige me every Hour,
Could I but faithful be;
He stole my Heart, could I refuse
Whatever he asked of me:
Hard Fate that I must banished be,
Gang heavily and monrn,
Because I loved the kindest Swain
That ever yet was born.
Oh! the Broom, the bonny Broom,
Where lost was my Repose,
I wish I was with my dear Swain,
With his Pipe and my Ewes.
SONG CCIX.
Set by Mr. Baildon,
HARK; the Birds begin their Lay,
Flowerets deck the Robe of May;
See the little Lambkins bound,
Playful over the Clover-ground:
While the Heifers sportive low,
Where the yellow Cowslips blow.
Now the Nymphs and Swains advance,
Over the lawn in perfect Dance;
Garlands from the Hawthorn Bough,
Grace the happy Shepherd's Brow;
While the Lasses, in Array,
Wait upon the Queen of May.
^nnocence, Content and Love,
Fill the Meadows and the Grove;
Mirth that never wears a Frown,
Health with Sweetness all her own;
Labor puts on Pleasure's Smile,
And pale Care forgets his Toil.
Ah! what Pleasure Shepherds know,
Monarchs cannot such bestow;
Love improves each happy Hour,
Grandeur has not such in Store;
Learn, Ambition, learn from hence,
Happiness is Innocence.
SONG CCX.
ASK if yon Damask Rose is sweet
That scents the ambient Air;
Then ask each Shepherd that you meet,
If dear Susanna's fair.
Say, will the Vulture quit his Prey,
And warble through the Grove;
Bid wanton Linnets quit the Spray,
Then doubt thy Shepherd's Love.
The Spoils of War let Heroes share,
Let Pride in Splendor shine;
Ye Bards unenvied Laurels wear,
Be fair Susanna mine.
SONG CCXI. A new DIALOGUE.
DEAREST Dapne turn thine Eyes,
Jocund Day begins to rise;
See the Morn with Roses crowned,
Sprinkling Dew-drops on the Ground:
Love invites to yonder Grove,
Where only Lovers dare to rove;
Let us haste, make no delay,
Cupid's Call we must obey;
Let us haste, make no Delay,
Cupid's Call we must obey.

She. Ah! Philander, I Am afraid:
There poor Laura was betrayed
By young Strephon's subtle Wiles,
Soothing Words, and artful Smiles:
Simple Maids are soon undone,
When their simple Hearts are won:
Press me not, I must away,
And Honor's strict Commands obey:
Press me not, etc.

He. Gentle Daphne, fear not you,
I Will be ever kind and true;
Think no more on Laura's Fate,
View yon Turtle and it is Mate;
See how freely they impart
The Impulse of each other's Heart:
Like them, my Fair, let us sport and play.
Nature prompts us to obey.
Like them, etc.

She. Shepherd, I perceive your Aim,
You and Strephon are the same;
You like him would me betray,
Should I trust what ever you say.

He. If Daphne doubts, let Hymen's Bands
This Instant join our willing Hands.

She. The Invitation I obey,
And Love with Honor will repay:
The Invitation, etc.

Both. No longer then the Moments waste,
But to the Altar let us haste,
But to the Alter let us haste:
The Invitation we obey,
And Love with Honor each repay,
The Invitation we obey,
And Love with Honor each repay.

SONG CCXII. Sung in LETHE
YE Mortals, whom Fancies and Troubl^ perpler.
Whom Folly misguides, and Infi^m^es vex;
Whese Lives hardly know what it is to be best;
Who rise without Joy, and lie down without Rest:
Obey the glad Summons, to Lethe repair,
Drink deep of the Stream, and forget all your Care.
Old Maids shall forget what they wish for in vain,
And young ones the Rover they cannot regain;
The Rake shall forget how last Night he was cloyed.
And Chloe again be with Passion enjoyed;
Obey then the Summons, to Lethe repair.
And drink an Oblivion to Trouble and Care.
The Wife at one Draught may forget all her Wants,
Or drench her fond Fool to forget her Gallants;
The troubled in Mind shall go cheerful away,
And Yesterday's Wretch be quite happy to-cay;
Obey then the Summons, to Lethe repair,
Drink deep of the Stream, and forget all your Care.
SONG CCXIII. The SHEEP SHEARING.
COME, my good Shepherds, our Flocks we must shear;
In your Holiday Suits with your hasses appear:
The happiest of Folks are the Guileless and Free;
And who are so guileless, so happy, as we.?
We harbor no Passions by Luxury taught;
We practice no Arts with Hyprocrisy fraught:
What we think in our Heart you may read in our Eyes,
For, knowing no Fa^shood, we need no Disguise.
By Mode and Caprice are the City Dames led;
But we all the Children of Nature are bred:
By her Hands alone we are painted and dressed,
For the Roses will bloom when there is Peace in the Breast.
That Giant, Ambition, we never can dread;
Our Roofs are too low for so lofty a Head;
Content and sweet Cheerfulness open our Door;
They smile with the simple, and seed with the Poor.
When Love has possessed us, that Love we reveal;
Like the Flocks that we feed are Passions we feel;
So harmless and simple we sport and we play,
And leave to sine Folk to deceive and betray.
SONG CCXIV. The SPINNIG WH^^L.
Set by Mr. Baild^^,
YOUNG Collin Fishing near the Mill,
Saw Sally underneath the Hill,
Whose Heart Love's tender Power could feel.
The Mill was stopped. no Miller there,
She smiled to see the Youth appear:
But turned about her Spinning-wheel.
Thy Cheeks, says he, like Peaches bloom,
Thy Breath is like the Spring's Perfume;
On thy sweet Lips my Love I Will seal,
Yon stately Swains so white and sleek,
Are like to Sally's Breast and Neck,
But still she turned her Spinning wheel.
Though fair one, Beauty's transient Power,
Fades like the new-blown gaudy Flower;
Not so where Virtue loves to dwell,
For where sweet Modesty appears,
We never see the Vale of Years,
She smiled and stopped her Spinning-wheel.
The Pomp of State, the Pride of Wealth,
Says she, I scorn for Peace and Health,
Where honest Labor earns her Meal:
Who tells the Flatt'rer's common Tale,
Can never over my Heart prevail,
And make me leave my Spinning-wheel.
The Swain who loves the virtuous Mind,
Alone can make young Sally kind;
For him I Will toil, I Will spin and reel,
It is the Voice, says he, of Love,
Come hasten to yon Church above;
She blushed and left her Spinning-wheel.
SONG CCXV. A Loyal Song.
SAY, lovely Peace, that graced our Isle,
Why you withdraw the indulgent Smile?
Is it, you fly the Sons of Fame,
That the, the Pride of France may tame?
For Mars is roused by Wars alarms,
And calls the Britons forth to Arms.
Our Chiefs, renowned upon the Main,
Once more in Arms shine forth again,
Whose steady Courage dares oppose
And stem the Fow'r of Gallic Foes.
For Mars, etc.
What State but does its Fate deplore,
Where ever the British Thunders roar?
All, all must in Subjection bow;
And to Britannia's Sons it is due;
For Mars, etc.
As Rome of old her Terrors huri'd,
And proved the Mistress of the World,
The Globe itself must subject be
To Albion's Sons, who rule the Sea;
For Mars, etc.
Arise, arise, to War's great Call;
Prepare to meet the audacious Gaul;
And, in return for all your Toils,
Return with Victory and Spoils:
For Mars is ^o^z'd by the War's Alarms,
And calls the Britons forth to Arms.
SONG CCXVI.
Sung by Mr. Beard.
WHO has ever been at Baldock must needs know the Mill,
At the Sign of the Horse at the Foot of the Hill;
Where the grave and the gay, the Clown and the Beau,
Without all Distinction promiscuously go;
Where the grave and the gay, the Clown and the Beau,
Without all Distinction promiscuously go.
This Man of the Mill has a Daughter so fair,
With so pleasing a Shape, and so wining an Air;
That once on the ever-green Bank as I stood,
I Would swore she was Venus just sprung from the Flood.
That once, etc.
But looking again I perceived my Mistake,
For Venus, though fair, has the Looks of a Rake;
While nothing but Virtue, and Modesty fill,
The more beautiful Looks of the Lass of the Mill.
While nothing, etc.
Prometheus stole Fire, as the Poets all say,
To enliven that Mass which he modeled of Clay;
Had Polly been with him, the Beams of her Eyes
Had saved him the Trouble of robbing the Skies.
Had Polly, etc.
Since first I beheld the dear Lass of the Mill,
I can never be quite; but do what I will,
All Day and all Night, I sigh and think still
I shall die, if I have not the Lass of the Mill:
All Day and all Night, I sigh and think still
I shall die, if I have not the Lass of the Mill.
SONG CCXVII.
COME all you young Lovers who wan with Despair,
Compose idle Sonnets, and sigh for the Fair;
Who puff up their Pride by enchanting their Charms,
And tell them it is Heaven to lie in their Arms;
Be wise by Example, take Pattern my me,
For let what will happen by Jove I Will be free,
By Jove I Will be free.
For let what will happen, by Jove I Will be free.
Young Daphne I saw, in the Net I was caught,
I ly'd and I flattered as Custom had taught;
I pressed her to Bliss, which she granted full soon,
But the Date of my Passion expired with the Moon,
She vowed she was ruined, I said it might be,
I Am sorry, my dear, but by Jove I Will be free,
By Jove I Will be free.
The next was young Phillis as bright as the Morn,
The Love that I proffered she treated with Scorn;
I laughed at her Folly, and told her my Mind,
That none can be handsome, but such as are kind;
Her Pride and Ill nature was lost upon me,
For in Spite of fair Faces, by Jove I Will be free,
By Jove I Will be free, etc.
Let others call Marriage the Harbor of Joys,
Calm Peace I delight in, and fly from all Noise;
Some choose to be hampered, it is sure a strange Rage,
And like Birds they sing best, when they are put in a Cage:
Confinement's the Devil, 'twas never made for me,
Let who will be Bondslaves, by Jove I Will be free.
By Jove I Will be free, etc.
Then let the brisk Bumper run over the Glass,
In a Toast to the young and the beautiful I ass;
Who yielding and easy, prescribes no dull Rule,
Nor thinks it a Wonder a Lover should cool.
Be wise by Example, take Pattern by me,
For let what will happen, by Jove I Will be free,
By Jove I Will be free.
For let what will happen, by Jove I Will be free.
SONG CCXVIII.
SYLVIA, will thou waste thy Prime,
Stranger to the Joys of Love?
Thou have Youth, and that is the Time
Every Minute to improve:
Round thee will thou never hear
Little wanton Girls and Boys
Sweetly sounding in thy Ear,
Infant's Prate and Mother's Joys?
Only view that little Dove,
Softly cooing to his Mate;
As farther Proof of Love,
See her for his Kisses wait:
Hark! that charming Nightingale,
As he flies from Spray to Spray,
Sweetly tunes an amorous Tale,
I love, I love, he strives to say.
Could I to thy Soul reveal
But the least, the thousandth Part,
Of those Pleasures Lovers feel,
In a mutual Change of Heart;
Then, repenting, would thou say,
Virgin Fears, from hence remove,
All the Time is thrown away,
That we do not spend in Love.
SONG CCXIX.
I Searched the Fields of every Kind,
The fairest Flower I chose,
And sent them in a Wreath to bind
My Rosalinda's Brow,
My Rosalinda's Brow.
Here Hyacinthus tinged with Blood,
In purple Beauty glows,
There bursting from the swelling Bud,
Appears the blushing Rose,
Appears the blushing Rose.
Here Violets of purple Hue,
Chaste Lillies white as Snow;
Narcissuses that drink the Dew,
And near the Fountain blow.
And near the Fountain blow.
To boast thy Charms when crowned with those,
Cease, cease O beauteous Maid,
Thy Face that blooms so like the Rose,
Like that, alas! will fade,
Like that, alas! will fade.
SONG CCXX. ODE to MAY,
FAIREST Daughter of the Day,
Lovely Goddess, sprightly May;
Hither come with Roses crowned,
Painting where you tread the Ground.
At the loved Approach of thee,
Shoot the Mulberry, luscious Tree;
Vine their ruddier Leaves unfold,
Nor the Fig Tree dreads the Cold.
Nymph divine, behold the Flowers,
Rise to grace thy vernal Showers;
Woodbines spangled over the Dew.
Deck their Arborets for you.
Tulips rear their glittering Heads,
Pinks adorn the fragrant Beds,
And the silver Lillies swell;
And the golden Asphodel.
Goddess, with thy Vest of Green,
Goddess, with thy youthful Mien,
Come, and bring the Mines of Wealth,
Gladness, and her parent Health.
Bring along thy Virgin Train,
Chase away grim Care and Pain:
Now the Loves and Graces all,
Throng obedient to thy Call.
SONG CCXXI.
HOW few like you, would dare advise
To trust the Town's deluding Arts;
Where Love in daily Ambush lies,
And triumphs over heedless Hearts!
How few, like us, would thus deny
T'indulge the tempring dear Delight,
Where daily Pleasures charm the Eye,
And Joys superior crown the Night.
SONG CCXXII.
WHO, to win a Woman's Favor,
Would solicit long in vain?
Who, to gain a Moment's Pleasure,
Would endure an Age of Pain?
Vainly toying, never enjoying,
Pleased with suing, fond of Ruin,
Made the Martyr of Disdain.
Made the Martyr of Disdain.
Give to me the handsome Rover,
Whom a generous Temper warms;
Kindly using every Lover;
Well-bestowing all her Charms:
Never flying, but complying;
Frank and easy, glad to please ye:
Throw me then into her Arms.
Throw me then into her Arms.
SONG CCXXIII.
SICK of the Town, at once I flew
To Contemplation's rural Seat;
Adieu, said I, vain World adieu,
Fools only study to be great:
The Book, the Lamp, the Hermit's Cell,
The moss-grown Roof, the matted Floor;
All these I had -- 'twas mighty well;
But yet I wanted something more;
Yet I wanted, yet I wanted,
But yet I wanted something more.
Back to the busy World again,
I soon returned, in hopes to find,
Ease for imaginary Pain,
Quiet of Heart, and Peace of Mind:
Gay Scenes of Grandeur every Hour,
By Turns my Fancy fill;
The World seemed all within my Power;
But yet I wanted something still.
But yet I wanted something still.
Cities and Groves by Turns were tried;
'Twas, all, ye Fair, an idle Tale,
Celia at length became a Bride,
A Bride to Damon of the Vale:
All Nature smiled; the Gloom was cleared;
Damon was kind -- I cannot tell how;
Each Place a Paridise appeared:
And Celia wanted nothing now;
Celia wanted, Celia wanted,
And Celia wanted nothing now.
SONG CCXXIV. The CONFESSION,
LOVELY Fanny charming Maid,
Kind, gentle fair and free,
In all thy Sexes Charms arrayed,
How few are formed like thee.
Thy Image always fills
My Mind the Theme of every Song.
I Am fixed to thee alone, I find,
But ask not for how long.
The Fair in general I Have admired,
Have long been false and true,
And when the last my Fancy tired,
It wandered round to you,
Then while I can I Will be sincere,
As Turtles to their Mates,
This Moment's yours and mine my Dear,
The next you know is Fates.
SONG CCXXV.
THE Lass that would know how to manage a Man,
Let her listen and learn it from me,
His Conrage to quell, or his Heart to trapan,
As the Time and Occasion agree.
The Girl that has Beauty, though small be her Wit,
May wheedle the Clown or the Beau,
The Rake may repel, or may draw in the Cit,
By the Use of the pretty Word, No.
When powdered Toupees all round are in chat,
Each striving his Passion to show,
With Kiss me, and love me, my Dear, and all that,
Let her Answer to all be, oh, No.
When a Dose is contrived to lay Virtue asleep,
A Present, a Treat, or a Ball,
She still must refuse, if her Empire she would keep,
And No, be her Answer to all.
But when Mr. Dapperwit offers his Hand,
Her Partner in Wedlock to go,
With a Horse, and a Coach, and a Jointure in Land,
She Is an Idoit if then she says, No.
But if she is attacked by a Youth full of Charms,
Whose Courtship proclaims him a Man,
When pressed to his Bosom, and clasped in his Arms,
Then let her say No, if she can.
SONG CCXXVI. In EKIZA. an ENGLISH Opera.
WITH Swords on their Thighs the bold Yeomen are seen,
For their Country they arm, their Relligion and Queen.
How glorious their Ardour to lay down their Lives
In Desence of their Freedom, their Ch^^dren and Wives.
Ye Tyrants, ye know not what Liberty yields,
How she guards all our Shores, and protects all our Fields.
As Hebe she is fair, and as Hercules strong,
She Is the Queen of our Mirth, and the Joy of our Song,
To Liberty raise up the high cheerful Strain,
Fill the Goblets around to the Lads of the Main,
Eliza is Queen, and her brave loyal land,
Shall drive each Invader far out of the Land.
SONG CCXXVII. CONTENTMENT.
O True Content! secure from Harms,
What Is all the World without thy Charms;
Which still allute to Rest?
Compared therewith, all earthly Joys
Are empty, fading, trifling Toys:
In thee Mankind is blessed.
Bereft of thee, not Monarchs have
Such Pleasure as the meanest Slave,
To whom thou giv'st Relief;
Though Subjects show profound Respect,
Nor Duty wilfully neglect,
Thy Absence causes Grief.
When thou art banished from the Mind,
Frail Mortals vainly are inclined
To Pride and Avarice,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Thefts, Murders, and Adultery,
With every other Vice.
Put where thou reign'st there is solid ^eace;
Through thee true Virtue does increase;
Thy Countenance expels
The gloomy Prospects of Despai^,
It dissipates the slavish Fear,
With whomsce'er it dwells.
Come, then, thou pleasing Beauty bright
Reside with me both Day and Night,
Display thy lovely Charms;
Be thou diffused within my Breast,
And let me still to rely
Infolded in thy Arms.
Through all the various Scenes of Life,
Preserve me free from envious Strife,
On Heaven still to rely
For true protecting Aid; and when
Time termina^es in Death, Oh! then
To thee, O Heaven! to fly.
SONG CCXXVIII. The HONEST CONFESSION.
MY Mother cries, Betty be shy,
Whenever the Men would intrude;
I knew not her Meaning, not I;
But I Would take her Advice if I could.
Alexis stepped up the other Day,
To Kiss me, and asked if he should;
Pray what could a Shepherdess say?
But I Would fain have said no -- if I could.
My Mother remembers the Time,
When she, like a Vestal was mewed;
Now this I conce^ve was a Crime,
And I Would not be served so, if I could.
If free with Alexis, she will chide,
She says, perhaps he may be rude;
I will not pre^end to decide,
But I fancy he would -- if he could.
Last May Morn I tript over the Plain,
He saw me and quickly pursued;
I heartily laughed at the Swain,
I Would catch you, he cried, -- if I could.
Well, soon he overtook my best Hasle,
And swore he would be canslant and good;
I vow I Will live decent and chaste,
But I Would marry the Swain -- if I could.
SONG CCXXIX.
Sung by Mrs. Vincent.
FLY hence grim Melancholy's Train,
Hence wasting Thought and Years of Pain;
What to us is Age and Care,
Eves of Grief and Looks of Fear;
Join the Laughter-loving Train,
This is Pleasure's boundless Reign.
Mind not what the Stoics say,
Life is only for a Day;
Banish far Reflection's Power,
Lose not one important Hour;
Fly the meagre hideous Train,
This is Pleasure's boundless Reign.
Make the most of Beauty's Pride,
Youth and Beauty soon subside;
Courted, yield, while yet you may,
Cupid else will fly away;
Join the sportive harmless Train,
This is Pleasure's golden Reign.
Bacchus all his Treasure lends,
(Mirth and Wine are constant Friends;)
Lifts on high the human Soul;
Dread no Poison in the Bowl.
Seek the jovial rosy Train,
This is Pleasure's boundless Reign.
In the Meadows safely stray,
Innocence shall guard the Way;
And by Moon light on the Green,
View the Faires with their Queen;
Go where Love directs the Train,
For it is Pleasure's golden Reign.
Envy's Snakes, all murdering War,
With Plantom Honor, hence are far;
Hope, and Peace, and Joy sincere,
And Love, maintain their Reve's here;
Haste to join the festive Train.
This is Pleasure's golden Reign.
Nor to scornful Airs inclined,
Know the Season to be kind;
What would all your Beauty do,
Should Shepherds once neglect to woo
See the beck'ning sportive Train;
Hark, they cry it is Pleasure's Reign.
Freedom, with immortal Shield,
Guards the Blessings we can yield;
Freedom hails thee, to resign
All thy Cares in Love and Wine:
Stay no longer, join the Train
This is Pleasure's golden Reign.
Hymen's graceful Altars smoke;
Hasle, and wear the silken Yoke:
Endless Peace, unsading Youth,
Rise the sure Rewards of Truth:
Hasten then to join the Train,
For it is Pleasure's golden Reign.
SONG CCXXX. The SHEPHERD.
NO more the festive Train I Will join,
Adieu! ye rural Sports adieu!
For what alas! have Griefs like mine
With Pastimes or Delights to do?
Let Hearts at Ease such Pleasure prove
But I am all Despair and Love.
Ah! well a Day! How changed am I?
When late I seized the rural Reed;
So soft my Strains, the Herds hard by,
Stood gazing, and forgot to feed,
But now my Strains no longer move,
They Are Discord all Despair and Love.
Behold around my straggling Sheep,
The fairest once upon the Lea;
No Swain to guide, no Dog to keep,
Unshorn they stray, nor marked by me;
The Shepherds move to see them rove,
They ask the Cause, I answer Love.
Neglected Love first taught my Eyes,
With Tears of Anguish to overflow;
It Is that which filled my Breast with Sighs,
And turned my Pipe to Notes of Woe;
Love has occasioned all my Smart,
Dispersed my Flock, and broke my Heart.
SONG CCXXXI.
ATTEND, ye Nymphs, while I impart
The secret Wishes of my Heart;
And tell what Swain, if one there be,
Whom Fate designs for Love and me.
Let Reason over his Thoughts preside,
Let Honor all his Actions guide;
Steadfast in Virtue let him be,
The Swain designed for Love and me.
Let solid Sense inform his Mind,
With pure good Nature sweetly joined;
Sure Friend to modest Merit be
The Swain designed for Love and me.
Where Sorrow prompts the pensive Sigh
Where Grief bedews the drooping Eye;
Melting in Sympathy I see
The Swain designed for Love and me.
Let sordid Av'tice claim no Part,
Within his tender generous Heart;
Oh! be that Heart from Falsehood free,
Devoted all to Love and me.
SONG CCXXXII. The FRUITLESS ENDEAVOUE.
WHEN gentle Harriot first I saw,
Struck with a reverential Awe,
I felt my Bosom moved;
Her easy Shape, her charming Face,
She smiled and talked with so much Grace,
I gazed, admired and loved.
Up to the busy Town I flew,
And wandered all its Pleasures through,
In hopes to ease my Care.
The busy Town but mocks my Pain,
Its gayest Pleasures all are vain,
For Harriot haunts me there.
The Lobours of the learned Sage,
The comic Humor of the Stage,
By turns my Time employ;
I relish not the Sage's Lore,
The Stage's Humor please no more,
For Harriot's all my Joy.
Sometimes I tried the jovial Throng,
Sometime the Female Train among,
To chase her Form away;
The jovial Throng is noisy, rude,
Nor other Female dares intrude,
Where Harriot bears a Sway.
Since then nor Art nor Learning can.
Nor Company of Maid or Man,
For want of thee atone;
O come, with all thy conquering Charms,
O come! and take me to thy Arms,
For thou art all in one.
SONG CCXXXIII.
THE Heroes preparing to finish the War,
And bid to the Camp, to the Camp an Adieu
Now sheath up their Swords, and rejoice, O ye Fair,
To think, to think of returning to you.
With Smiles, then ye Lasses, embellish your Charms.
Your Lovers with Rapture, with Rapture will come;
Oh! take the brave Fellows then close to your Areas,
And tenderly, tenderly welcome them home.
SONG CCXXXIV.
MYRTILLA. demanding the Aid of my Pe^,
To tell what of her were the Thoughts of the Men,
Insisted for once I would alter my Tune,
And write Panegyricks as well as Lampoon;
With Candor describing the Woman I see,
When I steal from my Glass, to Myrtilla and Tea.
If the Eyes sweet Employ to the Soul give Delight,
And Beauty's an Object engaging to Sight;
How kind is my fair One whose Studies confess,
Her Aim is at Nature's Amendment in Dress:
Though often in the Structure, mistaking the Plan,
She spoils what she means should give Pleasure to Man
When I heard her sweet Voice in its natural Key,
Her good-humored ^rattle is Music to me,
Her Kiss would soon make the dull Hermit forego
His Cell and high Views, for that Heaven below.
But when for a Trifle with Anger grown bold,
Her Words are but Discord, her Kisses are cold.
Like Dew to the Flowers is Love to Mankind,
Each Sense's Enjoyment in Woman we find;
Unless Affectation, that Bane to the Fair,
Unfetters the Heart they attempt to ensnare:
Let Nature the Science of Pleasing direct,
A Charm ill displayed soon becomes a Defect.
SONG CCXXXV. The Words from SHAKESPER.
COME, live with me, and be my Love,
And we will all the Pleasures prove,
That Hills and Valleys, Dales and Fields,
And all the craggy Mountain yields,
There will we sit upon the Rocks,
And see the Shepherds feed their Flocks.
Near shallow Rivers, by whose Falls,
Melodious Birds sing Madrigals.
There will I make thee B^ds of Roses,
With a thousand fragrant Posies,
A Ca^ of Flowers, with a Girdle,
Embroidered all with Leaves of Myrtle;
A Gown made of the finest Wool,
Which from our pretty Lambs we pull,
If these Delights thy Mind may move,
Come live with me, and be my Love.
Fair lined Slipper for the Cold,
With Buckles of the purest Gold;
A Belt of Straw with Ivy Buds,
And coral Clasps, and Silver Studs,
The Shepherd Swain shall dance and sing,
For thy Delight each May Morning:
If these Delights thy Mind may move,
Then live with me, and be my Love.
SONG CCXXXVI.
WHEN Faities dance round on the Grass,
And revel to Nignt's awful Noon:
O say, will you meet me, sweet Lass,
All by the clear Light of the Moon:
My Passion I seek not to screen,
Then can I refuse you your Boon;
I Will meet you at twelve on the Green,
All by the clear Light of the Moon;
I Will meet you at twelve on the Green,
All by the clear Light of the Moon.
The Nightingale perched on a Thorn,
Then charms all the Plains with his Tune,
And glad of the Absence of Morn,
Salutes the pale Light of the Moon:
How sweet is the Jessamin Grove,
And sweet are the Roses of June;
But sweeter the Language of Love,
Breathed forth by the Light of the Moon.
But sweeter, etc.
Too flow rolls the Charoit of Day,
Unwilling to grant me my Boon:
Away, envious Sunshine, away,
Give Place to the Light of the Moon:
But say, will you never deceive,
The Lass whom you conquered too soon,
And leave a soft Maiden to grieve,
Alone by the Light of the Moon;
And leave, etc.
The Planets shall start from their Spheres,
Ever I prove so sickle a Loon;
Believe me I Will banish thy Fears,
Dear Maid, by the Light of the Moon:
Our Loves when the Shepherds shall view,
To us they their Pipes shall attune;
While we our soft Pleasures renew,
Each Night by the Light of the Moon.
SONG COXXXVII.
ONCE more I Will tune the vocal Shell,
To Hills and Dales my Passion tell,
A Flame which Time can never quell,
But burns for thee, my Peggy.
You greater Bards, the Lyre should hit,
For sav, what Subject is more fit,
Than to record the sparkling Wit,
And Bloom of lovely Peggy.
The Sun first rising in the Morn,
That paints the cevy-bespangled Th^rn,
^^es not so much the Day ad^^n,
As does my lovely Peggy.
And when in Theti's Lap to rest,
He streaks with Gold the ruddy West,
He Is not so beauteous, as undrest,
Appears my lovely Peggy.
When Zephyr on the Vi'let blows,
Or breathes upon the damask Rose,
Is does not half the Sweets disclose,
As does my lovely Peggy.
I stole a Kiss the other Day,
And (trust me) naught but Truth I say,
The Fragrance of the blooming May,
Was not so sweet as Peggy.
Was she arrayed in rustic Weed,
With her the bleating Flocks I Would feed,
And pipe upon the oaten Reed,
To please my lovely Peggy.
With her a Cottage would delight,
All Is happy when she is in my Sight,
But when she is gone it is endless Night,
All Is dark without my Peggy.
While Bees from Flower to Flower still rove,
And Linnets warble through the Grove,
Or stately Swains the Waters love,
So long shall I love Peggy.
And, when Death, with his pointed Dart,
Shall strike the Blow that rives my Heart,
My Words shall be when I depart,
Adieu my lovely Peggy.
SONG CCXXXVIII. Sung in THOMAS and SALLY.
WHEN I was a young one, what Girl was like me,
So wanton, so airy, and brisk as a Be;
I tattled, I rambled, I laughed, and where ever
A Fiddle was heard, -- to be sure I was there.
To all that came near I had something to say;
'Twas this Sir -- and that Sir -- but scarce ever nay;
And Sundays dressed out in my Silks and my Lace,
I warrant I stood by the best in the Place,
At twenty I got me a Husband, poor Man!
Well rest him; we all are as good as we can;
Yet he was so peevish, he would quarrel for Straws,
And jealous -- though troly I gave him some Cause.
He snubb'd me, and huff'd me, but let me alone;
In Troth I Have a ^orgue, and I paid him his own:
Ye Wives, take the Hint, and when Spouse is untow'rd;
Stand firm to our Charter, and have the last Word.
But now I Am quite altered, the more to my Woe;
I Am not what I was forty Summers ago:
This Time's a fore Foe, there is no shunning his Dart:
However, I keep up a pretty good Heart.
Grown old, yet I hate to be sitting mum chance,
I still love a Tune, though unable to Dance;
And Books of Devotion laid by on my Shelf,
I teach that to others, I once did myself.
SONG CCXXXIX.
Set by Mr. Baildon, Sung by Mr. Low.
WHEN first by fond Damon Flavella was seen,
He slightly regarded her Air and her Mien;
The Charms of her Mind he alone did commend,
Not warm as a Lover, but cool as a Friend;
From Friendship, not Passion, his Raptures did move,
And he boasted his Heart was a Stranger to Love.
New Charms he discovered, as more she was known;
Her Face grew a Wonder, her Taste was his own?
Her Manners were gentle, her Sense was resin'd,
And every dear Virtue beamed forth in her Mind:
Still, still for the Sanction of Friendship he strove;
Till a Sigh gave the Omen, and showed it was Love.
Now proud to be conquered, he sighs for the Fair,
Grows dull to all Pleasure, but being with her?
He Is mute, till his Heart strings are ready to break;
For fear of offending forbids him to speak;
And wanders a willing Example to prove,
That Friendship with Woman is Sister to Love.
A Love thus conquered can never give Offense,
Not a Dupe to her Smiles, but a Slave to her Sense,
His Passion not Wrinkles nor Age can allay,
Since founced on that which can never decay;
And Time, that can Beauty's short Empire remove,
Increasing her Reason, increases his Love.
SONG CCXL. Sung in the Chaplet.
DECLARE, my pretty Maid,
Must my ^ond Suit miscarry?
With you I Will toy, I Will kiss and play;
But hang me if I marry, -- hang me if I marry:
With you I Will toy, I Will kiss and play;
But hang me if I marry.
Then speak your Mind at once,
Nor let me longer tarry:
With you I Will toy, I Will kiss and play;
But hang me if I marry,
With you, etc
Though Charms and Wit assail,
The Stroke I well can parry;
I love to kiss, to toy and play;
But do not choose to marry.
I love, etc.
Young Molly of the Dale,
Makes a mere Slave of Harry;
Because when they had toy'd and kissed,
The foolish Swain would marry.
Because, etc.
These fixed Resolves, my dear,
I to the Grave will carry;
With you I Will toy, and kiss and play;
But hang me if I marry, -- hang me if I marry.
With you I Will toy, and kiss and play,
But hang me if I marry.
SONG CCXLI.
Set by Dr. Arne.
AVAST, my Boys, avast, all Hands on Shore,
Mess mates, what Cheer? Old England hey! once more.
I Am thinking how the Wenches will rejoice;
Out with your Presents, Boys, and take your Choice,
I Have an old Sweetheart -- but look -- there is the Town:
Weigh Anchor, tack about, and let us bear down.
AIR.
From plowing the Ocean, and thrashing Mounseer,
In Old England we are landed once more;
Your Hands, my brave Comrades, holloo Boy, what Cheer!
For a Sailor that is just come ashore?
Those hectoring Blades thought to scare us, doubt,
And to cut us, and flash us -- Morblien!
But hold there, avast, they were plaguily out,
We have flic'd them, and peppered them too.
Then Courage, my Hearts, your own Consequence know,
Yon Invaders shall soon do you Right;
The Lion may rouse, when he hears the Cock crow,
But should never be put in a Fright.
You Have only to shun your nonsensical Jars,
Your damned Party and idle Contest;
And let all your Strise be, like us honest Tars,
Who shall fight for his Country best.
A seafaring Spark, if the Maids can affect,
Bid the simpering Gypsies look to it;
Sound Bottoms they would find us, in every respect.
And our Pockets well laden to Boot.
The Landsman, mayhap, in the Way of Discourse,
Have more Art, to persuade and the like;
But 'ware those false Colors, for better, for worse,
Is the Bargain we are willing to strike.
Now long live the King, may he prosperous reign,
Of no Power, no Faction afraid;
May Britain's proud Flag still exult over the Main,
At all Points of the Compass displayed.
No Quicksands endanger, no Storms overwhelm,
Steady, steady, and safe may she sail;
No ignorant Pilots e'cr sit at her Helm,
Or her Anchor of Liberty fail.
SONG CCXLII.
NEAR the Side of a Pond, at the Foot of a Hill.
A free-hearted Fellow attends on his Mill;
Fresh Health blooms her strong rosy Hue over his Face,
And Honesty gives even to Awkwardness Grace:
Beslour'd with his Meal does he labor and sing,
And regaling at Night, he is as blessed as a King;
After neartily eating, he takes a full Swill
Of Liquor home-brew'd, to Success of the Mill.
He makes no nice Scruples of Toll for his Trade,
For that is an Excise to his Industry paid;
His Conscience is free, and his Income is clear,
And he values not them of ten thousand a Year:
He Is a Freehold sufficient to give him a Vote,
At Elections he scorns to accept of a Groat;
He hates your proud Placemen, and do what they will,
They never can seduce the stanch Man of the Mill.
On Sunday he talks with the Barber and Priest.
And hopes that our Statesmen do all for the best;
That the Spaiards shall never interrupt our free Trade,
Nor good British Coin be in Subsides paid:
He sears the French Navy and Commerce increase.
And he wishes poor Germany still may have Peace:
Th^^ C^t N^^land, he knows, may have Strength and have Skiff,
To protect all her Manors, and save his own (...).
With this ^^nest Hope be goes home to his Work,
And if Water is scanty he take, up his bork,
And over the Meadows he sc^^ters his Hay,
Or with the stiff Plough turns up Furrows of Clay:
His Harvest is crowned with a good Engligh Gl^e.
That his Country man ever be happy and (...);
With his Hand and his Heart to King George c^^s he f^^,
May all Loyal Souls act the Man of the Mill.
SONG CCXLIII.
WHY heaves my sond Bosom, ah! what can it mean?
Why flutters my Heart that was once so serene?
Why this sighing and trembling when Daphne is ^ear?
Or why, when she is absent, this Sorrow and Fear?
Or why, when she is absent, this Sorrow and Fear?
Methinks I for ever with Wender could trace
The thousand soft Charms that embellish the Face;
Each Memory I view thee, new Beauties I find,
With thy Face I am charmed, but enslaved by thy Mind,
With thy Face, etc.
Untainted with Folly, unfully'd by Pride,
There native good Humor and Virtue reside;
Pray Heaven that Virtue thy Soul may supply
With Compassion for him who without thee must die,
With Compassion for him who without thee must die.
SONG CCXLIV.
THE new flown Birds the Shepherds sing,
And welcome in the May;
Come, Pastarella. now the Spring,
Makes every Landscape gay.
Wide spreading Trees their leafy Shade,
Over half the Plain extend,
Or in reflecting Fountains played,
Their quivering Branches bend;
Or in reflecting Fountains played,
Their quivering Branches bend.
Come, taste the Season in it is Prime,
And bless the rising Year;
Oh! how my Soul grows sick of Time,
'Pill thou, my Love, appear:
Then shall I pass the gladsome Day,
Warm in thy Beauty's Shine,
When thy dear Flock shall feed and play,
And intermix with mine.
And intermix, etc.
For thee of Doves, a Milk-white Pair,
In silken Bands I hold:
For thee a firstling Lambkin fair,
I keep within the Fold:
If Milk-white Dove, Acceptance meet,
Or tender Lambkins please,
My spotless Heart without Deceit,
Be offered up with these;
Be offered up with these.
SONG CCXLV. The WOUNDED MAID.
GENTLE Love, to paint my Lover
Let thy Pencil be thy Dart,
Let thy Pencil be thy Dart,;
Every killing Grace discover
Which is glowing in my Heart.
Which is glowing in my Heart.
Be his lovely Eyes defining:
But it is fatal to approach,
But it is etc.
Where ten thousand Charms are shining;
I, alas, have gazed too much.
I, alas, etc.
Be thy Pencil now descending;
But descend with tender Care,
But descend, etc.
Lest the new born Smiles offending,
Which are ever springing there.
Which are, etc.
Gently glide over every Feature,
With bewitching Softness formed,
With bewitching, etc.
In his Composinon, Nature
Was by Love and Bacchus warmed,
Was by Love, etc.
Touch his Lips, designed for pressing,
Where thy own fond Mother's lies,
Where thy, etc.
Everlasting Love expressing
From his Mouth and from his Eyes.
From his, etc.
Now his Shape and Air surveying,
How I chide my artless Song!
How I chide, etc.
I my Fondness am betraying,
And have done his Beauties wrong.
And have, etc.
Oh! how ill I am performing,
Though affilted by thy Dart,
Though affilted by thy Dart,!
Florio's Picture is more charming,
It has painted in my Heart.
It has painted in my Heart.
SONG CCXLVI. In COMUS.
LIVE and love, enjoy the Fair;
Banish Sorrow, banish Care;
Mind not what old Dotards say,
Age has had his Share of Play;
But Youth's Sport begins today.
From the Fruits of sweet Delight
Let no Scarecrow Virtue fright;
Here, in Pleasure's Vineyards, we
Rove, like Birds, from ^ree to Tree,
Careless, a^ry, gay, and free.
SONG CCXLVII:
'TWAS when the Seas were roaring
With hollow Blasts of Wind,
A Damsel lay deploring,
All on a Rock reclined.
Wide over the rolling Billows
She cast a wishful Look;
Her Head was crowned with Willows,
That trembled over the Brook.
Twelve Months were gone and over,
And nine long tedious Days,
Why did thou, venurous Lover,
Why did thou trust the Seas?
Cease, cease then, cruel Ocean,
And let my Lover rest:
Ah! what is thy troubled Motion
To that within my Beast?
The Merchant, robbed of Pseasure,
Views Tempests in Despair;
But what is the Loss of Treasure
To losing of m^ dear?
Should you some Coast be laid on,
Where Gold and Di'monds grow,
You Would find a richer Maiden;
But none that loves you so.
How can they say that Nature
Has nothing made in vain?
Why then beneath the Water
Do hideous Rocks ^emain?
No Eyes the Rocks discover,
That lurk beneath the Deep,
To wreck the wandering Lover,
And leave the Maid to weep.
All melancholy lying,
Thus wail'd she for her Dear,
Repaid each Blast with sighing,
Each Billow with a Tear:
When over the white Waves stooping,
His floating Corpse she spied,
Then, like a Lilly drooping,
She bowed her Head and died.
SONG CCXLVIII.
HOW little do the Landmen know
Of what we Sailors feel,
When Waves do mount, and Winds do blow!
But we have Hearts of Steel.
No Danger can affright us;
No Enemy shall flout:
We'll make the Monsieurs light us:
So toss the Can about.
Stick stout to Orders, Messmates;
We'll plunder, burn, and sink:
Then, France, have at your First Rates;
For Britons never shrink.
We rummage all we fancy;
We'll bring them in by Scores;
And Moll, and Kate, and Nancy
Shall roll in Louis d'Ors.
While here at Deal we are lying
With our noble Commodore,
We'll spend our Wages freely, Boys;
And then to Sea for more.
In Peace we'll drink and sing, Boys;
In War we'll never fly:
Here Is a Health to George our King, Boys,
And the Royal Family.
SONG CCXLIX.
NIGHT, to Lovers Joys a Friend,
Swiftly thy Assistance lend!
Lock up envious prying Day,
Bring the willing Youth away.
Haste, Oh! speed the tedious Hours,
To the secret happy Bowers;
Then my Heart for Bliss prepare,
Thyrsis surely will be there!
See the hateful Day is gone,
Welcome Evening now comes on;
Soon to meet my Dear I fly,
None but Love shall then be by.
None shall dare to venture near,
To tell the plighted Vows they hear;
Parting thence will be thy Pain,
But we part to meet again.
Don't you feel a pleasing Smart,
Gently stealing to your Heart,
Fondly hope, and fondly sigh?
For my Shepherd often do I.
Wish in Hymen's Bands to join,
I Will be yours, and you will be mine;
Tell me, Thyrsis, tell me this,
Tell me when, and tell me yes.
Farewell, loit'ring idle Day,
To my dear, I hie away;
On the Wings of Love I go,
He the ready Way will show.
Peace, my Heart, no Danger fear,
Love, and Thyrsis both are near;
It Is the Youth, I Am sure it is he,
Night, how much I owe to thee.
SONG CCL.
FAIR Fidel -- es grassy Tomb,
Soft Maids and Village Hinds shall bring,
Each opening sweet of earliest Bloom,
And rifle all the breathing Spring.
No wailing Ghosts shall dare appear,
To vex with Schrieks this quiet Grove,
But Shepherds Lads assemble here,
And melting Virgins own their Love,
No withered Witch shall here be seen
No Goblins lead their nightly Crew,
The Female Fays shall haunt the Green
And dress thy Grave with early Dew.
The Red Breast often at evening Hours,
Shall kindly lend his little Aid,
With hory Moss and gathered Flowr's.
To deck the Ground where thou art laid.
When howling Winds and beating Rain,
In Tempest shake the sylvan Cell,
Or'midst the Chase on every Plain,
The tender Thought on thee shall dwell.
Each lonely Seat shall thee restore,
For thee, the Fear be duly shed,
Beloved till Life could Charm no more,
And mourned till Pity's self be dead.
SONG CCLI. PEGGY.
THOUGH Peggv's Charms have often been sung,
The darling Theme of every Tongue.
New Praises still remain
Such heavenly Beauty can infuse,
New Flights new Fancies like a Muse,
And brighten every Strain.
It Is not her Form alone I crize
Which every Fool that has but Eyes,
As well as I can see,
To say she is fair is but to say,
When Phoebus at Noon it is Day.
What none need learn of me.
But I Am in love with Peggy's Mind,
Where every Virtue is combined
That can adorn the Fair,
Excepting one you searce can miss,
So trifling! that I would not wish,
That Virtue had been there.
She who possessess all the rest,
Must sure excel the Prude, whose Breast,
That Virtue shares alone,
To seek Perfection is a Jest,
They who have fewest Faults are best,
And Peggy has but one.
SONG CCLII. The ADIEU.
SINCE Moggy I mun bid adieu,
How can I help despairing,
Let Fate its Rigor still pursue,
There is naught more worth my Careing,
'Twas she alone could calm my Soul,
When wracking Thoughts did grieve me,
Her Eyes my Troubles could control,
And into Joys deceive me.
Farewell the Brooks, no more along,
Your Banks mun I be walking,
No more you will hear my Pipe or Song,
Or pretty Peggy's Talking,
But I by Death an End will give,
To Grief Since we must sever,
For who can after Parting live,
Ought to be wretched for ever.
SONG CCLIII. Sung at Drury Lane Theater.
CONFINED to the House till the Age of Fifteen,
Nor Man but Clowns of our Parish had seen,
An Aunt to instruct me, a formal old Maid,
And I, silly I, still believed all she said.
My Aunt in the Grave, to the Town straight I flew,
And instantly fond of each Pleasure I grew;
The Sparks waited round me where ever I went,
And I, silly I, could not guess what they meant.
They call me a Goddess, and, fighing, declare
The Toasts of the Town are not like me so fair;
They vow and declare, and my Pity invoke,
And I, silly I, then believed all they spoke.
They tickled my Pride, but my Heart still was free,
Nor one of them all was a Corquest for me,
Till young Strephen advand'd, and quickly he taught
What I, silly I, till that Moment had sought.
With good Breeding and Sense his Love he declared,
Not like the vain Fops who before had appenr'd:
His Expressions were sweet and sprung from his Min^.
And I, happy I, to my Strephon was joined.
SONG CCLIV. A favorite AIR.
OH how blissful it is to Languish.
When soft Wishes warm the Breast,
Sighs in Part disclose the Anguish,
And our Blushes speak the rest.
Gay Desires which fondly pleasure's,
Prove by Nights our loveliest Themes;
But when Midnight Slumbers seize us,
Oh the charming, charming Dreams.
SONG CCLV. The MISER'S Feasl
AVARUS sent for me to dine,
The Day and Guests bespoke,
The gilded Plate on Cupboard shine,
The Chimneys hardly smoke,
The various Dishes I behold,
Polo and Olio Sweet,
But Teeth so chatter with the Cold,
I knew not how to eat.
Avarus it is my Desire,
And with me join the rest,
In Winter you would improve your Fire,
Or not till Summer feast,
SONG CCLVI.
I Am a young Virgin, that often have been told,
I should try to get married before I Am too old:
I took the Advice, and got one in my Eye,
Whom if I cannot have, I Am afraid I shall die.
Young Thyrsis is witty, well, featured, and tall,
His Fellow Swains own that he out-does 'em all:
When first I beheld him, I cannot tell why,
I thought I was going that Moment to die.
If through the Recesses of yon silent Grove,
Or over the Meadows, I happen to rove,
And see my dear Shepherd at Distance pass by,
I tremble all over, and am ready to die.
When he plays on his Pipe to the Lambkins around;
I fly to the Place where I hear the blessed Sound;
O Thyrsis! sweet Youth! to myself then I cry,
I Would listen to thee, were I going to die.
Last Saturday Eve, (I remember the Day)
I caught him saluting Clarinda the gay;
That I envied each Kiss, I will never deny.
And fervently prayed that my Rival might die.
Come. Hymen, and lend a young Virgin an Aid,
Who, without your Assistance, must die an old Maid;
To all my fond Wishes make Thyrsis comply,
And if I don't have him, I wish I may die.
SONG CCLVII
BENEATH this Vragrant Myrtle Shade,
While I my weary Limbs recline,
O Love be thou my Ganymede,
And hither bring the generous Wine.
How swift the wheel of Life revolves,
How soon Life's little Race is over,
But Oh when Death this Frame disolves,
Mirth Joy and Frolic is no more,
Why then ah! fool profusely vain,
With Incense shall thy Pavements shine,
Why do thou pour Oh Wretch profane,
On senseless Earth the nectard Wine,
To me thy breathing Odours bring,
On me the mantling Bowls bestow,
Go ^hloe rob the Roseat Spring,
For Wreaths to grace my honored Brow.
Yes ever the airy Dance I Join,
Of fleeting Shadows light and vain,
I Will wisely drown in Floods of Wine,
Each busy Care and idie Pain.
SONG CCLVIII. VALENTINE'S Day,
WHEN last we parted on the Plain,
Fond Damon seemed full loath to go;
He kits'd, and said that soon again,
He Would come, and would not leave me so.
For that, says he, the Time is near,
And then, my Love, I do design,
It is the best Day in the Year,
To come and be your Valentine.
I wished the tedious Hours to fly,
And longed the look'd-for Day to see;
And as the Time grew still more nigh,
How blessed, thought I, must Nancy be!
The Morning came, and at my Door,
I heard a Voice that said incline,
For once, dear Girl, if never more,
To me, and be my Valentine.
A thousands Fears disturbed my Mind,
Thyrsis was there in Damon's Stead;
I thought the Youth was quite unkind,
Nor knew what should be done or said.
I hoped it could not be a Sin,
In spi^e to Damon, now not mine,
To le^ the kinder Thyrsis in,
And be the Shepherd's Valentine.
Nor what I did, do I repent,
For fickle Damon soon as light,
To Lucy, that same Morning, went,
Nor has been since from out her Sight.
And Th^rsis, late but half-lov'd Swain,
Is now both all, and only mine,
I bless the Time that once was Pain.
He came to be my Valentine.
SONG CCLIX.
GENTLE Winds that fan the Sea,
And wave the fragant Bower,
Bear hence thy Sighs and haste to me,
The Swain whom I adore.
In vain fair Flora spreads her Charms.
Over every Hill and Vale,
While absent from my longing Arms,
Is Roger of the Dale,
Let Wanton Nymphs and Swains employ,
In sensual Love their Days.
While I my Darling Youth enjoy,
In Virtue's smiling Rays,
Take all the false Delights of Courts,
Each glittering Beau and Belle,
Give me with harmless rural Sports,
My Roger of the Dale,
SONG CCLX. The Innocent FAIR.
YOUNG I am and yet unskil'd,
How to keep or how to gain,
When to love and when to fain,
Take me some of you,
While I yet am young and true,
Ever I can my Soul disguise.
Heave my Breasts and roll my Eyes,
Stay not 'till I learn the Way,
How to lie and to betray,
He that takes me first is best,
For I may deceive the rest,
Could I meet a blooming Youth,
Full of Love and full of Truth
Brisk and of a gentle Mien,
I would long to be Fifteen.
SONG CCLXI. The Virgins WISH
VIRGINS if ever at length it prove,
My Destiny to be in Love,
Pray wish me such a Fate,
May Wit and Prudence be my Guide,
And may a little decent Pride,
My Actions regulate.
Such stateliness I mean as may,
Keep nauseous Fools and Fops away,
But still oblige the Wise,
That may secure my Modesty,
And Guardian to my Honor, be
When Passion does arise.
When first a Lover I commence,
May it be with a Man of Sense,
And learned Education,
May all his Courtship easy be,
Neither too formal nor too free,
But wisely show his Passion.
May his Estate agree with mine,
That nothing look like a Design,
To bring us into sorrow,
Grant me all this that I have said,
And willingly I Would live a Maid,
No longer than Tomorrow.
SONG CCLXII.
CAN Love be controlled by Advice?
Can Madness and Reason agree?
O Molly! who'd ever be wise
If Madness is loving of thee?
Let Sages pretend to despise
The Joys they want Spirits to taste;
Let me seize old Time as he flies,
And the Blessings of Life while they last.
Dull Wisdom but adds to our Cares;
Brisk Love will improve every Joy;
Too soon we may meet with gray Hairs;
Too late may repent being coy.
Then, Molly, for what should we stay,
Till our best Blood begins to run cold;
Our Youth we can have but today;
We may always find ^^ime to grow old.
SONG CCLXIII.
THE Sun was sleeping in the Main,
Bright Cynthia silvered all the Plain;
When Collin turned his Team to rest,
And sought the Lass he loved the best:
As towered her Cott he jogged along,
Her Name was frequent in his Song;
But when his Errand Delly knew,
She vowed She Would something else to do.
He swore he did esteem her more
Than any Maid he would seen before;
In tender Sighs protesting he
Would constant as the Turtle be;
Talked much of Death, should she refuse,
And used such Arts as Lovers use;
It Is fine, says Doll, if it is but true;
But now -- I Have something else to do.
Her Pride then Collin thus addressed;
Forgive me, Doll, I did but jest;
To her that is kind I Will constant prove,
But trust me, I Will never die for Love:
Though first she did his Courtship scorn;
Now Doll began to court in turn;
Dear Collin, I was jesting too,
Step in -- I Have nothing else to do.
SONG CCLXIV. Sung at Vauxhall.
SHALL, I wasting in Despair,
Die because a Woman's fair;
Shall my Cheeks look pale with Care,
'Cause another's rosy are;
Be she faiter then the Day:
Or the flowery Meads in May,
Yet if she think not well of me,
What care I how fair she be.
Shall a Woman's Goodness move,
Me to perish for her Love;
Or her worthy Merits known,
Make me quite forget my own?
Be she with that Goodness blessed,
As may merit Name the best;
Yet if she be not such to me,
What care I how good she be.
Be she good, or kind, or fair,
I will never more despair;
If she love me, this believe,
I will die ever she can grieve,
If she slights me when I woo,
I will scorn and let her go;
So if she be not fit for me,
What care I for whom she be.
SONG CCLXV. LUCY.
OF all the Nymphs that trip the Green,
Lucy bore the Sway,
Joy in each Shepherd's Look was seen,
Her presence made them gay,
I too among the admiring rest,
Her rising Charms surveyed,
Gazed but little thought my Breast,
By gazing was betrayed.
But since I Have heard with sweet Surprise,
Her pleasing Voice and Strain,
Resolved my rebel Heart denies,
With me more to remain,
Farewell my Heart since then you will go,
Farewell too late you will find,
Fair Lucy's Charms don't stoop so low,
As your fond Tale to mind.
SONG CCLXVI. BRITAIN'S REMEMBERANCES. For the Years 1758 and 1759.
COME listen awhile and ^^l^ tickle your Ears.
With a few little Vict'ries, b^ which it appears.
We have gained from the French in two little Years.
Which nobody can deny, which nobody, etc.
We have beat them, my Boys; and I Will hold you a Pound.
We shall beat them, my Boys, upon Sea or dry Ground,
We shall beat them as long as the World goes round.
Which nobody, etc.

With Guadalupe first I embellish my Strain;
Then a Cluster of Forts crowd into my Brain,
Crown Point, Frontenack, Niagara, Duques^e.
Which nobody, etc.

Quebeck we have taken, and taken Breton;
That the Coast was as steep, that a Man might as soon,
As the Frenchmen imagined, have taken the Moon.
Which nobody, etc.

Senegal we have taken, and taken Goree,
And thither we trade, for our Blacks, do you see;
For who should buy Slaves, but they that are free:
Which nobody, etc.

Then at Mind^n you know, we defeated our Foes,
Though our Horse stood aloof without coming to Blows,
And w^y nobody's hanged for it, nobody knows.
Which nobody, etc.

F^s^a^ven at Lages, and Hawke in the Bay.
Your Vict'ries had I but Room to display,
I Am s^^e I ^^^^^d not have done singing to day.
Which nobody, etc.

Oh! what (...) me of the fleet out of Breast,
Some are bur^^^ (...) are taken, and where are the rest,
Why some are fied East, and some are fled West.
Which nobody, etc.

Some ten Fathom deep in the Sea may be found,
And some in the River Villain are a ground,
Where they lie very safe, but not very sound.
Which nobody, etc.

Let France then all Title to Glory resign,
For these Years shall unmatched in our Histories shine,
The renowned Fifty-eight, and the great Fifty-nine.
Which nobody can deny.

SONG CCLXVII FRIENDSHIP united.
AS pleasing as Shades to a wayfaring Swain,
When the Ardours of Phoebus has deav'd the scorched Plain
As Groves to the Linnet or Thyme to the Be,
Welcome my fair one so welcome to me.
Whom Love has united no Tyrants can part,
Nor can Time ever Efface what is engraved in the Heart,
Remembrance survives when all Rapture is past,
And Friendship's a Flame that burns bright to the last.
SONG CCLXVIII.
I Have rambl'd, I own it, whole Years up, and down,
And sighed over each beautiful Nymph of the Town;
Iuch Fancies have plagued me, that often in my Life,
I Have been ready to start at the Name of a Wife.
But shamed from my Fears, that have often broke my Rest,
And weary with roving, both cloyed, and unblest;
I Will try to be happy the rest of my Life,
And venture, though late, yet at last, on a Wife.
Then farewell the Jilt, and the Fop, and the Bold,
I quite you with Pleasure before I grow old;
One Girl of my Heart I will take to for Life,
And enough of all Conscience, I think, is one Wife,
I Will search the Town over this fair One to find,
Nor fickle, nor jealous, nor vain, nor unkind;
Whose Wit, and good Humor, may hold it for Life,
And then, if she will have me, I Will make her my Wife.
It Is time, that the Follies of Life had an End,
And soon, nay, this Instant, I Am ready to mend;
What Wonder there'll be, at so altered a Life,
If you're wise, you, like me, will resolve on a Wife.
SONG CCLXIX.
Sung by Mr. Beard.
BRITANNIA, Queen of Ocean, rise,
Perfidious Gallia's Threats despise,
Send forth the Fleet; -- each hostile Shore,
Shall tremble when thy Cannons rore.
Thy Sword the Hand of Justice draws,
And Heaven approves thy righteous Cause;
Nor Forts nor Forces stop thy Way;
So Minden, so Quebeck can say.
Not more affrighted flies the Deer,
When he perceives the Hunter near,
Than Gallia's Fleets, when they descry,
The British Ensign waving high.
Then strike again some deadly Blow,
And urge thy Vengeance on the Foe;
Till vanquished Tyranny submit,
To what is just, and what is fit.
Nor may kind Heaven the Time prolong,
Ever thou shall verisy my Song;
Shall I bid the horrid Havoc cease,
And give the Nations lasting Peace.
Return, sweet Peace! Return once more,
With Commerce spread the Ocean over;
Ah! soon return, and spread the Sail,
And Riches bring with every Gale.
SONG CCLXX.
MORE bright the Sun began to dawn,
The merry Birds to sing;
And Flowerets dappl'd over the Lawn,
In all the Pride of Spring:
When for a Wreath young Damon strayed,
And smiling to me brought it;
Take this he cried, my dearest Maid,
And who, who, aye, aye, who'd have thought it,
I blushed the Present to receive,
And thanked him over and over,
When soft he sighed, bright Fair, forgive,
I must have something more:
One kind sweet Kiss will pay me best,
So earnestly he sought it;
I let him take it I protest,
And who, -- aye, who'd have thought it.
A Swain that wooed with so much Art,
No Nymph could long disdain;
A secret Flame soon touched my Heart,
And flushed through every Vein:
'Twas Love insp^^'d the pleasing Change,
From his my Bosom caught it;
'Twas strange indeed. 'twas passing strange,
And who, -- aye, who'd have thought it.
Kind ^ortune, soon throw him this once in my Way,
Then I Will know all his Thoughts and hear all he can say;
If we cannot have each other I will not complain,
But we never from that Moment will meet once again,
We fondly kiss, and sport, and play,
And who, who, aye, aye, who'd have thought it.
FINIS.
AN Alphabetical TABLE OF THE SONGS
A
AH who in all these happy Plains, Page 9 AH whence this Impotence of Mind,
Page 16 Amanda's fair by all confessed, Page 26 A Lady, possessed of a handsome
Estate, Page 36 All hail to the King, Page 36 Ah mickle is the Power and Force
that lies, Page 39 Attend all ye Fair, and I Will tell ye the Art, Page 54 Awake,
my Lyre! thy sadly pleasing Strain, Page 63 A whimfical Lover's a Prey to each
Care; Page 70 A Dawn of Hope my Soul revives, Page 80 As Jame Gay, gang'd blyth
his Way, Page 83 All Nature blooms, when you appear, Page 84 A Virgin like me
sure was never so distressed Page 99 Among all the Arts which to please we
pursue, Page 116 Adieu for a While to the Town and its Trade, Page 124 As Chloe
came into the Room the other Day, Page 129 A Merry Land By this Light, Page 135
At the Foot of a Hill in a neat lonely Cot, Page 149 A Term full as long as the
Siege of old Troy, Page 157 As the other Day milking I sat in the Vale, Page 160
Alexis, a pretty young Swain, Page 162 As May in all her youthful Dress, Page
163 Ask if yon Damask Rose is sweet Page 171 Attend ye Nymph; while I impart,
Page 187 Avast, my Boys, avast, all Hands on Shore, Page 195 Avarus sent for me
to dine, Page 206 As pleasing as Shades to a wayfaring Swain, Page 214
B
Bound out on a Cruise, no Tar would refuse, Page 51 Boast not mistaken Swain
thy Art, Page 131 Beneath this vragrant Myrtle Shade, Page 207 Britannia, Queen
of Ocean, rise, Page 215
C
COME cheer up, my Lads to our Country be firm Page 20 Come ye Hours with Joy
repleat, Page 25 Cast my Love, thine Eves around, Page 105 Come dear Pasiora,
come away! Page 114 Cupid, the flyest Rogue alive, Page 130 Come Listen and
laugh at the Times, Page 140 Come here fellow Servants and listen to me, Page
155 Come Damon come Oh! haste away, Page 156 Come, my good Shepherds, our
Flocks we must shear; Page 173 Come all you young Lovers who wan with Despair,
Page 176 Come, live with me, and be my Love, Page 189 Confined to the House
till the Age of Fifteen, Page 205 Can Love be controlled by Advice? Page 210
Come listen a while and I Will tickle your Ears, Page 213
D
DOWN in yon Meadow a Couple did tarry, Page 33 Dear Cloe come give me sweet
Kisses, Page 78 Dear Cloe what means this Disdain, Page 108 Did you see ever a
Shepherd ye Nymphs pass this Way, Page 131 Dearest Daphne turn thine Eyes, Page
171 Declare my pretty Maid, Page 194
F
FROM Lincoln to London rode forth our young Squire, Page 111 Fair Hebe I left
with cautious Design, Page 133 From sweet bewitching Pricks of Love, Page 159
Fly Hence grim melancholy's Train, Page 185 Fair Fideles grassy Tomb, Page 203
G
GGDDES forsake thy favorite Shades Page 71 Grant me ye Powers, a calm Repose,
Page 86 Gentle Love to paint my Lover; Page 198 Gentle Wind that Fans the Sea,
Page 208
H
HARK! hark! over the Plains what Tumults we hear! Page 19 How pleassing, dear
Wedlock, appear thy Domains Page 22 How sweat are the Roses of June? Page 56
How vain are the Efforts of Art, Page 67 How could you deceive me, my Fair?
Page 73 How can you lovely Nancy thus cruelly slight, Page 80 Hear me gallant
Sailor hear me, Page 123 Happy Bard who without Fear, Page 75 He that cuckold
is let it not grieve him, Page 126 How blithe was I each Morn to see, Page 169
Hark, the Birds begin their Lay, Page 170 How few like you would dare advise,
Page 180 How little do the Landmen know, Page 201
I
I SAID on the Banks by the Stream, Page 27 In vain to keep my Heart you
strive, Page 30 It is I believe, Page 42 I own that I Love; but then my Heart,
Page 43 In Infancy our hopes and Fears, Page 82 If those who live in Shepherd's
Bower, Page 126 I met in our valley a Swain to'ther Day, Page 128 In all the
Sex some Charms I find, Page 163 I seek my Shepherd gone astray, Page 164 I
searched the Fields of every Kind, Page 178 I am a young Virgin, that often have
been told, Page 206 I Have rambled, I own it, whole Years up and down, Page 214
K
KITTY, think though every Grace, Page 75
L
LET others Damond's Praise rehearse, Page 15 Love's a gentle generous Passion,
Page 18 Let Harmony Reign, Page 50 Let others more forward behave, Page 58 Let
sweet May her Flowerets boast, Page 61 Last Holiday Eve how gaily were seen,
Page 64 Let the Tempest of War, Page 142 Life how Vain esteemed a Blessing,
Page 143 Love, thou Bane of soft Content Page 168 Lovely Fanny charming Maid,
Page 181 Live and love, enjoy the Fair; Page 199
M
MY Shepherd so handsome and gay, Page 21 My Da -- die was gone to the Mar --
ket two Mile, Page 35 My Betsy flies me like a Fawn, Page 39 My conquered Heart
I freely yield, Page 45 My Love my Rosabel, Page 59 My fond Shepherds of late
were so blessed, Page 82 Make haste, and away mine only Dear; Page 133 My Banks
they are furnished with Bees, Page 142 My Mother cries, Betty be shy, Page 184
Myrtilla, demanding the Aid of my Pen, Page 189 More bright the Sun began to
Dawn, Page 216
N
NO longer let whimsical Songslers compare, Page 8 Now gaily blooms each Field
and Grove, Page 10 Now the happy Knot is tied, Page 17 Nature's fairest Charms
we see Page 40 Now the Wood-land Choirists sings, Page 45 No more I shall dread
the Disaster, Page 72 Nature gave all Creatures Arms, Page 84 No more my Song
shall be ye Swains, Page 86 No Lass on famed Hiberrings Plains, Page 161 Now
the Snow-drops list their Heads, Page 167 No^ more the festive Train I Will join,
Page 186 Near the Side of a Pond, at the Foot of a Hill Page 196 Night, to
Lovers Joys a Friend, Page 202
O
ON the white clifts of albion, see fame where she stands Page 24 One Day
behind my Lady's Back Page 41 Over Moorlands and Mountains rude, barren and
bare, Page 47 On Pleasure's smooth Wings, how old Time steals away Page 49 On
the Slope of a shady Mount Page 61 On a Bank beside a Willow, Page 66 Oh! pity
Colin! cruel Fair Page 90 Our Glory, renowned on the Ocean and Shore, Page 95
Once the Gods of the Greeks, at Ambrosial Feast, Page 100 Old Care begone thou
churlish guest, Page 104 Oh! Polly throw by that contempub^e Air, Page 117 One
Miosummer Morning when Nature looked gay, Page 127 On a Grassy Pillow, Page 134
One Morning young Roger accosted me thus, Page 198 O True Content! secure from
Harms, Page 183 Once more I Will tune the vocal Shell, Page 191 Oh how blissful
it is to Languish, Page 205 Of all the Nymphs that trip the Green, Page 212
P
PHILANDER long had loosely roved, Page 7 Parents Divine of Heavenly Lore, Page
14 Pursuing Beauty Men descry, Page 39 Phillis we don't grieve that Nature,
Page 154 Preach not to me your musty Rules, Page 169
R
REflections that makes Mortals wise, Page 56
S
SEE how the sick'^ing Year decline, Page 6 Swell the Song in Strains sublime,
Page 6 See Royal Charlo^te come! Page 26 Since Time shall steal each tempting
Rose, Page 38 Say, Lovely Polly, have you never seen, Page 51 Sweet Annie
slowly left the Shore Page 68 See how Saphira^mid the Crowd appears! Page 69 So
brightly sweet fair Nanny's Eyes, Page 77 Silvia whose Eyes kill sure as any
Gun, Page 107 See, Daphne, see, Florelio cried, Page 112 Sweet Summer is
coming, the Peach Trees in Bloom Page 113 Sad Mufidora all in woe, Page 13^ Saw
you the Nymph whom I adore; Page 138 Sure Damon is the blithest Swain, Page 139
Sure Sally is the loveliest Lass, Page 145 Soft pleasing Pa^ns, unknown before,
Page 147 Saw ye John a coming quoth she; Page 148 Since Life is a Bubole, Page
152 Since we went out a Maying, too late can I find, Page 158 Say, lovely
Peace, that graced our Isle, Page 175 Sylvia, will thou waste thy Prime, Page
177 Sick of the Pown, at once I flew Page 180 Since Moggy I mun bid adieu, Page
204 Shall, I wasting in Despair, Page 211
T
TURN dearest, Ci^thia, turn and see, Page 13 The World my Dear Myra, is full
of Deceit Page 22 The Court were all met, Page 31 To Dance, and to Dress, and
to flaunt it about, Page 35 The Sun's gay Metal, shining Gold, Page 44 To the
Wood Robin red breast is flown, Page 46 The Poe^s, in Conscience, have teas'd
us too long, Page 48 Three Georges now, for Britain's Welfare born, Page 50
Though Strephons Heart from Loves Alarms, Page 55 To thee, my fair, the Muses
sing; Page 59 The wanton God who pierces Heart, Page 76 'Twas underneath a May
blown Bush Page 85 The Sun from East tips the M^nntains with Gold, Page 94 The
Echoing Horn calls the Sportsmen abroad; Page 94 Though I sweep to and through old
I^on to find, Page 96 The Morning is charming all Nature is gay, Page 97 The
Virgin when so^tned by May, Page 102 The Blooming Spring makes Joy appear, Page
103 Though K^ty and Lucy are fair, Page 107 It Is Night and on the Hill of
Storms Page 118 The Sun was now descerded to the Main, Page 121 To Peace and
Love, in Courts but seldom seen, Page 122 The Shepherd's plain life, Page 123
Those best Sons of Britain bold open and brave, Page 124 Though cruel you seem to
my Pain, Page 137 To Fanny Fair I would impart, Page 144 The Lass that would
know how to manage a Man, Page 182 The Heroes preparing to finish the War, Page
188 The new flown Birds the Shepherds sing, Page 197 'Twas when the Seas were
roating Page 200 Though Peggy's Charms have often been sung, Page 203 The Sun was
sleping in the Main, Page 211
V
VIRGINS if ever at length it proves, Page 209
W
WHEN late I wandered over the Plain, Page 4 When Flora, with her plighted
Love, Page 32 Where shall Ce^ia fly for Shelter, Page 32 When first I saw thee
graceful move, Page 41 What Nation shall dare with Old England compare, Page 46
Wanton Cupid, footh my anguish, Page 51 When the nymphs were contending for
beauty and fame Page 52 Well Gentlemen, since you will needs have a Song, Page
54 Where is he gore whom I adore, Page 57 When pleasing Cares disturb the
youthful Breast, Page 62 Whilst on thy dear Bosom lying, Page 63 When Beauty
appears, Page 64 With Roses and with Myrtles crowned, Page 65 What Medicine can
soften the Bos^m's keen Smart, Page 76 When Vernal Airs perfume the F^e^ds,
Page 81 We Have Fought we have Corquer'd, Page 91 While Youthful Balds in L^^ck
Lays, Page 92 Wine, Wine we allow the b^^sk Fountain of Mirth, Page 101 What
means that tender Sigh my Dear, Page 106 While Poets tune their monthly Lays,
Page 109 When Fanny to Woman is growing a Pace, Page 110 When Britain first, at
Heaven's C^mmand, Page 125 What means that Throb said I my Heart, Page 132 Waft
me some soft and Co^^ing Breeze, Page 136 Why Cloe still those Jealous Heart.
Page 139 Why will you my ^assion reprove, Page 141 When first we see the Ruddy,
Page 153 Where the Primrose decks thee well, Page 153 With every Grace young
Strephon, Page 154 When Trees did bud and Fields were green, Page 161 When I
entered my Teens, and threw Playthings aside, Page 165 Who has e'ver been at
baldock must needs know the mill, Page 176 Who, to win a Woman's Favor, Page
180 With Swords on their Thighs the bold Yoemen are seen, Page 182 When gentle
Harriot first I saw, Page 188 When Fairies dance round on the Grass. Page 190
When I was a young one, what Girl was like me, Page 192 When first by fond
Damon Flavella was seen, Page 193 Why heaves my fond Bosom, ah! what can it
mean? Page 197 When laft we parted on the Plain, Page 207
Y
YE Critics above, and ye critics below, Page 3 Young Strephon long doated on
Phaebe the Fair: Page 5 Ye verdant Woods, ye crystal Streams, Page 11 Ye fair
possessed of eve'ry Charm, Page 12 Ye Shepherds attend to my Strain, Page 28
Yes, Phillis, we'll trip over the Meads, Page 43 Ye foplings, and prigs, and ye
would be smart things, Page 53 You tell me, dear Tom like a faint Hearted Toad,
Page 78 Ye Am^rous Youths whose tuneful Lays, Page 79 Ye cheerful Virgins have
ye seen my fair, Page 87 Ye dear pretty Ladies Page 88 Young Fanny once all
pensive sa^, Page 89 Young Molly who lives at the Foot of the Hill, Page 93 Ye
fair marrie'd Damen who so often deplore, Page 98 Ye Subject of Bace^us who
laughed at dull thinking Page 100 Young J^ck^y ^e cour^ed sweet Moggy so fair,
Page 115 Ye Shepherds give liar to my Lay, Page 145 You tell me I Am Handsome, I
know not how true, Page 147 You may ta^k as you will of new modes and new
fashions, Page 150 Ye true honest Britons, who^ love your own Land, Page 151
Young Roger of the Mill, one Morning very soon, Page 166 Ye Mortals whom
Fancies and Troubles perplex, Page 173 Young Collin Fishing near the Mill, Page
174 Young I am and yet unskil'd, Page 209

