LIBERTY AND PROPERTY, WITHOUT OPPRESSION.

As is set forth in Sundry LETTERS, directed to the PUBLIC of the County of
MONMOUTH, in the Province of NEW JERSEY.

THE PREFACE.
TO THE READER.
WHEREAS Liberty, is the Glory of every true Subject under the Crown of
Great Britain, and as every Subject when crampt of that Liberty, ceded to him
by the many Acts of Parliament, in particular, that Act for holding Courts, is
taken from him, or at least, so far as to make the Court an Oppression, instead
of being a Refuge to fly to, when oppressed, -- I say, when Privileges are thus
turned to Oppression; every true Lover of his Country, will readily agree with
me, that the Subjects under such Oppression, have a just Cause of Complaint;
and that such has been the Condition of the Inhabitants of the County of
Monmouth, in the Province of New Jersey, will appear by the following Copies of
several Letters sent and dispersed, directed to the Public of said County; by
which the Public may have an Idea of the Oppression, there so much complained
of; and hope that every Lover of his Country, whether Creditors or Debtors,
will duly consider the same.

LIBERTY AND PROPERTY, WITHOUT OPPRESSION.
The first Letter was found near the Courthouse, in said County, directed to
the Public of the County of Monmouth, enclosed with the following Verse,
Whose Hands these may Chance to fall into,
Are desired to let the Public know,
The Matters that it does contain,
If well persued, wont prove in Vain.

My dear Countrymen, etc.
PERMIT me to declare to you my deep Concern for you and myself, in regard to
the present deplorable and afflictive Times, etc. which brings to my Mind the
past heavy Burdens we have struggled through; it is but a few Years ago, when
we were burdened, with a l^ng, tedious and expensive War, which drained our
Country in a great Measure, of both Men and Money: but as it was in Defense of
our Rights and Liberties, we cheerfully struggled through the same

Secondly, we were burdened with a most Destructive, alarming, and
unconstitutional Act of Parliament, ( to wit the Stamp Act) and that from our
Mother Country, the Thoughts of which alarmed every considerate Breast, from
the highest to the lowest Bank of People: every one calling out for Liberty and
Property: The Consequence of which, was, that by a steady, firm and undaunted
Resolution, in Opposition to so unconstitutional an Act; we as Freemen held our
Right to Freedom, and boldly withstood the Threats, and at ^^^^th were heard by
our Mother, our Grievance red^^ssed, and we restored to our former Liberties.

Thirdly, We having by our good Resolutions turned our the w^^^ding and
devouring Serpent, and then setting ourselves down easy, and not keeping out a
resolute Watch, have let in Serpents seven Times more devouring than the first
( to wit L -- yrs) who in their daily Practice are as Private Leaches, sucking
out our very Hearts B^^^^; our public Houses are p^p^r^d with (...)
Advertisements, and we daily h^a^^^ (...) Lands and Goods sold for (...) one
Fourth Part of the Value, (...) is ruined, and his Family turned ou^ of (...)
his whole Estate not amounting to m^re th^^ ^^wyer's and Sheriff's Fees, while
the Cre^^^^ (...) hi^ Money, and in the next Place the (...) to G^al, the^e to
starve and suffer, (...) in the like Condition at hom^; the Consideration of
which makes me cry out to you my Countrymen, Rouse, Rouse! and shake off your
dr^w^y and stupid Delays; open your Eyes, and you will see the ruinous State of
your Country, and say with David of old, that the Hand that delivered us out of
the Paw of the Lion and the Bear, shall he not deliver us out of the Hands of
the uncircumcised L -- yrs? We all of us complain of the Hardness of the Times,
but not one of us offers to forward any Means to shake off the Burden, David
would never have slain the uncircumcised Philistine, had he not used Means for
that Purpose; neither shall we ever overcome the ungrateful L -- yrs, if we do
not bestir ourselves: Consider the daily Practice of those Gentlemen of the
Law, as they Style themselves; what extravagant Bills of Cost are made, and
Escapes brought against Sheriffs, when they already have got the Man's whole
Estate? We are free People, and shall we be brought to Slavery, and that by a
Set of People brought up among us, who are living upon the Ruins of the Poor,
and will hardly look at a common Man, when they meet him, unless they can
persuade him to have an Action brought against one or another of his
Neighbors? We were deemed a People of good Courage and undaunted Resolution,
when we withstood the Stamp Act; and shall we now give away our all to this
unconscionable Set of L -- yrs? No, but let us with the same manly Spirit
withstand them; and first in a friendly Manner desire them to desist their
unwarrantable Practices, and if that will not take Effect, then where are all
our courageous young Men? Remember the saying of Soloman of old, that
Oppression makes a wise Man mad; stand together and forbid them Practicing in
our Court, and rid the County of such Barbarity, and turn them out of the
County. Young Men consider you are now entering the Stage of Life; the Burden
has been laid upon your Fathers, and Friends, and if you do not shake it off in
Time, it will be seven Times as weighty upon your Shoulders, and so multiply
from Generation to Generation; it is easier to grub up a Sapling, than to grub
up an old Tree: My Advice to you is, to collect a Body together, and to forbid
them entering the County House, except such as are concerned in Kings Business;
let them with the Court proceed on such Business, and no farther; let us bear
true Allegiance to our Rightful Sovereign, GEORGE the Third, whom God prosper;
but not bear Allegiance to a Set of uncharitable and ungrateful L -- yrs; let
their Money be deemed a Curse, their Company a Disgrace, their Practice
unwarrantable, the very Sight of them an Aggravation; let such who encourage
them, be deemed a public Nuisance, and Enemies to their Country. Those L -- yrs,
will tell you they do not act of themselves, but that their Clients order them,
which may be the Case in Part; but consider their Practice after Judgment, --
they will grant Execution against a Man's Goods and Chattels, Lands and
Tenements, ordering the Sheriff to sell them at all Events, let it sell for
what it will; the Sheriff is thereby obliged to sell, to save himself; but
before the Sheriff can have Time to make the Money of the Man's Estate, which
is due, the L -- yrs will grant what they call a Casa, for the Residue; and by
the Time that is returnable, they will have an Escape against the Sheriff, for
not confining the Debtor to Goal, and so make a treble Bill of Cost, before the
First has had Time to be settled; when the Whole comes to a Conclusion, perhaps
they have not raised Money to pay one Third Part of the Cost; well then, the
artful L -- yr, will say to his Client, I have done all in my Power to serve
you, I have been diligent in my Business for you, and am sorry Matters have
turned out so bad, but you see I could do no better; you will be so kind as to
pay the Remainder of the Cost; and then the Creditor may think himself well off
it he has not above Fifteen or Twenty Pounds Cost to pay.

Now, I would give a Word of Advice to Creditors: You see by the above
Practices of the Gentlemen of the Law, how artful they are a taking your Money
from you; yea, more so than the noted Robin Hood, the great Robber; for he
would do it to your Face, and let you know what he was about to do; but those
Gentlemen will take it from you smiling, and telling of you a fair and
plausible Story: Note, the above Case, perhaps, had the Creditors taken the
Debtor's Estate, and made the best of it, he would have got his Whole Money,
and the Debtor left at Freedom; but now you find the Creditor has lost his
Demands, and obliged to pay a considerable Cost, and the poor Debtor in
Confinement.

So I conclude with this my Advice to you, open your Eyes, and every one see
for himself and his Friend, is the Prayer, of a Friend to the Public in General.

A Freeman of said County.
June 21st, 1769.
The Second Letter was also found near the same Place, and directed as the
Former. Enclosed with the following Verse.
We give the Lawyers all our Forts, we take the Chain,
And they make us Slaves, and we complain:
Now if you smart, blame not the Heavenly Powers,
For they are good; the Fault is only Ours.

To all Christian People, to whom these Presents shall come: Greeting.
MY dear Friends and Countrymen, please to consider the critical and most
lamentable State our County of Monmouth is in, from the licen^ious Liberties,
that the voracious L -- yrs take in their Practices of the Law; and which is
worse, they get their Abominations sanctified elsewhere; to the utter undoing
of whole Families, (to wit) One Person was sued for Seven Pounds, on a Note;
the Person paid the Sheriff, L 16, the Sheriff told the Person that the
aforesaid Sum was not sufficient for Debt and Cost, but must have Goods in
Execution, which he took to treble the Value of the Debt, besides the sixteen
Pounds; before the Money could be had, an Escape was brought against the
Sheriff, so that the Debt and Cost, with Forty Shillings Interest, came to
Twenty Five Pounds.

Another, Person was sued upon a Bond in Judgment, the Defendent confessed
Judgment, to prevent further Cost; yet the Costs in Six Months, amounted to
above Fifteen Pounds: Another Person was sued for Eight Pounds, upon a Book
Debt, Judgment and Execution were obtained against said Person, and he died
intestate; his Administrators had Twenty eight or Thirty Pounds Cost to pay to
a preying Vulture, when Forty Shillings would have been full enough: Thus have
we a Widow left with four or five small Children, in a lonely Cottage, almost
without Bread to support Nature, or Clothing to keep them from the Extremity of
the Cold! What a pretty Article would it have been to them in a Christian Land,
that the Law should have secured the Sum, thus obtained by the above said
Extortion, for the Relief of those little innocent Ones? when alas! they have
now nothing left but Penury and Want.) To number or sum up the Whole of such
Transactions and Extortions, that are perpetrated under Pretense of Law, is
needless, since a Letter found at Freehold, in the County of Monmouth, June
21st, 1769, will fully demonstrate the L -- yrs Abominations, which, if not
timely prevented, will be the Case of Hundreds of Families in this County;
these crying and abominable Practices, as is set forth in the aforesaid Letter,
are at this Time thoroughly known by the major Part of the County. For Heaven's
Sake! Can it be thought, that the wise and merciful Creator, made a few Men to
govern as Gods, and the rest of Mankind to be governed as Beasts? The Almighty
has formed us, to get our Bread by the Sweat of our Brow, and he that does it
not, is a useless Member, and ought to be turned out of Society, which are the
L -- yrs.

And now my dear Countrymen, what Heart that is human, or is not as hard as an
Adamant, would not melt to hear the Distresses and Cries in our Land? and not
be moved to put down such idle Drones from practicing, until there is a
thorough Regulation in the Law? and that the Law may be made so legible, that
we may do without these Drones, or may prevent them for ever from their
unconscionable Practices any more! And now my brave Countrymen arise, and let
us join in mutual Defense of each other, and against every Practitioner of the
Law, and prevent them from vexing and ruining so many Hundreds, if not
Thousands; for it seems to be the strange Policy in us, to leave the Whole
Property of New Jersey, to be disposed of by the ungodly Consciences of the
petty Foggers, the L -- yrs, that cannot one in ten of them, plead as well as
Balaam's Ass, except they are illuminated, which is impossible.

For Prevention whereof, we the Public of said County in general, do sincerely,
absolutely, and bonefide, engage to defend ourselves and each other, in Pursuit
of a thorough Regulation, against every Practitioner of the Law or his Deputy,
or Substitute, that does or shall practice in this County; and prevent their
perpetrating any Suit as aforesaid, or hereafter, in said County, by turning
him or them out of said Country, King's Business only excepted; we do hereby
promise that we will not disturb such Suits, upon the Account of the Peace of
Society, and good Order of Government; but do acknowledge a true and faithful
Allegiance to his Majesty, GEORGE the Third, and do sincerely engage to defend
him with our Lives and Fortunes; and by these Presents do hope and pray, that
every true Lover of his Country, will appear early the first Day of July Term
next, at Monmouth Court House, there to prevent any more of our Countrymen, and
their Families from Ruin, until our Complaints be heard and our Grievances be
redressed.

July 6th, 1769.
In the next Place, I shall give a Brief Account of the Effects, the foregoing
Letters had upon the Minds of the People, etc. The major Part of the People of
said County, upon hearing and reading the foregoing Letters, were ready to join
the Proposals made in said Letters, and many Consultations were held upon the
Subject; it was at length agreed to present the following Petition to the
Court, which was signed by about One Hundred Freeholders in said County, etc.

The following is the PETITION.

To the Honorable COURT of Common PLEAS, for the County of Monmouth, etc.
THE Petition of the Subscribers, humbly shows, Your Petitioners beg Leave to
lay before your Honors, the distressed State of said County, etc. Your Honors
will readily allow, that such a Time of Distress, among the Inhabitants, never
was, since this was a County; which Distress we conceive, arises in a great
Measure, from the irregular Use of the Law, made by those Gentleman, called
Lawyers, of which many Instances might be numbered, which we think unnecessary,
as your Honors are not Strangers to the Proceedings of those Gentlemen
aforesaid; we daily see their oppressive Practices increase; we understand that
there are now between 130 and 150 escape Writs served upon our late Sheriff,
returnable to this Court, which is enough to alarm the most stupid of Mankind:
We your Petitioners had thought not to make my Complaint, until we had a
Legislative Power to complain to; but as we are at Present deprived of that
Power, we are now under the Necessity of laying our Complaints before your
Honors; we are of Opinion that unless there is an immediate Stop put to the
Proceedings and abominable Practice of the aforesaid Gentlem^n, that our County
will in a few Years be ousted of the greater Part of its present Inhabitants:
Now we your Petitioners humbly pray, that your Honors in your Wisdom, will
take the beforementioned distressed State of this County into Consideration,
and with us lament the Consequences. We farther pray, that there may be a Stop
put to the aforesaid Practices, by making a Rule in this Court, that all
Proceedings in the Law Way (King's Business excepted) be stopped until we your
Petitioners, with the remaining Part of this County, have an Opportunity to lay
our Grievance^ before the Legislative Power; surely your Honors wisely
considered the Alarms of the Stamp Act, and stoped Proceedings upon the Account
of said Act, to the great Satisfaction of the Public; and shall you not now
stop Proceedings upon the aforesaid Abominations, which are much more alarming?
The Thoughts of the before recited Practices of said Gentlemen, has alarmed the
greatest Part of this County, of which there is a Number ready to risk their
Lives, to shake off the aforesaid Burden; and it is our Opinion, that unless
your Honors acquiesce with us in the above Proposal, of making a Stop of
Proceedings, as aforesaid, that the People will be riotously mad, and where it
will then end, God only knows; for it seems to be the Resolution of the People
in general, to stop the unwarrantable Proceedings of the aforesaid Gentlemen,
by one Means or other: We therefore earnestly pray, that your Honors will
remedy the aforesaid Grievances as aforesaid, so that the People may return
home, quietly and peaceably.

We your Petitioners pray, that your Honors will after considering this our
Petition, favor us with an Answer thereto, before you admit one Lawyer in, or
adjourn the Court; for which, your Petitioners, as in Duty bound, shall ever
pray, etc.

Thirdly, I shall now give an Account how Matters were carried on at the Court.
The Evening before the Court, there was a Liberty Pole set up, with a Union
Flag at the Head of said Pole. Tuesday the 25th of July, it being the first Day
of the Court, there was no less than two or three Hundred Liberty Boys,
appeared under said Flag, in Defiance of the Gentlemen called La -- yrs; the
Court being called, the Court with the Grand Jury, were admitted peaceably to
enter the Courthouse, but no La -- yrs were admitted to go in; upon which the
Court made Proposals to the Public, with Assurances, that they would redress
the Grievances of the People, as far as lay in their Power; which in some
Measure appeased the People, but could not fully consent to make Way for the
Lawyers to enter the Courthouse. Wednesday the 26th Day of July in the
Morning, it was again warmly insisted upon, by the Court Party, that the
Liberty Pole should be taken down; a Gentleman of said County, asserted to the
People, that the Lawyers had given up the Point, and would not seek for an
Opportunity to enter the Court; upon which in Obedience to the Court, the Pole
was taken down, and all Ma^ters appeared quiet; but when the Liberty Boys were
in a Manner all dispersed, the Court was called; the Judges coming to the
House, intermixed with the Lawyers, gave some few of the Liberty Boys Reason to
suspect, that the Assertion from the aforesaid Gentlemen, was not fully
observed; upon which they demanded the Reason of the Lawyers coming to enter
the Court; but were answered with a general Attack from Judges, Sheriff, and
Lawyers; who played away so furiously, that they soon overcame the small Number
that opposed them; they being four to one, and so Judges, Sheriff, and Lawyers
entered the Court, etc.

Fourthly, I shall here introduce a Third LETTER, found as aforesaid, which
will add Something more to opening a View, to the Public, of the Oppressions so
much complained of.
New Jersey, Monmouth,
I think it is highly necessary to acquaint the Public, what was the moving
Cause of the Opposition made by the Inhabitants of said County, against the
Gentlemen called L -- yrs; at our Court held in said County, on Tuesday the
25th July, the Inhabitants of said County, having long labored under great
Oppression, arising from some of the aforesaid Men, of which, I shall mention
one Instance, though many more of the like Kind might be proved; one of the said
Gentlemen finding that a Shopkeeper, of said County, was indebted to a
Merchant in New York, the said Gentleman (though not worthy of that Character)
informed the Merchant, that if he did not immediately push for his Money, he
would be very likely to lose it; upon which, the Creditor put the Debtor's Bond
in the Lawyer's Charge; the Lawyer yer sent to the Debtor that he had such a
Bond, and that if he did not put Bonds and Accounts in his Hands sufficient to
discharge the Debt, that he must immediately sue him; upon which the Debtor put
between 40 and 50 Bills of Accounts, in said Lawyer's Hands, by an Agreement,
that they should not be sued upon, until after the next Court; but the
ungrateful Lawyer, violated the Agreement, and before the Court, granted Writs
for all the above cited Bills and Accounts, and also for the Shopkeeper
himself; this with many such like Practices might be proved.

The Second Oppression arising from the said Gentlemen, is the many
unwarrantable Bills of Costs made by many of them, which was fully proved, at
the Court aforesaid; the Inhabitants under the aforesaid Oppressions, were
determined to show the Court, their Disapprobation of such Proceedings; upon
which the Court, with the Public, agreed upon amicable Terms, and all
Animosities to be laid aside; but by a misunderstanding of some Persons, when
the Court was called, said Persons pretended still to oppose the said Lawyers,
which caused some considerable Confusion for a few Minutes, but when fully
understood by both Sides was also dropped for the Present; I mention the above
Proceedings of the aforesaid Gentlemen, and also the Proceedings of the Court,
to show the Creditors of the People in said County, that it was not with a
Design to defraud them, but that it was much the contrary. After the above
Commotions, a few Bills of Costs were laid before the Court, off of which,
there were above one Hundred Pounds docked; if my Information be right, there
is so much saved for Creditors, and I doubt not, but in the Term of a few
Years, it will prove, that there will be many Thousands of Pounds saved for the
Use of Creditors as aforesaid.

Fifthly, I shall farther introduce (...) LETTER, found as aforesaid (...) will
show where the Lawyers' Ab^mi^^tions get Sanctity, as set forth (...) the
Second LETTER, before (...), etc.
Directed to the PUBLIC of the County of Monmouth.
GENTLEMEN, I being a Spectator at your Court, of July Term last, and there
seeing the great Tumults, that were made in opposition to the Gentlemen, called
Lawyers, put me to a Consideration, were the Abominations there so much
complained of, against said Lawyers, might arise from, upon which I put myself
in the Way of Discourse, with a worthy Gentleman, who I knew was well versed in
the Business of Courts, and what they were erected for, who I shall introduce
under the borrowed Name of Moderator.

Questioner, Sir, WHERE did our Courts of Quarter Session, first take Rise
from?


Moderator. Our gracious Sovereign, Charles the Second. having the Good of his
Subjects much at Heart, he with his Council, first granted Commissions for
Courts to be held throughout his Dominions, for the Safeguard of his People; so
that every County and Shire, should have Judges, and Courts, among themselves,
to hear and redress the Grievances of his People, to which every Subject had
free Recourse, and there to be heard.


Questr. Were there any Lawyers to appear in said Courts, to open the Laws to
said Judges?


Modr. No, their Judges were not deemed worthy of that Honorable Commission,
until they were fully versed in the Law, and likewise Men that were so well
grounded in their Principles, as not to be swayed or controuled by any
Solicitor whatsoever.


Questr. What was the Consequences, if they should be swayed by the Influence
of a Solicitor, so as to deviate from the true Intention of said Courts?


Modr. In Honor to so worthy a Commission, they were publicly made an Example
of, and their Commissions taken from them, and they never deemed worthy of
bearing a Commission again, under his Majesty.


Questr. Do we not hold our Courts under the same Commission the People of
England did, and yet do?


Modr. Yes. our Sovereign's Laws for holding Courts, extend as far as he has
any Subjects to hold Courts, and that under the same Discipline as they are and
were held in England.


Questr. Are the Lawyers Members of that Honorable Court?


Modr. No, they are not Members of the Court.


Questr. What then is their Business in the Courts, and where do they get their
License from, for acting in said Courts?


Modr. The Lawyers first obtained a License from our Governor, to appear in the
Courts, to act for the People, there to open the Complainers Cause to the
Court, so that the Court may have a full Apprehension of the Complaint to them
made, so that they do Justice to the Subjects.


Questr. Then the Lawyers are Subjects to the Court, and are liable to be
brought to Justice, if they act against the true Tenor of the Law?


Modr. Surely they are liable to be (...) brought to the Bar, for acting the
least (...) ^^^y to the Law.


Questr. How comes it then the Lawyers (...) ^^^plained of in your County, are
not brought to (...)


Modr. It is my Opinion that the Judges (...) be blamed for the great
Oppression complaine^ ^^^g the People, than the Lawyers; for the Law^^^ (...)
as all other Mechanics, they endeavor to get (...) Business they can, and when
they have got the Business, to make all the Profits by it possible, to support
them in their luxurious Way of living.


Questr. Have not the Judges Power to dock the Lawyer's and Sheriff's Fees, if
they take more than the Law allows them.


Modr. Yes, and they are bound by Oath, to do so according to Law.


Questr. I understand that there were some Bills of Costs that had been taxed
by one of the Judges of your Court, brought before said Court, and there docked
of near one Third; then where was that Judge's Oath?


Modr. Indeed I cannot tell you, unless he had it shut up in his Snuff Box, or
drowned it in a Glass of Wine.


Questr. Ought not such Judges to be brought to Justice?


Modr. Yes, they ought, but where will you bring them to Justice, for all of
them have swallowed so much of the unrighteous Mammon, that it is hard to find
a competent Judge among them, and it is necessary for the County, that they be
brought before a higher Court.


Questr. But how shall we common People bring the Judges before a higher Court?


Modr. Now you come to the Point, which Question I cannot resolve, unless you
have a large Purse of Gold, and then fee a Lawyer; then perhaps you may have
them called to an Account in the Supreme Court, or a Court of Chancery.


Questr. I understand that your Grand Jury, found Bills of Indictment against
some of the Lawyers, ought not they then to be brought openly before the Court,
and to be tried by their Country?


Modr. Surely they ought, but I fear that there is so much accessory Guilt
among those that have the Power to bring them there, that they will rather
punish a Dozen common Men, who would spend their Lives in a good Cause for
their Country, then that there should one of those Extortioners, be openly
brought to Justice.


Questr. What you say in your last answer, I think seems to be a hard saying.


Modr. Not one whit too hard! was it not fully proved at our last Court, when
the County under the heavy burden of Oppression, sought out the best Means to
relieve themselves that they conceived they could do, the Judges would not
enter the Court, without they had a Train of Lawyers after them, and that the
Judges were the first Men that entered into the unhappy Combat, in Defense of
the Lawyers; and shall we expect, Justice from such Judges, against Lawyers,
that they will fight for? no reasonable Man can expect it.


Questr. What you say seems to carry great Weight with it, and how shall you
then bring the Court to Justice?


Modr. I know of no other Means, unless it be to withstand them in all their
Wiles, until they will appear hearty in the Cause of their Country, to bring
every Offender to public Justice, from the highest to the lowest Rank of People.


Questr. Do you not think the late Commotions will make the Judges, think
something more of their Duty toward their Country.


Modr. I fear that they, like Pharaoh of Old, will again harden their Hearts,
until they feel the Effects of it themselves.


Questr. I think according to what you say, that the Judges in every County,
are placed as Fathers of that Family.


Modr. They surely are; as a Father's Duty is to discipline his Children, and
govern them according to the Rules laid down in holy Writ, without respect of
Persons, so it is the Duty of all Judges and Justices to discipline and govern
the People, and Judge between Man and Man, without Respect of Persons,
according to the Laws of our Land.


Sir,
I am very much obliged to you for your Condescension in opening so far to me
the Grounds of our Courts, and also the Duty of the Judges of said courts.

So remain your humble Servant. QUESTIONER.
August 3d. 1769.

From the POET.
Thou have opposed thy Country and the Laws,
Which raised the Name of Britons to the Skies;
The Delphic God inspired the deep Design,
For more then human was the Power of Thought,
Which joined the public Good,
With such Perfection that each selfish Passion,
Flowed in the Channel of the common Welfare,
And like one Family of Sons and Sires,
And dearest Brothers, a great People lived:
In Peace they lived without or Stri^e or Scorn,
In War they fought, to conquer or to die.
Equal and free, our happy fathers knew
No Interest but the Interest of the State,
No Gain but George's Glory; proud they bore
Their Palm aloft, and showed the high Respect,
The Admiration which consenting Monmouth,
Paid to the imperial Virtue of their Country.
The Laws have been neglected, not annulled,
^^d corrupt Rulers have corrupted Manners;
^^thority will soon revive the Laws,
^^d great Example yet restore the Manners;
^^spite of those who have oppressed their Country,
^epriv'd the People of their ancient Rights,
And while the County sunk beneath their Sway,
Still strove for Power, in a declining Day;
Still sought for Wealth in an impoverished Land,
Even at this Hour repaciously they stand,
And like to Wretches in a stranded Vessel,
Plunder and Riot though amidst Oppression.
QUOTES. LIBERTY BOYS.
Moved by the present Perils of the State,
The Signal Hour of Choice unknown as yet,
The Fortune of the Field to change their conduct,
And make an Offer of our Aid to Monmouth.
OMAR. The LIBERTY BOYS' HEALTH.
Here Is a Health to GEORGE our KING,
^ITT's Glory we will Sing,
^ith our Union flying high,
^^e L -- yrs we'll defy,
(...) boast on LIBERTY,
^^^ough in Slavery,
(...) sought us for to bring.
FINIS.

