A SERMON PREACHED ON SUNDAY, April 4, 1^^2. BEFORE THE University of OXFORD.

By CHARLES WESLEY, M. A. STUDENT of CHRIST-CHURCH.

The Nineteenth EDITION.

WILMINGTON, Printed by James Adams, M,DCC,LXX.

EPHESIANS V. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and CHRIST
shall give thee Light.


IN discoursing on these Words, I shall, with the Help of GOD, I. Describe the
Sleepers to whom they are spoken. II. Enforce the Exhortation Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the Dead. And, III. Explain the Promise made to such
as do awake and arise, CHRIST shall give thee Light.


I. 1. And first, as to the Sleepers here spoken to. By Sleep is signified the
natural State of Man; that deep Sleep of the Soul into which the Sin of Adam
has cast all who spring from his Loins; that Supineness, Indolence and
Stupidity, that Insensibility of his real Condition, wherein every Man comes
into the World, and continues 'till the Voice of GOD awakes him.

2. Now they that sleeps sleep in the Night. The State of Nature is a State of
utter Darkness; a State wherein Darkness covers the Earth, and gross Darkness
the People. The poor unawakened Sinner, how much Knowledge soever he may have,
as to other Things, has no Knowledge of himself: In this Respect he knows
Nothing yet as he ought to know. He knows not that he is a fallen Spirit, whose
only Business in this present World is to recover from his Fall, to regain that
Image of GOD wherein he was created. He sees no Necessity for the one Thing
needful, even that inward universal Change, that Birth from above, (figured out
by Baptism,) which is the Beginning of that total Renovation, that
Sanctification of Spirit, Soul and Body, without which no Man shall see the
LORD.

3. Full of all Diseases as he is, he fancies himself in perfect Health: Fast
bound in Misery and Iron, he dreams that he is happy, and at Liberty. He says,
Peace, Peace, while the Devil, as a strong Man armed, is in full possession of
his Soul. He sleeps on still, and takes his Rest, though Hell is moved from
beneath to meet him; though the Pit, from whence there is no Return, has opened
its Mouth to swallow him up: A Fire is kindled around him, yet he knows it
not; yea, it burns him, yet he lays it not to Heart.

4. By one who sleeps, we are therefore to understand (and would to GOD we
might all understand it!) a Sinner satisfied in his Sins, contented to remain
in his fallen State, to live and die without the Image of GOD: One who is
ignorant both of his Disease, and of the only Remedy for it: One who never was
warned, or never regarded the warning Voice of GOD to flee from the Wrath to
come: One that never yet saw he was in Danger of Hellfire, or cried in the
Earnestness of his Soul, What must I do to be saved?

5. If this Sleeper be not outwardly vicious, his Sleep is usually the deepest
of all: Whether he be of the Laodicean Spirit, neither cold nor hot; but a
quiet, rational, inoffensive, good-natured Professor of the Religion of his
Fathers; or whether he be zealous and orthodox, and after the straitest Sect of
our Religion, lives a Pharisee, that is, according to the scriptural Account,
one that justifies himself; one that labors to establish his own
Righteousness, as the Ground of his Acceptance with GOD.

6. This is he, who, having the Form of Godliness, denies the Power thereof;
yea, and probably reviles it wheresoever it is found, as mere Extravagance and
Delusion. Meanwhile, the wretched Self-deceiver thanks GOD that he is not as
other Men are; Adulterers, Unjust, Extortioners: No, he does no Wrong to any
Man. He fasts twice in the Week, uses all the Means of Grace, is constant at
Church and Sacrament; yea, and gives Tithes of all that he has, does all the
Good that he can: Touching the Righteousness of the Law, he is blameless: He
wants Nothing of Godliness, but the Power; Nothing of Religion, but the Spirit;
Nothing of Christianity, but the Truth and the Life.

7. But know ye not, that however highly esteemed among Men, such a Christian
as this may be, he is an Abomination in the Sight of GOD, and an Heir of every
Woe, which the Son of GOD, Yesterday, Today and for ever, denounces against
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites? He has made clean the Outside of the Cup
and Platter, but within is full of all Filthiness. An evil Disease cleaves
still unto him; so that his inward Parts are very Wickedness. Our LORD fitly
compares him to a painted Sepulcher, which appears beautiful without; But
nevertheless is full of dead Men's Bones, and of all Uncleanness. The Bones
indeed are no longer dry; the Sinews and the Flesh are come upon them, and the
Skin covers them above: But there is no Breath in them, no Spirit of the Living
God. And if any Man have not the Spirit of CHRIST, he is none of His. Ye are
CHRIST 's if so be that the Spirit of GOD dwell in you. But if not, GOD knows
that ye abide in Death, even until now.

8. This is another Character of the Sleeper here spoken to. He abides in
Death, though he knows it not. He is dead unto GOD, dead in Trespasses and Sins.
For, to be carnally minded, is Death. Even as it is written, by one Man Sin
entered into the World, and Death by Sin: And so Death passed upon all Men, not
only temporal Death, but likewise spiritual and eternal. In the Day thou eatest
(said GOD to Adam) thou shall surely die: Not bodily (unless as he then became
mortal) but spiritually: Thou shall lose the Life of thy Soul: Thou shall die
to GOD; shall be separated from Him thy essential Life and Happiness.

9. Thus first was dissolved the vital Union of our Soul with GOD; insomuch
that in the Midst of natural Life we are now in spiritual Death. And herein we
remain, 'till the Second Adam becomes a quickening Spirit to us, 'till He raises
the Dead, the Dead in Sin, in Pleasure, Riches, or Honors. But before any dead
Soul can live, he hears, (hearkens to) the Voice of the Son of GOD: He is made
sensible of his lost Estate, and receives the Sentence of Death in himself. He
knows himself to be dead while he lives, dead to GOD; and all the Things of
GOD: Having no more Power to perform the Actions of a living Christian, than a
dead Body to perform the Functions of a living Man.

10. And most certain it is, that one dead in Sin, has not his Senses exercised
to discern spiritual Good and Evil: Having Eyes he sees not; he has Ears, and
hears not. He does not taste and see the LORD is gracious. He has not seen GOD
at any Time, nor heard his Voice, nor handled the Word of Life. In vain is the
Name of JESUS like Ointment poured fourth, and all his Garments smell of Myrrh,
Aloes, and Cassia. The Soul that sleeps in Death, has no Perception of any
Objects of this Kind. His Heart is past feeling, and understands none of these
Things.

11. And hence, having (...) Senses, no ^^^ets of spiritual Knowledge, the
natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of GOD: Nay, he is so far
from receiving them, that whatsover is spiritually discerned, is mere
Foolishness unto him. He is not content with being utterly ignorant of
spiritual Things, but he denies the very Existence of them. And spiritual
Sensation itself is to him, the Foolishness of Folly. How, says he, can these
Things be? How can any Man know that he is alive to GOD? Even as you know, that
your Body is now alive? Faith is the Life of the Soul; And if ye have this Life
abiding in you, ye want no Mark to evidence it to yourself, but that divine
Consciousness, that Witness of GOD, which is more and greater than ten thousand
human Witnesses.

12. If He does not now bear Witness with thy Spirit, that thou art a Child of
GOD; O that He might convince thee, thou poor unawakened Sinner, by his
Demonstration and Power, that thou art a Child of the Devil! O that, as I
prophesy, there might now be a Noise and a Shaking, and may the Bones come
together, Bone to his Bone. Then come from the four Winds, O Breath, and
breathe on these Slain, that they may live! And do not ye harden your Hearts,
and resist the Holy Ghost, who even now is come to convince you of Sin, because
you believe not on the Name of the only begotten Son of GOD.

II. 1. Wherefore Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead. GOD
calls thee now by my Mouth; and bids thee know thyself, thou fallen Spirit;
thy true State, and only Concern below. What meanest thou O Sleeper? Arise!
Call upon thy GOD if so be thy GOD will think upon thee, that thou perish not.
A mighty Tempest is stirred up round about thee, and thou art sinking into the
Depths of Perdition, the Gulf of GOD'S Judgments. If thou would escape them,
cast thyself into them. Judge thyself, and thou shall not be judged of the LORD.

2. Awake, awake! Stand up this Moment, lest thou drink at the LORD 's Hand the
Cup of his Fury. Stir up thyself to lay hold on the LORD, the LORD thy
Righteousness, mighty to save! Shake thyself from the Dust. At least, let the
Earthquake of GOD'S Threatenings shake thee. Awake and cry out with the
trembling Jailer, What must I do to be saved? And never rest, 'till thou
believe on the LORD JESUS, with a Faith which is his Gift, by the Operation
of his Spirit.

3. If I speak to any one of you more than to another, it is to thee, who
think thyself unconcerned in this Exhortation. I have a Message from GOD
unto thee. In his Name I warn thee to flee form the Wrath to come. Thou unholy
Soul, see thy Picture in condemned Peter, lying in the dark Dungeon, between
the Soldiers, bound with two Chains, the Keepers before the Door keeping the
Prison. The Night is far spent, the Morning is at Hand when thou art to be
brought forth to Execution. And in these dreadful Circumstances thou art fast
asleep in the Devil's Arms, on the Brink of the Pit, in the Jaws of everlasting
Destruction.

4. O may the Angel of the LORD come upon thee, and the Light shine into thy
Prison! And may thou feel the Stroke of an Almighty Hand, raising thee with,
Arise up, quickly gird thyself, and bind on thy Sandals, cast thy Garment about
thee, and follow me!

5. Awake thou everlasting Spirit, out of thy Dream of worldly Happiness. Did
not GOD create thee for Himself? Then thou can not rest, 'till thou restest
on Him. Return thou Wanderer. Fly back to thy Ark. This is not thy home. Think
not of building Tabernacles here. Thou art but a Stranger, a Sojourner upon
Earth: A Creature of a Day, but, just launching out into an unchangeable State.
Make Haste, Eternity is at Hand. Eternity depends on this Moment. An Eternity
of Happiness, or an Eternity of Misery.

6. In what State is thy Soul? Was GOD, while I am yet speaking, to require it
of thee, Art thou ready to meet Death and Judgment? Can thou stand in his
Sight, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity? Art thou meet to be
Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light? Have thou fought a good
Fight, and kept the Faith? Have thou secured the one Thing needful? Have thou
recovered the Image of GOD, even Righteousness and true Holiness? Have thou put
off the Old Man, and put on the New? Art thou clothed upon with CHRIST?

7. Have thou Oil in thy Lamp? Grace in thy Heart? Do thou love the LORD thy
GOD, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Mind, and with all thy Soul, and with
all thy Strength? Is that Mind in thee, which was also in CHRIST JESUS? Art
thou a Christian indeed? That is, a new Creature? Are old Things past away, and
all Things become new?

8. Art thou Partaker of the Divine Nature? Know thou not, that CHRIST is in
thee, except thou be reprobate? Know thou, that GOD dwells in thee, and
thou in GOD, by his Spirit which He has given thee? Know thou not, that thy
Body is a Temple of the Holy Ghost, which thou have of GOD? Have thou the
Witness in thyself? The Earnest of thine Inheritance? Art thou sealed by that
Spirit of Promise, unto the Day of Redemption? Have thou received the Holy
Ghost? -- Or do thou start at the Question, not knowing whether there be any
Holy Ghost?

9. If it offends thee, be thou assured, that thou neither art a Christian, nor
desire to be one. Nay, thy very Prayer is turned into Sin; and thou have
solemnly mocked GOD this very Day, by praying for the Inspiration of his holy
Spirit, when thou did not believe there was any such Thing to be received.

10. Yet on the Authority of God's Word, and our own Church, I must repeat the
Question, Have thou received the Holy Ghost? If thou have not, thou art not yet
a Christian: For a Christian is a Man that is anointed with the Holy Ghost, and
with Power. Thou art not yet made a Partaker of the pure Religion, and
undefiled. Do thou know what Religion is? That it is a Participation of
Divine Nature: The Life of GOD in the Soul of Man: CHRIST in thee, the Hope of
Glory: Happiness and Holiness: Heaven begun upon Earth: A Kingdom of GOD within
thee; not Meat and Drink; no outward Thing; but Righteousness, and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost? An everlasting Kingdom brought into thy Soul, a Peace of
GOD, that passes all Understanding; a Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory?

11. Know thou, that in JESUS CHRIST, neither Circumcision avails any
Thing, or Uncircumcision; but Faith that works by Love; but a new Creation:
See thou the Necessity of that inward Change, that spiritual Birth, that Life
from the Dead, that Holiness? And art thou thoroughly convinced, that without
it, no Man shall see the LORD? Art thou laboring after it? Giving all
Diligence to make thy Calling and Election sure? Working out thy Salvation with
Fear and Trembling? Agonizing to enter in at the strait Gate? Art thou in
earnest about thy Soul? And can thou tell the Searcher of Hearts, Thou, O GOD
art the Thing that I long for! LORD, Thou know all Things, Thou know that
I would love thee!

12. Thou hopest to be saved -- but what Reason have thou to give of the Hope
that is in thee? Is it because thou have done no Harm? Or because thou have
done much Good? Or because thou art not like other Men; but wise, or learned,
or honest and morally good? Esteemed of Men, or of a fair Reputation? Alas, all
this will never bring thee to GOD. It is in his Account lighter than Vanity.
Do thou know JESUS CHRIST, whom he has sent* Has he taught thee, that by
Grace we are saved, through Faith; and that, not of ourselves; it is the Gift of
GOD; Not of Works, lest any Man should boast? Have thou received the faithful
Saying, as the whole Foundation of thy Hope, that JESUS CHRIST, came into the
World to save Sinners! Have thou learnt what that means, I came not to call
the Righteous, but Sinners, to Repentance? I am not sent but to the lost Sheep?
Art thou (he that hears, let him understand) lost, dead? Damned already? --
Do thou know thy Deserts? Do thou feel thy Wants? Art thou poor in Spirit?
Mourning for GOD, and refusing to be comforted? Is the Prodigal come to
himself, and well content to be therefore thought beside himself, by those who
are still feeding upon the Husks which he had left? Art thou willing to live
godly in CHRIST JESUS? And do thou therefore suffer Persecution? Do Men say
all Manner of Evil against thee falsely, for the Son of Man's Sake?

13. O that in all these Questions ye may hear the Voice that wakes the Dead,
and feel that Hammer of the Word, Which breaks the Rock in Pieces! -- If ye
will hear his Voice Today, while it is called Today, harden not your Hearts.
Now awake thou that sleep in spiritual Death, that thou sleep not in Death
eternal! Feel thy lost Estate, and arise from the Dead. Leave thine own
Companions in Sin and Death. Follow thou JESUS, and let the Dead bury the Dead.
Save thyself from this untoward Generation. Come out from among them, and be
thou separate, and touch not the unclean Thing, and the LORD shall receive
thee. CHRIST shall give thee Light.

III. 1. This Promise I come, lastly, to explain. And how encouraging a
Consideration is this, That whosoever thou art who obeyest his Call, thou can
not seek his Face in vain. If thou even now awakest, and arisest from the Dead.
He has bound himself to give thee Light. The LORD shall give thee Grace and
Glory; the Light of his Grace here, and the Light of his Glory, when thou
receivest the Crown that fades not away. Thy Light shall break forth as the
Morning, and thy Darkness be as the Noonday. GOD, who commands the Light to
shine out of Darkness, shall shine in thy Heart, to give the Knowledge of the
Glory of GOD in the Face of JESUS CHRIST. On them that fear the LORD, shall the
Sun of Righteousness arise, with healing in his Wings. And in that Day it shall
be said unto thee, Arise, shine; for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the
LORD is arisen upon thee. For CHRIST shall reveal himself in thee. And he is
the true Light.

2. GOD is the Light, and will give himself to every awakened Sinner that
waits for Him: And thou shall then be a Temple of the living GOD, and CHRIST
shall dwell in the Heart of Faith: And being rooted and grounded in Love, thou
shall be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and Length
and Height of that Love of CHRIST which passes Knowledge, that thou may be
filled with all the Fullness of GOD.

3. Ye see your Calling, Brethren. We are called to be an Habitation of GOD
through his Spirit: And through his Spirit dwelling in us, to be Saints here, and
Partakers of the Saints in Light. So exceeding great are the Promises which are
given unto us, actually given unto us who believe. For by Faith we receieve not
the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of GOD, the Sum of all the
Promises, that we may know the Things that are freely given to us of GOD.

4. The Spirit of CHRIST is that great Gift of GOD, which at sundry Times, and
in diverse Manners He has promised to Man, and has fully bestowed since the
Time that CHRIST was glorified. Those Promises before made by the Father, he
has thus fulfilled; I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my Statutes Ezekiel. xxxvi. 27.
. I will pour Water upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground: I
will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessings upon thine Offspring Isaiah
xliv. 3.
.

5. Ye may be all living Witnesses of these Things: Of Remission of Sins, and
the Gift of the Holy Ghost. If thou can believe, all Things are possible to
him that believes. Who among you is there that fears the LORD, and yet
walks in Darkness, and has no Light? I ask thee in the Name of JESUS,
Believe thou that his Arm is not shortened at all? That He is still mighty to
save? That He is the same Yesterday, Today, and for ever? That He has now
Power on Earth to forgive Sins? Son, be of good Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven.
GOD for CHRIST'S Sake has forgiven thee. Receive this, not as the Word of Man;
but as it is, indeed, the Word of GOD; and thou art justified freely through
Faith. Thou shall be sanctified also through Faith which is in JESUS, and shall
set to thy Seal, even thine, that GOD has given unto us eternal Life, and this
Life is in his Son.

6. Men and Brethren, let me freely speak unto you: And suffer ye the Word of
Exhortation, even from one the least esteemed in the Church. Your Conscience
bears you Witness in the Holy Ghost, that these Things are so, if so be ye
have tasted that the LORD is gracious. This is eternal Life, to know the only
true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST whom He has sent. This is experimental Knowledge,
and this alone is true Christianity. He is a Christian, who has received the
Spirit of CHRIST. He is not a Christian, who has not received Him. Neither is
it possible to have received Him, and not know it. For John xiv. 20.
at that Day (when He comes, says the LORD) ye shall know, that I am in my
Father, and you in Me, and I in you. This is that Spirit of Truth, whom the
World cannot receive, because it sees Him not, neither knows Him: But ye
know Him: for he dwells with you, and shall be in you.

7. The World cannot receive Him, but utterly rejects the Promise of the
Father, contradicting and blaspheming. But every Spirit which confesses not
this, is not of GOD. Yea, this is that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have
heard, that it should come into the World, and even now it is in the World. He
is Antichrist, whosoever denies the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, or that the
indwelling Spirit of GOD is the common Privilege of all Believers, the
Blessings of the Gospel, the unspeakable Gift, the universal Promise, the
Criterion of a real Christian.

8. It nothing helps them to say, We do not deny the Assistance of GOD'S
Spirit; but only this Inspiration, this receiving the Holy Ghost, and being
sensible of it. It is only this feeling of this Spirit, this being moved by the
Spirit, or filled with it, which we deny to have any Place in sound Religion.
But in only denying this, you deny the whole Scriptures, the whole Truth and
Promise and Testimony of GOD.

9. Our own excellent Church knows nothing of this devilish Distinction: But
speaks plainly of Art. 17.
feeling the Spirit of CHRIST; of being Office of consecrating Priests.
moved by the Holy Ghost, and knowing and Visitation of the Sick.
feeling there is no other Name than that of JESUS, whereby we can receive any
Salvation. She teaches us also to pray for the Collect before the Holy
Communion.
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit; yea that we may be Order of Confirmation.
filled with the Holy Ghost. Nay, and every Presbyter of here is, professes to
receive the Holy Ghost, by the Imposition of Hands. Therefore to deny any of
these, is, in Effect, to renounce the Church of England, as well as the whole
Christian Revelation.

10. But the Wisdom of GOD was always Foolishness with Men. No marvel then,
that the great Mystery of the Gospel should be now also hid from the Wise and
Prudent, as well as in the Days of Old; that it should be almost universally
denied, ridiculed and exploded as mere Frenzy: And all who dare avow it still,
branded with the Names of Madmen and Enthusiasts. This is that falling away
which was to come: The general Apostasy, of all Orders and Degrees of Men,
which we even now find to have overspread the Earth. Run to and fro in the
streets of Jerusalem, and see if you can find a Man; a Man that loves the LORD
his GOD with all his Heart, and serves him with all his Strength; How does our
own Land mourn (that we look no farther) under the Overflowings of Ungodliness?
What Villainies of every Kind are committed Day by Day? Yea, too often with
Impunity, by those who sin with a high Hand, and glory in their Same? Who can
reckon up the Oaths, Curses, Profaneness, Blasphemies, the Lying, Slandering,
Evil-speaking, the Sabbath-breaking, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Revenge, the
Whoredoms, Adulteries, and various Uncleanness, the Frauds, Injustice,
Oppression, Extortion which overspread our Land as a Flood?

11. And even among those who have kept themselves pure from those grosser
Abominations, how much Anger and Pride, how much Sloth and Idleness, how much
Softness and Effeminacy, how much Luxury and Self-indulgence, how much
Covetousness and Ambition, how much Thirst of Praise, how much Love of the
World, how much Fear of Man is to be found? Mean while, how little of true
Religion? For where is he that loves either GOD or his Neighbor; as He has
given us Commandment? On the one Hand are those, who have not so much as the
Form of Godliness: On the other, those who have the Form only: There stands the
open, there the painted Sepulcher. So that in very Deed, whosoever were
earnestly to behold any public gathering togethether of the People, (I fear
those in our Churches, are not to be excepted) might easily perceive, that the
one Part were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees: The one having almost as
little Concern about Religion, as if there were no Resurrection, neither Angel,
nor Spirit: and the other making it a mere lifeless Form, a dull round of
external Performances, without either true Faith, or the Love of GOD, or Joy in
the Holy Ghost.

12. Would to GOD I could except us of this Place, Brethren, my Heart's Desire,
and Prayer to GOD for you is, that ye may be saved from this Overflowing of
Ungodliness, and that here may its proud Waves be stayed! But is it so indeed?
GOD knows, yea, and our own Conscience, it is not. We have not kept ourselves
pure. Corrupt are we also, and abominable; and few are there that understand
any more, few that worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth. We too are a Generation
that set not our Hearts aright, and whose Spirit cleaves not steadfastly unto
GOD. He has appointed us indeed, to be the Salt of the Earth: But if the Salt
has lost its Savor, it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out,
and to be trodden under Foot of Men.

13. And shall I not visit for these Things, says the LORD? Shall not my Soul
be avenged on such a Nation as this? Yea we know not how soon He may say to the
Sword, Sword, go through this Land! He has given us a long Space to repent. He
lets alone this Year also: But He warns and awakens us by Thunder. His
Judgments are abroad in the Earth. And we have all Reason to expect that
heaviest of all, even that He should come unto us quickly, and remove our
Candlestick out of its Place, except we repent and do the first Works: Unless
we return to the Principles of the Reformation, the Truth and Simplicity of the
Gospel. Perhaps we are now resisting the last Effort of divine Grace to save
us. Perhaps we have well nigh filled the Measures of our Iniquities, by
rejecting the Council of GOD against ourselves, and casting out his Messengers.

14. O God, in the midst of Wrath remember Mercy! Be glorified in our
Reformation, not in our Destruction! Let us hear the Rod, and him that
appointed it. Now that thy Judgments are abroad in the Earth, let the
Inhabitants of the World learn Righteousness.

15. My Brethren, it is high Time for us to awake out of Sleep, before the
great Trumpet of the LORD be blown, and our Land become a Field of Blood. O may
we speedily see the Things that make for our Peace before they are hid from our
Eyes! Turn Thou us, O good LORD, and let thine Anger cease from us. O LORD look
down from Heaven, behold and visit this Vine; and cause us to know the Time of
our Visitation. Help us, O GOD of our Salvation, for the Glory of thy Name: O
deliver us, and be merciful to our Sins, for thy Name's Sake: And so will we
not go back from Thee. O let us live and we shall call upon thy Name. Turn us
again, O LORD GOD of Hosts, show the Light of thy Countenance, and we shall be
whole.

Now unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask
or think, according to the Power that works in us, unto Him be Glory in the
Church by CHRIST JESUS throughout all Ages, World without End, Amen.


