A CONFESSION OF FAITH Held by a SOCIETY of FRIENDS CALLED SEPARATES,
CONTAINING THEIR FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES.

IT WAS WROTE WITH A DESIRE OF PROMOTING TRUTH BY ONE THAT SINCERELY WISHES THE
GOOD OF ALL MANKIND.

CHRISTOPHER CLARK.

WILLIAMSBURG: PRINTED BY CLEMENTINA RIND. (...)

A CONFESSION OF FAITH, etc.
I. Of faith in the holy trinity.
THERE is one God, Ephe. 4, 6, who is a spirit, John, 4, 24; he is light, and
in him is no darkness at all, 1 John, 1, 5, who by the word of his power
created all things for his own glory; man, in his own image, created he him
male, and female, created he them, Genesis 1, 27. There are three that bear record
in Heaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1
John, 5, 7. The father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, John 10,
38. The Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, chap. 15, 26, is of
one substance, majesty, and glory, with the Father; and the Son and these three
are one (very) God. 1 Cor. 8, 6.

II. Of the c^^^ting of man, and of his fall.
And God said let us make man in our own image, Genesis 1, 26: God created man in
his own image, in the image of God created he him male, and female, created he
them, Genesis 1, 27. The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed in^^ his nostrils the breath of life, and man become a livi^^ soul,
chap. 2, 7, in the image of God, chap. 1, 26, endued with a will capable of
paying perfect obedience to the divine law, chap. 2, 16, 17, which would have
continued him and all his posterity in the favor of their creator, and made
them forever happy in the enjoyment of him, Romans 2, 13; yet, being left free to
fall, Adam, with all mankind, in him as a seed, Genesis 1, 27, yielded his will to
the temptation given him by the serpent, through the woman, chap. 3, 6, and
took the fruit which God commanded him not, chap. 2, 16, 17, and did eat, chap.
3, 6. By this sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed
upon all men, Romans 5, 12; for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God, chap. 3, 23; lost the image of God, and are, by nature, the children of
wrath, Ephe. 2, 3, being dead in sin, verse 1, and John 5, 25; for God has
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, Romans 11, 32.

III. Of the word of God, which was made man; of the end and use of his
appearance in the flesh.
The word was in the beginning with God, John 1, 2, and was God, verse 1, and
all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made, verse 3; for God created all things by Jesus Christ, Ephe. 3, 9; who,
being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2,
6, yet condescended to be made flesh, John 1, 14, or rather took on him a body
of flesh, Heb. 10, 5, which was conceived in the womb of the blessed virgin, by
the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, Luke 1, 31, 35, and became man of her
substance; so that two whole and perfect natures; that is to say, the Godhead
and manhood were joined together in one person, John 12, 44, 45, and chap.
(...) 21, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, Luke 2, 11, and Rev. 1,
18, which is (very) God, and man, verse 8, the image of the invisible God, the
first born of every creature, Col. 1, 15; in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, chap. 2, 9; he paid perfect obedience to the law of God, Mat.
5, 17, 18, and became the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10, 4, and Ephe. 2, 15, 16; he suffered the just for the
unjust, Isai. 53, 9, 10, 11, 12, and gave himself for us an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling favor, Ephe. 5, 2, having obtained
eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9, 12; who, through the eternal spirit, offered
himself, without spot, to God, that he might, by his grace, purge our
consciences from dead works to serve the living God, verse 14, in newness of
life, being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the
word of God, which lives and abides forever, 1 Pet. 1, 23, and John 1, 12, 13.

IV. Of the benefits of Christ's death; the resurrection of the dead; and of
eternal judgment.
In the fullness of time, Gal. 4, 4, the Son of God appeared to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9, 26, who, through the eternal spirit, offered
himself, without spot, to God, verse (...); he bore the iniquities of us all,
Isai. 53, 6, and the chastisement of our peace was upon him, verse 5: he died
for our sins, and rose a^^in for our justification, Romans 4, 25, that we might
be saved through him, by the w^shing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Titus 3, 5, being justified freely by his grace, through faith, Ephe. 2,
8; he died, was buried, and rose again the third day from the dead, Luke 2^,
46, 52, 53, and Acts 10, 40, and showed himself alive to his Apostles, chap. 1,
3, was seen o^ them forty day^ verse 3, and then ascended up into Heaven, with
immortal body, Mark 16, 19, and sits on the right hand of God, Heb. 10, 12,
where he ever lives, to make intercession, chap. 7, 25, from whence he will
come, at the last day, to judge the world, 1 These. 4, 16, 17, and Romans 2, 16,
when at the sound of the last trumpet, all the dead, both small and great,
shall arise, and come forth, with immortal bodies, and stand before God, to be
judged according to their works, Rev. 20, 10, 13; the righteous will be
received with that blessed welcome: Come, ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Mat. 27, 34; they
will rest in the presence of God forever, where there is fullness of joy, Psalm.
16, 11; the wicked will be driven from the presence of God, with that dreadful
sentence: Go, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Matt. 25, 49. The wicked will be eternally miserable, being separated
from God; reserved in darkness forever, 2 Peter, 2, 17.

V. Of the condition of man after the fall; and of the new birth.
In Adam all sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3, 23, lost his
image, and became, by nature, the children of wrath, Ephe. 2, 5, being
naturally inclined to evil; so that the flesh l^steth always contrary to the
spirit, Romans 8, 7, and chap. 7, 23, and Gal. 5, 17, and therefore every person
that is naturally engendered of the offspring of Adam deserves the wrath of
God, Romans 5, 12, and chap. 6, 23. The condition of man is such that he cannot
turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength, and good works, to faith,
Gal. 2, 16; neither can ^an, in his own will and strength, do good works
^^^asant and acceptable to God, Romans 8, 8, wherefore (...) us submit to the
divine life, John 1, 4, that we may be led out of darkness into light, Ephesians. 5,
8, and become the children of light, John 12, 36, being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and
abides forever, 1. Peter 1, 23, having put on the new man, which is renewed in
knowledge after the image of him that created him, and which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephe. 4, 23, 24, and Col. 3, 10;
these are renewed in the spirit of their minds, Ephe. 4, 23, and glory in
nothing, save in the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto them, and they unto the world, Gal. 6, 14; for in Christ Jesus,
neither circumcision avails any thing, or uncircumcision; but a new creature,
verse 15, and chap. 5, 6.

VI. Of the inward manifestation of Christ; and of the true guide of his
children.
God dwells with the contrite and humble in spirit, Isai. 15, 5, 6: for he
has said he will dwell in them, and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6, 16; and Christ
stands at the door, and knocks: If any man hear his voice, and open the
door, he will come in to him, and ^up with him, and he with him, Rev. 3, 20.
This is the riches of the glory of the mystery which God would make known among
(or rather) in the Gentiles, Christ within the hope of glory; Col. 1, 27: he
prayed to the father, and he gave the Saints another comforter, that was to
abide with them forever, even the spirit of truth, which is to be in them, John
14, 16, 17. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God, Romans 8, 14; for this is the covenant that God has made with the house of
Israel; he has put his laws in their minds, and writ them in their hearts, and
they are all taught of God, Heb. ^^ 10, 11, and the anointing which they have
receiv^^^ of him abides in them, and they need not that any man teach them;
but as the same anointing teaches them of all things, and is truth, and is no
lie, 1 John, 2, 27.

VII. Of the unity of the Saints with Christ.
He that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, Heb. 2, 11;
for by the exceeding great and precious promises that are given them, they are
made partakers of the divine nature, 2, Pet. 1, 4. For this end prayed Christ,
that they all might be one, as the Father is in him, and he in the Father, that
they also might be one in them, and the glory which he had gotten from the
Father he gave them, that they might be one, even as the Father and he is one;
Christ in the Saints, and the Father in Christ, that they might be made perfect
in one, John 17, 21, 22, 23.

VIII. Of the SCRIPTURES.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that
we, through patience, and comfort of the scriptures, might have hope, Romans 15,
4, which are able to make wise unto salvation, through faith, which is in
Christ Jesus, all scripture being given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for instruction, in righteousness, that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished with all good works, 2
Timo. 3, 15, 16, 17. No prophecy of the scriptures is of any private
interpretation; for the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1, 20, 21.

IX. Of the love of God to all men; and of the appearance of the true light to
all, in order to their salvation.
When we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly,
Romans 5, 6. God commends his love toward us in that while we were yet
sinners. Christ died for us, verse 8, who, by the grace of God, has tasted
death for every man, Heb. 2, 9; he gave himself a ransom for all, to be
testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2, 6. He was a lamb slain from the foundation of
the world, Rev. 5, 8, 12, 13. In the fullness of time he appeared to put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9, 26, that they which live might not
live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, Romans 5, 8. He is not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet.
3, 9, and receive the gospel, which is the power of God, unto salvation, to
them that believe, Romans 1, 16, which was preached to every creature under
Heaven, Col. 1, 23; and if it be hid, it is hid to them which are lost, in whom
the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest
the light of the glorious gospel of Christ should shine into them, 2 Cor. 4, 3,
4; for this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil, John 3, 19. In
Christ was life, and the life was the true light, which lights every man that
comes into the world, chap. 1, 4, 9, by which all things that are reprovable
are made manifest; for whatsoever makes manifest is light, Ephe. 5, 13. This
is the more sure word of prophecy, whereunto we do well to take heed, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1, 19; for God has said his spirit
will not always strive with man, Genesis 6, 3, wherefore let us submit ourselves
to the word of his grace, which is able to give us an inheritance among all
them which are sanctified, Acts, 20, 32.

X. Of the necessity of repentance; of conviction, faith, and justification.
By one man sin entered into the world, and deathly sin, and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5, 12, and come short of the glory
of God, chap. 3, 23, and by nature carnally minded, which is enmity against
God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then
they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8, 7, 8, wherefore let us
not grieve the holy spirit of God, but submit to his grace, Tit. 2, 11, that we
may be renewed in the spirit of our minds, Ephe. 4, 23, and become the children
of light, through faith, chap. 5, 8. God is light, and in him is no darkness at
all, 1 John, 1, 5; the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father,
John, 17, 21; the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, chap. 15,
26, by which all things that are reprovable are made manifest; for whatsoever
makes manifest is light, Ephe. 15, 13. As many, therefore, as do submit to the
divine life, John 1, 4, which shines into them by way of reproof, verse 9, and
Isai. 51, 1, 4, making manifest to them what is sin, John 13, 19, 20, and Ephe.
5, 13, will be led to see the evil of sin, and feel condemnation for it in a
higher or lower degree, beholding, with the eye of the mind, that damnation is
the just reward of sin, Romans 6, 23. This all must see and feel in a greater or
smaller measure, as all have sinned, chap. 5, 12. Being thus made sensible of
the just reward of sin, Gal. 3, 10, they are filled with a fear that there is
no mercy for them, Romans 7, 9: This causes them to mourn over their misspent
time, being grieved with their sins, Psalm. 25, 11, 17; their minds are so
occupied, partly through fear, and a desire to be saved, that their sleep and
wordly enjoyments depart from them; so that nothing is more agreeable to them
than to mourn over their hard ^^arts, Job 3, 24, crying, what must we do to be
saved? Acts 16, 31. The Lord lets them see, when they have done all they can,
he is just in their damnation, psalm. 51, 4, and, under a sense of it being
just, they are led to submit to the will of God, crying, Lord, if there is any
mercy for such an one as I, let me have it; if not, thy will be done, Luke 11,
2, now they find mercy from him that said I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more,
Heb. 8, 12; they are enabled to receive the promise by faith, the burden of sin
is suddenly removed, and the love of God is shed abroad in the heart, Romans 5,
5; they find peace with God, through Jesus Christ, and they rejoice, with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1, 8, being justified by grace, through
faith, Ephe. 2, 8, which is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence
of things not seen, Heb. 11, 1; they live, yet not they, but Christ lives in
them; and the life which they now live in the flesh is by the faith of the Son
of God, who loved them, and gave himself for them, Gal. 2, 20.

XI. Of perfection and good works, which are the fruits of faith; and of the
final perseverance of the Saints.
Sin shall not have dominion over such as are not under the law, but under
grace, Romans 6, 14; for there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; for the law of the
spirit of life makes free from the law of sin and death, chap. 8, 1, 2, for
such are become dead unto sin, and alive unto righteousness; and, being made
free from sin, become servants of righteousness, chap. 6. 2, 18. How, then,
shall they that are dead to sin live any longer therein verse 2; for they
delight in the law of God after the inward man, chap. 7, 22; they are his
workmanshi^ created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2, 10; for whosoever is born of God
does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot, because he
is born of God, 1 John, 3, 9; for God has said he will dwell in them, and walk
in them, 2 Cor. 6, 16, and his commandments are not grievous, 1 John, 5, 3.
This is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment; and he that keeps
his commandments dwells in him, and he in him, and hereby we know that he
abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us, chap. 3, 23, 24; for as
many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, Romans 8, 14. Let
us love one another, for love is of God, and every one that loves is born of
God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love, 1
John, 4, 7; they which have believed in God are careful to maintain good works,
Tit. 3, 8, for they love God, and delight in his law, Psalm. 11, 9, 7, and love
works no ill to his neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law,
Romans 13, 10. These are persuaded that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
heights, nor depths, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate them
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, chap. 8, 38, 39; for
God has made a new covenant with the house of Israel, Heb. 8, 8; he has put
his laws into their minds, and writ them in their hearts, and said, I will be
to them a God, and they shall be to me a people, verse 10; he said I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities, will I
remember no more, verse 12. If they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments, then will I visit their transgressions ^ith the rod, and their
iniquities with stripes. Never^heless my loving kindness will (...) him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail, my covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my lips. Psalm. 89, 31, 32, 33, 34; my mercy will I
keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him; his seed
also will I make to endure forever, verse 28, 29. The mountains shall depart,
and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither
shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on
thee, Isa. 54, 10; for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God,
Col. 3, 3; but of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1, 30.

XII. Of the church and ministry.
The church of God is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3, 15, whereof the
dear Son of God is the head, Col. 1, 18, by which all the body, by joints and
bands, having nourishment, ministered and knit together, increases with the
increase of God, chap. 2, 19, which church of God are them that are sanctified
in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1, 2, who, when he ascended up on high, gave gifts unto
m^n, and he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors
and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the ministry,
Ephe. 4, 11, 12, who ought to be blameless, vigilant, sober, of good behavior,
given to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not greedy
of filthy lucre, but patient, not brawlers, not covetous, 1 Timothy, 3, 2, 3,
lovers of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful
word, as they have been taught, that they may be able, by sound doctrine, both
to exhort and t^ convince gainsayers, Tit. 1, 8, 9, taking ^^ed (...)
themselves, and to the flock over which the Ho^^ Ghost has made them
overseers, to feed the church of God, Acts 20, 28, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready
mind, neither as being lords over God's heritage, but as being examples to the
flock, 1 Pet. 5, 2, 3; and such elders as rule well are to be accounted worthy
of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy
5, 17, and to be esteemed very highly in love for their works sake, 1 These. 5,
12, as every man has received the gift, so ought the same to be ministerd; if
a man minister, let him do it of the ability which God gives, 1 Pet. 4, 10,
11, preaching the gospel, not with the wisdom of words, lest the cross of
Christ be made of none effect, 1 Cor. 1, 17, nor yet with enticing words of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power, that the faith
may not stand in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God, chap. 2, 4, 5.

Howbeit such speak wisdom among them that are perfect, yet not the wisdom of
this world, nor of the princes of this world, which comes to naught, but they
speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God
obtained, before the world, to their glory, 1 Cor. 2, 6, 7; which things they
also speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy
Ghost teaches, verse 13; for it is not they that speak, but the Holy Ghost, or
spirit of the Father, that speaks in them, Mat. 10, 20, who, if they sow
spiritual things, ought to reap carnal things; for so the Lord has ordained,
that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel, for the scripture
says, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn,
and the labourer is worthy of his reward, 1 Cor. 9, 9, 11, 14, yet a necessity
is laid upon them, yea, woe is unto them if they preach not the gospel, and
their reward is, that when they preach the gospel, they make the gospel of
Christ without charge, verse 16, 17, 18; not coveting any man's silver or gold,
or apparel, but their hands minister to their necessities, that so laboring,
they may support the weak, remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, how he
said, it is more blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20, 33, 34; for they are
not of the greedy dogs, that can never have enough, Isa. 56, 11, nor of the
shepherds, that look to their own way; every one for his gain, from his
quarter, verse 11, that feed themselves, and not the flock, Ezekiel. 34, 8, that
make the people err, biting with their teeth, and crying peace, and preparing
war against all such as put not into their mouths, teaching for hire, and
divining for money, Mic. 3, 5, 11,; nor yet of those which teach things which
they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake, Tit. 1, 11; that run greedily, after
the error of Balaam, for reward, loving the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2,
15; and through covetousness, with feigned words, making merchandise of souls,
verse 3; men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness, 1 Timothy 6, 5; but they know that godliness, with content, is great
gain, verse 6; that having food and raiment, they are therewith content, verse
8.

XIII. Of the true worship.
The hour comes, and now is when the true worshippers shall worship the Father
in spirit, and in truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him, John 4,
23. God is a spirit, and they which worship him must worship him in the spirit,
and in the truth, verse 24. For the Lord is nigh to all them that call upon
him, to all that call upon him in truth, Psalm. 34, 18; he is far from the
wicked, but he hears the prayers of the righteous, Prove. 15, 29; and this is
the confidence (...) we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his
will he hears us, 1 John 5, 14. What is it then? We must pray with the
spirit, and with the understanding also, 1 Cor. 14, 15. Likewise the spirit
also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for, as we
ought, but the spirit itself makes intercession for us, with groanings, which
cannot be uttered, and he that searches the heart knows what is the mind of
the spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the
will of God, Romans 8, 26, 27.

XIV. Of baptism.
As there is one Lord, one faith, so there is one baptism, Ephesians. 4, 5, which
does also now save us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1
Peter, 3, 31; for John indeed baptized with water, but Christ with the Holy
Ghost, and with fire, Matt. 3, 11, and Acts 1, 5; therefore as many as are
baptized into Jesus Christ are baptized into his death, and are buried with
him, by baptism, into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead,
by the glory of the Father, even so they also should walk in newness of life,
Romans 6, 3, 4, having put on Christ, Gal. 3, 27.

XV. Of the living bread, and of the receiving of it.
Then Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, Moses gave you not that
bread from Heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from Heaven; for
(...) bread of God is he which comes down from ^^aven, and gives life unto
the world, John 6, 32, (...) and Jesus said, I am the living bread, which came
down from Heaven: If any (...) bread, he shall live forever, and the bread the
(...) will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world, verse
51. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; he that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dw^^leth in me, and I in him, as the living
Father ha^ sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eats ^e, even he,
shall live by me, verse 55, 56, 57; for (...) is the spirit that quickens,
the flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit
and they are life; and Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life, he that
comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never
thirst, John 6, 35; and if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will
come into him, and will sup with him, and he with me, Rev. 3, 20. At that day
ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you, John 14, 20.
God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him, 1
John, 4, 16. If Christ be in us, the body is dead, because of sin; but the
spirit is life, because of righteousness, Romans 8, 10. The souls of the children
of God ^eed, by faith, upon the divine life, John ^ ^ This is that bread which
came down from Heaven; he that eats of this bread shall live forever, chap.
6, 58.

XVI. Of swearing, fighting, and persecution.
It has been said, by them of old, thou shall not forswear thyself, but shall
perform unto the Lord thine oaths; but Christ says unto us, swear not at all;
neither by Heaven, for it is God's throne, nor by the earth, for it is his
footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King; neither
shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or
black. But le^ your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; f^ we have in hi^ ^s
more than these comes of evil, Mat his ^, and 37, and James charges us, above
a^ things, not to swea^ neither by Heaven, neither b^ earth, neither by any
other oath; but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, lest you fall into
condemnation, Ja. 5, ^^. Though we walk in the flesh, we are not (...) war
after the flesh; for the weapons of our warfare are not to be carnal, but
mighty, through God, to the pulling down o^ strong floods, ca^^^^g down
imaginations, and every high thing th^^ ^^^^lts itself against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10, 3, 4, 5* for (...) and fightings come out of the lusts that war in the
members, Ja. 4, 1, 2; therefore Christ commands not to resist evil, but
whosoever will smite thee on the right cheek to turn the other also Matt. 5,
30; because christians are lambs among wolves, Luke 10, 3; therefore are they
hated o^ all men for Christ's sake, Matt. 10, 22; and all that will live godly
in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3, 12. Such are blessed, for
theirs i^ the kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 5, 10. For though they have lost their
lives, yet shall they save them, chap. 16, 25; and because they have confessed
Christ before men, he will also confess them before the Angels of God, Luke 12,
8, 9. We ought not the^ to fear them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul; but rather him which is able to destroy both soul and body in
Hell, Matt. 10, 28.

XVII. Of magistracy.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers^ for there is no power but of
God. The powers (...) be are ordained of God; whosoever, therefore, (...) the
power resists the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation; for rulers are not a terro^ (...) to the evil. Will thou,
then^ (...) Power? Do that which is goo^ (...) praise of the same; for he is
(...) as a revenger to execute wrat^ (...) evil, whereof we must needs (...)
for wrath, but also for cons^^^^^ (...) cause pay we also tribute; (...)
ministers, attending continua^^^ (...) thing: Render, therefore, to (...) to
whom tribute is due, custo^ (...) fear to whom fear, honor to (...) 13, 1 to
7; therefore are we (...) every ordinance of men, for the (...) ^^ther it be to
the King, as supre^^ (...) ^^^^^nors, as unto them that are sen^ (...)
punishment of evil doers, and (...) them that do well. For so is the (...) with
well doing, we may put to (...) ^^^^rance of foolish men, 1 Pet. (...) is
right, in the sight of God, to he (...) more than unto them, Acts 4, 19 (...)
they straightly command us not to te^^^^ (...) name, we ought to obey God rather
chap. 5, 28, 29.

N. B. There are several of the afor^ articles that were taken from Robert
Ba^^^ ^^^fession of faith, which the reader may from the rest by the marks of
quotation.

THE END.

