FRUITS OF RETIREMENT: OR, Miscellaneous Poems, MORAL AND DIVINE.

BEING CONTEMPLATIONS, LETTERS, etc.

Written on Variety of Subjects and Occasions.

BY MARY MOLLINEUX, LATE OF LIVERPOOL, DECEASED.

To which is prefixed, Some Account of the AUTHOR.

And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the LORD, for he has triumphed
gloriously, Exodus xv. 21. THE SEVENTH EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-street.

M DCC LXXVI.

A TESTIMONY CONCERNING MY DEAR FRIEND AND COUSIN MARY MOLLINEUX, DECEASED, In
a living Remembrance of the Benefit which I received by her Labor of Love; and
now recommend to the Youth of our Age, to excite them to Faithfulness, and a
circumspect Conversation.
THE worthy Author of these Writings, was one whose near Relation to me began
our Acquaintance almost with our Lives; she was the only Child of her Mother,
as I of my Father, and they one Brother and Sister. This gave us Opportunity of
frequent Converse with each other; and having no Sisters of our own, and our
natural Inclinations and Tempers being suitable, caused us more to respect each
other: Though she was of more Years, and different Principles, in Matters of
Religion Being one called Quaker.
, at that Time, yet the Sympathy and Kindness that was betwixt us, out-balanced
the seeming Disparity; and we could argue without Wrangling, and dissent
without Discord; and such was her prudent winning Carriage toward me, that
even in my green and childish Years, she often prevailed with me to quit many
trifling Things, in which I then delighted, for more profitable Employments;
which she was not wanting to recommend to me, nor to tell me of my Faults; but
with so much Affection and good Counsel, that like a mollifying, healing
Balsam, it cured almost insensibly. And so far was I from accounting her my
Enemy, for telling me the Truth, that considering her Wisdom and Virtue,
together with her plain Dealing, which I took as no small Argument of her
Kindness; knowing, Reproof and good Advice to be so thankless an Office, that
nothing but Love and Duty can prevail with a discreet Person to act that Part:
I say, upon these Inducements I made Choice of her as my particular Bosom
Friend. Nor was I mistaken or disappointed, for such she approved herself;
making Choice of me also as hers, soon after my Convincement. Thus was our Love
reciprocal: And this was the Beginning of our Friendship, so often mentioned in
her Verses; which the rather induces me to hint it here, as an Encouragement
to all who profess the pure unerring Truth, to keep faithful in their Place and
Testimony, that so the Lord may make Use of them to invite and win their
Familiars and Relations to love and embrace the precious Truth, as she was made
an happy Instrument of Good to me, by her many kind Admonitions, and seasonable
Cautions, verbal and literal, both in Verse and Prose: But chiefly, that
prevailing Argument of good Example, and circumspect Conversation, which the
Lord, in his infinite Mercy, was pleased so to bless, that they became Motives
to me, to consider how much I was short of her; and to examine her Principles,
as well as my own: Then did the Lord open my Eyes, and by his Light and Spirit
in my Heart, gave me a Sight of my inward State and Condition; which I found to
be unsafe, notwithstanding the Advantages of a sober Education; and that, if my
Righteousness exceeded not that of the Scribes and Pharisees, in vain was it to
expect an Admittance into the heavenly Kingdom. So that after much Sorrow and
many Conflicts, the Lord brought me to this Resolution in my own Mind, That if
he would be pleased to discover his Way, which leads to Life and Salvation, and
how I should attain Power to walk in it, so that I might enjoy his Peace, which
I so much wanted, with his Assistance I would become his Disciple, and follow
him whithersoever he should lead: Then did the Lord, in his great Love, and
never to be forgotten Condescension, show me, that it was a straight Way,
despised by many wise and prudent of the World; and walked in by a poor,
self-denying, under-valued People, which it would be hard for me to be numbered
with: And so I found it, being almost ready to despair, until the Lord inclined
my Heart to take her Counsel, and go to some Meetings of the People called
Quakers; where I heard the Way of God so plainly discovered, and his blessed
Truth so livingly preached, that I was convinced thereof, and well satisfied
that the glorious Presence of the Lord, and his Heart-mollifying Power, was
with this People; which unusually tendered my Spirit, and distinguished their
Meetings from those I had formerly frequented. This made me delight to meet
with them, though much wondered at, scoffed and reproached for it; yet by her
encouraged: But, praised be the great Almighty God, he brought me in his own
appointed Time, to witness the Fulfilling of his ancient Prophecy, Psalm cx. 3.
making me willing in the Day of his Power; willing to become a Fool and
Gazing-stock to my former Acquaintance; willing to be rid of the Load of Sin I
had labored under: And considering that no Burden could be heavier, was also
made to accept the tender Invitation of our blessed Lord and Savior, who said,
Mat xi. 8. 29, 30.
Come unto me, all you who labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
Rest; take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart,
and ye shall find Rest to your Souls; for my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is
light: And blessed be the eternal Goodness, I have witnessed it to be so, in
comparison of the Bondage of Corruption. And I here insert my Exercise, for the
Encouragement of the Sincere-hearted, that all may depend upon the Lord, Heb.
xi 6.
who is a good Rewarder of them who diligently seek him; and can give
Testimony, according to their Measure, that his Ways are Ways of Pleasantness,
Prove. iii. 17.
and all his Paths are Peace: Therefore let those, whose Feet are thither
turned, hold on their Way, and persevere in Righteousness and Purity; that so
they may grow stronger and stronger, and be able to lend a helping-hand to them
who are weak; as this my dear Friend has often done, both to me and others.
And let all, who are yet seeking the Lord and his Truth, be encouraged in his
Faithfulness and Obedience to follow God's Requirings in their own Hearts; Romans
i. 19.
for that which may be known of God, Ephesians. v. 13.
is there manifest; and whatsoever does make manifest, is Light, (viz.) the
Light of Jesus, which enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World: This is
that which truly discovers God to Man, and Man to himself; yea, the whole
Mystery of Godliness. Therefore let none tire in their Search after Truth, nor
be weary in well-doing, Gal. vi. 9.
for they shall reap in due Season, the Benefit thereof, if they faint not, but
hold out to the End; as did the Author of the ensuing Verses; of whom I am
willing to give the Reader some Account.

She was one who, in her Childhood, was much afflicted with weak Eyes, which
made her unfit for the usual Employment of Girls; and being of a large natural
Capacity, quick, witty, and studiously inclined, her Father brought her up to
more Learning, than is commonly bestowed on our Sex; in which she became so
good a Proficient, that she well understood the Latin Tongue, fluently
discoursed in it; and made a considerable Progress in Greek also; wrote several
Hands well; was a good Arithmetician, yea, in the best Arithmetic; for she so
numbered her Days, as to apply her Heart unto Wisdom; Psalm xc. 12.
as also to the Study of several useful Arts; had a good Understanding of
Physic and Surgery, the nature of Plants, Herbs, and Minerals; and made some
Inspection into diverse profitable Sciences; delighting in the Study of Nature,
and to admire the great God of Nature, in the various Operations of his Power
and Goodness; the wonderful Harmony and Order of the Creation, and the infinite
Wisdom by which it is governed; of which she would often speak: Admiring how
there could be an Atheist in the World, since the Creation does so plainly
assert the Being of a Deity. And as we have been walking or riding together,
would often discourse of the present Objects, much tending to Edification;
making many pretty Remarks, and comparing outward Things with inward: As also,
upon all Occasions, would draw such useful Observations, as made her Company
profitable and delighting: For she was of a thoughtful, composed Temper; yet of
a quick Apprehension, and ingenious; which, being seasoned with Truth, in which
she had many sweet Openings, these meeting in a Temper conversable, and
concerned for the Good of others, made her Conversation improving and
desirable. She was one who loved the blessed Truth, and they who walked
according to it, from a Child, being early convinced thereof; though she was not
satisfied with a bare Profession of Religion, but zealous for the Life of it,
both in herself and others; also furnished with good Arguments to defend it,
being ready to give an Answer to every one that asked a Reason of the Hope
which was in her, with Meekness and Fear: Nor forward to begin a Dispute, yet
sound in what she undertook, and never, that I know of, ^oil'd in an Argument;
for she had an Eye to the Lord, and liked to be satisfied that she was in her
Place, and called by him to what she did for him: Would often mention the
Passage of Uzzah, 2 Samuel vi. 6, 7. how Death was his Punishment, for putting
forth his Hand to take hold of the Ark of God, when the Oxen shook it; it being
a Service not required of him.

Nor was she proud, or conceited of her Parts and Learning, but adorned with an
humble Modesty; having, I believe, meaner Thoughts of herself, than any one
else had of her, who knew her Qualifications.

Plain and decent in her Clothes, which she valued for Service more than Sight;
and slighted, in comparison of those better Ornaments of the Mind, which she
preferred above splendid or costly Apparel.

She was one that loved to read the Holy Scriptures, and such useful Authors as
had a Tendency to Improvement; in which she spent much Time: God having
furnished her with an extraordinary Memory to retain the same.

She delighted much in Solitude, and was often alone; setting apart some Time
of the Day for Retirement; and would frequently say to me, in the Evenings, Let
us go aside, and wait upon the Lord; we have daily Need of daily Bread, and to
renew our Strength; and how can we expect it, if we do not wait for it? And
would recite the Passage of Elijah, 1 Kings xviii. 36. that at the Time of the
Evening Sacrifice, the Lord answered by Fire; with other pretty Remarks, too
tedious to insert, which she abounded in, upon all Occasions, to promote that
which was good: In these Times of Retirement, Verses would often come up in her
Mind, which she afterward wrote: Many of these, herewith printed, being
Meditations according to the Frame and Exercise of her Spirit, when thus
composed.

Neither did she neglect public Opportunities to worship God; for she was
diligent in frequenting religious Meetings, not being apt to omit any, unless
upon an extraordinary Occasion. Nor did she suffer her Eyes to wander, which
the Mind too often accompanies; but the Composedness of her Countenance, showed
the Sedateness of her well exercised Mind: And the good Improvement she made of
public and private Devotion, her innocent and Christian Life did clearly
discover; which she well began in her early Years, and manifested her Progress
therein, by her Constancy and Perseverance to the End, which crowns all; for
it is he that endures to the End, that shall be saved: This she had a Regard to,
more than the fading Enjoyments of this uncertain World; and, I believe, she
was in a good Condition when she left it, and laid down her Head in Peace with
the Lord, leaving a good Savor behind her.

She was one who willingly and cheerfully suffered for the Truth, encouraging
others to do the like, both by Precept and Example: One just, honest, and true
to her Word, temperate and self-denying; keeping within the Limits prescribed
for Health, which she regarded, more than to gratify a luxurious Appetite:
Solid and grave in her Carriage, mixed with an innocent Cheerfulness; not
formally austere; yet rather reserved, than over-free; bashful, than bold.

To conclude, she was one whose Modesty, Charity, Friendship, and religious
Conversation, came not short of her excellent Writings; to which I refer the
Reader, for a fuller Character of their Author than I am capable of giving: Her
own Pen having discovered the rich Treasure of her pious Mind. But what I have
written, is from an experimental Knowledge of her; and no one, I believe, knew
her better than myself: For she was as much without Reserve to me, I think, as
one Friend could be to another; for we loved entirely, communicated our Minds
and Exercises to each other freely, advising with one another on most
Occasions: And great was our Nearness and Unity of Spirit, in the Truth; yea,
great was her Concern of my Welfare, which she zealously labored for; as the
many Letters, both in Verse and Prose, to me writ, and herewith printed,
largely demonstrate.

And though Verse is not so commonly used in divine Subjects as Prose, and but
too much abused by the extravagant Wits of the Age; yet she, like a skilful
Chemist, had learned to separate the purer Spirits, and more refined Parts of
Poetry, from the earthly, worthless Dross; and made Use of her Gift, rather to
convince and prevail upon the Mind, to affect and raise the Soul upon the Wings
of divine Contemplation, than to please the airy Fancy with Strains of Wit, and
unprofitable Invention; which she was ever careful to avoid.

And though living Testimonies to the Truth are numerous, yet few extant in
Verse, which has an harmonious delightful Faculty in it, that influences the
Minds of some more than Prose, especially young People, and is more apt to
imprint itself in the Memory: Therefore her Subject being divine, and so
sensibly and solidly managed; as it has been of Service to those few who have
had the Perusal of it, so, I hope, will be attended with a general Benefit.

And having reaped no small Advantage thereby myself, could do no less, than
recommend her worthy Labors, and exemplary Life, to others, as a Pattern well
worth following. For her Acquaintance may say of her, as was said of Ruth, The
City of my People does know that she was a virtuous Woman. And being a good
Instrument in the Hand of the Lord to me, having also been much comforted,
encouraged, and refreshed by her Verses, my Desire is, that the Lord may so
bless them to Posterity, that they may reap such an Advantage by them, as may
tend to the Promotion of Truth, and the Good of Souls in general.

Which is the sincere Desire of an universal Well-wisher to all Mankind,
FRANCES OWEN.
Rigate, the 20th of the Third Month, 1701.
A TESTIMONY CONCERNING MY DEAR FRIEND MARY MOLLINEUX.
AS concerning my dearly beloved Friend, Many Mollineux, I have more to testify
than I shall commit to Writing, having had intimate Acquaintance and Fellowship
with her above sixteen Years; in all which Time, her grave, virtuous, modest
Life and Conversation, deserves singular Remembrance; because her friendly
Communication, Conference, and Deportment, was always solid, sensible, and
tender, mixed with a feeling and sympathizing Love to her Friends, in all
Exercises and Afflictions: She was one, to whom I could freely impart my Mind
and Concerns, in any Exercises; as I have often done, to my Comfort and
Refreshment. My Heart is moved, in the Remembrance of her Faithfulness and
Integrity, from the Day that I was first acquainted with her, with Sorrow for
the Loss of so near a Friend; who, although she was plentifully endued with
many worthy Gifts and Parts, both natural and spiritual, yet I never knew her
lifted up in any of them, nor exalted above her Measure; but rather reserved,
than in any wise forwardly divulging her Gifts to the public Censure, without
weighty Consideration; so that she would not cast her Pearls before Swine: Yet
not so much reserved, but that to her near intimate Friends, whom she knew in
the Fellowship and Bond of Truth, she was very free and tender. I remember,
that several Years ago, when she was a single Woman, upon the Perusal of some
Copies of her Verses which she gave me, I felt such Unity of Spirit with them,
that I said, I thought they might be of Service, if made public in print; but
she was not then free that her Name should be exposed; she not seeking Praise
amongst Men, but to communicate the Exercise of peculiar Gifts amongst her near
Friends and Acquaintance; but now, since it has pleased the Lord to remove her
out of the earthly Tabernacle, into everlasting Rest, in which I am well
satisfied she is forever blessed, I think it would be very ungrateful to her
Memory, and also a wronging of others, to keep such worthy Things unpublished;
with which, I believe, the most that are of open Understandings, and
unprejudiced Hearts, will have, in some measure, Unity. I desire and hope, they
may truly tend to the Benefit of all moderate Readers, and to the Praise of
Him, who is the only Author of every good and perfect Gift.

And so I rest a Well-wisher to all Mankind; but more especially to the
Household of Faith. TRIAL RIDER.

A TESTIMONY CONCERNING MY LATE WIFE MARY MOLLINEUX, DECEASED.
CONCERNING my dear, loving, and late deceased Wife, Mary Mollineux, formerly
Mary Southworth, whom I took in Marriage on the 10th Day of the Second Month,
1685. I was first acquainted with her at Lancaster-Castle, where we both at one
Time were Prisoners, for being at a peaceable religious Meeting of the People
called Quakers, in the Year 1684, though we had seen each other before. In which
Imprisonment, I believed that she should be my Wife; but never intended to
express any Thing thereof, whilst we were both Prisoners there; and after she
was released, I saw her, and was in Company with her several Times, before I
expressed any Thing of my Concern to take her to be my Wife; several
considerable Men having before attempted to prevail with her on that Account:
And during the whole Time of my Acquaintance with her, which was above eleven
Years, her Life and Conversation was serious, innocent, sweet and savoury; and
she was very loving, diligent, tenderhearted, and kindly affectionate toward
me, and our Children; and generally loving and tender toward all People,
especially such as were in any Distress, Sickness, or Affliction, though never so
poor; and the Lord blessed her Endeavors, as well in Advice, as Administration
of Remedies, to several; so that they have acknowledged their Recoveries to
have (...) thereby, through his Blessing: And what she did therein, was free. She
was very careful, that nothing of Evil might get a Place in her Children, or in
any with whom she was concerned: And therefore good Advice and Admonition she
frequently gave, which many received in Love and good Esteem of her. The Lord
opened her Understanding, and enlarged her Capacity, in a great Degree, upon
several Accounts; yet her Mind was not lifted up thereby, so as to glory in her
Gifts or Parts; but learning of Christ, the Truth, to be lowly in Heart, she
chose rather to appear little to Men. She was very constant and cordial to her
Friends, and true in concealing of Secrets. She was often concerned to make
Peace amongst them that were at Difference, and often prevailed therein. She
was plain and free in speaking to the Faces of any, but abhorred to reproach
any in secret. Her Heart was inclined toward God, therefore she was just in
her Dealing, with all people with whom she had to do. She was convinced of the
Way of Truth in her Youth, by the Light or inward Appearance of Christ in her
Heart, which she loved; and therefore, she retaining her Integrity to the End
of her Time, a Crown of endless Life and Glory, I believe, the Lord has
bestowed upon her. She was very noble in suffering Persecution for the
Testimony of Truth, and enduring hard Exercises, occasioned by my several
Imprisonments for the same Cause, whilst she was my Wife. And through several
Sicknesses and Afflictions the Lord supported her, to persevere in Patience,
Faithfulness and Constancy to him. She was very punctual in Performance of her
Undertakings, and quick, discreet, and diligent in her Business; yet still she
used to take a Time for private Retirement in Evenings alone, except I was with
her, to wait upon, and feel after the Lord, in the Gift of his Light; Love and
Grace in her Heart; and to see that, with the wise Virgins, she had Oil in her
burning Lamp, that it might not go out; but that she might be ready to enter
into the Marriage Chamber, whenever the Lord, the Bridegroom of her Soul,
came. She was also very diligent, in attending the Assemblies of the People of
God called Quakers, with them to meet in the Name, Power, Light and Spirit of
the Lord, to wait upon him, to be opened by him, and to receive Refreshment,
Strength and Comfort from him, and to feel the Renewings of his Love and
Goodness in her Soul. And that Day Week next before her last Illness seized
her, after a more than usual manner, she said to me, That the feeling and
enjoying of the sweet eternal Love of God in her Heart, was more precious to
her, than all other Things that could be enjoyed, etc. She was concerned in her
Spirit, that many, with her, and all that are faithful to God, might come to
taste and see how good the Lord is; and upon that Account, her Words, Writings
and Conversation, were acceptable, prevalent, and serviceable to the
Invitation, Convincement, Strengthening and Encouragement of some to seek after
the Lord, and his blessed Way and Truth, inwardly revealed, and to be revealed;
wherein many have found great Satisfaction and Cause of Rejoicing. And that
many more may receive Benefit by her Writings, I am desirous and concerned to
publish them, and refer all sober Readers, in the Fear of God, to peruse them;
not doubting but such may receive Advantage thereby; though she was not free to
commit them to public View in her Lifetime, yet she had nothing against the
publishing thereof afterward.

And now I shall give a brief Account of what I was and am a Witness of,
concerning her last Illness; and some of the sweet, sensible and precious Words
which she spoke in the Time thereof, being very sensible to the End; so that
she spoke no impertinent or unsensible Word therein, that I know of, who
constantly attended her.

Upon the 8th Day of the Tenth Month, 1695, she was seized with violent Pain
and Sickness, which continued, sometimes more, and sometimes less: And one
Morning, soon after, she said to me thus; I have had such a Dream, as I have
seldom had; it is an Emblem of my Life. And then she told it me thus; viz. She
dreamed, that she was going at the Side of a pleasant broad River, and
sometimes she came to Breaches; which Brooks, running into the River, or the
like, had made upon the Shore of it; which Breaches she passed over, but
sometimes with Difficulty, and then ran fast on still, till she came to another
Breach, and having passed several Breaches, some greater, and some lesser, at
last, she came to a Breach which was greater than any of the rest, and she said
within herself, how shall I get over this Breach? But yet she went on, and
passed through it, and it was fair on the other Side; and she awaked. Now, as
she looked upon this Dream to be an Emblem of her Life, so I cannot, nor could
not, since she told it me, expound it otherwise than thus, viz. That the
pleasant broad River, signified the Lord her Creator, who is to his People a
Place of broad Rivers, Isa. xxxiii. 21. and the Shore thereof, upon which she
walked, signified Time; and the Breaches, which she passed over, were the
Difficulties and Afflictions which she passed through in her Time, and the last
and greatest Breach which she came to, and passed over, signified her last
Sickness and Death. From which Dream, as a significant Parable, all may learn
and consider, how fast they are hastening, or running, toward their last and
greatest Breach; even the Death, or Dissolution of their earthly Tabernacles;
and none knows how near they are to it. About nine Days after her said
Illness began, she said to me thus, viz. I am well content, if the Lord see
meet, that he take me away by this Distemper, rather than to be in this Pain;
for my Pain is great, and I know not what in this World I can desire to stay to
enjoy, except it be my Love, and my little Lads; meaning me, and our two
Children: Of whom she then said thus: I would rather have my Children enriched
with the Fear of the Lord, than with all manner of worldly Riches. About the
same Time she said, I am thinking of honest Richard Johnson, who was a near
Friend to us, that slept much of the Time of his Illness before his Departure;
methinks it seems like an easy Passage. And soon after that, she began to be
inclined to Sleepiness, and slept more and more till the End; yet, at her
awaking, was still sensible and cheerful: And though she was daily weaker and
weaker, yet she would still sit up five or six, or more, Hours in the Evenings,
and discourse freely and cheerfully, till within five Days of her Departure. I
often desired her to accept of the Advice of some Physician, but she was still
averse thereto in this Illness, though in other^ she had complied. On the 20th
Day of her Illness; in the Evening, discoursing very freely, as formerly, she
told me, She was well satisfied, that if the Lord took her away by that
Distemper, she should be eternally happy; with many other sensible and
comfortable Expressions: Though she was so weak, that the same Evening, about the
eleventh Hour, I thought she had been departing; but in a little Time,
recovering her Breath, she spoke cheerfully, and slept, At her awaking, that
Night, I asked her, How she was? She answered, Through Mercy, indifferent. And
after a little Pause, she very sensibly said, Amictum iri, vel Ami^iendum esse;
which is in English, To be clothed hereafter, in two Expressions of it:
Whereby I understood, that she was minding how the Lord would cloth her
hereafter, when her mortal Clothing was put off. Then I desired her, in
English Words, for they that were present, understood not Latin, that if she
had any Thing in her Mind, either concerning her Children, or any other Thing,
farther to communicate to me, that she would do it; but she, as if all outward
Things were then out of her Thoughts, quickly replied in Latin, saying, Why
speak thou such Things? Do not thou understand me? I answered in Latin,
Yes, I very well understand thee, and that thou speak of spiritual Things:
She answered, Yes, but she had nothing, concerning outward Things, farther to
communicate to me. The next Morning, about the ninth Hour, I again thought she
had been departing; but after a little Time, somewhat recovering her Breath,
and seeing me express, to Friends that were present, something of my Concern
for her, she said to me, N^ nimis (...) es^s; that is in English, Be not thou
overmuch careful, or troubled; which Advice took Impression in my Heart: And
that was the last Latin Sentence that she spoke, that I know of; and she never
spoke in Latin, in this Illness, that I remember, except when Company was
present, that she would speak only to me: A little after, most of the Company
being gone out, I asked her, How she was? She answered, Drawing nearer and
nearer. And many sweet and loving Sentences she spoke to me that Day, and the
Day next after; but afterward was scarcely able to answer to any Question, but
continued mostly sleeping as it were, sweetly and quietly: And on the 3d Day of
the eleventh Month 1695, in the Evening, she departed without the least Sigh or
Groan.

And so, though the Lord, who, in his Love, joined us together, and gave us for
Blessings to each other, and blessed us with the abundant Increase of his Love
in our Hearts, even to the End of her Time, has seen meet to take from me her
Company, which I valued above all other temporal Enjoyments; the Loss whereof
is great to me: Yet being satisfied that she is entered into Rest, in the Bosom
of God's Love, with him to live in Peace and Happiness for ever; and also,
being clear, in that, through his Assistance, according to the Understanding
given me, I have endeavored fully to discharge my Duty of endeared Love to
her, in every Respect, in her last, as well as former, Exercises; therefore I
am, in the Love of God* comforted, and can cheerfully and freely say, The
Lord's Will is worthy to be done in all Things, and his Name to be blessed,
praised and magnified, over all, for ever,

By HENRY MOLLINEUX.

A few Words more, in Remembrance of my dear Wife, M. Mollineux.
THOUGH it may seem to some that read my Lines
As a delightful Thing, because their Minds
Still their Enjoyments have; yet they must know
No lasting Joys remain in Things below.
The Sithe of Time, Death, parts Friend from Friend,
But to true Friendship cannot put an End;
Though Friends surviving Exercise may find,
Whose Friends removed, whilst they remain behind.
My Friend, my Friend, my dearest Friend, my Wife,
The greatest Joy and Comfort of my Life,
In Visibles, is now removed from me:
Though, as one destitute of Hope, I see
No Cause to mourn for her; but sure I may
Be, for my Loss, concerned: Yet this can say,
The Lord has given, the Lord has took again,
High Praises still be to his glorious Name,
Though mine is the Loss, here is is the endless Gain.
Although to me my Loss to bear is hard,
Yet am I from Repining quite debarred;
The Lord does with his Goodness so supply,
My Soul shall ever praise him, till I die.
Blessed be the Day, wherein my Love abounded,
At first to her, and Friendship firm was founded,
In our United Hearts, my faithful Friend:
Friendship 'twixt thee and me shall never end.
She was my Wife for full ten Years, alas,
Short Time! which we in tender Love did pass
Endearingly, which in our Hearts was sown,
Some Time before, by the Eternal One;
Which, living in our Bosoms, did increase,
Until the Time of her deplored Decease,
And now is as fresh as ever. Surely she,
Who wrote of Friendship, Love's extreme Degree,
Although with Life, her Pen was much sublimed,
Yet, did not, as her Bosom held it, find
Words half sufficient, ^ully to declare
The faithful Love she to her Friend did bear.
True, tenderhearted, in Affection kind,
Exceeding diligent, and much inclined
All for to serve in Love; but much more me,
To Whom she had complied my Wife to be.
She to the Age of thirty-four Years staid
A modest, chaste, reserved, ingenious Maid;
Who did not only write of Modesty,
In Words profound, and spotless Chastity,
But in Example was, as well as Words,
A Pattern in the same: Wherein accords
Her Life, Works, Writings, Words, true, lovely, sweet,
Which in concinnate Harmony did meet.
And as she wrote of Worship, Truth, and Zeal,
With Courage bold for God, she did not fail,
Being by his Arm upheld, when deeply proved,
To stand a faithful Witness: For she loved
The Praise of God, more than the Praise of Men;
Therefore was more to him, seemed less to them
That did not choose his Fear: Wherein she found
Wisdom to stop their Mouths, their Wits confound;
Though of the chief in Babel's Learning, they
Stood as amazed, and knew not what to say.
A Bishop of two Counties Diocese
Her questioned, she replied, he proved this:
His Chaplain then, the Master's Cause to mend,
Attempting to dispute, was foiled in the End;
Whose Brother, being Lawyer, present cried,
Her Learning made her mad; when she replied,
He, as ashamed and speechless, turned aside.
Thus three great learned Men, of subtle Wit,
To Silence put, did in one Hour submit
T^ a little Woman, crowned with Wisdom's Bays,
Who, in God's Fear did celebrate his Praise,
Declaring boldly against that Worship, which
God never set up, that makes its Merchants rich.
She loved the precious Truth, placed in her Heart,
For which she was imprisoned; but the Smart
Its Adversaries felt: For Joy to her
Thereby accru'd, who did its Cause prefer
Before all Transitories. And, when I
Was Prisouer for the same, it was my Joy,
That she great Exercise did nobly bear,
Therein rejoicing in God's holy Fear:
Though for her Sake, Grief pierced often my Mind,
When I the Sense did of her Suffering find,
So deep, that from mine Eyes my Sleep withdrew,
And secret Tears did frequently pursue:
Yea, without outward Notice, once was I,
When she was by Distemper, like to die,
Made sensible thereof, though in the Goal,
Distant near forty Miles, and did condole;
And for her to the Lord I prayed, whose Ear
Was open, and through Prison-walls did hear:
And he released her from her Malady,
And me from Prison, her again to see;
Though then confined, as firm as Men could ^ye;
Praises be to God's Name eternally.
She sweetly wrote of Charity divine,
Which in her Heart and Life did clearly shine
More bright, than in her Words; which did extend,
In her, to Poor and Rich, to Foe and Friend:
To all in Plainness she, with due Respect,
Would freely show her Sense; but to reflect
Against any, being absent, did eschew;
Charity taught her better Things to do.
To any in Affliction, she was free
Advice to give, or Help with Remedy,
Where her Endeavors could; which God did bless,
Remarkably, with the desired Success:
Yea, sometimes, when Physicians had been tried.
Much Money paid, and still the Cure denied
To their Performance, she in Freeness gave
What, from Distempers dreadful, proved to save.
But Charity in her did farther move
Her tender Heart, in sympathizing Love,
To use her Tongue or Pen, a Word to give
To Minds in Exercise; which did relieve,
Convince, or satisfy, and strengthen some,
The Race of Virtue in their Time to run.
For which, some have good cause to bless the Name
Of God, from whom these Words with Virtue came.
This is not writ to magnify her Praise,
The Praise belongs to God, who first did raise
Her Mind, from Things below to seek bis Truth,
Hid in her Heart, in Time of tender Youth;
Which, truly sought, she found, and prized more
Than Ophir's Gold, or Pearls of Indian Shore.
This taught her to discern the Way of God,
From Ways of Men; this made her love his Rod:
This gave her Knowledge of her Duty right
Unto the Lord; this gave her also Sight
Into the Properties of needful Things,
Of many Kinds, that Mortals Comfort brings:
This gave her, in her tender Years, to see
The frail Estate of poor Mortality;
The Sense whereof she daily did retain,
Striving, with earnest Diligence, to gain
The precious Pearl of Immortality.
As if she knew how short her Time should be;
In Hope of which, when painful Death assailed
Her mortal Part, her Courage never failed,
But did, with Sense as sound as ever, show
Her true Content, and Satisfaction too.
To leave this World, of true Felicity
To be possessed to all Eternity.
Oh! may, with me, her Offspring still remain
In God's pure Fear, eternal Life to gain:
Then, this short Time once past, we may in Peace,
Live with the Just, where Joys shall never cease;
Where we, with her, may living Praises sing
For ever to the LORD, the heavenly King.
HENRY MOLLINEUX.

The following Relation, touching some Discourse that, upon Occasion, she had
with Doctor Stratford, so called, Bishop of the Diocese of Cheshire and
Lancashire, etc.
Given forth and attested by my Kinsman Henry Mollineux, who was there present,
viz.
UPON the 18th Day of the twelfth Month, 1690, I and another Neighbor were
taken Prisoners, and brought to Lancaster Jail, upon a Writ De Excommunicato
Capiendo, for not appearing at the Bishop's Court in Chester; though willing to
appear, but had no Citation showed us, nor lawful Notice given: Of which
Proceedings, it being witnessed under the Hands of several who were present
when such Notice was pretended to be given, she acquainted the said Bishop, he
being at Ormskirk, near our Dwelling, in the sixth Month, 1691, and it was so
evidently manifested to him, that he seemed satisfied of the Truth thereof, and
said, They who should have given the Notice, were to be blamed, etc. And
moderately discoursing with her, he said, If she would come to his
Dwelling House in Wigan, within two or three Weeks, when he had conferred with
his Chancellor, if he could find out any Way to do it, he would do any Kindness
therein that lay in his Power for her. Now that which she desired, was that the
Prisoners might be admitted in his Court to put in their Appearance; for want
of which they were imprisoned. So, upon his Advice, on the 24th Day of the
sixth Month 1691, she went to the Bishop's House in Wigan, to receive his
Answer; where he again discoursed with her, and seemed willing that the
Prisoners might be admitted to put in their Appearance; but his Chancellor's
Deputy there concluded, that they could not be so admitted. Then the Bishop
asked her, Why they could not pay the Church-leys, for that was the Cause for
which we were prosecuted; she answered, They could not pay them for
Conscience Sake: He required her to show him some Scripture for it; then she
asked him to show her any Precept or Example in the Scriptures, that the Jews,
or any of the People of God, ever offered to compel any other People to pay
toward the upholding of their Worship, or Worship-houses, or Temples? The
Bishop replied, Though he could not do that, yet what Scripture have you for it,
said he, that you cannot pay to ours for Conscience Sake? She answering, said,
I will offer thee Scripture for it, and it is this: It is said in the
Scriptures, Come out from among them, (my People) and be ye separate, says the
Lord, touch not the unclean Thing, and I will receive you, 2 Cor. vi. 17, 18.
Rev. xviii. 4. Now, said she, if we had believed that you, in your Worship, had
been right, we had not come out from amongst you; but because we believed, and
were convinced, that it was not right, and therefore are come out from amongst
you, we dare not for Conscience Sake touch with you; but if we should pay
toward your Worship, or Worship-houses, we should both touch and uphold. To
which Answer, the Bishop made no Reply; but he said to his Chancellor's Deputy,
I pray you, Mr. Prescot, if you can find out any way, that they may put in
their Appearance, that they may have their Liberty, let it be done; and do what
Kindness you can for them: And so he went his way. The Bishop could give no
Scripture, in Answer to her Question; but she answered his Question with
Scripture, so that he made no Reply: And she, to his Face, bore a faithful
Testimony against their Worship, which is prescribed by Men; which Testimony
the Bishop did not contradict. And there being then present, one Entwistle, the
Bishop's Chaplain, so called, and his Brother Entwistle, a Lawyer, and another
Priest, and the Bishop's Daughter; when the Bishop was gone, and she and her
Kinsman were come out of the House, and were going away, they all four
followed; and the said Chaplain, or Priest Entwistle, began, and engaged with
her in a Dispute concerning Religion; and in about half an Hour, or less, he
was so taken and confounded in his own Arguments, that his Mouth was stopped;
which his Brother, the Lawyer seeing, as it were to excuse him, said to him, I
wonder you should trouble yourself to discourse with that Woman, she has so
much Learning, it makes her mad. To which she said, What! do you
(Letter-learned) now begin to vilify Learning, by which you have your Honors
and Preferments? Then the Lawyer, not speaking any other Word, went away, and
she left them.

Declared and testified by my Kinsman, HENRY MOLLINEUX.

So the Bishop, and his Chaplain, and the Chaplain's Brother, a Lawyer, were
all put to Silence by the Wisdom wherewith the Lord endued her, to speak in
Defense of the Cause of his Truth: Praises be to God for ever.

After this, we being out of Prison, and understanding that the Parish Priest
was endeavoring to get us into it again, (and so we were again imprisoned) she
spoke these Words, which I then wrote, viz. Esuriens agnis quantum concedet in
agris
Ipse lupus, vobis jam dabid iste miser;
Crudelisque rapax, cupidus, sine jure, Sacerdos,
Nummos, non Animas, curat, egetque cupit.
Which bears the Signification following, viz. Even what the hungry Wolf in
Field would do
To feeding Lambs, so will the Wretch to you:
The cruel Priest, fierce, covetous, unjust,
For Money, not for souls, does cark and lust.


And so, in getting us into Prison again, the Priest obtained his Point; but he
missed of his Prey, and never got it.

Many were the loving, sweet and sensible Epistles, that she sent to me, when
in Prison; ever showing her free Resignation to the Will of the Lord, in all
her Exercises, which then were great; and with much Cheerfulness and Patience
she went through them. And since her Decease, I found these following Lines,
which she had written, viz. Though some on furious Waves be often tossed,
And by the stormy Winds opposed and crossed,
And watched by raving Pirates, surely they
Are kept by one, whom Winds and Waves obey:
Though sometimes exercised, thereby to learn
Who guards and sits as Pilot at the Stern,
And with his Arm of Power does interpose
Betwixt his Children and their wondering Fees.
Oh who would not love, honor, and depend,
On such a potent, such a constant Friend!
So she depended upon the Lord, and he preserved her.

In a Letter dated the 9th of the Twelfth Month, 1691, she sent to me in Prison
these Lines, viz.

I.
Qui nocent Sanctis, Dominus locutus,
Hi sui tangunt Oculi Pupillam,
Sentient iram, quoque reddet istis
Proemia dira.
II.
Si Deo credis, filioque Christo,
Quisquis es Vir desipiensque rudis!
Cautus es ne tu Domino repugnas
Cordeque pugnis.
III.
Stultus at dixit sibi Cord, nullus
Est Deus; spernens igitur doceri
Soepe protervus ruit in ruinam
Absque timore.
M. M.

She signified her Haste in the writing of these because the Bearer staid for
the Letter; and that she had not made any of such Quantities for above twenty
Years before. They bear the Signification following, viz.

I.
The Lord, of them that hurt his Saints, does say,
They touch the Apple of his Eye; and they
Shall feel his Anger; he will them requite
With dreadful Plagues, in Death's eternal Night.
II.
If thou believe God, and Christ his Son,
Whoever thou art, thou rude and foolish Man,
Beware, lest thou the Lord of Heaven resist,
And fight against him both with Heart and Fist.
III.
But in his Heart the foolish Man has said,
There is no God; and therefore not dismayed
To slight his Teachings: He, in froward Wrath,
Runs fearless on in Ruin's dreadful Path.
Englished by H. M.
About a Week before her last Illness seized her, she desired me, being
writing, to write these two Lines, viz.

Non quoerit laudem Virtus, sibi debita vera est
Gloria, quam frendens nequit hinc depellere livor.
Which I translate thus, viz.

Virtue seeks not for Praise of Men, true Glory is its Due,
Which fretting Envy never can dispel from Virtue true,
H. M.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of this miscellaneous Grove,
Was fruitful both in Virtue and in Love:
Read but the following Lines, and thou may find,
She was the Mistress of a noble Mind;
A Soul, of more than common size, possessed
Her almost, I had said, too narrow Breast.
True to her Friend, as plainly does appear,
In dealing plainly with her Friend so dear:
She used no gilded Baits, no Flattery,
No feigned Words, but plain Sincerity;
Which does bespeak her Love, and Virtue too,
Contended one the other to outdo.
In Numbers sweet, her warbling Pen has tried
Unerring Truth from Error to divide:
Her Lines, thus measured, have successful been
To turn the wandering Mind to search within;
Where that invaluable Treasure lies,
Unsought by most, discovered to the Wise;
But yet concealed and hid from vult'rous Eyes.
It Is not the common Way, I must confess,
To write in Verse; although it is ne'ertheless
To be esteemed; because some do disdain,
And undervalue what they cannot attain:
I Would have such unadvised ones to know,
Their Genius perches on a lower Bough,
For want of Wings their untuned Souls to raise
Unto a Pitch of Harmony and Praise.
Often have I seen the Lark upon the Wing,
Toward the Sun ascend, and sweetly sing,
As if she had a Tribute due to pay
Unto the mighty Ruler of the Day,
In well composed Songs of tuneful Breath,
Such as the Swan repeats before her Death.
Thus was our Author's noble Faculty
Employed to render Thanks, in Melody,
To Him, from whom she did her Life receive;
To Him, who never sparingly does give
To them that, to His Praise, His Gifts do use,
And with His Blessings don't the World abuse.
It Is such as these unto the Well can sing,
That bubbles up from the eternal Spring;
And these alone, that to themselves secure
A Place, where Waters fail not, and where Bread is sure.
IN the Praise of noble Verse, much I might say,
Which, though by some abused, its Value don't allay.
A Pearl will not the less a Crown adorn,
'Cause by a filthy Swine it has been worn,
And trampled under Foot; the intrinsic Price
Will still appear unto the truly Wise.
We read in sacred Writ of some that wore,
The Jewels of the Lord, and played the Whore.
We also read, how David, with his Lyre,
Could still Readiness Rage, and sooth his secret Fire,
That did his Breast inflame, and heavenly Thoughts inspire;
How with his Verse, he could his Mind compose,
And ^ull his Passions to a soft Repose.
His Psalms are full of Hymns and Songs of Praise,
Prophetic mystic Flights, in heavenly Lays;
Which may suffice to let the Reader know,
He was a Poet, and a Prophet too.
The wisest Prince that ever filled a Throne,
Or swayed a Scepter in the World, was one,
Who of divine and heavenly Love has sang
A Song, which, from the harmonious Being sprang,
Therefore, kind Reader, don't pre-judge, but try,
And then, no doubt, but in this Harmony,
Thou Wilt, to thy Comfort, Satisfaction find,
When Discomposure does possess thy Mind.
THE CONTENTS.
EPistles in Prose. from 1 to p. 7. Of the Fall of Man. 8 Of a sinful State. 9
On God's Love. 11 Of this Age. 12 On the fruitless Fig Tree 14 On Israel's
Rebellion. 15 Meditations in trouble. 17 A Meditation. 19 On Peter. 20 A
Meditation in Affliction. 21 On the Sight of a Skull. 22 A Meditation. 23 On
the Parable of the ten Virgins. 24 A Meditation. 25 On Nadab and Abihu. 27 On
Charity. 28 Contemplation. 30 A Meditation in Retirement. 31 On the Vanity of
the World. 32 Contemplation. 33 A Meditation. 34 On Truth. 35 Contemplation. 37
The Retreat, a Meditation. 38 The first Epistle to Cousin F. R. 39 The second
Epistle to Cousin F. R. 41 A Remembrancer. 44 An Epistle to Cousin E. S. 45 To
Cousin M. S. 46 The third Epistle to Cousin F. R. 47 The fourth Epistle to
Cousin F. R. in Answer to one received. 49 To Cousin P. S. 51 Contemplation. 53
An Epistle to M. J. ib. Meditations, 55 The fifth Epistle to Cousin F. R. 56
The sixth Epistle to Cousin F. R. 58 Meditations in Trouble. 60 Concerning
Trials 61 A Meditation in Retirement 62 Of Modesty. 64 Meditation. 68 On
Elijah. 69 Of Chastity 73 Of a Friend. 76 A Meditation. 77 Of the Rainbow. 79
Of Content. 80 An Epistle to M. R. 82 An Epistle to Cousin J. R. 83 An Elegy.
85 An Epistle. 88 The seventh Epistle to Cousin F. R. being then under some
Exercises of Mind. 89 The eighth Epistle to Cousin F. R. 91 A Letter to Cousin
F. R. 92 A Parable to Cousin F. R. 93 Solitude 94 A Meditation 96 Meditations
on Persecution 97 On Daniel. 100. Meditations concerning our Imprisonment only
for Conscience Sake, 1684, in Lancaster Castle. 102 Another Letter to Cousin F.
R. 105 On Friendship. 107 On the three holy Children. 108 The Conclusion of a
Letter to Cousin F. R. 111 A Meditation. ib. To her Friend M. J. ib. A
Meditation. 112 Friendship tried. 113 A Meditation. 114 Of a happy Life. 117 On
David and Jonathan. ib. On Modesty and Chastity. 120 Retirement. 121 On
Solomon's Requests. 122 A Meditation. 124 Contemplation. ib. Of Friendship. 126
A Letter to a Friend. 130 Another Letter to a Friend. 131 Upon parting with a
Friend. 132 A Letter of Invitation to a Friend. 133 A Meditation. 134 Another
Meditation. 136 Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbis. ib. A Letter to
Cousin F. R. 138 Another Letter to Cousin F. R. ib. A third Letter to Cousin F.
R. 139 Upon Silence. 141
Fruits of Retirement: OR EPISTLES in Prose.
An EPISTLE to her Kinswoman F. R.
Dear Friend and Cousin,
IN the unfeigned Love, my Heart is concerned for thee, really desiring thy
temporal and eternal Welfare: I should be glad indeed to be made instrumental
for thy Satisfaction, in Doubts or Scruples; but, alas! Words or Arguments
cannot, without the powerful Influence of the living Eternal Word in thy own
Heart, resolve or disannul the Consultations and Reasonings of this kind, that
may inwardly arise, or be by others suggested unto thee: Yet this is in my Mind
to signify, touching the Word [Thou] that besides the Properness thereof, it is
the Phrase and Language used in Scripture, by some owned for a Rule; and it is
mostly a slavish Fear of Men, that in the Hearts of those that would shun the
Cross, deters from the Use of it. Yet I desire not to invite thee to a bare
Formality, etc. for until thou art convinced in thy own Mind, that the Day of
small Things is not to be despised, and know that Power and Love which
capacitates and enables to undergo Trials; which are indeed but momentary, in
comparison of the exceeding Weight of Glory, that unto the Faithful is and
shall be revealed, it signifies little; but it is written, He that will be my
Disciple, must take up the Cross, etc.

As for the Names of Days or Months, as now used, they are contrary to
Scripture, where it is written, the first and second, etc. as in John xx. 1,
19. and in Zephaniah iii. 9. there is a Promise, I will turn the People to a
pure Language, etc. I will take away the Names of Baalim out of her Mouth, Hos.
ii. 17.

Now concerning outward Sacraments, as thou termest them; they indeed are
outward only, and Shadows; but the Substance being come, they flee away.
Neither can outward Water purify the Conscience, nor outward Bread nourish the
immortal Soul. And though in the Infancy of some, such Things were in
Condescension permitted, as also Circumcision; yet the Baptism of Christ, which
was then said to exceed John's, was with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, which
quickens and purifies the Heart, Soul, and Body; which Paul preferred before
Touching, Col. ii. 21. 22.
T^sting, and Handling, all which perish with using, after the Doctrines of
Men, etc. Christ, the Substance of all Shadows, is now by many witnessed to be
come, to nourish the inward Man; whereof the Lord alone, in his tender Love,
can make thee truly sensible, as thou abidest faithful to what is already
revealed; even in the true Fear, the Fountain of Wisdom, the chiefest Treasure,
which the Thief can never break through to steal.

Know farther, dear Cousin, That the Secrets of the Lord are with them that
fear him; and, He that is faithful in a little, shall be made Ruler over much:
Of which gracious Privilege, that thou may become a living Witness, is the
hearty Desire of

Thy faithful Friend and Cousin.
Warrington, the 3d of the Tenth Month, 1678. POSTSCRIPT
THE Lord can and will preserve those that love and depend upon him, and love
the Light, bringing their Deeds to it, that they may be made manifest; as it is
written, Ephesians. v. 13. whatsoever makes manifest, is Light, and that within
revealed, even in the Heart. And as one of our Sex has notably said or writ,
several Years since: He that commands himself, is more a Prince
Than he that Nations keeps in Awe;
Who yield to that which does their Souls convince,
Shall never need another Law.




Another EPISTLE TO F. R.
Dearly-beloved Cousin,
DISTANCE of Place cannot easily cancel the Characters of true Friendship from
solid Minds; especially where the true Marks of Christ's Disciples are
manifest, viz. Love, which is indeed the Fulfilling of the royal Law; for it
bears all Things, thinks no Evil, and seeks not its own, but others Good:
In this therefore is the true Perfection, which I desire we may daily more and
more (...) after, and travail for. I am

Thy truly loving Cousin.

Another EPISTLE to F. R.
Well-beloved Friend and Cousin,
I HAVE received two Letters from thee, the first of which does signify thy
going to a Meeting, where thou heardst M. Worrel, etc. whereof I was very glad,
desiring the Effect thereof may not easily be raced out of Mind. I do dearly
desire thee, not to prolong thy Servitude in Egypt's Land, the Land of
Darkness: For I may tell thee with Grief, many have suffered Loss by consulting
with Flesh and Blood, and a glorious Day has passed over their Heads, O who
knows what Instruments the Lord is preparing for himself? Let us wait to be
made Vessels of Honor for his heavenly House, wherein the Righteous shall
dwell in everlasting Peace, and Joy unutterable, and full of Glory, in the
Presence of the immaculate Lamb, who reigns in the holy City, and is alone
worthy to reign for ever, and evermore, Amen.

Ah! it is now no Time to delay, but flee from Babylon to the Rock of Ages,
even to Mount Zion the Refuge of Israel, the safe Hiding Place. Where, that we
may together know an eternal Habitation, is the hearty Desire of

Thy true Friend and Cousin.
1678.
Another EPISTLE to F. R.
Dear Cousin,
IN that unfeigned Love that thinks no Evil, do I dearly salute thee; hoping
thou, in that, wilt excuse my Omission of writing all this Time, when thou
considerest the Cause, which I suppose ere this, thou art informed of, viz.
Some hurryings of us before Magistrates, for being at an Evening meeting; who,
having required Bonds for Appearance at Sessions, we not being willing to enter
into Bonds, though we promised to appear, were many, of us committed to be sent
to Lancaster; we came to the Castle betimes the third Day of our setting out,
which was the last Sixth-day, not being wearied so much as sometimes in going
to our Monthly Meeting: Blessed be the Name of the Lord, who preserved Israel's
Feet from swelling in their Travels of old. His Arm of Power is the very same
as ever; and we can say, our Confinement is not grievous to us: For these
strong Walls cannot seclude us from our best Beloved, who is our exceeding
great Reward. For his Presence is near, and his tender Care over us
continually, beyond Expectation, making our Trials easy. This day we had a very
sweet Meeting, a good Friend being come to visit us; and we daily find
ourselves engaged to bear with Patience (if I may so say, being not proved
above the Power granted us) those Things which are for Trials to us. Therefore,
dear Friend, be encouraged; for, that the Wrath of Man shall turn to the Praise
of the Lord, and the Remainder be surely restrained, is the Hope and Confidence
of

Thy true Friend.
Lancaster Castle, the 31st of the Fifth Month, 1684.
Another EPISTLE to F. R.
Dear Friend,
CAN any but a second Self judge how welcome thy kind Epistle was to confined
Friends? Or can such an one ignore the grateful Reception thereof? Surely nay.
And though thou seem concerned, and I believe art so indeed, for these our
Exercises, yet do I really desire thou may rather sympathize with me, in that
Solace and true Satisfaction of Mind, which in great measure abolisheth the
small Trouble of Confinement, especially to single Persons; for it is probably
more to those that have the Charge of Families. And though sometimes other
Friends, Prisoners in the Castle in other Rooms, keep the Key of ours, and and
other Times the Under-Jailor, it is all one to us that know Israel's King and
Keeper to be our Guard; whose universal Love and Spirit penetrates the proudest
Walls: And we can truly say, We lay us down and sleep in Safety; for the Lord
sustains us, and watches over us; he is our Rock and strong Tower, and he
restrains the Wrath of Men as he pleases. But if he permits us to be proved
yet more, his blessed Will be done; he is All-sufficient to support, as well as
ever: Let nothing discourage thee from following him, who is wise to prove whom
he loves.

I was never Prisoner before this Time, nor never better contented to be one;
and the Lord has preserved me unto a suitable Season, blessed be his Name for
ever.

As to what Act, whereby they proceed against us, I value not, they are all
alike to me; it is in vain to wage War with them their own Weapons: But the
indictment, read at the Quarter Sessions, was, for riotous, ro^tous, and
tumultuous Assembling, etc. but how they will proceed I know not. Yet that both
we and thou moy know a Will and Mind freely resigned to the Eternal Wisdom in
all Things, is the secret Breathings of

Thy cheerful and constant Friend.
Lancaster Castle, the 10th of the Sixth Month 1684.
Another EPISTLE to F. R.
Dear Cousin,
I Have received thy redoubled Tokens of Friendship, whereby my Pen is hastened
to Paper sooner than otherwise designed; though not without a secret Sympathy
with thee in the Exercises both inward and outward, that attend, both from the
Miscarriages of some, and other near Concerns. But we may not be ignorant, that
the Entrance into the Kingdom is through many Tribulations: And the Power is as
sufficient to preserve as ever; or else what would become of us every Day? Ah!
let us never forget to lean to it; for Israel's King was well pleased with one
that leaned on him of old, so that he was noted to be the Disciple whom Jesus
loved: O Love incomprehensible! Who can enough admire thee?

Dear Friend, wait low to feel the Influence thereof every Opportunity, that so
the Life may be known to capacitate our engaged Souls to return all the Praise,
Honor and Glory unto him to whom alone it does belong.

This from thy true friend and Cousin.

Fruits of Retirement: OR Miscellaneous Poems, MORAL, AND DIVINE.
Of the Fall of Man.
THE Holy One did, by his Word, create
Man in a blessed innocent Estate;
Gave him a righteous Law, whereby he might
Live in eternal, pure, unstained Delight;
But the Serpent, more subtle than any Beast in the Field,
Soon with a Lie our Mother Eve beguiled,
Through a vain Hope; and to Iniquity
Enslaved poor Man, breaking the Unity
Betwixt him and his Maker; leading him
Fondly to seek a Satisfaction in
Self-hood, and transitory Things, below
The chiefest Good: Whereby Man came to know
Sad Disappointments; whence he could not be,
By Power (...) Self, ever ransomed or set free.
But, ah, the Bowels of eternal Love
Did then, with Pity and Compassion, move
Toward his Creature, that he promised,
The Woman's Seed should bruise the Serpent's Head:
And, in the Time appointed, freely gave
His darling Son a Sacrifice, to save
Perishing Mankind from that dreadful State,
Which was so miserable desperate;
So that believing in the heavenly Power,
He comes to know his Lord and Savior,
Redeeming him from Sin unto Salvation,
And to eternal Reconciliation.
Written 1663.
Of a sinful State.
MY Sins are numberless, more than the Hair
Upon my Head; yea, more than I can bear.
O how my Soul does languish in Distress,
Because polluted with Unrighteousness!
Ah, how my wretched Heart has often been
Ensnared with Folly, and enticing Sin!
Sin, seeming pleasant, subtly betrays
Poor doting Mortals; but its cursed Ways
Lead to Death's Chambers, and like Poison sweet,
Lulls on the Soul into a lasting Sleep.
Lord, rouse me from such Slumbers that arise,
That I may this deformed Sin despise,
And quite forsake all earthly Vanities,
Which me into temptation thus has brought,
That I, instead of Wisdom, Folly sought.
O that I were at Peace with thee, and could
Truly lament my Sins, so manifold!
My Sins, which will, except thou grant Relief,
Over whelm me with intolerable Grief.
Awake, awake, my Soul, do not remain
In Slothfulness and Sin; but turn again
To him that made thee: Do not still transgress
His holy Law, but, whilst he calls thee, cease
From Evil, learn his Precepts, follow him,
Who freely gave his Life thee to redeem
From this vain World, from Sin and Slavery,
That brings to endless Woe and Misery:
He bought thee dear, with his most precious Blood,
Shed on the Cross for thine and others Good.
But, ah! how often have I despised true Joys,
And placed my Heart on transitory Toys?
How often did I the glorious Pearl refuse,
Vile empty Husks, that nourish not, to choose?
Look down upon me, and commiserate,
Most gracious Lord, my lamentable State;
And tenderly lead thou me back again
Into the Land of Promise, whence I came
Into this Land of Darkness; where, alas!
I thus was brought to Bondage and Distress:
For, ah! thou King of Kings, if thou reject me,
Pharaoh's pursuing Host will soon afflict me;
And if thou help me not in this Distress,
Then shall I perish in the Wilderness.
In what Egyptian Red Sea Streights am I?
Whither, or to what Refuge, shall I fly,
But unto thee? In whom alone I must
Repose my Confidence, and chiefest Trust.
Renew my Strength, dear Lord, that so I may
Overcome my great Temptations Day by Day;
And so support my Soul, that I may bear
The World's Revilings with a thankful Ear;
And that I truly may in thee rejoice,
Great Spring of Life and Light, in Heart and Voice;
Confessing thee, the only Savior,
Who sav'st thy People from the Dragon's Power,
And with thy Blood do wash and purify
Our Souls from all Sin and Iniquity:
Who art indeed the good Samaritan,
That cast an Eye of Pity on us, when
The Priest passed by, and Levite turned aside,
And, as it were, Relief and Help denied:
But thou had Wine and Oil to purify,
Supple and heal our grievous Malady.
Thou, thou alone, the true Physician art,
The Consolation of a contrite Heart:
Oh say, Be whole; say likewise, Sin no more,
Lest worse Afflictions happen than before:
Say also, if it please thee, gracious Lord,
Who what thou will, effectest by thy Word,
Thy Sin's forgiven, thy Iniquity
Is covered; and beget true Faith in me,
That I may praise thy Name eternally.
1664.
On GOD'S LOVE.
THE King of Kings, the great Eternal One,
Sent from his Bosom his beloved Son,
Lost Man to seek, and to restore ag'in,
From the most vile Captivity of Sin;
Who for our Sakes his Father's Throne forsook,
And, as a Servant, freely on him took,
The Form of Man, and among Mortals came,
Yea, meekly bore the Cross, despised the Shame,
Walking on Earth amongst his chosen Ones,
The Isra'lites, beloved Jacob's Sons.
But they, rebelling in disdainful Pride,
Their King, their Savior disowned, denied,
Because he did not, to the sensual Eye,
Unveil his Glory and his Majesty.
The Rays that did around his Temples shine,
His Mein, his Speech, bespoke him all divine.
Yet this vain Offspring did him still deny,
Accuse, condemn, degrade and crucify;
Who patiently resigned his Life, his Breath,
And, through his Lamb-like Sufferings, conquered Death.
Thus they with wicked Hands did crucify
The spotless Lamb, descended from on high:
Yet him they could not long in the Grave detain,
But with great Glory he arose again;
Astonishing the Watchmen at the Tomb.
He, to their great Amazement, forth did come:
Which, when they to the Rulers did declare,
They charged them not to noise it in the Ear
Of the Plebeian Multitude; but say,
That his Disciples stole him thence away,
While they slept in the Silence of the Night.
Thus seeking, by Deceit, to hide the Light
That then was dawning, to confound its Foes;
But for a Leader, and a Guide, to those
That meekly waited for its Consolation;
They have entailed a Curse upon their Nation.
But Isra'l's Glory's surely broken forth,
Light to the Gentiles, shining in the North;
As by the holy Prophet was foretold,
That in the latter Days the Almighty would,
Call and bring forth a Seed out of the North,
A then despised Corner of the Earth.
Should we not now, in Lowliness of Mind,
And true Contritedness, wholly be resigned
Unto his Will in all Things, who has thus
Extended his engaging Love to us,
And tasted Death for us? Alas! who can
Enough admire his boundless Love to Man!
1665.
Of this. Age.
O HOW does England now polluted lie,
And deeply plunged in Iniquity!
Are not her People brutish and so vain,
That even as great Motives to complain
And mourn for her, as for that City was,
Through whose sad Streets our Savior did pass,
Bearing his Cross, may now be found? For they.
As did the Jews, contemn the blessed Day
Of Visitation; hate the heavenly Light,
That shines in Darkness; daily to despite
Unto the only Author of all Good,
And trample under Foot the precious Blood
Of Holy Jesus, by the Father sent
A just High Priest, a blessed Covenant,
Unto the People: Him do they despise,
And on their Beds do Wickedness devise
Against the Just and Innocent; for they,
That live uprightly, make themselves a Prey.
Alas! both Priests and People now are bent,
With one Accord, God's Heritage to rent:
But he observes them, and the Day draws near,
Wherein he will surely meet them, as a Bear
Bereaved of her Whelps; and then he will take
Vengeance for his afflicted Isr'el's Sake.
And though the Priests, Peace unto many cry,
They know not Peace; but such as do deny
To feed them with the Fat, they rend and tare,
Like those of old; yea, cruel War prepare
Against them. Thus, for all their Learning, they
Know not the Scripture-record (which does say,
Touch ye net mine Anointed, neither harm
My prophets; for I Will guard them with the A^m
Of my salvation) nor the Power of God,
That will chastize, as with an Iron Rod,
The proud rebellious ones; who shall be known
To be but Hirelings, whom he will not own.
These are they that for Gain do prophesy
Devices of their Brain, and speak a Lie
To People; yet dare say Thus says the Lord;
When as they do not rightly know his Word,
That Is as a Fire and Hammer to destroy,
Consume, and batter down Iniquity.
People, observing Priests to count their Gain
Their Godliness, rush into all profane
Abominations and Impurity;
Counting Religion a mere Policy
To overawe dull Souls, whilst some enjoy
All the Delights Wherewith Earth can supply
Their soaring Fancies. Thus, alas! they run
The Road to Ruin, swift to be undone:
If Heaven prevent not with a gracious Hand,
They Will soon draw down sad Judgments on the Land.
On the fruitless Fig Tree.
THE Fig Tree, though it flourished, did afford
No Fruit, as was expected by the Lord;
Therefore 'twas cursed, did wither and decay,
No Fruit producing from that very Day.
But unto Mankind, O most gracious Lord!
Great are the Mercies which thou do afford;
Though slothfully they hide, sometimes deny,
The Talents given by thy Majesty:
Thou do not in thine Indignation thus
Pass so severe a Sentence upon us;
Although we, of ourselves, so barren be,
And often more fruitless than that blooming Tree,
Thou prun'st us, and with sweet refreshing Showers,
Art pleased often to renew our weakened Powers:
Yea, long thou spar'st us; and at length who proves,
Fruitful thou cherishes, and freely loves.
But if thy great Forbearance, Lord, should be,
As 'twere frustrated by a fruitless Tree,
Thou justly may the Vine-dresser require
To cut it down and cast it in the Fire:
Though there was frequent Intercession made,
As when the Dressers of the Vineyard said,
Lord let us try it yet another year,
And then if any Fruit thereon appear,
It Is well forbearance has thereto been shown;
If otherwise, it is time to cut it down.
When thus the Lord has long Time Fruit expected
From Men, and yet is carelessly rejected;
Though waiting still, he is pleased to condescend
Line upon Line, with Patience to extend;
And Precept upon Precept did dispense;
And likewise promised a sure Recompense
Of durable Reward, eternal Joy.
To those that ceasing from Iniquity,
Would unto his most sacred Will resign
Themselves, and all: Then would he with divine,
Sweet heavenly Showers bedew, and always bless
Them, that they might be Trees of Righteousness.
But if such should resist, they will come to be
Like Heath in the Desert, or the fruitless Tree:
And if against them the Decree be sealed,
To cut them down, how can it be repealed?
Ah! prize the present Day of Visitation,
And dare not to provoke his Indignation:
That, through Distillings of his heavenly Love,
You fertile Plants unto his Praise may prove.
1666.
On Israel's Rebellion.
O House of Israel, why will ye die?
O House of Israel, why shall not I
Be King over you? Said the Eternal One,
When their Rebellions came before his Throne,
Rouzing his Justice: Why do ye refuse
Me to be King, another King to choose?
Incline your Ear, and hearken to my Voice,
Lest you too late repent your hasty Choice:
Have I not gathered you that ye might be?
A pure peculiar People unto me?
Did I not bring you out of Egypt's Land,
And set you free from Pharach's cruel Hand?
Did I not guide you safely through the Sea,
Leading you with a glorious Cloud by Day,
And with a Pillar of bright Fire by Night,
Conducted you in pleasant Baths of Light?
Did I not Jordan's flowing Streams divide,
Whilst you passed dry-shod to the further Side?
Yea, without human Art, I caused to fall,
Down to the Ground, proud Jericho's high Wall
Could any mortal Prince do thus for you?
I gave you Being, Life, and Conquest too.
Why do you then rebel against your God?
Do you not fear him, nor his Iron rod?
Remember how in Love, I nourished
Thee, like a tender Child, with Angels Bread;
With Water from the Rock I did supply thee,
Although I knew 'twas good sometimes to try thee:
Thine Enemies I did for thee subdue,
Yea, great and mighty Kings I overthrew,
When they oppressed or opposed thee:
But, ah, what Guile, or what Iniquity,
Have your Forefathers ever found in me?
Or in my righteous Statutes? Yet have they
Delighted rather in a crooked Way,
Than in my Law; whose Path is perfect Light,
In which the Wise and Prudent take Delight.
Though they perversely often turned aside,
As you their Children, who have now denied
Me to be king: It Is me that you forsake,
To choose a Mortal, who will from you take
Your Sons and Daughters for his Offices.
For Horsemen, Cooks, and other Services;
Your Vineyards, Fields, Cattle, and other Treasure,
As he thinks fit, he will call for at his Pleasure.
Stiff-necked People are ye the^* to choose
Man for your King, but stubbornly refuse
Me, your Creator, that ye may thereby
Be like your Neighbors; whose Idolatry
You also dote upon: Though my Command
Was to destroy the Idols of the Land;
Which to extirpate utterly, I did
All Converse and Affinity forbid,
With those Inhabitants; whom therefore I,
Since they the Land with gross Iniquity
Had long defiled, determined to expel,
And give them for a Prey to Israel,
To root them out, not imitate: For they,
By ill Example, soon would lead astray
From my pure Precepts. Yet you rather be
Inclined to hearken unto such than me,
And t'imitate the Nations round about ye,
Who, should I but withdraw, would quickly rout ye,
Take now your Choice; but know, the time will be,
In your Afflictions, ye will seek to me:
For they will prove as Thorns to vex and grieve you,
And there is none but I that can relieve you;
For it is not Man can give you Victory
Over your Opposers; no, it is only I.
And had you still obeyed my just Command,
I Would quite expelled your Foes from out the Land.
Meditations in Trouble.
O How is my distressed Soul perplexed
With overwhelming Sorrows! Ah, how vexed
With daily Troubles, hurried to and fro!
I know not where to stay, or where to go,
To find some Ease, or to avoid my Grief;
From this false World I cannot find Relief.
Alas! alas! that which afflicts me,
Is Thoughts, how I have often rejected thee,
Most gracious Lord, when thou invitedst me,
With other wearied (...) to give us Rest,
And Consolation at thy tender Breast.
But, ah! incline thine Ear to this my Cry,
Grant me thy quickening Presence, or I die.
Though in Obscurity I have been hid,
And as in crooked Paths often wandered;
Some Glimpse of Light is surely broken in,
Which gives to see the Loathsomness of Sin:
Yea, through thy Goodness, I begin to know
You Are rich in Mercy, and to anger flow:
Lord, speak the Word, that so I may be healed,
Knowing thy holy Life in me revealed.
Ah! let thy heavenly Fear always in me
Abound, Salvation is alone of thee.
For, though thy righteous Law I have transgressed
And often despised Knowledge like the Beast,
That has no Understanding; thou did please
TO engage thyself, that if a Sinner cease
From his past Wickedness, and frequently
Do unto thee, great King, for Mercy cry,
So that thy holy Precepts he obey,
And walk sincerely in thy living Way;
Thou, by thy Prophet, Lord, were please to give
Thy Princely Word, He shall not die, but live.
Encouraged hereby, my panting Soul
Cries unto thee, that thou would make me whole;
Thou only Author of true living Faith,
That has subdued the Power of Hell and Death,
And overcome the World: Ah, lighten me,
That I may know thy Way, and follow thee:
Beating the daily Cross, and find the Power,
Which is to the Redeemed a Refuge-tower;
And so enjoy eternal Peace with thee,
Thou taking up thy blessed Abode with me,
That I may sing thy Praise eternally.
A Meditation.
THough Zion sits in Misery,
And does in Ashes mourn,
And all her Foes as they pass by,
Do her deride and scorn.
Though like the spotless turtle Dove,
That in the Rock does dwell,
'Wailing the Absence of her Love,
Whose Grief no Tongue can tell.
Though for a Season thus she may
Sit, like a Widow poor
And desolate, there is a Day
When she shall grieve no more.
Though yet she mourn, lament and weep,
To see her Children dear
To wander, like poor scattered Sheep,
Through Deserts far and near:
Hourly in Danger to be torn,
By Tiger, Wolf or Bear,
As they are seeking to return
Unto their Mother dear.
Yet those that would these Sheep annoy,
Let them for certain know,
They shall not, if such them destroy,
Long unrewarded go.
Ere long this Cloud of Misery
Shall vanish quite away;
She, that sat in obscurity,
Shall see a glorious Day.
Then shall her tyrannizing Foes
Receive just Punishment,
Who did her Children dear expose
TO Exile and Banishment.
These shall return to her again,
With sacred Songs of Joy;
But those shall roar and howl for Pain,
And to the Mountains cry,
Fall on us, hide us from the Wrath
Of the Lamb's Anger, and
Which he against us justly has
Sent forth: For who can stand
When he appears? Sure only those
That know his blessed Power
TO surround and guard them from their Foes,
As in a Refuge-tower.
1668.
On PETER.
COULD Peter, unto whom the watchful Cock
Was as a Sign, be that abiding Rock,
And firm Foundation, whereupon the Lord,
According to his never-failing Word,
Would build his Church, against which the Gates of Hell
Should not prevail? For Christ himself would dwell
Even in the Midst of her: Can these Things be,
And Peter so prevailed against? For he
Did after this yield to the Infirmity
Of Flesh and Blood; and so, for Fear, deny
His Lord and Master: Till his Master's Look
Pierced his Heart; and yet Compassion took
On weeping Peter: But the heavenly Power
Abides, that showed him clearly in that Hour,
Jesus to be the Son of God, the Christ.
Though Gog and Magog study to resist
This Rock of Ages, all their Strength shall fail;
For against this, Hell-gates shall never prevail:
Nor shall the Faith or Hope ever be confounded,
That is on this abiding Basis grounded.
Would Man be safe against the storms of Hell?
Then build upon this Rock of Israel.
A Meditation in Affliction.
O Gracious Lord! thou only King of Kings,
Who only saving Health and Comfort brings
To the afflicted, that in Faith do cry
To thee: It Is thou can heal each Malady;
Thou a Physician of Physicians art,
And of thy Mercies freely do impart
Unto thy Creatures, who have none but thee
To hope for Help from, in their Misery.
O thou that to the Blind restored Sight,
Capacitating to behold the Light,
Which makes Things manifest, whereby we may
Walk without stumbling, and not loose our Way:
Who likewise did the dumb Man's Tongue untie,
That he might speak thy Name to magnify;
The Dead reviv'dst, the Buried raised again,
Strengthened the Ancle-bones, whereby the Lame
Leaped as an Heart: Thy Power is still the same.
O thou that art the God of Love alone!
Look down, look down, from thy most gracious Throne;
Have Mercy on me, ease me from my Grief,
And grant unto thy Handmaid some Relief:
Hold forth thy righteous Scepter, and say, Live;
It Is thou alone that can my Sins forgive:
Speak but the Word, and my -- Infirmities
Shall soon be healed. -- Ah! heal my feeble Eyes,
Of Soul and Body, Lord, that I may see,
Thy heavenly Light, and learn to follow thee,
And in thy Fear spend my remaining Days,
To tell thy Goodness, and to sing -- thy Praise.
1668.
On the Sight of a Skull.
BEhold, ambitious Lump of Clay resin'd,
Thy Epilogue; see, see to what designed!
So soon as thou were born, so soon as Air,
Affords thee Breath, thy Vitals to repair;
So soon as thy small feeble embrion Breast,
Is of an active Power, unknown, possessed;
So soon thou may expect the dreadful Day,
When thou once more must be reduced to Clay;
And the whole Fabric of thy Body must,
Again be brought to its first nothing, Dust:
Then shall those Eyes, those crystal Eyes of thine,
Which now, like sparkling Diamonds do shine,
Their little Chambers circular forsake,
And them to Essence more obscure betake;
The tender Funnel of thy Nose, must thence
Corroded be, and lose its smelling Sense;
And all the Volume of thy Face will be
So changed, none may thereby remember thee:
Therefore the Hopes of all terrestrial Glory,
Is frivolous, and vain, and transitory.
Ah then, what Cause have thou, presumptuous Man,
To boast thyself? Whereon, alas, where can,
Thy vain Ambition build a Trophy now?
What Cause has Majesty upon that Brow
TO enthrone itself? Which must ere long become
A threadbare Skull, a simple naked Bone?
Therefore, whoever thou be, that dreads this strange,
To Flesh and Blood, this doleful, certain Change,
Let it be thy Concern, in holy Fear,
To pass the Time of thy Sojourning here,
In pure Obedience to that heavenly Power,
Who, when he pleases, can to Life restore
And give thy Soul assured Satisfaction,
In him, who is our Life and Resurrection,
To rest with him; whereby the Dread and Fear,
That does so frequently in some appear,
When Thoughts of this great Change does rise in Mind,
Are vanished and dispelled; they inward find
Such hearty Resignation, they can sing,
Grave, where is thy Victory? Death, where is thy Sting?
Sin, Death's sad Sting, must therefore conquered be,
Before poor Man this joyful Day can see:
Then, being called, we freely may lay down
This transitory Life, to gain a Crown
Of Life eternal, with the Prince of Peace;
Where all Affliction shall for ever cease.
Then having put on Immortality,
Our Souls shall praise his Name eternally.
1669.
A Meditation.
O Who would think it such a Task to find
A vigilant and truly stable Mind!
Low centered down in that eternal Light,
Which, with its Brightness, drives away the Night
Of gross Egyptian Darkness, that it may,
Like pleasant Phospher, usher in the Day.
Alas, what Heart can rightly comprehend,
The Soul-amazing Conflicts that attend
All that begin to travel toward Zion,
How they are opposed by the roaring Lion,
That goes about, still seeking to destroy,
And hinder from true everlasting Joy.
Ah, none but those that walk the narrow Way,
Can see the Snares laid to entice astray,
And draw aside from that protecting Power,
Which only can preserve them in the Hour
Of great Temptation. Ah, thrice happy they
That know the Sheepfold, where they safely may
Lie down secure, and need not be afraid
Of any Beast of Prey, that would invade
The couching Lambs, whose Shepherd never sleeps,
But, as an Army, them securely keeps:
Here may they Pasture sweetly, safely, blessed;
But from this Fold there is no place of Rest.
1669.
On the Parable of the Ten Virgins.
TRUTH pleased to say, Ten Virgins typify
The heavenly Kingdom's sacred Mystery.
Ten Virgins, and but five were counted wise:
Though all, alas! inclined to slumbering Eyes,
Both wise and foolish; yet the King discerned
Who were his faithful Ones, for they had learned
To be prepared and in their Vessels they
Had taken Oil, and labored in the Day,
And furnished their Lamps: that in the Night,
The Bridegroom coming suddenly, they might
Find Favor and Admittance in to see
The sacred nuptial Joys; as also be
Happy Partakers of the same: When they
That foolish were, and idly slept away*
Their precious Time, not having Oil, must go
To buy; but then, too late returning to
The Door, they find it shut; where, though they cry,
Lord open to us! Ah! the sad Reply
Will be, I know you not; depart from me,
Ye foolish Workers of Iniquity.
Then may they wander, destitute of Light,
In horrid Darkness of perpetual Night.
Now, you that would be numbered with the Wise,
Take heed of sleeping in Formalities;
Lest ye forget the Oil, the life of Light,
And so be unprepared in the Night:
For though you imitate the Wise, and bear
A Show of Lamps, there can no Light appear,
If Oil be wanting. O redeem your Time!
Have Oil in the Vessel, that your Lamps may shine;
Lest, if it be to seek, when it is too late,
Such may in vain stand knocking at the Gate,
But find no Entrance: Therefore watch to hear
The midnight Cry, Arise, prepare, prepare
To meet the Bridegroom; it is the Wise that shall
Be entertained, that waited for the Call,
And in their Vessels kept the Oil for Light;
Such were in Readiness, and therefore might
Have free Access unto the Marriage Feast,
And with a cheerful Heart, sit down and taste;
Yea, feed and drink thereat abundantly,
Having the Wedding Garment on, whereby
They read the welcome in the Bridegroom's Eye.
True durable Delights do then abound,
Salvation, as a Bulwark, does surround
These highly favored Ones; who therefore sing
Praise to the Bridegroom, Zion's blessed King.
1669.
A Meditation.
THE Lord, the Lord of Hosts, is Zion's King,
Who dwells in the midst of her, and she shall sing,
High Praises to his Name; knowing his Word
Her only Law, to which, with one Accord,
Her Children hearken: Though she once did mourn,
She shall rejoice; although she was the Scorn
Of Nations, he will exalt her as the Crown
Of all the Earth, because she is his own.
Then shall Jerusalem be known to be
The bright, but tender Apple of his Eye;
And all that touch her, to afflict or grieve her,
Shall feel a fiery Dart struck through their Liver:
Her Children are a chosen Generation;
Jerusalem shall be an Habitation
Of Peace and Quietness; for she shall be,
By her victorious Lord and King, kept free
From all Invasion; and her glorious Light,
Which never more can be surpised by Night,
Is Heaven's great Lord, against whom none can stand,
The Son of Righteousness; whose glorious Hand
Is Zion's Shield, Salvation is her Wall
And fenced Bulwarks, which can never fall,
By Force of batt'ring Rams, or Cannon shot,
For their great Founder's always on the Spot,
And never can be shaken, but shall be
Invincible to all Eternity.
And through her Gates, each of a Pearl entire,
Whose dazzling Splendour justly may require
Our humble Admiration, are by Day
Open to all that walk in Zion's Way;
That which defiles, or that is impure,
Or loves, or makes a Lie, cannot endure
To enter there; the Fire consumes all Dross:
The only Way therein is through the Cross.
Her Streets, where her Inhabitants do pass,
Are bright as Gold, or like transparent Glass:
Hither the Lamb conducts his chosen Ones,
To reign with him, and sit on glorious Thrones;
There to behold, for ever Face to Face,
The heavenly King, who gives Grace for Grace,
With princely Privilege, to take and eat
Life's pleasant Fruit, which Man at first might take;
Which every Month brings forth a new Supply,
Whose precious Leaves shall heal each Malady
Among the Nations, that there may remain
Not one infirm, or blemished with a Stain.
The saving Health of Nations dwells here,
Where the Redeemed serve him without Fear;
Keeping the eternal Sabbath Day of Rest,
With great Emanuel, for ever blessed.
The Crystal River streaming from the Throne
Of pure unblemished Glory, (whereupon
The Lord God, and the Lamb immaculate,
In Mercy reigns) refreshing every State,
Here sweetly flows; and also, Proclamation
Is made to every Kindred, Tongue and Nation,
If any thirst* let the poor Soul repair
Unto this Fountain, for Salvation's there:
Come, says the Spirit: Come, the Bride does say;
Why in a Land of Drought should any stay?
Come, all that thirst, come, drink abundantly,
These Soul-refreshing Streams of Purity:
This is the blessed River, that makes glad
The Heritage of God, as David said;
For this does through the holy City slow,
And on its Banks the Tree of Life does grow:
No cursed Thing is in this City found,
But perfect Peace, and heavenly Joys abound,
Because the righteous Reigns; whose Servants all
Praise him incessantly; the Elders shall
Cast down their Crowns before his pure white Throne,
And say, All Praise, all Honor, and Renown,
Belongs to thee; who, by the living Word,
Created us for thy own Pleasure, Lord.
1670.
On NA^AB and ABIHU.
WERE these the Highpriests Heirs, that did begin
In Sacrifice to perpetrate a Sin
So capital, so dreadful, to provoke
Offended Justice, to inflict a Stroke
So terrible, as to destroy at once
Two of the anointed Priests, the High-Priest's Sons,
For offering Sacrifice; yea, Incense, when
They hoped to purchase Favor, but in vain?
It Is not Presumption in the carnal Will,
That finds Acceptance; nor can this fulfill
The sacred Precepts of the highest King.
But rather sad and dreadful Judgments bring
Upon the Heads of them, whose Confidence
In Self produces such a bold Offense,
As in an adding to the Law of God,
To such he will add his Plagues, his Iron Rod
Shall sore afflict them. It Is his Word alone
Must be the Law; in his beloved Son
Is he well pleased; him only all should hear,
And feel their Hearts abound with holy Fear;
Not taught by carnal Precepts, Man's Tradition,
Or a Self-will, but where a true Submission
Is known; the Author of our Faith does here,
In the humble Heart, beget true Son-like Fear:
Such dare not pass the Limit of Command,
Lest he say, Who required it at your Hand?
For he to whom, of his abundant Grace,
The great Eternal One spoke Face to Face,
Who knew what he required, then testified,
Thus says the Lord, I will be sanctified
By them that do approach me; for I,
As with Refiner's Fire will purify
The Sons of Levi. Therefore all in Fear,
Must with a broken contrite Heart draw near
To Israel's God; this is the Sacrifice
Which he has promised never to despise.
On CHARITY.
WHAT a sublime, celestial Mystery,
Is couched in this obscure Name, Charity!
So frequent in the Mouths of most, but known,
To few, save in the empty (...) alone;
Else it would teach us how to sympathize
One with another in Infirmities.
This mourns with those that mourn, and, to their, Grief,
Studies, in Kindness, to impart Relief:
This bearing all Things, and suspecteth none;
This seeks another's Good, even as its own;
Never rejoicing in Iniquity,
For it is true Love to Friend, to Enemy;
Desiring more to veil, to hide and cover,
Than to disclose the Weakness of a Brother;
And, with a Garment, hides a Multitude
Of Faults, that Enmity may not intrude.
But this, with Lynx-ey'd Passion cannot rest,
Nor long cohabit in the self-same Breast;
One's mild and gentle, apt to condescend;
The other's peevish with a Bosom Friend:
One joys in that most, that offends none;
The other seeks to please itself alone:
The one fulfills the Law in all Respects:
The other, Law and Gospel (...).
Now, are not all engaged to entertain
The gentle Nature? Not alone the Name
Of Charity; which, keeping Residence
Within the Bosom, may exile from thence
All Peace disturbing Passion, and restrain
Insulting Self, that she alone may reign,
This would incline all Hearts to a serene
Calmness, and to a condescending Frame
Of Spirit; still rejoicing to dispense
Favors to all, in true Benevolence;
Not in Ambition, or Formality,
To be applauded by a mortal Eye.
Restless Distrust, and haughty-ey'd Disdain,
Envy, that frets and gnaws itself in vain,
At others Happiness, with Discontent,
Which does, in any State, true Peace prevent,
And self-tormenting Rage, with fierce Revenge,
Which often heaves the Senses off the Hinge
Of Reason; all (where this prevails) are gone,
Dispersed like Mists before the rising Sun:
For Wars and Strife, where this inhabits, cease;
And she confirms the Mind in lasting Peace.
1675.
Contemplation.
GREAT God, arise, that so thine Enemies
May be dispersed, as Clouds when the Sun does rise!
Thou King of Kings, who only must expel
The intruding Foe, that in the Heart does dwell,
Which is thy proper Right, who did create
It for thy Service: Teach us, Lord, to wait
For thine Appearance in Sincerity;
To know thee first to judge, then justify
The Meek, the broken contrite Heart: It Is thou
That teach rightly to thy Name to bow;
For none can bow acceptably, or call
Thee Jesus, Lord; (though thou art Lord of all,
Both Heaven and Earth) but by thy holy Spirit;
Whereby we come, through Mercy, to inherit
Thy princely Favors; and not only know
To call thee truly Lord, but Father too.
What! though Man in Externals may conform,
And seemingly from his Pollutions turn;
Yet to subdue and regulate the Will,
Is thy own Work, surpassing human Skill;
Poor wretched Man, though he thy Power resist,
Cannot return unto thee when he list,
Without thy Help; since his depraved Will
Is so averse to Good, so prone to Ill:
Except he be, by thy redeeming Power,
Set free, and taught to know the Refuge-tower:
Then neither Winds nor Waves, nor stormy Weather,
(Although with Fury all conspire together,
TO assault and ruinate the House that is founded,
And on the Rock is deep and firmly grounded)
Can overthrow it: Here Is a Fortress sure,
Which will against all Batteries endure;
Here may we find a Captain will defend,
Whom all dear Zion's Foes cannot withstand.
Lord, since Salvation is alone from thee,
From Self-destruction, Woe and Misery,
Teach us to wait to feel thy conquering Love,
Within our yielding Bosoms, freely move.
To quicken, heal, and strengthen us; that we
May, through thy Goodness, rise and follow thee:
Believing, there is none but thee that can
Crown with Perfection this thy Work in Man;
And give Access before thy royal Throne,
Where perfect Peace and Joy in thee is known:
Then holy Thanks and Praises shall ascend
To thee, who to our Grief do put an End.
1676.
A Meditation in Retirement.
O That my Mind was centered where it ought,
Entirely freed from all distracted Thought,
Vain wandering Thoughts, that crowd within my Breast,
Do often obstruct my Soul from solid Rest;
And like to vagrant Clouds obscure the Mind,
Which should to serious Watching be inclined:
Ah! rise thou Son of Righteousness, thy Light.
Can soon dispel the Gloominess of Night:
Appear, appear, let thy victorious Ray,
And longed for Presence, still renew the Day:
Whereby my slumbering Eyes may wake and see
The dawning Morning of Felicity,
Still more and more break forth to perfect Day,
Whose heavenly Light guides in the blessed Way,
That leads to thy renowned holy Hill;
Where true Obedience to thy sacred Will,
Makes glad the Hearts of thy redeemed Ones,
Who know the Comfort of adopted Sons,
And can sing Praises to that glorious Hand,
Which raised 'em up, and taught them how to stand,
To walk and run the pleasant Paths of Peace,
Rejoicing in true Joys that never cease.
1677.
On the Vanity of the World.
HOW long shall empty Toys possess the Mind,
Which should to solid Joys be more inclined!
What true Content can spring t'immortal Souls
From Riches, that take Wings, or lurk in Holes!
Thereby deluding those who seem to possess
Them; but excluding from the Happiness,
Which, in right Use of them, might be enjoyed;
So in the Abuse their Hearts are more employed,
Hoping to find therein a true Content
Unto the Mind: Yet nothing permanent
Can ever be found in fading Vanity;
Such Hopes are crowned at last with Misery.
Shall then the seeming Beauty of this Thing
So disengage from Duty to the King
Of Glory, who alone should rule in Man?
The Heart shall be his Throne: Shall these Things then
So sway the Mind, that Mortals should thereby
Be thus inclined to dote on Vanity,
Rather than to adore their Maker, and
Fall down before him, at his just Command.
May he be their Delight and Joy alone,
For everlasting Life in him is known:
Whereas the Love of transient Objects here,
Does often prove a Soul deluding Snare,
To hold them fast, as in Captivity:
Until at last, for their Iniquity,
They come to find themselves in this sad State,
Their Minds tormented, and their Joys to abate.
Should any then employ his Time, his Labor,
To gain a fading Toy, and lose the Favor
Of his Creator! Who, with tender Love,
Does as a Father, visit from above,
And gently call unto himself, that he
Might ransom all to perfect Liberty:
Yet might we use needful Enjoyments here,
Without Abuse, in holy Dread and Fear.
These outward Things should not possess the Mind,
That to the King of Kings should be resigned.
And he persuades to leave Things transitory,
Yea, freely leads to never-fading Glory;
Come then, embrace the Crown that is set before ye.
1677.
A Contemplation.
HOW amiable is thy Presence, Lord!
O how desirable thy holy Word!
Though as a Fire or Hammer it appear,
To burn and ^^tter down whatever's dear
To sinful Flesh and Blood, thy Judgments be
Exceeding sweet and pleasant unto me:
For Zion's Children are redeemed thereby,
And purified from their Iniquity;
Yea, everlasting Righteousness brought in,
Her Converts ransomed from ensnaring Sin;
And thy Salvation is hereby revealed
More near, and thy great Mysteries unsealed,
When Judgment is brought forth to Victory,
That thine may walk with thee in Purity.
Ah, teach us daily patiently to wait,
In holy Awe, to know this happy State
Confirmed and sealed unto us, that we may
Reign with the Lamb in the Eternal Day;
Then may we, to the Praise of Zion's King,
A Song of Judgment and of Mercy sing.
A Meditation.
O Keep me in thy Fear, thou All in All,
That I may always hearken to thy Call,
And answer thy Commands: If thou say, Come,
Or Go, I with a willing Mind may run
The Paths of thy pure Precepts; that I may
Still know thy Presence in thy living Way.
Ah, guide me by thy bright enam'ring Eye!
Wherein sweet Mildness, mixed with Majesty,
So overcomes my Soul, that, ah! my Heart
Thus wounded, loves to feel so sweet a Smart:
It Is thou alone that wounds, and gently heals;
Thou kills, and everlasting Life reveals
Unto the Dead that hear thy Voice; they live
To bless thy Name, and living Praises give
Unto thy Life-restoring Word; whereby
Thine are set free from their Iniquity,
To live and reign with thee, whose Power alone
Works Wonders: Weakness wholly is our own;
But Strength invincible is thine, great King!
Thou living Fountain, whence all Comforts spring;
Ah! teach me fervently to wait to see
Salvation and Deliverance wrought for me;
That all Thanksgiving may to thee redound,
Who art with everlasting Glory crowned.
On TRUTH.
TRUTH in the inward Part is my Delight,
To meditate therein both Day and Night,
And feel its pure enlivening Power in me,
Surmount all Pleasure that on Earth can be
Enjoyed by Mortals: Ah, this is alone
More precious than the Diadem or Throne
Of Egypt's Land! O how my Soul admires it,
And in the Secret of my Heart desires it,
Above all transitory fading Things!
For this alone true Satisfaction brings
To to the immortal Soul; then how can I,
But, in true Meekness and Humility,
Bow down before the glorious Majesty,
And Supplication make, that this may be
Abundantly each Day revealed in me
By the Holy Ghost; that so a contrite Heart
May be prepared, by Truth in the inward Part,
And offered up a living Sacrifice
Unto the Lord, who never will despise
A truly humble, broken, contrite Heart,
Because he loves Truth in the inward Part:
Who can but prize it! For the Eternal Love
Distills sweet Showers of Blessings from above,
Into the Heart, where this abides and dwells;
Which, with its heavenly Luster, far excels
All oriental Gems: The Rubies rare,
Or sparkling Diamonds, may not compare,
Or be esteemed with this; its Worth exceeds
Them all, as Sharon's Rose all noisome Weeds
In aromatic Fragrancy transcends;
And as by sacred Influence extends
A spicy Sweetness to what is touched thereby,
And tinctures with a sacred Sympathy;
As when one formerly was pleased to knock,
TO awake his Love, the Handles of the Lock,
Embalmed with Droppings of sweet smelling Myrrh,
Streamed with a Virtue, that enamored her,
Who 'rose to open to him, so that she
Was wounded deep, O sacred Sympathy!
Nor could she rest till seeking far and near,
Her best Beloved did again appear.
This is that princely Lover, that inspires
The Hearts of Mankind with such pure Desires
After himself: And those that be affected
With Love sincere, the World must be rejected
By such, for their Beloved's Sake; for he
A perfect Recompense to them will be,
Love can admit no Rivals; they must choose
But one, and then the other quite refuse:
For he that loves Truth in the inward Part,
Ought to be sole Possessor of the Heart;
Then in this Pilgrimage he will grant a Guide
Unto their Steps, lest they should turn aside;
Even this for ever blessed Truth within,
Which, as the Light, does first discover Sin;
Then, as it is obeyed, the Heart and Mind
Hereby comes to be cleansed and refined
(As Gold refined in the Fire from Dross)
From all Pollutions; and upon the Cross
The Enmity is slain, and holy Awe,
With true Submission to the royal Law,
Springs in its stead; thus Sin and Wickedness
Cast out and conquered, perfect Righteousness
Is then brought in, whereby Salvation is
Revealed, with Earnest of eternal Bliss.
Thus Man's redeemed unto a blessed State,
That was become lost and degenerate,
Through Disobedience to that sacred Law,
Enjoined to Man at first, thereby to draw
To sole Dependence on the chiefest Good,
Who granted him the Tree of Life for Food,
Till he transgressed; but then Man presently
Became a Slave to Sin and Vanity.
So as by Disobedience in that Day,
Man, hearkening to the Serpent, lost his Way
In Death's dark Region; if his pensive Mind
Begins sincerely, by some Glimpse inclined,
TO obey the Light of Life, he comes to be
Redeemed from Death and Darkness, and set free;
Free from Captivity of Sin and Death,
To serve the Lord of Life, who gave him Breath,
Yea, Life and Being; and when ever he pleases
But to withold his Power, the Creature cease
To move: In him alone is Life and Love,
In whom the Righteous always live and move,
As led by this pure, holy, blessed Truth,
The inward Word, the Guide of Age and Youth.
For by this may a young Man cleanse his Way;
And to the Aged, it is their Strength and Stay;
This surely is the goodly Pearl of Price;
And this is Mary's well approved Choice:
This is the hidden Treasure that does lie
So undiscerned by the carnal Eye;
Which, whosoever finds, and ^elleth all
To purchase, though at first it seem but small
Unto the worldly Wise, yet shall it be
A good Inheritance eternally.
1678.
Contemplation.
MY Life, my Love, my Joy,
Who can enough admire
The sweetning Influence
Of Shiloh's Stream, from whence
Virtue abounds unto thy Plants, whereby
The Lily sprouts, free from the choking Briar;
Thy Trees do likewise bring forth Fruit, and flourish,
To the Praise of thee, who do both prune and cherish.
The Time that is employed,
In holy Meditation
Of thy prevailing Love,
Engaging from above
The upright Heart, (wherein it is enjoyed)
In humble Fear, and sacred Admiration,
Is best improved; for this indeed does tend
To true Content and Peace, World without End.
1678.
The Retreat, a Meditation.
THOU only Solace of a panting Soul,
Let not Earth's interposing Mists control
The earnest Breathing of my Heart, and veil
Thy Beauty overlong, lest Doubts prevail:
Yet gently teach me always to submit
To what Chastisement thou, my Lord, think fit;
That a more intimate Acquaintance may
With thee be known, and thy eternal Day
Shine forth as when the Moon's Light must become,
As the bright quickening Luster of the Sun;
And so the Splendour of the Sun increase
As the united Light of seven Days.
Ah then, what Cause of Stumbling can there be
To the redeemed Souls, that follow thee
In true unfeigned Love! Thou only art
Worthy to have sole Interest in the Heart:
It Is thou alone, who do our Foes subdue,
And, with kind Invitations long pursue
Rebellious Souls, too apt to turn aside,
Or to forget thy Kindness, if thou hide
Thy Face a little; or like Israel,
When Moses tarried in the Mount, rebel:
For, ah, distrusting Thoughts do presently
Object the sad Impossibility
Of finding thee again, whereby we might
Be overwhelmed in Egyptian Night;
And with our borrowed Jewels, form and make
A golden Calf, and wretchedly forsake,
For new Inventions, thy most righteous Law,
If Moses for a Season should withdraw;
Willing and running to our own Destruction,
When we should wait on thee to gain Instruction.
Ah, let thy tender Care preserve and keep
Us, with an Eye that is not apt to sleep,
But always guards thy little Heritage,
From all their Adversaries, in this Age,
As formerly; though the Unfaithful are
Often surpised, and cast into a Snare:
But though thou try'st thy true depending Ones,
Thou still protect'st them as beloved Sons.
Ah, prove me, but support me; my Desire
Is, with resigned Will to pass the Fire
Of Trials and Afflictions, till thereby
I be refined from all Impurity.
For those whom thou have thoroughly purified,
And in the Furnace of Afflictions tried,
Thou bear up in the Arms o^ thy Salvation,
And suckles at the Breast of Consolation,
That they may speak thy Praise, and run the Way
Of Life and Peace, in thy eternal Day.
1678.
The first EPISTLE to Cousin F. R.
MY Heart, dear Cousin, thy eternal Good
Truly desires, and that Life's saving Food
Thy Soul may taste and feed upon; that so
Thou may unto a perfect Stature grow
In Jesus Christ, the blessed Emanuel,
And with him in pure heavenly Places dwell;
That in Sincerity, thy Heart and Mind
May to this loyal Lover be resigned:
Then will it not be grievous unto thee,
To wait to know his Will more frequently;
Which, when made known, be careful to obey,
That thou may travel in his holy Way;
Not still resisting, lest he cease to strive,
Who by his potent Love preserves alive.
O prize this Love; and see that, with Disdain,
Thou do not recompense this Love again:
Plead not for Flesh, nor fleshly Vanity,
Left thou be plunged into Iniquity.
Thou know, thou have a Talent to improve,
Yea, more than some: O do not grieve, or move
To Indignation, him that does extend
His tender Arm of Love thee to defend
From the devouring Dragon, that with Wiles
And sluggard Poisons, subtly beguiles
Unstable Souls, that ^ell the precious Truth,
And in vain Pleasures waste their Prime of Youth,
But be not thou as they, who for mere Toys,
Contemn and sell their Souls eternal Joys:
Nor be ashamed, dear Friend, I thee entreat,
To honor him that did thy Soul create,
And Body too; although the World should scorn
For Jesus Sake; thou know thou wast not born
To serve the World, the Flesh, nor Satan neither;
Therefore, although all these conspire together,
Give Christ thy Heart, and he will give thee Strength
To overcome thine Enemies at length.
But if thou be, before the Sons of Men,
Ashamed to own thyself his Servant, then
He Will be ashamed of thee before his Father,
And ever blessed Angels; therefore rather
Deny thou all for him, than him for any;
For though there be pretended Lovers many,
Let this the Chiefest of ten Thousand be;
For surely so he will prove himself to thee,
If thou can but believe, and not exclude
Thyself, through Sin and vile Ingratitude,
O set thyself to seek him, that seeks thee
With his endeared Love, to set thee free
From the Oppression of the Enemy,
Thee to adorn in spotless Purity.
Though Troubles, Griefs, and Crosses, do attend
Thee many Times, thou have a Bosom Friend,
To whom in secret thou may tell thy Grief,
Who will not fail to grant thee true Relief.
Come then, dear Cousin, in Humility,
Prove, and thou wilt find this Friend's Fidelity;
Who will undoubtedly from Griefs divert thee:
And unto Holiness and Peace convert thee:
His Grace sufficient is, he only can
Effect what seems impossible to Man.
My Heart is full, and fluent to indite,
My Hand is therefore thus engaged to write,
Much more than at the first I did intend,
And yet I scarce can freely make an End.
Third Month, 1678.
The second EPISTLE to Cousin F. R.
SHALL I, endeared Friend, expect in vain
Thy Promise answered, and not yet obtain
The Joy of better Fruits of vacant Hours,
Which we are not assured long to be ours?
Alas, the Time will come when some will say,
O that I had as yet another Day!
What, to add Sin to Sin, and to retire,
If once washed clean, to wallow in the Mire!
No, no; but diligently to improve
Their Time, that they might treasure up above,
In Heaven's Exchequer, that which will endure;
Gold tried in the Fire, refined and pure,
With Garments of Salvation, which will bring
Into Acceptance with the eternal King.
These are the Robes of Righteousness, that can
Procure the Favor of both God and Man.
O come! Consider, let all Vanity
Stoop to Concerns of such Importancy:
And let none say, I hope it is well with me,
Because I yet no Condemnation see,
Nor feel I Judgment: If such yet retain
A fond Delight in transitory, vain,
And fading Toys, their Treasure lies below,
Which soon corrupts; such reap, even as they sow,
Sad Disappointments. Zion's Converts must
Redemption know, by Judgments true and just.
Alas, the Hope of Hypocrites shall fail!
In Times of Trial, what shall it avail?
But those that singly leave all Things below,
Shall in themselves the Hope of Glory know;
A living Hope, a Hope that will endure:
This purifies the Heart, as he is pure,
That raises up the same in Men, that they
May be encouraged in the good Way,
That leads to Life, to everlasting Peace,
In Joys eternal, which shall never cease.
Ponder these Things, my Friend, thou have indeed
Engaged thyself, although thou yet proceed
But slowly to perform, with Diligence,
To render humble due Obedience
To what is made known, by him that from above
Draws tenderly, by his long-suff'ring Love:
O let it not so soon forgotten be!
Which, as desired, will more increase in thee
Its sweet'ning Virtue, its enlivening Power;
That unto thee will more and more discover
Iniquity, and for the same reprove
Thy Soul in secret; but will gently move
And lead thee, by his Strength-renewing Hand,
Whith Cheerfulness to answer his Command,
And fully recompense thee: O be wise
Learn thou to fear, but do not now despise
The Day of small Things; ah, believe that she,
That faithful in a little is, shall be
Made Ruler over much: Commit thine All
To him, that does in Love so often call,
Come unto me! And know, if thou abide
Faithful in fervent Zeal, when thou art tried,
Thou Wilt in thy Bosom find a sweet Increase
Of an admired overflowing Peace,
Which, rightly known, will more esteemed be,
Than all those Objects carnal Eyes can see.
But know, that mighty Works were never done
Amongst them that would not believe the Son,
The Lamb of God; such from a near Relief,
Excluded were, because of Unbelief:
Yet unto one, not conscious of that Guilt,
Be it unto thee even as thou will,
Was graciously proclaimed; whereby she found
Her meek Petition fairly heard, and crowned
With a desired Grant; although to try
Her Faith, at first the Answer did imply
Rather Repulse than Favor when 'twas said,
It is not fit to take the Children's Bread,
And give to Dogs: She answered, Truth: Yet Lord,
These lick the Crumbs that fall beside their Beard.
Here Is wrestling Faith indeed, which as expressed
In fervent Meekness, from a panting Breast,
Admiredly prevailed with him; whose Name,
Whose matchless Love and Goodness is the same
For ever. Faint not, but go supplicate
For Grace, to him that is easy to entreat
By all that, in true Lowliness of Mind,
Make their Addresses: Seek and ye shall find,
Is the authentic Warrant to begin
To seek the glorious Pearl that is lost within.
Look not abroad, but light thy Candle there;
Seek thou at home, and thou shall find it near:
Therefore redeem thy Time, and meditate
How best thy Promise thou may yet complete.
Verily, what thou say, cannot avail
To justify, if thy Performance fail;
Nor is there Strength in Self: Therefore endeavor
To know that Hand, which helps to persevere
Unto the End; and if thou faithful be,
A Crown of Life shall be bestowed on thee.
1678.
A Remembrancer.
CONSIDER well some bypast Days,
On former Times reflect,
And see if thou, in all thy Ways,
Art truly circumspect.
'Twas said in Scripture's true Record,
The People well have spoken,
Had they an Heart to serve the Lord,
And not so falsely broken,
Their sacred Vows; whereby they did
Engage in holy Fear,
To leave undone what he forbad,
That they might know him near,
Strengthening to do what he requires,
(In deep Humility)
And still begetting new Desires,
His Name to magnify:
Whose Promise is to dwell within,
Even in the humble Heart,
And wholly to redeem from Sin,
And of his Grace impart;
That we may know his just Command
Revealed within, and done;
And all destroyed, that would withstand,
Then shall his Kingdom come;
Which does consist in Righteousness,
In Peace, and heavenly Joy
In the Holy Ghost, where Blessedness
Abounds eternally.
1637.
An EPISTLE to Cousin E. S.
WHEN I remember thee, dear Friend, I find
My Heart thus to advise thee is inclined;
If thou can hear in Calmness, and subdue
All peevish Passion, which in open view
Of sober Persons, justly merits Blame,
And manifests the Ground from whence it came:
Then let this Counsel find a Place in thee;
Stoop low to Truth, and learn Humility:
This thou wast once acquainted with; beware,
Lest Strangeness interpose, and learn to fear.
Know thou not what true Wisdom said of old,
Man's greatest Foes are of his own Household?
And true it is, not outwardly alone,
But inwardly; for greater there is none,
Than these, we can encounter with; for they
Lurk close within, and secretly betray.
Therefore take heed, for though there do appear
Bad Precedents, and ill Examples near,
They Will not so soon infect a solid Mind,
Which unto Watchfulness is still inclined:
And then, though Trials frequently attend,
There is an Arm of Love that will defend
From all Assaults of Man's grand Enemy,
As it is leaned to, in Simplicity.
O let us remember this, lest we should prove
Unmindful of our first, our chiefest Love!
Or lest a second Love should so engage
Our Hearts and Minds, in this infectious Age,
As Wholly to lead captive, and betray
Us to a treacherous, fawning Delilah,
A subtle bosom Traitor; such prevailed
Over one, whose Strength and Valor never failed,
Until he doted on a Stranger's Love.
O may such false Enticements never move
Our Hearts to turn aside, lest we may lose
Our Strength and Stay, and frequently expose
Ourselves to Snares and Dangers! Surely we
Are always bound to wait in Fear, to be
Kept near that living Virtue, that does favor
Thoughts, Words and Actions, and that keeps in Favor
With our first Love; that we may live and rest
With Zion's holy King, for ever blessed.
To Cousin M. S.
SOmetimes, dear Friend, this rises in my Heart,
Come let us with Mary, choose the better Part;
Of which the Meek shall not deprived be:
Her Seat was low, in deep Humility,
At holy Jesus's Feet, where her Desire
Was still to hear that Voice, which did inspire
Her Heart with fervent Love. She did not seek
Usurped Power, but learned to be meek;
For certainly, the humble Hearted shall
Exalted be; but Pride portends a Fall.
Whoever would be great, must first be low
And little, and a true Subjection know
To that which teaches Lowliness of Mind;
And to the Truth their All must be resigned,
Before they can obtain that true Content,
And solid Joy, that is firm and permanent:
Such then may say, No Solace, Joy, nor Love,
Like unto this, which freely from above
Distills and streams into the Heart that is pure;
Here Is Treasure, Pleasure, Peace, that will endure:
To this we ought to make our Calling sure.
1678.
The third EPISTLE to Cousin F. R.
THAT Love, dear Friend, which brings thee to my Mind,
Thus frequently, has now again inclined
To visit thee, with these Considerations
Concerning thee: O let thy Meditations
Hereof be serious! Let all Vanity
Be far exiled, and love Simplicity.
Shall I object to thee the pompous State
Of purple Dives, or his dreadful Fate?
Nay surely! Thou the History can read;
Read thou within, and let not Self-hood plead.
His unrelenting Heart despised the Poor,
Even Lazarus, that languish'd at his Door,
Without Relief: Whereas in such a State,
I should (think thou) be more compassionate,
And not so disregard him. Ah, my Friend!
Though some a Hand of Charity extend,
As outwardly, which in its Place is good,
Imparting sometimes Raiment, sometimes Food,
To fellow Creatures: Yet there is one that is poor,
Humble and meek, contemned at thy Door;
That waits for Entrance, and that gently knocks,
Until the Dew have wet his comely Locks;
Open to entertain him now, for he
Is come in tender Love to visit thee:
And though poor, meek, and lowly he appear
He Is King of Kings; therefore incline thine Ear
To his Request, that he may dwell with thee,
Whose Love's the Fountain of Felicity.
Let Superfluities be laid aside,
The gaudy Trophies of insulting Pride;
And be not over curious to express
Too much Exactness in an outward Dress;
Lest peevish Passion should too often prevail,
To banish Reason from its Throne, and vail
Sound Judgment; which would search and purify
Submissive Souls from their iniquity,
And Vanity, abounding in the Abuse
Of Visibles, which Mortals fondly choose,
And seek a Satisfaction in, in vain;
For here no lasting Joy can they obtain.
Why then should any so unmindful be
Of that great Offspring of Eternity,
The immortal Soul? That Epitome of Wonder;
Compared to which, all Things beneath or under
The glorious Sun are vain! What can be given
In change for this, whose proper Home is Heaven?
Ah, what Advantage will it be to gain
The World, and plunge the Soul in endless Pain!
Alas! Earth's transient, vain, deluding Toys,
So fondly snatched at, for true lasting Joys,
Though, as by Rattles often a crying Child
Is for a Season of the Breast beguiled,
They seem to please, can never satiate
The panting Soul, nor bring t'a blessed State:
Why should they thus be prized, my Friend, O seeing
Thou art the Offspring of the Eternal Being:
Whilst that the Lord of Lords invites thee, come,
Love him that will conduct thee safely home,
Unto himself; and in thy Heart reveal
Eternal Life, as the abiding Seal
Of his endeared Love: Then heavenly Joy
Shall consolate thy Heart eternally.
Alas, that thou hereby might rightly know,
How the abounding Streams of Love do flow
To thee and others, with increasing Store;
Its boundless Current streams and issues more
Than through the slender Conduit of a Quill,
In such small sable Channel can distill:
O may thou always at the Fountain dwell!
For its unsealed to wrestling Israel.
1678.
The fourth EPISTLE to Cousin F. R. in Answer to one received.
THine I have now received, which manifests
Thou have had some Regard to my Requests.
And by these good Effects, do testify,
You Are not so much inclined to Vanity,
To childish Sports, and Time-beguiling Play,
As thou have been therein, and spent thy Day:
Endeared Friend, may thou be yet more wise,
And let thy Mind find better Exercise;
That thou may learn, with Diligence to wait,
To feel the Springing-Life regenerate
Thy Soul; whereby thou wilt know no greater Trial
Can meet us here, than daily Self-denial:
Suffer we must, if we expect to reign
With Christ, (or else our Expectation's vain)
In Sorrows, as in Joys, participate.
Alas! He never came to consecrate
A Way for us to true Felicity,
Through curious Trims, and Silks of princely Dye:
This Path is not bestrew'd with golden Crowns,
Rich Coats of Arms, and Sceptres of Renown;
Nor yet with Oriental Gems, that be
Such dazzling Sparks unto the carnal Eye:
No, no; it is through the Cross we must obtain
The Crown of Glory; other Hopes are vain.
This Men of Understanding knew of old,
And prudently disdained that Idol Gold:
Wise Solon told King Croesus (when he ^ate
In gaudy Pomp upon his Throne of State,
Doting upon his Wealth, in lofty Pride,
Expecting almost to be deify'd)
That Peacocks with their spreading Plumes express
A greater Luster in their natural Dress,
Than he in all his Glory; which, though he
Disdained to own, whilst in Prosperity,
Expect with Frowns, nor cared to meditate
So deep a Sentence: Sudden Change of State
Thereto constrained, and taught him to confess,
It Is neither Wealth nor Honor, that can bless
Man's Heart with true Content; but rather do
Betray, and bring to Misery and Woe.
Therefore delight not in these fading Things,
Which suddenly may vanish as on Wings:
But let true Wisdom teach thee (no Excuse
Avails to plead for precious Time's Abuse)
That with an humble Spirit thou array
Thyself: This is a Robe will never decay;
No outward Ornament can beautify,
As Lamb-like Meekness, inward Purity.
Now, though for what thou sensible do seem
In thy Condition, thou of true esteem
Art no less worthy, Love does here constrain,
With Heart and Pen, to be thus bold and plain;
And that because thy Soliloquies do
Express, what Truth obliges thee unto,
The deep Engagement of thy Soul: O then!
Take heed, le^t that alone with Tongue or Pen
Thou honor him, and heart be far removed;
Or thou be found perfidious, being proved:
It Is not because I evidently see
The Symptoms of such Consequence in thee;
But, ah, the Stratagems and Subtilty
Of the Deceiver, our grand Enemy,
Are but too prevalent with some, except
True Watch and Ward within be always kept:
That thus my exercised Heart indites
Unto thee; and my Hand, thus guided, writes,
With true Dependence on that Arm of Power,
Which is to Israel's Seed a Refuge-tower.
And therefore, since thou have in measure known
Engagement from above, you are not thine own,
But purchased with a Price to serve the Lord,
The price of Blood; therefore obey his Word:
Then shall he teach, instruct and strengthen thee,
To follow him in true Sincerity;
And thou shall daily know the blessed Increase
Of sacred Solace from the Prince of Peace:
And as thou hungerst, daily may be fed
With finest of the Wheat, and heavenly Bread;
Yea, Honey from the Rock, and drink new Wine,
Distilling from the true and living Vine:
And in its sweet refreshing Shade sit down
In Rest and Peace, ascribing all Renown,
Honor and Glory, unto Judah's Lion,
The meek, the spotless, holy Lamb of Zion.
1678.
To Cousin. P. S.
LOVE, that inviteth all Men, has, I see,
Extended its engaging Hand to thee,
Dear Child: Consider and incline thine Ear,
Bow down in Meekness, and thou wilt quickly hear
The still small Voice, which does behind thee say,
Come follow me, this is the heavenly Way,
Walk in it: Travel here, thou wilt not be weary,
(This Path leads on Zion's Sanctuary)
But diligently waiting shall renew
Thy Strength in him, that is holy just, and true,
The blessed Prince of everlasting Peace,
Who as obeyed, will plentiously increase
His daily Favors in thee, and reveal
His holy Will, and strengthen to prevail
Against thine Enemies, that do surround
The Soul with Snares, whereby thy Griefs abound:
This is indeed the good Samaritan,
That binds up broken Hearts, and only can
Heal the afflicted; but he loves to see
Jacob bow down in deep Humility:
For then is the Time of Love; he then extends
His Love to contrite Hearts; such he defends
With his indwelling Presence: Therefore fear
Always; for he delights to appear
To those that fear his Name, and faithful be
To what is made known in small Things; they shall see
Dominion over much, if they forsake
The flattering Word, and Self, for Jesus Sake,
Who suffered for us, and despised the Shame;
He Is only worthy over all to reign.
Stoop therefore to the Cross, and do not fear
What Earth can do, though Mortals scoff and jeer,
And persecute, as they have ever done,
That stubbornly rebel against the Son
And Heir of Glory: Him they buffeted,
Reviled and scorned; and on his comely Head
They tauntingly did set a Crown of Thorn,
Whose Head the Crown of Glory does adorn.
'Twas he, that for his Foes resigned his Breath,
And by his Suffering conquered Hell and Death.
Therefore let us suffer with him, that we may
Live in his Presence in the approaching Day;
When all his Adversaries shall become
But as a Footstool to be trampled on.
1679.
Contemplation.
ESTABLISHMENT in holy Fear,
That I may know my Darling near,
Is more to me
Than all the Pleasures Earth can boast,
Which are but pleasing Pains at most,
And fading Vanity.
O Thou prevailing Prince of Peace!
Reveal still more the blessed increase
Of thy Authority,
And Government that shall remain,
But never end; that so thy Reign,
In Dread and Majesty,
May be exalted over those
That would thy conquering Arm oppose;
But to the Joy
Of all that humbly wait in Fear,
And love to see thee, Lord, appear
In Perfect Purity.
1679.
An EPISTLE to M. J.
BELOVED Friend, thy Welfare every Day,
And Preservation in Truth's holy Way,
Is heartily desired; and that in Fear,
And holy Dread, thy Soul may persevere,
To travel Zion's Path in Purity,
Learning to dwell in true Humility.
Ah, let us both, in Lowliness of Mind,
Bow to the Power, by which the Heart's inclined,
With true Sincerity, to stand and wait,
In Silence of all Flesh, at Wisdom's Gate;
Until the heavenly Lawgiver appear,
And in the Heart reveals his Counsel near;
Who teaches Meekness; never to repay
Railing for Railing; both in Love to pray
For those that do despitefully accuse us,
And with Revilings frequently abuse us.
When spotless Innocence was by Men
Accused, and Truth condemned; O did he then,
By verbal Arguments with them, assay
To justify his upright Cause, or say
The least reviling Word? Nay, surely Nay.
How then dare any, whom his boundless Love
Has once engaged, if he be pleased to prove
Their Faith by Trials, as in secret say,
We'll follow him in a more easy Way?
Can we, without the Cross, expect the Crown
Of everlasting Glory and Renown?
Nay verily, except the cross do kill
The Self-hood, and subdue the carnal Will,
How can we hope eternally to reign
With him, who by his Sufferings overcame?
It Is not Restraint from gross Iniquity,
But Self-denial, inward Purity,
And Holiness made perfect in his Fear,
That finds Acceptance, when he does appear,
To judge the Secrets of all Hearts, and bring
Into the Presence of the highest King.
Then it is the Pure in Heart shall see the Lord,
And sing eternal Praise with one Accord;
Because they know that holy Name, whereby
They were redeemed from all Iniquity;
The Righteous enter everlasting Joy.
1679.
Meditations.
O LOVE! thou Substance of the royal Law,
Let thy sweet influence Power draw
Our troubled Hearts, in true Humility,
To wait on thee with holy Fervency:
For thou our Souls have often visited,
That we might, by thy tender Hand, be led
From Darkness unto Light; from Enmity,
Strife and Contention, unto Unity,
In undefiled, in unfeigned Love;
Which, though it may in Gentleness reprove,
Or otherwise instruct, it covers all
Faults and Offenses; yea, if any fall
Through Weakness it bears up with ready Hand,
And lends a Shoulder, till such learn to stand,
And walk more strongly: For it joys to see
Brethren to dwell in perfect Unity,
Only contending who may most be found
In Lowliness, that Love may more abound,
But, ah, it is Hatred, Wrath, Revenge and Strife,
Discovers Faults, strikes at the very Life;
Provoking often one seeming Friend or Brother,
To bite, despise, if not devour another,
For empty Trifles; so that Vanity
Becomes vexatious, and Perplexity
Of Spirit: For, as well observed by one,
All Things are Vanity below the Sun;
The Son of Righteousness, which when it shines
With its resplended conquering Ray, refines
The drossy Nature, righly purifies
The Heart, consuming all Impurities;
Whereby, at last, the Enmity is slain,
And Love exalted over all to reign.
Great Prince of Peace! Instruct our Souls to wait
To be established in this happy State;
Where Joys abound, and Enmity does cease,
And Charity withal does still increase;
That, with thy dear redeemed Ones, we may
Walk Hand in Hand in Zion's blessed Way;
Where no Iniquity can ever be found,
Nor Love wax cold, but more and more abound;
Yea, Love that thinks no Evil, but does seek
The Good of all, and teaches to be meek;
Not easily provoked, but in Peace
With all: Here Happiness shall still increase.
Then may our cheerful Souls triumph, and sing,
Pure, holy, living Praise to Salem's King.
1679.
The fifth EPISTLE to Cousin F. R.
WHEN I, endeared Cousin meditate,
How Heaven has blessed thee in thy tender State,
Reading thy Lines, by Wisdom's Dictates penned,
Which thou by mutual Love engaged, did send,
And weightily reflect upon the (strange
To Flesh and Blood! but) truly happy Change
That Is wrought in thee, by that eternal Power,
That, as a Father, leads to Zion's Tower,
The Rock of Ages, us, that went astray,
Wandering like Pilgrims, that had lost their Way
In some vast Desert, where the savage Bear,
And other savage Beasts range here and there,
To seek their Prey: Yet by a sacred Hand
They Are brought t'a happy habitable Land.
Methinks we are bound to say with one Accord,
Who can enough admire thy Goodness, Lord!
O how can such but much esteem their Guide!
Who, had their careless Steps but turned aside,
And frowardly left the discovered Way,
Had certainly become a wretched Prey
To those Devourers: Ah! Such was our Case,
Had not the Eternal led us by his Grace:
Which, let us never forget, but Praises sing
To our most gracious Guide, dear Zion's King:
Who by his holy Life, the Light within
Revealed, redeems believing Hearts from Sin;
And the Obedient to the Lord's Command,
Shall eat the Good and Sweetness of the Land;
The Land of Promise, given them to possess,
Though Murmurers fall in the Wilderness,
Then shall they feel that Life, which as with Nerves
And Joints, unites, and tenderly preserves
As Members of one Body; so to give
Due Service to the Head, in whom we live,
By Distribution of that precious Blood,
Which to the Body is both Life and Food;
And though it may retire, yet soon again
It circulates and flows through every Vein;
Renewing Wrath, increasing Strength, whereby
The Body flourishes in Unity.
As doubly thus engaged, methinks I prize thee,
Much more than Pen and Ink can advertise thee
Then how can those, who feel these Streams of Love
And Life, but prize each other far above
Outward Relations, yet rejoice to see
Them to partake of this blessed Unity!
Thus thou to me art now becoming more near
Than formerly related; yea, as dear
As Children of one Father, mutually
Obliged to breathe for the Prosperity
And Welfare of each other, in the pure
Eternal Love, which makes Election sure,
And seals Salvation to us; yea, I find
My Soul, in sympathizing Love, inclined,
As (...) itself, so to desire for thee,
That we in Faithfulness may ever be
Preserved; though Tribulations should attend,
Emanuel, almighty to defend,
Is near; yea, nearer than our Hearts expect,
Though often undiscerned through our Neglect;
He Is omnipresent, though not always seen,
For interposing Clouds may from us skreen
His Countenance: This he permits, to try
And prove our Love, our chaste Fidelity.
But still he leaves us Pledges of his Love,
That, ah, methinks, nothing should ever move
Our firm engaged Hearts! Yet we, poor we,
Are weak, and subject to Infirmity;
Apt to forget his Favors, multiplied
Toward us daily; apt to turn aside,
Did not his blessed Arm protect, defend,
And still renew Engagements to depend
Only on him, who loves unto the End.
1679.
The sixth EPISTLE to Cousin F. R.
CAN I but frequently remember thee,
Endeared Friend, when I such Dangers see,
That daily meet the Travelers that set
Their Faces Zion-ward? Can I forget
To recommend thee to that Arm of Power,
That keeps Worm Jacob, as a fenced Tower?
Nay, nay; can any Heart but break or bleed,
To view the Affliction of the holy Seed,
Which in that City of Chester.
careless City is oppressed,
Like to a tender Babe kept from the Breast?
Ah! Dreadful is the State of those, that lay
Such Stumbling Blocks, to hinder from the Way
That leads to Life, and by a bare Profession,
Discourage them that seek the true Possession.
O! Can lukewarm Laodicea be
So justified? No, no, the firm Decree,
Without Repentance, may not be repealed;
What Is done in secret, soon shall be revealed:
Ah, let their Stumblings and Backslidings be
A Caution, but no Stumbling Block to thee:
Wait in the Deep, to know Love's Streams distill,
Like the refreshing Dew of Hermon's Hill:
Then, as thou travell'st in the Valleys low,
Where Shiloh's sacred Rivulet does flow,
Thou may be, by its quickening Influence,
Preserved in an holy living Sense
Of heavenly Things: Which blessed Privilegde,
The Rage and Strength of Men can never abridge
Us of. Nor yet can I unmindful be
Of my own State, whilst I admonish thee;
But, sensible of Weakness, pity those
Whom great Offenses frequently oppose,
To hinder them, if possible, that they
Might not persist to travel Zion's Way.
And as the wicked Spies, that falsely told
Discouragements to Israel of old,
Excluded both themselves, and likewise those
That, with them, did by Unbelief oppose
The heavenly Promise; though the Faithful were
Conducted safe, and took Possession there,
Even in the Land that did with Sweetness flow;
So do the Slothful and the Careless now
Raise Doubtings, and distrust of Victory,
In all that do not, with true Fervency,
Press forward cheerfully, with holy Fear,
Knowing their Captain of Salvation near.
O let the Love, which sets the Heart on Fire
To follow him, increase a true Desire
In thee, to persevere unto the End;
For Israel's King for ever will de^end
All that upon him faithfully depend.
1679.
Meditations in Trouble.
ALAS, when my distressed Mind,
Through secret Drawings, is inclined
Great King! to wait on thee;
O how the subtle Enemy
Presents fond Fancies, to entice aside,
My Heart from true Stability;
So to despise true lasting Joys,
And entertain vain transitory Toys,
Which never can satiate the Soul, when tried.
O how would Sloth entice mine Eyes!
My weary Eyes to Sleep,
That had more cause to weep,
Because the Solace of my Soul seems gone,
And left my Heart alone,
Surrounded with a Troop of Enemies.
O whither is he gone? Or where
Shall I go mourn, till he appear,
Who is my Life, my Love?
Alas, how shall I move
Him to return, that is secretly retired;
Like unto one displeased,
Who, till he be appeased,
My Heart cannot be eased;
He is one lovely, and to be admired!
How long, alas, my Love, my Life,
Will thou withold the Influence
Of thy enam'ring Countenance,
The Light of Life! Bow down thine Ear
To an afflicted Heart, and hear
Its Cries and Groans, and grant Relief.
Without thy Presence all is in vain:
Alas, how long shall I complain?
The Cause of Grief is not from thee:
Is there not some Iniquity,
That keeps thus at a Distance from my Love?
Or art thou pleased to shroud
Me thus, as in a Cloud?
How long, Lord, shall it be
Before thou please to answer from above?
It Is none but thee, thou holy One!
It Is thy prevailing Light alone
Can rend the Veil, and all these Clouds remove:
It Is thou that grieves for me,
And makes my Soul in Sympathy,
Thus to pant after thee, thou God of Love.
1679.
Concerning Trials.
ALAS, how hard a Thing
It is to bring
Into a true Subjection, Flesh and Blood,
Quietly to entertain
(And not complain)
Those Exercises that attend for Good!
My Life, my Joy, my Love,
If thus thou please to prove
And exercise my poor perplexed Mind,
Teach me to wait in Fear,
That I may learn to bear
What Trials may attend, of any Kind:
And, guarded by thy Ray,
Walk in the Way,
That leads directly to the Throne of Grace:
Where in Humility,
Poor I may be
Admitted to sit down in the heavenly Place;
And there to thee discharge
My Griefs at large,
As to a Bosom-Friend, that bears with me,
And often passes by
Faults of Infirmity:
Alas, I cannot bear too much for thee!
Then work thy blessed Will,
So to fulfill
Thy sacred Counsel, for a further Trial;
All Trials work for Good
(Though cross to Flesh and Blood)
To them that follow thee in Self-denial;
Bearing the Cross, for so
Thine come to know
We have a just High Priest, that is pleased to be
(Although he dwells above
What Grief can move)
Touched with a Sense of our Infirmity.
Ah, let us never forget,
When sore beset
With Tribulation, or when Snares surround,
Humbly to lean to thee!
Then shall we see
The Joys of thy Salvation to abound.
So living Praises due
(Thou holy, just and true)
To thee, thy dear Redeemed may proclaim,
And in Sincerity
May magnify,
With Heart and Tongue, thy great eternal Name.
Amen. 1679.
A Meditation in Retirement.
O Thou, great King of Kings, arise and reign!
Except thy Virtue springs, all Worship's vain;
Except thy quickening Life be felt to rise,
There Is none can offer up a Sacrifice,
That finds Acceptance with so great a King:
And then, who dare into thy Presence bring
The Blemished, the Maimed, or the Blind,
Which with an earthly Prince could never find
Any Regard, but rather for the same,
Severe Chastisement, with Rebuke and Shame.
O let thy holy Power operate
Within thy Temple, thou immaculate,
Holy, High Priest! O let thy Hand prepare
The Sacrifice: Then Israel may not fear
To find Admittance to the royal Throne;
Thou Wilt smell the Sweetness, and accept thy own.
We'll wait in Patience, and depend on thee,
Thou only can rebuke the Enemy;
That old Deceiver, Satan, though he stand
Among thy Children, as at the right Hand
Of Joshua; it is thy own Arm alone
Can save the Brand plucked from the Fire, or none.
It Is thou that take the filthy Garment from us,
And in thy Love art pleased to put upon us
Thy royal Robe of Righteousness, whereby
We find Access before thy Majesty,
To touch thy glorious Scepter, and appear
Before the Throne of Grace; where, over Fear,
Love sweetly has prevailed: Yet shall there be
An holy Awe in all that worship thee,
An humble, deep engaged, filial Fear,
As to a tender Father, from his dear
Obedient Offspring; watchful to attend
His holy Precepts; fearful to offend,
For very Love; not as in Slavery,
Dreading the Laws of just Severity;
But as by Love engaged, which fills the Breast
With Satisfaction, not to be expressed
With mortal Tongue; as thou wast pleased, by
The Apostle, whom thou lov'dst, to signify.
We Are now thy Sons, great King! but who can tell
What we shall be hereafter, when we dwell
With thee in Glory? Can the Hand of Man
Measure the Fullness of the Ocean?
Then may a finite Engine testify
The boundless Splendour of Eternity.
1679.
Of MODESTY.
SOME covet to be decked in rich Attire,
With Gold and Pearl, that others may admire,
Esteem, and honor them; and that they may
Advance a Beauty, that will soon decay.
If Imperfections did not lodge within,
What mean these Deckings of the fading Skin?
They, in whose noble Breast true Virtue dwells,
Need not so much t'adorn their outward Shells;
For Modesty does many Ways express,
To all Observers, innate Comeliness:
Modest Attire, and Meekness, signify
A Mind composed of native Purity;
Needs no Appendices for to set forth
A Jewel of more admired Worth,
Than Indian Mines can boast; those beautify
A Sepulcher, and make it fair to the Eye;
But this shows innate Worth, and adds thereto
Such Luster, those alone could never show:
For where there is a chaste retired Mind,
The Apparel, Gesture, Speech, and Looks confined
Within the Bounds of Modesty, proclaim
An upright Heart, kept clear from Spot or Stain:
This both adorns the Gravity of Age,
And does in blooming Years timely presage
A right heroic Heart; where Liberty,
That Is inconsistent with true Modesty,
Is not desired: Such study to behave
Themselves discreetly, modest, meek, and grave;
But if a Smile appear, such as a Child
Reflects on's his Mother, in Love undefiled,
It Is guarded with such simple Innocence,
As gives no just Occasion of Offense.
For Modesty in Covenant does bind
The Eyes, lest they prove Traitors to the Mind;
But never instructs the Hand to plant a Snare,
Lay Nets with gaudy Garments, plaited Hair,
Or other golden Superfluities,
To captivate vain Hearts, and wandering Eyes:
No, it abhors whatever seems to be
A Blemish unto chaste Simplicity:
Yet proves itself a far more potent Charm,
Than wanton Looks, but daunts approaching Harm,
Like some strong Fortress, whence the Enemy
Retreats, despairing of a Victory.
Thus Modesty, and spotless Innocence,
Is often to itself a sure Defense.
This is the Virgin's Ornament, whereby
Beauty's adorned; for this does beautify,
Where fading Colors flourish not, and may
Be termed a Dower, whose Worth shall never decay.
Sure Men, as Men, cannot forget to prize it;
Though some, as Brutes, not minding it, despise it;
Else would their Words and Gesture rarely be
So poisonous, with gross Impiety:
Obscene Discourse, that horrid Smoke that fumes
From scorching Darkness, that within consumes
Some broiled tormented Hearts, cannot proceed
From a chaste Breast, no Rose brings forth a Weed.
For this does always constantly retain
Such an Abhorrence of all frothy, vain,
Absurd Expressions, that 'twill manifest,
The sad Resentment of a troubled Breast,
In crimson Colors; which do often appear
In modest Blushes, when the unwilling Ear
Is made Partaker of such Words as be
A bold Affront to spotless Modesty.
Although there does no inward Guilt upbraid,
Or bring Indictment; yet with Looks dismayed,
They signify Disgust, and seem to fear
They should be censured, being present where
Such Words were uttered (though injuriously)
As one with them in the Conspiracy.
Some say, it is Treason but to lend an Ear
To treasonable Speeches, and forbear
TO accuse, or else to leave the Company.
Thus chaste Clitomachus, through Modesty
Quickly departing, showed that he abhorred
The needless Guilt of an uncivil Word,
Whenever he heard it; and 'twas worthily
Recorded, to instruct Posterity.
For though the Dictates in each human Breast,
Would, if observed, teach all Men to detest
Such criminal Expressions, as declare
Their Owners odious to a modest Ear;
Yet Precedents of Virtue may be found
Of good Effect, when those of Vice abound.
Nor let it seem to any sober Mind
A Paradox, that Modesty should find
A Place in either Sex, although it be
Ascribed to the one peculiarly.
Reason, that honors Mankind more than Beast,
Gives forth its Laws and Dictates in each Breast;
Virtue should therefore in both Sexes dwell;
Some may in these, and some in those, excel:
Yet this, with many more, are not confined
To either solely; but the prudent Mind
In both embrace it; for it regulates
Deportment both in high and low Estates:
For where she dwells, insulting Arrogance,
Or any unbecoming Confidence,
Must not remain, lest these defile and stain
The Heart, where Virtue should prevail and reign;
That Modesty may by its Influence,
Hide and avoid Occasion of Offense.
As Scripture Record to Posterity,
Does chronicle the virgin Modesty
Of Shem and Japhet, who went back to hide
The Nakedness their Brother did deride;
On whom the Curse became thereby entailed
To after Ages, but a Blessing sealed
To them, and to their Progeny, whose Names
(Like to a precious Ointment, that retains
Its Fragancy) shall still inherit Praise,
And be a Precedent to latter Days.
For though the Memory of some does rot,
Virtue shall live, and never be forgot:
The wise in Heart esteem it, and thereby
Order their Conversation prudently,
And would not an unseemly Act commit,
Though mortal Eye should never discover it:
For Modesty, that in their Bosom reigns,
Detests and loathes whatever spots or stains;
Restraining from all Rudeness, it inclines
To Gravity and Meekness, and refines
The Languages intimating, that we should
Be swift to hear, but never overbold
To speak, though eloquent; and then take heed
Lest Words extravagantly may exceed
A mild and civil Tone; for spoken loud,
They seem to summons in the listening Crowd:
Nor should they savor of Scurrility;
For these are not the Effects of Modesty,
Which never can delight in Calumnies,
Abusing others with Tongue-injuries,
Although reviled: Civility disdains
To vie in Folly, where no Prize pertains
Unto the Victors; the true noble Mind
Conquers a Wrong by Patience is resigned
For Virtue's Sake to bear, that Reason may
Be re-enthron'd, and Passion pass away.
The Examples, which the Ancients did afford
Hereto, are many, left upon Record;
For civil Nature's Dictates in each Breast,
Do far exceed what here can be expressed.
1679.
Meditation.
ALAS, alas! This Day
Seems almost past away;
What shall I say? My Love
Does hide his Face from me,
Who sorrows in Perplexity:
Ah, shall not Sighs and Groans prevail to move
Unto Compassion? Shall
My drooping Spirit call
And cry, but find no Ear,
No Entrance, no Access,
To ease my Heart in great Distress?
Ah, Lord! How long can thou forbear to hear?
Great dreadful Majesty,
Whose Omnipotency
Is Omnipresent! Does not Love
Always abound with thee?
Yea surely, though it be
Thine holy Pleasure thus sometimes to prove.
Especially when we
Have slighted thee,
Or to thine Enemy inclined,
Or have not kept retired,
Nor fervently desired
Thy Presence with a right composed Mind.
Yet, O my chiefest Love!
Thy rolling Bowels move,
And thee to Pity now constrain,
Thy condescending Ear
Could not forget to hear,
Nor shall worm Jacob's Seed for Want complain.
Worthy art thou to be
Sought (...) in Fervency;
The careless ones shall not prevail;
Thou, gracious Prince indeed,
Favors the wrestling Seed;
This, in its Expectation, cannot fail.
Thy sweet Encouragement
In Season does prevent
All Doubtings and Distrust that can
Arise, if faithfully
Our Hearts depend on thee;
Thou waits to manifest thy Love to Man.
O teach my Soul to wait
At the Posts of Wisdom's Gate,
In holy Fear! So to be found
Prepared to meet with thee
In true Sincerity,
In whose sweet Presence heavenly Joys abound.
1679.
On ELIJAH.
O How the eternal Goodness from above
Distills upon his Children Showers of Love!
And in the Midst of Trials manifests
Supporting Solace in their panting Breasts;
Engaging those, whom chiefly he designs,
To set for Witnesses in trying Times;
Refreshing, feeding, strengthening, and directing.
Safely, with his indulgent Arm protecting,
And hiding in the Hollow of his Hand,
Those that are faithful to his just Command.
Thus was that holy Prophet of the Lord,
Elijah,shelt'red from the threatening Sword
Of cruel Jezabel, whose raging Breath
Had vowed, by all her Idols, sudden Death
Unto this Man of God (although in vain)
For seeking to lead Israel back again
Unto the Lord, who then were gone astray,
And wandered in a dark forbidden Way:
The Almighty's sacred Power did surround
And guard him, but his Enemies confound.
Now though Elijah thought himself alone,
Surviving all true Prophets, and that none
Were left but him, there was seven thousand more
Preserved alive, that only did adore
The God of Jacob, would not bow the Knee
Unto, or worship Baal's false Deity,
This Heaven revealed unto him, when he sat,
As one in Sorrow, in dejected State;
Because the sacred Name was then reviled
By Priests of Baal, the holy Prophets killed:
For thus the Lord does in his Wisdom try
The Utmost of Man's Wrath and Cruelty,
As may conduce to the Honor of his Name,
But the Remainder shall his Arm restrain.
And though that be permited to extend
Affliction to the Body, put an End
To poor Mortality, here is Man's Rage
Confirmed; whilst from a weary Pilgrimage,
The immortal Soul released, arrives with Joy
Unto the Heaven of Felicity,
Where the more noble Soul lives to survive
Those short-lived Sorrows, and forgets to grieve;
Whose everlasting Glory does transcend
Expression, or what Man can comprehend;
Yet when the Eternal pleases to oppose
The base Designs and Stratagems of those
That would destroy, or wickedly suppress
His faithful Ones, whom he intends to bless,
He soon can blast their Projects, and confound
Their chiefest Agents; with a Word surround
His own, as with a bright celestial Host
Of Seraphims. Let not the Mighty boast
Themselves in Strength: Can Man resist his Hand?
The Thorns and renting Briars then may stand
In Battle, to oppose consuming Fire,
Let Israel bow before him, and admire
His mighty Arm, and magnify his Name:
He guardeth whom he will; his Pow'r's the same,
Which formerly the holy Prophet fed,
And by the obsequious Ravens sent him Bread;
Yea, Bread and Flesh, early and late, they brought
Him, who his Maker's Glory chiefly sought;
And for his Drink, Brook Cheri^h did supply
With Water; which, for want of Rain, grew dry:
Unto Zereptha, by Command, he came
Where a poor Widow, though to entertain
A Guest but meanly furnished, did receive
The Prophet; and, through Faith, she freely gave
Part of her small, her almost wasted Store,
Which she had thought a little Time before
To dress for her, and for her Son, thereby
To be refreshed, and shortly after die;
Not knowing of so strange Increase, until
The holy Man, that knew the heavenly Will,
Did, by divine Authority, proclaim,
That till the Lord was pleased to send down Rain
(Which then withheld, for the Iniquity
That did abound, had brought the Extremity
Of Dearth and Famine) her small Stock of Meal,
And little Cruise of Oil, should never fail;
Which she believing, from the holy Word,
Lived to admire the Wonders of the Lord
Upon her Son, whom when deprived of Breath,
Elijah did prevail to call from Death,
By fervent Supplication to that Power
That can the Dead to Life again restore;
That unto her it might not seem to be
Hard Measure for her Hospitality.
Thence by Commission from above he came
To bring glad Tidings of long-sought-for Rain;
That Israel might yet again incline
To seek the Lord, who by his Power divine,
Gives or withholds a Blessing; and might learn,
By those and other Wonders, to discern
The living God from Idols, who alone
Answers by Fire from's imperial Throne,
As then 'twas proved, to their Amaze and Shame:
Yet when some sought the Prophet to have slain,
He to the Wilderness again retired
Where, though he, as in Agony, desired
The Lord to take away his Life; yet there,
To comfort him, an Angel did appear;
Who, touching him, bad him arise and take
What he found ready there; which was a Cake
Baked on the Coals: O who can but admire
How there the Cake was baked on Coals of Fire!
For which he took no care; and for his Drink,
A Cruise of Water set! Ah, who would think
The King of Kings should be concerned for these
Small Matters for poor Man! who, if he please,
Can well support, without the Strength of Bread,
As then he did that holy Prophet lead
Through the sandy Desert forty Days, until
He came to Horeb's Mount, the sacred Hill,
Where, resting in a Cave, the great Command
Then given to him was, Go forth and stand
Before the Lord, his Wonders to admire;
The rending Wind, the Earthquake, and the Fire,
Passed by, but he in none of these did see
Such Soul-amazing dreadful Majesty,
As in the still small Voice; then as with Dread
And Reverence, his Face he covered,
Or wrapped in his Mantle, stood to hear
What more the Lord was pleased to declare,
Or to command him; that he humbly might
Obey his Precepts, which was his Delight.
Thus was he treated by the holy One,
And afterward caught up unto his Throne
As in a fiery Chariot, where, above
All Grief, he joys in pure eternal Love:
Yet who dare say, that for his Sake alone,
Such great, such glorious Wonders then were done?
Did not the eternal Wisdom signify
His boundless, his all-conquering Love, thereby
To all his faithful Servants? Ah, can he
Cease to be gracious, or unmindful be
Of his afflicted tribulated Ones?
Nay surely, he has owned them for his Sons,
And for his Daughters; and if they be found
Faithful to Death, they shall with Life be crowned*
For he delights to glorify his Name
Amidst the Heathen: Therefore it is in vain,
For Men to curse whom he designs to bless,
Or by their Laws to hinder Righteousness
From running like a Stream; though formerly
They pleaded Law, whereby the Just must die:
Who now, and ever, lives sole King of Kings,
To whom the Angels Hallelujah sings.
Of CHASTITY.
VIRTUE's it own Reward; and Innocence,
Wherever it dwells, a Fortress of Defense;
And in the Confines of pure Chastity,
The Heaven-born Soul finds joyful Liberty,
And pleasant Freedom; far surpassing all
The Latitude of base, luxurious Thrall,
Wherein the captivated Heart's inclined
To dote on Trifles, where it cannot find
True Solace, suiting the Nobility
Of that which sprung from Immortality:
Then why should any, styled rational,
So slight their princely great Original,
As to sit down content, to equalize
Themselves to Brutes, and sordidly despise
Enjoyments more sublime, which gratify
The noble intellectual Faculty,
Proper alone to Creatures rational?
To be preferred before those criminal,
Polluting Pleasures, which do so incense
The injured (if not seared) Conscience,
As much allays their present seeming Joys,
And feeds the gnawing Worm that never dies;
Whilst prudent Minds delight to contemplate
The Wisdom of that Power, that did create
And form the Universe: The Mystery
Of Nature's scarce observed Harmony,
And that intrinsic Virtue, that is found
In some familiar Concrets to abound,
Brings a Delight inferior to none,
Save the Indwelling of that Lord alone,
That gives the Knowledge of them, and did frame
Them to the Glory of his holy Name:
The sweet Experience whereof, I find,
Is, by a noble and ingenious Mind,
Acknowledged; asserting it to raise
The Heart, to celebrate their Maker's Praise.
Why then should so much Time, Expense and Cost,
Be on on some vain deluding Objects lost;
Which, as with Chains, do bind in Slavery,
And overwhelm in gross Impurity,
Some doting Mortals, whose depraved Sense
Can taste no Pleasures, not derived thence?
But where unstained Chastity does reign,
The Mind kept pure, is apt to entertain,
Joys more refined; and then, if any rude
Disturbing Thought would secretly intrude,
It Is soon expelled, and banished from the Breast,
Where Chastity has taken up her Rest:
For here the Thoughts, the Words and Actions be,
Well seasoned with an awful Gravity;
The good Effects of an eternal Law,
Which does, by its prevailing Precepts, draw
Unto Obedience; whose Recompense
Does far surmount all transient Joys of Sense:
Yet, ah, how many make it their Design,
TO entice the Soul, and lead beyond the Line
Of innate Law, through pleasant Confidence,
Bringing at last to boundless Impudence;
That Enemy to Virtue, that profane
Preludium unto a tragic Scene,
Which does by Heart-beguiling Pastimes bring
The yielding Captive to the wounding Sting
Of inward Horror, a tormenting Pain,
That frets their Hearts, involved in lasting Shame:
Whilst Peace and Honor evermore remains
To them, in whose chaste Breast true Virtue reigns.
Both Sexes are adorned by Chastity,
For, as recorded to Posterity,
Great Heroes, for their Valor much renowned,
If in their princely Bosoms this was found,
As by a Law to limit; such did gain
A more enobling Luster to their Name:
But those, from whom great Armies conquered fled,
That by a wanton Heart were vanquished,
(Though Fortitude is not to be forgot)
This to their Names is a perpetual Blot.
Who conquers Self, Virtue more noble calls,
Than he that overthrows the strongest Walls:
Then for the blushing Sex, what Tongue can tell
The Infamy that on her Name shall dwell,
That wants the Ornament of Chastity?
It Is a Reproach unto her Memory:
But she that keeps her Mind retired and Chaste,
Her Praise shall flourish; Fame nor Envy's Blast
Can never blemish it; that happy Peace,
That in her Bosom lives, shall never cease.
This therefore is to some a Pearl as dear
As Life; and such do less regard or fear
The Loss of Life, and all, than once to stain
Their chaste reserved Souls, with Guilt and Shame.
Thus fair Matilda rather chose to die
A Martyr to her spotless Chastity,
Than with a gnawing Guilt and Horror live,
In all the Pleasures that a Court could give;
Who though with Mortals she be ceased to dwell,
She lives where Joys immortal do excel
All Vanities on Earth; and here her Name
Does still in Honor and Esteem remain.
Virtue bestows a Crown of endless Praise,
On all that to it consecrate their Days.
1679.
Of a FRIEND.
IF I to Love would be inclined,
And without seeking, knew to find
One, whose unblemished outward Case,
Princely Deportment, comely Grace,
Might unto each observant Eye,
Denote the true Nobility
Of an heroic Heart and Mind,
From sordid Vanity sublimed
Sincerely pious, loyal, chaste,
And with such inward Peace possessed,
That blustering Storms could never prevent
True inward Solace and Content:
Whom prosperous Lot exalts not high,
Nor can a cross Adversity
Much discompose; observing well
That all Things here are mutable:
Who rightly knows to prize a Friend,
Without a base sinister End.
And though a Competency here
Of needful Things, without much Care
Enjoying, knows Treasure laid up,
Secured from Theft, and Moths corrupt;
Yet here, in Visibles, can see
The Wisdom of Eternity;
And knowing Rule, and ruling know,
In true Dominion Things below;
Meek, though Majestic; Valiant, and
That Self and Passion can command:
Rich in all Virtues, to complete
A noble Heart, more good than great;
It Is such an one as this shall be
Much honored, and esteemed by me.
A Meditation.
AH, Lord! Why hid'st thou now thy Face (from me?
My Soul expects no Comfort but from thee;
No Joy, but Grief; no Solace can be found,
But Soul-distracting Sorrows still abound,
Within my troubled Breast; if thou retire,
Or hide thy Face, all my Delights expire.
How can I live, except thy quickening Breath
Breathe on me, and subdue the Power of Death?
Ah, let my Heart thy Holy Ghost receive,
That so a Resurrection from the Grave,
I may not only know, but be renewed
In Strength, to press even through a Multitude
Of Tribulations, Lord, to-follow thee!
Which if they sometimes as a Trial be,
To prove the Love, whereto thou do engage
My Heart and Soul, in this backsliding Age,
Let many Waters never quench the fame,
But rather be as Oil poured on the Flame;
Which quickens, not extinguisheth the Fire:
So may these Trials rouse my dull Desire,
Still more and more in Fervency to move
And tend to thee, thou pure eternal Love;
For, ah, the Warmth of thy enlivening Ray,
Proclaims the Dawning of the eternal Day;
Which secretly encourages to bear
These light Afflictions; for the Day draws near,
Wherein shall be a Glory, far transcending
These Griefs revealed, a Glory never ending.
But, Lord, support me; there is no Trials can
So far perplex, that on the outward Man
May be imposed; no Sorrow that can be
Like the withdrawing of thyself from me:
Thou only art the Solace of my Soul,
To thee let my distressed Heart condole
Her Troubles, for there is none like that, when thou
With Frowns beclouds the Brightness of thy Brow,
Or secretly withholds the glorious Ray,
Which is my Sun and Shield, my Strength and Stay;
My chiefest Counselor, mine All: Ah, then
How can my Troubles be described by Pen!
The Threats of this vain World shall not afflict me,
Except the Darling of my Soul reject me:
For it is thine Absence is the greatest Grief,
Thy loving Presence is a true Relief.
O it is my longed for Joy, mine only One!
This Blessing therefore grant me, Lord, or none.
O it is thy Love that thus engages me,
To wrestle with, and follow after thee!
And though to prove me, thou may tarry long,
Preserve in Patience, let me never wrong
Thy Favors, so as once to entertain
Another Lover, or to turn again
In Heart to Egypt: Can her Garlic be
Of any pleasant Savor now to me,
Or any other Soul, that once had fed
On Manna-Delicates, or Angels Bread?
Which even in the Desert thou affords
Abundantly, as holy Writ records
Thou did of old: No, no, 'twas Penury
Enforced, in the Land of Slavery,
To feed thereon. If thy indulgent Care
Provide and feed my Soul with better Fare,
Teach me to prize thy Love; it is now the same;
To Israel's Seed, thou say not, Wait in vain;
But thou appear'st, who always do regard
Thy breathing Babes, and with thee thy Reward
Of inward Comforts known, with an Increase
Of Joy, and Earnest of eternal Peace,
To those that keep thy Covenant; to them
Thy Promises are all Yea and Amen.
1680.
Of the Rainbow.
O How stupendous are thy Wonders, Lord,
Which thou effectest by thy living Word!
How gloriously presented every where,
Do they to the discerning Eye appear!
Which, as it views the Outside, may discover
The inward Wonder, by the Shell veiled over.
Has not each Visible a Mystery?
Does not each Herb proclaim a Deity?
Which, with so fine an Essence, gave it Birth,
Out of the gross dark Bowels of the Earth.
If these familiar little Creatures be
Such Cause of Admiration, what may we
Observe in this vast Concave of the Sky,
So full of Wonders to a searching Eye?
Do not the heavenly Orbs declare thy Glory,
Great King, as in an universal Story?
Sun, Moon and Stars, do by their Light proclaim
A Power Divine, and magnify thy Name:
Can then this curious Semicircle, decked
With such pure undy'd Colors, but affect
Our Hearts with Dread and Wonder! Can a Sign
Of such Concern and Glory, by divine
Authority placed in the Firmament,
To signify that gracious Covenant,
Which, for thy Goodness, for thy Mercy's-sake,
Thou, in thy tender Pity, pleased to make
With poor ungrateful Mortals, that thereby
They might believe, Floods should no more destroy
All Animals, pass unobserved? Though Man,
Through his ambitious Ignorance began
Soon to insult, although in vain; his Power
And Policy, both failed at Babel's Tower:
Yet have thou not removed this signal Token
Of thy endearing Love; nor rashly broken
Thy lasting Covenant, but thereby do show,
That thou alone art faithful, just and true.
O can the great Memorial to the Nation,
The Rainbow, but excite our Admiration,
When it appears! Were not the Signs of Heaven,
And Wonders in the Earth, ordained and given
For more sublime Designs, than only be
Looked at, and gazed on, by Mortality?
Did not the great Apostle once attest,
That Things invisible are manifest
By those that do appear? Did not thereby
Some of the Gentiles learn Divinity?
Why may they not as well excite and raise
Our Hearts, to celebrate the Author's Praise?
1680.
Of CONTENT.
WHO seeks a Prize where it is not to be found,
Makes his Confusion but the more abound:
So they who dote on Riches that have Wings,
Or any other transitory Things,
Do but with great perplexing Cares prevent
That which they most pretend to seek, Content.
Where may it then be sought? Behold, it lies
Hid, as a Treasure, from the vult'rous Eyes:
Yet there is a Garden where this Plant does grow,
Which who desires to find, must learn to know
A Heart that is well refined and purified
From high-aspiring discontented Pride;
Disdaining to admire that Idol, Gold,
But can, as with undazled Eyes, behold
Its Earth-bred Luster; knowing how to use it,
Not hoarding it to rust, that is to abuse it;
That cannot for vile Pleasures prostitute
The noble Soul to grovel with the Brute;
That cannot be so bound to human Fashion,
As to be over-sway'd with furious Passion:
But does, as with a well composed Mind,
Hear Self reviled and scorned; yet not inclined
Unto Revenge, but still refers the Wrong
To him, to whom all Vengeance does belong;
And can in inward Purity rejoice,
Though Virtue's branded with the Name of Vice;
That do in Joy such equal Temper know,
That Sorrow cannot make it stoop too low,
Nor be afraid, although the World should frown,
Nor yet forget himself, through vain Renown;
That counts an Injury worth no Reward,
Save only this, a noble Disregard;
That Is unto slavish Fear so much a Stranger,
That it undaunted meets approaching Danger;
Yea, high and low Estates can calmly bear,
Without Disturbance or distracting Care;
That honors Virtue, though in Poverty,
Rather than Vice, (...) up with Dignity;
Whose equal Justice cannot vex his Foe,
Nor spare his Friend, if that his Cause says, no;
Who, though in Power, would not inflict a Wrong,
Nor yet can see the Oppressed suffer long,
Without Relief; but cheerfully does lend
A Helping-hand to Enemy or Friend;
Whose Word's more binding than a golden Chain,
Who steadfast to his Promise does remain;
And will perform it, though no Ear attend,
To testify betwixt him and his Friend;
Who, in great multiplicity, can find
A calm and wisely recollected Mind;
Knowing, that Heaven did never this ordain
A Slave to Earth, but over it to reign:
And having Treasure, which no Rust can rot,
Does use the World as if he used it not:
And cheerfully submit to Providence,
(Not by Constraint) in what it does dispense;
Whether in Storms or Trials; for he knows
That promised Comforts appertain to those
That mourn; or if his Lord and Master please,
Can joy in Sunshine, or more prosperous Days;
Knowing the eternal Wisdom never errs,
Therefore sincerely in his Thoughts prefers
That Will before his own: so comes to learn,
Wisdom and Love in all Things to discern;
Who need not boast what Ancestors have been,
When all their Virtues shine more bright in him;
Which is a greater Honor than to be
The Refuse of some famous Pedigree;
This knows such Peace the World can never prevent,
Here Is that much sought-for, durable Content.
1630.
An EPISTLE to M. R.
THIS Opportunity did me invite,
Dear Cousin, though with scribbling Pen, to write
These Lines unto thee, thus to manifest
I have not yet excluded from my Breast
The Remembrance of thee, neither Time nor Place,
Though far remote, should cancel or deface
The Monument of Friendship in that Mind,
That is to everlasting Truth inclined.
O may this always our Instructor be!
Then shall we live in constant Amity:
Let Truth in the inward Part be always dear
Unto thee, then thy Counselor is near;
Who will instruct thee, how thou may behave
Thyself at Times, modest, meek and grave;
That thou may find that Peace, which does excel
All visible Enjoyments, and so dwell
In undefiled Love, that will attend
The truly humble Heart unto the End.
An EPISTLE to Cousin J. R.
COULD pious Paul desire that dreadful State,
To be anathemiz'd, or separate
From Jesus Christ, his high esteemed Lord,
For Israelites, to whom the heavenly Word,
The Promises and Law did appertain,
The People unto whom the Cov'nants came,
His Kindred in the Flesh? Then how can I
Be unconcerned for thee, my near Ally?
No. no; for Love, the universal Love,
Which tenderly does visit from above,
Desires the Good of all; takes no Delight
That Sinners die in Sin, but does invite
All to return to him, and live; for he
Has promised their Iniquity shall be
Forgotten, they in Righteousness shall live;
And he, to them who overcome, will give
A Crown of Life; yea, they shall splendidly
Be clothed with Robes of Immortality.
Consider well these Things, my Friend, and learn
To know what chiefly is thy great Concern;
That noble Offspring of the Deity,
Why should it be seduced with Vanity?
O come, and in true Lowliness of Mind,
Receive Instruction! Seek, and ye shall find,
Is a sufficient Warrant to begin
To seek the Piece of Silver, hid within
The House, thy Heart; redeem thy precious Time,
And find it out. O Let thy Mind incline
Unto the Voice, that does in secret say,
As one behind thee, This is Wisdom's Way,
Walk in it; this will lead to lasting Joys;
Despise them not for transitory Toys.
Aim'st thou at Honor? Know, a sudden Puff
Blasts it and often leaves a stinking Snuff.
Ah, see thou not, that here all vain Renown
Is dashed and disannulled with a Frown?
Seek Honor from above, and fear the Lord,
And hearken to his holy living Word,
Hid in thy Heart, that frequently reproves:
Wisdom rebukes, and chastens whom she loves.
But where there is no Reproof, there is Cause of Fear
Lest that the holy One cease striving there:
Such may too late bewail themselves, and say,
O that I might be spar' a another Day!
What can a wounded Spirit satiate,
When Soul and Body must be separate?
Whilst therefore Time does unto thee remain,
Take up the Cross, and own that holy Name,
Christ crucified, and risen from the Grave.
Whose Life's the Light of Men, that comes to save.
But what avails to read the History!
Unless we learn to know the Mystery:
For inwardly the Heart's defiled with Sin,
Therefore Salvation must be wrought within,
By that which humbles, and that boweth down
To Judgment; first the Cross and then the Crown.
The Word is as a Fire to purify
The Heart of Man from all Iniquity,
Before it be a Word of Consolation,
And bring the Soul glad Tidings of Salvation.
All this, I hope, thou know; but he that knows it
Is not thereby approved, but he that does it:
The Doer of the Word is justified,
Because he by the same is sanctified.
Slight not the Day of small Things, lest there be
Greater withheld and concealed from thee.
Was it not said, when Ephraim was a Child,
I loved him (that is lowly, meek and mild?)
O be not high and lofty, but come down,
With quick Zacheus, if thou wilt gain the Crown
Of Life and Peace, Hark, does not Jesus say,
Salvation's come unto thy House this Day?
If thou wilt receive it, cast it not away.
1680.
An ELEGY.
THE fairest Flowers are not secured from Blasts,
The strongest Towers must unto Ruin yield,
Each Visible unto its Period hastes,
And by Reticat all called to quit the Field;
Both Animals and Vegetables fall,
Nature to common Change exposes all:
None can secure himself. Man, though possessed
Of that great Faculty, styled rational,
May plead no Privilege above the rest
But stoop to the Fate of the meanest Animal:
Yet herein does a mystic Grandeur lie,
He has a nobler Part can never die.
Although removed from Converse with his Friend;
Relations and Acquaintance, are deprived
Of his Society, words cannot extend
TO unequal Objects; some are therefore grieved
Thus to be separated from each other;
From a dear Father, or a tender Mother.
O can their Offspring be so unconcerned,
As not a little to breathe forth their Grief,
Where sympathetick Bowels often yea^^*
Yet cannot now administer Relief
To either Side! Survivers may complain,
Mourn and lament their Absence, but in vain.
But yet we may a little ruminate
On bypast Things, impressed on the Mind,
And (though with Grief) revolve that former State,
When each in others Joys did Solace find;
And let their Virtues flourish in each Breast,
And Mem'ries live, though they are gone to rest.
Ah, he is gone, who was a Father dear
Unto his Offspring, with a tender Eye,
Waiting for Good, though seemingly severe,
When careless Crimes enforced Severity:
As famous Judges often Sentence give
With Tears, so he with the Chastised did grieve.
This dear Paternal Love did more engage
His Children's Hearts, than here may be expressed,
Alluring (as i^ were) our tender Age
To his Advice; Love's Conquest is the best.
Let others boast their forced Authority,
Reigning like Tyrants in their Family.
Nor did he count it as his chiefest Care,
To gather for them Superfluity
Knowing that Earth-bred Wealth is often a Snare,
Whereby the Heart's engaged to Vanity:
His generous Spirit rather was inclined
To Furnish them with Treasures of the Mind
And though, in outward Show, he did appear
Less forward in professing Things divine,
His Heart was not without an holy Fear,
Light in his Youthful Days began to shine,
And show to him the empty Vanity
Of Rome's seducing Soul-Idolatry.
For when he was, by a related Friend,
Solicited their Fancies t'entertain,
Who urging (when his Life seemed near its End)
To die a Catholic, 'twas all in vain:
The sacred Precepts of the blessed Truth
Began to spring up in his blooming Youth.
So that, for all the Favors he received
From that Relation, or great Hopes of more,
By Promise due, he would not be deceived
To own those Principles he knew before
Were Men's Inventions; thus Heaven secretly.
Did shroud and keep him from such Subtilty.
And in succeeding Days did plainly show
A way more excellent, a blessed Way;
Whereby he, to his Satisfaction knew
That Path, wherein Fools walking cannot stray;
Now, let his Weakness be forgotten quite,
And with his Dust be buried out of Sight.
His second Self, by him was well beloved;
Who, though she for a Season did survive,
That she by future Trials might be proved
And by renewed Sorrows learn to grieve:
A second Love she never entertained,
But a chaste Widow many Years remained.
And if Affliction and Chastisement be
Undoubted Characters of Father's Love,
Whose Prudence often in Severity
Does, for Instruction to his Children, prove
A greater Favor than they apprehend:
She had her Share, and found it in the End.
Nor may her dear Affection be forgot
Unto her Offspring, whom she taught the Law
Of filial Duty; yet delighted not
So much through Fear, as Love, to keep in Awe;
Austerity may gain a slavish Fear,
But natural Affection more endear.
She likewise, as her consort did before,
Delighted much to gratify her Friend;
If any her Assistance did implore,
She freely would reach forth a helping Hand;
Thus studying Good, she sometimes grieved to see
Relations for small Trifles disagree.
Yea, she would rather bear an Injury,
Than recompense it; rather reconcile
Dissenting Parties, through her Lenity,
Than seem t'encline to either for a while:
But these her Exercises now must cease,
And she rejoice in everlasting Peace.
Alas! that those, who knew her well, might learn,
By her Example, to become more mild,
And not account Revenge a just Concern
Nor study to revile, because reviled;
Such would more inward Consolation know,
Than from an angry Breast can ever grow.
Well, though both he and she be gone to Rest,
And cannot with our Sorrows now he moved,
Nor with the Frownings of this World oppressed,
Wherewith some may as yet be further proved,
Their Names engraved in our Hearts, may not
Be razed, or canceled, or in Time forgot.
Nor shall we study high Hyperboles,
So to perpetuate their Memory,
Or raise a Monument of common Praise,
Which cannot add to their Felicity;
For they were what this insufficient Pen,
Cannot describe unto surviving Men.
1682.
An EPISTLE.
Is Friendship fled, or Love grown cold?
Do frozen Walls of Ice withold
Its pearly Streams? Or let the Sun,
That gave it Being, shine upon
The brittle Fence! Or is some Skreen
Injuriously set up between
The gentle Spring, and that bright Ray
Which conquering Night, brings joyful Day?
Remove that Obstacle away
Then, though with Grief I may confess,
In Wintertime the Effects be less,
Because of Distance or cold Air,
Prevailing in our Hemisphere,
And interposing (for Sol's Power
Is still the same each Day and Hour)
It will dissolve the Frost in Time,
If its warm Ray thereon may shine;
Though vacant Clouds do interpose
Its pure refulgent Beam, and those
Inferior Concrets that have Birth
From the gross Element of Earth.
But stay, methinks a Spring should be
From Winter's chilling Force, more free
Than to be frozen! Inbred Heat
Is then, with purest Springs, more great;
And with its Current soon does glide
Through Ice besetting either Side.
Let Love spring up, that we may see
The same Effects, dear Friend, in thee.
1682.
The seventh EPISTLE to Cousin F. R. being then under some Exercises of Mind.
IN Love pure Sympathy, endeared Friend,
I know that secret Trials will attend,
And raise some Conflicts in thy tender Breast,
Such as by Pen cannot be well expressed:
But all Things shall, as left upon Record,
Convene for Good to them that fear the Lord.
Some latent Cause, from carnal Eye concealed,
May bring a Satisfaction when revealed
By that refulgent Light, whose sacred Ray
Leads on the Meek in Zion's pleasant Way;
Whose Paths are Peace to them that persevere
To follow Jesus with an holy Fear;
Jesus, the spotless Lamb, whose Power surrounds
His Babes, when Tribulation most abounds:
Lean on his Bosom, for his Love extends
Abundantly unto his Bosom-Friends:
Who, though he in true Wisdom please to prove
Our Faithfulness, our Fervency of Love,
As he sees good: Yet there is never just
Cause or Occasion of the least Distrust
Of Loyalty in him; who, when as we
Were Strangers in a State of Enmity,
Nay, in a poor defiled, polluted State,
Objects more likely for Disgust and Hate,
Did cast an Eye of Pity and of Love
On us, who had no Comeliness to move
The least Affection, till his gracious Hand
Had washed, swadled, had anointed, and
Adorned with his Robe of Righteousness,
And put upon us his own Comeliness:
And, by his sacred Covenant, engage
Our Hearts unto him in our tender Age:
This, this is Love indeed; O let it never
Be quenched in our Hearts, but live for ever:
This, this is Love worthy to be admired!
Ah, this is he alone to be desired.
Therefore contend not in the carnal Will,
Tread Self-hood under Foot, watch and be still;
For all Additionals shall added be,
By him who knows what is best for thee and me:
In Resignation let us wait to know
His Will fulfilled, and living Praises flow
Unto his holy ever-blessed Name,
Who only's worthy in our Hearts to reign
For evermore, eternally. Amen.
Ninth Month, 1682.
The eighth EPISTLE to Cousin F. R.
SHALL transitory Toys, vile Chaff and Dross,
Ever be esteemed and prized above the Cross?
The Cross of Christ, the Power of God, whereby
The holy Men of old did crucify
The World and Self-hood; and thereby obtain
A Crown of Glory, over all to reign,
With Zion's King, in everlasting Peace,
Where Joys abound, but Griefs and Sorrows cease,
Ah! Shall that precious Seed, that has been sown
In Ground prepared, so soon be overgrown
With Briars and Thorns? Or must the scorching Ray
And parching Heat of Trials, cause Decay
In that once green, though tender sprouting Plant?
Has it but little Root? Or does it want
Refreshing Showers, or early Dews? O see
Why thus it seems to droop! Why should it be
So long neglected? It may sprout again,
If cherished with first and latter Rain,
Which bount'ous Heaven will not too long deny,
If Disobedience and Idolatry
Do not provoke thereto: That gracious Hand,
That planted it, can make a barren Land,
More fertile for its Sake; and if he please,
Can make a fruitful Land a Wilderness.
Ah! Let our Breathings for each other be,
That since we were from the wild Olive Tree
Removed and separated, that we might
Be grafted in the Good, we may not slight
The Hand that planted, nor the Root that bare us,
Lest we decay; for can the Pruner spare us,
That spared not natural Branches, if we be
Unfruitful, but divide us from the Tree?
But that we ever may, as we depend,
Upon the Root, feel Life and Sap ascend
Into our Branches; that pure Praise may spring,
And Fruits of Righteousness to Zion's King.
A Letter to Cousin F. R.
IN secret yearning for thy Preservation,
Endeared Friend, I send the Salutation
Of Love unfeigned, and heartily desire
Its pure refining Flame may never expire,
Or be extinguished: For 'twas said of old,
Iniquities abound, when Love grows cold.
Now, though thy silent Pen does testify,
There Is some yet latent Cause of Jealousy:
I Will not my Rival envy, if it be
One worthy to be entertained by thee,
Without Detraction from that innate Worth,
Whereto I hope thou art by second Birth
Entitled. But can Affairs so crowd,
Or interpose, no Hour must be allowed
To send some welcome Evidence of Love,
Which did so mutually engage and move,
Our Hearts and Pens so frequently to express
Their quondam Sympathy? Well, ne'ertheless
What Is charactered in my poor pausing Mind,
I send unto thee, as by Love inclined;
Wishing thy candid Aspect on the same,
Or else annihilate them in a Flame.
3 d of the Seventh Month, 1683.
A Parable to Cousin F. R.
ON Shiloh's fruitful Banks, in Valleys low,
A pleasant Garden flourished, where did grow
And spring, with early Dews, each curious Plant,
Some rich in Beauty, some in pleasant Scent:
Amongst the rest a Lily budded forth,
Which flourishing a while in native Worth;
One Time looked out, to observe and take a View
Of some strange Plants, which in the Highway grew:
To her a scarlet Poppy then resorted,
And with fine Academick Phrases courted;
Yea, did with florid Subtilty invade
Her Innocence, and charmingly persuade
To quit that close Confinement and become
An Object more admired and gazed on:
The Lily seemed to listen, till thereby
She was almost seized by a Lethargy;
Scarcely regarding, that in unfenc'd Land
She might be nip'd by some rash careless Hand,
Or that she in the enclosed Garden might
Flourish, secured from Storm both Day and Night,
And know the precious Dew of Hermon's Hill,
Daily upon her tender Leaves distill.
A neighboring Plant observing this, dismayed,
Unto the Master of the Garden, said,
(In sympathizing Bowels) Dearest Lord,
Be pleased to send thy pure prevailing Word,
To guard thy Lily; let it not remain
Without thy Fence: Ah, with thy early Rain
Bedew and quicken! Let it know, that there
Is Blasting and Decay, but Safety here
Within thy Walls, which are Salvation round
About thy Garden, for it is holy Ground.
3 d of the Seventh Month, 1683.
SOLITUDE.
HOW sweet is harmless Solitude?
What can its Joys control?
Tumults and Noise may not intrude,
To interrupt the Soul.
That here enjoys itself, retired
From Earth's seducing Charms;
Leaving her Pump, to be admired
By such as court their Harms;
While she, on Contemplation's Wings,
Soars far beyond the Sky,
And feeds her Thoughts on heavenly Things,
Which in her Bosom lie.
Great Privileges here, of old,
The wise Men did obtain;
And Treasure, far surpassing Gold,
They dig'd for not in vain.
The Tincture of Philosophers,
Here happily they found;
The Music of the Morning-Stars,
Here in their Hearts did sound.
Moses, that meek and prudent Prince
Of Israel, did with Joy,
By the burning Bush, experience
This sacred Mystery;
When in Retirement he withdrew,
And led his tender Flock
Beyond the Desert, he might view
The Wonders of the Rock.
So Heaven's high honored Favorite,
Did often choose to dwell
Less for a Refuge, than Delight,
Upon the Mount Carmel:
For in the incensed Justice, he
From Heaven called down Fire,
To curb vain Man's Authority,
That did by Force require
The holy Prophet to submit
Unto their proud Command,
Or to come down, till Heaven thought sit
Thereto to Condescend.
There Is neither Stateliness of Court,
Nor any frantic Mirth,
Deluded Mortals childish Sport,
Nor Glories of the Earth,
Can counterpoise that inward Peace,
Which in her Bosom dwells;
Joys here abounding, Sorrows cease;
Delight all Grief expels.
Here may the Soul, secured from Noise,
In Calmness meditate;
And waiting, hear the still small Voice,
Which makes the Mountains shake.
But consolates the Soul and Mind,
As with a sweet Repose,
Which here, as from its Dross refined,
Participates of those
Diviner Joys, whereto by Birth
She has a sacred Right;
Which far transcends all Joys on Earth,
In spotless true Delight.
But those that covet to enjoy
The Sweets of Solitude,
Must bid adieu to Vanity;
Not let the World intrude,
Like an alluring Delilah,
Into their Privacy;
For her Design is to betray
By subtle Flattery;
Which, who by Watchfulness does learn
Discreetly to repel,
Such to their Solace, shall discern
Where perfect Peace does dwell
And in Retirement, always find
Such innocent Delight,
As fully satiates the Mind,
And plenteously requite,
Denial of all earthly Things,
Which never can satisfy
The noble Soul, whose Solace springs
From Immortality.
The glorious Joys of Seraphims;
For which each daily sings
High Praises, and melodious Hymns,
Unto the King of Kings.
1683.
A Meditation.
CAN I forget that Hand, that first did lay
My mean Foundation out of Dust or Clay?
Can I forget the Breath, that did inspire
My lifeless Mass with pure eternal Fire?
Can I forget the Word, that first said, Live;
And with its Virtue, Life to me did give?
Can I forget that Eye, that guides me
With heavenly Brightness through Obscurity?
Can I forget that holy Arm of Power,
That guards and keeps me safe, as in a Tower?
Can I forget that sweet celestial Bread,
By which, when hungry, I am nourished?
Or Can my Soul ever unmindful be
Of those refreshing Streams that flow from thee?
Thou great eternal Fountain of all Good!
Whose Name by Mortals is not understood;
Nor can, by Letters, Words, or Sentences,
Be rightly comprehended as it is:
For thou art All in All; and who can say,
He can remember thee another Day?
Except thy holy Spirit still abide,
And lodge with us, to teach, direct and guide
Our Hears and Thoughts, and quicken good Desires,
Whereby we long for thee, when thou retires
To thy Pavillion, to thy secret Place,
So that we rest not, till we see thy Face:
For thou alone prepares true Rest for thine;
Though furious Men against the Saints combine,
Their Habitation they can never destroy,
By all their hostile Arts and Policy:
For it is founded on the Rock that shall
Abide; and though Waves beat, shall never fall,
As faithful they remain to thee, thou art
Author of Faith, that shields from every Dart.
Ah, why should any doubt? Thy Arm's the same
As ever; all sufficient to restrain
The Wrath of Man, though as a flowing Tide,
It seems resistless: If thou please to guide
Our feeble Footsteps in thy Path, we shall
Not be dismayed, but follow thee through all
That would oppose: Thou art our chiefest Guard;
Yea, thou art our exceeding great Reward.
Ah, take up they Abode with us! For we
Can find no resting Place except in thee.
1684.
Meditations on Persecution.
COLD hungry Seamen, though they often endure
Day-dark'ning Storms and Tempests, to procure
The winged Treasures of this fading World;
Although they run the Hazard to be hurled
On wrecking Rocks, or quick devouring Sands,
Or cast as Captives on some foreign Lands,
To spend their wretched Days in Misery,
Instead of what they sought for to enjoy,
Abounding Wealth, if to their wished Shore
They safe arrive; venture again, yet more
Undaunted than at first, in hopes to be
With more Success, kept from those Dangers free.
Then why should such Faint-heartedness appear,
In Israel's Camp, that ought of right to fear
None but the Lord? Can any doubt, that have
The Word of an almighty King, to save
Them to the uttermost? What! though he seem
To tarry long, his own appointed Time
Is always best; in greatest Streights, we do
Wholly depend on, and acknowledge too,
Salvation only from above; for then
We find, it is vain to hope for Help from Men.
Ah, was not Israel thus beset? Could they
Encounter furious Pharoah's Host, or the Sea?
Yet was Deliverance near; the Sea must be
A Path to them, a Grave to the Enemy;
Pharaoh might follow, to his own Destruction;
Whilst Israel is proved, to gain Instruction:
That these may learn whom they should chiefly fear,
And whom to trust, when Tribulation's near.
Ah, then in this our Gospel Dispensation,
Why should the Children of this Generation
Seem so far wiser, or more valiant, than
The sacred Offspring of Jerusalem?
Those hazard Life for transitory Toys,
And shall not these, for everlasting Joys,
Resign up Visibles, yea, Life and all,
To him that gave it, if he please to call
To such a Trial? Can we baulk the Way
Wherein he leads, except we ran astray?
We must through Exercises overcome,
And bear the Cross, if we would wear the Crown,
And fully follow him! The Recompense
Will far exceed when we are parted hence.
But who art thou, that art so loath to give
Up an Estate? A Thief may soon deprive
Thee of a greater Share, than he requires;
Some suffer more by Carelessness and Fires:
Which justly Heaven permits, to let them see
How vain these poor, these trifling Treasures be.
Or do thou fear Confinement? Heaven may send
Grievous Diseases, which Physician's Hand
Cannot remove, and to the uneasy Bed
Make thee a Prisoner when thy Health is fled.
But if thou be confined for Jesus Sake,
He will a Prison much more pleasant make,
Than any spacious Palace: For he will be
Fullness of Joy, and saving Health to thee.
Now, though some shun the Cross, as worldly wise,
And from the Path of Truth apostatize,
And yet the Judgments do not soon ensue,
(Although they be in dreadful Vengeance due)
So that the Wicked did of old aver,
Surely the Lord his coming does defer:
Yet shall they not have Peace, but feel the Rod
Of a displeased, of a jealous GOD;
Whose Word can never fail, although he try
Some with Long-suffering, and great Clemency.
Ah, kiss the Son, lest that his Anger be
Incensed! For he alone can comfort thee:
And let not any faint or start aside,
Heaven will support his faithful Ones when tried.
1684.
On DANIEL.
WHEN Babel's Grandees, by unjust Decree,
With royal Signet, surreptitiously
Obtained, and sealed an Edict, that none should
Exhibit a Request, or be so bold
To make Petition, save unto their King,
In thirty Days, in hopes thereby to bring
TO inevitable Ruin, and destroy
The Prophet Daniel, whose Sincerity,
Was well approved; Can we find, that he
Was ever so startled at the rash Decree,
As to omit what formerly he knew
Was an incumbant Duty, or to show
His Zeal for Israel's God? But every Day
Did he not, with his Window open, pray
As formerly, and boldly supplicate
For Israel's Seed in their afflicted State?
Now some may say, What Daniel, could not thou
In Heart, and in thy private Closet bow,
And make Petition in his Ear, that hears
Deep Sighs and Groans, as well as louder Prayers;
But indiscreetly thus thyself expose
A sought-for Prey unto thy watchful Foes?
No, no; he stood not to consult his own
Security, as knowing GOD alone,
Whom he adored, was able to restrain
The Wrath of Man, and in his sacred Name,
Support his faithful Ones, though Trials should
Be heaped on them, even sevenfold;
Or else would give the sweet Experience,
Of a desirable Deliverance.
Thus noble Daniel, when Spies attended,
He, as a Criminal, was apprehended
And cast, by Sentence of malicious Men,
Into the (now more gentle) Lions Den;
Whither, approaching in the royal Robe
Of spotless Innocence, the eternal God,
That holds the Lives of Creatures in his Hand,
Muzzled the Lions Mouth, with a Command
Of Abstinence; and whispered in their Ear
Such Dread, that they durst not approach to tear
The Angel guarded, Prey; but still must wait,
Though Hunger-bit, for other coarser Meat.
But Babel's King could not be unconcerned,
For upright Daniel: Ah, his Bowels yearn'd
For this his faithful Subject: So that he
Could take no Rest, but early rose to see
What was become of him, or if the Power
Of Israel's God, whom Daniel did adore,
Was able to preserve him from the Paws
Of those Devourers, and their ravenous Jaws:
Whereof, when Babel's King was satisfied
By Daniel's Answer, who there testified
His Loyalty to Heaven, his Innocence
Toward the King, he is soon removed thence;
Whilst his Accusers must become a Feast
For them that durst not touch the sacred Guest:
The eternal Arm's the same, his Love's the same,
To those that trust sincerely in his Name.
But those that doubt when he is pleased to prove,
And saw such signal Tokens of his Love,
Are now but rarely seen, our Foe prevails
Too much against us, whilst our Courage fails;
Do by Distrust and Doubting often, I fear,
Prevent those Wonders, which might else appear.
Alas! it is Faith that conquers; he believed,
And doubted not, and therefore was relieved:
For he resisted even unto Blood,
Therefore the Lord brought all about for Good.
Shall Man prescribe a Way for him, whereby
His glorious Name he best may magnify?
A prudent General does not permit
Such to appear in the Front, he knows unfit
To bear the first Assault of the Enemy,
But valiant Hearts, that cannot yield nor fly;
Can then the everlasting Counselor,
The King of Kings, be more unskilled in War?
No, no; for he, the only wise Commander,
Though of his meanest Soldier truly tender,
Yet honors them in higher Place, that be
Free to encounter Dangers cheerfully.
And though proud Gog and Magog arm for Fight,
Destruction from his Sword shall stop their Flight:
They shall not 'scape from his All-seeing Eye;
His Wrath shall overtake them suddenly:
He, and his Saints must have the Victory.
Then why should any weak and faint appear?
Though great Goliath glory in his Spear,
And monstrous Stature, little Davidshall,
Without Readiness Armor, make the Giant fall;
And bring Deliverance to Israel's Host,
Though the Philistines long against them boast:
And though Worm Jacob's Seed be often proved
With Tribulations, he is still beloved,
And for his Sake great Kings shall be reproved.
The Lord of Lords will get himself a Name,
He Will overturn, and overturn again,
Until he come, whose Right it is to reign.
Amen. 1685.
Meditations concerning our Imprisonment only for Conscience Sake, 1684, in
Lancaster Castle.
THOUGH the Eternal Wisdom, Zion's King,
Be pleased to try his Babes by Suffering;
Though some departing from the Sinner's Way,
And walking Zion-ward became a Prey;
Yea, though through Tribulation Israel must
Enter the promised Land, yet Heaven is just,
And tenderly supports his patient Ones,
Although he chastens his beloved Sons;
And though in Prisons outwardly they be
Confined, the Son of Love does set them free,
And leads in verdant Plains of Liberty:
The fresh fat Valleys, where sweet Shiloh flows,
Upon whose fertile Banks the Lily grows;
Where, though he by some Exercises prove,
He solaceth with Flaggons of his Love.
Then why should any murmur? Jesus thus
Extended single Favors unto us.
Here are we with the hidden Manna fed,
Though with Transgressors we be numbered:
Here can we Prospect from our Tower survery,
With much more innocent Delight, than they
That range at large; yea, here we may descry
The pleasant Path, hid from the vult'rous Eye:
Wherein the Righteous follow Christ their King,
And tender Shepherd, to the living Spring
Of Joy; and to his Name high Praises sing.
Nor can the proudest Walls (though never so high,
The Monuments of grave Antiquity)
Be terrible to spotless Innocence,
That knows the Rock of Ages a Defense.
Though some be from their families removed,
Here Mary's Choice may better be improved.
And Christ take care of his, although they sit
As unconcerned, weeping at Jesus Feet:
He Will be a Father to the Family
Of such as, for his Name, in Prison lie,
And fill their Hearts with everlasting Joy.
These rugged Walls, less grievous are to me,
Than those bedecked with curious Arras be;
TO a guilty Conscience, to a wounded Heart,
A Palace cannot palliate that Smart:
Though drunk with Pleasure, dull with Opiates,
Some seem as senseless of their sad Estates,
Till on their dying Bed Conscience awakes.
But though the Righteous be in Bonds confined,
They inwardly sweet Satisfaction find.
Neither can stately Roofs, Gates, Bars, nor all
The Art of Man, suppress the Cries and Call,
Or Supplication, or the poorest Sigh,
Of Israel's Seed, for his Redeemer's nigh;
Who will regard the Cries, and hear the Groans,
Of his afflicted, tribulated Ones;
And will, in his appointed Time, arise
Utterly to confound his Enemies.
Although by them he for a Season prove
His Children dear; he will yet in Time remove
The Scourge, and cast the chast'ning Rod aside,
When Israel's Faith and Patience he has tried.
Now though some rage, because we cannot bow
Unto their vain Traditions, since we know
The blessed Truth, which has engaged to give
Our Hearts to him, in whom alone we live:
Yea, though for this, some fret, and storm, and rage,
And study to afflict God's Heritage;
Their Wrath's restrained by One, that if he please,
Can curb the furious, rolling, raging Seas,
As in a Moment; and upon the Wave
Teach him to walk, and by his Presence save
From sinking, as of old; his Art's the same,
Eternal Praises to his holy Name.
He is our Shield, our Sun, that penetrates
Our closest Rooms, and sweetly consolates
Our waiting Souls; and with his quickening Ray,
Changes black Nights of Sorrow into joyful Day:
So that it is not the Terrors of the Night,
Nor Darts that fly by Day, that can affright
The righteous Souls, who walk in holy Fear;
They know their Captain of Salvation's near,
The blessed Prince of Peace, their Joy, their King,
The only Fountain, whence true saving Comforts spring.
Sixth Month, 1684.
Another Letter to Cousin F. R.
AS Winter's tedious Nights to weary Eyes,
As nipping Cold to chirping winged Flocks,
Until the welcome Day Star does arise,
And light the Trees to shake their dewy Locks:
Or as a Door close locked, to limit thee,
Even thee, to whom I send these hasty Lines,
Such was thy tedious Silence unto me,
Till now of late a better Aspect shines.
For from thy bounteous Hand I have received,
What I esteem more than the Miser's Gold;
If I for lieu of it should be bereaved,
Of the dear Inter'st which in thee I hold;
Surpassing that of Consanguinity,
Which scarce obliges, but in Compliments;
But cordial Friendship's lasting Unity,
Hearts by endearing Virtue so cements,
That Distance, though remote, cannot separate;
Though interposing Business prevail,
To hinder mutual Converse, and create
Those Exercises which sometimes assail:
That Adage, clouded to the World in Mists,
Is in thy Conversation verified;
Honor with true Nobility consists,
And nothing more ridiculous than Pride.
Pride in Deportment, and in gaudy Dress,
Indulged by some to obtain a Monarchy,
Is shunned by thee; thy Empire ne'ertheless
Extended further, than desired by thee.
Thou to the World in Plainness bravely shows,
Thou covet'st not the Troubles of her Noise;
Yet unawares obligingly subdues,
Far more than they that court her Vanities.
Pride's gaudy Captives strive to dazzle Eyes,
But thy sweet Gravity affects the Heart,
Yet such sometimes gain Conquest by Surprise;
But whom thou overcomes, own due Desert.
Yet were thy Virtue and thine Honor less,
If such Ambition found a Place in thee,
As frequently attends the gaudy Dress,
TO insult over those taken in Captivity.
But though thou can not totally redress
Such Expectation, as some seem to have,
Yet by a prudent Mein and Gentleness,
Would loose the Fetters, that so far enslave;
And innocently ever do extend
Such candid Favors, as may best agree
To those whom thou vouchsafes to own thy Friend,
And yet kept from reflecting Censure free.
But thy great Zeal for true Religion shines
In Life and Conversation, even as far
Above what others talk these cloudy Times,
As the Day-Ruler does a twinkling Star.
For in thy blooming Years, thy tender Mind
Was influenced with such warm Desires
Of Holiness; and so to Good inclined,
As Love, and Power divine, alone inspires,
Nor did thou take Religion upon Trust,
But wisely sought to know its Basis; and,
Noble Bercan like, so wise and just,
To search the Records of divine Command:
Which having proved, thou heard'st, and then obeyed
And with a right composed Heart and Mind,
Bowed to the Truth; so Truth its Scepter swayed,
And thou herein do Peace and Solace find.
And though at first the frowning World assayed,
By Scornings and Revilings, to have deterred
From Goodness, thy great Soul was not dismayed.
But this, before her Vanities, preferred:
So Things that once seemed difficult, became
More easy; and the glorious shining Light,
That first but glimmer'd in the Dark, the same
Broke out more bright, and overspread the Night.
Thus what seemed once impossible, appeared
To thy great Satisfaction; and thine Heart
(Thy Understanding being fully cleared)
Enjoyed the Choice of Mary's better Part,
Which from the Righteous may not be removed:
They know Salvation near, Truth is their Choice;
And though such be with Exercises proved,
They have the Earnest of eternal Joys.
1690.
On FRIENDSHIP.
AMongst the many Records I have read,
And Transcripts, through the World much scattered,
I Have met with several Hints and Whisperings
Of an abstruse Grand-Property, that springs
From some interior, hidden, innate Cause,
In noble Breasts, uncircumscrib'd by Laws,
Styled Friendship, which of such a Nature is,
That many think they know it when they miss.
But it is supposed of such sweet Innocence,
Of so divine and sacred Influence,
When it does in true tender Hearts prevail,
That when occurrent Troubles would assail,
It guards, as does a Bulwark, either Breast,
Where it resides, and takes up its Rest.
But O! this treacherous World knows little of it,
Except it be in Name, whereby to scoff it.
For now, though some affected with the Name,
Would be supposed touched with its noble Flame.
They scorn its Dictates, and will not regard
A troubled Friend, except some fair Reward
Appear in View; their Business or their Pride
Engrosses all; Self may not be denied.
O when will Mortals raise their Eyes to see,
That all Things here are only Vanity!
1691.
On the Three Holy Children.
WHen conquering Babel's Foes were subjugate,
And fair Jerusalem depopulate,
King Nebuchadnezzar triumphed in Pride,
And his Concerns of War seemed laid aside:
Who glorying in his Strength, not in the Lord,
Formed a golden God to be adored.
Now this great Image, made by mortal Hand,
Must worshipped be (such was the King's Command)
Though senseless, helpless, though he never could bless
Their Warlike Enterprises with Success;
But it is the King's Decree, and then who dare
Resist, but such as do a Greater fear?
The Sentence is, The fiery Furnace must
Consume the Rebel's Body unto Dust.
Yet they were captive Jews of royal Blood,
Who, in their Zeal for Israel's God, withstood
That cursed Edict, that vain Law reject.
That Decree with them had small Effect:
Then the Informers, that observed the Jews,
And sought for an Occasion to accuse
The Innocent, (as some do now) drew near;
And first, to gain Acceptance in his Ear,
Said, Live, O King, forever! Thou have made
A firm Decree, which some have not obeyed;
Even three conceited Jews, who neither thee
Regard, nor to thy Gods do bow their Knee.
O how his Fury does at this arise!
That any should his golden God despise:
His Visage does its native Features change;
His Eyes, with sparkling Rage, proclaim Revenge:
Therefore, at his Command, they all in haste
The Persons of the Innocent arrest;
Called Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
And they before the wrathful King must go
To prove the Matter, and, it seems to try
If they would bow; which when they still deny,
As knowing, he alone that did create
The Fire, and all Things else, could soon abate
Its Violence; and from the threatening Hand
Of Babel's King, deliver them who stand
In Awe to none but him, and fear not Man;
But dread the living God, who only can
Kill and destroy, or save and keep alive;
For he to Man does Life and Being give,
This they believing, did not study how
To answer; but resolved not to bow
To any, but the Lord: Although the King
Seemed in his Wrath, to count it as a Thing
Impossible, that any God could be
So potent, to withstand his fierce Decree.
But great JEHOVAH did that Law confound;
For when all Three were in their Vestments bound,
And cast into the furious fiery Flame,
The Eternal Word did pow'rfully restrain
Its proper Quality, and so surround
Them with Defense, no Harm on them was found:
Yet did the Fire retain its former Vigor,
And manifest it with resistless Rigor,
Against those Men, who bold to execute
The King's Command, the Just did persecute:
Which, when Nebuchadnezzar saw, dismayed,
He rose in Haste, and to his Nobles said,
Were not Three Men cast bound into the Fame!
They answered, True: The King replied again,
Now, in the Midst thereof, behold, I see,
Four Men walk loose, and from their Fetters free,
Whereof the Fourth seems clothed in Majesty,
As Son of the immortal Deity.
Thus was the Lofty forced to confess,
There was a Power above him, and to bless
The God of Israel; set his Servants free,
That, trusting in him, would not bow the Knee
Unto, or serve another than the Lord,
Their only God; but, as with one Accord,
Did yield their Bodies to his Will, that they
Might magnify him in their Trial-day.
Consider now, had they not faithful been,
The captive Seed of Israel had not seen
That great Deliverance, so signally
Wrought for them, that in true Simplicity,
Resigned themselves, their All, unto the Lord,
Who is alone worthy to be adored:
Nor Babel's Monarch been constrained to bless
His holy Name, who reigns in Righteousness;
Deposing Kingdoms unto whom he sees
Most fit, and changing Men's perverse Decrees.
Lord, may thy Wisdom, in these latter Days,
Limit, or turn Man's Wrath unto thy Praise!
Put thou an Hook into the Jaws of those,
That study politickly to oppose,
Thy Works of Love and Wonder in the Land,
And with their Subtilty seek to withstand
The Progress of despised Israel,
In their Return toward the holy Hill,
Zion, the sacred Mount of thy Renown,
Which Babylon has sought to batter down,
But never shall prevail; although she seem
To sit in Pomp, like to a stately Queen,
That sees no Sorrow; all her Pride is vain;
For fall she must, and never rise again;
The Time's appointed: Then shall Zion rise,
And triumph over all her Enemies.
The Conclusion of a Letter to Cousin F. R.
Never let the Prospect of so great Estate
Dazzle those Eyes, which I presumed of late,
Could from on high, with brave Disdain, look down
On this World's fading Glory; since a Crown
Of Life is promised for a Recompense
Of hearty, true, sincere Obedience,
Unto the faithful Soul, whose strong Desires
Are centered in that Joy that never expires.
Ah, let enough suffice: Could Poverty
Be Advocate, 'twould plead Excuse for thee:
But if we grasp at Riches that are vain,
Then how is our Religion strong and plain?
A Meditation.
LORD, teach me patiently to follow thee,
Through thy sore Travails, through thine Agony,
Which thou so meekly did endure for me,
Amongst such unworthy Worms as wounded thee,
Piercing thee fresh with our Iniquity;
Teach us to suffer, till we reign with thee.
Amen.
To her Friend M. J.
LET us. my Friend, all peevish Self withstand,
And in the Meekness of the spotless Lamb,
Lead one another gently by the Hand,
And travel forward to the holy Land,
Where the Redeemed on Mount Zionstand,
With Harps of living Praises in their Hand.
A Meditation.
ETernal Love, before whose glorious Face
All Times are present, filling every Place;
Uncircumscribed, unexcluded! Can
Thy boundless Mercy to forgetful Man
Be told! Or can thy long Forbearance be
Enough admired? Great dreadful Majesty!
Ah, let my Soul, in a true living Sense
Now ruminate on the sweet Influence
Of that abounding Goodness, which from thee
Did freely reach to such a Worm as me!
The Beast, that cleaves the Hoof, and chews the Cud,
Was by the ancient Law proclaimed good:
And you are pleased to enjoin thine Israel,
In humble due Acknowledgement, to tell
Thy mighty Wonders, each one to his Friend,
Whereby thou brought 'em to the promised Land.
So amongst the many Favors, Lord, of thine,
May I now call to Mind that doleful Time;
Wherein, as pondering of my State, I found
(Though Life and Virtue does with thee abound)
Myself as one of those dry senseless Bones,
Which lay in the open Valley, which thou once
Did show thy Prophet, all exceeding dry,
Until thou pleased to cast a tender Eye
Of Pity on them, and the Answer give
Unto that great Demand, Can dry Bones live?
By breathing on them, when thy gracious Hand
Had gathered them, and by thy blessed Command
Clothed them with Flesh: Great King! thy Pow'r's the same
It was of old, and cannot move in vain.
Thus, though at first my miserable State
Seemed unto me doleful and desperate,
How soon thou in the Bone did broach a Spring,
Which to my soul did sweet Refreshment bring.
Friendship tried.
THOUGH it surpasses Winter's Skill
TO impede the flowing Tide,
Which from the Spring in Hermon's Hill
Each Moment in supplied:
Though Icy Walls cannot immure
Its crystal Streams, that run secure;
Nor yet the scorching fiery Beams
Of Summers' Heat exhale,
Or to drink up those purling Streams,
Which all its Drought prevail;
Which, ever flowing freely, bring
Their Treasures from a living Spring.
Yet have I seen a pretty Well,
Derived from Showers of Rain,
Which into Nature's Cistern fell,
And did some Time remain;
By Summer's Drought, exhaled away,
And vanish in a scorching Day.
So little Brooks and Torrents flow,
While they have fresh Supply
From the distilling Clouds, but grow
(When most they are wanted) dry,
Like Cherith's Brook, whose pleasant Stream
Ceased, when the Drought was most extreme:
So common Kindnesses may flow
In some sinister Hearts,
And petty Favors seem to grow,
Whilst sometimes they impart
Renewed Bribes, in hopes to obtain
The Stock, with Interest, back again.
But then, if any Fret (...),
Or Disappointment come,
How soon Upbraiding testifies,
True Friendship found not Room
Within those narrow bounded Breasts,
The Lodging of Self-Interest.
True Friendship, that from Virtue springs,
Does so enlarge the Mind,
It cannot be blocked up with Things
Of such a servile Kind,
As makes dull Misers fret and rage
In this our mercenary Age.
It Is not the nipping stormy Winds
Of sharp Adversity,
Nor Winter's Frost, can chill the Minds,
Or stop the Sympathy,
Which with unfeigned Love does flow,
Where Friendship does sincerely grow.
A Meditation.
HOW long will Man forget himself,
And be so much inclined
To treasure up that fordid Pelf,
Which he must leave behind?
And seek these Vanities on Earth,
Which quickly come to naught;
A little Jollity and Mirth
Is often dearly bought:
Fools, for the Belly, fell away
Their Birth right to the Wise;
What Is this Inheritance? Cry they
Thus they for Trash despise
That Treasure, which no Thief own steal,
No Canker-worm nor Rust
Can ever corrupt: And it is by Seal
Confirmed to the Just;
Who, though they here may suffer Loss,
It shall become their Gain,
If patiently they bear the Cross,
They shall the Crown obtain.
But those who choose their Portion here,
Shall wail in Misery,
Because such would not lend an Ear
To the Voice of Wisdom's Cry;
Who called to lead them in the Way,
Where no Destroyer's found,
Nor any hurtful Beast of Prey
Can tread this holy Ground.
The vult'rous Eye here cannot spy;
But yet the humble Mind,
That seeks in true Simplicity,
This pleasant Path may find;
And, though unlearned, cannot err,
Led by a sacred Guide,
Unto a Habitation, where
True Comforts are enjoyed.
Then why should Men unmindful be
Of their more noble Part,
The Offspring of Eternity,
As wholly to invert
The sole Use of their Intellects,
To gain a fading Toy,
This faithless World; while they reject
True everlasting Joy?
They snatch at Shadows here, and slight
The Substance that remains
For ever: Thus they, in the Night,
Walk on to endless Pains;
If they persist to wander there,
And carelessly contemn
The springing Light that does appear
Thence to deliver them:
Then why, alas! should they destroy
Their Hopes of lasting Treasures,
And rest contented, sordidly
To share with Beasts in Pleasures?
Since Wisdom has prepared a Feast,
Her Tables furnished,
That Fools may now become her Guests.
And feed on Heavenly Bread.
Indeed the Wise in their own Eyes,
Are filled with vain Conceit;
Such will the Honeycomb despise;
Yet shall the Hungry eat,
Till satisfied, and with Delight
Walk on in Wisdom's Way;
Knowing the Light expels the Night,
And brings in perfect Day;
Whereby they see Things as they be,
And so are taught to choose
Eternal Life in Purity,
But Sin and Death refuse.
There Is no abiding City here;
Seek one that shall remain:
To Wisdom's Counsel lend an Ear;
True Godliness is Gain;
Where the contented Mind is known,
There is a sweet Increase
Of Solace, where the Soul lies down
In everlasting Peace;
True Peace and Joy, not to be found
In vain terrestrial Things:
Pure holy Praises then abound
Unto the King of Kings;
Who from on high, with tender Eye,
Looked down, and pleased to send
Wisdom to call, whose Voice and Cry
Does unto all extend.
Of a happy Life.
SHALL we exclude from a sedate,
Sweet, happy, and contented State,
The honest Man, that lives in Health,
Enjoying still sufficient Wealth,
Though not from an Inheritance,
But sure Supply from Providence?
Estate by Industry can find,
But treasures Goodness in his Mind;
Though boasting no Nobility,
Nor Honors, from a Pedigree;
But rather can, with Tully, Ego meis Majoribus Virtute proeluxi.
tell,
He does his Ancestors excel;
Yet is not overclog'd with Care;
Can Time for Mind and Body spare;
Can feed and sleep in Season, free
From superfluous Luxury;
That has an equal loyal Spouse,
An handsome habitable House;
Inherited, or purchased, that
He need not fear the sullen Threat
Of griping Landlord; but if not,
Finds true Content in any Lot;
Since in the Closet of his Mind
Dwells Solace not to be defined,
Has a just Friend, that cannot be
Transformed in Adversity;
And what is more happy, yet more strange
He Is always ready for a Change.
On DAVID and JONATHAN.
ARE learned Pens solicitous to express
Idle Chimera's in romantic Dress?
And shall the Fame of these heroic Friends,
Be thought a Theme unworthy of such Pens?
Where a more Princely Pattern can we find
Of loyal Friendship, and a nobler Mind,
Than shines in Jonathan, Readiness famous Son?
Whose Heart to David, since the Conquest won
From great Goliath, was so firmly knit,
That no Self-Int'rest could ever alter it:
Such potent Love sprang in his royal Breast,
That he disrobed himself, to cloth his Guest;
And gave his Garments, Girdle, Sword, and Bow,
Whether he did, by sacred Instinct, know
He should his Father in the Throne Succeed;
(Can Man divert what Heaven has decreed?)
And though the Kishite politickly told,
While Jesse's Son survived, he never should
Establish his Dominion, or advance
His royal Scepter: Yet since Providence
Had so disposed it, he, with pious Mind,
Serene from Envy, had in Heart resigned
His Kingly Power to David: For had he
Been false in Heart, some Trick of Treachery
Had broken forth, his Honor to obscure;
Yet David other Ways been kept secure.
But O his brave heroic Soul disdained
Ignoble Projects; yea, a Crown so stained
With Breach of Friendship: Ah, how did he plead
With furious Saul, and nobly intercede
For absent David, till he did provoke
To (had it hit) a sad and fatal Stroke
Against himself? Then meekly he withdrew,
And at the appointed Season went to show
This unto him, whose Life seemed to depend
On the Fidelity of such a Friend;
Who (pre-advis'd) did privately attend
The Prince's Coming; where, with mutual Grief,
Leave to depart, was then the sole Relief
Time and afford: With Tears, and great Increase
Of Sorrow, David is dismissed in Peace.
But David, truly worthy such a Friend,
Remembered this, when Heaven had put an End
To Rivalty of Rule, and called away
The noble Prince; lest here his longer Stay
Might seem to eclipse his great renowned Name,
Had he survived to see another Reign:
David yet grateful (when with watery Eyes,
He had bewailed his near Friend's Exequies,
And grieved that he was by Philistines stain,
Against whom his Sword was never drawn in vain,
Until that dismal Day, that Heaven's Decree
On wretched Saul must executed be)
Sought out Occasion how to manifest
The Effects of Friendship in his kingly Breast;
And to the Offspring, gently did extend
The Favors due to his deceased Friend;
Mephibosheth, though Readiness Posterity,
(Readiness, that was of such noted Enmity
To David) being Son to Jonathan,
Must dwell at Court, the king will entertain
Him at his royal Table, gives Command
For the Surrender of Readiness State and Land.
Was David valiant? Did he, void of Fear,
Assail and slay a Lion and a Bear,
And with undaunted Courage overcome
The warlike Gathite with a little Stone?
But, which preferred him more than all the rest,
An upright Heart he bore within his Breast.
Was not his friendly Rival Jonathan,
Renowned for Valor too? The only Man
That, with his Armor-bearer, overthrew
The proud Philistines, are his Father knew
With whom he le^^ the Host of Israel,
Whilst the proud Garrison before him fell,
With Dread and Trembling; Israel mean while
Amazed, made haste but to pursue and spoil:
Yet did he not out-brave his loyal Friend,
But by majestic Meekness recommend
That true Nobility of Mind, that brings
A greater Honor than the Name of Kings.
For though his Sword many Philistines flew,
And Israel's Foes he bravely did subdue;
Yet did that Love and Friendship in his Breast,
Embalm his honored Name above the rest
Of his renowned Virtues, and engage
Immortal Fame in each succeeding Age.
On MODESTY and CHASTITY.
O How is this luxurious World beguiled!
That spotless Modesty seems quite exiled;
And Chastity cashiered, or banished hence,
Lest her prevailing powerful Influence
Should tincture human Hearts with holy Awe,
And deeply there engrave the royal Law;
Which few regard, though of a vast Extent,
Although its Precepts teaches to prevent
The sad Effects, Grief, Shame, and Obloquy
That still attend them that slight Modesty.
For Chastity, sits as with awful Grace,
Enthroned in the Heart, and sweetly in the Face
Holds forth its Ensign, Modesty as 'twere
A Flag of Peace, which, when it does appear,
It bids Defiance to the voluptuous Mind,
Although to hospitality inclined;
And does with friendly Treatments entertain
Those that converse therewith, without a Stain,
Or base Extravagance of wanton Look,
Wherewith deluding Sirens bait their Hook,
To catch unstable Hearts with seeming Joy,
Though the Design is chiefly to destroy.
No, here is a pure, though far more potent Charm,
That, as a Castle, daunts approaching Harm
With simple Innocence, whose chiefest Care
Is to prevent, rather than plant a Snare.
Then why should either Sex claim Liberty,
Beyond the Confines of sweet Modesty?
It seasons Words, and fairly regulates
Deportment, both to high and low Estates:
It crowns the Man with Comeliness: But she
That wants it, deserves Shame and Infamy.
Retirement.
O Whither is my Love withdrawn? And where
Shall I direct my Steps to find him near,
And fear no prying Eyes, not listening Ear?
Ah! Whither shall I now repair to find
A solitary Place to ease my Mind,
To him that can my Foes in Fetters bind?
Ah, Lord! withold not those replendent Beams,
Nor stop the Current of those crystal Streams,
Which would both heal my Wounds, and cleanse my Stains.
Spring! Spring! O Fountain of Felicity!
And let sweet Shiloh's Stream flow forth, that I
May drink and be refreshed; or else I die.
Appear, thou great High priest of Israel!
Who in that vast Eternity does dwell,
Whose perfect Beauty, Tongue can never tell.
O can my Soul but much affected be
With those enam'ring Rays that dart from thee,
Great Spring of Light! O teach me fervently
To wait for thee! whose Love is still inclined
To favor Israel's Seed, whose Heart and Mind
Is unto thee unfeignedly resigned.
Though Mortals cannot see thy Face, and live;
Yet to thy royal Seed you are pleased to give
This Princely Favor, this Prerogative.
Lord cast thine Eye upon a Worm whose State
Is even like a Widow desolate!
Remove, consume all that would separate,
Or interpose betwixt my Love and me:
O rend the Veil throughout, that I may see
My Soul's chief Darling! Ah, thou, thou art he,
That stands behind the Wall, and there does wait
To show thyself, when thine do supplicate
To see thee near; then do thou satiate
The Pure in Heart: Although thou please to try
Their Zeal, their Fervor, their Sincerity
To thee; whose Presence, Lord, is always nigh.
On SOLOMON's Request.
GReat Solomon, to whom Heaven was pleased to
A Token of his Favor, when required (give
To ask and have; 'twas not that he might live
To numerous Years, or Riches he desired,
Nor yet the Fame of outward Victory,
But that his Heart true Wisdom might enjoy.
Who, when he had this great Request obtained,
Esteeming it above the finest Gold,
Other more mean Enjoyments also gained;
He learned by this, Enigma's to unfold;
And saw by thsi, all Things below the Sun
Were Vanity, and must to Period come:
And while to this he rightly was inclined,
His Steps were guided in the Path of Peace;
His understanding Heart and Princely Mind
In Wisdom's Secrets daily found Increase:
He then experimentally could tell,
Her Price all glistring Rubies did excel.
For this alone gives true Nobility,
Rightly instructing Princes how to reign,
As with a righteous Scepter: It Is hereby
The Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain,
To punish or protect; but knows to extend
Mercy and Justice with impartial Hand:
Therefore a Terror only unto them,
Whose Acts and Deeds are Evil; but a Praise
To Wisdom's Children. Thus the Diadem
Of Princely Solomon gave forth such Rays,
As dazzled the Beholders: Majesty
Shined in his Wisdom to each wondering Eye,
Much more than in the Plenty of his Gold,
Or sparkling Gems, common to other Kings;
'T was none of these, when niggard Fame had told
His Name in Sheba's, Court, that from thence brings
That famous Queen, whose Heart was set on fire
To prove the Truth, his Wisdom to admire.
Where secret Wisdom dwells, at her right Hand
Are Length of Days, and Peace, wherewith to bless
Those that attend on her, and always stand
As at her Door, the Gate of Righteousness:
With Wealth and Honors her right Hand requites
Those whom she is pleased to own her Favorites.
But Words, alas! cannot enough set forth
Its Excellence, nor Tongue of Man declare
True wisdom's Price, according to its Worth:
She dwellsi'th' humble Heart, that is filled with Fear
Of the Almighty; and all those that have her,
Find Substance that remains, yea, endless Treasure,
A Meditation.
O Who would think, all outward Foes might be
Suppressed and conquered, much more easily
Than that insulting Tyrant in the Heart,
Which there usurps, and acts the Traitor's Part!
For though a Man externally reform
His Actions, so that strictly he perform
The Precepts of the Law; it is all in vain,
If he the accursed Achan entertain
In his polluted Breast: This will expose
Him to the Fury of all outward Foes;
Whom otherwise he might with Ease repel,
Did not this Traitor in his Bosom dwell.
We'll therefore wait, to feel the searching Power,
By its enlight'ning Influence, discover
This cursed Achan, that the Camp may be
Entirely sanctified to follow thee,
Israel's victorious King, who truly do
Watch with a tender Care over Israel's Host:
For it is a Task, surpassing human Skill,
Rightly to govern and direct the Will,
Let therefore Heart and Will be still resigned
To thee, with a free, fervent, humble Mind.
A Contemplation.
GREAT Prince of Peace! When I incline
To wait on thee,
Thou say in secret, Thou art mine;
Thou'st purchased me;
Not with corruptible or fading Things
But with a Price that far exceeds the Crown of Kings.
Ah, Lord! Who can enough admire
Thy boundless Love,
Which does so far surpass Desire,
Yea, often prove
Beyond what might expected be by me,
Unworthy of the smallest smiling Glance from thee.
O gracious Love! Thy Sweets excel
All things below,
Alas! Earth's Beauty cannot parallel
Thy meanest Glimpse, I know;
For one's an Earnest of ne'er-fading Joy:
The other's an ensnaring Soul-deluding Toy.
Thy smallest gentle Ray invites
Our Souls to taste
Those never-fading fresh Delights,
Which always last;
And, as desired, more increase,
Unto the humble, holy Child of Peace.
Mark how the Taper's feeble Light,
With glimmering Ray,
Gilds as it were the Shades of Night,
Instead of Day;
But what is its Luster, when the Sun appears
TO illuminate our doleful Hemispheres!
So though Earth's Pleasures sometimes do,
With seeming Joys,
Allay small Sorrows, mitigate a Woe,
That from her Toys
Proceeds, and vex the grovelling Soul that feeds
Upon her empty Husks, and noisome Weeds.
Yet when the Brightness of thine Eye
Does from above
Discover dark deluding Vanity,
And with its Love
Invite; how less than nothing then are those
Fondly ensnaring Toys, and flattering Shows,
Which only by Reflections do
Produce Remorse
In the injured Conscience, to increase the Woe
That will with Force
Fall upon those that dote on fading Toys,
But slight the Light that Leads to endless Joys?
Ah then, who can enough admire
Thy Love, thy Light!
Who can but long, with strong Desire,
For such Delight!
This is the Light of Life, fades not away,
But shines more bright unto the perfect Day.
Of FRIENDSHIP.
VIrtue is the right sacred Spring, whence flows
Those crystal Streams, whereby true Friendship grows;
That dear Affection, that firm Unity,
That interwoven free Community:
Which so engages Hearts and Minds together,
No stormy Sea, nor utmost Land can sever
These willing Captives: For the generous Mind
Is not by Place, though far remote, confined.
True Friends, when they by Distance are bereaven
Of verbal Converse, have their Names engraven
In one another's Hearts, which cannot be
Cancelled or razed by Earth's vain Obloquy:
Yet, lest the same should, as a glimmer'ring Spark,
Seem to expire, as buried in the Dark,
There is by Mediums (if the place deny
Them, Viva voce, free Community)
Reciprocal Reflections of its Beams
Unto each other, couched in sable Streams;
Though the abounding Solace does increase,
When Friends converse together Face to Face;
Then freely they unbosom their Requests,
And treasure Secrets in each others Breasts,
As in firm Cabinets, close locked, where none
Can find the Key, but only each his own.
Is one oppressed with Grief? He lays a Share
Upon his Friend, that he may help to bear:
Swims one in Solace? Finds the Cause of Joy?
It Is then re-doubled by Community:
Mourns one? The other mourns: Does one rejoice?
His second Self then, both in Heart and Voice,
Does sympathize: True Friendship may not be
Without an inward secret Sympathy.
But fawning Parasites, though they pretend,
In Compliment to be each others Friend,
For mere Self-Int'rest, or some close Design,
Become, if not proud Enemies, in Time
Absolute Strangers; and so manifest
True Friendship; never was grounded in their Breast.
Although there was some formal Show, whereby
Some were deluded, through Hypocrisy,
TO impart their hidden Secrets, which are now
Made Proclamations, with a scornful Brow;
Nor are Reproaches, taunting Calumnies,
Backbiting, railing, other Injuries,
Withheld, as Opportunity affords
Them Vent for Wrath, with either Tongue or Swords;
Surely, because such do not rightly know
That innate Spring, which makes true Friendship grow:
For this, by Covenant, does so engage
Their noble Hearts, that no Self-wounding Rage
Can here prevail or once dissolve the Knot
Friendship has tried: Mistakes are soon forgot,
If any interpose, or would present
Some Crime, to cause a Frown in Discontent.
There Is Charity in friendly Breasts, that heals
Such Scars, whereby true Love, not Rage, prevails:
And when it is unto Perfection grown
In both their Hearts, such Scars are seldom known.
Gentle Advice, whereby one may reclaim
A Friend from Error, does not wrong the Name,
Or make a Breach in Friendship: None may be
Rightly esteemed a Friend, that if he see
His Neighbor lose his Way, will not direct
Unto a better; or that will reject
Good Exhortation, fancying Reproof
A greater Crime than he is guilty of.
Self-hood is often blind; therefore a Friend
Is not prohibited to reprehend,
So he proclaim not Faults, But they that would
Sin uncontrolled, and hug their Errors, should
Never contract a Friendship, lest thereby
That sacred Name be stained with Infamy
Is any wise, that when Distempers do
Begin to seize, would not desire to know?
Diseases known, are sooner cured; but they
That would indulge and hide them, that they may
Thereby increase, do frequently expose
Themselves, as a Derision to their Foes.
True cordial Friends, without Offense, can bear
King Admonition, though it be severe
The faithful Wounds of Friends are like Incision,
Made by the skilful Hand of some Physician,
To let our noxious Humors that invade
The afflicted Part, and stubbornly impede
The hoped cure; which afterward with Speed
Does, by some suppling Ointment, well succeed.
Thus, by this needful Freedom, Friendship shines
With greater Luster; but its Light declines,
Where this is limited. Who can but grieve
To be so overpowered, not to relieve
A Friend afflicted; that may not apply
A precious Balm to heal his Malady?
But there is rejoicing, when with equal Mind
Exchanging Thoughts, they may in any kind
Express their Sentiments, and signify
Reproof or Approbation faithfully.
Thus still persisting in the sweet Increase
Of Love unfeigned, and firm abiding Peace:
Here innocent Delight more freely springs,
Than may be found in Courts of mighty Kings.
But as true Virtue's rarely to be found,
So Friendship grows not up in every Ground:
He that would choose a Friend should prove and try;
Before the Knot be knit, none should unty,
While either Friend remains; for Friendship must
(Though one be separated unto Dust)
If poor Mephibosheth survive, extend
To the Posterity and Name of Friend;
Else that is imperfect, which should rather be
A little Ray of Immortality.
Have thou a Friend, whose Ingenuity,
Well guarded with a right Simplicity,
Can both esteem what thou wilt communicate,
And of his own richly retaliate
The hidden Treasures of a knowing Breast,
Whose cordial Love (too great to be expressed
By feigned Speeches) freely can reveal
His Secrets in thy Ear, but thine conceal
Close from all others, whose Fidelity
Will ^^'er desert thee in Adversity,
Although the World frown on thee, but remain
In Offices of L^^, the very same,
Or more endeared, than in Prosperity?
If likewise thou retain Integrity;
Or if you are overtaken by Surprise,
And have transgressed, can deeply sympathize,
(If thou forsake thine Error, and accept
Of Counsel, that Advice may take Effect)
And, as in secret, mourning over thee,
Can with Love's Garment wisely cover thee,
From the Eyes of others; yet if Scandals should
(When raised by others) in his Ear be told,
Will still thy true Intelligencer be;
Yet boldly guard thy name, and plead for thee,
When thou art absent: Know that he expects
Friendship should have in thee the same Effects;
Yet hates Upbraiding, or a slanderous Tongue:
What can to Friendship be a greater Wrong?
But those that flatter thee in prosperous Times,
And subtly indulge thy darling Crimes;
Will not endure a blustering Storm, but flee,
And, with thy Riches, haste away from thee.
This is a Friend indeed, that cannot be
Bribed with thy Wealth, or lost in Misery:
O grant him in thy Heart a worthy Place;
And see, as in a Glass, Face answers Face,
Thou answer him; yea, prize him more than Gold
Of Ophir; for his Worth cannot be told.
It Is but the wise and honest Heart, from whence
Deceit's exiled, that Friendship's Residence.
A Letter to a Friend.
SOmetimes this Query rises in my Mind,
Can Friends be to each other so unkind,
Thus to perplex, and yet not show the Cause
Why Friendship should admit so long a Pause?
Has Grandeur stupify'd thy fertile Quill,
Or Mammon metamorphos'd thus thy Will?
So condescending formerly, and kind,
As if to Love and Friendship most inclined.
Methinks Abundance of such outward Store
Should never abridge our Time, but gain us more.
Not that Wealth can add Number to our Days;
But Time (wherein the Indigent may raise
Some Stipend, to procure their daily Food)
Might be improved, as for a mutual Good,
By such as have obtained a full Supply;
Or else wherein does the Advantage lie
Betwixt the Rich and Poor? Heaven still extends
Bread, to sustain each to their latter Ends.
Then should not those, that greater Mercy share,
Some Time for Friendship's Privileges spare?
But should my Grief by Words be thus expressed,
I Will cease to write, and only sigh the rest;
For since my Letters may not answered be,
I may conclude, that all is Vanity.
Another Letter to a Friend.
MY hasty Pen about to write unkind,
(When interrupted by my zealous Mind)
Again admits of dear Marcaria; though
Thy tedious Silence gives Affront unto
True cordial Friendship, which in every State
Sweetly delights to communicate
Pure Streams of Love, as Opportunity
Permits, to manifest its Sympathy:
Which, seeming now to cease, gives Cause of Doubt,
Some new Concern has jostled Friendship out
From that fair Bosom; where, if yet it dwell,
'Twill by its influencing Power dispel
Whatever would stop its Current: For we see
That standing Pools oft-times corrupted be,
When smaller Brooks, whose Streams do gently glide
Along their Banks, are purged and purified.
Alas, that Love that burns with Fervency,
Is frequently perplexed with Jealousy!
Then why so silent? Why so strangely mute?
Must I indeed not only find my Suit
Ungranted, but disdained? And must I be
Therefore unanswered, for a Penalty
To be imposed, as for a heinous Crime?
Though I forgot once a Request of thine,
I did not wholly throw aside my Pen;
But, as full fraught with other Matter, when
In hopes of sending, though I did omit
To answer each Punctilio, yet I writ,
(Grateful or not:) For my officious Quill,
As formerly engaged, is ready still
To write to thee. --
Ah! can thou think what Doubtings do attend,
Whether sad Sickness, or some rival Friend
May now so long restrain thy careless Pen,
As if it would not deign to write again?
O must that Friendship in Oblivion lie
That seems immortal? Then send Reasons why:
How should I else resent this Injury?
Upon parting with a Friend.
I.
AND can the Effects of cordial Friendship be
So apt to-raise a Tumult in the Mind?
Or so injurious to my Friend and me,
To make us to each other seem unkind?
'Twere then but weak; nay, Weakness surely must
Be challenged ours: Friendship is always just.
II.
May we not innocently then rejoice
In the Society of Bosom Friends?
Yea; yet we cannot always have our Choice,
Since Things below unto Mutation tends.
True Friends must part of mere Necessity;
Best Titles here are but Uncertainty.
III.
Yet might the Ocean cease to ebb and flow,
E're I should once ungratefully deny
Those Obligations deep, whereby I owe
Much more to thee, than my poor Company
Could ever retaliate in many Days;
But I might suffer Losses other Ways.
IV.
Whilst she, obliging she, might never want,
What was so much desired, Society;
There Is many too ambitiously would grant
That which themselves would so much gratify.
Why should she then strive for a Thing so mean,
And scarcely worth the Labor to obtain?
V.
Then why should too too furious fiery Zeal,
Usurp a Place in such a noble Heart,
Where only Love should evermore prevail.
As knowing best to act true Friendship's part
Which thinks no Evil, but does tenderly
Heal, or conceal and hide Infirmity?
VI.
They that are unengag'd in Wedlock, seem
TO enjoy a Privilege of Liberty.
To act spontaneously, and may redeem
Time to enjoy a Friend; yet frequently
Such can plead urgent Business to withdraw,
And think it is no Breach of Friendship's Law.
VII.
When such as (...) by nuptial Tie confined,
Should not be censured in sarcastick Strains,
Lest some seem cruel, when the, would be kind,
And so change mutual Pleasures into Pains:
Therefore let Heats and Animosities,
On Friendship's Score, no more among us rise.
A Letter of Invitation to a Friend.
IF to the Country I my Friend invite,
It Is but to do languishing Friendship right:
What to a Friend can be a greater Wrong,
Than that the Second's absent overlong?
Now, though our Cottage be but mean for thee,
Make it more pleasant by thy Company.
For though we think, we have an Interest,
Firmly secured in each other's Breast;
Yet if it cease to circulate and flow,
'T will sooner stagnate, than increase and grow,
Never let it be like that adored Gold,
Possessed by wretched Misers (that of old
Concealed and hid it) useless, lest we seem
Quite to reject, and loose that just Esteem,
Due to the Root, from which true Friendship springs,
Which to the Heart, immortal Solace brings.
Indeed in high-flown Panegyric Verse,
My Pen is not accustomed to rehearse
Praises incredible, nor to commend,
In deep Hyperboles, a worthy Friend;
Yet she that treasures Virtue in her Breast,
Shines in those Robes, wherewith it does invest
The truly noble Soul, whereby each Eye
Something of innate Luster may espy.
Then may such well assert, like Sheba's Queen,
When she great Judah's King and Court had seen,
One Half had not been told: So may it be
Affirmed by many that have heard of thee:
Why then should this mean Pen pretend to tell
Half of those Virtues that in thee excel?
A Meditation.
I.
WHY should the pure immortal Mind,
That cannot circumscribed (...)
Within the Bounds of Flesh and Blood,
Seem to fallacious Toys inclined;
Neglective of the chiefest Good,
And only true Felicity,
The never-fading Joys of vast Eternity
II.
Were wretched Infants naked hurled
Upon the Banks of sullen Cares,
To beg the Favors of the World,
And only be involved in Snares,
And suckled at the Breasts of Misery;
Unless in all Things-they comply
With Earth's imperious Nods, and sordid Tyranny?
III.
No, no; that all-discerning Eye,
That with a strict-observant Look
Surveys the Corners of the Universe,
And Tokens of his Power disperse
Therein, who now and ever took
Care of the Helpless, cannot pass them by,
Since the young Raven's Wants he does supply.
IV.
But an instructive Lesson's learned hence,
That helpless Man might look unto
The all-preserving Hand of Providence,
From whom alone all Blessings flow;
To whom alone our humble Eye
Should always in Sincerity
Be lifted up, for he will regard our earnest Cry.
V.
Though Infants many Days, do more
Regard the Pap than her that gives it,
They learn in Time both to implore
Help, and to acknowledge who relieves it;
And, though they do not want the Breast,
Would with their tender Mother's Bosom ever rest.
VI.
Thus is not both our Heart and Mind
Taught, with Magnetic influence
Of sacred Love and Sympathy,
That we thereby might be inclined
To soar above the Sphere of Sense,
Of perishing Mortality;
Yea, with unwearied Fervency,
Seek the sublimer Joys of bright Eternity?
Another Meditation.
Oh! If my mind
Should be inclined,
This would increase my Fear:
Lord, from above,
Thou God of Love,
Reveal thy Counsel near;
That I may know,
That I may do
Thy ever blessed Will:
Ah, thine alone,
And not mine own,
Great King! Do thou fulfill.
Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbis.
WHAT a Succession of Delusion's here,
Whilst righteous Reason is dethroned!
Shall Darkness thus cover our Hemisphere?
Ah! Must no other Law be owned,
But a depraved Will, that still inclines
To choose the worst, and leave the best;
Disdaining to observe the Sun, that shines
Within the Conclave of the Breast!
Why, both in former and more modern Days,
Should Virtue, as an heinous Crime
Be prosecuted! Lest its conquering Rays,
Through the whole Universe should shine,
And thence dispel the horrid Shades of Night,
That does surround poor Mortals, so
That till this, rising, undeceive the Sight,
They wound their Friend, and spare their Foe:
Striking at pure unspotted Innocence,
Condemning true Sincerity,
As Malefactors, guilty of Offense;
Whilst Barabbas has Liberty
Granted by common Suffrage: Birds of Prey
And Rapine, may uncensur'd tear
The harmless Doves; and who dare that gainsay?
But unto these, (Oh) how severe!
Yet have some few been raised in every Age,
Led by a Spark of Light and Love
Divine, which, as in secret, did engage
To plead a little for the Dove;
At least, to manifest their Discontent,
As none of the Confed'racy;
That they might either limit or prevent
The Progress of such Tyranny;
And like the wise Gamaliel, intercede
With sober Caution, to beware,
Lest some thereby the Prince of Heaven invade,
And cast themselves into a Snare;
Yea, launch thereby into the sad Abyss
Of endless Woe and Misery;
Except reclaimed by such Advice as this,
They learn to show more Clemency.
A Letter to Cousin F. R. [Written after her Marriage.]
DEAR Cousin, thine is safely come to Hand,
Whereby I may thy Welfare understand;
Which is right pleasant welcome News to me;
As the like Notice here of mine to thee:
For mutual Love, where it abides does joy
In Friends, as in their own Felicity.
O may it ever have Pre-eminence!
Then shall we not be apt to take Offense,
Nor wilfully offend; but in each Breast,
Where it prevails, believe and hope the best:
This still indulgeth Amity and Peace,
But causes Animosities to cease;
Distance of Miles can never quench the same,
It lives a warming not consuming Flame:
In which I re-salute thee, and remain
Thy constant Friend, not changed but in Name.
Another Letter to Cousin F. R.
NO doubt ever this, rejoicing Friends are come,
Congratulating thy Arrival Home;
And with the kindest Welcome, signify
Their Expectation to renew to Joy
They Would formerly in thy Society.
Be sure, a watchful Heart may never be
Lost (though engaged) in Multiplicity;
But eyes the Rock, which, when in rolling Waves,
Is safe to anchor on, and firmly saves,
As in a Cliff, or secret hiding Place,
Free from the Dangers of tempestous Seas;
Wherein, as any does securely stand,
Such cannot be unmindful of a Friend
That does in such like Habitation dwell,
But can delight by Tongue or Pen to tell
Their Exercises, with Endearments free;
Love circulating thus in Sympathy.
But scarce had these my Musings finished,
With many more quite lost and scattered,
For want of Penning, when thy Letter came,
And proved my Hopes deferred were not in vain;
Therefore in curtail Lines herewith I send
My Sentiments thereof to thee, my Friend.
A third Letter to Cousin F. R.
CAN I be silent, though I seem to intrude
Amongst such a thronged important Multitude?
Can I forget that Heart, that seemed to me,
Firmly engaged in mutual Sympathy,
And Bonds of sacred Friendship, which were then
Supposed immortal? Can my sluggish Pen
Forget its useful Office, though it want
That influencing fair Encouragement,
Which once was wont so freely to distill
In copious Lines, from thy more pregnant Quill?
Nay, nor although I own Realities,
May I in curled Strains hyperbolize,
That innate Virtue, which in thee does lie,
Needs no such varnishing, vain Sophistry:
This naught avails, but, like Adventures, tossed
On boistrous Seas, may well be reck'ned lost,
If no Return be made: Yet may there be
A better Traffic 'twixt my Friend and me,
If she will but deign to step from out the Crowd
Of those encumbrances, which so be-cloud
And intercept that Converse, which should be
Not too too long confined in such as thee;
Who, by Example and good Converse, may
Lead on Associates in an happy Way.
Should then this fading World again ever find
So great a Place in that heroic Mind,
Which heretofore so prudently denied
Its Grandeur, Pomp, and all its swelling Pride,
To treasure up a far more noble Prize,
Than can be well observed by common Eyes,
Which dote on Toys, and can admire the Blaze
Of transitory Honors, but soon daze
At the Appearance of that glorious Light,
Which to the immortal Soul gives perfect Sight,
And Prospect of the new Jerusalem,
Where the Redeemed wear the Diadem
Of endless Glory, and rejoice to sing
Melodious Songs of Praise to Sion's King?
Should then this World's inferior Trifles be
Of such Regard, as to prevail with thee
To look aside? Ah! nay; for thou have learned
To pass by all her Triumphs unconcerned.
Now therefore, persevere, my worthy Friend,
In that where Friendship never knows End.
M. M.

UPON SILENCE [Written by another Hand.]
I.
WHAT Muse so soft, or who is sit to sing
Thy Praise, thou mighty passive Thing?
Who can define thy Genealogy,
Thou Product of the Deity?
For before any Thing, thou had thy Place
Extended through the wide and empty Space.
II.
The Inhabitants above, in that bright Sphere,
Acknowledge thee a Being there,
When they their Hymns and Hallelujahs sing
To their high and heavenly King,
In a most reverend Frame, make use of thee
To magnify the great Solemnity.
III.
When Horeb's Mount was topt with Fire and Smoke
And with a dreadful Trembling shook;
To add unto its Horror and its Wonder,
The Rocks and Mountans split asunder:
Yet ne'ertheless, JEHOVAH was not there,
But in the silent Voice he did appear.
IV.
Though Voice and Speech alone to Man was given,
To worship him, whose Throne is Heaven;
Yet in an awful reverend Silence, he
Admits of a Discovery;
For to his Ears, Words uttered without Noise.
Are louder languag'd than a vocal Voice.
V.
What Praise is due to thee, thou calm Abode,
Thou Rest of Souls, that worship God
In thy Recess; the Spirit does convey
To Man the Knowledge of the Way,
That leads to where Desires terminate,
Where more's enjoyed than Mortals can relate.
VI.
Though some confess the Pleasure of thy Loves,
Thy nightly Walks and silent Groves,
Thy sweet Retirements, and thy pleasant Shades,
Where neither Wind nor Storm invades;
Where Pleasure's free, unmixt, and unconfined,
Always attend upon a quiet Mind.
VII.
Yet very few there are, that really be
Fully satisfied with thee:
Therefore thine artless Altar neglected lies,
For want of holy Votaries;
Whilst Noise, thine Enemy, ascends the Chair,
And Crowds her Praises echo through the Air.
W. A.

FINIS.
BOOKS PRINTED and SOLD by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, on the North side of
Market-Street, between Second and Third Streets, Philadelphia.
PENN's brief Account of the Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers; in
which their fundamental Principles, Doctrines, Worship, Ministry and
Discipline, are plainly declared. With a summary Relation of the former
Dispensation of God in the World, by way of Introduction. To which is added,
Barclay's Anarchy of the Ranters, and other Libertines; the Hierarchy of the
Romanists, and other pretended Churches, equally refused and refuted, in a
twofold Apology for the Church and People of God, called in Derision, Quakers.
Wherein they are vindicated from those that accuse them of Disorder and
Confusion on the one hand, and from such as calumniate them with Tyranny and
Imposition on the other: showing, that as the true and pure Principle of the
Gospel is restored by their Testimony, so is also the ancient Apostolic Order
of the Church of Christ re-established among them, and settled upon its right
Basis and Foundation. An Account of the Convincement, Exercises, Services and
Travels, of that ancient Servant of the Lord, Richard Davies, with some
Relation of ancient Friends, and the spreading of Truth in North Wales, etc. A
Journal of the Life, Travels, and Gospel Labors of a faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ. Daniel Stanton, late of Philadelphia, with the Testimony of the
Monthly Meeting of Friends in that City, concerning him. A Journal of the Life,
Gospel Labors, and Christian Experiences, of that faithful Minister of Jesus
Christ, John Woolman, late of Mount-Holly, in New Jersey. The Grounds of a Holy
Life, or the Way by which many who were Heathens, came to be renowned
Christians; and such as are now Sinners may come to be numbered with Saints, by
little preaching. To which is added, Paul's Speech to the Bishop of Cretia. As
also a true Touchstone of Trial of Christianity. By Hugh Tur^ord. The History
of the Life of Thomas Ellwood, or, an Account of his Birth, Education, etc.
with diverse Observations on his Life and Manners when a Youth; and how he came
to be convinced of the Truth; with his many Sufferings and Services for the
same. Also several other remarkable Passages and Occurrences. Written by his
own Hand. Some Memoirs of the Life of John Roberts, written by his Son Daniel
Roberts. Primitive Physic, or an easy and natural Method of curing most
Diseases, by John Wesley. Bartlet's Collection of elegant and approved Remedies
for the Diseases of Horses. Dilworth's Schoolmaster's Assistant, being a
Compendium of Arithmetic, both practical and theoretical.

