The Lives, Last Words, and Dying Speech of EZRA ROSS. JAMES BUCHANAN, and
WILLIAM BROOKS, who were executed at WORCESTER, on Thursday the 2d Day of July,
1778. for the Murder of Mr. JOSHUA SPOONER, of BROOKFIELD. BATHSHEBA SPOONER,
who was convicted of being acessary to the Murder was also executed at the same
Time.
I JAMES BUCHANAN was a Sergeant in the Army under General Burgoyne, born in
Gla^gow, in Scotland, aged 36 years, I WILLIAM BROOKS was a private in said
army, born i^ the parish of Wednesbury, in the county of Stafford, in England,
aged 27. We together o^ February 8th, 1778, left Worcester, with an intent to
go to Springfield to work. In passing Mr. Spooner's, w^ were called in by
Alexander Cummings, whom we thought wa^ a British soldier. Having ^od some time
by the fire, he told u^ his master was gone from home, but he would go and call
hi^ mistress, for she had a great regard for the army, as her fath^ was in it
and one of her brothers. He called her, and she came down, and appeared glad to
see us. She asked us, whether we came from the Hill? We told her we had, and
were going to Canada, as I, Buchanan, had left my family there. She ordered
breakfast for us, and as soon as it was ready we were desired to go into the
sitting-room. We were very much surprised a^ this, for we should have thought
ourselves well dealt by, to h^ received any favor she might see fit to bestow
o^ (...) the kitchen. However we all breakfasted together. The weather being
very bad, we were asked to stay '^ill it cleared up. As we had (...) little
money, we accordingly stayed. The weather continued very bad, we stayed there
that day and night, I (Buchanan) a^ no positive whether it was the first or
second day, she told me (...) by ourselves, that she and her husband did not
agree that he was gone a journey to Princetown, and that he would not be at
home soon, that we should not go from thence until the weather was fair, there
being a great fall of snow at this time* We very readily consented, and stayed
from day to day, expecting M^. Spooner home. Mrs. Spooner getting very fre^ in
discourse with me (Buchanan) one day told me that she never expected Mr.
Spooner to return, as there was one Mr. Ross gone with him, who had an ounce of
poison, which he had promised her he would give to Mr. Spooner, the first
convenient opportunity. The reader must needs think this a very strange
circumstance, that she should make such a discovery to an entire stranger. She
said at the same time, we should stay 'till we sa^ whether Mr. Spooner returned
or not. Accordingly we stayed and were never in better quarters, little
thinking of the ba^ the seducer of souls was laying for us, we were then in a
disposition to c^tch at it, having no fear of GOD before (...) entirely to ^ken
of him. Having tarried ten or eleven day^ as ne^r as can be recollected, he at
length came home, and ^eing us there, asked her who we were. She told him that
I (^cha^^^) was co^sin to Alexander Cummings. He took ^o further notice of it;
but going out a^ong his neighbors, it is likely he was informed how long we had
been ^here, and probably heard at the tavern of the quantity of liquor he had
to pay for, since his going on his journey. Be that as it may, at night he came
home, and seeing we were not gone, he desired us to go immediately. We begged
he would let us stay 'till morning: He after some time consented that we should
stay by the ^re all night. He was in the sitting room by himself, and Mrs.
Spooner went to bed. There was one Reuben Old, came upon some business with Mr.
Spooner, and after some time came out and told us that Mr. Spooner told him he
was afraid we should rob him, adding, that he had lost a silver spoon, and a
great deal of pewter. This vexed us, as we were conscious we had no thought of
stealing from him. Had we been so inclined, we had as much opportunity as we
could have desired. The spoon, he found where he laid it, Cummings convinced
him there was none of the pewter missing. Mr. Spooner went up stairs and
brought down a box, which he had his money in, and laid down on the floor with
it under his head. Every thing Mr. Spooner did or said, Old came and told us,
and was out with us all the time he was asleep, and we were all merry together,
sitting by the kitchen fire. Said Old declared in court, that I (Buchanan)
said, if Mr. Spooner came out I would for two coppers put him in the well,
which is false. In the morning, it not being convenient to see Mrs. Spooner to
take our leave of her, we, Buchanan, Brooks, and Cummings, ^ent to Mrs.
Stratten's to pass the day, 'till we could get an opportunity to bid Mrs.
Spooner farewell. We stayed at Mrs. ^ten's the best part of the day, Cummings
having received five dollars from Mr. Spooner, to treat his pretented cousin
with we went to Mr. Cooley's tavern and had some drink, from thence to Dr.
Foxcrofts, stayed there until cummings came and told us Mr. Spooner was in bed.
We then went to the house, and had supper and liquor, retired to the barn, and
tarried all night. In the morning had breakfast sent to the barn for us. And as
Mrs. Berry and Mrs. Tufts had been there the day before, and wanted to see me
(Buchanan) I said I would go and see them. Mrs. Spooner said she would also go,
which was agreed on. Buchanan and Brooks went there, and we all stayed at Mr.
Green's drinking 'till late; some distance from thence, she said she had given
a handkerchief to a British soldi^r that had some words in anger with me,
Buchanan, upon which, Brook^ ^ent back on her horse, and she and I went home.
-- Brooks missed his road on his return, but got to the house some time after
us, but did not get the handkerchief, as the soldier would not deliver it,
until he saw Mrs. Spooner. Buchanan and Brooks stayed that night in the barn,
in the morning went to Gilbert's Tavern, and staid there some time, and on
coming out from his house, we saw Cummings coming on one of Mr. Spooner's
horses, he told us his master was gone to the tavern, and that his mistress
desi^ed we would come there, which we did, and had supper, we went to the barn
that night, and in the morning she s^nt (...) word that her husband was gone
abroad into the count^y (...) get some oats. The boy Parker, had proposed to
Brooks, (...) would come and meet Mr. Spooner and him on their return, he, said
Parker, said he would help to take Mr. Spooner's life. We went over from the
barn to the house, and found he was gone* and stayed there all day, and lived
on the best the house afforded o^ meat and drink: Mr. Spooner came home in the
dusk of the evening, so that we had like to have been seen; but we heard him
come with the ^ey to the door, and Brooks ran into the cellar, and I went and
stood on the back stairs, until he went into the sitting room. We then came
out, and went to the barn, there stayed all next day, and at night, when Mr.
Spooner was in bed, we were sent for to the house, and received supper and
liquor, to encourage another plan, which Cummings and Parker (who have for this
time escaped punishment) proposed to poor Brooks, which was, they all three to
go up stairs, and Brooks to take his life from him, for which he w^^ to receive
one thousand dollars, Mr. Spooner's watch, his buckles, and as much cloth as
would make a suit of clothes; but Brooks's heart failed him; and Mrs. Spooner
said she did not think he was so faint-hearted. H^ this been done he was to be
put into the well as he was taken out of bed; for she observed it would be
thought he had fallen in, drawing water in the night; next day had breakfast
brought us by Cummings. He informed us, there was another plan formed by her,
which was to have been executed as follows. Either Cummings or Parker to tell
Mr. Spooner one of his horses was sick, and as he came to the barn to kill him,
and put him amongst the horses feet, to make the people believe when he was
found that the horses had killed him. But Brooks told Parker not to tell him,
but to make her believe he would not go over. The boy conducted accordingly. We
stayed all that day and night. Next day, being Sunday, we stayed there; she
came over at night; we told her we would go away the next morning; she desired
we would not; but we wou^d not stay. We set out to go to Springfi^ld, as we
went through Western, on that road, we en^ged to wo^k with one Mr. Marks a smith;
I Buchanan worked there two days; but as he had no files fit for the b^ch ^ade,
^ooks followed, we proposed to go to Worcester to g^t some, which was agreed to.

We set off on Wednesday about noon, and in going by Mr. Spooner's we called in
and told her where we were going; she said she would follow us down next day as
she wanted to see her sister, saying she was glad we had got work so near; and
further added, that she had two notes, one of twenty pounds lawful, and another
of three hundred dollars, which she would an^ to get changed, and let me,
Buchanan, have one hundred dollars, to purchase any thing I might want. We
staid in the barn 'till morning, and then set out for Worcester, and she
followed us the same day and called at Mrs. Walker's (...) us, according to
agreement; she came in and staid some (...)* and gave me, Buchanan, a note, as
much cloth as made a shi^ and 6 or 7 dollars; observing to me they came from
one M^ Donald, an acquaintance of mine; she then went to see her sister, and
desired us to stay 'till she came back, which we did* she returned on Friday
morning about 10 o'clock, and staid 'till night; she told me, Buchanan, at
parting, that she had no (...) paper money, but what she had given me; but
begged I would procure her some poison to give Mr. Spooner; I accordingly that
day got one drach^ of Calomel, and made it into 2^ papers. I desired her to
give one in the morning; she told (...) she never gave him any; she went to her
sister's late that nigh^ and called on us in the morning, about 10 o'clock. I
went (...) the door; she would not come in, but desired me to come (...) to Mr.
N^zro's shop, and she would get files for (...) h^ not money sufficient to get
what we wanted; she ask^ (...) when we would come through Brookfield. I told
her if (...) would set up, we would call on Monday night at eleven o'cloc^; she
said she would; I parted with her, and sent Brooks up to the shop. But as he
came in sight he saw her ride from the door and therefore did not go there; we
staid at Walker's until Sunday afternoon, and then left Worcester, and about 8
oclock at night got to Mr. Spooner's; we saw Mrs. Stratten a^ the well. I
Buchanan, spoke to her, she told me there was ^n company in the house, but she
would ^et Mrs. Spooner know we were there; Mrs. Spooner came out, and told us
that one Mr. Ross was in the house, who had a brace of pistols loaded, and that
^e had promised her he would kill Mr. Spooner as ^e came home from the tavern,
she desired us to come in, which we did, he showed us a pistol, and said Mr.
Spooner should die by that to night. Either Brooks or Buchanan said it would
alarm the neighbors.

Brooks said, if Ross would help him he would knock him down, accordingly, it
was agreed on, and there was a look out kept a^ the sitting room door for his
coming, in the mean time there was some supper brought by Mrs. Stratten to us,
we had some ^lip before, there was now some rum brought, which we drank, each
of us by turns giving a look out. We are certain Mrs^ Stratten could not but
know what was going forward. That we leave to the judgment of the public. Mr.
Spooner was at length seen coming, and then was the time for the Devil to show
his power over sinners who had forsaken GOD.

An Account of the MURDER as it was committed*
William Brooks went out and stood within the small gate leading into the
kitchen, and as Mr. Spooner came past him he knocked him down with his hand. He
strove to speak when down, Brooks then took him by the throat and partly
strangled him. Ross and Buchanan came out; Ross took Mr. Spooner's watch out
and gave to Buchanan; Brooks and Ross took him up and put him into the well
head first; before they carried him away, I, Buchanan, pulled off his Shoes: I
was instantly struck with horror of conscience, as well I might; I went into
the house and met Mrs. Spooner in the sitting room, she seemed vastly confused:
She went immediately up and brought the money which was in a box. She not
having the key desired me to break it open, which I did; at the same time
Brooks and Ross came in: She gave two notes of 400 dollars each to Ross to
change and give the money to Brooks; but there was found some paper money,
which Brooks receive^, being 243 dollars, and the notes were returned.

At the same time she gave Ross four notes, each of them ten pounds, to
purchase camblet for a riding dress. Ross gave Brooks his waistcoat, breeches
and shirt. She went and brought Ross a waistcoat, breeches and shirt of Mr.
Spooner's. When they were shifted, she gave me* Buchanan, three eight dollar
bills, and asked me when she should see me again? I told her in fourteen days,
but it pleased GOD to order it sooner, and in ^ dreadful situation. Had we all
been immediately struck dead after the perpetrating so horrid a murder, and
sent to hell, GOD would have been justified and we justly comdemned.

About 11 o'clock at night, we ^et off for Worces^er. About 4 o'clock in the
morning we reached Mrs. Walker's house* Mary Walker and a Negro girl were
within; we told them a parcel of lies to excuse ^r sudden return; in the
morning we went to drinking, to endeavor to drown the horrid action we had been
guilty of; we tarried there all day, with a view to go off at night, but it
pleased GOD to order it otherwise. (...) Brooks being i^ liquor, went d^wn to
Mr. B^own's tavern, there showing Mr. Spooner's watch, and the people seeing
him have silver buckles, became suspicious of him, and one Ensign Clark going
to Mrs. Walker's and seeing what passed there gave information concerning us.
The news of the murder had now rea^hed the town, and we were all taken and
brought to trial before the Committee, examined and committed to goal. On the
24th of April last we were brought to trial before the Superior Court, found
guilty and received sentence of death.

JAMES BUCHANAN, EZRA ROSS, a Cont. Soldier, born at Ipswich, in the parish of
Lyndebrook, (New England) aged 18. WILLIAM BROOKS's Mark.

We, Buchanan, Brooks and Ross, are conscious to ourselves that we are indeed
guilty of the above murder, and that hereby we have forfeited our lives into
the han^ (...) public justice, and exposed ourselves to have our part in the
^ke which burns with fire and brimstone. We desire to give glory to GOD by a
free and full confession of our heinous guilt. We trust we have, with deep
penitence and contrition of soul, confessed it (...) GOD, hoping in his
infinite mercy and compassion, through (...) atoning blood of his Son Jesus,
that our scarlet and crimson guilt may be done away, that we may be saved from
etern^ damnation, which we know we j^stly deserve, and obtain eternal life and
salvation. We would, as dying men, who (...) made to feel what an evil and
bitter thing sin is, earnestly (...) all, especially young people that they
would avoid the vices we have been addicted to, and which prepared the way for
our committing the heinous wickedness for which we are to suffer an immature
and ignominious death 1. That they would avoid bad company, excessive drinking,
profane cursing (...) swearing, shameful debaucheries, disobedience to
parents, the profanation of the Lord's Day, etc. That they would be pious,
sober and virtuous, that so they may be in favor with GOD and man.

And now we commend our departing souls into the hands of a merciful GOD and
Savior, earnestly desiring that all who may be spectators or hearers of our
tragical end, while we are the subjects of prayer, would lift up their hearts
in fervent supplications for us, that GOD would receive us to his everlasting
mercy.



The CRUEL MURDER: Or, a MOURNFUL POEM, occasioned by Sentence of Death being
passed upon WILLIAM BROOKS, JAMES BUCHANAN, EZRA ROSS, and ^ATHSHEBA SPOONER,
who were tried and found guilty of murdering Mr. JOSHUA SPOONER, of Brookfield,
and who were all executed at Worcester, on Thursday the 2d Day of July, 7^*
YOU sinners all both young and old attend to what I write,
And (...) heart while you have time 'twill be a doleful (...).
(...) I say a sinful (...) for their wicked crime^,
Soon going to the gallows tree to die before their times.
Who being wicked over much, cannot live out half their days;
This is the portion of all such as follow sinful wa^s.
And though for wi^e and holy ends, their doom may yet suspend,
Judgment will most assuredly overtake the^ in the end.
Unless they do by times forsake all their most wi^ed ways,
And turn to God w^ their heart and live unto ^s praise.
Be^d the Murd'rers, now in chain (...) and heavy hear^
(...) thing (...) where (...) (...) their (...)
No hope of favor can they have from any humane hand.
(...) they have spi^ must be (...) ^and.
Yet if they in sincerity, to GOD (...)
They may find mercy at his hand, For JESUS CHRIST his s^
No human pardon can be got, By (...) made.
But (...) they must unto the pi^* and by no man be stayed.
Their sad and woeful case an awful sight reveals.
Of those whom vengeance in his chase has taken by the heels.
(...) see the fall of those that cas^ their lot in by degree,
With those that wait the twilight ^as^ that so no one might see.
That ^d'r^s action which the tho'^ by night would be concealed
By Providence was strangely bro't thus far to be revealed.
By which we see apparently, there are no places sure,
Where workers of iniquity, can hide themselves secure.
There are no men by human wit, can keep their crimes concealed,
When he that made them thinks it fit the same shall be reveald.
How odious Murder i^ we see, how dear for it we pay.
By the sad anguish of those folks, that are thus ^oon to die.
We pray that all would notice take of their untimely death,
And make their peace with GOD bet^mes,
While they have life and breath.
They that get wealth by bloody ways, and slight the righteous rules,
Do leave them here amidst their day^, and die at last like fools.
Then take a caution high and (...) for warni^g here you have*
From those whose (...) the borders of the (...)
Repeat of all your errors past* and eye the stroke of fat^,
^est you should come to shame at last and mourn when it is too late*
(...) O that all who reads this vers^ would warning take by them,
That ^o they may avoid the snare* that they were taken in.
Be sure young men do yea attend to what the Scripture says,
"He that i^ wicked overmuch* "s^n't live out half his days.
And let this warning loud and shrill, be heard by every one,
"O do no more such wickedness, "as has of late been done."

