THE GENTLEMAN's Pocket-Farrier* SHOWING How to Use your HORSE On a Journey;
AND What Remedies are proper for Common Accidents, that may be^^l him on the
Road.

The Remedies this little Tract prescribes, are simple, a (...) obtained; and
never fail of a Cure where the Disorder is curable: therefore no Man who values
his Horse should presume to travel without it.

BOSTON: N. E. PRINTED AND SOLD BY N COVERLY IN NEWBURY-STREET MDCCLXXVIII

[PRICE SIX SHILLINGS]

THE GENTLEMAN's POCKET-FARRIER.
-- Queis gratier usus Equorum, Nicturna versate manu, versate diurna.
Try before you buy.
IF you meet with a horse you like, and are desireous of buying him; don't fall
in love with him before you ride him* for though he may be handsome he may start
or stumble.

To discover a stumbler.
If you ^o to buy of one that knows you, it is not unreasonable to desire to
ride him for an hour. If refused, you may suspect he has some faults; if not
mount him at the door of the stable where he stands* let him neither feel your
(...), nor see your whip. mount him easily and when (...), ^o gently off with a
(...) rein, which will make him careless; and if he is a stumbler, he will
discover himself presently, especially if the road in which you ride him be any
thing rough.

The best horse indeed may stumble, (a young one of spirit, if not properly
broken in. will frequently: and yet, if he moves nimbly upon the ^it, dividing
his legs true, he may become a very good saddle-horse) the best horse I say,
may stumble, but (...) ^e ^p^ings out when he stumble, as if he ^eared your
whip or sour, depend upon it, (...) is an, old offender. A horse should never
be struck for stumbling or starting: the provocation, I confess is great. but
the ^ear of correction makes (...) worse.

In the purchase of a horse, examine fo^^ things, his teeth, his eyes, his legs
and his wind.

To know his age.
Every treatise on farriery has instruct^^ us to know a horses age, by the mark
(...) his mouth; but not one in five hundred (a dealer excepted) can re^ain it
in (...) mind. Let this then be sufficient; (...) your finger and thumb raise
his upper lip, and if his teeth shut close, you (...) suppose him young; but if
they point forward and the upper and under edges don't meet even, you may
suspect he is old. And the longer his teeth are, (the gums being dry and shrunk
from them, looking yellow and (...)) the older he is

There are some exceptions to the above rule, but by a due attention you will
seldom be deceived.

You may indeed examine his ^^sh, and if it be pointed and grooved that is,
hollowish on the inside, he cannot be judged to be above seven years old.
Crafty jockeys will sometimes burn holes in the teeth, to make them appear
young, which they call bishoping, but a discerning eye will soon discover the
cheat. -- Mares have no rushes, so that it is more difficult to know their age,
but if the root of their mouth be fleshy, and almost as proud as the teeth,
she is young.

Eyes.
If a horses eyes are lively and clear, and you can see to the bottom, and the
image of your face be reflected from thence, and not from the surface of the
eye, they are good; but if muddy, cloudy, or coal-black, they are bad.

Legs.
If his knees are not broken, nor stand bending and trembling forward, (which
is called knuckling) his legs may be good; but if he st^ps short and digs his
to^^ in the ground, it is a sign he will knuckle. In short, if the hoof be
pretty ^lat and not (...), you need not fear a founder.

Wind.
If his flanks beat even and slow, his wind may be good, but if they heave
double and irregular, or if (while he stands in the stable) he blows at the
nostrils, as if he had just been galloping, they are signs of a broken wind.
Deceitful dealers have a draught which they sometimes give* to make a horse
breathe regularly in the stable; the surest ^^y therefore to judge of his
(...), is, to give him a good brushing gallop, and it is ten to one, if his wind
be broken or even touched, that he will cough and whe^^^ very much* and no
medicine can prevent his doing so.

Cure for a broken wind.
A broken wind may be cured, if the following be applied on the discovery of
it. A quarter of a pound of common tar, and the like quantity of honey; beat
them well together, then dissolve them in a quart of new milk; let the horse
fast two hours before you give this drench; walk him an hour after, and let him
fast two hours; give this drench, every second day, with warm meat and drink.

A draught horse.
A horse with thick shoulders and broad chest, laden with flesh hanging too
forward, and heavily projecting over his knees and feet, is fitter for a collar
th^n a saddle.

A saddle horse.
A horse with thin shoulders, and a flat chest, whose fore^feet ^^nd boldly
forward and even, his neck rising semicircular from the points of those thin
shoulders to his head may justly be said to have a ^ight forehand and be fitter
for a saddle than a collar. As most horses in the hands of farmers are drawn
while they are young, which notwithstanding their make occasions them to move
heavily, if you ^esire a nimble-footed horse, choose one that has never drawn.

In buying a horse enquire into four other things, viz. biting, kicking,
stopping and starting.

A horse may be ^ound* though guilty of all four, which a man can hardly discover
by barely looking on him; so I refer you to his keeper.

When you are buying* i^ is common for the owner, to say in praise of his
horse, that he has neither sp^^nt, spavin nor windgall.

That you may not be imposed upon, those three are thus described.

The Splint.
The splint is a fixed callous excrescence or hard knob, growing upon the flat
of the in (...) outside (and sometimes ^^th) of the shank bone: a little under,
and not far from the knee, and may be seen and felt.

To take it off shave the part, and beat it with a stick, prick it with a nail
in a flat stick clap on a blistering plaster as strong us you can make it: let
it (...) on three days ^hen take it off, and rub the place with half a dr^c^^^
of the (...) of or^^^y, and as much oil of vitriol mixed (...) the (...) does
not do, rub it a second time with the ^yls; if you find any remains of the
splint* apply a second blistering plaster for twenty four hours, walk (...)
moderately, to prevent any swelling or excrescence from settling.

Most young horses have splints more or less, and they will occasion lameness
while they are coming upon the bone, but after they are grown to the firmness
of bones, they do not lame a horse nor is such a horse worse for use, though he
may not look so well to the eye.

The Spavin.
The spavin is of the same nature, and appears in like manner, on the instep
bone behind, not for below the hough.

To take it off* ^eat the bone with a bleeding stick, and rub it; then anoint
it with the oil of origanum, ty^ a wet cloth* about it, and with a hot brick
applied to it, soak in the oil, ^ill it be dry.

Windgall.
Windgalls are several little swellings just above the feetlo^k-joints of all
the four legs; they seem, when felt, to be full of wind or jelly, but they
never lame a horse; the splint and spavin always do. They all three proceed
from one and the same cause, which is hard riding, traveling too far in one
day, or carrying too great a weight when young.

Setting out on a journey.
Whenever you intend to travel, hunt, or only ride out for the air, let your
horses feet be examined sometime^ before, to see that his shoes are all fast
and fit easy on his feet, for on that depends the pleasure and safety of your
journey.

Directions for mounting.
Before you mount, look round your horse, to see if his bridle, curb, saddle,
and girts are all fitted in their proper place. -- Always accustom your horse
to stand firm and without a motion, till you are fixed in your ^eat, and your
clothes be adjusted.

Directions for going.
When you would have him go, teach him to move, by pressing close your knees,
or speaking to him, without using whip or spur; for a horse will learn any
thing; and a good quality may as (...) be taught him as a bad one*

Correction ill timed. Correction well timed -- An easy Rein.
Most men whip and spur a horse, to make him go faster before they bid him; but
it is cruel treatment, to beat a generous creature, before you have signified
your mind to him, (by some token which he may be taught to understand) who
would obey you if he knew your pleasure; it is time enough to correct him when
he refuses, or resists you. Don't haul his head about with too ^ight a rein, it
deaden his mouth; b^^i^es, he will carry you safer, and take better care of his
steps with an easy h^nd, than a heavy one; much ^^p^nds on the quietness of the
bridle-hand. Keep your (...) steady, and you cannot hurt his mouth. Again,
nothing discovers a bad horseman (even at a distance) so much as throwing his
legs and arms about; for it is easiest to the horse and rider, and he can carry
you further by ten miles a day, when you sit as steady upon him, as if you were
a part of himself.

Cutting.
If he ^u^s either before or behind, look that his shoes stand not with an edge
beyond the hoof, and feel, that the clinches of the nails lie close; but if
cutting proceeds from interfering that is crossing his legs in his trot, it is a
natural infirmity and can only be a little helped by c^re* Horses will
sometimes cut, when leg-weary, which they will recover of by rest. If you would
not have a horse that ^uts buy not one who stands with his toes turned
outward, nor one who, in trotting, carries his legs too near each other.

Lameness. -- A Poultice.
If (^s he stands in the stable) you observe him to point one foot forwarder
than the other, either before or behind, seeming to bear no weight on it; you
may reasonably conclude he is not easy; if the shoe is the cause, the farrier
can remove it presently, but if the foot is not hurt by some unknown accident,
make a poultic* of any sort of greens, such as lett^ce, cabbage, mallow leaves,
turnip-tops, or turnips themselves, the best of all, boil them tender, squeeze
the water out, chop them in a wooden bowl, with two or three ounces of hog's
lard or butter; put this poultice into a cloth, and tie his foot in it all
night, as hot as you can*

In the morning when the farrier comes to take off his shoe, he will find his
hoof cut soft and easy, so that he will soon discover (in paring with his
butrice) whether he is pricked or bruised.

Bruised.
If bruised only, the next poultice will cure him.

Pricked -- Graveled. -- The cure.
If pricked or otherwise wounded to the quick; open the hole with a penknife,
and drop a little ^i^chilon or me^^^ot, through a pa^^ of warm tongs, into the
hole to suck out the gravel, but the horse ointment is best; which I shall
mention by and by; cover it close with dry ^ow, fa^^ened in with a couple of
splints and put his foot, as before, into a hot poultice.

Repeat this till he is well, which will be in two nights, if you have not been
too free with your penknife.

A caution against the Farrier.
But let not the farrier put flaming turpentine to it, which will close the
hole before the gravel is out, in this case; it must work out at the coroner
above, and may require six months time to cure it.

Lame in the heel or hoof. -- The cure.
If your horse is lame with a hole in his heel, or any part of his hoof, be it
ever so deep, ^^^asioned by an over reach of his hind foot, or a tread of
another horse, though gravel be in it; put his foot into the aforesaid poultice
and repeat it mornings and evenings 'till it is well; for it will such it out,
(...) it again with ^ound flesh, and make the hoof grow over it, much sooner
than any other method or medicine whatsoever.

A Caution.
The Farriers practice is to put (...) sticks into such holes (a composition of
mercury, lime, vitriol, and ^he ^like) to burn '^m, and to cut a quarter of the
hoof away to come at the bottom as they say, which requires about six months to
make good again; but oftenest ends if not always, in an unsound c^ub foot.

Cu^^, treads and bruises cured.
All (...), treads and bruises are cured by this poultice; not only (...) and
safest but without leaving any mar^^*

The-horse-ointment.
Into a clean Pipkin, that holds about a quart, put the bigness of a pullet's
egg of yellow rosin; when it is melted over a middling fire add the same
quantity of (...) when that is melted put in half a pound of hogs (...); when
it is dissolved, put in two ounces of honey, when that is dissolved, put in
half a pound of common turpentine; keep it gently boiling. stirring it with a
stick all the time; when the turpentine is dissolved, put in two ounces of
verdegrease; you must take off the Pipkin (else 'twill rise into the fire in a
moment) set it on again and give it two or three wa^bl^^ and strain it through
a course sieve, into a clean vessel for use, and throw the dregs away.

This is an extraordinary ointment for a wound or bruise in flesh or hoof
broken knees, ga^l'd backs, bites, cracked heels, mall^nders, or when you geld
a horse, to heal and keep the flies away; nothing takes fire out of a burn
(...) in human flesh so soon: I have had personal experience of it I had it,
out of D^grey, but finding (...) heal a wou^d at the top, before the bottom was
^ound, (...) in proved it, by adding an ounce of verdegrease.

Heat balls.
If upon a journey any little (...) heat ba^^s should rise on your horses
shoulders or any part of him: upon coming ^o your inn, order the (...) to rub
them often with hot vinegar, which will disperse them. They are owing to the
heat of the body in hard riding. If they are not dispersed, they will burst and
look ugly, and it will be some time before the hair comes on upon the part
again.

Swelled and cracked heels.
If his legs and heels should swell and crack, and become stiff and sore, so
that he can hardly be got out of the stable, in the morning and perhaps did not
lie down all night; you may travel on, but walk him for the first mile or two,
very gentle till the swelling falls, and he begins to feel his legs.

Cure.
When you end the days journey, wash his sore legs with warm water, and a great
deal of soap; or foment his heels, (first cutting away the hair very close,)
with old urine, pretty warm, for a quarter of an hour by dipping a woolen
cloth, or an old stocking into the urine, squeezing it, and then applying it to
the part affected, having first well washed it with the urine. You may then
prepare the poultice, as in page 12 and tie it on hot, as soon as it can be got
ready ^etting it stay on all night. Feed him as usual and offer him warm water
in the house. About nine or ten o'clock (that is an hour or two after he is put
up for all night, and fed) give him a ball.

A ball.
"Half an ounce of ethi^p^ mineral. Ditto of balsam of sulphur (...) Ditto of
di^p^^ts or powdered anniseeds, mixed and made into a ball with honey or
molasses You may give him a pint of warm ale after it."

Don't stir him out of the stable on any account whatever till you mount him
the next morning for your journey, and give him a draught of warm ^ater in the
stable before you set out (that being proper on account of the ball) When you
are on the ^o^d, he may drink water as usual.

The next night omit the ball, but continue the poultice.

The third night give the second ball.

Greasing heels.
The fifth night give the third ball and still continue the poultice till his
heels are well: But if you can get not sort of poulticing* then, melt hogs
lard; or butter, and with a rabbits foot, or a rag, grease his heels with it
very hot.

If he is a young horse, and the distemper new, you will hear no more of it.
but if he is old, and has had it a long time on him, 'twill require further
repetition

N. B. During this op^eration you must not gallop on the road, but ride
moderately, for sweating will retard the cure. You must consider that wet
weather and wet roads are by no means proper for this regimen.

Traveling indeed is an improper time for this cure, except in cases of
necessity: if you can give your horse rest, his heels will get well sooner by
turning him out to grass and renewing the poultices: but he should be kept in
the stable, while he takes the medicine.

If the greasy poultice does not effect a cure, which may sometimes be the
case: after fomenting the legs with urine anoint his heels well with the
following ointment warm every ^ight. "Take ten eggs, boil them very hard, put
them in cold water, when cold, separate the yolks from the whites put all the
yolks into a frying pan, bruise them with a spoon over the fire till they turn
black and yield a fetid oil, which decant off, and mix it, whilst warm, with
two ounces of honey and two ounces of white ^ead in powder, and then keep it
for use It should be heated into a horses heels with a fire shovel." The heels
in the day time should be constantly well rubbed -- ^his ointment exceeds any
thing that can be applied for a bu^^ or scald in the human body if applied soon
after the accident and the part affected b^ anointed for an hour after, by
times with a feather.

I have often cured a horse of greasy heels by giving him only (...) ounce and
a h^^f of saltpetre pounded fi^e or dissolved and mixed with his corn, morning
and evening. But this must be continued for a month or more, till his legs are
well; but they should be kept washed as above. If you give a horse five or six
pounds of saltpetre, in this manner, it will not hurt him, it will free him
from all sorts of humors and put him into excellent spirits.

Mallender.
The mallender is a crack in the bend of the knee. it (...) a sharp humor like
that at the heels or (...) a horse dare not -- step out (...) away his belly;
it makes him step short, and stumble much.

The cure.
The same method, medicine, greasing and poulticing (which you used for swelled
or cracked heels) will cure it

Sellender and cure.
The sellender is a crack in the bend of the hough; and must be cured with the
same things, and after the same manner.

Sore back and cure
If the saddle bruises his back, and makes it sweell, a greasy dish^clout laid
on hot, and a cloth or rag over it, bound on a quarter of an hour (with a
surcingle) and repeated once or twice, will sink it flat. If it is slight, wash
it with a little water and salt only; But you must have the saddle altered,
that it press not upon the tender part, for a second bruise will be worse than
the first. If his furniture does not fit and ^it easy, 'twill damp him; but if
nothing wound or hurt him, he will travel with courage.

Advice for watering
Make it a standing rule to water on the way before you arrive at the baiting
place, be it noon or night; if there is no water by the way, do not (when once
you have entered the stable) suffer any man to lead him out to a river or
horse-pond, to wash his legs or drink, but give him warm water in the house.

If you ride moderately, you ought to let your horse drink at any time on the
way, you may trust him* he will not take harm, but always refresh himself; but
if he has long been without water, and is hot, he will then over drink himself
and it may spoil him, because a load of cold water greedily swallowed while
he is hot, will certainly chill and deaden the tone of the stomach; but two, or
three go downs are really necessary to cool his mouth, and may be allowed him
at any time on the road.

Difficulty of staling.
Sometimes a horse cannot stale, and will be (...) great pain; to ease him,
"take half an ounce of anniseeds beaten fine in a mortar one handful of parsley
roots, boil these in a quart of old strong beer, and strain it off, and give it
him warm."

Hard riding. -- Surfeit
If you ride hard, and go in hot your horse will be off his ^omach, then is
your time to guard against a surfeit which is always attended with the grease,
the farcy or both; the symptoms are a staring of the (...), and ^ide bound.

Staring coat and hide-bonnd -- The anniseed cordial.
Staring of the coat, will appear the very next morning. To prevent which as
soon as you dismount rub him well, cover him, pick his ^eet throw a handful or
two of beans before him and litter him deep. Go immediately and boil for a
cordial. "half a pound of anniseeds in a quart of ale pour it upon half a pound
of honey into a bowl or basin; brew it about, till it is almost as cool as
blood, then give it (with a horn) seeds and all"

The cure.
Feed as usual, but keep him warm clothed; give him warm water that night and
next morning. A mash will do well that night, and left the cordial should not
have force enough to carry off the surfeit, you must give him (after all, and
just before bed time) one of those balls, directed in page 16.

To prevent stiffness; supple and wash his legs with greasy dish-wash, or water
and soap, as hot as a man can bear his hand in it, with a dish clout, and by no
means take him out of the stable that night. Grease his hoofs, and (...) his
feet with the following ball; it is safe and innocent.

A ball to stop feet.
"Two or three handfuls of bran put in to a little saucepan with as much grease
of any kind as will moisten it. Let it cool, and put a ball of it into each
sore foot."

Cover each ball with a little tow or straw, and put a couple of splints over
that, to keep it (...) al^^ig^^. This do every night if you please throughout
your journey. it is good at any time of he (...) still: but these balls are not
necessary in the winter or when the roads are full of water.

A caution against hostler's.
Ever avoid all stuffings made of c^w dung, ^l^y and urine, which you will find
ready mixed in a rub, in the custody of almost every hostler; such cold
stuffings benumb the feet to that degree, that the horse ^^^bles and steps
short for two or three miles, till he he gets a little warmth and feels his
feet again.

Shoulder slip
If you wrench his shoulder, "mix two ounces of the oil of spike with one ounce
of the oil of swallows and half an ounce of turpentine, and with your hands rub
a little of it all over the shoulder." It will be bell to (...) the oils well
with a broad mouth'^ fire (...) plate of iron, hot. Then b^eed him and let him
rest two days This will cure a slight strain Should he still continue ^ame, you
may travel on, but slowly, and he will grow well upon the road, but repeat the
oils.

A caution against boring and firing.
Some farriers cut a hole through the skin in the middle of the shoulder, and
(with the shank of a tobacco-pipe) blow it, as a butcher does a shoulder of
veal; then they run a flat cold iron, like a horseman's sword-blade eight or
ten inches up, between the shoulder blade and his ribs, (which they call
boring) after that they burn him round his shoulder with a hot iron, and cross
it like a glass window; next they lay a charge all over the shoulder (which is
a composition of pitch, rosin and tar) then put a patten shoe upon the contrary
foot, and in that condition turn him to grass.

I cannot say I ever knew a horse cured by this method, but I have known many a
one lame ever after; for they never get clear of the stiffness which the boring
and firing leave in the shoulder; a tender hearted man would be astonished at
the cruelty of this invention; for all that can be obtained, is a free
discharge of the humors (occasioned by the wrench) which may lodge between the
shoulder blade and the ribs; for which you will find ^^ow^ling alone sufficient.

A caution against Origanum.
Most farriers will endeavor to persuade you to use oil of origanum in all
cases of strains, but I am against that also, by experience; it is too hot and
subtle, and by frequent application will insinuate itself into the bone, and
make it brittle.

I saw one instance, when the the thickest bone in a horse (between the
shoulder blade and the elbow) broke, while a servant led him a foot pace in
hand. The farrier confessed he had used much of that oil.

Stifle. -- The cure.
If you strain your horse in the sti^^le, a little bone upon the thigh bone,
above the inside bend of the hough; (you find such another in a leg of mutton)
the turnip poultice will infallibly cure it, but you may rub in the oils first,
as ordered for a shoulder slip. By it is situation you will find a difficulty to
keep the poultice on, yet it may be done with a few yards of lift.

If it it i^ not well, or very much mended in two or three days, examine the
hip, perhaps you may find it there; but this most be cured by oiling, as in a
shoulder slip, for the poultice cannot be fastened on there.

A clap in the back sinews
When lameness arises from a clap in the back sinews which is a relaxation of
the sinews from a strain, take a spoonful or two of hog's lard, or rather
goosegrease, melt it in a saucepan, and rub it into the back sinew very hot
from the bend of the knee to the fetlock; make (as you are directed in page the
12th) a turnip poultice and tie it on hot, from the fetlock to above the knee,
and let it stay on all night; thus, first tie the cloth about the fetlock, then
put in the poultice, and raise the cloth and the poultice together, till you
get it above the bend of the knee: twisting the list or string round his leg as
you rise, and fasten it above the knee; take it off in the morning, and put on
a fresh one; at night do the same. Two or three of these poultices will cure a
new strain; five or six an old one.

How to know a shoulder slip from a strain in in the back sinews.
This lameness by ignorance farriers, is frequently taken for a shoulder-slip,
and in consequence of this, they proceed to blowing boring and ^roweling, and
thus make your horse useless for a long time. Be not imposed on; be sure it is
in his shoulder, before you admit the operation:

If it is in his shoulder, he will drag his to: on the ground, as he walks.

If in the back sinew, he will lift it off and step short, though downright lame.

There does not happen above one shoulder-slip, to fifty back sinew strains.

A cold -- a running of the eyes and nostrils.
You may know if your horse has caught cold by a running at his eyes, and a
little gleeting at his nostrils; though it is impossible to know exactly how he
came by it; (for standing near a hole, a window or door, a damp new built
stable, and many other ways may do it) yet I would warn you against one
practice in particular, too much in use, which seldom fa^ls to give a horse a
cold.

A caution against catching cold.
That is, taking him out of a warm stable and riding into a river or horse
pond, at an unseasonable hour, either too late or too early read page 20; a
horse should never be taken out of a warm stable on a journey, till you mount
him for travel.

Haltercast.
Note, the same poultice will also cure the fetlock of a horse that is cast in
his halter, by frequently repeating.

A caution to prevent ^oundering on the road.
It is the opinion of most grooms that a horse hea^ (...) legs and feet upon a
hard road, especially it he is a heavy horse, or carries a great weight and
that he should be refreshed and cooled by washing. To which I agree; but then
it must be with warm water, for that cools best. This will not only open the
pores, and make his legs perspire, but it will clear his fetlock joints best of
any gravel that may get in between the wrinkles and thus fret and it flame his
legs; cold water naturally contracts the skin, and binds any gravel there may
chance to be, the firmer. Stop his feet also with the ball directed in page 22,
but make it pretty warm.

Note, a horse in this case ought to have a large stall, that he may stretch
his legs. Young horses require larger stalls than old ones; for an accustomed
old horse will ease himself in a stall of five feet wide as well as in one of
two yards.

A cough.
If (after a day or two) you perceive a running at his eyes, and a little
gleeting at his nostrils, you may expect to hear him cough. In that case,

Take a pint of blood from his neck, in a morning, (a horse will travel
notwithstanding, if you do not exceed it) and at noon give an additional feed,
to make amends for the loss of blood.

At night give him a mash, over and above his usual allowance. The next night
give him the anneseed cordial as before.

A great cough
If his cough continues three days, you must take another pint of blood from
his neck and try to remove it with abler medicines. Therefore to keep it off
his lungs, give him just before you go to bed,

The cure.
"Liquorish powder, an ounce. Sweet oil, a spoonful ^^^hiops mineral, an ounce.
Balsam o^ sulphur, half an ounce." Made into a ball with a little honey.

Cloth and keep him warm. Repeat the ball next night, which will be sufficient
to cure any new ^o^ten cold or surfeit.

Knotted between the jaws -- The cure.
Feel between (...) and if his kernels are swelled, don't (...) the farrier cut
them out with a pair of ^^ed-^ot (...) (as some of them do) but dissolve them
with 2 or 3 or more turnip poultices and continue the anniseed cordial till
he is well

If the almonds of a man's ears were down; that it if the gland^ were swelled,
and a surgeon proposed to cut them out for a cure. you would treat him with
great contempt for his ignorance. It is the same with respect to a horse.

Note. The horse's throat ought to be kept warm with cloths. till the swelling
is either dissolved or come to a head: ^f the ^atter any common farrier may
open the tumor with a sharp p^nk ^^fe, and when the matter has free discharge,
the wound will easily heal, by the use of the horse ointment applied warm.

A cold in the eyes.
When a horse has got cold, i^ sometimes falls into his eyes when you may know
by the symptoms before mentioned in page 26; (a running or a thick glare upon
them,) put your hand to his nostrils, and if you find his breath hotter than
usual, 'twill then be necessary to take a little blood from his neck.

A caution in bleeding.
It Is a common thing with some farriers, to take 2, 3 and sometimes 4 quarts of
blood away at one time I am very much against that practice because you rob a
horse of more animal spirits, than you can restore in a long time, without much
rest and high feeding; the latter of which is diametrically opposite to the
cure.

Bleed by measure.
Therefore, a pint or quart at most (unless it is very thick and very hot) will
be sufficient; it is (...) to take a gallon at five or six bleedings, than two
quarts at once, for the reason above. Let me advise you also to take it by
measure, I mean in a pint or quart pot; for when you bleed at random upon the
ground, you never can know the quantity you take not what quality his blood is
of. From such violent methods ^ied with ignorance proceed the death of (...)
the horses in the nation.

What proof must a farrier, a groom or a coachman give of his skill, to
administer to a horse a comfortable (...) call (...)) (...) and the rest of the
(...) ^^^redients, at a time when his blood (...) in his veins? It Is like (...)
in a fever. I say, by knowing the true (...) of ^our horse's blood you can
better judge what medicines are most proper to give him.

Therefore a pint of blood, for the first time, is enough, and you may repeat
that (...) you see occasion but you cannot easily before (as I ^^id) the blood
and spirits you have been, too lavish of. To return to the eyes.

A poultice for the eyes
After you have taken a pint of blood: "get a quartern loaf ho^ out of the oven
cut away the crust and put the soft inside into a linen ^^g large enough to
cover his forehead and temples, press it flat and bind it on by way of
poultice, as hot as may be without scalding; at the same time fasten something
of a cloth about his neck to keep his throat warm" Let the poultice stay on
'till it is almost cold, and repeat it once or twice; then prep^^^ the following
eye, water.

Eye water.
Into half a pint of rose or spring water, put one dram of ^ut^y, finely
prepared, one dram of white sugar candy powdered, and half a dram of sugar of
lead. With a (...) put a d^^p into (...) eye (...).

A caution against eye powders.
Never blow any powders into the eyes; always use liquids

The next day (if needful repeat the poultice and for want of a hot loaf at any
time, make a poultice of bread boiled in milk, continuing the eye-water every
day. You may use the turnip poultice, but you must not put grease into it

Never let grease or oil come near the eyes.

A Philm -- The cure.
If a phlim grows over the eye, put a scruple of white vitrol and a scruple of
roach-allum, both finely powdered into half a quartern (...) spring water; and
with a feather put a drop into each eye mornings and evenings and 'twill eat it
clean off in three days or thereabouts: but be not prevaled on to blow flint
and glass (pounded together) into the eyes because the sharp points of the
glass wound all the tender-blood vessels, and cause an inexpressible painful
infl^mation not much inferior and full as insignificant as the farriers way of
burning a thousand holes in his skin with a red-hot poker to cure the f^rcy,

^^^ding and docking are but little help to bad eyes.

Cautions against blindness.
Blistering the temples, cutting out the haws, and taking up the veins, weaken
the optics and hasten blindness.

Observations on washy horses.
It Is observed, that some horses carry a good belly all the journey, others
part with their food before it is well digested, and scour all the way; which
makes 'em so thin and lank, that they are ready to slip through their girts; they
are called washy. Such horses must be chiefly fed with dry meat that is, oats
and b^ans, and but seldom with bran. They will eat as much or rather more than
other horses, and you should feed them oftener, for being soon empty they
require it; and if you will allow 'em enough, they will perform a tolerable good
journey; but I do not recommend such a one.

Remember to feed.
If you do not gallop your horse off his wind I will venture to say, it is not
the journey that hurts him, but your neglect of him when you dismount* Consider
he is tied up, and can have nothing but what is brought to him; for he cannot
help himself, and if you don't cause him to be properly attended, a dog that
wanders about fares better than the horse that carried you so well; and since
he cannot ask for what he wants, you must supply every thing.

Directions for feeding.
When you end the day's journey, fill your horse's belly as soon as you can,
that he may go to rest, and he will be the fresher for it in the morning. It Is an
old observation, that young men eat and sleep better than old; but old horses
eat and sleep better than young.

Give two or three little feeds instead of a large one; too much at once may
cloy him.

A cordial if saint upon the road
If you perceive your horse travel faintly, you may give him at any time a pint
of warm ale with a quartern of brandy, rum or geneva in (...) or an ounce of
diapente (...). Diapente will comfort his bowels, drive out cold and wind, and
cause him to carry his food the longer.

Gripes
If your horse is taken with the gripes (which he will discover to you by often
looking toward his flanks) and cannot keep upon his legs, but rolls and beats
himself about, seeming, (as undoubtedly he is) in very great misery.

Caution against a drench.
The farrier (after he has bled him) will bring you a pint of beef brine mixed
with a quart of the grounds of stale beer, to drench him with; then a glyster
of the same? and if that don't cure him (...)

Nothing but a horse could live after having such a composition forced into his
stomach.

The cure -- (...) gl^ster.
Don't bleed (...) (unless his br^ath is very hot) but cloth him warm
immediately, and (with a horn) give him "half a pint of brandy, with as much
sweet oil mixed." then trot him about till he is a little warm which will
certainly cure some horses. If it does not yours, "bo^l^o^e ounce of beaten
pepper in a quart of milk, put half a pound of butter and two or three ounces
of salt into a bowl or basin, and brew then together, give it rather warmer
than usual;" 'twill purge him in half an hour or thereabouts, and perhaps
remove the fi^^. If it does not omit half the pepper, and give the same in
quantity and quality by way of glister, adding (as it cools) "the yolks of four
eggs."

If this has the good effect that is wished for, you must nurse him up till he
gets his strength again: but if neither will do "boil a pound o^ anniseeds in
two quarts of ale, brew it upon a pound of honey; when it is almost cool enough,
put in two ounces of diacordium" and give it (with a horn) at three doses
allowing about half an hour between each dose.

If his (...), give him time to recover himself.

Worms or Botts.
If all this does not give him ease, and if you have a suspicion of worms or
botts breeding in his guts (which indeed may be the case, for they sometimes
fasten in the passage from the stomach into the great gut, and ^op it; and so
torment him till he dies; (I have seen it in dissections.) Then give him "two
ounces of AEthiops mineral made into a ball, with an ounce of the powder of
anniseeds, and a spoonful of honey."

A caution.
N B. But you must not give this to a mare with soa^* You may bleed her in the
roof of the mouth: it is to be hoped some of th^se things will hit.

Staggers.
Don't let your horse stand too long without exercise it fills his belly too
full of meat, and his viens too full of blood. From hence the staggers and many
other distempers.

The cure
The cure is to bleed and purge.

Grazing
Thin skinned horses that have been well kept and months a clothed should never
be turned to grass above three months in the year. viz From the beginning of
June to the end of August.

Thick skinned horses have strong coats which keep out the weather, and (if well
fed) will lie abroad, and endure hard hunting all the year, better than stable
horses. For walking about to feed prevents stiffness in their limbs; and
treading in the grass keeps their ho^fs moist and cool: But they should have a
hovel to come in at night, or when it snows or rain.

Never purge a horse just taken from, grass; it dissolves or loosens some
tender fat or humors which fall into his legs or heels. But after six days you
may bleed him once under a quart; and at night give him the anniseed cordial,
see page 21 which is a gentle opener,

No cold water with physic.
If you needs must purge your horse (for which I would have a good reason
given) let him not touch cold water within or without, till the day after it
has done working; but you cannot give him too much warm water, I wish he would
drink enough, for the sake of dilution.

A purge
"Aloes, one ounce* Jollop, two or three drams. Oils of cloves, ten drops; made
into a ball with honey.

Caution against cold water.
Some obstinate grooms will work it off with cold water, and tell you the
sicker he is the better the purge works. I deny it for cold water checks the
working of all physic, and causes gripings. A purge may work the first day but
commonly does not till the second. I have known one lie two* nay three days, in
a horse, and work well off at last.

It works by urine.
Sometimes it works by urine only and then the purge steals off unobserved by
his keeper; upon which, he makes have to give him a second, (which he says) is
to carry off the first purge that has not worked with him. After giving the
second, he takes him out of a warm stable and trots him abroad, be the weather
hot or cold till he warms him and opens all the pores of his body to make the
physic work I do not think it possible for a horse, with a purge or two in his
belly, to escape catching cold by such a method and must impute great injuries
to it; for by such carelessness, and the want of better understanding, some
horses lose an eye others have irrecoverable lamenesses settled in their limbs,
and many die. Then they tell you his liver was rotten, and his lungs (upon
opening) all in^^^^n'd.

Purge within doors.
How can any gentleman be sati^fied with the loss of a good horse with such an
ignorant account, so contrary to the rules of physic and even common sense? An
understanding man when he has given his horse a purge will not stir him out of
the stable till it has done working; for there is really no need of exercise
during the operation because every purge will carry itself off, if you keep him
warm and supple him with warm mashes, and as much warm water as he pleases to
drink, and as often.

To stop violent purgings.
When a purge work^ two long, or two strong upon him, which will weaken him too
much give him "an ounce of Venice treacle in a pint of warm ale, and repeat it
if needful, to blunt the force of the Aloes.

All the keepers at NEW MARKET bleed and purge the running horses pretty often;
and all the gentlemen in ENGLAND agree with them in doing so. The reason given
for it, is to carry off the humors which cause their legs to swell and grow
first and to clean them. The reason's good, because no horse is fit to run that
is not clean; but bleeding and purging weakens both man and beast; besides the
hazard of a horse's life in every purge (as I have demonstrated) Would it not
therefore be a good amendment to get quit of those superflous humors another
way, so as to prevent stiff and swelled legs without bleeding and purging?
Would not a horse come into the field with better advantage, who instead of
bleeding and purging, only once a we^k takes a medicine that effectually cleans
his body (...) keeps his legs from swelling and stiffness; mends his wind by
opening his lungs, and preserves him in his full vigor.

If a horse looks ill -- The Lampars -- The cure.
If your horse (who once looked fat and sleek) is brought to you with a staring
coat and hallow flank, open his mouth, look on the roof and if the gums next
his fore-teeth are swelled higher than his teeth 'twill hinder his feeding and
make him fall of his flesh. Let a smith burn it down with a hot iron that is a
comp^eat cure for the Lampars.

Take care of your hay and oats.
If you suspect that the groom does not give him your allowance it behooves you
to take care that you have thirty-six tru^^es in each load of hay, as well as
eight bushels in every quarter of oats: and that they are not brewed; for there
are some m^n that can turn oats into ale.

Broken wind.
If a groom gallops his horse when he is full of water, he will tell you it is to
warm the water in his belly; from hence often comes a broken wind.

Rowels.
There is a wrong judged custom amongst our professors concerning rowels. If a
horse is sick they bleed him, right or wrong give him a drench and put a rowel
under his belly; and without enquiring of his master or keeper. what usage he
has lately had which might occasion the illness. Rowels are absolutely
necessary in same cases, but are absolutely unnecessary in others, and serve
only to d^^figure and torment a horse.

As for example.
The rowel in the navel for the grease (which you may see in almost all the
coach and carthorses in town) is very wrong; because rowels in a horse that is
greased promote too great a discharge from the blood and animal spirits, which
weaken him to a degree of irrecoverable poverty I have put fiv^ rowels in a
horse at one time thinking, by them, to let the grease run off, but the more
the rowels ran, the more he ran at the heels, till the texture of his blood was
so broken that I could not recover him. This convinced me 'twas the wrong way
to cure the grease.

The farcin.
The farcin proceeds from a stagnation of blood in the capillary or hair like
vessels, which corrupts and breaks through into buds, and (...) itself at the
heels or ^rush. Colds, hard ex^r^ise, high feeding, etc. will occasion this.

Running at the heels or ^rush
Farriers ignorantly endeavor to stop a running at the heels or ^rush by
applying bolearmo^^^^, allom, vitrol, lime water verdigrease which are quite
contrary to the cure; for all stypticks (...) the sharp distillation which
should have a free passage; ^^se the limbs will swell to a very great degree,
and must in time f^ll and burst out again in such a tide as will be hard to
^^em. For stoping is not curing. See page ^6.

Four parts in five of our farriers, maintain that the farcin lies between the
flesh and the skin. Why then don't ro^elling cure it? But it does not lie
between the flesh and the skin, therefore ro^elling never did, nor ever can
cure it. For example.

Before the buds break out, the veins cord; which is a strong presumption that
the distemper has it is o^^gion in the blood; because there is its first
appearance. Besides, take a pint of blood from the neck of any horse, whose
viens are corded any where about him, and 'twill show its corruption as soon as
it is cold Now, bleeding ch^^ks the distemper; whereas if you did not bleed, it
would break out in every part about him; from the ears to the foals of his
feet; even in the corners of his eyes, his yard, and the very (...) of his
hoofs, or wherever there are any blood vessels.

These demonstrations oblige me to believe the distemper does not lie in the
skin; but in the veins.

A description of firing.
The generality of our present farriers give the fire; that is they draw, with
a red-hot iron a circle like a magic spell round the buds, burning half through
the skin. This they say stops the spreading, and is called firing. Then, into
every bad, they thrust the end of a red-hot poker, burning the bad to the
bottom, which is accounted, by them, a complete cure for the farcin; but I
should rather take it to be a description of the last punishment allotted (...)
wicked men. Who can imagine that a red hot iron would correct the blood, and
cure a distemper?

To cure the farcin, "Take half an ounce of Roman vitrol boiled in a pint of
cha^^^^ley two penny worth of turpentine, two pennyworth of bole a^moniac, and
a handful of ^^e. Give it inwardly and ^^peathe dose, if required

A description of the glanders.
The glanders proceed from severe repeated colds, such as are taken at winter
grass, and by lying long upon the lungs and glands corrupt the blood, a (...)
produce that unhappy consequence of running at the nostrils

The mourning of the chine is downright poverty of flesh and blood, which the
severity of the distemper ( i. e. cold) brings on and may be compared to the
condition of a lean man in a consumption; but there is no such thing as the
running of the spinal marrow at the nostrils as many affirm, for the vessel
that contains the spinal marrow is composed of the same coats that i^ close the
brain, and is continued from the brain without disjunction, through the neck
and chine bones, till it ends in the dock; so that there is not the least
communication between the spinal marrow and the nostrils: it is the same in
human bodies

To discover a fever.
Would you know when a horse is in a fever? There is a pulse a little above the
knee, in the inside of his leg, which may be felt in thinskin'd horses, but the
best and surest way, is to put your hand to his nostrils, and discover it by
the heat of his breath.

Glisters.
There is a time (in some fevers) when it is dangerous to bleed or purge; then
glisters are of excellent use, I must say absolutely necessary; but not one in
a thousand will give themselves the trouble to relieve the poor sick creature
in that way, for two reasons: first, few people know when a horse is in a fever.

A glister in a fever.
Secondly, they seldom are provided with so material an instrument as a glister
pipe, therefore for the sake of the creature and those that love him, the
following glister (in a fever) is as good as any, and as little trouble. But
first bespeak at a pewterer's a pipe eight or ten inches long, with a bore
large enough to receive the end of your fingers, and a (...) at one end of this
pipe, that what you tie on may not slip off. Then boil a spoonful of oatmeal in
two quarts of water, together with two ounces of sena, and half a pound of
brown sugar half a pint of sweet oil, and a handful of salt. Get a bladder at
an apothe^ary's that will contain the above said quantity, and tie its neck to
the pipe. Pour the glister, with a funnel, through the pipe into the bladder,
and give it blood warm, setting the hors^s hinder parts highest. Keep him quiet
in the stable till he voids it the longer it stays with him, the better: but
you need not tie his tail down to his fundament^^ It Is ridiculous to think
'twill detain it a moment.

Swelled neck
If a farrier, in bleeding, miss the veins don't let him strike his fl^m a
second time into the same place, because it sometimes make the neck swell, and
proves troublesome to cure: and as the (...) blood infallibly makes the neck
swell and the j^glar vein rot quite away from the orifice up to the jaw bone
and downward almost to the shoulder, (which may prove the loss of your horses)
he should take care in the pinning that he leaves not a drop of blood between
the flesh and the skin.

Bleed high in the neck.
(Note the nearer the throat you bleed him, the better. The vein is not so apt
to swell into a knot, as if bled lower.)

The cure.
The turnip poultice makes the best cure (...) but if the neck should happen to
be extremely b^d and a tumor should form, when you feel matter fluctuate under
your finger, it is best to open it and give a free discharge, and dress it with
the horse ointment, keeping the neck elevated.

A horse after bleeding should not eat hay for half a day left the motion of
the muse (...) should bring on an inflammation and swelling.

Docking^.
It seldoms happens that we dock a horse upon a journey, but permit me to give
a caution on that subject here, in docking a horse never put under his tail the
knife or instrument which is to cut it off; because you then must strike the
tail^ which will bruise it, and will be apt to mortify, which is the reason so
many horses die with docking; but lay his tail next the block and at one ^ow
drive the knife through a joint if possible; stand prepai^^d with a hot iron to
^ear the end of the dock and stop the bleeding.

Never draw a horse's foals on any pretense whatever. There is no hurt or wound
in the cask of the foot but may be come a^^ and it is the reverse of a cure for
a founder, though the farriers always do it. A man may help a foundered horse,
but I never knew one cured.

I have now mentioned most of the common accidents, and have taken care that
under some of those heads, you may find a great deal of help by the analogy
they have to one another; and having added more than is necessary on a journey,
I beg leave to end.

I have read all I could find, and have tried their receipts with great
attention and expense; and can say it was experience alone that led me into the
knowledge of contracting overgrown receipts, hastening cures, and moderating
costs.

TO MAKE BLACK BALLS FOR BOOTS.
TAKE six ounces of Bee's-wax, two ounces of Virgin's wax, one ounce of hard
tallow, and one barrel of Lamp-black, well mixed and boiled together in an
earthed pot, glazed. When you take it off the fire, take one ounce of Plumb-gum
bea^^n very small which pour in gradually, stirring it continually till it is
quite cold and incorporated; then preserve it for use.

THE END.

