AN APPEAL TO THE PEOPLE OF THE MASSACHUSETTS STATE, AGAINST ARBITRARY POWER.

Every one that does evil, hates the light -- But he that does truth comes
to the light.

JESUS CHRIST. Deliver me from the oppression of man; so will I keep thy
PRECEPTS.

KING DAVID. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS, in
State-Street: Sold also by PHILIP FREEMAN, in Union-Street. M,DCC,LXXX.

An Appeal to the People of the Massachusetts State, against Arbitrary Power.
FRIENDS AND COUNTRYMEN,
A Cause is now to be tried before you, which is of infinite and eternal
importance to us all; and can I be reasonably blamed for addressing you upon it
since I am publicly called to act for many thousands in the affair? The cause I
refer to turns upon this point, viz. Whether TRUTH and EQUITY, or PARTIALITY
and HYPOCRISY shall constitute the future government of this State? I am far
from supposing that you would adopt the latter under these names, or when you
viewed them in their true nature and effects. The divine law was violated by
our first mother, under a view of its being good and pleasant so to do; and the
empire of iniquity ever since has been carried on, by calling evil good, and
good evil; by putting darkness for light, and light for darkness, bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter. And the inspired apostle says, I fear lest by any
means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. And he earnestly calls us
to mark those who cause divisions and offenses, contrary to his doctrine, under
good words and fair speeches. 2 Cor. 11.3. Rom 16.17, 18. And the case to be
tried by you is, who this mark belongs to, and whether it shall now be put upon
the right persons or not?

One of the greatest historians of New England exerted all his art to fix it
upon the first baptists therein. Magnalia, book 7. p 9. Baptist history, p. 109.
And the ruling party in this State, have now made a like attempt to fix it
upon me, and upon the communities I am connected with. And you are all called
upon, to approve or disapprove of this attempt; and if you suffer a wrong
judgment to proceed, when you can prevent it, you cannot be guiltless therein.
Upon this great cause you are to judge according to law and evidence; and my
business is to open the case before you, as clearly as I can.

Now you are to note, that Christ himself came on purpose to make divisions
upon earth; therefore it is not all divisions, but only such as are contrary to
his doctrine, that are condemned. And a first and capital article of his
doctrine is that HE IS HEAD OVER ALL THINGS TO THE CHURCH; and that she is
complete in him, Ephesians 1.21, 22. Col. 2.10. And those are to be marked as
deceivers who do not thus hold THE HEAD. Col. 2.19 -- 23. Another article in
his doctrine is, that no man can see his kingdom, nor have right to any power
therein without regeneration. John 1.12, 13 and 3.3 And the first man that
offered money as a means of obtaining power therein, is marked with an eternal
brand of infamy. Acts 8.19.23. A third article is, that the whole of our duty
is included in love to GOD, and love to our neighbor. Mat. 7.12, and 22. 37 --
40. A fourth is, that the civil magistrate's power is limited to the last of
these; and that his sword is to punish none but such as work ill to their
neighbors. Romans 13.1 -- 10. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. A fifth is, that those who
receive instruction and benefit from Christ's ministers, are required freely to
communicate, according to their ability, to their temporal support, as they
will answer it to him in the great day. Luke 10.7 -- 12. 1 Cor. 9.4 -- 14. Gal.
6.6, 7. A sixth is, that none should hear, nor give countenance, to any
teachers who bring not Christ's doctrine, but pervert his gospel, as they would
avoid partaking in their guilt. Prove. 19.27. Mark 4.24. 2 John, 10, 1^. These
are plain points of law. The facts and evidence, that you are called to judge
upon are as follow.

The doctrine that New England was founded upon was, that the merits of saints
might as well be mingled with the purity of Christ for the saving of the
church, as the laws of men with her laws, for the ruling and guiding of it.
Which doctrine was violated fifteen years after, when the legal ^ at Boston
determined to mix their laws with Christ's laws about worship, and to compel
every man in the colony to swear allegiance to that power, or to be punished at
their discretion. And for testifying against such power and such oaths, they
banished the first baptist minister in America out of their jurisdiction
Baptist history, p 31, 62 -- 70, 156, 157.
And to prevent the like evils for the future, our churches sent me to
Philadelphia, when the first congress was sitting, to improve the best means we
could, to promote impartial liberty among ourselves, seeing we were equally
concerned (...) against foreign invaders. This attempt was plainly encouraged
by the 17th resolve of the county of Suffolk, wherein they promised to pay all
due respect and submission to such measures as the Congress should recommend,
"for the restoration and establishment of our just rights, civil and
religious." It was not then known here that they would refuse to be judges of
religious controversies. These resolves I carried with me to that city, where a
promise was obtained from our delegates in congress, that they would improve
their influence toward diffusing the religious liberty that has long been
enjoyed in Boston into the remotest parts of this State. But this was so far
from being fulfilled, that some, if not all of those gentlemen accused us in
the convention last fall, of acting an unfriendly part toward our country, for
making the attempt which procured that promise. Therefore, in the Independent
Chronicle of Dec. 2, I gave a narrative of these affairs, and challenged them
to a fair hearing thereon. But instead of any such thing, that accusation is
repeated in said paper of Feb. 10, to which other horrid ones are added, by one
who styles himself a number of the convention, without intending the public
should know his name. And all this, my countrymen, is to persuade you to
swallow down the third article, which, after a very hard struggle, they have
inserted in the bill of rights, that they would lay as the foundation of our
future government. Which article is pregnant with the following evil.

1st. It asserts a right in the people of this State, to make and execute laws
about the worship of God; directly contrary to the truth, which assures us that
we have but ONE LAWGIVER in such affairs. Isai. 33 22. James 4, 12

2d. They who framed this article are so far from holding THE HEAD of the
church, and from allowing her to be complete in him, that they do not name
either Christ or his church in all their account of the worship of God, and of
the choice and support of religious teachers. So that good and happiness are
the fine names under which you are urged to receive instructions, "in piety,
religion and morality," without any regard either to our only Mediator, or to
her who is presented as a chaste virgin to him. 2 Cor 11, 2.

3d This article is so partial, that it would empower the majority in every
town and parish, to covenant for the rest with religious ministers, and to
compel every man therein to support the parish minister, if the money paid was
not required for others. And no man could require it, nor minister receive it,
with a good conscience, who believed this way to be unjust and there are
thousands in this State, of various denominations.

4th If this article should be established, our case would be incomparably
worse than it has ever yet been. For first, our former laws about worship
proceeded entirely from the mistakes and errors of the legislators, and not at
all from our charters: but this article would make them an essential part of
our constitution. Secondly, we had formerly a legal way of appeal from the
unjust acts and sentences of the ruling sect here; which was a great restraint
upon them. But the plan they have now laid, is to have that restraint entirely
taken off. Thirdly, this plan is to empower legislators, who are elected by
money qualifications, if they do but bear the christian name, (which the church
of Rome does as well as others) to compel all to attend and support what they
shall call the worship of God; and what a door this would open upon us you
ought to consider. Fourthly, the advocates for this power, have already
threatened revenge upon us for opposing it, if they can ever get it
established. And in the mean time they have exhibited a specimen thereof to the
world. For a former legislator headed a mob the June before last, and violently
broke up a peaceable meeting for divine worship, only because it was in a way
different from the judgment of his party. And because I published an account of
it, he said in open town meeting. I know how I will get my recompense of him if
ever I come across him! Independent Chronicle of Dec. 3, 1778.
Yet he was so far from receiving any punishment for all this, that he has been
employed in forming the plan of government that is now offered to you. Another
member of the convention was so much inflamed by the forenamed accusations
against us last fall, that he went home and procured the imprisonment of two of
my brethren, on the very day that I answered those accusations. And two more of
my hearers were fined for refusing to assist in seizing the bodies of their
friends, for a tax to a minister they had dissented from and had declared they
could not in conscience support. And they have since been taxed to him again,
and are daily exposed to imprisonment therefore. And our oppressors in their
publications of Feb. 10. have accused my brethren in the convention of being
such monsters as "even to rake open the ashes of the dead."

They say, No man would betake himself to declaiming and reviling, who had any
solid arguments to support his cause. I readily grant that such a practice
indicates a bad temper, or a bad cause, or both. So far we are agreed But the
dispute is about which party have discovered this black mark. In this
publication they have ra^ed up ^he German Anababtists whom they represent as
pleading conscience for lying with each other's wives, and for murdering their
peaceable neighbors. To whom they add. the covetous Pharisees -- Mahomet and
the Jesuits; and the writer then says, the above account appears to me to
contain a full answer to what Mr. Backus has published, excepting what concerns
the particular gentlemen I named.

Here therefore, my dear countrymen, you have a very plain case to judge upon.
Our opponents call that good which we call evil. And the great judge of all
says. Every one that does evil, hates the light -- but be that does truth
comes to the light. John 3.20, 21. And you are called to judge betwixt us upon
this great point. Each of us profess to plead for the cause of truth and
equity, as it concerns your welfare as well as ours; and if you should give a
wrong judgment upon it, none can say how great and pernicious the effects will
be to us all, and to all succeeding generations, even till time shall be no
more; yea, to all eternity. Never was there so fair an opportunity offered to
any people since the rise of antichrist, as you now have, to assert your own
rights, and to cast off tyranny. One character of those who have a form but
deny the power of godliness. is that they are false-accusers. Another is, that
they are ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy 3.1 -- 7. And since it is certain that christianity was founded upon the
truth, and that the power of it conquered the Roman empire; do they not deny
the power of it, who hold that it would soon be lost from among us, if force
was not used to support it? I concur with them that religion has been the the
life of New England. But I am so far from thinking that human laws about
religious worship have been our life that I know they have been most deadly
things to us; and that if the power of godliness had not been above them and
had not prevailed against them we should all have been ruined long ago Plagues
from God ever have followed, and ever will follow, those who add to his laws
about worship Rev. 22 18. This was the practice and the portion of the
Pharisees, Mahomet, the Jesuits, and the mad men of Munster; and can you be so
much deceived, as to continue that practice among us, because the advocates for
it, cast those hateful names upon those who oppose it! They do not come so near
to the light as the Pharisees did; for when they taught God's fear by the
precepts of men, they made a man an offender for a word. Isai 29.13, 21. Mat.
15, 9; but our accusers have not done so much as this.

Since I was first called to act as agent for the Baptists in this State, we
have published four books, besides a number of papers, against the use of
secular force in religious affairs, which are now to be had in Boston; yet,
when in behalf of our churches, I challenged our accusers in the convention, to
a fair and open hearing; they have been so far from it, as to (...) the
covetous Pharisees, Mahomet the Jesuits, and the German Anabaptists, upon us:
and have added thereto an enormity that but few tyrants were ever guilty of.
And all this without producing so much as a single word from all our writings
to prove their charges against us. And in Mr. Gill's paper of March ^^ they
call those who oppose said article, a certain junto, composed of disguised
tories, British emisaries, pro^^^e and licentions deists, avaricious
worldlings, disaffected sectaries, and furious blind bigots. And you must
remember that they tell you plainly, that if they could have found any better
arguments than these to support their cause, they would gladly have used them.

Instead of raking open the ashes of the dead, we earnestly requested our
countrymen seven years ago, to bury some of their bones which appeared above
ground. Appeal to the public, page 01.
This our opponents were so far from consenting to, that they dragged a carcass
into the convention, to defile the worship of GOD with. Ezekiel 43, 7 -- 9.
Upon which one of my brethren turned the covering a little off from it; which
is what they mean by their bitter exclamation. That is, they denied that their
fathers ever persecuted any in this country; and he recited a few acts of their
courts to prove that they did. The sentence of Solomon may give light in this
case. 1 Kings. 3.27. For our opponents are so much for dividing the living
child, that they would have religious teachers settled and supported in the
name of this State, who should administer ordinances in the name of Christ. But
those women never thought of disputing about which was the living child, and
which not, as our adversaries do. For after the head of their form was cut
clear off, they contend for power to put another head to it, and for the people
to give life to such a monster; as being essentially necessary to the good of
the State. Rev. 13.15 -- 18. The image there spoken of is undoubtedly a form of
godliness, invented and supported by the power of man. In Luther's time it
received a great wound by the sword of truth, which state policy has since
healed. But now when its head has been out clean off, our accusers are in
earnest to have the people put another head thereon, so that the teachers who
were settled in the name of King George, might be supported by a name that then
had no existence.

All this norse proceeds from no better cause than our insisting upon
impartiality in our future government. We lately proved, that the greatest
minister in Boston, eighty years ago, who was then president of
Harvard-College, called the practice we oppose SIMONY and ROBBERY. Discourse on
policy and honesty, page 6.
And the special act which was then made in favor of this town, shows that the
legislators meant to abridge the country of the liberty Boston would not part
with. And I challenge all our opponents to prove if they can, that we have ever
desired any other religious liberty, than to have this partiality entirely
removed. And such light in these matters has now been obtained, in all parts of
this State, and among gentlemen of all denominations, that those who will yet
plead, for having the sword put into the hands of any to prepare war against
such as put not into their teachers mouths, are welcome to all the honor or
advantage they can ever obtain thereby.

I close with requesting my dear countrymen well to consider what GOD says of
those who fasted, and asked of him the ordinances of justice, while they
refused to let the oppressed go free. Isai. 58.1 -- 12 and 59.1 -- 20. And
since he has so remarkably saved us, from the galleys and gallant ships that
were sent against us, from the islands (Isai. 33.20 -- 22) have we not reason
to hope, that HIS FEAR will soon become so great in the west, as to return
again with glorious effects upon those who dwell toward the rising of the sun?

ISAAC BACKUS, Agent for the Baptist Churches in this State, by advice of their
Committee.
Boston, April 6, 1780.
At the Places where this Address is to be sold, may also be had 1. An Appeal
to the Public, for Religious Liberty. 2. A Discourse about Honesty and Policy
in Government. 3. A Baptist History of New England.



