DESCRIPTION OF THE SUFFERINGS OF THOSE WHO WERE ON BOARD THE JERSEY AND OTHER
PRISON SHIPS IN THE HARBOR OF NEW YORK, DURING THE STRUGGLE FOR OUR GLORIOUS
INDEPENDENCE.
BY AN AMERICAN who was a Prisoner on board of one of them.
The various horrors of these HULKS to tell,
These PRISON SHIPS where pain and penance dwell,
Where death in tenfold vengeance hold his reign,
And injured ghosts, yet unaveng'd complain.
This be my task, ungenerous BRITAINS you
Conspire to murder whom you cannot subdue.
'Two HULKS on Hudson's (...) bosom lie,
Two on the East alarm the pitying eye;
There the black SCORPION at her mooring rides,
There STROMBOLO swings, yielding to the tides;
Here, bulky JERSEY fills a larger space
And HUNTER, to all hospitals disgrace.
'No masts or sails these crowded ships adorn,
Dismal to view, neglected and forlorn:
Here mighty ills oppressed the imprisoned throng,
Dull were our slumbers and our nights were long. --
From morn to eve along the decks we lay,
Scorched into fevers by the solar ray;
No friendly ^^ning cast a welcome shade,
Once was it promised and was never made;
No favors could these sons of death bestow,
'T was endless vengeance and unceasing woe.
Immortal hatred does their breasts engage
And this lost empire swells their souls with rage.
Thou Scorpion, fatal to thy crowded throng;
Dire (...) of horror and Plutonian song,
Requir'st my lay -- thy sultry decks I know,
^
The briny wave that Hudsons bosom fills,
Dripp'd through her bottom in a thousand rills:
Rotten and old, replete with sighs and groans,
Scarce on the waters she sustained her bones;
Here, doomed to toil, or founder in the tide,
At the moist pumps incessantly we plied,
Here, doomed to starve, like famished dogs, we tore
The scant allowance, that our tyrants bore.
'Remembrance shudders at this scene of fears --
Still in my view some tyrant chief appears,
Some base born Hessian slave walks threatening by,
Some (...) Scot, with murder in his eye,
Still haunts my sight as vainly they bemoan
Rebellions managed so unlike their own!
O may I never feel the poignant pain
To live subjected to such fiends again,
Stewards and Mates, that hostile Britain bore,
Cut from the gallows on their native shore;
Their ghastly looks and vengeance-beaming eyes
Still to my view in dismal visions rise --
O may I never review these dire abodes,
These piles for slaughter, floating on the floods, --
And you, that over the troubled ocean go,
Strike not your standards to this venomed foe,
Better the greedy wave should swallow all,
Better to meet the (...) conducting ball,
Better to sleep on ocean's (...) bed,
At once destroyed and numbered with the dead,
Then thus to perish in the face of day
Where twice ten thousand deaths one death delay
When to the ocean sinks the western sun,
And the sco^ch'd Torie^ fire their evening gun,
"Down, rebels, down!" the angry Scotchmen cry,
"Base dogs, desc^^d, or by our broad swords die!"
Hail dark abode! what can with the compare --
Heat, ^^^^ness, (...), death, and stagnant air --
Pandor^^ box, from whence all mischiefs flew,
Here real found, ^^^ments mankind anew! --
Swift from the (...) decks we rushed along,
And vainly (...), so vast our throng;
Three hundred wretches here, denied all light,
In crowded (...) pass the infernal night,
Some for a bed their tattered vestments join,
And some on (...), and some on floors recline;
Shut from the (...) of the (...) air
(...) we lay with mingled corpses there,
Meagre and wa^ and scorched with heat, below,
(...) like ghosts, ere death had made us so --
How could we (...), where heat and hunger joined
Thus to debase (...) body and the mind, --
Where cruel thir^ the patching throat invades,
Dries up the man, and fits him for the shades.
No waters laded from the bubbling spring
(...) these dire ships these little tyrants bring --
(...) p^^nk and ponderous beams completely walled
In vain for water and in vain we called --
No (...) was granted to the midnight prayer,
(...) rebels in these regions of despair!
The loathsome c^sk a deadly dose contains,
(...) poison (...) through the languid veins;
"Here, generous, Britons, generous, as you say,
"(...) tongue one (...) drop convey,
"(...) has no mischief like a thirsty throat,
"Nor one tormentor like your David (...)"
Dull flew the hours till from the east displayed,
Sweet morn dispelled the horrors of the shade;
On every side di^e objects meet the ^^ght.
And pall^d forms and murders of the night.
The dead were past their pain! the living groan,
Nor dare to hope another morn their own.
'Hunger and thirst to work our woe, combine,
And moldy br^^d, and flesh of rotten swine.
The mangled carcass and the battered brain,
The doctor's poison, and the captain's cane.
The soldier's ^^squet, and the steward's debt,
The evening shackle and the noonday threat.
'While yet they deigned that healthsome balm to lade
The putrid water felt its powerful aid.
But when refused to aggravate^ our pains,
Then fevers raged and revel'd through our veins,
Throughout my frame I felt its deadly heat,
I felt my pulse with quicker motions beat:
A pallid hue over every face was spread,
Unusual pains attack^d the fainting head;
No physic here, no doctor to assist,
With oaths they placed (...) on the sick man's list.
Twelve wretches mo^e the same dark symptoms took,
And these were entered on the doctor's book;
The loathsome HUNTER was our destined place,
The HUNTER to all hospitals disgrace.
With soldiers sent to guard us on our road,
Joyful we le^t the (...) dire abode.
Some tears we shed for (...) remaining crew,
Then cursed the HULK, and from her ^ides withdrew.
Now toward the HUNTER's gloomy decks we came,
A slaughter house, yet hospital in name;
For none came there, 'till ruined with their fees,
And half consumed, and dying of disease; --
But when too near, with laboring oars we plied
The Mate, with curses, drove us from the side;
That wretch who, banished from the navy crew,
Grown old in blood, did here his trade renew,
His rancorous tongue, when on his charge let loose,
Uttered reproaches, scandal, and abuse,
Gave all to hell, who (...) disown,
An^ ^wore mankind (...) George (...),
A ^^ousand times, to (...) woe,
He ^ish'd us foundered (...) the gulf below;
A thousand times, he brandished high his stick,
And swore as often that we were not sick --
And yet so pale! -- that we were thought by some
A freight of ghosts from ^eath's dominions come --
But calmed at length -- (...) who can always rage,
Or the fierce war of boundless passion wage,
He pointed to the stairs that led below
To damps, disease, and varied shapes of woe --
Down to the gloom I took my pensive way,
Along the decks the dying captives lay;
Some struck with madness some with scurvy pained,
But still of (...) fevers most complained!
On the hard (...) these (...) objects laid,
There tossed and tumbled (...) the dismal shade,
There no soft voice their ^itter (...) bemoaned,
And death trod stately, while the victims groaned;
Of leaky deck^ I heard them long complain,
D^own'd as they were in deluges of rain,
Denied the comforts of a dying bed,
And not a pillow to support the head --
How could they else but pi^^, and grieve, and sigh,
Detest a wretched life -- and wish to die.
Scarce had I mingled with this dismal band
When a thin victim seized me by the hand
"And art thou come," (death heavy on his eyes)
"And art thou come to those abodes, -- (he cries;)
Why did thou leave the Scorpion's dark retreat,
And hither haste, a surer death to meet?
Why did thou leave thy damp infected cell --
If that was purgatory, this is hell,
We, too, grown weary of (...) shade
Petitioned early for the (...);
His aid denied, more (...) came,
Weak, and yet weaker, (...) vital flame;
And when disease had (...) so low
That few could tell if we were ghosts, or no,
And all asserted death would be our fate --
Then to the doctor we were sent -- too late.
Here wastes away (...) the brave,
Here young Palemon finds a watery grave,
Here loved Aleander, now ^as! no more,
Dies, far sequestered from ^^s native shore;
He late, perhaps, too eager for the fray,
Chased the proud Briton over the watery way,
'Till fortune, jealous, bade (...) clouds appear,
Turned hostile to his ^ame, and brought him here.
Thus do our warriors, this our heroes fall,
Imprisoned here, sure ruin meets them all,
Or, sent afar to Britain's barbarous shore,
There pine neglected, and return no more. --
Ah rest in peace, each injured, parted shade,
By cruel hands in death's dark weeds arrayed."
'From Brooklyn heigh^ a Hessian doctor came,
Not great his skill, nor greater much his fame!
Fair science never called the wretch her son,
And Art disdained the stupid man to own!
Yet still he put his genius to the rack,
And, as you may suppose, was owned a QUACK.
'He on his charge the healing work begun,
With antimonial mixtures by ^he tun,
Ten minutes was the time he deigned to stay,
The time of grace allotted once a day,
He drenched us well with bitter draughts it is true,
Nostrums from hell, and cortex from Peru.
Some with his pills he sent to Pluto's reign,
And some he blister'd with his sties of Spain;
His tartar doses walked their deadly round,
Till the lean patient at the potion frowned
And swore that hemlock, death, or what you will,
Were nonsense to the drugs that stuffed his bill.
On those refusing he bestowed a kick,
Or (...) vengeance with his walking stick.
Here uncontrolled he exercised his trade,
And grew experienced by the deaths he made;
By frequent blows we from his cane endured,
He killed at least, as many as he cured.
On our lost comrades built his future fame,
And scattered fate wherever his footsteps came;
Some did not bend submissive to his skill,
And swore he mingled poison with his pill.
But I acquit him by a fair confession
He was no Myrmidon -- he was a Hessian.
Although a dunce he had some sense of (...)
Or else the Lord knows where we now had been;
No doubt in that far country sent to range
Where never prisoner meets with an exchange. --
No centries stand to guard the midnight post,
Nor ^eal down hatch-ways on a crowd of ghosts.
Knave though he was, yet candor must confess,
Not chief physician was this man of Hesse.
One master over the murdering tribe was placed,
By him the rest were honored or disgraced,
Once, and but once, by some strange ^,
He came to see the dying and the dead;
He came; but (...) deformed his (...),
And such a faulchion glittered on his thigh
And such a gloom his visage darkened over,
And two such pistols in his hands he bore,
That by the Gods! with such a load of (...),
He came we thought to murder, not to (...),
Rage in his heart, and mischief in his head,
He gloom'd destruction -- and had smote (...) dead;
Had he so dared -- but fear withheld his hand,
He came -- blasphemed and turned again to land.
From this poor vessel, and her sickly crew
A British seaman all his titles drew,
Captain, esquire, commander, too, in chief,
And hence he gained his bread, and hence his beef,
But, (...), you might have searched creation round
And such another russian not have found --
Though unprovoked, an angry face he bore,
All were astonished at the oaths he swore;
He swore, till every prisoner stood aghast,
And thought him Satan in a brimstone blast;
He wished us banished from the public light,
He wished us shrouded in perpetual night!
That were (...) king, no mercy would he show,
But drive all rebels to the world below;
That if we scoundrels did not scrub the decks
His staff should break our base rebellious necks; --
He swore, besides, that should the ship take fire
We too must in the pitchy flames expire;
And meant it so -- this tyrant, I engage,
Had lost his life, to gratify his rage. --
If where he walked a murdered carcass lay,
Still dreadful was the language of the day --
He called us dogs, and would have held us so,
But terror checked the meditated blow,
Of vengeance, from our injured nation due
To him, and all the base unmanly crew.
Such food they sent, to make complete our woes,
It looked like carrion torn from hungry crows.
Such vermin vile on every joint were seen,
So black, corrupted, mortified, and lean,
That once we tried to move our flinty chief.
And thus addressed him, holding up the beef;
"See, captain, see! what rotten bones we pick,
What kills the healthy cannot cure the sick:
Not dogs on such by Christian men are fed,
And see, good master, see, what lousy bread."
"Your meat or bread, (this man of death replied)
It Is not my care to manage or provide; --
But this, base rebel dogs, I Would have you know,
That better than you merit, we bestow;
Out of my sight" -- nor more he deigned to say,
But whisk'd about, and frowning strode away.
'Each day, at least six carcases we bore,
And scratched them graves along the sandy shore;
By feeble hands the shallow graves were made,
No stone, memorial, over the corpses laid.'

