THE NEWS-CARRIER's ADDRESS TO HIS CUSTOMERS.
Hartford, January 1, 1783.
IN England, where the poets scribble,
And thrive on flattery and libel,
A chatt'ring, poor, poetic parrot,
Decked with the lofty name of Laureat,
Is culled, and hired with sal'ry clear
Of one good hundred pounds a year,
On every New Year's day to sing
So bright a Queen, so good a King;
To hail their George in birthday lays,
And stuff his happy ears with praise:
Till puft'd aloft in Laureat ode,
The oaf believes himself a god,
Dreams all his foes before him quaking,
And scarce believes Cornwallis taken.
But in this land, as fates befall,
Where verse comes slow, and pay is small,
Where folks have other rules to choose by,
Your only Laureat is the News-Boy;
Who every New Year's morn, in time
Hands round his little page of rhyme,
Collects his pence from hands propitious,
And pays the balance in good wishes.
Yet he, though young in years and name,
With pleasure views his Country's fame;
Beholds the happy land secure
In freedom and imperial power,
That freedom earned by foes repelled,
In many a bright, but dreadful field,
Where British pride availed no more,
But fled from troops it scorned before;
Beholds our Chief's and Statesmen's name
Above all Greek and Roman fame;
Sees foreign realms afford us aid,
And credit rise from taxes paid;
Sees Science tune the immortal lays,
And Genius ripening into praise;
Beholds the foe our deeds revere,
And learn humanity by fear:
While now no fires of battle rise,
Nor desolation spreads the skies;
Their weakened troops from arms retreat,
To guard their fortresses and fleet,
Their breasts disturbed with anxious fears,
And all the alarms of war are theirs.
And oh, to give these troubles end,
May white-rob'd Peace from heaven descend!
Before her War's grim horrors yield,
And Carnage quit the sanguine field;
No terrors call with dire alarms
The peaceful lab'rer forth to arms,
But safe beneath auspicious skies,
The unmolested harvest rise.
Then Trade shall catch the favoring gale,
Over every ocean pour the sail,
And plenteous load our freighted strands,
With fruitful stores of foreign lands:
While unborn ages joyful see,
The Empire great, and blessed, and free.
So sings your bard and sings delighted,
In lofty strain, like Laureat Poet Laureat of Great Britain, who is probably
at this (...) such a set of new year's verses, as this is.
Whitehead;
Attempts to tune the various lay,
Fond of his country's praise -- and pay;
Hopes for your smiles, and bowing down to ye,
Trusts his kind Customers and their bounty.

