The TRUE CHURCH of CHRIST Described; IN A SERMON, DELIVERED AT RUTLAND, ON
OTTER-CREEK; At the gathering of a CHURCH in that TOWN. OCTOBER 20th, A. D.
1783.

By the Reverend Benajah Roots, A. M. Of late, PASTOR to the First CHURCH in
SYMSBURY, CONNECTICUT.

Fair as the MOON; clear as the SUN, and terrible as an ARMY with BANNERS: KING
SOLOMON. A Woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her Feet, and upon
her Head a Crown of Twelve Stars. ST. JOHN. BENNINGTON: PRINTED BY HASWELL and
RUSSELL.

1783

Preface.
THE population of this wilderness, so lately the range of savages, and the
lonesome haunt of wild beasts, echoing with the frightful screeches, and
sonorous bootings of desolate owis, is truly surprising! Every town, almost,
north and south, through that tract west of Connecticut river, lately called the
province of New Hampshire; has more or less inhabitants: As it is probable
most of the towns, in this large extended wilderness has. One (I am informed)
has more than two hundred families in it; others are various. The town of
Rutland, situate about seventy miles from the north line of the province of the
Massachusett's-Bay, has thirty-five families in it: more are coming.

But what is truly affecting is, That there is not more than one regular
Minister of the standing order settled, as ever I have heard of, in all this
large extent; yea for a hundred miles or more, in length, and in breadth;
perhaps as many from Connecticut river, to Hudson's river; and from the north
line of Massachusett's-Bay, to Canada; in which there are even a multitude of
people. And indeed, there are but few Ministers of any denomination! Not only
this; but what is still more affecting is, The poverty or nearness of some, and
the want of an inclination in many others, seem to forbid their having any at
all, in most places, at least at the present; and the affecting consequences of
a people continuing long in such circumstances; with regard to religion, the
worship of God, and the Salvation of their souls, is easy to be perceived by
the judicious.

Having a call, in providence, to preach the Gospel in this wilderness, in the
midst of which I now am, and have been for some time; and being desired to
assist in gathering a Church at Rutland, October 20, 1783; and to preach on
that occasion, (to which I consented) I thought proper, as suitable to the
occasion, to give a description of the true Church of Christ; without the least
thoughts of its ever appearing in public: However, it now appears, with a very
little alteration, from what it was, when delivered; excepting the improvement,
which I have considerably enlarged.

I have but very little to say by way of apology for its publication; besides
that very common one, viz. "That it is published at the earnest desire of those
that heard it." For I have not the vanity to think, that there is any thing
very extraordinary in it, to recommend it to the public: I apprehend, it
contains plain truths, in a style suited to the capacity of the auditory.

I add this was some further inducement to me, to consent to its publication,
viz.. That I expect many of the books will be scattered in this wilderness,
where books are scarce: And if they may be of service to form in the minds of
any, just sentiments of the true Church of Christ, and awaken in them, an
earnest solicitude to belong to this Church of Christ, my end is, in some
measure, answered.

I shall only add, I ask the candor of my readers; to which I am ready to
fancy, I am the more entitled; since I am in the midst of this vast wilderness,
without the ordinary helps in such cases; and destitute of any of my brethren
in the ministry to converse or advise with.

Requesting the prayers of God's people, on behalf of the people inhabiting in
this wilderness; who seem to be in imminent danger of perishing for lack of
vision; I subscribe myself your servant, for Jesus sake.

B. R.
Rutland, November 25, 1783.
A Description of the TRUE CHURCH of CHRIST.
I. PETER, ii. 5. Ye also as living Stones, are built up a SPIRITUAL HOUSE, an
HOLY PRIESTHOOD, to offer up SPIRITUAL SACRIFICES, acceptable to GOD, by JESUS
CHRIST.
THE Apostle is here giving us a lively description of the true Church of
Christ. Having first described the foundation of the Church, viz. Jesus Christ,
whom he calls a ' Living Stone,' (in the preceding verse) Disallowed indeed of
men, but chosen of God and precious. In our text he speaks of the Church, under
the same metaphor, ' Living Stones,' Living Stones; is according to the
translation in my Bible: Since the composure of the Sermon, I have seen it
translated ' Lively,' In some other Bibles.

But, as I have not the original by me, nor is it in these parts; by which I
might determine which is the rightest; therefore I shall let it stand as it is
penned.


' Ye also as Living Stones,' etc.

Where we may observe, he (the Apostle) describes the Church.

I. By her likeness to Christ, with respect to internal, spiritual or divine
life; ' living.'

II. By her stability ' Stones.'

III. By her union with herself; ' Built up a Spiritual House.'

IV. By her divine constitution; ' An Holy Priesthood.'

V. By her exercises; ' To offer up Sacrifices.'

VI. By the quality of these sacrifices, viz. ' Spiritual and holy.'

VII. By their acceptance with God; ' Acceptable to God.'

VIII. By whose merits these spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God, viz.
The merits of Christ, ' Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.' Each of these
particulars, in the description of the true Church of Christ, I purpose briefly
to consider.

I. THE first decription of the true Church, is in her likeness to Christ, her
foundation, with respect to her internal, spiritual or divine life; ' Living.'

' Christ lives; and because he lives,' ' They shall live also.' John 14. 19.

Every true member lives by Christ's life, for he lives in them; ' I live,'
(says the Apostle) yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Gal. XX. 20.

So likewise, they have the same kind of spiritual life, that is in Christ.
Jesus Christ a living Stone; the foundation of this spiritual building! So
likewise, the true members of his Church are living Stones; compacted together
in this building* The foundation and the superstructure are alike in this; they
are living Stones. This spiritual life consists in holiness, divine love or
benevolence. Some indeed suppose, that holiness is nothing but divine love;
because what the law of God requires of us, is holiness, and the sum of what
the law requires of us, is love: Love is the fulfilling of the law; (says the
Apostle.) And upon these two commandments of love to God and our neighbor, our
Savior makes to hang all the law and the prophets. However, some would make a
little difference between holiness and divine love: Holiness in God (they say)
is the sum of all his divine attributes: And holiness in men they make
comprehensive of all the variety of christian graces, to be exercised in the
life of a christian; as love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, and temperance; which are called the fruits of the holy
spirit; Gal. v. 22, 23. And can any say, and say truly, that divine love, or
benevolence, is not comprehended of all the forementioned graces? Doubtless
holiness, is to be universally of a right temper of mind: So likewise, for
ought I know, love is radically this; a man destitute of love, has no right
temper; without divine love, he does nothing that is truly virtuous; nothing
that is truly praise worthy; without this, nothing is done from a right
principle, or to a right end: He that has no true love to God, has no sincere
regard to his glory, in any thing that he does. Without this, faith has no
real goodness, or moral virtue in it. All gifts and knowledge is vain without
it: Yea, had a man all faith, so that he could remove mountains, and understood
all mysteries, and could speak with the tongues of men and angels, and was
destitute of this divine principle, they would make him no better than sounding
brass, or a tinkling cymbal; a bare sign or representation of something, when
there is really nothing! Nay, should a man give all his goods to feed the poor,
and his body to be burnt in sacrifice for his religion, and be destitute of
love, it would profit him nothing: See all this confirmed, I Cor. Chap. xiii.
Love is the very soul and essence of every grace, and the distinguishing
character of a good man, for without this, he is a wicked man, and dead in
trespasses and sins. Love therefore, is the sum of all moral virtue, and of
every christian grace; yea the very soul and life of them all: As without
natural or animal life, there would be no natural actions; so also without
divine love, there would be no spiritual action. Natural self-love excites
natural men to those exercises, or actions, which are proper for moral agents:
So supernatural and divine love excites to those spiritual exercises and holy
actions, which are peculiar to a renewea man. Without love of some kind or
other, I cannot conceive of a man's acting at all, as a moral agent; and
without supernatural or divine love, I can have no apprehension of his acting
at all in a spiritual manner; or with the least regard to God, any more than I
can conceive of a man's acting as a natural man, without natural life. Hence it
is, I apprehend, that divine love is called spiritual life: And certain it is,
without divine love, men are dead, yea, wholly dead, in a spiritual sense. But
the true members of Christ's Church, are conformable to their spiritual and
public head, in this; Christ the living Stone, in the foundation of his Church,
and the Church built up of living Stones, upon this foundation

II. The true Church of Christ is described by her stability, Stones. A
metaphor borrowed from Stones which are compacted into a building, with an
adjective, expressing their peculiar, and distinguishing quality, living
Stones. A Stone is solid and durable, not easily moved with the wind; when
wrought into a building, they continue for a great length of time. So the
Church of Christ, compared to living Stones, built upon Christ, the living
Stone, is durable, staple and firm: It continues through every age, firm as the
everlasting mountains: It continues through all the convulsions of States and
Kingdoms. Whatever devastations and revolutions take place, in the world, the
Church must live; though earth and hell conspire together to destroy it, ' Yet
must this building rise!' Though Satan, with all his malicious arts, and
diabolical subtilty, lay ten thousand snares to destroy it, he cannot prevail;
for it is founded on a rock. He that fights against her, fights against God;
who will be sure to avenge ' The quarrel.' It Is with respect to the Church that
he says Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm? Psalm. cv, 15. Hurt
not (q. d.) the people consecrated to me, by the gifts and graces of my spirit;
and those, especially among them, to whom I farmiliarly reveal my mind and
will, that they may teach others. The Church is called the bride, the lamb's
wife, and is most dear to the almighty bridegroom: And whosoever touches his
bride, (i.e. hurts or injures her,) shall find the arm of her almighty husband
to be strong; who will ' Soon avenge the wrong.' For thus says the Lord, to
his Church; ' He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye..' Zach. 2,
8. And how precious! how dear! the Church of Christ is to him, he has
manifested in many striking instances of his providence, in punishing those
that injured or were unkind to her. For this cause he plagued and destroyed the
Egyptians, and when they pursued his people to the red sea, they were all
myraculously drowned in it; they sank as lead in the mighty waters; yea they
sank like a stone to the bottom: That this was the case is further evident from
Joel, iii, 19. Egypt shall be a desolation, for the violence against the
children of Judah, because they shed innocent blood in their land. How did it
fare with the Amalekites for their unkindness, because they did not meet God's
ancient Church with bread and water; but instead of this, they smote the
hindermost part of them that were weary and faint; therefore the Lord gave it
in charge, utterly to destroy Amalak, and to blot out his name from under
heaven; which was fully accomplished.

And how did it fare with the Babylonians, for captivating God's people? though
done by his permission and direction of his providence. They were threatened
with perpetual desolation for it, which threatening has been and still is
fulfilling: Babylon shall become a heap, a dwelling place for dragons, an
astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant. Jer. ii 37. This city,
though the most extensive, viz. magnificent of any in the known world, is made
a perpetual desolation, never more to be built or inhabited from generation to
generation forever. See Jer. I. 39, 40, ver* and Isa. xiii, 19, to the end,
where the desolation, perpetual desolation of Babylon, is very fully and
emphatically expressed. And how did it fare with the Jews themselves, when they
rejected the King of Zion, and persecuted his Church? Why he miserably
destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their city Jerusalem. Though Kings,
Rulers and people of Israel joined to destroy the Church, yet they failed. What
though with hand joined in hand, they set themselves against the Lord, and
against his anointed, yet, He that sits in the Heavens laughed, as the Lord
then had them in derision. And though all the powers of Rome, when she was
mistress of the world, were bent to destroy and to root out the christian name,
from under Heaven; though she (Rome) murdered millions, and christian blood
flowed down like rivers; she could not prevail. Under all these trials, the
Church rather increased, than diminished; the suffering of one martyr was
sometimes the means of converting numbers. They who persecuted the Church, made
war with the lamb, and he overcame them; for he is Lord of Lords and King of
King's. Rev. xvii, 14. Thus staple and firm is the true Church of Christ, and
nothing shall be able to destroy it: earth and hell have tried out their
strength, in combinations and have not prevailed; for the Lord God and the Lamb
is in the midst of her. He keeps her, he watches over her with as much care and
tenderness as the apple of his eye; and the gates of hell cannot prevail
against her, cannot overcome her. Thus the church is firmer than heaven and
earth, and more unshaken than the solid world; her foundation is strong, she is
built upon a living rock, from which she cannot be shaken or removed, for she
is united to it, and the union is indissoluble.

III. The true church of Christ is described by her union with herself, built
up a spiritual house.

This metaphor shows how the church is united with itself. As stones which are
compacted together in a building, by the artist, are all united together and
make one house; so the Church of Christ, as living stones, is one spiritual
house built together by the great master builder, in which house he dwells
forever. As this building is united to the living stone which is its
foundation, so likewise these living stones which compose this building, are
united among themselves, cemented in love, which holds it together, and the
union is indissoluble: Not one living stone shall ever fail in this building.
For this the redeemer prayed and his prayer is always effectual. John xvii. 11,
21, 22, 23. "Holy father, keep through thine own name those whom thou have
given me, that they may be one as we are.' That they all may be one, as thou
father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be ONE in us: And the
glory, which thou gave me, have I given them; that they may be ONE, even as
we are ONE: I in them and thou in me; that they may be made perfect in ONE:
That the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them even as
thou have loved me.

The Church is called The only one of her mother, and the choice one of her
that bare her. Cant. vi, 9, which denotes that the Church of Christ is one, and
is most dear to him, who is the great founder of it. This union in the Church,
the Apostle describes by the similitude of a human body, which is united to the
head, by joints and bands, from which it receives nourishment, and being knit
together it increases, with the increase of God, Coll. ii, 19. and that which
cements together the several parts of Christ's mystical body, (the Church) is
love, Coll. ii, 2. Being knit together in love. The living members, in Christ's
Church, are one, in all the following respects, viz. They all have one and the
same public head, even Christ, from whom they receive spiritual nourishment and
growth in grace. They all trust their salvation in his merits alone. They all
with one consent hold the essential doctrines of the Gospel, viz. Such as
these, Salvation from sin and hell, by free and sovereign grace alone, bestowed
through the merits of the great Redeemer. Their dependence is solely upon the
righteousness of Christ to clothe them in the sight of a holy God; they all
trust in the merits of his blood, for the atonement of their sins: The merit
of his obedience, and death for the justification of their persons, and
acceptance with God, both of their persons and services; eternal life and
happiness in the enjoyment of God: They all depend upon his spirit and grace to
sanctify them and make them meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
saints in light. In these they all agree, if they are capable of understanding
doctrines: If there be babes in Christ, that do not clearly understand
doctrines at present, yet surely they have a disposition to understand, and as
soon as they do understand, or have just notions of the truth, they cordially
embrace it: They have a spiritual taste and appetite for the doctrines of free
grace; they are pleased with them and like them in their hearts; for like new
born babes, in health, they desire the sincere milk of the word, that they may
grow thereby, which no unsanctified soul does. Doubtless there are many, who
have so much light and conviction of the truth, that they are forced to
acknowledge it; yet have no love for it; no appetite for it at all in their
hearts. They may have the form of knowledge and of the truth, who do not love
it: This the Apostle asserts Romans ii. 20, to 24. concerning those to whom he
does not give a very good character, viz.. That they made their boast of the
law, and knew God's will, but never taught themselves; to whom he says, ' The
name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you.

Once more, every living member of Christ's Church have all the same spirit of
divine love, that bond of perfectness, of which the Apostle speaks, Coll. iii:
14. Wherever they are scattered up and down the world, this is the spirit that
dwells in them;' this their distinguishing character: By the spirits of love,
or true benevolence, which they have to each other All men may know, that they
are Christ's disciples, John xiii. 35 And by this, we may know, that we are of
God; and that he dwells in us, viz.. by the spirit which he has given us, As
says the Apostle, I John iii. 24. And to the same purpose is the Apostle Romans
viii. 9, If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

False pretenders to religon, may profess themselves to be his disciples, when
they are entirely destitute of the distinguishing character of his true
disciples, viz. divine love. Doubtless there are many such professors, who are
entirely destitute of any true love, either to God or man: We have a record of
some, who professed well, and no doubt had a very good opinion of themselves,
to whom Christ says, I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. Not
all that profess faith in Christ, will put their trust in him; the scribes and
pharisees professed to believe in a Messiah to come, but when he came, they
rejected him; they Trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised
others; and what reason is there to think, but many at the present day, are of
the same spirit; they profess to believe in Christ, but trust in themselves, '
Walking in the light of their own fire, and in the sparks which they have
kindled.' There were some who professed to be Christ's disciples, his cordial
friends; to whom he would not commit himself, but hid himself from them,
because he knew them, he knew their hearts; For he knew all men, and needed not
that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man, John ii. 24. 25.
Yea many that professed to be Christ's disciples, and were so called, took
disgust at some important doctrines which he taught, viz. (...) of atonement,
That they (...) walked no more with him* John (...) what if some renounced
their (...) Christ and the gospel, and forsook the (...) and fellowship of his
true disciples (...) an evidence that they did not belong to them. They went
out from us, (says the Apostle) But they were not of us, for if they had been
of us, they would, no doubt, have continued with us; but they went out, that
they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. It Is nothing
strange, that that, which has no root or deepness of earth, should wither
away: It is nothing strange, that those who are not living Stones, and not
belonging to Christ's building; having no special grace, no love to Christ in
their hearts; nothing strange, for these to renounce their profession, and turn
to another, where they can better gratify their pride or their passions in so
doing: But the living members of Christ have an unction from the holy one, i.
e. an holy anointing, from the holy spirit, viz. Those divine influences, or
special graces shed abroad in the heart, which secures them from falling; it is
an unfailing bond, which holds them fast, and forever secures them; it is the
bond of perfectness; therefore they shall never finally fall away: This bond of
perfectness, or divine love maintains the union among themselves.

IV. THE Church is described by her divine constitution, an holy priesthood.
One special part of the priests office, under the law, was to offer sacrifices.
Besides this, they were to be wholly devoted to God, separated from the world,
and to be constantly employed in the service of the sanctuary, and in teaching
the people* in allusion to this, the Church of Christ is called a holy
priesthood, in the text; because she is to be separated to the service of God:
she offers up herself as A living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God,
through Jesus Christ: And has made us, (says the church) Kings and priests
unto God, and his father, Rev i. 6. This spiritual and holy priesthood, is
peculiarly descriptive of the true Church of Christ, it is their peculiar and
distinguishing character, as it cannot justly be attributed to any other. None
truly give up themselves to God, as living sacrifices, none are devoted to his
service but saints; of which are composed the true Church of Christ.

V. The true Church of Christ is described by her exercises, viz. to offer up
sacrifices: which she does in consequences of her divine constitution, ' A holy
priesthood.'

These sacrifices consist in the offering up of their souls, their bodies, with
all their powers and faculties to God, to be employed in his service. Their
hearts are given to God; (i. e.) they sincerely love him. It is not uncommon
for lovers to say to the beloved friend, You have my heart! or I have given you
my heart! So the Church of Christ has given him her heart; and Christ has set
his heart upon the Church, his spouse: the divine will is her will; this is the
rule by which she walks. She chooses those things which God chooses; Christ and
his Church have the same object of love and hatred: she is ready both to do and
to suffer for Christ's sake. In the worship of her God, she spends her daily
breath. She dearly loves the worship and ordinances of Christ, where he is wont
to reveal his power and grace: She loves to hear of Christ, of his love and
divine excellencies: And her meditation of him is sweet, even in the night
watches; she is ready to part with all for his sake; to sacrifice name, estate,
and life itself, for his sake whom her soul loves. Yea to esteem reproaches,
for Christ, to be great riches, Heb. xi. 26* She can take joyfully the spoiling
of her goods, and part with father and mother, and other near and dear
relatives, houses and lands, and life itself for his sake and the Gosple's.
Unless men can part with all for Christ's sake and the Gospel's, they are not,
nor can they be his true deciples; (this we have from his own mouth) this truth
is illustrated from the words of the Apostle; I am not only ready to be bound
(says he) but to die for the name of Jesus, Acts, xxi, 13. yea, doubtless, and
I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung, etc. Phil. iii. 8. And, not only St. Paul, but every living
member in the Church of Christ, is ready to sacrifice every thing, and count
them as dung for Christ's sake. In this manner the Church offers up sacrifice
to God.

VI. The Church is further described by the quality of those sacrifices which
she offers, viz. spiritual and holy, they are not such earnal sacrifices, as
were in use under the law; nor do they consist in modes and forms or mere
bodily exercises, which profits little, I. Tim. iv. 8. which may be done
entirely without the heart; but they are sacrifices spiritual and holy;
spiritual sacrifices, are such religious exercises, as are performed by the
special and genuine influences of the holy spirit; from whence the term
spiritual is taken in scripture. They are such exercises therefore, as are
peculiar to the spiritual man, viz. Saints; and is given in our text, as one of
the distinguishing characteristics of the true Church of Christ: Certainly,
none but spiritual men offer spiritual and holy sacrifices; and the spiritual
man in the scripture dialect, is the distinguishing character of a good man, or
a true Saint, I Cor. ii. 14, 15, and Gal. vi. I. The natural man receives not
the things of the spirit of God, etc. But he that is spiritual judges all
things: Ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness:
By which it is abundantly plain, that by a spiritual man, he means a true
Saint, or a living member in Christ's Church. And it is peculiar to such as are
spiritual, to offer up spiritual sacrifices; otherwise a corrupt tree may bring
forth good fruit; but in a word, spiritual and holy sacrifices, are such
exercises as God requires, being done with those inward and holy affections;
such as faith, love, joy, etc. which are effected and maintained by the holy
spirit of grace, dwelling in those who are the subjects of those graces, by his
genuine operations, in which he communicates his own image or nature: Such are
said to be made partakers of the divine nature.

VII. THE true Church of Christ is described by the acceptance of her
sacrifices, ' Acceptable to God.' By this the living members of Christ's Church
are distinguished from all others; none besides those who belong to the true
Church are acceptable to God: The sacrifices, i. e. Spiritual sacrifices of the
true Church alone, are acceptable to God; ' But the sacrifices of the wicked
are an abomination.' Do you desire to know what acceptance means? I will
endeavor to inform you. In our text it must mean favorably or kindly to
receive; it signifies, being pleased,(...) delighted with; thus God is pleased
or (...) with his Church. This is evident in (...) he is said to see ' No spot
or wrinkle in her'* It is further evident, in that he is said ' To rejoice over
her.' That the Lord Jesus likewise takes peculiar pleasure and delight in his
Church and in the exercise of her graces, is evident from many endearing
appellations, that he gives her as My sister, my spouse, my love, my dove, my
undefiled; often repeated, I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I
have gathered my myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honey comb with my honey;
I have drank my wine with my milk. Cant. V, I. These expressions, no doubt,
have reference to the Church's graces, in which he greatly delights; that the
prayers of the Saints are pleasing and delightful to God, is evident, in that
they are compared to incense, Rev v, 8. (which was a rich perfume, used in
sacrifices by God's appointment, typifying the precious blood of Christ,)
likewise the preaching of the Gospel, by the faithful ministers of Christ, is
mentioned as most pleasing and acceptable to God; though some did not believe,
2 Cor. ii, 15. ' We are unto God,' A sweet savor of Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish; and in a word, every spiritual sacrifice is
pleasing and acceptable to God; which he will most graciously reward; this
brings me to say.

VIII. BY whose merits these spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God, '
Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.' That is, by his merits: excellent as the
Church is, and, however high in God's account, yet neither the Church nor her
sacrifices, (or religious services) are acceptable to God on account of her own
merits or excellency, but wholly by the merits of Christ; she is accounted
righteous, by his righteousness imputed; acquitted from the guilt of sin, by
the virtue of his atonement; made holy by the sanctification of his spirit;
otherwise she could not be acceptable to God. Hence it is, we are said to ' Be
made accepted in the beloved,' Ephesians. i. 6. The prayers of all Saints are said to
ascend, with the incense of Christ's merit, see Rev. viii, 3, 4. However it may
be, that some sinners expect acceptance with God, on account of their own
excellencies and virtue of their good deeds (as it is certain they have no
dependence upon, or trust in the merits of Christ) yet it may be presumed, that
the Saints, or the living members of Christ, (acting in character) have no
dependence upon any goodness or merit of their own, to recommend them to the
divine favor; nor indeed, do they so much as desire acceptance with God,
either of their persons or services, but by the merits of Christ; because in no
other way, can God, consistently with the honor of his divine, perfections,
accept of them: And as they love the divine honor, they cannot in any other
way, desire acceptance. This, in one view, is the true Church of Christ, viz.
She is alive; all the members in this Church, are living members of Christ;
they live, by Christ living in them: The life is a spiritual and divine life:
The same kind of life is in every true member of this mystical body of Christ;
as is in the divine head: From this divine head, spritual life is communicated
to every true* member in this building; the foundation and the superstructure
are alike. The essence of this life, consists in holiness or divine love. This
house (the Church) is built upon a rock, and built with living Stones;
therefore no storms can overthrow it: The blowing winds, and driving rains, how
fiercely soever they beat upon it, cannot overturn it: No storms of
persecution; no trial or temptation nor yet the gates of hell can overcome it.

Not one of these living Stones, shall ever be jostled from its foundation; not
one can ever be moved out of its place; nor one Stone separated from another,
in this building; for they are cemented together by an indissoluble union: And
the cement that holds them together, is divine love, which never fails. Charity
never fails: This is a Royal Priesthood, whose business is to offer up
spiritual sacrifices; which are holy and acceptable to God, by the merits of
Christ; by which she is distinguished from all others: None of all the human
race besides, can be compared to her in these respects; no other can offer such
sacrifices: The sacrifices of the rest of mankind, are carnal and dead; as
different as those offered by Cain and Able; but the sacrifices offered by this
Royal Priesthood, are spiritual and holy, pleasing and acceptable to God; in
which he smells a sweet savor, being perfumed with the most costly incense;
the precious merits, righteousness and atoning blood of God, Acts xx. 28. Thus
I have endeavored to give you a plain description of the true Church of
Christ; agreeable to our text.

I now proceed to the IMPROVEMENT.
Improvement.
FROM this description of the Church of Christ, it is easy to perceive, even at
the very first blush, that no unrenewed, unbelieving person, belongs to the
true Church of Christ. They have none of those distinguishing characteristics
of his true Church, as for instance, they have no spiritual or divine life or
love: They are not built upon the living Stone, Christ Jesus, the foundation of
the Church: They have no union with Christ the head: They derive no spiritual
nourishment from him: If they creep into his fold among his sheep, they come
not in by Christ, the door; but climb over some other way; and after all, they
are but goats, who leave a stinking savor behind them; and will be set on the
left hand of Christ, in the last great day of trial. Though they eat and drink
at his table, they are not nourished; and will at last be disowned by Christ:
And though they have had the faith of miracles, and have cast out devils in his
name, he will bid them depart accursed into everlasting fire: And though they
be counted among the living branches in Christ the vine, they have no vital
union with him nor do they derive any sap or nourishment from him, but are dry
and useless branches, that will be pruned off and cast into the fire. They have
no proper and indissoluble union among the living branches: If in any respect,
they may be said to be united to the Saints, it is an improper sense; the union
can be no better, nor any other, than the union of the dead and the living
together; in which case there can be no spiritual communion. Communion
signifies fellowship, a participation, or receiving together* But living and
dead branches have no fellowship; communion, or participation of vital sap from
the true vine Christ Jesus; for For what communion on has light with darkness,
or what part have believers with unbelievers. "Can the dead arise and eat the
banquet of the living?" (says Mr. J. Allen.) And can they any more, who are
spiritually dead, participate of the spiritual banquets of those spiritually
alive? Surely no. And however, graceless, unrenewed souls, may be numbered in
the Church of Christ; they are not living, but dead; and truly and really
belong not to it; for this building is made up of living Stones; not one dead
Stone is to be found in it; but of living Stones, is built a spiritual house.
This is another distinguishing character, which every graceless-person is
destitute of; for they never have the character of spiritual, but carnal, given
to them in scripture: Spiritual and carnal are very different and opposite
characters; by which Saints and sinners are distinguished. The term spiritual
is taken from the holy siprit, (as before noted) they and they only, are called
spiritual in the scripture dialect; in whom the holy spirit dwells, by his
genuine operations; in which he communicates his own nature; but not his divine
essence: The nature which he communicates is a temper or disposition of mind
like himself, i. e. the moral image of God in the soul. Now this indwelling of
the holy spirit is peculiar to the Saints. Hence the Apostle says, ' If any
man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.' That it is abundantly
evident, that no unrenewed person, can have any just pretensions to union with,
or interest in this spiritual house, the true Church. Nor can they lay any just
claim to this holy Priesthood; they are not yet set apart, (by the divine
influences of the holy spirit) to offer spiritual sacrifices; this they can
have no just pretensions to; for none but spiritual men can offer spiritual
sacrifices. They never gave up themselves, soul and body to God; nor any thing
that is their's, to be employed in his service. That unholy souls do not offer
up spiritual sacrifices, is evident; because these sacrifices are holy: And a
corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit; nor does a bitter fountain send
forth sweet waters. Men do not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles.
Even nature itself teaches, that the fruit cannot be superior to the tree that
bears it. By these similitudes our savior shows, that it is the distinguished
character of a good man, to bring forth good fruit, as he himself explains it.

Furthermore, no graceless person can justly pretend to acceptance with God:
Acceptance, as heretofore explained, signifies to be pleased or delighted, etc.
But God can be pleased, or delighted with no one out of Christ, as has been
shown; that even the Saints Are made accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. vi. 6. Upon
whose account then do Christless, graceless sinners expect acceptance? Not on
Christ, surely; for they reject him, and are not united to him; but this union
to Christ, is the ground upon which Saints are accepted.

Nor can graceless sinners, expect acceptance with a God of infinite holiness,
on their own account, without the most daring presumption and infidelity; for
if Saints, who have some degree of holiness within, ' Are made accepted only in
Christ the beloved,' in whose righteousness shall the wicked and ungodly
appear. Not in their own indeed* for that is no better than filthy rags; and
when trusted in for acceptance, is odious and detestable in the sight of God;
whose abhorence of it, is expressed, by its being A smoke in his nose, a fire
that burns all the day. His abhorence is further manifest by his fearful
declaration, concerning those that walk in the light of their own fire, and in
the sparks which they had kindled; This shall ye have at mine hand, (says the
Lord) ye shall lie down in sorrow. This is further evident from the accumulated
woes, denounced against the scribes and pharisees; Who trusted in themselves
that they were righteous and despised others. Hence it appears, that sinners
are not accepted, either by Christ's rightousness, or their own, for the
reasons mentioned above.

2d. Is the true Church so high in God's account, as you have heard; as dear as
the apple of his eye: We hence learn, how dear she should be to us! How high in
our esteem! For what God highly esteems and values, he would have as highly
esteemed and valued to* It is rational and fit, that what God has set his
greatest and everlasting love upon (in union with the glory of his own
attributes,) that his rational and intelligent creatures, should also, in like
manner, set their hearts upon: And God has set his unchangeable, and
everlasting love, upon his Church, Christ has redeemed it with his own blood*
Acts xx. 28.* So ought we to engrave her as upon the palms of our hands; and
set her as a signet upon our right arm, as a seal upon our heart. As Christ
laid down his life for the Church; so ought we ' To lay down our lives for the
brethren, says the Apostle.

We hence learn, how excellent the Church is is. This appears from her being so
greatly be loved by the sacred three: True she is imperfect in herself and in
her outward dress, according to the divine law, considered in a separate view,
(mean without her relation to Christ,) but view her as united to her husband,
Christ Jesus; and she ' Has no spot nor wrinkle, nor any such thing as says
the Apostle: She is completely adorned with the righteousness of the law; for
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, to every o^^ that believes,
Romans x. 4. There is none to (...) compared with her, especially, if we consider
her in her married state: She is excellent as the Cedars comely as ^irzah,
looking forth as the morning: Fair as the Moon; clear as the Sun; and terrible
as an Army with Banners.

As to internal excellencies; she has all those divine virtues or graces, which
are to be found in Christ her head and husband; who has ' Formed her beauties
like his own.' She has received of his fullness, and grace for grace; grace
answering to the grace that is in Christ: She is compared to a bride adorned
for her husband, Rev. xxi. 2. She is compared to the King's daughter, All
glorious within, and her garments of wrought gold; and her beloved calls her '
The fairest' among women: Her spiritual beauties are described by metaphors
borrowed almost from every thing excellent in nature. However, the shines not
altogether with reflected rays like the moon, which is a dark body, and shines
only as it is shone upon. The sun shines upon the moon, and from thence its
rays are reflected to the earth, but after all it has no light in itself; but
it is not so with the Church of Christ: True she has nothing that she did not
receive; but then, the divine excellencies that make her shine, are living
principles within, which will continue and abide forever: God dwells in his
Church, in every member of it; Christ lives in them, as you have heard. The
Holy Ghost lives and dwells in every true member of Christ's Church forever;
and is in them, a foundation of light, love, joy and every grace. They are made
partakers of the divine nature; they have the divine image in them; they are
become little suns, which shine always, yea will eternally shine; they have
light within.

4th. Is the Church so dear to God, so high in his esteem, as you have heard?
Hence see how very dangerous it is to injure this spouse of Christ, though but
in one of her members; touch her, and you touch the apple of his eye; injure
her, and his almighty arm shall soon avenge the wrong. She is injured, when she
is deprived of the ministry of the word and ordinances of the Gospel; those
breasts of consolation, by which she is refreshed, and her spiritual appetite
regaled. The word and ordinances of God, are those cloudy cysterns, from which
distill enriching and refreshing showers upon them; therefore, whoever deprives
her of these, greatly injures her.

This may be done many ways; but particularly, she may be deprived of the word
and ordinances of the Gospel, by raising persecution against her, or her
officers; either with the sword of steel, or of the tongue: This may be done by
stiring up the people against the Pastor, or against the truth, unjustly
fomenting divisions: A house divided against itself, cannot stand: Schisms and
rents in the body wounds it, divide it in the midst, and it is destroyed. True
it is, this Church of Christ can never be destroyed; yet it may be wounded and
injured; For it must needs be (says our Lord) that offenses come, but woe unto
that man, by whom the offense comes; it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and he drowned in the midst of the sea, than to
oftend one of these little ones, who believe in me. See them, the amazing
danger which they expose themselves unto, who wound and injure this spouse of
Christ.

5th. Do none belong to the true Church of Christ besides those, whom the
scripture calls ' living Stones,' in our text, compacted into one building,
cemented together by divine love: Then it is glaringly evident, that out of
this Church, there is no Salvation: No building of this kind can stand, unless
built upon the living, the chief corner Stone, Christ Jesus, in the foundation
of this building* for a house built upon the sand will fall: None but living
branches are united to the vine, so as to derive any sap or nourishment from
it; but will be pruned off, separated from that superficial and seeming union
that they have, and cast into the fire. The King of the Church has declared,
the gates of hell shall never prevail against his Church, built upon a rock,
but they will eternally prevail against every dry branch in it. Here it is easy
to see, that no unbeliever is built upon this rock; Such as are only visibly,
in appearance, or by profession, in the Church of Christ, are the children of
the kingdom that shall be cast our, Mat. viii. 12. These, (he has told us) he
will disown, as none of his, at the last day; and profess he never knew them to
be such as they professed themselves to be; notwithstanding any boasted
profession of having eat and drank in his presence; or of many great and
miraculous things done in his name, even that of casting out devils. Every
plant (says our Savior) which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be
rooted up. Christ laid down his life for the sheep: And it was the Church that
was redeemed by his blood; so that out of this Church there is no salvation.

This discourse may be further improved by way of enquiry; whether we do truly
belong to this living Church of Christ or not.

1st. The first thing to be enquired after, is, whether you have any spiritual
or divine life in you or not; for there are no lifeless members in the true
Church of Christ, as you have heard. If you are able to determine this point,
it will be sufficient to determine your character. Let me ask you? Do you
perceive any signs of life in you? Do you breathe spiritually? Do you perform
the functions of the living? If you are alive (in the sense we speak,) Christ
lives in you, the holy spirit dwells in you by his divine influences; for the
Apostle has given, us this sign, if you have this divine life, ' You have the
witness in yourselves:' Ask yourselves, whether you have the fruits of the
spirit, as faith, love, joy, meekness, patience, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, etc. I add, if you have this evidence, you have been quickened, i. e.
made spiritually alive; who before, were dead in trespasses and sins. If you be
risen with Christ, you seek those things that are above, where Christ Jesus is:
If so, your treasures are laid up in heaven, and your hearts are there also: If
you are new born, you will desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may
grow thereby; you will hunger and thirst after righteousness; you will long
after perfect conformity to God: If you be a living member in Christ, God will
be the object of your supreme love and desires: Your souls will pant after God;
they will thirst for God, even for the living God: your meditations of him will
be sweet in the night watches: You will make his word your study and delight,
the man of your council, your guide: According to this rule, you will endeavor
to form your hearts and lives. Again enquire: Have you had a real, sensible
discovery of the ravishing beauty of Christ, the excellency of his person and
character; so that he has been very precious to you, high in your account, your
joy, your trust, your foundation upon which you build your righteousness, your
atonement, the chiefest among ten thousands, and altogether lovely, your all
and in all. Again enquire: Is sin your burden? your grief, your abhorence? And
do you abhor yourself, and repent as in dust in ashes.' Can you sincerely
answer these queries, and honestly apply all these rules of trial? If so, then
are ye Christ's disciples indeed, members of his true Church.

And to you this discourse administers sweet consolation; for the eternal God,
with all his fullness is yours forever, your unfailing portion. God is your
everlasting father and unchangeable friend. The enjoyment of this God, is
consummate happiness and endless bliss: This divine consolation is greater than
can be expressed! How refreshing, that the eternal God has made you his son and
heir; 'heir of all things.' If sons, then heirs (says the Apostle) heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Christ. O, the inexpressible riches contained in this
inheritance; how comfortable the thoughts, that Jesus Christ, with all his
unsearchable riches is yours! that Christ Jesus, in whom dwells all the fullness
of the Godhead, with all his saving benefits, is yours! How comfortable to
reflect, that you have a wedding garment, a beautiful and spotless robe, even
the righteousness of Christ, a garment fit to be worn in the palace of the King
of heaven, a garment which shines with equal brightness, if not superior to
those worn by angels: How comfortable this; when you reflect how naked you once
were; not having clothing to hide your shame, but now adorned with a gorgeous
robe, which will never fade, nor be soiled in the least, nor be at all the
worse for wearing! How comfortable to reflect upon that near relation you have
to the son of God; That you are his brother, sister or mother, his body his
member; his flesh and his Bones, his bride his wife. And that this relation
will never cease; that the Almighty husband will never disown you; that nothing
can separate you from his love: neither angel nor spirit; life nor death; nor
any other creature: this your union to Christ being indissoluble! How
comfortable to reflect that all the promises are yours in Christ, being first
made with him; that in him they are, yea and in him amen; your bread, upon
which you may most sweetly feed: Promises of all good* temporal, spiritual and
eternal. Eternal life and glory* and, no good thing will be withhold from them
that love him! How comfortable to think, that the holy spirit of promise is
given to you, and dwells in you, and shall abide with you forever: This truly
is the sum of all gospel blessings: He is the spirit of grace and consolation,
and his consolations are neither small nor few. He is the comforter, the spirit
of truth that will abide with you forever. The consolations are so numerous,
which flow from this union to Christ; that there is no end of them: Even a
large volume would not contain them all, if particularly mentioned. I shall
therefore leave you to enlarge in your contemplations upon them, 'While life
and being lasts;' and shall conclude with a word of exhortation, to those of a
different character; I mean the Christless and unbelieving, to come and
participate of this happiness.

Come precious souls, and be incorporated into this spiritual building: Be
united to Christ the living Stone by faith: Be ye living Stones also; living
branches in Christ the true vine: And for motive consider, this is the way, the
only way to inexpressible, inconceiveable happiness; which has no end; the
road to eternal bliss: The way to every kind of felicity: For out of this
Church there is no salvation as you have heard: But if out of this Church, you
are in the high road to perdition, your way leads down to death and misery:
Suffer me then, precious souls, with all the bowels of tenderness and
compassion to persuade you to be happy: Shall we suppose you are in love with
death, with your own misery and ruin? Can human nature be sunk below the
principles of natural reason and self preservation? If otherwise, why will you
not be persuaded to accept of happiness suitable, both in kind and duration, to
your being? I beseech you by all the joys of heaven, and the torments of the
damned, that you come into this spiritual house; you have no safety elsewhere;
no not for a moment. I beseech you by the unparellelled love of God the father,
who gave his only begotten son to purchase your ransom: I beseech you by the
immense love of a dying Savior; by his agony in the garden; his bloody sweat,
his strong cries and tears, while he bore the heavy load of sin and guilt which
was laid upon him; by his dying groans and precious blood, which streamed from
his sacred side, while he was suspended on that cursed engine of cruelty, the
cross; that you will consent to be happy by believing in Jesus, and thereby
becoming one of his living members, yea, I beseech you by every thing
desirable, every thing dear to you, by the eternal happiness of your precious
and immortal souls, that you join this happy society without delay, in the
mid^t of which God dwells. Secure an inheritance in this delightful city, the
New Jerusalem, the true Church of Christ; in the midst of which, the Lord God
and the lamb is the light thereof; where streams of delight and drivers of
uninterrupted, unabated pleasure forever roll.

Why sleep ye, precious souls, in this your market day? Rouse every power,
awake every passion; and now make sure an inheritance among the Saints in
light. Now is the time to make yourselves forever; a precious opportunity is
now in your hands; But boast not of tomorrow; for ye know not what a day may
bring forth, tomorrow may be too late; make no delay, least you fail, the
season be past, and the door of mercy be so ever shut, and God swear in his
wrath, ye shall never enter into his rest. Then, Oh then, you will gnaw your
tongues for anguish, and gnash your teeth with pain and horror inexpressible!
Oh! can you bear the thoughts of being shut out from all good, and plunged into
the depths of misery? Oh flee, (...), from wrath to come, and the the Lord
mercy on you, to the praise of his glorious grace in Christ Jesus, Amen and
Amen.

FINIS.

