Evening's Improvement, SHOWING, The NECESSITY of beholding the LAMB of GOD.

To which is added, A DIALOGUE, ENTITLED, The KIND MASTER and DUTIFUL SERVANT.

Written by JUPITER HAMMON, a Negro Man belonging to Mr. John Lloyd, of Queen's
Village, on Long Island, now in Hartford.

HARTFORD: Printed for the Author, by the Assistance of his Friends.

An Evening's Improvement, etc.
JOHN I.29. -- Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.


IN the beginning of this chapter John bears testimony, that Jesus is the Son of
God. Verse 1st. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and
the word was God. This is that Lamb of God which I now invite you to behold. My
Brethren, we are to behold the Son of God as our Lord and giver of life* for he
was made flesh and dwelt among us, verse 14 of the context, and here he is
declared to be the Son of God full of grace and truth. And here in the first
place I mean to show the necessity of beholding the Lamb of God in the sense of
the text. 2d. Endeavor to show when we are said to behold the Son of God in
the sense of the text. 3^ I shall show when we may be said not to behold the
Lamb of God as we should do. In the 4th place I shall endeavor to show how far
we may be mistaken in beholding the Lamb of God. In the 5th place I shall
endeavor to rectify these mistakes.

My brethren, since I wrote my Winter Piece it has been requested that I would
write something more for the advantage of my friends, by my superiors,
gentlemen, whose judgment I depend on, and by my friends in general, I have had
an invitation to give a public exhortation; but did not think it my duty at
that time; but now, my brethren, by divine assistance, I shall endeavor to show
the necessity of beholding the Lamb of God. My brethren we must behold the Lamb
of God as taking away the sin of the world, as in our text, and it is necessary
that we behold the Lamb of God as our King: ah! as the King immortal, eternal,
invisible, as the only Son of God, for he has declared him, as in the 8th
verse of the context, no man has seen God at any time: The only begotten Son,
which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. My brethren, let us
strive to behold the Lamb of God, with faith and repentance; to come weary and
heavy laden with our sin, for they have made us unworthy of the mercy of the
Lamb of God; therefore, we see how necessary it is that we behold the Lamb of
God, in the sense of the text, that is, in a spritual manner, not having on our
own righteousness; but we must be clothed upon, with the unspotted robes of
the Lamb of God; we must work out our salvation with fear and trembling, always
abounding in the works of the Lord; we must remember the vows of our baptism,
which is to follow the Lamb of God, John Chap. I.33. speaking of baptism, he
says, upon whom thou shall see the spirit descending and remaining on him, the
same is he which baptiseth with the Holy Ghost, and verse 34, and I saw, and
bare record, that this is the Son of God, verse 35, again the next day after,
John stood and two of his disciples, verse 36, and looking upon Jesus, as he
walked, and says, behold the Lamb of God, verse 37, and the two disciples
heard him speak and they followed Jesus. Thus, my dear brethren, we are to
follow the Lamb of God, at all times, whether in prosperity or adversity,
knowing that all things work together for good, to them that love God, or as in
Romans viii.28. now let us manifest that we love God, by a holy life; let us
strive to glorify and magnify the name of the most high God. It is necessary
that we behold the Lamb of God, by taking heed to our ways, that we sin not
with our tongues, Psalm xxxix.1. Here, my brethren, we have the exhortation of
David, who beheld the Lamb of God with faith and love, for he cries out with a
most humble petition, O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger; neither chastise me
in thy hot displeasure. Psalm vi.1. and now, my brethren, have we not great
reason to cry to the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world, that
he may have mercy on us and forgive us our sins, and that he would give us his
holy spirit, that we may have such hungerings and thirsting as may be
acceptable in the sight of God, for as the heart pants for the water brook,
so should our souls pant for the living God. Psalm xlii.1. and now, my
brethren, we must behold the law of God, as is expressed, John I.51. And he says
unto him, verily, verily I say unto you, hereafter you shall see heaven open,
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man. This is a
representation of the great day, when the Lamb of God shall appear. Matt.
xxiv.30, and then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, and then
shall the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming
in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. Here my brethren, we have
life and death set before us, for if we mourn with the tribes for our sins,
which have made us unworthy of the least favor in the sight of God, then he
will have mercy and he will give us his holy spirit; then we shall have hearts
to pray to the Lamb of God, as David did when he was made sensible of his
imperfections, then he cried to the Lamb of God, have mercy upon me O God,
Psalm. lxi.1, according to thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions. This my brethren is the
language of the penitent, for he has a desire that his heart may be turned
from darkness to light, from sin to holiness; this none can do but God; for the
carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God,
neither can be. Here we see that we must behold the Lamb of God as calling to
us in the most tender and compassionate manner, Matt. xxiii.37, saying, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. As much
as if he had said, O ye wicked and rebellious people have I not given my word
as a rule of life; have I not sent the ministers of the gospel to teach you,
and you will not receive the doctrine of the gospel, which is faith and
repentance, I tell you nay; but except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish,
Luke xiii.4.

And now my dear brethren, have we repented of our sins? have we not neglected
to attend divine service? Or if we have attended to the word of God, have we
been sincere? For God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit and truth, John iv.24. When we have heard the word of God sounding in
our ears, inviting of us to behold the Lamb of God; O my dear brethren, have we
as it were laid up these words in our hearts, or have we not been like the
stony ground hearers? Matt. xii.20. But he that received the seed into stony
places, the same is he that hears the word, and anon with joy receives it.
Ver. 21. Yet has not root in himself, but dureth for a while; for when
tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is
offended. This is the effect of a hard heart. There is such a depravity in our
natures that we are not willing to suffer any reproach that may be cast on us
for the sake of our religion; this my brethren is because we have not the love
of God shed abroad in our hearts; but our hearts are set too much on the
pleasures of this life, forgetting that they are passing away; but the children
of God are led by the spirit of God. Romans viii.12, Therefore brethren we are
debtors, not to the flesh to live after the flesh. Ver. 13, For if ye live
after the flesh ye shall die; but if through the spirit do mortify the deeds of
the body, ye shall live. Ver. 14, For as many are led by the spirit of God,
they are the sons of God. Here my brethren we see that it is our indispensible
duty to conform to the will of God in all things, not having our hearts set on
the pleasures of this life; but we must prepare for death, our great and last
change. For we are sinners by nature, and are adding thereunto by evil
practices; for man is prone to evil as the sparks to fly upward; and there is
nothing short of the divine power of the most high God can turn our hearts to
see the living and true God; and now we ought to behold the Lamb of God, as it
is expressed in Isaiah vii.14, A virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and
shall call his name Emanuel. This my brethren is the Son of God, who died to
save us guilty sinners, and it is only by the mercy of the blessed Jesus we can
be saved: Therefore, let us cast off self-dependence, and rely on a crucified
Savior, whose blood was shed for all that came unto him by faith and
repentance; this we cannot do of ourselves, but we must be found in the use
means; therefore we ought to come as David did, Psalm. li.1, Have mercy on me O
God, according to thy loving kindness. This my brethren is the duty of all
flesh to come to the divine fountain, and to confess our sins before the most
high God; for if we say we have no sin we deceive ourselves and the truth is
not in us; but if we confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our
transgressions. And now my brethren, seeing I have had an invitation to write
something more to encourage my dear fellow servants and brethren, Africans, in
the knowledge of the Christian religion, I must beg your patience, for I mean
to use the utmost brevity that so important a subject will admit of; and now my
brethren, we have, as I observed in the foregoing part of this discourse, life
and death set before us, for we are invited to come and* accept of Christ on
the terms of the gospel. Isaiah xliv.1, O every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters, and he that has no money, come ye buy and eat, yea, come ye buy
wine and milk, without money and without price. Here is life, and if we search
our hearts, and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord he will forgive us
our sins and blot out our transgressions, Lamen. iii.40. But if we continue in
our sins, having our hearts set on the pleasures of this life, forgetting that
we must give an account for the deeds done in the body. Psalm. lxii.12, Also
unto the Lord belongs mercy, for he rendereth to every man according to his
works. Here we see that we should behold the Lamb of God by a holy life. Psalm.
vii.11, God judges the righteous and is angry with the wicked every day, ver.
12, if he turn not. He will whet his sword, he has bent his bow and made it
ready. Here we see that the wrath of God abides on the unbelievers and
unconverted sinner. And now my brethren, should not a sense of these things
make us cry out in the apostle's language, 'Men and brethren what shall we do
to be saved?' We must be found in the use of means, and pray that God would be
pleased to rain down a rain of righteousness into our souls; then we shall
behold the Lamb of God as taking away the sins of the world. Let us my brethren
examine ourselves whether we have had a saving change wrought in our hearts,
and have been brought to bow to the divine sovereignty of a crucified Savior;
have we been brought to behold the Lamb of God, by obeying the precepts of
Isaiah, and turning from evil and learning to do well. Isaiah i.16, Wash ye,
make you clean; put away the evil of your doing from before mine eyes; cease to
do evil, learn to do well. Here we have the admonition of the prophet Isaiah,
who was inspired with the knowledge of divine things, so that he calls heaven
and earth to witness against the wicked and rebellious sinner. Isaiah i.2, Here
O heavens and give ear O earth; for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished up
children, and they have rebelled against me. Is not this the case? Have we not
been going astray like lost sheep? Luke xv.6, Have we not great reason to lay
our hands on our mouths and our mouths in the dust, and come upon the bended
knees of our souls and beg for mercy as the publican did, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner, Luke viii.13. This my dear brethren should be the
language of our conversation; to have a life void of offense toward God and
toward man. Have we beheld the Lamb of God, by taking up our cross, denying
ourselves, and following the blessed Jesus. Matt. xvi.24, Then said Jesus unto
his disciples, if any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself, take up
his cross and follow me. Here we see that we should behold the Lamb of God as
our only Savior and mighty Redeemer, and we are to take up our cross and
follow the Lamb of God at all times, not to murmur at the hand of Divine
Providence; and we have our example set before us, Luke xxii.41, 42, And he was
withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and he kneeled down and prayed,
saying, my Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me, nevertheless
not my will but thine be done. We should behold the Lamb of God as coming in
the clouds of heaven with great power and glory, whom our heavenly Father has
declared to be his only Son. Matt. xvii.5, And while he yet spoke, behold a
bright cloud overshadowed them; and behold a voice out of the cloud which said,
this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Should not a sense
of these things inflame our hearts with fear and love to God; knowing that
there is no other name given by which we can be saved, but by the name of
Jesus; let us behold the Lamb of God as having power to make the blind to see,
the dumb to speak, and the lame to walk, and even to raise the dead: But it may
be objected and said by those that have had the advantage of studying, are we
to expect miracles at this day? These things were done to confirm that Jesus
was the Son of God, and to free us from the burden of types and ceremonies of
the Jewish law; and this by way of instruction, which I desire to receive with
an humble spirit. Others may object and say, what can we expect from an
unlearned Ethiopian? And this by way of reflection. To this I answer, Pray Sir,
give me leave to ask this question, Does not the raising of Lazarus give us a
sight of our sinful natures? John xi.12, 13, And when he had thus spoken, he
said with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth. Ver. 4, And he that was dead came
forth, bound hand and foot with grave clothes, and his head was bound with a
napkin; Jesus says unto them, loose him and let him go. Is not this a simile
of our deadness by nature? And there is nothing short of the power of the most
high God can raise us to life. Sirs, I know we are not to expect miracles at
this day; but hear the words of our Savior Matt. xvi.16, And Simon Peter
answered and said, thou art Christ the Son of the living God. Ver. 17, And
Jesus answered and said unto him, blessed art thou Simon Barjona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. Sirs,
this may suffice to prove that it is by grace we are saved, and that not of
ourselves, is the gift of God. But my brethren, for whom this discourse is
designed, I am now in the second place to show when we are said to behold the
Lamb of God in the sense of the text: When we are brought humbly to confess our
sins, before the most high God, and are calling on our souls and all that is
within us to bless his holy name; this is the duty of all flesh, to praise God
for his unmerited mercy in giving his Son to save lost man, who by the fall of
Adam became guilty in the sight of God. Romans v.8, But God commands his love
toward us, in that while we were sinners Christ died for us. Here we are to
behold the Lamb of God as suffering for our sins, and it is only by the
precious blood of Christ we can be saved, when we are made sensible of our own
imperfections and are desirous to love and fear God; this we cannot do of
ourselves, for this is the work of God's holy spirit. John vi.64, And he said,
therefore said I unto you that no man can come unto me except it were given
unto him of my Father. Here we see to behold the Lamb of God, in the sense of
the text, as the gift of God; we should come as David did, saying, O Lord
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy hot displeasure, Psalm.
v^.1. And we should put our whole trust in the Lord at all times; we should
strive to live a religious life, to avoid the very appearance of evil, least we
incur the wrath of God. Psalm. xi.6, Upon the wicked he shall rain showers of
fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion of their
cup. Here we see the unhappy state of the sinner; for he is not only led away
by that subtle adversary the devil, but he has the word of God pronounced
against him. Matt. xxv.40, Then shall he say unto them on the left hand depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
Here my brethren we are to behold the Lamb of God as being crucified for us.
Matt. xxiii.20, Pilate therefore willing to release Jesus spoke again to them.
ver. 22, But they cried, saying crucify him, crucify him. Here we see the
effect of sin; the blood of Christ was shed for all that came unto him by faith
and repentance. O my brethren, when those things have a proper influence on our
minds, by the power of the most high God, to say as David did, Psalm. ciii.1,
Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Then we may be said
to behold the Lamb of God in the sense of the text: And we are to behold the
Lamb of God as it is expressed in Matt. xvii.22, And while they abode in
Galillee Jesus said unto them, the Son of Man shall be betrayed into the hands
of men; and ver. 23, And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall rise
again. And now should not a sense of these things have a tendency to make us
humble in the sight of God, and we should see the place and situation of Christ
suffering. Luke xxii. 33, And when they were come to the place called Calvary,
there they crucified him, and the malefactors one on the right hand and the
other on the left. Here we see the boundless riches of free grace; he is
numbered with transgressors, whose blood speaks better things than the blood of
Abel; for the blood of Abel calls for justice on the sinner, but the blood of
Christ calls for mercy. Luke xxiii.34, Then said Jesus, Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do. Here we have the example of our Savior, that
we should forgive our enemies, and pray that God would forgive them also, or
how shall we say the Lord's Prayer, 'Forgive us our tresspasses as we forgive
them that tresspass against us.' Now when we are enabled to do these things, as
we should do them, then may we be said to behold the Lamb of God in the sense
of the text. And now my dear brethren, I am to remind you of a most melancholy
scene of Providence; it has pleased the most high God, in his wise providence,
to permit a cruel and unnatural war to be commenced; let us examine ourselves
whether we have not been the cause of this heavy judgment; have we been truly
thankful for mercies bestowed? And have we been humbled by afflictions? For
neither mercies nor afflictions proceed from the dust, but they are the works
of our heavenly Father; for it may be that when the tender mercies of God will
not allure us, afflictions may drive us to the divine fountain. Let us now cast
an eye back for a few years and consider how many hundreds of our nation and
how many thousands of other nations have been sent out of time into a
never-ending eternity, by the force of the cannon and by the point of the
sword. Have we not great cause to think this is the just deserving of our sins;
for this is the word of God. Isaiah iii.11, Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill
with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him. Here we see that we
ought to pray, that God may hasten the time when the people shall beat their
swords into plough-shares and their spears into pruning hooks, and nations
shall learn war no more.

And now my dear brethren have we not great reason to be thankful that God in
the time of his judgments has remembered mercy, so that we have the preaching
of the gospel and the use of our bibles, which is the greatest of all mercies;
and if after all these advantages we continue in our sins, have we not the
greatest reason to fear the judgments of God will be fulfilled on us. He that
being often reproved hardneth his neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy. Have we not great reason to praise God that he is giving us
food and raiment, and to say as David did, Psalm. cxxxvii.1, O give thanks unto
the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever. And now my brethren, when these
things make ua more humble and more holy, then we may be said to behold the
Lamb of God in the sense of the text. And now, in the third place, I am to show
when we may be said not to behold the Lamb of God in the sense of the text:
When we are negligent to attend the word of God, and unnecessarily, or are
living in any known sin, either of omission or commission, or when we have
heard the word peached to us and have not improved that talent put into our
hands by a holy life, then we may be said not to behold the Lamb of God in the
sense of the text. And now my brethren, I am in the fourth place, to show how
in some things we may be mistaken in beholding the Lamb of God, while we are
flattering ourselves with the hopes of salvation on the most slight foundation,
because we live in a Christian land and attend to divine service; these things
are good in themselves; but there must be a saving change wrought in our
hearts, and we must become a new in Christ Jesus; we must not live after the
flesh, but after the spirit, for as many as are led by the spirit of God are
the sons of God, Romans viii.14. and we are to pray that God would keep us from
all evil, especially the evil of sin. Bishop Bevrage, in his second Resolution,
speaking of sin, he says, "For as God is the center of all good, so sin is the
fountain of all evil in the world, all strife and contention, ignominy and
disgrace." Read a little further, and he goes on to protest against sin, "I
resolve to hate sin (says he) wherever I find it, whether in myself or in
others, in the best of my friends as well as in the worst of my enemies." Here
we see my brethren that if we commit any willful sin, either of omission or
commission, we become the servants of sin, and are deceiving ourselves, for the
apostle has told us, that the wages of sin is death, Romans vi.22, 23; but now
being made free from sin, and are become the servants of God ye have your
fruits into holiness, and in the end eternal life; for the wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord We are
to behold the Lamb of God by reading the scriptures, and we must believe that
he has power to give everlasting life. John vi.47, Verily, verily I say unto
you, he that believes on me has everlasting life. Do we my brethren believe
in the blessed Jesus as we ought? Are we not going the broad way to utter
destruction? Are we not leaving the blessed Jesus, who has the bread of life
and is that bread? John vi.48, I am the bread of life. Here we see that the
blessed Jesus has power to give eternal life to all that come unto him by
faith and repentance; and we see that he is calling to us as he did to his
disciples, saying, Will thou go away also; for this is the language of the
scriptures, John vi.67, 68, Then Simon answered him, Lord to whom shall we go?
Thou have the words of eternal life. And we are my brethren to behold the Lamb
of God as being the door of eternal life, for this he has declared in his word
to us. John x.9, I am the door, by me if any man enter he shall be saved, and
shall go in and out and find pasture. But it is very plain my brethren that if
we come in our sins God will not hear us, but if we come and worship him in
spirit and in truth he will have mercy on us. John ix.31, 32, Now we know that
God hears not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of God and does his
will, him he neareth. My dear brethren as I am drawing to a conclusion, let me
press on you to prepare for death, that great and irresistible king of terrors,
by a holy life, and make the word of God the rule of your life; but it may be
objected we do not understand the word of God. Mr. Burkit, a great divine of
our church says, in the scriptures there is depths that an elephant may swim,
and shoals that a lamb may wade. Therefore we must take the plainest text as a
key to us. And now my brethren I am in the fifth place to endeavor to rectify
any mistake we may labor under, when we are taking on us the form of
Godliness, without the power thereof, then we cannot be said to behold the Lamb
of God in the sense of the text. We must pray earnestly to God for his holy
Spirit to guide us in the way to eternal life; this none can do but God. Let us
my brethren lay up treasure in heaven, where neither moth does corrupt nor
thieves break through and steal. Matt. vi.20 -- 23, Seek first the kingdom of
God and his righteousness and all these things shall be added unto you. And now
my dear brethren, we must pray earnestly to God for the influence of his holy
spirit to guide us through this howling wilderness and sea of trouble to the
mansions of glory, and we should pray that God would give us grace to love and
to fear him, for if we love God, black as we be, and despised as we are, God
will love us. Acts x.34, Then Peter opened his mouth and said, of a truth I
perceive that God has no respect to persons. Ver. 35, In every nation he that
fears him is accepted of him. Psalm. xxxiv.8, O taste and see that the Lord
is good, and blessed is the man that trusts in him. Ver. 15, The eyes of the
Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry. Let us my dear
brethren remember that the time is hastening when we shall appear before the
Lamb of God to give an account for the deeds done in the body, when we shall be
stumbling over the dark mountains of death looking into an endless eternity. O
that we may be of that happy number that shall stand with their lamps burning.
Matt. xxv.7, Then all those virgins rose and trimmed their lamps. Come now my
brethren, let us examine ourselves whether we have had a saving change wrought
in our hearts, and have been brought to bow to the divine sovereignty of the
most high God, and to flee to the armies of Jesus, for he is the author of our
peace, and the finisher of our faith. Heb. xii.2, Looking to Jesus the author
and finisher of our faith. Come now my brethren, we are one flesh and bone, let
us serve the one living and true God. Come let us behold the Lamb of God by an
eye of faith, for without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. xi.5, For
faith my brethren is of the things not seen. Let us my brethren strive by the
grace of God to become new creatures; for if any man be in Christ he is a new
creature, 2. Cor. iv.17. Let us come to the divine fountain, by constant
prayer. Psalm. iv.1, Give ear to my words O Lord, consider my meditations, ver.
2, 3. Let us improve our talents by a holy life, striving to make our calling
and election sure, for now is the accepted time; behold now is the day of
salvation. 2. Cor. vi.2. Let us pray that God give us of the waters that the
woman of Samaria drank. John xiv.19, But whosoever shall drink of the water I
shall give him shall never thirst, but the water I shall give him shall be in
him a well of water springing up into everlasting life. O my dear brethren we
should be brought humbly to submit to the will of God at all times, and to say
God be merciful to us sinners. Acts iii.19, Repent and be converted that your
sins may be blotted out. My dear brethren we are many of us seeking for a
temporal freedom, and I pray that God would grant your desire; if we are slaves
it is by the permission of God; if we are free it must be by the power of the
most high God; be not discouraged, but cheerfully perform the duties of the
day, sensible that the same power that created the heavens and the earth and
causes the greater light to rule the day and the lesser to rule the night, can
cause a universal freedom; and I pray God may give you grace to seek that
freedom which tends to everlasting life. John viii.32, And ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. Ver. 36, If the Son shall make you
free, then you shall be free indeed. But as I am advanced to the age of
seventy-one years, I do not desire temporal freedom for myself. My brethren, if
we desire to be a happy people, we must be a holy people, and endeavor to keep
the commandments of God, and we should pray that God would come and knock at
the door of our hearts by the power of his holy spirit, and give us a
stedfastness in the merits of Christ, and we are to believe in Christ for
eternal salvation. Mr. Stoddard, a great divine, says, in speaking of appearing
in the righteousness of Christ, when men believe it is part of God's covenant,
to make them continue to believe. Job. vi.12. And again he says, since God
has promised life unto all that believe in this righteousness, it must needs
be safe to appear before God in this righteousness. Jer. iii.22, Return ye
backsliding children and I will heal your your backslidings; behold we come
unto thee for thou art the Lord our God. My dear brethren let not your hearts
be set too much on the pleasures of this life; for if it were possible for one
man to gain a thousand freedoms, and had not an interest in the merits of
Christ, where must all the advantage be; for what would it profit a man if he
should gain the whole world and loose his own soul, Matt. xvi.26. My brethren
we know not how soon God may send the cold hand of death to summon us out of
this life to a never-ending eternity, there to appear before the judgment seat
of Christ. 2 Cor. v.10, For all must appear before the judgment seat of Christ.
And now I conclude with a few words -- let me tell you my dear brethren, that
in a few days we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, there to
give an account for the deeds done in the body. Let us my brethren strive to be
so prepared for death, by the grace of God, that when the time shall come when
we are shaking off the shackles of this life, and are passing through the
valley of the shadow of death. O may we then be enabled to say, come Lord Jesus
come quickly, for thou art the Lamb of God, in whom my soul delights: Then my
dear brethren all those which have repented of their sins shall hear this
voice, come unto me. Matt. xxv.34, Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand; come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. But if we do not repent of our sins we must
hear this voice, Matt. xxv.41, Then shall he say also unto them on his left
hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and
his angels. Then will our souls waft away into an endless eternity, and our
bodies lodged in the cold and silent grave, there to remain till Christ's
second coming. My brethren, we believe the word of God, we must believe this. 1
Cor. xiii.41, Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall
be changed in a moment in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for the
trumpet shall sound and the dead shall be raised, ver. 35, For this corruptable
must put on incorruption, and this mortals must put on immortality. And now my
brethren, let me persuade you to seek the Lord. Isaiah lv.6, Seek the Lord
while he may be found, and call on him while he is near; ver. 7, Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to our God and he will abundantly
pardon. Therefore not be contented with the form of godliness without the power
thereof. AMEN.

A DIALOGUE, entitled, The KIND MASTER and the DUTIFUL SERVANT, as follows:
Composed by JUPITER HAMMON.
MASTER. 1.
COME my servant, follow me,
According to thy place;
And surely God will be with thee,
And send the heavenly grace.

SERVANT. 2.
Dear Master, I will follow thee,
According to thy word,
And pray that God may be with me,
And save thee in the Lord.

MASTER. 3.
My Servant, lovely is the Lord,
And blessed those servants be,
That truly love his holy word,
And thus will follow me.

SERVANT. 4.
Dear Master, that is my whole delight,
Thy pleasure for to do;
As far as grace and truth's in sight,
Thus far I Will surely go.

MASTER. 5.
My Servant, grace proceeds from God,
And truth should be with thee;
Whence ever you find it in his word,
Thus far come follow me.

SERVANT, 6.
Dear Master, now without control,
I quickly follow thee;
And pray that God would bless thy soul,
His heavenly place to see.

MASTER. 7.
My Servant, Heaven is high above,
Yea, higher than the sky:
I pray that God would grant his love,
Come follow me thereby.

SERVANT. 8.
Dear Master, now I Will follow thee,
And trust upon the Lord;
The only safety that I see,
Is Jesus's holy word*

MASTER. 9.
My Servant, follow Jesus now,
Our great victorious King;
Who governs all both high and low,
And searches things within.

SERVANT. 10.
Dear Master I will follow thee,
When praying to our King;
It is the Lamb I plainly see,
Invites the sinner in.
11.
My Servant, we are sinners all,
But follow after grace;
I pray that God would bless thy soul,
And fill thy heart with grace.

SERVANT. 12.
Dear Master I shall follow then,
The voice of my great King;
As standing on some distant land,
Inviting sinners in.

MASTER. 13.
My Servant we must all appear,
And follow then our King;
For sure he will stand where sinners are,
To take true converts in.

SERVANT. 14.
Dear Master, now if Jesus calls,
And sends his summons in;
We'll follow saints and angels all,
And come unto our King.

MASTER. 15.
My Servant now come pray to God,
Consider well his call;
Strive to obey his holy word,
That Christ may love us all.

A LINE on the present WAR. SERVANT. 16.
Dear Master, now it is a time,
A time of great distress;
We'll follow after things divine,
And pray for happiness.

MASTER. 17.
Then will the happy day appear,
That virtue shall increase;
Lay up the sword and drop the spear,
And nations seek for peace.

SERVANT. 18.
Then shall we see the happy end,
Though still in some distress;
That distant foes shall act like friends,
And leave their wickedness.

MASTER. 19.
We pray that God would give us grace,
And make us humble too;
Let every nation seek for peace,
And virtue make a show.

SERVANT. 20.
Then we shall see the happy day,
That virtue is in power;
Each holy act shall have its sway,
Extend from shore to shore.

MASTER. 21.
This is the work of God's own hand,
We see by precepts given;
To relieve distress and save the land,
Must be the power of heaven.

SERVANT. 22.
Now glory be unto our God,
Let every nation sing;
Strive to obey his holy word,
That Christ may take them in.

MASTER. 23.
Where endless joys shall never cease,
Blessed Angels constant sing;
The glory of their God increase,
Hallelujahs to their King.

SERVANT. 24.
Thus the Dialogue shall end,
Strive to obey the word;
When every nation act like friends,
Shall be the sons of God.
25.
Believe me now my Christian friends,
Believe your friend called HAMMON:
You cannot to your God attend,
And serve the God of Mammon.
26.
If God is pleased by his own hand
To relieve distresses here;
And grant a peace throughout the the land,
'Twill be a happy year.
27.
It Is God alone can give us peace;
It Is not the power of man:
When virtuous power shall increase,
'Twill beautify the land.
28.
Then shall we rejoice and sing
By power of virtues word,
Come sweet Jesus, heavenly King,
Thou art the Son of God.
29.
When virtue comes in bright array,
Discovers every sin;
We see the dangers of the day,
And fly unto our King.
30.
Now glory be unto our God,
All praise be justly given;
Let every soul obey his word,
And seek the joys of Heaven.

FINIS.

