EXPLANATORY NOTES UPON THE NEW TESTAMENT.

BY JOHN WESLEY, M. A. Late Fellow of Lincoln-College, OXFORD.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY CHARLES CIST: SOLD BY JOHN DICKINS, NO. 43,
FOURTH-STREET, NEAR THE CORNER OF RACE-STREET. M DCC XCI.

NOTES ON THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.
THIS Book, in which St. Luke records the Actions of the Apostles, particularly
of St. Peter and St. Paul whose Companion in Travel he was) is as it were the
Center between the Golpels and the Epistles. It contains, after a very brief
Recap^t (...) of the Evangelical History, a Contian^tion of the History of
(...), the Event of his Predictions, and a Kind of Supplement to what ^e had
before spoken to his Disciples, by the Holy (...) now given unto them. It
contains also the Seeds, and first Stamina of all those Things, which are
enlarged upon in the Epistles.

The Gospels treat of Christ the Head. The Acts show, That the same Things
b^^al his Body; which is ani^^ted by his Spirit, persecuted by the World,
defended and exalted by GOD.

In this Book is shown the Christian Doctrine, and the Method of applying it to
Jews, Heathens, and Believers; that is, to those, who are to be converted, and
those who are converted: The Hindrances of it in particular Men, in several
Kinds of men, in different Ranks and Nations: The Propagation of the Gospel,
and that grand Revolution among both Jews and Heathens: The Victory thereof, in
spite of all Opposition, from all the Power, Malice, and Wisdom of the whole
World, spreading from one Chamber into Temples. Houses, Streets, Markets;
Fields, Inns, Prisons, Camps, Courts; Chariots, Ships, Villages, Cities,
^lands: To Jews, Heathens, Magistrates, Generals, Soldiers, Eunuchs, Captives,
Slaves, Women, Children, Sailors: To Athens, and at length to Rome.

The Parts of it are Seven,

1. Pentecost, with its Ant^ceden^s, C. i. ii. 2. Trans^to^s with the Jews, in
Jerusalem, in all Judea, and in Sam^ria, C. iii -- ix. 3. Transactions at
Cesarea, and the Reception of the Gentiles, C. x, xi. 4. The first Course of
Barnabas and Paul among the Gentiles, C. xiii, xiv. 5. The (...) to^ and
Council at Jerusalem, concerning (...) of ^he Gentiles, C. xv. 6. The Second
C^urse of St. Paul, C. xvi -- xix. 7. His Third, as far as Rome, C. xix --
xxviii.
THE ACTS.
I.
them together, he commanded them, not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait
for the promise of the Father, which, says he, ye have heard from me. For John
indeed baptized with water;

Mat. ^ 2. Mark iii. 14. Luke vi. 13.
And when they were come in, the ^on of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Jude
the brother of James tarried.

And in these days, Psahn xli. 9.
scripture must needs have been fuinlied, which the Holy Ghost spoke before by
the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who was guide to them that apprehended
Jesus. Psalm lxix. 2^.
Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and, Psalm cix.
8.
His bish^prick let another take.

V. 1. The former treatise -- In that important Season, which reached ^^^m the
Resurre^ti^^ of Christ to his Ascension, the former treatise (...) this beg^s:
This defer bing the Acts of the Holy Ghost (...) the Ap^^tles (...) that does
the Acts of Jesus Christ. Of all things -- In a summary manner: Which Jesus
began to do -- until the day -- That is, O^ all Thing, which Jesus did, from
the Beginning till that Day.

V. 2. After^aving given commandment -- In the 3d. Verse, St. Lube expresses in
general Terms, what Christ said to his Aposiles during those forty days. But in
the 4th and following Verses, he declares what be (...) on the Day of his
Aseension. He had brought his former A^ount down to that Day. And from that Day
begins the Acts of the Apo^les.

V. 3. Being (...) by them forty days -- That is, Many Times during, that
Spare. And s^eaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God^. Which was
the S^m of all his Discourses with them, before his Passion also.

V. 4. Wait for the prom^se of the Father, which ye have heard from me^ When He
was with them a little before, as it is recorded. Luke xxiv. 49.

V. 5. Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost -- And so are all true
Believers, to the End of the World. But the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost also are here pronused.

V. 6. Do thou at this time -- At the Time thou now speak est of? Not many
days hence? Restore the kingdom to Israe^? -- They still seemed to dream of an
outward, tempor^^ Kingdom, in which the Jews should have Dominion over all
Nations. It seems, they come in a Body, having before concerted the Design, to
a^k, When this Kingdom would come?

V. 7. The times or the seasons -- Times, in the Language of the Scripture,
denote a longer; Seasons, a shorter space. Which the Father has put in his own
power -- To be revealed, when and to whom it pleases Him.

V. 8. But ye shall receive power -- and shall be witnesses to me -- That is,
Ye shall be empowered to witness my Gospel, both by your Preaching and
Suffering.

V. 12. A sabbath day's journey -- The Jews generally fix this to two thousand
Cubits, which is not a Mile.

V. 13. They went up into the upper-room -- The Upper-rooms, so frequently
(...) in Scripture, were Chambers in the inghest Part of the House, set apart
by the Jew for pr^ate Prayer. T^ese, on account of their being so retired and
convenient, the Apostles now ^^d for all the Offices o^ Religion.

V. 14. His (...) -- His near Kin^inen, who, for some Time, did not believe:
(...) seems, not 'till near his Death.

V. 15. The number of persons to^ther -- Who were together in the Upper (...);
were an ^undred and twenty -- But He had und^ ^btedly many more in other
Places* Of whom more than five hundred saw him (...) after his Res^trrection, 1
Cor. xv. 6.

V. 18. This man ^ur^hased a field with the reward of iniquity -- Thy is, (...)
was pure^ased with the Reward of his Iniquity; tho^ very possibly Juda^ night
de^^n the Purchase. And falling down (...) face -- It seems, the Rope broke
before, or as he died.

V. 19. In their own (...) -- This Expression, that is, The field of blo^d, St.
Luke seems to have (...) to the Words of St. Peter, for the (...) of Th^oph^^us
and other Readers, who did not understand H^w.

V. 20. His (...) -- Th^^ is h^s Apostle^ip.

V. 21. All the time that the Lord Jesus was going in and out -- That is,
Conversing ^liarly. Over us -- As our Master.

V. 22. To be a witness with us of his resurrection -- And of the Cir^^mstan^^s
which preceded and followed it.

V. 23. And they appointed two -- So far the Faithful could go by consulting
together, but no farther. Therefore here commenced the proper Use of the Lot,
whereby a Matter of Importance, which c^nt^t be d^termined by any ordinary
Method, is committed to the Divine De^sion.

V. 25. Fell -- By his trans^ression -- Sometime before his Death: To go to his
own place. That which b^ Crimes had deserved and which he had chosen for
himself, far from the other Apostles, in the Region of Death.

II.
where they were sitting. God?

Then Peter standing up with the eleven, but the third hour of the day. Joel
ii. 28.
And it shall come to pass in the last days, faith God, I will pour out of my
Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and
your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: And in
those days I will pour out of my Spirit upon my servants and upon my handmaids,
day, be saved. Psalm xvi. 8.
I have seen the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I
may not be moved. and brethren, I may say to you freely of the patriarch David,
that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is among us to this day. and
knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, That of the fruit Psalm lxxxix.
4, etc.
of his loins one should sit on his throne, this, spoke of the resurrection of
Christ, That his soul was not left in Hades, Psalm cx. 1.
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,

And hearing this, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus, for
the remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. to them
that day about three thousand souls. And they continued steadfast in the
teaching of the apostles, and divided them to all,

V. 1. At the Pentecost of S^nai in the Old Testament, and the Pentecost of
Jerusalem in the New, were the two grand Manifestations of GOD, the Leg^d and
the Evangel^^al: The one from the Mo^tain, and the other from Heaven; that
^^ible, and the mereiful one. They were all with one lord in ^^^p^ -- So here
was a Con^un ^on of Company, Minds, and Place; the whole hundred and twenty
b^ing presem

V. 2. And suddealy there was a sound from heaven -- So will the Son of (...)
to J^^^^ment. And it filled all the house -- That is, all that Part of the
Temple, where they were sitting.

V. 3. And there appeared distinct tongnes, as of fire -- That is, small Flames
of Fire. This is all which the Phrase, tongues of fire, incans in the Language
of the Seventy Yet it might intimate GOD's touching their Tongues as it were
(together with their Hearts) with Divine Fire: His giving them such Words as
were active and penetrating, even as flaming Fire.

V. 4. And they began to speak with other tongnes -- The Miracle was not in the
Ears of the Hearers (as some have unaccountably supposed) but in the Month of
the Speakers And this Fam^ly praising GOD together, with the tongues of all the
World, was an Earnest that the whole World should in due Time praise GOD in
their various Tongues. As the Spirit gave them utterance -- Moses the Type of
the Law, was of a slow Tongue. But the Gospel speaks with a fiery and flaming
one.

V. 5. And there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews -- Gathered from all Parts, by
the peculiar Providence of GOD.

V. 6. The multitude came together and were confounded -- The Motions of their
Mines were swist and various.

V. 9. Judea -- The Dialect of which greatly differed from that of Galilee As^a
-- The Country strictly so called.

V. 10. Roman sojourners -- Born at Rome, but now living at Jerusalem. These
seem to have come to Jerusalem, after those who are above-men^oned. All of them
were partly Jews by Birth, and partly Pros^lytes.

V. 11. Cretans -- One Island seems to be mentioned for all. The wonderful
works of God -- Probably those which related to the Miracles, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, together with the Effusion of his Spirit,
as a Fulfillment of his Promises, and the glorious Dispensations of Gospel Grace.

V. 12. They were all amazed -- All the devout Men.

V. 13. But others mocking -- The World begins with mocking, thence proceeds to
cavilling, chapter iv. 7; to threats, ver. 17; to imprisoning, chapter v. 18; to blows,
ver. 40; to slaughter, chapter vii. 58. These Mockers appear to have been some of
the Natives of Judea, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem (who understood only the
Dialect of the Country) by the Apostle's immediately directing his Discourse to
them in the next Verse. They are full of sweet wine -- So the Greek Word
properly signifies: There was no New Wine so early in the Year as Pentecost.
Thus natural Men are wont to ascribe supernatural Things to mere natural
Causes: And many Times as impudently and unskilfully as in the present Case.

V. 14. Then Peter standing up -- All the Gestures, all the Words of Peter show
the utmost Sobriety: ^fted up his voice -- With Cheerfulness and Boldness. And
said to them -- This Discourse has three Parts, each of which (ver. 14, 22,
29.) begins with the same Appellation, Men: Only to the last Part he prefixes
with more Familiarity, the additional Word Brethren. Men of Judea -- That is,
Ye that were born in Judea. St. Peter spoke in Hebrew, which they all
understood.

V. 15. It is but the third hour of the day -- That is Nine in the Morning. And
on the soleran Festivals, the Jews rarely eat or drank any Thing till Noon.

V. 16. But this is that which was spoken of by the prophet -- But there is
another and better Way of accounting for this.

V. 17. The times of the Messiah are frequently called The last Days, the
Gospel being the last Dispensation of Divine Grace. I will pour out of my
Spirit -- Not on the Day of Pentecost only, upon all flesh -- On Persons of
every Age, Sex, and Rank. And your young men shall see visions -- In young Men
the outward Senses are most vigorous, and the bodily Strength is entir^,
whereby they are best qualisied to sustain the Shock which usually attends the
Visions of GOD. In old mea the internal Senses are most vigorous, su^ed to
Divine Dreams. Not that the Old are wholly excluded from the former, nor the
Young from the lat^er.

V. 18. And noon my servants -- On those who are literally in a State of
Servitude.

V. 19. And I will ^ew prodicies in heaven above, and signs on earth be^^ath --
Great Revelations of Grace are usually attended with great Judgments on those
who reject it. In heaven -- Treated of, ver. 20. On earth -- Described in this
Verse. Such signs were thosementioned ver. 22, before the Passion of Christ;
which are so mentioned as to include also those at the very Time of the Passion
and Resurrection, at the Destruction of Jerusalem, and at the End of the World.

Terrible indeed were those Prodigies in particular, which preceded the
Destr^ction of Jerusalem: Such as the ^laming sword hanging over the City, and
the fiery Comet, pointing down upon it for a Year; the F^ht that shone upon the
Temple and the Altar in the Night, as if it had been Noonday; the opening of
the great and heavy G^te of the Temple without Hands; the Voice heard from the
most Holy Place, Let us depart he^e; the Admonition of Jesus the Son of Anauns,
crying for seven Years together, Woe, Woe, Woe; the Vision of contending Armies in
the Air, and of Intrenchments thrown up against a City there represented; the
terrible Thunders and Lightnings, and dreadful Earthquakes, which every one
confidered as portending some great Evil: All which, through the singular
Pr^vidence of GOD, are particularly recorded by Josephus. Blood -- War and
Slaughter. Fire -- Burnings of Houses and Towns, involving all in Clouds of
Smoke.

V. 20. The moon shall be turned into blood -- A bloody Color: Before the day
of the Lord -- Eminently, the last Day; though not excluding any other Day or
Season, wherein the LORD shall manifest his Glory, in taking vengeance of his
adversaries.

V. 21. But -- whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord -- This Expression
implies the whole of Religion, and particularly Prayer ^ttered in Faith; shall
be saved -- From all those Plagues; from Sin and Hell.

V. 23. Him, being delivered by the determinate council and foreknowledge of
God -- The Apostle here anticipates an Objection, Why did GOD suffer such a
Person to be so treated? Did He not know what wicked men intended to do. And
had He not Power to prevent it? Yea, He knew all that those wicke^ Men intended
to do. And He had Power to blast all their Designs in a Moment. But He did not
exert that Power, because He so loved the World! Because it was the determinate
Council of his Love, to redeem Mankind from eternal Death, by the Death of his
only-begotten Son.

V. 24. Having loosed the pains of death -- The Word properly m^ans, the Pains
of a Woman in Travail. As it was not possible that he should be held under it
-- Because the Scripture must needs be fulfilled.

V. 27. Thon wilt not leave my soul in Hades -- The invisible World. But it
does not appear, that ever our LORD went into Hell. His Soul, when it was
separated from the Body, did not go thither, but to Paradise. ( Luke xxiii.
43.) The Meaning is, Thou will not leave my Soul in its separate State, nor
suffer my Body to be corrupted

V. 28. Thou have made known to me the ways of life. -- That is, Thou have
raised me from the Dead. Thou will fill me with joy by thy countenance -- When
I ascend to thy Right Hand.

V. 29. The Patriarch -- A more honorable Title than King.

V. 32. He foreseeing this, spoke of the resurrection of Christ -- St. Peter
argues thus, It Is plain, David did not speak this of himself. Therefore He
spoke of Christ's Rising. But how does that Promise of a Kingdom imply his
Resurrection? Because He did not receive it before He died, and because his
Kingdom was to endure forever. (2 Samuel vii. 13.)

V. 33. Being exalted by the right hand of God -- By the right hand, that is,
the mighty Power of God, our LORD was exalted at his Ascension to GOD's right
Hand in Heaven.

V. 34. Sit thou on my right hand -- In this and the following Verse is an
Allusion to two ancient Customs; one, to the highest Honor that used to be
paid to Persons by placing them on the Right Hand, as Solomon did Bathsheba,
when sitting on his Throne; (1 Kings ii. 19.) and the other, to the Custom of
Conquerors, who used to tread on the Necks of their vanquished Enemies, as a
Token of their entire Victory and Triumph over them.

V. 35. Until I make thine enemies thy footstool -- This Text is here quoted
with the greatest Address, as suggesting in the Words of David, their great
prophetic Monarch, how certain their own Ruin must be, if they went on to
oppose Christ.

V. 36. Lord -- Jesus after his Exaltation is constantly meant by this Word in
the New Testament, unless sometimes where it occurs, in a Text quoted from the
Old Testament.

V. 37. They said to the apostles, Brethren -- They did not style them so
before.

V. 38. Repent -- And hereby return to GOD: Be baptized -- Believing in the
name of Jesus -- And ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost -- See the
Three-One GOD clearly proved. See e. xxvi. 20. The gift of the Holy Ghost does
not mean in this Place, the Power of speaking with Tongues. For the promise of
this was not given to all that were afar off, in distant Ages and Nations: But
rather the constant Fruits of Faith, even Righteousness, and Peace and Joy in
the Holy Ghost. Whomsoever the Lord our God shall call -- (Whether they are
Jews or Gentiles) By his Word and by his Spirit: And who are not disobedient to
the heavenly Calling. But it is observable St. Peter did not yet understand the
very Words he spoke.

V. 40. And with many other words did he testify and exhort -- In such an
accepted Time we should add Line upon Line, and not leave off, till the Thing
is done. Save yourselves from this perverse generation -- Many of whom were
probably mocking still.

V. 41. And there were added -- To the hundred and twenty.

V. 42. And they continued steadfast -- So their daily Church Communion
consisted in these four Particulars, 1. Hearing the Word, 2. Having all Things
common, 3. Receiving the LORD's Supper, 4. Prayer.

Ye different Sects, who all declare,
Lo here is Christ, and Christ is there;
Your stronger Proofs divinely give,
And show me, Where the Christians live!
V. 43. And fear came upon every soul -- Of those who did not join with them;
whereby Persecution was prevented, till it was needful for them.

V. 45. And sold their possessions -- Their Lands and Houses; and goods --
Their Movables; And parted them to all, as any one had need -- To say the
Christians did this, only till the Destruction of Jerusalem, is not true; for
many did it long after. Not that there was any positive Command for so doing:
it needed not; for Love constrained them. It was a natural Fruit of that Love
wherewith each Member of the Community loved every other as his own Soul. And
if the whole Christian Church had continued in this Spirit, this Usage must
have continued through all Ages. To affirm therefore that Cryis^ did not design
it should continue, is neither more nor less than to affirm, that Christ did
not design this Measure of Love should continue. I see no Proof of this.

V. 46. Centinuing daily -- treaking the bread -- In the LORD's Supper, as did
many Churches for some Ages. They partook of their food with ^^^dness and
singleness of heart -- They carried the same happy and holy Temper through all
their common Action. Eating and working with the same Spirit, wherewith they
prayed and received the LORD's Supper.

V. 47. The Lord added daily such as were saved -- From their Sins; from the
Guilt and Power of them.

III.
hour. And a certain man, lame from his mother's womb, was carried, whom they
laid daily at the gate of the temple, called Beautiful, to ask alms of them
that were entering into the temple, to receive something of them. him up, and
immediately his feet and anklebones were strengthened,

And as he held Peter and John, it, answered the people, Ye men of Israel, why
marvel ye at this? Or why do ye six your eyes on us as if by our own power or
piety we had made this man to walk? him. God has raised from the dead, whereof
we are witnesses. it, as did also your rulers. Deuteronomy. xviii. 15.
The Lord your God shall raise you up a prophet of your brethren, like unto me;
him shall ye hear in all things, Genesis xii. 3.
And in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

V. 1. The ninth hour -- The Jews di^ided the Time from Sunrise to Sunset
into twelve Hours; which were consequently of unequal Length at different Times
of the year, as the Days were longer or shorter. The third Hour therefore was
Nine in the Morning; the ninth Three in the Afternoon; but not exactly. For the
third was the middle Space between Sunrise and Noon; which, if the Sun rose at
five, (the earliest Hour of its rising in that Climate) was half an Hour after
Eight: If at Seven (the latest Hour of its rising there) was half an Hour after
Nine. The chief Hours of Prayer were the third and ninth; at which Seasons the
Morning and Evening Sacrifices were offered, and Incense (a Kind of Emblem
representing Prayer) burnt on the golden Altar.

V. 2. At the Gate of the Temple called Beautiful. This Gate was added by Herod
the Great, between the Court of the Gentiles and that of Israel. It was thirty
Cubits high, and fifteen broad, and made of Corinthian Brass, more pompous in
its Workmanship and Splendour than those that were covered with Silver and Gold.

V. 6. Then said Peter, Silver and gold have I none -- How unlike his supposed
Successor! Can the Bishop of Rome either say or do the same?

V. 12. Peter' answered the people -- Who were running together, and enquiring
into the Circumstances of the Fact.

V. 13. The God of our fathers -- This was wisely introduced in the Beginning
of his Discourse, that it might appear they taught no new Religion,
inconsistent with that of Moses, and were far from having the least Design to
divert their Regards from the GOD of Israel -- Has glorified his Son -- By
this Miracle, whom ye delivered up -- When GOD had given him to you, and when
ye ought to have received Him as a most precious Treasure, and to have
preserved. Him with all your Power.

V. 14. Ye renounced the holy one -- Whom GOD had marked out a such; and the
just one -- Even in the Judgment of Pilate.

V. 16. His name -- Himself: His Power and Love. The faith which is by him --
Of which He is the Giver, as well as the Object.

V. 17. And now, brethren -- A Word full of Courtesy and Compassion, I know --
He speaks to their Heart, that through Ignorance ye did it -- Which lessened,
though it could not take away the Guilt. As did also your rulers -- The Prejudice
lying from the Authority of the chief Priests and Elders, He here removes, but
with great Tenderness. He does not call them our but your Rulers. For as the
Jewish Dispensation ceased at the Death of Christ, consequently so did the
Authority of its Rulers.

V. 18. But God -- Who was not ignorant, permitted this which He had foretold,
to bring good out of it.

V. 19. Be converted -- Be turned from Sin and Satan unto GOD. See c. xxvi. 20.
But this Term so common in modern Writings, very rarely occurs in Scripture:
Perhaps not once in the sense we now use it, for an entire Change from Vice to
Holiness. That the times of refreshing -- Wherein GOD largely bestows his
refreshing Grace, may come -- To you also. To others they will assuredly come,
whether ye repent or no.

V. 20. And he may send -- The Apostles generally speak of our LORD's second
Coming, as being just at hand. Who was before appointed -- Before the
Foundation of the World.

V. 21. Till the times of the restitution of all things -- The Apostle here
comprizes at once, the whole Course of the Times of the New Testament, between
our LORD's Ascension and his Coming in Glory. The most eminent of these are the
Apostolic Age, and that of the spotless Church, which will consist of all the
Jews and Gentiles united, after all Persecutions and Apostacies are at an End.

V. 22. The Lord shall raise you up a prophet like unto me -- And that, in many
Particulars. Moses instituted the Jewish Church: Christ instituted the
Christian. With the prophesying of Moses was soon joined the Effect, the
Deliverance of Israel from Egypt: With the prophesying of Christ that grand
Effect, the Deliverance of his People from Sin and Death. Those who could not
bear the Voice of GOD, yet desired to hear that of Moses. Much more do those
who are wearied with the Law, desire to hear the Voice of Christ. Moses spoke
to the People all, and only those Things, which GOD had commanded him: So did
Christ. (...) tho He was like Moses, yet was he infinitely superior to him, in
Person, as well as in Office.

V. 23. Every soul who will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from
among the people -- One cannot imagine a more masterly Address than this, to
warn the Jews of the dreadful Consequence of their Infidelity, in the very
Words of their favorite Prophet, out of a pretended Zeal for whom they
rejected Christ.

V. 24. These days -- The Days of the Messiah.

V. 25. Ye are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant -- That is, Heirs
of the Prophecies. To you properly, as the first Heirs, belong the Prophecies
and the Covenant.

V. 26. To bless you, by turning you from your iniquities -- Which is the great
Gospel-Blessing.

IV.
the resurrection from the dead. whole. Psalm cxviii. 22.
This is the stone which was set at naught by you builders, which is become the
head of the corner.

And seeing the boldness of Peter and John, it. is manifest to all that dwell
at Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it. obey you rather than God, them go, finding
nothing how they might punish them, because of the people; for they all
glorified God for that which was done.

And being let go, it, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and
said, Lord, thou art the God who made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all
that in them is: Who said by the mouth of thy servant David, Psalm ii. 1.
Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? name of thy holy
child Jesus.

And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart,

And Joses, a Levite, it, and brought the money, and laid it at the feet of the
apostles.

V. 1. And as they were speaking to the people, the priests -- came upon them
-- So wisely did GOD order, that they should first bear a full Testimony to the
Truth in the Temple, and then in the Great Council; to which they could have
had no Access, had they not been brought before it as Criminals.

V. 2. The priests being grieved -- That the name of Jesus was preached to the
People; especially they were offended at the Doctrine of his Resurrection; for
as they had put Him to Death, his rising again proved Him to be the just one,
and so brought his blood upon their heads. The Priests were grieved, lest their
Office and Temple Services should decline, and Christianity take root, through
the Preaching of the Apostles, and their Power of working Miracles: The captain
of the temple -- Being concerned to prevent all Sedition and Disorder, the
Sadducees -- Being displeased, at the overturning of all their Doctrines,
particularly with Regard to the Resurrection.

V. 4. The number of the men -- Beside Women and Children, were about five
thousand -- So many did our LORD now feed at once with the Bread from Heaven!

V. 5. Rulers, and Elders, and Scribes -- Who were eminent for Power, for
Wisdom, and for Learning.

V. 6. Annas, ^ho had been the high priest, and Caiaphas, who was so then.

V. 7. By what name -- By what Authority, have ye done this? -- They seem to
speak an iguously on Purpose.

V. 8. Then P^er ^illed with the Holy Ghost -- That Moment. GOD moves his
Instruments, not when they please, but just when He sees it needful. Ye rulers
-- He gives them the Honor due to their Office.

V. 10. Be it known to you all -- I^obably the Herald of GOD proclaimed this
with a loud Voice. Whom God has raised from the dead -- They knew in their own
Conscience^ that it was so. And though they had hi^^d the Soldiers to tell (...)
most senseless and incredible Tale to the contrary, ( Mat. xxv^^ 12 -- 15.) yet
it is observable, they did not, so far as we can learn, dare to plead it before
Peter and John.

V. 12. There is no other name whereby we must be saved -- The Apostle uses a
beautiful Gradation, from the temporal Deliverance which had been wrought for
the poor Cripple, by the Power of Christ, to that of a much nobler and more
important Kind, which is wrought by Christ for impotent and sinful Souls. He
therein follows the admirable Custom of his great LORD and Master, who
continually took Occasion from earthly to speak of spiritual Things.

V. 13. Illiterate and uneducated men -- Even by such Men (though not by such
only) has GOD in all Ages caused his Word to be preached before the World.

V. 17. Yet that it spread no farther -- For they look upon it as a mere
Gangrene. So do all the World upon genuine Christianity. Let us severely
threaten them -- Great Men, ye do nothing. They have a greater than you to flee
to.

V. 18. They charged them, Not to speak -- Privately; nor teach -- Publicly.

V. 19. Whether it be just to obey you rather than God, judge ye -- Was it not
by the same Spirit, that Socrates, when they were condemning him to Death, for
teaching the People, said, O ye Athenians, I embrace and love you: but I will
obey GOD rather than you. And if you would spare my Life, on Condition I should
cease to teach my Fellow-citizens, I would die a thousand Times rather than
accept the Proposal.

V. 21. They all glorified God -- So much wiser were the People than those who
were over them!

V. 24. The Sense is, LORD, thou have all Power. And thy Word is fulfilled. Men
do rage against thee. But it is in vain.

V. 27. Whom thou have anointed -- To be King of Israel.

V. 28. The Sense is, But they could do no more than thou wast pleased to
permit, according to thy determinate counsel, to save Mankind by the Sufferings
of thy Son. And what was needful for this End, thou did before determine to
permit to be done.

V. 30. Thou stretchest forth thy hand -- Exertest thy Power.

V. 31. They were all filled -- Afresh; and spoke the word with boldness -- So
their Petition was granted.

V. 32. And the multitude of them that believed -- Every individual Person,
were of one heart and one soul -- Their Love, their Hopes, their Passions
joined: And not so much as one -- In so great a Multitude: This was a necessary
Consequence of that Union of Heart; said that aught of the things which he had
was his own -- It is impossible any one should, while all were of one soul. So
long as that truly Christian Love continued, they could not but have all things
common.

V. 33. And great grace -- A large Measure of the inward Power of the Holy
Ghost, was upon them all -- Directing all their Thoughts, Words, and Actions.

V. 34. For neither was there any one among them that wanted -- We may observe,
this is added as the Proof that Great Grace was upon them all. And it was the
immediate, necessary Consequence of it: Yea, and must be, to the End of the
World. In all Ages and Nations, the same Cause, the same Degree of Grace, could
not but in like Circumstances, produce the same Effect. For whosoever were
possessors of houses or lands sold them -- Not that there was any particular
Command for this: But there was great Grace and great Love; of which this was
the natural Fruit.

V. 35. And distribution was made -- At first, by the Apostles themselves;
afterward by them whom they appointed.

V. 36. A son of consolation -- Not only on account of his so largely assisting
the Poor with his Fortune; but also of those peculiar Gifts of the Spirit,
whereby he was so well qualified, both to comfort and to exhort.

V. 37. Having an estate -- Probably of a considerable Value. It is not
unlikely, that it was in C^prus. Being a Levite, he had no portion, no distinct
Inheritance, in Israel.

V.
part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and, bringing a certain
part, laid it at the feet of the apostles. part of the price of the land? While
it remained, And the young men rising up, him out, are at the door,

And many signs and wonders were wrought among the people by the hands of the
apostles: them on beds and couches, that even the shadow of Peter coming by,
might overshadow some of them. bringing persons sick and troubled by unclean
spirits, and they were all healed.

But the high priest arising, them, we found no man within. them before the
council. blood of this man upon us. other apostles answering said, We ought to
obey God rather than men. him on a tree. to the heart, and took counsel to slay
them. were scattered and came to nothing. and take heed lest ye be found even
fighting against God. them, they charged them not to speak in the name of
Jesus,

V. 1. But a certain man named Ananias -- It is certain, not a Believer; for
all that believed were of one heart and of one soul^ Probably, not baptized;
but intending now to offer himself for baptism.

V. 2. And bringing a certain part -- As if it had been the whole: Perhaps,
saying it was so.

V. 3. To lie to the Holy Ghost -- Who is in us. And to keep back -- Here was
the first Instance of it. This was the first Attempt to bring Propriety of
Goods into the Christian Church.

V. 4. While it remained, did it not remain thine? -- It is true, Whosoever
among the Christians (not one excepted) had houses or lands sold them, and laid
the price at the feet of the Apostles. But it was in his own Choice, to be a
Christian or not: And consequently either to sell his Land, or keep it. And
when it was sold, was it not in thy power? -- For it does not appear, that he
professed himself a Christian, when he sold it. Why have thou conceived this
thing in thy heart? -- So profanely to dissemble on so solemn an Occasion? Thou
have not lied to men only, but to God also. Hence the Godhead of the Holy Ghost
evidently appears: Since lying to Him (ver. 3.) is lying to GOD.

V. 5. And Ananias fell down and expired -- And this Severity was not only
just, considering that Complication of Vainglory, Covetousness. Fraud, and
Impiety, which this Action contained; but it was also wise and precious, as it
would effectually deter any others from following his Example. It was likewise
a convincing Proof of the upright Conduct of the Apostles, in managing the Sums
with which they were entrusted: And in general of their Divine Mission. For
none can imagine that Peter would have had the Assurance to pronounce, and much
less the Power to execute such a Sentence, if he had been guilty himself of a
Fraud of the same kind; or had been belying the Holy Ghost in the whole of his
Pretensions to be under his immediate Direction.

V. 7. About the space of three hours -- How precious a Space! The Woman had a
longer Time for Repentance.

V. 8. If ye sold the land for so much -- Naming the Sum.

V. 11. The church -- This is the first Time it is mentioned: And here is a
native Specimen of a New Testament Church; which is, a Company of Men, called
by the Gospel, grafted into Christ by Baptism, animated by Love, united by all
kind of Fellowship, and disciplined by the Death of Ananias and Sapphira.

V. 12. And they were all -- All the Believers. None of the rest -- No
Formalists or Hypoerites, durst join themselves -- In an outward Show only,
like Ananias and Sapp^ira.

V. 14. But so much the more were true Believers added, because Unbelievers
kept at a Distance.

V. 17. The high priest -- and the sect of the Sadducees -- A goodly Company
for the Priest! He and these Deniers of any Angel or Resurrection, were filled
with zeal -- Angry, bitter, persecuting Zeal.

V. 20. The words of this -- That is, these Words of Life: Words which thew the
Way to Life everlasting.

V. 23. We found the prison shut -- The Angel probably had shut the Doors again.

V. 24. They doubted what this should be -- They were even at their Wits End.
The World in persecuting the Children of GOD, entangle themselves in numberless
Difficulties.

V. 28. Did not we strictly command you, Not to teach? -- See the poor Cunning
of the Enemies of the Gospel. They make Laws and Interdicts at their Pleasure,
which those who obey GOD cannot but break: And then take Occasion thereby, to
censure and punish the Innocent, as guilty. (...) would bring the Blood of this
Man upon us -- An artful and invidious World. The Apostles did not desire to
accuse any Man. They simply declared the naked Truth.

V. 29. Then Peter, in the Name of all the Apostles, said, -- He does not now
give them the Titles of Honor, which he did before, (chapter iv. 8.) but enters
directly upon the Subject, and justifies what he had done. This is, as it were,
a Continuation of that Discourse, but with an Increase of Severity.

V. 30. Has raised up Jesus -- Of the Seed of David, according to the Promises
made to our Fathers.

V. 31. Him has God exalted -- From the Grave to Heaven; To give repentance --
whereby Jesus is received as a Prince; and forgiveness of sins -- whereby he is
received as a Savior. Hen^e some infer, that Repentance and Faith are as mere
Gifts as Remission of Sins, Not so: for Man co-operates in the former, but not
in the latter. GOD alone forgives Sins.

V. 32. And also the Holy Ghost -- A much greater Witness.

V. 34. But a certain Pharisee -- And as such believing the Resurrection of the
Dead; a doctor, or Teacher, of the law -- That is, a Scribe, and indeed one of
the highest Rank: Had in honor by all the people -- Except the Sadducees;
rising up in the council -- So GOD can raise Defenders of his Servants,
whenever and wheresoever He pleases.

V. 36. Before these days -- He prudently mentions the Facts first, and then
makes the Inference.

V. 38. Let them alone -- In a Cause, which is manifestly good, we ^ould
immediately join. In a Cause, on the other Hand, which is manifestly evil, we
should immediately oppose. But in a si^^den, new, doubtful Occurrence, this
Advice is eminently useful. If this counse! or this work -- He seems to correct
Himself, as if it were some sudden Work, rather than a Counsel or Design. And
so it was. For the Apostles had no Counsel. Plan, or Design of their own; but
were mere Instruments in the Hand of GOD, working just as He led them from Day
to Day.

V. 41. Rejoicing -- to suffer sheme -- This is a sure Mark of the Truth; Joy
in Affliction, such as is true, deep, pure.

VI.
daily ministration. their hands upon them.

And Stephen, that of the Libertines, and Cy^enians, and Alexandrians, and of
them of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen. him, dragged him away, and
brought him to the council,

V. 1. There arose a murmuring -- Here was the first Breach made, on those who
were before of one heart, and of one soul. Partiality crept in unawares on
some; and Murmuring on others. Ah LORD! how ^ort a Tune did pure, genuine,
undefiled Christianity remain in the World! O the Depth! How unsearchable are
thy Counsels! Mavelous are thy Ways, O King of Saints! The He^enists were
Jews born out of Pal^s^ine. They were so called, because they used the Greek as
their Mother Tongue.

In this Partiality of the Hebrews, and Murmuring of the Hellenists, were the
Seeds of a General Persecution town. Did GOD ever in any Age or Country, will
drew his restraining Providence, and let loose the World upon the Christians,
till there was a Cause among themselves? Is not an Open, General Persecution,
always both Penal and Medicinal? A Punishment of those that will not accept of
milder Reproofs, as well as a Medicine to heal their Sickness? And at the same
time a Means both of purifying and strengthening those whose Heart is still
right with GOD?

V. 2. It is not right that we should leave the word of God and serve tables --
In the first Church, the primary Business of Apostiles, Evangelists, and
Bishops, was to preach the word of God; the secondary, to take a kind of
paternal Care (^he Church being then like a Family) for the Food, especially of
the Poor, the Strangers, and the Widows. Afterward, the Deacons of both S^xes,
were constituted for this latter Business. And whatever Time they had to spare
from this, they employed in Works of Spiri^al Merey. But their proper Office
was, to take Case of the Poor. And when some of them afterward pre^ched the
Gospel, they did this not by Virtue of their Deaconship, but of another
Commission, that of Evangelists, which they probably received, not before, but
after they were appointed Deacons. And it is not unlikely, that others were
chosen Deacons, or Stewards, in their Room, when any of these commenced
Evangel^sis.

V. 3. Of good report -- That there may be no Room to suspect the a of
Partiality or Injustice. Full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom -- For it is not a
light Matter, to dispense even the Temporal Goods of the Church. To do even
this well, a large Measure both of the Gifts and Grace of GOD is requisite.
Whom we will set over this business -- It would have been happy for the Church,
had its Ordinary Ministers in every Age, taken the same Care to act in Concert
with the People committed to their Charge, which the Apostles themselves,
Extraordinary as their Office was, did on this and other Occasions.

V. 4. We will constantly attend to prayer, and to the ministry of the word --
This is doubtless the proper Business of a Christian Bishop: to speak to GOD,
in Prayer; to Men, in preaching his Word, as an Ambassador for Christ.

V. 5. And they chose -- It seems seven Hellenists, as their Names show. And
Nicolas a proselyte -- To whom the Proselytes would the more readily apply.

V. 7. And the word of God grew -- The Hindrances being removed.

V. 9. There arose certain of the synagogue which is called -- It was one and
the same Synagogue which consisted of these several Nations. Saul of Cilicia
was doubtless a Member of it; whence it is not at all improbable, That Gamaliel
presided over it. Libertines -- So they were styled, whose Fathers were once
Slaves, and afterward made free. This was the Case of many Jews, who had been
taken captive by the Romans.

V. 14. We have heard him say -- So they might. But yet the Consequence they
drew would not follow.

V. 15. As the face of an Angel -- Covered with supernatural Luster. They
reckoned his preaching of Jesus to be the Christ, was destroying Moses and the
Law; and GOD bears Witness to him, with the same Glory as he did to Moses, when
He gave the Law by him.

VII.
Then said the high priest, Are these things so? And he said, Men, brethren,
and fathers, hearken. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, Genesis
xii. ^.
being in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran, And said to him, thy kindred,
and come into a land, which I will show thee. Genesis xv. 13.
his seed should sojourn in a strange land, (and they will inslave them and
treat them evil) four hundred years. Genesis xvii. 10.
And he gave him the covenant of circumcision, Genesis xxxvii. 28.
And the patriarchs moved with envy, time, Joseph was made known to his
brethren, and Joseph's kindred was made known to Pharaoh. his father Jacob and
all his kindred, seventyfive souls. the father of Shechem. Exodus i. 7.
And when the time of the promise which God had sworn to Abraham drew near, the
people increased and multiplied in Egypt, Till another king arose, male infants
to be exposed, Exodus ii. 2.
In which time Moses was born, and was exceeding beautiful, who was nursed
three months in his father's house. And when he was exposed, him up, it not.
Exodus iii. 2.
And forty years being expired, the angel of the Lord appeared to him, in the
wilderness, in a flame of fire in a bush. it, wondered at the sight. But as he
drew near to behold it, am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses trembled, place where thou
stand is holy ground. to be a ruler and a deliverer, by the hand of the
angel, who appeared to him in the bush.

This is that Moses who said to the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. xviii. 15.
The Lord your God will raise you up, out of your brethren, Exodus xix. 3.
This is he that was in the church in the wilderness, with the Angel who spoke
to him in mount Sinai and with our fathers; who received the living oracles to
give to us: Exodus xxxii. 1.
Whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their hearts
turned back into Egypt, to go before us; for this Moses, who brought us out of
the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him. Amos v. 25.
Have ye offered victims and sacrifices to me, for forty years in the
wilderness, O house of Israel? Josh. iii. 14.
Which also our fathers having received, brought in Joshua into the possession
of the Gentiles, whom God drove out from the face of our fathers, Isa^ah lxvi.
1.
Heaven is my throne, and earth my footstool. is the place of my rest? Has not
my hand made all these things? do ye. Which of the prophets have not your
fathers persecuted? And they have slain them that foretold the coming of the
Just One, of whom ye have now been the betrayers and murderers: it. And hearing
these things they were cut to the heart, and gnashed their teeth upon him. the
Holy Ghost, looking steadfastly up to heaven, saw the Glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the righthand of God: him out of the city, stoned him: And the
witnesses laid down their clothes at the feet of a young man,

V. 2. And he said -- St. Stephen had been accused of Blasphemy against Moses,
and even against GOD; and of speaking against the ^ple and the Law, threatening
that Jesus would destroy the one, (...) change the other. In answer to this
accusation, rehearsing as ^re the Articles of his historical Creed, he speaks
of GOD with ^high Reverence, and a grateful Sense of a long Series of Acts of
Goodness to the Israelites, and of Moses with great Respect, on account of his
important and honorable Employments under GOD: Of the Temple with Regard, as
being built to the Honor of God; yet not with such Superstition as the Jews;
putting them in Mind, That no Temple could comprehend GOD -- And he was going
on, no Doubt, when he was interrupted by their Clamor, to speak to the last
Point, The Destruction of the Temple, and the Change of the Law by Christ. Men,
brethren, and fathers, hearken -- The Sum of his Discourse is this; I
acknowledge the Glory of GOD revealed to the Fathers, ver. 2; the Calling of
Moses; ver. 34, etc. the Dignity of the Law, ver 8, 38, 44; the Holiness of
this place, ver. 7, 45, 47. And indeed the Law is more ancient than the Temple;
the Promise more ancient than the Law. For GOD showed himself the GOD of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their Children freely (ver. 2. etc. 9. etc. 17, etc.
32, 34, 35.) and they showed Faith and Obedience to GOD. (ver. 4, 20. etc. 23.)
particularly by their Regard for the Law, (ver. 8.) and the promised Land,
(ver. 16.) Meantime GOD, never confined his Presence to this one Place or to
the Observers of the Law. For He has been acceptably worshipped, before the
Law was given, or the Temple built, and out of this Land, (ver. 2. 19, 33, 44.)
And that our Fathers and their Posterity were not tied down to this Land, their
various Sojournings (ver 4, etc. 14, 29, 44.) and Exile (ver. 43.) show. But
you and your Fathers have always been evil; (ver. 9.) have withstood Moses,
(ver. 25, etc. 39, etc.) have despised the Land, (ver. 39.) forsaken GOD, (ver.
40, etc.) superstitiously honored the Temple, (ver. 48.) resisted GOD and his
Spirit, (ver. 50.) killed the Prophets and the Messiah Himself, (ver. 51.) and
kept not the Law, for which ye contend ver. 53.) Therefore GOD is not bound to
you; much less to you alone. And truly this solemn Testimony of Stephen is most
worthy of his Character, as a man full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith and
power: in which though he does not advance so many regular Propositions,
contradictory to those of his Adversaries, yet he closely and nervously answers
them all. Nor can we doubt but he would, from these Premises, have drawn
Inferences touching the Destruction of the Temple, the Abrogation of the Mosaic
Law, the Punishment of that rebellious People: and above all, touching Jesus of
Nazareth, the true Messiah, had not his Discourse been interrupted by the
Clamours of the Multitude, stopping their Ears, and rushing upon him. Men,
brethren, and fathers -- All who are here present whether ye are my Equals in
Years, or of more advanced Age. The Word which in this and in many other Places
is rendered Men is a mere Expletive. The God of Glory -- The glorious GOD
appeared to Abraham, before he dwelt in Haran -- Therefore Abraham knew GOD,
long before he was in this Land.

V. 3. Which I will show thee -- Abraham knew not where he went.

V. 4. After his father was dead -- While Terah lived, Abr^ham lived partly
with him, partly in Canaan: But after he died, altogether in Canaan.

V. 5. No, not to set his foot on -- For the Field mentioned, ver. 16. he did
not receive by a Divine Donation, but bought it; even thereby showing that he
was a Stranger in the Land.

V. 7. They shall serve me -- Not the Egyptians.

V. 8. And so he begat Isaac -- After the Covenant was given, of which
Circumcision was the Seal.

V. 9. But God was with him -- Though he was not in this Land.

V. 12. Sent our fathers first -- Without Benjamin.

V. 14. Seventy-five souls -- So the Seventy Interpreters (whom St. Stephen
follows) one So^ and a Grandson of Manasseh, and three Children of Ephraim,
being added to the seventy Persons, mentioned Genesis xlvi. 27.

V. 16. And were carried over to Shechem -- It seems, that St. Stephen rapidly
running over so many Circumstances of History, has not Leisure (nor was it
needful where they were so well known) to recite them all distinctly. Therefore
he here contracts into one, two different Sepulchers, Places and Purchases, so
as in the former History, to name the Buyer, omitting the Seller, in the
latter, to name the Seller, omitting the Buyer. Abraham bought a Burying-place
of the Children of Heth. Genesis xxiii. There Jacob was buried. Jacob bought a
Field of the Children of Hamor. There Joseph was buried. You see here, how St.
Stephen contracts these two Purchases into one. This concise manner of
speaking, strange as it seems to us, was common among the Hebrews:
Particularly, when in a Case, notoriously known, the Speaker mentioned but part
of the Story, and left the rest, which would have interrupted the Current of
his Discourse, to be supplied in the Mind of the Hearer. And laid in the
sepulcher that Abraham bought -- The first Land which these Strangers bought
was for a Sepulcher. They sought for a Country in Heaven. Perhaps the whole
Sentence might be rendered thus: So Jacob went down into Egypt and died, he and
our fathers, and were carried over to Shechem and laid by the sous (that is
Descendants) of Hamor the father of Shechem, in the sepulcher that Abraham
bought for a sum of money.

V. 18. Another king -- Probably of another Family.

V. 19. Exposed -- Cast out to perish by Hunger or wild Beast.

V. 20. In which Time -- A sad but a seasonable Time.

V. 21. Pharaoh's daughter took him up -- By which means, being designed for a
Kingdom, he had all those Advantages of Education, which he could not have had,
if he had not been exposed.

V. 22. In all the wisdom of the Egyptians -- Which was then celebrated in all
the World, and for many Ages after. And mighty in words -- Deep, solid,
weighty, though not of a ready Utterance.

V. 23. It came into his heart -- Probably by an Impulse from GOD.

V. 24. Seeing one wronged -- Probably by one of the Taskmasters.

V. 25. They understood it not -- Such was their Stupidity and Sloth: Which
made him afterward unwilling to go to them.

V. 26. He showed himself -- Of his own Accord, unexpectedly.

V. 27. W^o appointed thee -- Under the Pretense of the Want of a Call by Man,
the Instruments of GOD are often rejected.

V. 30. The Angel -- The Son of GOD; as appears from his stiling himself
Jehovah. In a flame of fire -- Signifying the Majesty of GOD then present.

V. 33. Then said the Lord, Loose thy shoes -- An Autient Token of Reverence;
for the place is holy Ground -- The holiness of Places depends on the peculiar
Presence of GOD there.

V. 35. This Moses whom they refused -- Namely, forty Years before. Probably,
not they, but their Fathers did it and GOD imputes it to them. So GOD
frequently imputes the Sins of the Fathers to those of their Children who are
of the sun Spirit. Him did God send to be a deliverer -- Which is much more
than a Judge; by the hand of -- That is, by means of the angel -- This Angel
who spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai expressly called himself Jehovah, a Name which
cannot, without the highest Presumption, be assumed by any created Angel, since
he whose name alone is Jehovah, is the most High over all the earth, (Psalm
lxxxiii. 18.) It was therefore the Son of GOD who delivered the Law to Moses,
under the Character of Jehovah, and who is here spoken of, as the Angel of the
Covenant, in Respect of his Mediatorial Office.

V. 37. The Lord will raise you up a prophet -- St. Stephen here shows, That
there is no Opposition between Moses and Christ.

V. 38. This is he -- Moses. With the angel and with our fathers -- As a
Mediator between them. Who received the living oracles -- Every Period
beginning with, And the Lord said unto Moses, is properly an Oracle. But the
Oracles here intended are chiefly, The Ten Commandments. These are tenned
Living, because all the Word of God, applied by his Spirit, is living and
powerful, Heb. iv. 12. enlightening the Eyes, rejoicing the Heart, converting
the Soul, raising the Dead.

V. 40. Make us Gods to go before us -- Back into Egypt.

V. 41. And they made a calf -- In Imitation of Apis, the Egyptian GOD: and
rejoiced in the works of their hands -- In the GOD they had made.

V. 42. God turned -- From them in Anger; and gave them up -- Frequently, from
the Time of the Golden Calf, to the Time of Amos, and afterward. The host of
heaven -- The Stars are called an Army or Host, because of their Number, Order,
and powerful Influence. In the book of the prophets -- Of the twelve Prophets,
which the Jews always wr^te together in one Book. Have ye offered -- The
Passage of Amos referred to, (chapter v. 25, etc.) consists of two Parts; of which
the former confirms ver. 41. of the Sin of the People, the latter the Beginning
of ver. 42 concerning their Punishment. Have re offered to me -- They had
offered many Sacrifices; but GOD did not accept them as offered to Him; because
they sacrificed to Idols also; and did not sacrifice to Him with an upright
Heart.

V. 43. Ye took up -- Probably not long after the Golden Calf: But secretly;
else Moses would have mentioned it. The shrine -- A small, portable Chapel, in
which was the Image of their God. Moloch was the Planet Mars, which they
wor^ipped under an human Shape. Remphan, that is, Saturn, they represented by a
Star. And I will carry you beyond Babylon -- That is, beyond Damas^us (which is
the Word in Amos) and Babylon. This was fulfilled by the King of Assyria, 2
Kings xvii. 6.

V. 44. Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony -- The testimony was
properly, The Two Tables of Stone, on which the Ten Commandments were written.
Hence the Ark which contained them, is frequently called the ark of the
testimony; and the whole Tabernacle in this Place. The tabernacle of the
testimony -- according to the model which he had seen -- When he was caught up
in the Visions of GOD, on the Mount.

V. 45. Which our fathers having received -- From their Ancestors; brought into
the possession of the Gentiles -- Into the Land, which the Gentiles possessed
before. So that GOD's Favor is not a necessary Consequence of inhabiting this
Land. All along St. Stephen intimates two Things, 1. That GOD always loved good
Men in every Land: 2. That he never loved bad Men even in This.

V. 46. Who petitioned to find an habitation for the God of Jacob -- But he did
not obtain his Petition. For GOD remained without any Temple, till Solomon
built him an House. Observe how wisely the Word is chosen, with respect to what
follows.

V. 48. Yet the most High inhabiteth not temples made with hands -- As Solomon
declared at the very Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings viii. 27. The most High
-- Whom as such no Building can contain.

V. 49. What is the place of my rest? -- Have I need to rest?

V. 51. Ye stiff-necked -- Not bowing the Neek to GOD's Yoke; (...)
uncircumcised in heart -- So they showed themselves, ver. 54. and ^rs -- As
they showed, ver 57. So far were they from receiving ^e Word of GOD into their
Hearts, that they would not hear it even with their Ears. Ye -- And your
Fathers, always -- As often as ever ye are called, resist the Holy Ghost --
Testifying by the Prophets of Je^s, and the whole Truth. This is the Sum of
what he had shown at large.

V. 53. Who have received the law, by the administration of angels -- GOD, when
he gave the Law on Mount Sinai, was attended with ^ousands of his angels, Gal.
iii. 19. Psalm lxviii. 17.

V. 55. But he looking steadfastly up to heaven, saw the glory of God Doubtless
he saw such a glorious Representation, GOD miraculously operating on his
Imagination, as on Ezckiel's, when he sat in his house at Babylon, and saw
Jerusalem, and seemed to himself transported thither, chapter viii. 1 -- 4. And
probably other Martyrs, when called to suffer the last Extremity, have had
extraordinary Assistance of some similar Kind.

V. 56. I see the Son of man standing -- As it were just ready to receive him.
Otherwise He is said to sit at the Right Hand of GOD.

V. 57. They rushed upon him -- Before any Sentence passed.

V. 58. The witnesses laid down their clothes at the feet of a young man, whose
name was Saul -- O San!, could thou have believed, if one had told thee, that
thou thyself should be stoned in the same Cause? And should triumph in
committing thy Soul likewise, to that Jesus whom thou art now blaspheming? His
dying Prayer reached thee, as well as many others. And the Martyr Stephen, and
Saul the Persecutor (afterward his Brother both in Faith and Martyrdom) are
now Joined in everlasting Friendship, and dwell together in the happy Company
of those, who have made their robes white in the blood of the Lamb.

V. 59. And they stoned Stephen, invoking and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit -- This is the literal Translation of the Words, the Name of GOD not
being in the Original. Nevertheless such a solemn Prayer to Christ, in which a
departing Soul is thus committed into his Hands, is such an Act of Worship, as
no good Man could have paid to a mere Creature: Stephen here worshipping
Christ, in the very same Manner in which Christ worshipped the Father on the
Cross.

VIII.
And at that time there arose a great persecution against the Church which was
in Jerusalem. And they were all dispersed through the countries of Judea and
Samaria, them to prison.

And Philip coming down to a city of Samaria, and was astonished, beholding the
signs and mighty miracles which were done. art in the gall of bitterness, and
the bond of iniquity. And Simon answering said,

And an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, Isaiah liii, 7.
He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before his
shearer,

V. 1. At that time there was a great persecution against the church -- Their
Adversaries, having tasted Blood, were the more eager. And they were all
dispersed -- Not all the Church: If so, who would have remained, for the
Apostles to teach, or Saul to persecute? But all the Teachers except the
Apostles, who, though in the most Danger, staid with the Flock.

V. 2. Devout men -- Who feared GOD more than Persecution And yet, were they
not of little Faith? Else they would not have made so great lamentation.

V. 3. Saul made havoc of the church -- Like some furious Beast of Prey. So
the Greek word properly signifies. Men and women -- Re^arding neither Age nor
Sex.

V. 4. Therefore they that were dispersed went every where -- These very Words
are reassumed, after as it were a long Parenthesis, chapter xi. 19. and the Thread
of the Story continued.

V. 5. Stephen -- Being taken away, Philip his next Colleague, (not the
Apostle) rises in his Place.

V. 9. A certain man -- using magic -- So there was such a Thing as Witchcraft
once! In Asia at least, if not in Europe or America.

V. 12. But when they believed -- What Philip preached, they then saw and felt
the real power of GOD, and submitted thereto.

V. 13. And Simon believed -- That is, was convinced of the Truth VOL. II.

V. 14. And the Apostles hearing that Samaria -- The Inhabitants of that
Country, had received the word of God -- By Faith, sent Peter and John -- He
that sends must be either superior, or at least equal to him that is sent. It
follows, that the College of the Apostles was equal, if not superior to Peter.

V. 15. The Holy Ghost -- In his miraculous Gifts? Or his sanctifying Graces?
Probably in both.

V. 18. Simon offered them money -- And hence the procuring any ministerial
Function, or ecclesiastical Benefice by Money is termed Simony.

V. 21. Thou have neither part -- By Purchase, nor lot -- Given gratis in this
matter -- This Gift of GOD. For thy heart is not right before God -- Probably
St. Peter discerned this, long before he declared it; although it does not
appear, that GOD gave to any of the Apostle, an universal Power of discerning
the hearts of all they conversed with; any more than an universal Power of
healing all the Sick they came near. This we are sure Paul had not; though he was
not inferior to the chief of the Apostles. Otherwise he would not have suffered
the Illness of Epaphroditus to have brought him so near to death ( Phil. ii.
25-27) Nor have left so useful a Fellow Laborer as Trophimus sick at Miletus,
2 Timothy iv. 20.

V. 22. Repent -- if perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee --
Without all Doubt if he had repented, he would have been forgiven. The Doubt
was, Whether he would repent? Thou art in the gall of bitterness -- In the
highest Degree of Wickedness, which is Bitterness, that is, Misery to the Soul;
and in the bond of iniquity -- Fast bound therewith.

V. 26. The way which is desert -- There were two Ways from Jerusalem to Gaza;
one desert, the other through a more populous Country.

V. 27. An ^unuck -- Chief Officers were anciently called Eunuchs, though not
always literally such; because such used to be chief Ministers in the castern
Courts. Candace, queen of the Ethiopians -- So all the Queens of Ethiopia were
called.

V. 28. Sitting in his chariot, he read the prophet Isaiah -- GOD meets those
that remember Him in his ways. It is good to read, hear, seek Information even
in a Journey. Why should we not redeem all our Time?

V. 30. And Philip running to him, said, Understandest thou what thou read?
-- He did not begin about the Weather, News, or the like. In speaking for GOD,
we may frequently come to the Point at once, without Circumlocution.

V. 31. He desired Philip to come up and sit with him -- Such was his Modesty,
and Thirst after Instruction.

V. 32. The portion of scripture -- By reading that very Chapter, the
fifty-third of Isaiah, many Jews, yea, and Atheists have been converted. Some
of them History records. GOD knows them all.

V. 33. In his humiliation his judgment was taken away -- That is, when he was
a Man, he had no Justice shown him. To take away a Person's Judgment, is a
proverbial Phrase for oppressing him. And who shall declare, or count, his
generation -- That is, who can number his Seed, ( Isai. liii. 10.) which he
has purchased by laying down his Life?

V. 36. And as they went on the way, they came to a certain water -- Thus even
the Circumstances of the Journey, were under the Direction of GOD. The Kingdom
of GOD suits itself to external Circumstances, without any Violence, as Air
yields to all Bodies, and yet pervades all. What hinders me to be baptized?
-- Probably he had been circumcised: Otherwise Cornelius would not have been
the first Fruits of the Gentiles.

V. 38. And they both went down -- Out of the Chariot. It does not follow that
he was baptized by Immersion. The Text neither affirms nor intimates any thing
concerning it.

V. 39. The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip -- Carried him away with a
miraculous Swiftness, without any Action or Labor of his own. This had
befallen several of the Prophets.

V. 40. But Philip was found at Azotus -- Probably none saw him, from his
leaving the Eunuch, till he was there.

IX.
But Chapter xxii. ^, etc. Chapter xxvi. 9, etc.
Saul still breathing threatening and slaughter against the disciples of the
Lord, going to the highpriest, It is hard for thee to kick against the goads.
said to him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou
must do. him into Damascus. without sight, am here, Lord. And the Lord said to
him, Arise, go into the street called Straight, and enquire in the house of
Judas, for one named Saul of Tarsus; heard were amazed, and said, Is not this
he who destroyed those that call on this name in Jerusalem? And came hither for
this intent, that he might bring them bound to the chief priests? him down the
wall in a basket. And coming to Jerusalem, he endeavored to join himself to
the disciples; but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a
disciple. him to the apostles, and declared to them, How he had seen the Lord
in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at
Damascus, Which the brethren knowing, brought him down to Cesarea, and sent him
forth to Tarsus. was multiplied.

And as Peter passed through all parts, there a certain man named Eneas, who
had kept his bed eight years, him, and turned to the Lord.

Now there was at Joppa, said,

V. 2. Bound -- By the Connivance, if not Authority of the Goernor, under
Aretas the King. See ver. 14, 24.

V. 3. And suddenly -- When GOD suddenly and vehemently attacks Sinner, it is
the highest Act of Mercy. So Saul, when his Rage was come to the Height, is
taught not to breathe Slaughter. And what was wanting in Time to confirm him in
his Disciple hip, is compensated by the inexpressible Terror he sustained. By
this also the suddenly-constituted Apostle was guarded against the grand Snare
unto which Novices are apt to fall.

V. 4. He heard a voice -- Severe, yet full of Grace.

V. 5. To kick against the goads -- Is a Syriac Proverb, expressing an Attempt
that brings nothing but Pain.

V. 6. It shall be told thee -- So GOD Himself sends Saul to be ^aught by a
Man, as the Angel does Cornelius, chapter x. 5. Admirable Condescension! That the
LORD deals with us by Men, like ourselves.

V. 7. The men -- stood -- Having risen before Saul; for they also fell to the
Ground, chapter xxvi. 14. It is probable they all journeyed on Foot. Hearing the
noise -- But not an articulate Voice. And seeing the Light, but not Jesus
Himself, chapter xxvi. 13. etc.

V. 9. And he was three days -- An important Season! So long he seems to have
been in the Pangs of the New Birth. Without sight -- By S^ales growing over his
Eyes, to intimate to him the Blindness of the State he had been in, to impress
him with a deeper Sense of the almighty Power of Christ, and to turn his
Thoughts inward, while he was less capable of conversing with outward Objects.
This was likewise a manifest Token to others, of what had happened to him in
his Journey, and ought to have humbled and convinced those bigot^ed Jews, to
whom he had been sent from the Sanhedrim.

V. 11. Behold, he is praying -- He was ^ewn thus to Ananias.

V. 12. A man called Ananias -- His name also was revealed to Saul.

V. 13. But he answered -- How natural is it to reason against GOD!

V. 14. All that call on thy name -- That is, all Christians.

V. 15. He is a chosen vessel, to bear my name -- That is, to testify of me. It
is undeniable, that some Men are unconditionally chosen or elected, to do some
Works for GOD.

V. 16. For I -- Do thou as thou art commanded. I will take Care of the rest;
will show him -- In fact, through the whole Course of his Ministry. How great
things he must suffer -- So far will he be now from persecuting others.

V. 17. The Lord has sent me -- Ananias does not tell Saul all which Christ
had said concerning him. It was not expedient, that he should know yet to how
great a Dignity he was called.

V. 24. They guarded the gates day and night -- That is, the Governor did, at
their request, 2 Cor. x^. 32.

V. 26. And coming to Jerusalem -- Three Years after, Gal. i. 18. These three
Years St. Paul passes over, chapter xxii. 17. likewise.

V. 27. To the apostles -- Peter and James, Gal. i. 18, 19. And declared -- He
who has been an Ene^ to the Truth, ought not to be trusted, till he gives Proof
that he is changed.

V. 31. Then the church -- The whole Body of Christian Believers, had peace --
Their bitterest Persecutor being converted. And being built up -- In holy,
loving Faith continually increasing, and walking in -- That is, speaking and
acting only from this Principle, the fear of God, and the comfort of the Holy
Ghost -- An excellent Mixture of inward and outward Peace, tempered with filial
Fear.

V. 35. Lydda was a large Town, one Day's Journey from Jerusalem. It stood in
the Plain or Valley of Sharon, which extended from Cesar^a to Joppa, and was
noted for its Fr^itfalness.

V. 36. Tabitha, which is by interpretation Dorcas -- She was probably an
Hel^enist Jew, known among the Hebrews by the Syriac Name Tabitha, while the
Greeks called her in their own Language, Dorcas. They are both Words of the
same Import, and signify a Roe or Fawn.

V. 38. The disciples sent to him -- Probably none of those at Joppa had the
Gift of Miracles. Nor is it certain, that they expected a Miracle from him.

V. 39. While she was with them -- That is, before she died.

V. 40. Peter having put them all out -- That he might have the better
Opportunity of wrestling with GOD in Prayer, Said, Tabitha, arise. And she
opened her eyes, and seeing Peter, sat up -- Who can imagine the Surprise of
Dorcas, when called back to Life? Or of her Friends, when they saw her alive?
For the Sake of themselves, and of the Poor, there was Cause of rejoicing, and
much more, for such a Confirmation of the Gospel. Yet to herself it was Matter
of Resignation, not Joy, to be called back to these Scenes of Vanity: But
doubtless her remaining Days were still more zealously spent in the Service o^
her Savior and her GOD. Thus was a richer Treasure laid up for her in Heaven,
and she afterward returned to a more exceeding Weight of Glory, than that from
which so astonishing a Providence had recalled her for a Season.

X.
man, and fearing God with all his house, who gave much alms to the people, and
prayed to God always. two of his houshould-servants, and a devout soldier, of
them that waited on him continually: came to him again, the second time, what
God has purified, house, them. And the next day, rising up, he went away with
them; and certain brethren from Joppa went with him. him. But Peter raised him
up, I ask therefore, for what intent ye have sent for me?

Then Peter opening his mouth, This is the word which he sent to the children
of Israel, preaching the glad tidings of peace through Jesus Christ; him on a
tree. Him God raised up the third day, and showed him openly; even to us, who
did eat and drink with him) after he rose from the dead. And he commanded us,
God the Judge of the living and the dead.

While Peter was yet speaking these words,

V. 1. And there was a certain man -- The first Fruits of the Gentiles in
Cesarea -- Where Philip had been before, (chapter viii. 40.) So that the Doctrine
of Salvation by Faith in Jesus, was not unknown there. Cesarea was the Seat of
the civil Government, as Jerusalem was of the ecclesiastical. It is observable,
that the Gospel made its Way first through the Metropolitan Cities. So it first
seized Jerusalem and Cesarea: Afterward Philippi, Athens, Corinth, E^hesus,
Rome itself. A centurion, or Captain, of that called the Italian band -- That
is, Troop or Company.

V. 2. Who gave much alms to the people -- That is, to the Jews, many of whom
were at that Time extremely poor.

V. 3. He saw in a vision -- Not in a Trance, like Peter; plainly, so as to
leave one not accustomed to Things of this Kind, no room to suspect any
Imposition

V. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God -- Dare
any man say, These were only splendid Sins? Or that they were an Abomination
before GOD? And yet it is certain, in the Christian Sense, Cornelius was then
an Unbeliever. He had not then Faith in Christ. So certain it is, that every
one who seeks Faith in Christ, should seek it in Prayer, and doing Good to all
Men: Though in Strictness, what is not exactly according to the Divine Rule, must
stand in need of Divine Favor and Indulgence.

V. 8. A devout Soldier -- How many such Attendants have our modern Officers? A
devout soldier would now be looked upon as little better than a Deserter from
his Colors.

V. 10. And he became very hungry -- At the usual Meal-time. The Symbols in
Visions and Trances, it is easy to observe, are generally suited to the State
of the Natural Faculties.

V. 11. Tied at the corners -- Not all in one Knot, but each fastened as it
were up to Heaven.

V. 14. But Peter said, In no wise, Lord -- When GOD commands a strange, or
seemingly improper Thing, the first Objection frequently finds Pardon. But it
ought not to be repeated. This Doubt and Delay of St. Peter, had several good
Effects. Hereby the Will of GOD in this important Point, was made more evident
and incontestable. And Peter also, having been so slow of Belief himself, could
the more easily bear the doubting of his Brethren, chapter xi. 2, etc.

V. 15. What God has purified -- Has made and declared clean. Nothing but
what is ^^an can come down from Heaven. St. Peter well remembered this Saying
in the Council at Jerusalem, chapter xv. 9.

V. 16. This was done thrice -- To make the deeper Impression.

V. 17. While Peter doubted in himself, behold the men -- Frequently the Things
which befall us within and from without at the same Time, are a Key to each
other. The Things which thus concur and agree together, ought to be diligently
attended to.

V. 19. Behold men seek thee, arise therefore and go down, and go with them,
doubting nothing -- How gradually was St. Peter prepared, to receive this new
Admonition of the Spirit! Thus GOD is wont to lead on his Children by Degrees,
always giving them Light for the present Hour.

V. 24. Cornelius was waiting for them -- Not engaging himself in any secular
Business, during that solemn Time, but being altogether intent on this one
Thing.

V. 26. I myself am a man -- And not GOD, who alone ought to be worshipped.
Matt. 4, 10.

V. 28. But God has showed me -- He speaks sparingly to them, of his former
Doubt, and his late Vision.

V. 29. I ask, for what intent ye have sent for me? -- St. Peter knew this
already. But he puts Cornelius on telling the Story, both that the rest might
be informed, and Cornelius himself more impressed by the Narration: The
Repetition of which, even as we read it, gives a new Dignity and Spirit, to
Peter's succeeding Discourse.

V. 30. Four days ago I was fasting -- The first of these days he had the
Vision; the second, his Messengers came to Joppa; on the third, St. Peter set
out; and on the fourth, came to Cesarca.

V. 31. Thy prayer is heard -- Doubtless he had been praying for Instruction,
how to worship GOD in the most acceptable Mauner.

V. 33. Now therefore we are all present before God -- The Language of every
truly Christian Congregation.

V. 34. I perceive of a truth -- More clearly than ever, from such a
Concurrence of Circumstances: That God is not a respecter of persons -- Is not
partial in his Love. The Words mean, in a particular Sense, That He does not
confine his Love to one Nation: In a general, That He is loving to every Man,
and wills all Men should be saved.

V. 35. But in every nation, he that fears God and works righteousness --
He that, first, reverences GOD, as great, wise, good, the Cause, End, and
Governor of all Things, and secondly, from this awful Regard to Him, not only
avoids all known Evil, but endeavors, according to the best Light he has, to
do all things well; is accepted of him -- Through Christ, though he knows Him not.
The Assertion is express, and admits of no Exception. He is in the Favor of
GOD, whether enjoying his Written Word and Ordinances or not. Nevertheless the
Addition of these is an unspeakable Blessing, to those who were before in some
Measure accepted. Otherwise GOD would never have sent an Angul from Heaven, to
direct Cornelius to St. Peter.

V. 36. This is the word which God sent -- When He sent his Son into the World,
preaching -- Proclaiming by him -- Peace between GOD and Man, whether Jew or
Gentile -- By the GOD-Man. He is Lord of both; yea, Lord of and over all.

V. 37. Ye know the word which was published -- You know the Facts in general,
the Meaning of which I shall now more particularly explain and confirm to you.
The baptism which John preached -- To which he invited them by his Preaching,
in token of their Repentance. This began in Galilee, which was near Cesarca.

V. 38. How God anointed Jesus -- Particularly at his Baptism, thereby
inaugurating him to his Office: With the Holy Ghost, and with power -- It is
worthy our Remark, that frequently when the Holy Ghost is mentioned, there is
added a Word particularly adapted to the present Circumstance. So the Deacons
were to be full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, chapter vi. 3. Barnabas was full of
the Holy Ghost and faith, chapter xi. 24. the Disciples were filled with joy, and
with the Holy Ghost, chapter xiii. 52. And here, where his mighty Works are
mentioned, Christ Himself is said to be anointed with the Holy Ghost and with
power. For God was with him -- He speaks sparingly here of the Majesty of
Christ, as considering the State of his Hearers.

V. 41. Not now to all the people -- As before his Death; to us who did eat and
drink with him -- That is, conversed familiarly and continually, with him, in
the Time of his Ministry.

V. 42. It is he who is ordained by God, the Judge of the living and the dead^
Of all Men, whether they are alive at his Coming, or had died before it. This
was declaring to them in the strongest Terms, How entirely their Happiness
depended, on a timely and humble Subjection to Him, who is to be their final
Judge.

V. 43. To him give all the prophets witness -- Speaking to Heathens he does
not quote any in particular; that every one who believes in him -- Whether he
be Jew or Gentile; receives remission of Sins -- Though he had not before either
feared God, or worked Righteousness.

V. 44. The Holy Ghost fell on all that were hearing the word -- Thus were they
consecrated to GOD, as the first fruits of the Gentiles. And thus did GOD give
a clear and satisfactory Evidence, that He had accepted them, as well as the
Jews.

V. 45. The believers of the circumcision -- The believing Jews.

V. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, who have
received the Holy Ghost? -- He does not say, They have the Baptism of the
Spirit; therefore they do not need the Baptism of Water. But just the contrary:
If they have received the Spirit, then baptize them with Water.

How easily is this Question decided, if we will take the Word of GOD for our
Judge? Either Men have received the Holy Ghost or not. If they have not,
Repent, says GOD, and be baptized, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost. If they have, if they are already baptized with the Holy Ghost, then who
can forbid Water?

V. 48. In the name of the Lord -- Which implies the Father who anointed Him,
and the Spirit, with which He was anointed to his Office. But as the Gentiles
had before believed in GOD the Father, and could not but now believe in the
Holy Ghost, under whose powerful Influence they were at this very Time, there
was the less Need of taking Notice, that they were baptized into the Belief and
Profession of the Sacred Three; though doubtless the Apostle administered the
Ordinance in that very Form which Christ Himself had prescribed.

XI.
Now the apostles and brethren who were in Judea heard, that the Gentiles also
had received the word of God. all things before them in order, saying, being in
a trance, I saw a vision, a certain vessel descending, as it were a great
sheet, let down from heaven by the four corners, and it came even to me: when
we believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that could withstand God?

Now they who had been dispersed by the distress which arose about Stephen,
Barnabas, them all, to cleave unto the Lord with full purpose of heart.

In those days prophets came from Jerusalem to Antioch. it to the elders, by
the hand of Barnabas and Saul.

V. 4. Peter laid all things before them -- So he did not take it ill to be
questioned, nor desire to be treated as Infallible. And he answers the more
mildly, because it related to a Point, which he had not readily believed
himself.

V. 5. Being in a trance -- Which suspends the Use of the outward Senses.

V. 14. Saved -- With the full Christian Salvation, in this World, and the
World to come.

V. 17. To us, when we believed -- The Sense is, Because we believed, not
because we were circumcised, was the Holy Ghost given to us. What was I -- A
mere Instrument in GOD's Hand. They had enquired only concerning his eating
with the Gentiles. He satisfies them likewise concerning his baptizing them,
and ^^ews that he had done right in going to Cornelius, not only by the Command
of GOD, but also by the Event, the Descent of the Holy Ghost.

And who are we, that we should withstand GOD? Particularly by laying down
Rules of Christian Communion, which exclude any whom he has admitted into the
Church of the firstborn, from worshipping GOD together. O that all
Church-Governors would consider, how ^old an ^surpation this is, on the
Authority of the Supreme Lord of the Church! O that the Sin of thus
withstanding GOD, may not be laid to the Charge of those, who Perhaps with a
good Intention, but in an Over-fondness for their own Forms, have done it, and
are continually doing it!

V. 18. They glorified God -- Being thoroughly satisfied. Repentance unto life
-- True Repentance is a Change from spiritual Death to spiritual Life, and
leads to Life everlasting.

V. 19. They who had been dispersed -- St. Luke here resumes the Thread of his
Narration, in the very Words wherewith he broke it off, chapter viii. 4. At far as
Phenicia to the North, Cyprus to the West, and Antioch to the East.

V. 20. Some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene -- Who were more accustomed
to converse with the Gentiles. Who coming into Antioch -- Then the Capital of
Syria, and, next Rome and Alexandria, the most considerable City of the Empire.
Spoke to the Grecks -- As the Greeks were the most celebrated of the Gentile
Nations near Judea, the Jews called all the Gentiles by that Name. Here we have
the first Account, of the preaching the Gospel to the idolatrous Gentiles. All
those to whom it had been preached before, did at least worship one GOD, the
GOD of Israel.

V. 21. And the hand of the Lord -- That is, the Power of his Spirit.

V. 26. And the disciples were first called Christians at Antioch -- Here it
was, that they first received this standing Appellation. They were before
termed Nazareaes and Galileans.

V. 28. Agabus rising up -- In the Congregation All the world -- The Word
generally signifies, all the Roman Empire. And so it is doubtless to be taken
here.

V. 29. Then -- Understanding the Distress they would otherwise be in, on that
Account. The Disciples determined to send relief to the brethren in Judea --
Who herein received a manifest Proof, of the Reality of their Conversion.

V. 30. Sending it to the elders -- Who gave it to the Deacons, to be
distributed by them, as every one had Need.

XII.
slew James the Brother of John, with the sword. And perceiving it pleased the
Jews,

And when Herod was about to bring him forth, angel departed from him. from all
the expectation of the people of the Jews. them, that Peter stood before the
gate. And they said to her, Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed, it was
so. Then they said, It is his angel. But Peter continued knocking. the door,
they saw him, him, examined the keepers, and commanded them to be put to death.
there. And he was highly incensed against them of Tire and Sidon: but they came
with one accord to him, and having gained Blastus, the king's chamberlain, sued
for peace; because their country was nourished by the king's country.

And on a set day, It is the voice of a god, and not of a man.

And Barnabas and Saul,

V. 1. About that Time -- So wisely did GOD mix Rest and Persecution in due
Time and Measure succeeding each other. Herod -- Agrippa; the latter was his
Roman, the former his Syrian Name. He was the Grandson of Herod the Great,
Nephew to Herod Antipas, who beheaded John the Baptist, Brother to Herodias,
and Father to that Agrippa before whom St. Paul afterward made his Defense.
Caligula made him King of the Tetrarchy of his Uncle Philip, to which he
afterward added the Territories of Antipas. Claudius made him also King of
Judea, and added thereto the Dominions of Lysanias.

V. 2. James, the Brother of John -- So one of the Brothers went to GOD the
first, the other, the last of the Apostles.

V. 3. Then were the days of nuleavened Bread -- At which the Jews came
together from all Parts.

V. 4. Four quaternions -- Sixteen Men, who watched by Turns, Day and Night.

V. 5. Continual prayer was made for him -- Yet when their prayer was answered,
they could searce believe it! (ver. 15.) But why had they not prayed for St.
James also? Because he was put to Death as soon as apprehended.

V. 6. Peter was sleeping -- Easy and void of Fear: Between two soldiers --
Sufficiently secured, to human Appearance.

V. 7. His chains -- With which his Right-arm was bound to one of the soldiers,
and his Left-arm to the other.

V. 8. Gird thyself -- Probably he had put off his Girdle, Sandals, and upper
Garment, before he lay down to sleep.

V. 10. The first and the second ward -- At each of which doubtless was a Guard
of Soldiers. The Gate opened of its own accord -- Without either Peter or the
Angel touching it. And they went on through one street -- That Peter might know
which way to go. And the angel departed from him -- Being himself sufficient
for what remained to be done.

V. 11. Now I know of a truth -- That this is not a Vision. ver. 9.

V. 12. And having considered -- What was best to be done. Many were gathered
together -- At Midnight.

V. 13. The gate -- At some Distance from the House; to hearken -- If any
knocked.

V. 14. And knowing Peter's voice -- Bidding her open the Door.

V. 15. They said, Thou art mad -- As we say, Sure you are not in your Senses
to talk so It is his angel -- It was a common Opinion among the Jews, that
every man had his particular Guardian Angel who frequently assumed both his
Shape and Voice. But this is a Point on which the Scriptures are silent.

V. 17. Beckoning to them -- Many of whom being amazed, were talking together.
And he said, Show these Things to James -- The Brother or Kinsman of our LORD,
and Author of the Epistle which hears his name. He appears to have been a
Person of considerable Weight and Importance, probably the chief Overseer of
that Province, and of the Church in Jerusalem in particular. He went into
another place -- Where he might be better concealed, till the Storm was over.

V. 19. Herod commanded them to be put to death -- And thus the Wicked
suffered, in the Room of the Righteous. And going down from Judea -- With
Shame, for not having brought forth Peter, according to his Promise.

V. 20. Having gained Blasius -- To their Side, they sued for and obtained
peace -- Reconciliation with Herod. And so the Christians of those Parts, were
by the Providence of GOD, delivered from Scarcity. Their country was nourished
-- Was provided with Corn, by the king's country -- Thus Hiram also, King of
Tire, desired of Solomon, food or Corn for his household, 1 Kings v 9.

V. 21. And on a set day -- Which was solemnized yearly, in Honor of Claudius
Caesar. Herod arrayed in royal apparel -- In a Garment so wrought with Silver,
that the Rays of the rising Sun, striking upon, and being reflected from it,
dazzled the Eyes of the Beholders. The people shouted, It is the voice of a god
-- Such profane flattery they frequently paid to Princes. But the Commonness of
a wicked Custom, rather increases than lessens the Guilt of it.

V. 23. And immediately -- GOD does not delay to vindicate his injured Honor:
An angel of the Lord smote him -- Of this other Historians say nothing: So wide
a Difference there is, between Divine and Human History! An Angel of the LORD,
brought out Peter: An Angel smote Herod. Men did not see the Instruments in
either Case. These were only known to the People of GOD. Because he gave not
glory to God -- He willingly received it to himself, and by this Sacrilege
filled up the Measure of his Iniquities. So then Vengeance tarried not. And he
was eaten by worms, or verm'n -- How changed! And on the fifth Day expired in
exquisite Torture. Such was the Event! The Persecutor perished, and the Gospel
grew and multiplied.

V. 25. Saul returned -- To Antioch; taking John surnamed Mark -- The Son of
Mary, (at whose House the Disciples met, to pray for Peter) who was Sister to
Barnabas.

XIII.
them away, their attendant. was Bar-jesus, is also called Paul) filled with
the Holy Ghost, fixing his eyes upon him, is upon thee; and thou shall be
blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately a mist and darkness
fell upon him, and going about, he sought some to lead him.

And Paul and those with him loosing from Paphos, Then Paul standing, Isaiah i.
2.
The God of this people chose our fathers, Deuteronomy. i. 31.
And he suffered their manners in the wilderness about the space of forty
years. them judges; 1 Samuel xvi. 12, 13.
he raised up to them David for their king, to whom also bearing witness he
said, I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, who
will do all my will.

Of this man's seed has God, his promise, raised unto Israel a Savior, Jesus;
John having first preached before his coming, Luke iii. 16.
And as John was fulfilling his course, he said, whom think ye that I am? I am
not he. But behold one comes after me, the shoes of whose feet I am not worthy
to loose.

Men, them, in condemning him. And though they found no cause of death in him,
him down from the tree, they laid him in a sepulcher.

And we declare to you glad tidings, fulfilled this to us their children, in
raising up Jesus: as it was written also in the second Psalm, Psalm ii. 7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And because he raised him up
from the dead, Isaiah lv. 3.
I will give you the sure mercies of David. Wherefore he says also in another
Psalm, Psalm xvi. 10.
Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Now David having served
the will of GOD in his generation, and brethren, that through this man is
preached to you the forgiveness of sins. And by him every one that believes is
justified from all things, by the law of Moses. Habak. i. 5.
Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish, For I work a work in your days, a
work which ye will in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you.

And when the Jews were going out of the synagogue, them, that these words
might be spoken on the sabbath between.

yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold! we turn to the Gentiles. saying,
Isaiah xlix. 6.
I have set Thee for a light of the Gentiles, so that thou might be for
salvation to the ends of the earth. it were glad, and glorified the word of the
Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.

V. 1. Manaen, who had been brought up with Herod -- His fostes Brotner, now
freed from the Temptations of a Court.

V. 2. Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them
-- This was not ordaining them. St. Paul was ordained long before, and that not
of men, neither by man: It was only inducting him to the Province for which our
LORD had appointed him from the Beginning, and which was now revealed to the
Prophets and Teachers In Consequence of this they fasted, prayed, and laid
their Hands on them, a Rite which was used not in Ordination only, but ^n
Blessing, and on many other Occasions.

V. 3. Then having fasted -- Again. Thus they did also, chapter xiv. 13.

V. 5. In the synagogues -- Using all Opportunities that offered.

V. 6. Paphos was on the western, Salamis on the eastern Part of the Island

V. 7. The proconsul -- The Roman Governor of Cyprus, a prudent man -- And
therefore not overswayed by Elymas, but desirous to enquire farther.

V. 9. Then Saul, who is also called Paul -- It Is not improbable, that coming
now among the Romans, they would naturally adapt his Name to their own
Language, and so called him Paul instead of Saul. Perhaps the Family of the
Proconsul might be the first, who addressed to or spoke of him by this Name.
And from this Time, being the Apostle of the Gentiles, he himself used the Name
which was more familiar to them.

V. 10. O full of all guile -- As a false Prophet, and all mischief -- As a
Magician. Th^^ son of the devil -- A Title well suited to a Magician; and one
who not only was himself unrighteous, but labored to keep others from all
Goodness. W^t thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? -- Even now
thou have heard the Truth of the Gospel.

V. 11. And immediately a mist -- Or Dimness within, and darkness without, fell
upon him.

V. 12. Being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord -- Confirmed by such a
Miracle.

V. 13. John withdrawing from them returned -- Tired with the Fatigue, or
drinking from Danger.

V. 14. Antioch in Pisidia -- Different from the Antioch mentioned ver. 1.

V. 15. And after the reading of the law and the prophets, the chief of the
sruagogue sent to them -- The Law was read over once every Year, a Portion of
it every Sabbath; to which was added a Lesson taken out of the Prophets. After
this was over, any one might speak to the People, on any Subject he thought
convenient. Yet it was a Circumstance of Decency which Paul and Barnabas would
hardly omit, to acquaint the Rulers with their Desire of doing it: Probably by
some Message before the Service began.

V. 16. Ye that fear God -- Whether Proselytes or Heathens.

V. 17. The God -- By such a Commemoration of GOD's Favors to their Fathers,
at once their Minds were conciliated to the Speaker, they were convinced of
their Duty to God, and invited to believe his Promise, and the Accompli^ment of
it. The six Verses, 17-22, contain the whole Sum of the Old Testament. Of this
People -- Paul here chiefly addresses himself to those whom he styles, Te that
sear God: He speaks of Israel first; and ver. 26, speaks more directly to the
Israelites themselves. Chose -- And this exalted the People; not any Merit or
Goodness of their own. Ezekiel. xx. 5. Our fathers -- Abraham and his Posterity.

V. 19. Seven nations -- Enumerated Deuteronomy. vii. 1. about four hundred and fifty
years -- That is, from the Choice of the Fathers to the dividing of the Land;
it was about four hundred and fifty Years.

V. 21. He ^ave them Saul forty years -- Including the Time wherein Samuel
judged Israel.

V. 22. Having removed him -- Hence they might understand, that the
Dispensations of GOD admit of various Changes. I have found David a man after
mine own heart -- This expression is to be taken in a limited Sense. David was
such at that time, but not at all Times. And he was so, in that respect, as he
performed all GOD 'S will, in the Particulars there mentioned. But he was not a
man after God's own heart, in other Respects, wherein he performed his own
Will. In the Matter of Uriah, for instance, he was as far from being a man
after God's heart as Saul himself was. It is therefore a very gross, as well as
dangerous Mistake, to suppose this is the Character of David in every part of
his Behavior. We must beware of this, unless we would recommend Adultery and
Murder as things after God's own heart.

V. 24. John having first preached -- He mentions this, as a Thing already
known to them. And so doubtless it was. For it gave so loud an Alarm to the
whole Jewish Nation, as could not but be heard in foreign Countries, at least
as remote as Pisidia.

V. 25. His course -- His Work was quickly finished, and might therefore well
be termed a course or ^ace.

V. 27. For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers -- He here
anticipates a strong Objection, Why did not they at Jerusalem, and especially
their Rulers, believe? They knew not him, because they understood not those
very Prophets whom they read or heard continually. Their very condemning him,
innocent as he was, proves, that they understood not the Prophecies concerning
him.

V. 29. They fulfilled all things that were written of him -- So far could they
go, but no farther.

V. 31. He was seen many days, by them who came up with him from Galilee to
Jerusalem -- This last Journey both presupposes all the rest, and was the most
important of all.

V. 33. Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee -- It is true, He was
the Son of GOD from Eternity. The Meaning therefore is, I have this Day
declared thee to be my Son. As St. Paul else where, Declared to be the Son of
God with power, by the resurrection from the Dead. (Rom i. 4.) And it is with
peculiar Propriety and Beauty, that GOD is said to have begotten him, on the
Day when He raised Him from the Dead, as He seemed then to be born out of the
Earth anew.

V. 34. No more to return to corruption -- That is, to die no more. I will give
you the sure mercies of David -- The Blessings promised to David in Christ.
These are sure, certain, firm, solid, to every true Believer in Him. And hence
the Resurrection of Christ, necessarily follows; for without this, those
Blessings could not be given.

V. 35. He says -- David in the Name of the Messia^.

V. 36. David, having served the will of God in his generation, fell asleep --
So his Service extended not itself beyond the Bounds of the common Age of Man:
But the Service of the Messiah to all Generations, as his Kingdom to all Ages.
Served the will of God -- Why art thou here, thou who art yet in the World? Is
it not, that thou also may serve the will of God? Art thou serving it now?
Doing all his will? And was added to his fathers -- Not only in Body. This
expression refers to the Soul also, and supposes the Immortality of it.

V. 39. Everyone that believes is justified from all things -- Has the Actual
Forgiveness of all his Sins, at the very time of his believing; From which ye
con^d not be justified -- Not only ye cannot now; but ye never could. For it
afforded no Expiation for presumptuous Sins. By the law of Moses -- The whole
Mosaic Institution. The Division of the Law into Moral and Ceremonial, was not
so common among the Jews, as it is among us. Nor does the Apostle here consider
it at all: But Moses and Christ are opposed to each other.

V. 40. Beware -- A weighty and seasonable Admonition. No Reproof is as yet
added to it.

V. 41. I work a work which ye will in no wise believe -- This was originally
spoken to those, who would not believe that GOD would ever deliver them from
the power of the Chaldeans. But it is applicable to any who will not believe
the Promises or the Works of GOD.

V. 42. When the Jews were going out -- Probably many of them, not bearing to
hear him, went out before he had done. The Sabbath between -- So the Jews call
to this Day the Sabbath between the first Day of the Month Tisri (on which the
civll Year begins) and the Tenth of the same Month, which is the solemn Day of
Expiation.

V. 43. Who speaking to them -- More familiarly, persuaded them to continue --
For Trials were at hand, in the grace of God -- That is, to adhere to the
Gospel or Christian Faith.

V. 46. Then Paul and Barnabas speaking boldly, said -- Those who hinder others
must be publicly reproved. It was necessary -- Though ye are not worthy: He
shows that he had not preached to them, from any Confidence of their believing,
But seeing ye judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life -- They indeed judged
none but themselves worthy of it. Yet their rejecting of the Gospel was the
same as saying, "We are unworthy of eternal life." Behold! -- A thing now
present! An astonishing Revolution! We turn to the Gentiles -- Not that they
left off preaching to the Jews in other Places. But they now determined to lose
no more Time at Antioch on their ungrateful Countrymen, but to employ
themselves wholly in doing what they could, for the Conversion of the Gentiles
there

V. 47. For so has the Lord commanded us -- By sending us forth, and giving us
an Opportunity of fulfilling what He had foretold. I have set thee -- The
Father speaks to Christ.

V. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life -- St. Luke does not say
foreordained. He is not speaking of what was done from Eternity, but of what
was then done, through the Preaching of the Gospel. He is describing that
Ordination, and that only which was at the very Time of hearing it. During this
Sermon those believed, says the Apostle, to whom GOD then gave Power to
believe. It is as if he had said, "They believed, whose hearts the Lord
opened;" as he expresses it in a clearly parallel Place, speaking of the same
Kind of Ordination, ( Acts xvi. 14, etc.) It is observable, the original Word
is not once used in Scripture to express eternal Predestination of any Kind.
The Sum is, All those, and those only, who were now ordained, now, believed.
Not that GOD rejected the rest: It was his Will, that they also should have
been saved: But they thrust Salvation from them. Nor were they who then
believed, constrained to believe. But Grace was then first copiously offered
them. And they did not thrust it away, so that a great Multitude even of
Gentiles were converted. In a Word, the Expression properly implies, a present
Operation of Divine Grace, working faith in the Hearers.

XIV.
And in Iconium they went together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke
that a great multitude both of the Jews and Greeks believed. But the
unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, them despitefully, and to stone them,
of it, they fled to Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia and the country round
about,

And there sat a certain man at Lystra, it, they rent their clothes, and sprang
in among the people,

But there came thither Jews from Antioch and Iconium, him out of the city,
supposing he had been dead. of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in
the faith; and that we must through many tribulations enter into the kingdom of
God.

V. 1. They so spoke -- Persecution having increased their Strength.

V. 9. He had faith to be healed -- He felt the Power of GOD in his Soul; and
thene^ knew it was sufficient to heal his Body also.

V. 11. The gods are come down -- Which the Heathens supposed they frequently
did; Jupiter especially. But how am^zingly does the Prince of Darkness blind
the Minds of them that believe not? The Jews would not own Christ's Godhead,
though they saw Him work numberless Miracles. On the other hand, the Heathens
seeing more Men work one Miracle, were for derfying them immediately.

V. 13. The priest of Jupiter -- Whose Temple and Image were just without the
Gate of the City, brought garlands -- To put on the Victims, and bulls -- The
usu^ O fering^ to Jupiter.

V. 14. They sprang in among the people, crying out -- As in a Fire, or other
sudden and great Danger.

V. 15. To turn from these vanities -- From worshipping any but the true GOD. He
does not deign to call them Gods, unto the living God -- Not like these dead
Idols, who made the heaven and the earth, the sea -- Each of which they
supposed to have its own Gods.

V. 16. Who in times past -- He prevents their Objection, "But if these Things
are so, we should have heard them from our Fathers." suffered -- An awful
judgment, all nations -- The Multitude of them that err, does not turn Error
into Truth, to walk in their own ways -- The Idolatries which they had chosen.

V. 17. He lest not himself without witness -- For the Heathens had always from
GOD himself a Testimony both of his Existence and of his Providence; in that he
did good -- Even by Punishments He testifies of Himself; but more peculiarly by
Benefits; giving rain -- By which Air, Earth, and Sea, are as it were all
joined together, from heaven -- The Seat of GOD; to which St. Paul probably
pointed while he spoke, filling the Body with food, the Soul with gladness.

V. 19. Who persuaded the multitude -- Moved with equal Ease either to adore or
murder him.

V. 20. But as the disciples stood round -- Probably after Sunset. The enraged
Multitude would scarce have suffered it in the Daytime: He rose and went into
the city -- That he should be able to do this, just after he had been left for
dead, was a Miracle little less than a Resurrection from the Dead. Especially
considering the Manner wherein the Jewish Malefactors were stoned. The
Withesses first threw as large a Stone as they could lift, with all possible
Violence upon his Head, which alone was sufficient to dath the Skull in Pieces.
All the People then joined, as long as any Motion or Token of Life remained.

V. 23. When they had or tained them presbyters in every church -- Out of those
who were themselves but newly converted. So soon can GOD ^nable even a Babe in
Christ to build up others in the common Faith: They commended them to the Lord
-- An Expression implying Faith in Christ, as well as Love to the Brethren.

V. 25. Perga and Attalia were Cities of Pamphylia.

V. 26. Recommended to the grace -- Or Favor, of God, for the work which they
had fulfilled -- This shows the Nature and Design of that laying on of Hands,
which was mentioned, chapter xiii. 3.

XV.
that Paul and Barnabas and certain others of them, should go up to the
apostles and elders at Jerusalem about this question. said they, certain of the
sect of the Pharisees, who believed, saying. That we ought to circumcise them,
and command them to keep the law of Moses.

And after much debate Peter rose up and said to them, purifying their hearts
by faith.

Then all the multitude kept silence, Amos ix. 11.
After this I will return and build again the fallen tabernacle of David; I
will build again the ruins thereof, and will set it up,

Then it seemed good to the apostles and elders with the whole church, Ye must
be circumcised, and keep the law, whom we commanded not; you the same things by
mouth. strangled and fornication; from which keeping yourselves ye will do
well. Fare ye well.

So being dismissed they came to Antioch, Which having read, they rejoiced for
the consolation.

And after certain days Paul said to Barnabas, and see how they do. other; and
Barnabas taking Mark with him, sailed away to Cyprus;

V. 1. Coming down from Judea -- Perhaps to supply what they thought Paul and
Barnabas had omitted.

V. 2. They (the Brethren) determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain
others, should go up to Jerusale^ about this question -- This is the Journey,
to which St. Paul refers, ( G^l. ii. 1.2.) when he says, He went up by
revelation: Which is very consistent with this; for the Church in sending them
might be directed by a Revelation, made either immediately to St. Paul, or to
some other Person, relating to so important an Affair. Important indeed it was,
that these Jewish Impositions should be solemnly opposed in Time; because
Multitudes of Converts were still zealous for the law, and ready to contend for
the O^servance of it. Indeed many of the Christians of A^tio^h would have
acqu^eseed in the Determination of Paul alone. But as many others might have
Pr^judices against him, for his having been so much concerned for the G^ntil^,
it was highly expedient to take the con^urrent Judgment of all (...) Apostles
on this Oc^asion.

V. 4. They were received -- That is solemnly welcomed.

V. 5. But ^ertain Pharis^es -- For even Believers are apt to reta^n their
former Turn of Mind, and Prejudices derived therefrom. The law of Moses -- The
whole L^w both moral and ritual.

V. 7. After much debate It does not appear, that this was among the Apostles
themselves. But if it had, if they themselves had debated at first, yet might
their final Decision be from an unerring D^rection. For how really soever they
were inspired, we need not suppose their Inspiration was always so
instantaneous and express, as to supersede any Deliberation in their own Minds,
or any Consultation with each other. Peter rose up -- This is the last Time he
is mentioned in the Acts.

V. 8. God bare them witness -- That He had accepted them, by giving them the
Holy Ghost.

V. 9. Purifying -- This Word is repeated, from chapter x. 15. their hearts -- The
Heart is the proper Seat of Purity, by faith -- Without concerning themselves
with the Mosaic Law.

V. 10. Now therefore -- Seeing these Things are so: Why tempt^e God? -- Why do
ye provoke Him to Anger, by putting so heavy a yoke on their neck?

V. 11. The Lord Jesus -- He does not here say Our Lord: Because in this solemn
Place he means, the LORD of All, We -- Jews, shall be saved even as they --
Gentiles, namely, through the Grace of the Lord Jesus, not by our Observance of
the ceremonial Law.

V. 12. Miracles and wonders -- By which also wh^t St. Peter had said was
confirmed.

V. 14. Simon has declared -- James the Apostle of the Hebrews, calls Peter by
his Hebrew Name To take out of them a people for his name -- That is, to
believe in Him, to be called by his Name.

V. 15. To this agree -- St. Peter had urged the plain Fact, which St. James
confirms by Scripture Prophecy, the words of the prophets -- One of whom is
immed^ely cited.

V. 16. After this -- After the Jewish Dispensation expires I will build again
the fallen tabernacle of David -- By ^aising from his Seed the Christ, who
shall build on the Ruins of his f^lien Tabernacle a spiritual and eternal
Kingdom.

V. 17. The Gentiles on whom my name is called -- That is, who are called by my
Name; who are my People

V. 18. Known unto God are all his works from eternity -- Which the Apostle
infers from the Prophecy itself, and the A^ompli^ment of it. And this
Conversion of the Gentiles being known to Him from Eternity, we ought not to
think a new or strange Thing.

It Is observable, he does not speak of GOD'S Works in the Natural World (which
had been nothing to his present Purpose) but of his Dealing with the Children
of Men. Now he could not know these, without knowing the Characters and Actions
of particular Persons, on a Correspondence with which the Wisdom and Goodness
of his providential Dispensations is founded. For instance, he could not know,
how he would deal with Heathen Idolaters (whom He was now calling into his
Church) without knowing there would be Heathen Idolaters: And yet this was a
Thing purely contingent, a Thing as dependent on the Freedom of the human Mind,
as any we can imagine. This Text therefore, among a thousand more, is an
unanswerable Proof, that GOD forek nows Future Cont^ng^nei^s, though there are
Diffien ties relating hereto which Man cannot solve.

V. 20. To abstain from fornication -- Which even the Philosophe^s among the
Heathens, did not account any Fault. It was particularly frequent in the Wor^ip
of their Idols; on which Account they are h^re named together. And from things
strangled -- That is, from whatever had been killed, without pouring out the
Blood. When GOD fir^ permitted Man to eat I Will, he commanded Noah, and in him
all his Posterity, whenever they killed any Creature for Food, to anstain from
the Blood thereof. It was to be poured upon the ground as water: Doub^less in
Honor of that Blood which was in due Time poured out for the Sin of the World.

V. 21. Perhaps the Connection is, To the Jews we need write nothing on these
Heads. For they hear the Law continually.

V. 22. With the whole church -- Which therefore had a Part therein; to send
chosen men -- Who might put it beyond ^ll Dispute, that this was the Judgment
of the Apostles and all the Brethren.

V. 23. Writine thus and sending it by their hand -- The wh^^ Conduct of this
Affair plainly shows, that the Church in those Day had no Conception of St.
Peter's Primacy, or of his being the chief Judge in Controversies. For the
Decree is drawn up, not according to his, but the Apostle James's Proposal and
Direction: And that in the Name, not of St. Peter, but of all the Apostles and
Elders, and of the whole Church. Nay, St. Peters's Name is not mentioned at
all, either in the Order for sending to Jerusalem on the Question, (ver. 2.) or
in the Address of the Messengers concerning it, (ver. 4.) or in the Letter
which was written in Answer.

V. 24. Forasmuch as, etc. The Simplicity, Weightiness, and Conciseness of this
Letter, are highly observable.

V. 26. Men that have hazarded their lives -- This is spoken of Paul and
Barnabas.

V. 27. Who will tell you the same things -- Which we have written.

V. 28. These necessary things -- All of these were necessary for that Time.
But the first of them was not necessary long: And the Direction concerning it
was therefore repealed by the same Spirit, as we read in the former Epistle to
the Corinthians.

V. 29. Blood -- The eating which was never permitted the Children of GOD, from
the Beginning of the World. Nothing can be clearer than this. For 1. from Adam
to Noah, no Man are Flesh at all; consequently no Man then are Blood. 2. When
GOD allowed Noah and his Posterity to eat Flesh, He absolutely forbad them to
eat Blood; and accordingly this, with the other six Precepts of Noah, was
delivered down from Noah to Moses: 3. GOD renewed this Prohibition by Moses,
which was not repented from the Time of Moses, till Christ came: 4. Neither
after his Coming did any presume to repeal this Decree of the Holy Ghost, till
it seemed good to the Bishop of Rome so to do, about the Middle of the Eighth
Century. 5. From that Time those Churches which acknowledged his Authority,
held the eating of Blood to be an indifferent Thing. But, 6. in all those
Churches which never did acknowledge the Bishop of Rome's Authority, it never
was allowed to eat Blood; nor is it allowed at this Day. This is the plain
Fact; let Men reason as plausibly as they please, on one Side or the other.
From which keeping yourselves, ye will do well -- That is, ye will find a
Blessing. This gentle Manner of concluding, was worthy the Apostolical Wisdom
and Goodness. But how soon did succeeding Councils of inferior Authority,
change it into the Style of Anath^na's! Forms which have proved an Occasion of
consecrating some of the most devilish Passions under the most sacred Names:
And like some ill-adjusted Weapons of War, are most likely to hurt the Hand
from which they are thrown.

V. 35. Paul and Barnabas abode in Antioch -- And it was during this Time, that
Peter came down from Jerusalem, and that St. Paul withstood him to the Face,
for separating himself from the Gentiles, Gal. i^. 11, etc.

V. 36. Let us go and visit the brethren in every city where we have preached
-- This was all that St. Paul designed at first. But it was not all ^at GOD
designed by his Journey, whose Providence carried him much farther than he
intended. And see how they do -- How their Souls prosper; how they grow in
Faith, Hope, Love: What else o^ght to be the grand and constant Enquiry in
every Ecclesiastical Visitation? Reader, How do thou do?

V. 37. B^rnabas counseled to take John -- His Kinsman.

V. 38. But Paul thought it not right -- To trust him again, who had deserted
them before: Who had shrunk from the Labor and Danger of converting those,
they were now going to confirm.

V. 39. And there was a sharp contention -- Literally, a Paroxysm, or Fit of a
Fever. But nothing in the Text implies, that the Sharpness was on both Sides.
It is far more probable, that it was not; that St. Paul who had the Right on
his Side (as he undoubtedly had) maintained it with Love. And Barnabas taking
Mark with him, sailed away to Cyprus -- Forsaking the Work in which he was
engaged, he went away to his own Country.

V. 40. But Paul departed -- Held on his intended Course; being recommended by
the brethren to the grace of God -- We do not find that Barnabas staid for
this: O how mighty is the Grace of GOD! Which in the midst of the World, in the
midst of Sin, among so many Snares of Satan, and in spite of the incredible
Weakness and Depravity of Nature; yet overcomes all Opposition, sanctifies,
sustains, and preserves us to the End!

It appears, not only that Paul and Barnabas were afterward thoroughly
reconciled (1 Cor. ix. 6. Gal. ii. 9.) but also that John was again admitted by
S. Paul, as a Companion in his Labors, Col. iv. 10. Phil. ver 24. 2 Timothy iv. 11.

XVI.
And he came down to Derbe and Lystra. And behold a certain disciple was there,
named Timotheus, the son of a certain Jewess that believed; but his father was
a Greek:

And having gone through Phrygia and the region of Galatia, Mysia, they
attempted to go to Bithynia; but the Spirit suffered them not. and a colony.

And we abode in that city certain days. we spoke to the women who were come
together. And a certain woman named Lydia, us saying, Since ye have judged me
to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there. And she
constrained us. them into the marketplace to the magistrates, And having
brought them to the pretors, And teach customs, them with rods. them into
prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely; brought them out he said,
Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

And when it was day, them out, requested that they would depart from the city.
to the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them
and departed.

V. 3. He took and circumcised him, because of the Jews -- The unbelieving
Jews, to whom he designed he should preach. For they would not have conversed
with him at all, so long as he was uncircumcised.

V. 6. And having gone through Phrygia -- And spoken there what was sufficient,
as well as in the region of Galatia, being forbid by the Spirit (probably by an
inward Dictate) to speak as yet in the Proconsular Asia, the Time for it not
being come.

V. 7. Coming to Mysia, and possing it by, as being a Part of Asia they
attempted to go into Bithynia; but the spirit suffered them not -- Forbidding
them as before. Sometimes a strong impression, for which we are not able to
give any Account, is not altogether to be despised.

V. 9. A vision appeared to Paul by night -- It was not a Dream, though it was
by Night. No other Dream is mentioned in the New Testament, than that of
Joseph, and of Pilate's Wife. A man of Macedonia -- Probably an Angel clothed
in the Macedon^an Habit, or using the Lang^age of the Country, and representing
the Inhabitants of it. Help us -- Against Satan, Ignorance, and Sin.

V. 10. We sought to go into Macedonia -- This is the first Place in which St.
Luke intimates his Attendance on the Apostle. And here he does it only in an
oblique Manner. Nor does he throughout the History, once mention his own Name,
or any one Thing, which he did or said for the Service of Christianity. Though
Paul speaks of him in the most honorable Terms, ( Col. iv. 14. 2 Timothy iv. 11.)
and probably, as the Brother, whose pr^ise is in the gospel went through all
the churches. (2 Cor. viii 18) The same Remark may be made on the rest of the
Sacred Historians, who every one of them show the like amiable Modesty.

V. 11. We ran with a strait course -- Which increased their Confidence that
GOD had called them.

V. 12. The first city -- Neapolis was the first City they came to in that Part
of Macedonia, which was nearest to Asia: In that Part which was farthest from
it, Philippi. The River Strymon ran between them. Philippi was a Roman Colony.

V. 13. We went out of the gate -- The Jews usually held their religious
Assemblies (either by Choice or Constraint) at a Distance from the Heathens: By
a river side -- Which was also convenient for purifying themselves. Where
prayer was wont to be made -- Though it does not appear, there was any House
built there. We spoke -- At first in a familiar manner. Paul did not
immediately begin to preach.

V. 14. A worshipper of God -- Probably acquainted with the prophetic Writings,
whose heart the Lord opened -- The Greek word properly refers to the opening of
the Eyes. And the Heart has its Eyes. ( Ephesians. i. 18.) These are closed by
Nature. And to open them is the peculiar Work of GOD.

V. 15. She was baptized and her family -- Who can believe, that in so many
Fami^ies, there was no Insant? Or, that the Jews who were so long accustomed to
circumcise their Children, would not now devote them to GOD by Baptism? She
entreated us -- The Souls of the Faithful cleave to those, by whom they were
gained to GOD. She cons^^ and us^ By her Importunity. They did not immediately
comply, lest any should imagine they sought their own Profit, by coming into
Macedonia.

V. 17. These men are -- A great Truth: But St. Paul did not need, nor would
accept of such Testimony.

V. 19. The ma^^strates -- The Supreme Magistrates of the City. In the next
Verse they are called by a Title which often signifies P^^t^rs. These officers
exercised both the Military and Civil Authority.

V. 20. Being Jews -- A Nation peculiarly despised by the Romans.

V. 21. And teach customs which it is not lawful for us to receive -- The world
has received all the Rules and Doctrines of all the Philosophe. that ever were.
But this is a Property of Gospel Truth; It has something in it peculiarly
intolerable to the World.

V. 23. They laid many stripes upon them -- Either they did not immediately
say, they were Romans; or in the Tumult it was not regarded. Charging the
jai^or -- Perhaps rather to quiet the People than because they thought them
criminal.

V. 24. Secured their feet in the flocks -- These were probably those large
Pieces of Wood, in use among the Romans, which not only l^ded the Legs of the
Prisoner, but also kept them extended in a very painful Manner.

V. 25. Paul and Silas sung an ^mn to God -- Notwithstanding Weariness, Hunger,
Stripes and Blood. And the prisoners heard -- A Song to which they were not
accustomed.

V. 28. But Paul cried -- As they were all then in the dark, it is not easy to
say, how Paul knew of the Jailor's Purpose; un^^ss it were by some immediate
Notice from GOD, which is by no means ^redible. With a land voice -- Through
Earnestness, and because he was at some Distance. Do thyself no harm --
Although the Christian Faith opens the Prospect into another Life, yet it
absolutely forbids and effectually prevents a Man's discharging himself from
this.

V. 30. Sirs -- He did not style them so the Day before. What must I do to ve
saved^ -- From the Guilt I feel, and the Vengeance I sear^ Undoubtedly GOD then
set his Sins in Array before him, and convinced him in the clearest and
strongest Manner, that the Wrath of GOD abode upon him.

V. 31. Thou shall be saved, and thy household -- If ye believe. They did so,
and were saved.

V. 33. He washed their stripes -- It should not be forgot, that the Apostles
had not the Power of working miraculous Cures when they pleased, either on
themselves, or their dearest Friends. Nor was it expedient they should, since
it would have frustrated many wise Designs of GOD, which were answered by their
Sufferings.

V. 34. He set a table before them and rejoiced -- Faith makes a Man Joyful,
prudent, liberal.

V. 35. The pretors sent -- Being probably terrified by the E^rthquake; saying,
Let these men go -- How different from the Charge given a few hours before? And
how great an Ease of Mind to the Jailor?

V. 37. They have beaten us publicly, being Romans -- St. Paul does not always
plead this Privilege. But in a Country where they were entire Strangers, such
Tr^a^^ent might have brought upon them a Suspicion, of having been guilty of
some uncommon Crime, and so have hindered the Course of the Gospel.

V. 40. When they had seen the Brethren, they comforted them and departed --
Though many Circumstances now invited their Stay, yet they wisely complied with
the Request of the Magistrates, that they might not seem to express any Degree
of Obstinacy or Revenge, or give any Suspicion of a Design to stir up the
People.

XVII.
And having journeyed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to
Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews. them and evincing, That
Christ ought to suffer, and to rise from the dead, and that this is the Christ,
even Jesus, whom I declare unto you. them out to the people. one Jesus. And
they alarmed the multitude and the rulers of the city, when they heard these
things.

But the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night to Berea,
thither, went into the synagogue of the Jews. and daily searching the
scriptures,

Now, Epicurean and Stoic philosophers encountered him: and some said, What
would this babbler say? Others, He seems to be a proclaimer of strange gods;
because he preached to them Jesus, and the resurrection. is, which is spoken by
thee? For thou bring certain strange things to our ears;

Then Paul standing in the midst of the Areopagus, addicted to the worship of
invisible powers. That they might seek God, repent. whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. was even
Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them

V. 1. And taking their journey through Amphipolis and Apollonia -- St. Luke
seems to have been lest at Philippi. And to have continued in those Parts,
traveling from Place to Place among the Churches, till St. Paul returned
thither. For here he leaves off speaking of himself as one of St. Paul's
Company; neither does he resume that Style, till we find them together there.
(chapter xx. 5, 6.) After this he constantly uses it to the End of the History.
Amphipolis and Apollonia were Cities of Macedonia.

V. 2. And Paul, according to his custom -- Of doing all Things, as far as
might be, in a regular Manner, went in to them three sabbath days -- Not
excluding the Days between.

V. 4. Of the chief women not a few -- Our Free-thinkers pique themselves upon
observing, That Women are more Religious than Men; and this, in Compliment both
to Religion and good Manners, they impute to the Weakness of their
Understandings. And inde^d as far as Nature can go, in imitating Religion by
performing the outward Act; of it this Picture of Religion may make a ^^irer
Show, in Women than in Men, both by reason of their more tender Passions, and
their Modesty, which will make those Actions appear to more Advantage. But in
the Case of True Religion, which always implies taking up the Cross, especially
in Time of Persecution, Women lie naturally under a great Disadvantage, as
having less Courage than Men. So that their embracing the Gospel was a stronger
Evidence of the Power of Him whose Strength is perfected in Weakness, as a
stronger Assistance of the Holy Spirit was needful for them to overcome their
natural Fearfulness.

V. 11. These were more ingenuous -- or generous. To be teachable in the things
of GOD, is true Generosity of Soul. The receiving the word with all readiness
of mind, and the most accurate Search into the Truth are well consistent.

V. 12. Many of them -- Of the Jews. And of the Grecian women -- Who were
followed by their Husbands.

V. 16. While Paul was waiting for them -- Having no Design, as it seems, to
preach at Athens. But his Zeal for GOD drew him into it unawares, without
staying till his Companions come.

V. 18. Some of the Epicurean and Stoi^philosophers -- The Epicureans entirely
denied a Providence, and held the World to be the Effect of mere Chance;
asserting sensual Pleasure to be Man's chief Good, and that the Soul and Body
died together. The Stoics held, that Matter was eternal; that all Things were
governed by irresistible Fate; that Virtue was its own sufficient Reward, and
Vice its own sufficient Punishment. It Is easy to see, how happily the Apostle
levels his Discourse at some of the most important Errors of each, while,
without expressly attacking either, he gives a plain Summary of his own
religious Principles. What would this babbler ^ay? -- Such is the Language of
Natural Reason, full of, and satisfied with itself. Yet even here St. Paul had
some Fruit; though no where less than at Athens. And no wonder, since this City
was a Seminary of Philosophers, who have ever been the Pest of true Religion.
He seems to be a proclaimer -- This he returns upon them at the 23d Verse, of
strange Gods -- Such as are not known even at Athens. Because he preached to
them Jesus and the resurrection -- A God and a Goddess. And as stupid as this
Mistake was, it is the less to be wondered at, since the Athenians might as
well count the Resurrection a Deity, as Shame, Famine, and many others.

V. 19. The Areopagus, or Hill of Mars (dedicated to Mars, the Heathen God of
War) was the Place where the Athenians held their supreme Court of Judicature.
But it does not appear he was carried thither as a Criminal. The original
Number of its Judges was twelve; but afterward it increased to three hundred.
These were generally Men of the greatest Families in Athens, and were famed for
Justice and Integrity.

V. 21. And the strangers sojourning there -- And catching the Distemper of
them. Some new thing -- The Greek Word signifies some newer Thing. New Things
quickly grew cheap, and they wanted those that were newer still.

V. 22. Then Paul standing in the midst of the Areopagus -- An ample Theater!
Said-Giving them a Lecture of Natural Divinity, with admirable Wisdom,
Acuteness, Fullness, and Courtesy. They enquire after new Things: Paul in his
divinely-philosophical Discourse, begins with the first and goes on to the last
Things, both which were new Things to them. He points out the Origin and the
End of all Things, concerning which they had so many Disputes, and equally
refutes both the Epicurean and Stoic. I perceive -- With what Clearness and
Freedom does he speak! Paul against Athens!

V. 23. I found an altar -- Some suppose this was set up by Socrates, to
express in a covert Way, his Devotion to the only true GOD, while he derided
the Plurality of the Heathen Gods, for which he was condemned to Death: And
others, that whoever erected this Altar, did it in Honor to the GOD of Israel,
of whom there was no Image, and whose Name Jehovah was never made known to the
idolatrous Gentiles. Him proclaim I unto you -- Thus he fixes the wandering
Attention of these blind Philosophers: Proclaiming to them an Unknown, and yet
not a new GOD.

V. 24. God who made the world -- This is demonstrated even to Reason, the One,
True, Good GOD; absolutely different from the Creatures, from every Part of the
visible Creation.

V. 25. Neither is he served as though he needed any thing or Person -- The
Greek Word equally takes in both. To all -- That live and breathe; life -- In
Him we live; and breath -- In Him we move. By breathing Life is continued. I
breathe this Moment: The next is not in my Power: and all things -- For in him
we are. So exactly do the Parts of this Discourse answer each other.

V. 26. He has made of one blood the whole nation of men -- By this Expression
the Apostle ^^ewed them in the most unaffected Manner, that though he was a Jew,
he was not enslaved to any narrow Views, but looked on all Mankind as his
Brethren: Having determined the times -- That it is GOD who gave Men the Earth
to inhabit, Paul proves from the Order of Times and Places, showing the highest
Wisdom of the Disposer, superior to all human Counsels. And the bounds of their
habitation -- By Mountains, Seas, Rivers, and the like.

V. 27. If happily -- The Way is open; GOD is ready to be found. But he will lay
no Force upon Man; They might feel after him -- This is in the Midst between
seeking and finding. Feeling being the lowest and grossest of all our Senses,
is fitly applied to that low Knowledge of GOD; Though he be not far from every
one of us -- We need not go far to seek or find Him. He is very near us; in us.
It is only perverse Reason which thinks, He is afar off.

V. 28. In him -- Not in ourselves, we live and move, and have our being --
This denotes his necessary, intimate, and most efficacious Presence. No Words
can better express the continual and necessary Dependence of all created
Beings, in their Existence and all their Operations, on the First and Almighty
Cause, which the truest Philosophy as well as Divinity teaches. As certain also
of your own poe^s have said -- Aratus, whose Words these are, was an Athenian,
who lived almost three hundred Years before this Time. They are likewise to be
found with the Alteration of one Letter only, in the Hymn of Cleanthes to
Jupiter, or the Supreme Being, one of the purest and finest Pieces of natural
Religion in the whole World of Pagan Antiquity.

V. 29. We ought not to think -- A tender Expression; especially in the first
Person plural. As if he had said, Can GOD Himself be a le^s noble Being, than
we who are his Offspring? Nor does He only here deny, That these are like GOD,
but that they have any Analogy to him at all, so as to be capable of
representing him.

V. 30. The times of ignorance -- What! Does he object Ignorance to the knowing
Athenians? Yes, and they acknowledged it by this very Altar. GOD overlooked --
As one paraphrases it, The Beams of his Eye did in a manner floot over it. He
did not appear to take Notice of them, by sending express Messages to them, as
he did to the Jews. But now -- This Day, this Hour, says Paul, puts an End to
the Divine Forbearance, and brings either greater Mercy or Punishment. Now he
commands all men every where to repent -- There is a Dignity and Grandeur in
this Expression, becoming an Ambassador from the King of Heaven. And this
universal Demand of Repentance, declared universal Guilt in the strongest
manner, and admirably confronted the Pride of the haughtiest Stoic of them all.
At the same time it bore down the idle Plea of Fatality. For how could any one
repent of doing, what he could not but have done?

V. 31. He has appointed a day in which he will judge the wor'd -- How fitly
does he speak this, in their Supreme Court of Justice? By the man -- So he
speaks, suiting himself to the Capacity of his H^arers. Whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead -- GOD raising
Jesus, demonstrated hereby, That he was to be the glorious Judge of all. We are
by no means to imagine, that this was all, which the Apostle intended to have
said. But the Indolence of some of his Hearers, and the Petulancy of others cut
him ^ort.

V. 32. Some mocked -- Interrupting him thereby. They took Offense at that
which is the principal Motive of Faith, from the Pride of Reason. And having
once stumbled at this, they rejected all the rest.

V. 33. So Paul departed -- Leaving his Hearers divided in their Judgment.

V. 34. Among whom was even Dionysins the Areopagite -- One of the Judges of
that Court: on whom some spurious Writings have been fathered in latter Ages,
by those who were fond of high-sounding Nonsense.

XVIII.
tent-makers by trade.

And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, is upon your own head;
I am pure: from henceforth I will go to the Gentiles. one that worshipped God,
whose house was adjoining to the synagogue. people in this city.

But when Gallio was proconful of Achaia, fellow persuadeth men to worship God
contrary to the law. to it; for I will be no judge of these matters.

And Paul still continued many days; then taking leave of the brethren, sailed
thence for Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila, having shaved his head at
Cenchrea; him to tarry longer with them, there,

Now a certain Jew, hearing him, took him to their house, and explained to him
the way of God more perfectly.

V. 1. Paul departing from Athens -- He did not stay there long. The
Philosophers there were too easy, too indolent, and too wise in their own Eyes
to receive the Gospel.

V. 2. Claudius, the Roman Emperor, had commanded all the Jews to depart from
Rome -- All who were Jews by Birth. Whether they were Jews or Christians by
Religion, the Romans were too stately to regard.

V. 3. They were tent-makers by trade -- For it was a Rule among the Jews (and
why is it not among the Christians?) to bring up all their Children to some
Trade, were they ever so rich or noble.

V. 5. And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia -- Silas seems to
have staid a considerable Time at Berea^ but Timothens had come to the Apostle
while he was at Ath^us, and been sent by him to comfort and confirm the Church
at Thessa^onica. (1 Thessa^. iii. 1-5.) But now at length both Silas and
Timotheus came to the Apostle at Corinth. Paul was pressed in spirit -- The
more, probably from what Silas and Timotheus related. Every Christian ought
diligently to observe any such Pressure in his own Spirit, and if it agree with
Scripture, to follow it: If he does not, he will feel great Heaviness.

V. 6. He stook his raiment -- To signify, he would from that time, refrain
from them; and to intimate, That GOD would soon ^ake them off as unworthy to be
numbered among his People. I am pure -- None can say this, but he that has
borne a full Testimony against Sin. From henceforth I will go to the Gentiles
-- But not to them altogether. He did not break off all Intercourse with the
Jews even at Corinth. Only he preached no more in their Synagogue.

V. 7. He went into the house of one named Justus -- A Gentile, and preached
there: though probably he still lodged with Aquila.

V. 8. And many hearing -- The Conversation of Crispus, and the Preaching of
Paul.

V. 10. I am with thee: therefore fear not all the Learning, Politeness.
Grandent, or Power of the Inhabitants of this City. Speak and hold not thy
peace -- For thy Labor shall not be in vain. For I have much people in this
city -- So he prophetically calls them that afterward believed.

V. 11. He continued there a year and six months -- A long Time! But how few
Souls are now gained, ^n a longer Time than this? Who is in the Fault?
Generally both Teachers and Hearers.

V. 12. When Gallio was proconful of Achaia -- Of which Corinth was the chief
City. This Gallio; the Brother of the famous Seneca, is much commended both by
him and by other Writers, for the Sweetness and Gener^sity of his Temper, and
Easin^ss of his Behavior. Yet one Thing he lacked! But he knew it not, and had
no Concern about it.

V. 15. But if it be -- He speaks with the utmost Coolness and Contempt, a
question of names -- The Names of the Heathen Gods were Fables and Shadows. But
the Question concerning the Name of Jesus is of more Importance than all Things
else under Heaven. Yet there is this Singularity (among a thousand other^) in
the Christian Religion, that human Reason, curious as it is in all other
Things, abhors to enquire into it.

V. 17. Then they all took Sosthenes -- The Successor of Crispus, and probably
Paul's ch^ef Accuser, and beat him -- It seems because he had occasioned them
so much trouble to no purpose, before the judgment seat -- One can hardly think
in the Sight of Gallio, though at no great Distance from it. And it seems to
have had an happy Effect. For Sosthenes himself was afterward a Christian, 1
Cor. i. 1.

V. 18. Paul continued for many days -- After the Year and Six Months, to
confirm the Brethren, Aquila, having shaved his head -- As was the Custom in a
Vow. (chapter xxi. 24. Numb vi. 18.) At Cenchrea -- A Seaport Town, at a small
Distance from Corinth.

V. 21. I must by all means keep the feast at Jerusalem -- This was not from
any Apprehension, that he was obliged in Conscience to keep the Jewish seases.
But to take the Opportunity of meeting a great Number of his Countrymen to whom
he might preach Christ, or whom he might farther instruct, or free from the
Prejudices they had imbibed against him But I will return to you -- So he did,
chapter xix. 1.

V. 22. And landing at Cesarea, he went up -- Immediately to Jerusalem; and
saluted the church -- Eminently so e^led, being the Mother Church of Christian
Believers: And having kept the Feast there, he went down from thence to Antioch.

V. 23. He went over the country of Galatia and Phrygia -- It is supposed,
spending about four Years therein, including the Time he staid at Ephesus.

V. 24. An eloquent man, mighty in the Scriptures -- Of the Old Testament.
Every Talent may be of use in the Kingdom of GOD, if joined with Knowledge of
the Scriptures and Fervor of Spirit.

V. 25. This man had been instructed -- Though not perfectly, in the way of the
Lord -- In the Doctrine of Christ. Knowing only the baptism of John -- Only
what John taught those whom he baptized, namely, To repent and believe in a
Messiah shortly to appear.

V. 26. He spoke -- Privately; and taught Publicly. Probably he returned to
live at Alexandria, soon after he had been baptized by John; and so had no
Opportunity of being fully acquainted with the Doctrines of the Gospel, as
delivered by Christ and his apostles. And explained to him the way of God more
perfectly -- He who knows Christ, is able to instruct even those that are
mighty in the Scriptures.

V. 27. Who greatly helped through grace -- It is through Grace only that any
Gift of any one is profitable to another. Them that had believed -- Apollos did
not plant, but water. This was the peculiar Gift which he had received. And he
was better able to convince the Jews, than to convert the Heathens.

XIX.
this, the Lord Jesus. his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came upon them, and
they spoke with tongues and prophesied.

And God wrought special miracles by the hands of know; pieces of silver. So
powerfully did the word of God grow and prevail.

After these things were ended, And about that time there arose no small tumult
concerning the way. this, they were filled with rage, and cried out, saying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians, is Diana of the Ephesians. image which fell
down from Jupiter? blasphemers of your goddess.

V. 1. Having passed through Galatia and Phrygia, which were termed The Upper
Parts of Asia Minor -- Certain disciples -- who had been formerly baptized by
John the Baptist, and since imperfectly instructed in Christianity.

V. 2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost? -- The Extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, as well as his sanctifying Graces? We have not so much as heard --
Whether there be any such Gifts.

V. 3. Into what were ye baptized? Into what Dispensation? To the sealing of
what Doctrine? Into John's baptism -- We were baptized by John, and believe
what he taught.

V. 4. John baptized -- That is, the whole Baptism and Preaching of John
pointed at Christ. After this John is mentioned no more in the New Testament.
Here he gives Way to Christ altogether.

V. 5. And hearing this, they were baptized -- By some other. Paul only said
his hands upon them. They were baptized -- They were baptized twice; but not
with the same baptism. John did not administer that Baptism, which Christ
afterward commanded, that is, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

V. 9. The way -- The Christian Way of worshipping GOD: He departed -- Leaving
them their Synagogue to themselves; Discoursing daily -- Not on the Sabbath
only, in the School of one Tyrannus -- Which we do not find was any otherwise
consecrated, than by preaching the Gospel there.

V. 10. All who desired it among the inhabitants of the Proconsular Asia, now
heard the word: St. Paul had been forbidden to preach it in Asia before; (chapter
xvi. 6.) But now the Time was come.

V. 11. Special miracles -- Wrought in a very uncommon Manne^.

V. 12. Evil spirits -- Who also occasioned many of those Diseases, which yet
might appear to be purely natural.

V. 13. Exorcists -- Several of the Jews about this Time pretended to a Power
of casting out Devils, particularly by certain Arts or Charms, supposed to be
derived from Solomon. Undertook to name -- Vain Undertaking! Satan laughs at
all those, who attempt to expel him either out of the Bodies or the Souls of
Men but by Divine Faith. All the Light of Reason is nothing, to the Craft or
Strength of that subtle Spirit. His Craft cannot be known but by the Spirit of
GOD; nor can his Strength be conquered, but by the Power of Faith.

V. 17. And the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified -- So that even the Malice
of the Devil wrought for the Furtherance of the Gospel.

V. 18. Many came confessing -- Of their own Accord, and openly declaring their
deeds -- The Efficacy of GOD'S Word, penetrating the inmost Recesses of their
Soul, wrought that free and open Confession to which perhaps even Torments
would not have compelled them.

V. 19. Curious arts -- Magical Arts, to which that soft Appellation was given
by those who practiced them. Ephesus was peculiarly famous for these. And as
these Practices were of so much Reputation there, it is no Wonder the Books
which taught them should bear a great Price. Bringing their Books together --
As it were by common Consent, burnt them -- Which was far better than selling
them, even though the Money had been given to the Poor Fifty thousand pieces of
Silver -- If these Pieces of Silver be taken for Jewish Shekels, the Sum will
amount to six thousand two hundred and fifty Pounds.

V. 20. So powerfully did the word of God grow -- In Extent, and prevail -- In
Power and Efficacy.

V. 21. After these things were ended -- Paul sought not to rest, but ^ressed
on, as if he had yet done nothing. He is already possessed of Ephesus and Asia.
He purposes for Macedonia and A^aia. He has his Eye upon Jerusalem; then upon
Rome; afterward on S^ain. ( Romans xv. 26.) No Caesar, no Alexander the Great, no
other Hero, comes up to the Magnanimity of this little Be^jamite. Faith and
Love to GOD and Man had enlarged his Heart, even as the Sand of the Se^.

V. 24. Silver shrines -- Silver Models of that famous Temple, which were
bought not only by the Citizens, but by Strangers from all Parts. The
artificers -- The other Silver-smiths.

V. 25. The workmen -- Employed by him and them.

V. 26. Saying, that they are not gods, which are made with hands -- This
manifestly shows, that the contrary Opinion did then generally prevail, namely,
that there was a real Divinity in their sacred Images. Though some of the latter
Heathens spoke of them just as the Romanists do now.

V. 27. There is danger, not only that this our craft [Trade] should come into
disgrace, but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be
despised -- No Wonder a Discourse should make so deep an Impression, which was
edged both by interest and Superstition. The great goddess was one of the
standing Titles of Diana. Her majesty destroyed -- Miserable Majesty, which was
capable of being thus destroyed! Whom all Asia and the world -- That is, the
Roman Empire, worship^eth -- Although under a great Variety of Titles and
Characters. But the Multitude of those that err, does not turn Error into Truth.

V. 29. They rushed with one accord -- Demetrius and his Company, into the
theater -- Where Criminals were wont to be thrown to the wild Beasts, dragging
with them Calus and Aristarchus* When they could not find Paul. Probably they
hoped to oblige them to fight with the wild Beasts, as some think St. Paul had
done before.

V. 30. When Paul would have gone in to the people -- Being above all Fear, to
plead the Cause of his Companions, and prove they are not Gods which are made
with Hands.

V. 31. The principal officers of Asia -- The As^an Priests, who pressded over
the public Games, which they were then celebrating (...) Honor of Diana.

V. 32. The greater part did not know for what they were come together -- Which
is commonly the Case in such an Assembly.

V. 33. And they thrust forward -- Namely the Artificers and Workmen, Alexander
-- Probably some well-known Christian whom they saw in the Crowd: The Jews
pushing him on -- To expose him to the more Danger. And Alexander waving with
his hand -- In Token of desiring Silence, would have made a defense -- For
himself and his Brethren.

V. 34. But when they knew that he was a Jew -- And consequently an Enemy to
their Worship of Images.

V. 35. The register -- Probably the chief Governor of the public Games. The
imaye which fell down from Jupiter -- They believed that very Image of Diana,
which stood in her Temple, fell down from Jupiter in heaven. Perhaps he
designed to insinuate, as if falling down from Jupiter, it was not made with
hands, and so was not that Sort of Idols, which Paul had said were no Gods.

V. 37. Nor blasphemers of your goddess -- They simply declared the One GOD,
and the Vanity of Idols in general.

V. 38. There are proconsuls -- One in every Province. There was one at Ephesus.

V. 39. In a lawful asse^bly -- In such a regular Assembly as has Authority to
judge of religious and political Affairs.

V. 40. This concourse -- He wisely calls it by an inoffensive Name.

XX.
them, departed to go into Macedonia. there three months, an ambush being laid
for him by the Jews, as he was about to sail into Syria, he determined to
return through Macedonia. Paul being to depart on the morrow, preached to them,
him in his arms, said, day we touched at Samos, and having tarried at
Trogyllium, the day after came to Miletus. For Paul had determined to sail by
Ephesus,

And sending to Ephesus from Miletus, And that I have withheld nothing which
was profitable,

And now being bound by the Spirit, saying that bonds and afflictions await me.
am pure from the blood of all men: For I have not shunned to declare unto you
all the council of God. I ceased not to warn every one, night and day, with
tears.

And now,

V. 1. After the (...) was ce^sed -- So Demetrius gained nothing. Paul remained
there till all was quiet.

V. 2. He came into Greece -- That Part of it, which lay between Macedonia and
Achaia.

V. 3. An ambush being laid for him -- In his Way to the Ship.

V. 4. To Asia -- There some of them left him. But Trophimu^ went with him to
j^rusalem, (chapter xxi. 29.) Aristarchus, even to Rome. (chapter xxvii. 2.)

V. 6. We set sail -- St. Luke was now with St. Paul again, as we learn from
his Manner of expressing himself.

V. 7. To break bread -- That is, to celebrate the LORD's Supper; contin^ed his
discourse -- Through uncommon Fervor of Spirit.

V. 8. There were many lamps in the room where they were assembled -- To
prevent any possible Scandal.

V. 9. In the window -- Doubtless kept open, to prevent Heat, both from the
Lamps and Number of People.

V. 10. Paul fell on him -- It is observable, our LORD never used this Gesture.
But Elijah and Elisha did as well as Paul. His life is in him -- He is alive
again.

V. 11. So departed -- Without taking any Rest at all.

V. 12. And they brought the young man alive -- But alas! how many of those who
have allowed themselves to sleep under Sermons, or as it were, to dream awake,
have slept the Sleep of eternal Death, and fallen to rise no more!

V. 13. Being himself to go on foot -- That he might enjoy the Company of his
Christian Brethren a little longer: Although he had passed the Night without
Sleep, and though Assos was of difficult and dangerous Access by land.

V. 14. Mity^ene -- Was a City and Port of the Isle Lesbos, about seven Miles
distant from the Asiatic Coast

V. 16. For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus -- Which lay on the other
Side of the Bay. He hasted to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pent^ost -- Because
then was the greatest Concourse of People.

V. 17. Sending to Ephesus he called the olders of the church -- These are
called Bishops in the 28th verse, (rendered Overseers in our Translation.)
Perhaps, E^ders and Bishops were then the same: Or no otherwise di^erent, than
are the Rector of a Pari^ and his Curates.

V. 18. Ye know -- Happy is he who can thus appeal to the Conscience of his
Hearers.

V. 19. Serving -- See the Picture of a faithful Servant! The Lord -- Whose the
Church is, with all humility, and with tears, and trials -- These are the
Concomitants of it. The Service itself is described more particularly in the
following verse. This Humility he recommends to the Ephesians themselves, Ephesians.
iv. 2. His Tears are mentioned again, ver. 31. as also 2 Cor. ii. 4. Phil iii.
18. These Passages laid together, supply us with the genuine Character of St.
Paul. Holy Tears, from those who seldom weep on account of Natural Occurrences,
are no mean Specimen of the Efficacy, and Proof of the Truth of Christianity.
Yet Joy is well consistent therewith (ver. 24.) The same Person may be
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing.

V. 20. I have preached -- Publicly; and taught -- from House to House. Else
he had not been pure from their Blood. For even an Apostle could not discharge
his Duty by Public Preaching only. How much less can an ordinary Pastor?

V. 21. Repentance toward God -- The very first Motion of the Soul toward GOD,
is a kind of Repentance.

V. 22. Bound by the Spirit -- Strongly impelled by Him.

V. 23. Save that -- Only this I know in general; The Holy Ghost witnesses --
By other Persons. Such was GOD'S good Pleasure, to reveal these Things to him
not immediately, but by the Ministry of others.

V. 24. Nor do I count my life precious -- It adds great Force to this and all
the other Passages of Scripture, in which the Apostles express their Contempt
of the World, that they were not uttered by Persons like Seneca and Autonius,
who talked elegantly of despising the World, in the full Affluence of all its
Enjoyments: But by Men who daily underwent the greatest Calamities, and exposed
their Lives in Proof of their Assertions.

V. 25. Ye shall see my face no more -- He wisely inserts this, that what
follows might make the deeper Impression.

V. 27. For I have not shunned -- Otherwise, if any had perished, their Blood
would have been on his Head.

V. 28. Take heed therefore -- I now devolve my Care upon you; first to
yourselves, then to the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers -- For no Man or Number of Men upon Earth can constitute an Overseer,
Bishop, or any other Christian Minister. To do this, is the peculiar Work of
the Holy Ghost: To feed the church of God -- That is, the believing, loving,
holy Children of GOD, which he has ^urchased -- How precious is it then in his
Sight! With his own blood -- For it is the Blood of the only begotten Son of
GOD, 1 John i. 7.

V. 29. Grievous wolves -- From without, namely, false Apostles. They had not
yet broke in on the Church at Ephesus.

V. 30. Yea, from among yourselves men will arise -- Such were the Nicolaitans,
of whom Christ complains, Rev. ii. 6. To draw away disciples -- From the Purity
of the Gospel, and the Unity of the Body.

V. 31. I ceased not to warn every one night and day -- This was watching
indeed! Who copies after this Example?

V. 32. The word of his grace -- It is the grand Channel of it, to Believers,
as well as Unbelievers. Who is able to build you up -- To confirm and increase
your Faith, Love, Holiness. GOD can thus build us up, without any Instrument.
But He does build us up by them. O beware of dreaming, that you have less need
of human Teachers after you know Christ th^n before! And to give you an
inheritance -- Of eternal Glory, among them that are sanctified -- And so made
meet for it. A large Number of these Paul doubtless knew, and remembered before
GOD.

V. 33. I have coveted -- Here the Apostle begins the other Branch of his
Farewell Discourse, like old Samuel, (1 Samuel xii. 3.) taking his Leave of the
Children of Israel.

V. 34. These hands -- Callous, as you see, with Labor. Who is he that envies
such a Bishop or Archbishop as this?

V. 35. I have showed you Bishops, by my Example; all things -- And this among
the rest; that thus laboring -- So far as the Labors of your Office allow you
Time; ye ought to help the weak -- Those who are disabled by Sickness^ or any
bodily Infirmity, from maintaining themselves by their own Labor. And to
remember -- Effectually, so as to follow it; the word which be himself said --
Without doubt his Disciples remembered many of his Words which are not
^ecorded; It is happier to ^ive -- To imitate GOD, and have Him, as it were,
indebted to us.

V. 37. They all wept -- Of old, Men, yea, the best and bravest of Men, were
easily melted into Tears; a thousand instance of which might be produced from
profane as well (...) lacred Writ^s. But now, notwithstanding the Effeminacy
which almost univer^^ly prevails, we leave those Tears to Women and Children.

V. 38. Sorrowing most, for that word which he spoke, That they should see his
face no more -- What Sorrow will be in the great Day when GOD shall speak that
Word, to all who are found on the Lefthand, that they shall see his Face no
more!

XXI.
it on the left hand, we sailed to Syria, and landed at Tire; for there the
ship was to unload her burden. our voyage, we came from Tire to Ptolemais, and
saluting the brethren, was one of the seven, him into the hands of the
Gentiles. And when we heard these things,

And after these days, some of the disciples also from Cesarea went with us,
and brought us to one Mnason, a Cyprian, an old disciple, with whom we should
lodge.

And when we were come up to Jerusalem, it, they glorified God, and said to
him, Thou see, brother, how many thousands of believing Jews there are, and
they are all zealous for the law. their children, have a vow on them: that thou
thyself walk orderly, keeping the law. holy place.

And as they went about to kill him, him to be bound with two chains, and
enquired, Who he was, and what he had done! But some among the multitude cried
out one thing, he was borne of the soldiers, through the violence of the
multitude. his hand to the people: and a great silence being made, he spoke to
them in the Hebrew tongue, saying, Brethren, and fathers, hear ye now my
defense unto you.

V. 1. And when we were torn away from them -- Not without doing Violence both
to ourselves and them.

V. 3. We landed at Tire -- That there should be Christians there was foretold,
Psalm. lxxx. ii. 4. What we read in that Psalm of the P^^l^s^ines and Ethiopians
also may be compared with Acts viii. 40. xxvii. 4.

V. 4. And finding dis^^^les, we tarried there seven days -- In order to spend
a Sabbath with them. Who to^d Paul by the Spirit -- That Afflictions awaited
him at Jerusalem. This was properly what they said by the Spirit. They
themselves advised him, Not to go up The Disciples seemed to understand their
Prophetie Impulse, to be an Intimation from the Spirit, That Paul, if he were
so minded, might avoid the Danger, by not going to Jerusalem.

V. 7. Having finished our voyage -- From Macedonia, (chapter xx. 6.) we came to
Ptolemais: A celebrated City on the Seacoast, anciently called Accos. It is
now, like many other once noble Cities, only an Heap of Ruins.

V. 8. We came to Cesare^ -- So called from a stately Temple, which Herod the
Great dedicated there to Angustus Caesar. It was the Place where the Roman
Governor of Judea generally resided and kept his Court. The Evangelist, who was
one of the seven Deacons. -- An Evangelist is, A Preacher of the Gospel to
those who had never heard it, as Philip had done to the Samaritans, to the
Ethiopean Eunuch, and to all the Towns from Azotus to Cesarea. (chapter viii. 5.
26, 40.) It Is not unlikely he spent the following Years, preaching in Tire and
Sidon, and the other Heathen Cities, in the Neighborhood of Galilee, his House
being at Cesarea, a convenient Situation for that Purpose. We abode with him --
We lodged at his House, during our Stay at Cesarea.

V. 10. A certain prophet came -- The nearer the Event was, the more express
were the Predictions which prepared Paul for it.

V. 11. Binding his own feet and hands -- In the Manner that Malefactors were
wont to be bound, when apprehended. So shall the Jews bind the man, whose
girdle this is -- St. Paul's Bonds were first particularly foretold at Cesarea,
to which he afterward came in Bonds, chapter xxiii. 33.

V. 12. Both we (his Fellow-travellers) and they of the place besought him, Not
to go up to Jerusalem -- St. Paul knew that this Prediction had the Force of a
Command. They did not know this.

V. 13. Breaking my heart -- For the Apostles themselves were not void of human
Affections. I am ready not only to be bound, but to die -- And to him that is
ready for it, the Burden is light.

V. 14. And when he would not be persuaded -- This was not Obstinacy, but true
Christian Resolution. We should never be persuaded, either to do Evil, or to
omit doing any Good which is in our Power; saying, The will of the Lord be done
-- Which they were satisfied, Paul knew.

V. 15. We took up our carriages -- Or Baggage; which probably went by Sea
before. What they took with them now in particular was, The Alms they were
carrying to Jerusalem, chapter xxiv. 17.

V. 16. The disciples brought us to one Mnason, a Cyprian, an old disciple --
He was a Native of Cyprus, but an Inhabitant of Jerusalem, and probably one of
the first Converts there.

V. 18. Paul went in with us -- That it might appear, we are all of one Mind,
to James -- Commonly called the LORD's Brother; the only Apostle then presiding
over the Churches in Judea.

V. 20. They are all zealous for the law -- For the whole Mosai^ Dispensation.
How astonishing is this! Did none of the Apostles, beside St. Paul know, That
this Dispensation was now abolished^ And if they did both know and testify
this, how came their Hearers not to believe them?

V. 21. They have been informed concerning thee, that thou teach the Jews --
not to circumcise their children, nor to walk after the customs -- of the
Mosaic Law. And so undoubtedly he did. And so he wrote to all the Churches in
Galatia, among whom were many Jews^ Yea, and James himself had long before
assented to Peter, affirming before all the Apostles and all the Brethren, (chapter
xv. 10.) Th^^ this very Law was a yoke, which (said he) neither our fathers nor
(...) were able to bear -- A mazing! That they did not now know this^ Or, that
if they did, they did not openly testify it at all Hazards, to every Jewish
Convert in Jerusalem!

V. 22. What is it therefore? -- What is to be done? The multitude must needs
come together -- They will certainly gather together, in (...) tumultuous
Manner, unless they be some Way pacified.

V. 23. Therefore -- To obviate their Prejudice against thee: D^ this that we
say to thee -- Doubtless they meant this Advice well: Bu^ could Paul follow it
in godly Sincerity? Was not the yielding so (...) to the Judgment of others,
too great a Deference to be paid to any mere Men?

V. 24. And all will know -- that thou thyself walk orderly, keeping the law
-- Ought he not, without any Reverence to Man, where the Truth of GOD was so
deeply concerned, to have answered plainly, I do not keep the Mosaic Law;
neither need any of you. Yea, Peter does not keep the Law. And GOD himself
expressly commanded him not to keep it; ordering him to go in to men
uncircumcised, and to eat with them. (chapter xi. 3) which the Law utterly forbids.

V. 26. Then Paul took the men -- Yielding his own Judgment to their Advice,
which seemed to flow not out of spiritual, but carnal Wisdom; seeming to be
what he really was not: Making as if he believed the Law still in force.
Declaring -- Giving Notice to the Priests in waiting, that he designed to
accomplish the days of purification, till after the Sacrifice should be
offered, as the Mosaic Law required, ( Numb. vi 13.)

V. 27. And when the seven days were about to be accomplished -- When after
giving Notice to the Priests, they were entering upon the Accomplishment of
those Days. It was toward the Beginning of them that Paul was seized. The Jews
that were from Asia -- Some of those Jews who came from Asia to the Feast.

V. 28. Against the people -- The Jewish Nation; and the law -- Of Moses; and
this place -- The Temple. Yea, and has even brought Greeks into the temple --
They might come into the Outer Court. But they imagined Paul had brought them
into the Inner Temple, and had thereby polluted it.

V. 30. And immediately the gates were shut -- Both to prevent any further
Violation of the Temple; and to prevent Paul's taking Sanctuary at the Horns of
the Altar.

V. 31. And as they went about to kill him -- It was a Rule among the Jews,
That any uncircumcised Person who came into the Inner Temple, might be stoned
without further Process. And they seemed to think, Paul who brought such in
thi^ her, deserved no better Treatment. Word came to the tribune -- A Cohort or
Detachment of Soldiers, belonging to the Roman Legion, which lodged in the
^diacent Castle of Antonia, were stationed on Feast-days near the Temple, to
prevent Disorders. It is evident, Lysias himself was not present, when the
Tumult began. Probably he was the oldest Roman Tribune (or Colonel) then at
Jerusalem. And as such be was the commanding Officer of the Legion quartered at
the Castle.

V. 33. Then the tribune -- Having made his Way through the Multitude, came
near and took him -- And how many great Ends of Providence were answered by
this Imprison ent? This was not only a Means of preserving his Life (after he
had suffered severely for worldly Prudence) but gave him an Opportunity of
preaching the Gospel safely, in spite of all Tumult; (chapter xxii. 22.) year and
that in those Places, to which otherwise he could have had n^ Access, (ver.
40.) And commanded him to ^e bound with two chain^ -- Taking it for granted, he
was some not rions Offender. And thus ^he Prophecy of Agabus was fulfilled,
though by the Hands of a Roman.

V. 35. When he came upon the stairs -- The Castle Antonia was situate on a
Rock fifty Cubits high, at that Corner of the Outward Temple, where the western
and northern Por^cos joined, to each of which there were Stairs descending from
it.

V. 37. As Paul was about to be brought into the castle -- The Wisdom of GOD
taught him, to make Use of tha^ very Time and Place.

V. 38. Art thou not that Eg^y^tian -- Who came into Jud^, when Felix had been
some Years Governor there? Calling himself a Prophet, he drew much People after
him: and having brought them through the Wilderness, led them to Mount Oliver,
promising that the Walls of the City should fill down before them. But Felix
marching out of Jerusalem against him, his Followers quickly dispersed: Many of
whom were taken or slain; but he himself made his Escape.

V. 40. In the Hebrew tongue -- That Dialect of it, which was then commonly
spoken at Jerusalem

XXII.
this day. a devout man according to the law, there, said to me, Depart: for I
will send thee far off to the Gentiles.

And they heard him to this word, then lifted up their voice and said, Away
with such a fellow from the earth; for it is not fit that he should live. And
as they cried out, it, went and told the tribune, saying, Consider what thou
art about to do; for this man is a Roman. freeborn. Then they who were going
to examine him, immediately departed from him: and the tribune was afraid,
after he knew he was a Roman, because he had bound him.

And on the morrow, his bonds, and commanded the chief priests and all the
council to come; and bringing Paul down, set him before them.

V. 1. Hear ye now my defense -- Which they could not hear before, for the
Tumult.

V. 3. I am verily -- This Defense answers all that is objected chapter xxi. 28 As
there, so here also mention is made of the Person of Paul, ver. 3. of the
people and the law, ver. 3, 5, 12; of the temple, ver. 17; of teaching all men,
ver. 15 -- 17, 21; and of the Truth of his Doctrine, ver. 6. But he speaks
closely and nervously, in few Words, because the Time was short. But brought up
at the feet of Gamaliel -- The Scholars usually sat on low Seats, or upon Mats
on the Floor, at the Feet of their Masters, whose Seats were (...) to a
considerable Height. Accurately instructed -- The learned Education which Paul
had received, was once no doubt the Mat^er of his Boasting and Confidence.
Unsanctified Learning made his bonds strong, and furnished him with numerous
Arguments against the Gospel. Yet when the Grace of GOD had changed his Heart,
and turned his Accomplishments into another Channel, he was the fitter
Instrument to serve GOD's wise and merciful Purposes, in the Defense and
Propagation of Christianity.

V. 4. And persecuted this way -- With the same Zeal that you do now. Binding
both men and women -- How much better was his Condition, ^ow he was bound
himself?

V. 5. The high pri^st is my witness -- Is able to testify. The brethren --
Jews: So this Title was not peculiar to the Christians.

V. 6. About noon -- All was done in the Face of the Sun. A great light shone
-- By whatever Method GOD reveals Himself to us, we shall have everlasting
Cause to recollect it with Pleasure. Especially when he has gone in any
remarkable Manner out of his common Way, for this gracious Purpose. If so, we
should often dwell on the particular Circumstances, and be ready, on every
proper Occasion, to recount those Wonders of Power and Love, for the
Encouragement and Instruction of others.

V. 9. They did not hear the voice -- Distinctly; but only a confused Noise.

V. 12. A devout man according to the law -- A truly religious Person, and
though a Believer in Christ, yet a strict Observer of the Law of Moses.

V. 16. Be baptized, and wash away thy sins -- Baptism administered to real
Penitents, is both a Means and Seal of Pardon. Nor did GOD ordinarily in the
primitive Church bestow this on any, unless through this Means.

V. 17. When I was returned to Jerusalem -- From Damascus, and was praying in
the temple -- Whereby he shows that he still paid the Temple its due Honor, as
the House of Prayer. I was in a trance -- Perhaps he might continue standing
all the while, so that any who were near him, would hardly discern it.

V. 18. And I saw him -- Jesus, Saying to me, Depart quickly out of Jerusalem
-- Because of the Snares laid for thee; and in order to preach, where they will
hear.

V. 19. And I said -- It is not easy for a Servant of Christ, who is himself
deeply impressed with divine Truths, to imagine to what a Degree Men are capable
of hardening their Hearts against them. He is often ready to think with Paul,
It Is impossible for any to resist such Evidence. But Experience makes him
wiser, and shows that wilful Unbelief is Proof against all Truth and Reason.

V. 20. When the blood of thy martyr Step^en was shed, I also was standing by
-- A real Convert still retains the Remembrance of his former Sins. He
confesses them, and is humbled for them, all the Days of his Life.

V. 22. And they heard him to this word -- Till he began to speak of his
Mission to the Gentiles, and this too in such a Manner as implied that the Jews
were in Danger of being cast off.

V. 23. They rent their garments -- In Tol^en of Indignation and Horror at this
pretend d^blaspnemy, and cast dust into the air -- Through Vehemence of Rage,
which they knew not how to vent.

V. 25. And as they -- The Soldiers ordered by the Tribune, were binding him
with thongs -- A Freeman of Rome might be bound with a Chain and beaten with a
Staff: But he might not be bound with Thongs, neither scourged or beaten with
Rods; Paul sa^d to the centurion -- The Captain who stood by to see the Orders
of the Tribune executed.

V. 26. Consider what thou art about to do; for this man is a Roman -- Yea,
there was a stronger Reason to consider. For this man was a Servant of GOD.

V. 28. But I was fr^^-born -- Not barely as being born at Tarsus; (...) this
was not a Roman Colony. But probably either his Father, (...) some of his
Ancestors had been made free of Rome for some (...) ^ilitary Service.

V. 29. We learn hence, that we are under no Obligation as Christians, to give
up our civil Privileges (which we are to receive and prize as the G^ft of GOD)
to every insolent Invader In a thousand Cir^umstances Gratitude to GOD, and
Duty to Men, will oblige us to insist u^^n them; and engage us to strive to
transmit them improved, rather than impaired, to Posterity.

XXIII.
Exodus xxii. 28.
Thou shall not revile the ruler of thy people.

And the night following, so thou must testify at Rome also. their lying in
wait, came, and entering into the castle, of them lie in wait, who have bound
themselves with a curse, neither to eat nor drink till they have killed him:
and now are they ready, expecting a promise from thee. him. Tell no man, that
thou have discovered these things to me. him safe to Felix the governor. him to
thee, commanding his accusers also to say before thee what they have against
him. Farewell.

The soldiers therefore taking Paul, him by night to Antipatris. it, he asked
of what province he was? And being informed that he was of Cilicia,

V. 1. And Paul earnestly beholding the council -- Professing a clear
Conscience by his very Countenance; and likewise waiting to see, whether any of
them was minded to a^k him any Question, said, I have lived in all good
conscience before God till this day -- He speaks chiefly of the Time since he
became a Christian For none questioned him concerning what had been before. And
yet even in h^s unconverted State, although he was in Error, yet he had acted
from Conscience, Before God -- Whatever Men may think or say of me.

V. 3. Then said Paul -- Being carried away by a sudden and prophetic Impulse,
God is about to smite thee, thou wh^ted wall Fair without; full of Dirt and
Rubbi^h within. And he might well be so termed, not only as he committed this
Outrage, while gravely sitting on the Tribunal of Justice; but also as, at the
same T^me that he stood high in the E^t^em of the Citizens, he cruelly
defrauded the priests of their leg^l Subsistence, so hat some of them even
p^ri^ed for Want. And GOD did remarkably smite him; for about five Years after
this, his House being r^duced to A^es, in a Tumult begun by his own Son, he was
besieged in the royal Palace; where having hid himself in an old Aqueduct, he
was dragged out and miserably slain.

V. 5. I was not aware, Brethren, that it was the high priest -- He seems to
mean, I did not advert to it, in the prophetic Transport of my Mind: But he
does not add, That his not adverting to it proc^ed (...) from the Power of the
Spirit coming upon him; as knowing they were not able to bear it. This Answer a
^mirably shows the Situ^tion of Mind he was then in, partly with regard to the
Bystand^rs whom he thus so^^ens, adding also the Title of Brethren, and
^stifying their Reproof by the Prohibition of Moses; partly with regard to
himself, who, after that singular Transport subsided, was again under the
Direction of the General Command.

V. 6. I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: for the hope of the resurrection
of the dead am I called in question -- So he was in Effect; although not
formally, or explicitly.

V. 8. The Pharisees confess both -- Both the Resurrection, and the Existence
of Angels and separate Spirits.

V. 9. And the Scribes of the Pharisees side arisiu^ -- Every Sect contains
both learned and unlearned. The former use to be the Mouth of the Party If a
spirit St Paul in his Speech from the St^irs had affirmed, that Jesus, whom
they know to have been dead, was al^ve, and that He h^d spoken to him from
Heaven, and again in a Vision. So they (...), only they construe it in their
own Way, putting an Angel or spirit for Jesus.

V. 11. And the night following, the Lord Jesus -- What Paul had before
purposed in Spirit, (chapter xix. 21) GOD now in due Time confirms. Another
Declaration to the same Effect is made by an Angel of GOD, (chapter xxvii, 23.) And
from the 23d Chapter the Sum of this Book turns on the Testimony of Paul to the
Romans. How would the Defenders of St. Peter's Supremacy triumph, could they
find but hal^^s much aser^ bed to him? Be of good courage, Paul -- As he
labored under singular Distresses and Persecutions, so he was favored with
extraordinary Assurances of the Divine Assistance. Thou must testify --
Particular Promises are usually given, when all Things appear desperate. At
Rome also -- Danger is nothing in the Eyes of GOD: All Hindrances further his
Work. A Promise of what is afar off, implies all that necessarily lies between.
Paul shall testify at Rome: therefore he shall come to Rome; therefore he shall
escape the Jews, the Sea, the Viper.

V. 12. Some of the Jews bound themselves -- Such execrable Vows were not
uncommon among the Jews. And if they were prevented from accomplishing what
they had avowed, it was an easy Matter to obtain Absolution from their Rabbi's.

V. 15. Now therefore ye -- Which they never scrupled at all, as not doubting,
but they were doing GOD service.

V. 17. And Paul -- Though he had an express Promise of it from Christ, was not
to neglect any proper Means of Safety.

V. 19. And the tribune taking him by the hand In a mild, condescending Way.
Lysias seems to have conducted this whole Affair with great Integrity,
Humanity, and Prudence.

V. 24. Provide beasts -- If a Change should be necessary, to set Paul on -- So
we read of his riding once; but not by Choice.

V. 27. Having learned, that he was a Roman -- True; but not before he rescued
him. Here he uses Art.

V. 31. The soldiers brought him by night to Antipatris -- But not the same
Night they set out. For Antipatris was about thirty-eight of our Miles
North-west of Jerusalem. Herod the Great rebuilt it, and gave it this Name in
Honor of his Father Antipater. Cesarea was near seventy Miles from Jerusalem;
about thirty from Antipatris.

V. 35. In Herod's palace -- This was a Palace and a Court, built by Herod the
Great. Probably some Tower belonging to it might be used for a Kind of
State-Prison.

XXIV.
named Tertullus; who appeared before the governor against Paul. him, saying,
Seeing we enjoy great peace through thee, and that very worthy deeds are done
to this nation by thy prudence always, and in all places, it, most excellent
Felix, with all thankfulness.

Then Paul, several years a judge to this nation, I cheerfully answer for
myself: exercise myself to have always a conscience void of offense toward God
and toward men. me, if they had any thing against me. it be concerning this one
word, Chapter xxiii. 6.
I am called in question by you this day.

And when Felix heard these things, him have liberty, and to hinder none of his
friends from ministering to him.

And after some days, to come, Felix being terrified, answered, Go thy way for
this time: when I have a convenient season,

V. 1. Ananias -- Who would spare no Trouble on the Occasion, with many of the
elders, Members of the Sanhedrim.

V. 2. Tertullus began -- A Speech how different from St. Paul's; which is
true, modest, solid, and without Paint. Felix was a Man of the most infamous
Character, and a Plague to all the Provinces over which he presided.

V. 4. But that I may not trouble thee any farther -- By trespassing either on
thy Patience or Modesty. The Eloquence of Tertullus was as bad as his Cause: A
lame Introduction, a lame Transition, and a lame Conclusion! Did not GOD
confound the Orator's Language?

V. 10. Knowing for several Years thou have been a judge over this nation --
And so not unacquainted with our religious Rites and Customs, and consequently
more capable of understanding and deciding a Cause of this Nature. There was no
Flattery in this. It was a plain Fact. He governed Judea six or seven Years. I
answer for myself -- And it may be observed, his answer exactly corresponds
with the three Articles of Tertullus' Charge; Sedition, Heresy, and Profanation
of the Temple. As to the first, he suggests, That he had not been long enough
at Jerusalem to form a Party and attempt an Insurrection: (For it was but
twelve days since he came up thither; five of which he had been at Cesarea,
ver. 1; one or two were spent in his Journey thither, and most of the rest he
had been confined at Jerusalem.) And he challenges them, in Fact to produce any
Evidence of such Practices. (ver. 11 -- 13.) As to the second he confesses
himself to be a Christian; but maintains this to be a Religion, perfectly
agreeable to the Law and the Prophets, and therefore deserving a fair
Reception. (ver. 14 -- 16.) And as for profaning the Temple, he observes that
he behaved there in a most peaceful and regular Manner, so that his Innocence
had been manifest even before the Sanhedrim, where the Authors of the Tumult
did not dare to appear against him.

V. 14. After the way which they call heresy -- This Appellation St. Paul
corrects. Not that it was then an odious Word; but it was not honorable
enough. A Party or Sect (so that Word signifies) is formed by Men: This way was
prescribed by GOD. The Apostle had now said what was sufficient for his
Defense: but having a fair Occasion, he makes an ingenuous Confession of his
Faith in this Verse, his Hope in the next, his Love in the 17th. So worship I
the God of my fathers -- This was a very proper Plea before a Roman Magistrate:
As it proved that he was under the Protection of the Roman Laws, since the Jews
were so: Whereas had he introduced the Worship of new Gods, he would have
forfeited that Protection. Believing all things which are written -- Concerning
the Messiah.

V. 15. Both of the just and of the unjust -- In a Public Court, this was
peculiarly proper to be observed.

V. 16. For this cause -- With a View to this, I also exercise myself -- As
well as they.

V. 19. Who ought to have been present before thee -- But the World never
commits greater Blunders, even against its own Laws, than when it is
persecuting the Children of GOD.

V. 21. Unless they think me blameable for this one word -- Which nevertheless
was the real Truth.

V. 22. After I have been more accurately informed -- Which he afterward was:
And he doubtless (as well as Fesius and Agrippa) transmitted a full Account of
these Things to Rome.

V. 23. He commanded the centurion to let him have liberty -- To be only a
Prisoner at large. Hereby the Gospel was spread more and more: Not to the
Satisfaction of the Jews. But they could not hinder it.

V. 24. And after Paul had been kept some days in this gentle Confinement at
Cesarea, Felix, who had been absent for a short Time, coming thither again,
with Drusilla his wife -- The Daughter of Herod Agrippa, one of the finest
Women of that Age. Felix persuaded her to forsake her Husband, Azizus, Ring of
Emessa, and to be married to himself, though a Heathen. She was afterward, with
a Son she had by Felix, consumed in an Eruption of Mount Vesuvius. Concerning
the faith in Christ -- That is, the Doctrine of Christ.

V. 25. And as he reasoned of justice, temperance, and judgment to come -- This
was the only effectual Way of preaching Christ to an unjust, lewd Judge. Felix
being terrified -- How happily might this Conviction have ended, had he been
careful to pursue the Views, which were then opening upon his Mind! But, like
thousands, he deferred the Consideration of these Things to a more convenient
season. A Season which, alas! never came. For though he heard again, he was
terrified no more.

In the mean Time we do not find Drusilla, though a Jewess, was thus alarmed.
She had been used to hear of a future Judgment: Perhaps too she trusted to the
being a Daughter of Abraham, or to the Expiation of the Law, and so was Proof
against the Convictions which seized on her Husband, though an Heathen. Let
this teach us to guard against all such false Dependencies, as tend to elude
those Convictions, that might otherwise be produced in us, by the faithful
preaching of the Word of GOD. Let us stop our Ears against those Messengers of
Satan, who appear as Angels of Light, who would teach us to reconcile the hope
of Salvation with a corrupt Heart or an unholy Life. Go thy way for this Time
-- O how will every damned Soul one Day lament his having neglected such a Time
as this?

V. 26. He hoped also -- An evil Hope^. So when he heard, his Eye was not
single. No Marvel then that he profited nothing by all St. Paul's Discourses:
that money would be given -- By the Christians for the Liberty of so able a
Minister. And waiting for this, unhappy Felix fell short of the Treasure of the
Gospel.

V. 27. But after two years -- After St. Paul had been two Years a Prisoner,
Felix desiring to gratify the Jews, left Paul bound -- Thus Men of the World,
to gratify one another, stretch forth their Hands to the Things of GOD! Yet the
Wisdom of Felix did not profit him, did not satisfy the Jews at all. Their
Accusations followed him to Rome, and had utterly ruined him, but for the
Interest which his Brother Pallas had with Nero.

XXV.
Now when Festus was come into the province, after three days he went up from
Cesarea to Jerusalem. Then the high priest and the chief of the Jews, him to
Jerusalem, lying in wait to kill him by the way. thither shortly. wickedness in
him. him, bringing many and heavy accusations against Paul, which they were not
able to prove: them.

And after certain days, me, desiring judgment against him. to be alive.

And on the morrow, my lord: wherefore I have brought him before you, and
especially before thee, O king Agrippa, that after examination taken, I may
have somewhat to write. alleged against him.

V. 2. Then the high priest and the chief of the Jews appeared against Paul --
In so long a Time their Rage was not cooled. So much louder a Call had Paul to
the Gentiles.

V. 4. But Festus answered -- So Festus' Care to preserve the Imperial
Privileges, was the Means of preserving Paul's Life. By what invisible Springs
does GOD govern the World! With what Silence, and yet with wh^^ Wisdom and
Energy!

V. 5. Let those of you who are able -- Who are best able to undertake the
Journey, and to manage the Cause. If there be any wickedness in him -- So he
does not pass Sentence before he hears the Cause.

V. 6. Not more than ten days -- A short Space for a New Governor to stay at
such a City as Jerusalem. He could not with any Convenience have heard and
decided the Cause of Paul within that Time.

V. 7. Bringing many accusations -- When many Accusations are heaped together,
frequently not one of them is true.

V. 8. While he answered -- To a General Charge, a General Answer was
sufficient.

V. 9. Art thou willing to go up to Jernsalem -- Festus could have ordered
this, without asking Paul. But GOD secretly overruled the whole, that he might
have an Occasion of appealing to Rome.

V. 11. I am standing at Cesar's judgment seat -- For all the Court of the
Roman Governors, were held in the Name of the Emperor, and by Commission from
him. No men can give meant -- He expresses it modestly: The Meaning is, Thou
can not. I appeal to Caesar -- Which any Roman Citizen might do, before
Sentence was passed.

V. 12. The council -- It was customary for a considerable Number of Persons of
Distinction, to attend the Roman Governors. These constituted a kind of
Council, with whom they frequently advised.

V. 13. Agrippa -- The Son of Herod Agrippa (chapter xii. 1.) and Bernice -- His
Sister, with whom he lived in a scandalous Familiarity. This was the Person
whom Titus Vespasian so passionately loved, that he would have m^de her
Empress, had not the Clamours of the Romans prevented it.

V. 15. Desiring judgment against him -- As upon a previous Conviction, which
they falsely pretended.

V. 16. It is not the custom of the Romans -- How excellent a Rule, To condemn
no one unheard! A Rule, which as it is common to all Nations, (Courts of
Inquisition only excepted) so it ought to direct our Proceedings in all
Affairs, not only in public but private Life.

V. 18. Such things as I supposed -- From their Passion and Vehemence.

V. 19. But had certain questions -- How coldly does he mention the Things of
the last Importance! And about one Jesus -- Thus does Festus speak of Him, to
whom every Knee shall bow! Whom Paul affirmed to be alive -- And was this a
doubtful Question? But why, O Festus, did thou doubt concerning it? Only
because thou did not search into the Evidence of it. Otherwise that Evidence
might have opened to thee, till it had grown up into full Conviction. And thy
illustrious Prisoner have led thee into the glorious Liberty of the Children of
GOD.

V. 23. With the tribunes and principal men of the city -- The chief Officers
both Military and Civil.

XXVI.
Then Agrippa said to Paul, It is permitted thee to speak for thyself. And
Paul, stretching forth his hand,

The manner of my life from my youth which was Agrippa, them. them to
blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even to
foreign cities. Acts ix. 2.
Whereupon as I was going to Damascus, with authority and commission from the
chief priests, It is hard for thee to kick against the goads. I have appeared
to thee for this purpose, to ordain thee a minister and a witness, both of the
things which thou have seen, and of those in which I will appear to thee, then
to the Centiles I declared, that they should repent and turn to God, doing
works worthy of repentance. great, saying nothing but what both the prophets
and Moses have declared should be, me to be a Christian.

And as he said this,

V. 1. And Paul, stretching forth his hand -- Chained as it was: a decent
Expression of his own Earnestness, and proper to engage the Attention of his
Hearers: answered for himself. Not only refuting the Accusations of the Jews,
but enlarging upon the Faith of the Gospel.

V. 2. King Agrippa -- There is a peculiar Force in thus addressing a Person by
Name. Agrippa felt this.

V. 3. Who art accurately acquainted -- Which Festus was not; with the customs
-- In practical Matters; and questions -- In speculative. This Word Festus had
used in the Absence of Paul, (ch xxv. 19.) who by the Divine Leading, repeats
and explains it. Agrippa had had peculiar Advantages, for an accurate Knowledge
of the Jewish Customs and Questions, from his Education under his Father Herod,
and his long Abode at Jerusalem.

Nothing can be imagined more suitable or more graceful, than this whole
Discourse of Paul before Agrippa; in which the Seriousness of the Christian,
the Boldness of the Apostle, and the Politeness of the Gentleman and the
Scholar, appear in a most beautiful Contrast, or rather a most happy Union.

V. 4. From my youth, which was from the beginning -- That is, which was from
the Beginning of my Youth.

V. 5. If they would testify -- But they would not; for they well knew what
Weight his former Life must add to his present Test^mony.

V. 6. And now -- This and the two following Verses are in a kind of
Parenthesis, and show that what the Pharisees rightly taught concerning the
Resurrection, Paul likewise asserted at this Day. The 9th Verse is connected
with the fifth. For Pharisaism impelled him to persecute I stand in judgment
for hope of the promise -- Of the Resurrection. So it was in Effect. For unless
Christ had risen, there could have been no Resurrection of the Dead. And it was
chiefly for testifying the Resurrection of Christ, that the Jews still
persecuted him.

V. 7. Our twelve tribes -- For a great Part of the ten Tribes also had at
various Times returned from the East to their own Country, ( Jam. i. 1. 1 Pet.
i. 1.) Worshipping continually night and day -- That is, this is what they aim
at in all their public and private Worship.

V. 8. Is it judged by you an incredible thing -- It was by Festus, (chapter xxv.
19.) to whom Paul answers as if he had heard him discourse.

V. 9. I thought -- When I was a Pharisee; that I ought to do many things --
Which he now enumerates.

V. 10. I shut up many of the saints -- Men not only innocent, but good, just,
holy. I gave my vote against them -- That is, I joined with those who condemned
them. Perhaps the chief Priests did also give him Power to vote on these
Occasions.

V. 11. I compelled them -- That is, some of them; to blaspheme -- This is the
most dreadful of all! Repent, ye L^emies of the Gospel, If Spira, who was
compelled, suffered so terribly, what will become of those who compel like
Saul, but do not repent like him?

V. 13. O king -- Most seasonably in the Height of the Narration, does he thus
fix the King's Attention. Above the brightness of the sun -- And no marvel. For
what is the Brigntness of this created Sun, to the Sun of Righteousness, the
brightness of the Father's glory?

V. 14. In the Hebrew tongue -- St. Paul was not now speaking in Hebrew: When
he was, chapter xxiii. 7. he did not add, In the Hebrew tongue. Christ used this
Tongue both on Earth and from Heaven.

V. 17. Delivering thee from the people -- The Jews, and the Gentiles, to whom,
both Jews and Gentiles, I now send thee -- Pan^ gives them to know, that the
Liberty he enjoys even in Bonds, was promised to him, as well as his preaching
to the Gentiles. I, denotes the Authority of the Sender. Now, the Time whence
his Mission was dated. For his Apostle^hip, as well as his Conversion,
commenced at this Moment.

V. 18. To open -- He opens them, who sends Paul; and He does it, by Paul who
is sent: Their eyes -- Both of the Jews and Gentiles: That they may turn --
Through the Power of the Almighty, from the spiritual Darkness wherein they
were involved, to the light of Divine Knowledge and Holiness, and from the
power of Satan, who now holds them in Sin, Guilt, and Misery, to to the Love
and happy Service of GOD: that they may receive through Faith (He seems to
place the same Blessings in a fuller Light) Pardon, Holiness, and Glory.

V. 19. From that time -- Having received Power to obey, I was not disobedient
-- I did obey, I used that Power. ( Gal. i. 16) So that even this Grace whereby
St. Paul was influenced, was not irresistible.

V. 20. I declared -- From that Hour to this, both to Jew and Gentile, that
they should repent -- This Repentance, we may observe, is previous both to
Inward and Outward Holiness.

V. 21. For these things -- The Apostle now applies all that he had said.

V. 22. Having obtained help from God -- When all other Help failed, GOD sent
the Romans from the Castle, and so fulfilled the Promise he had made, ver. 17.

V. 24. Festus said, Paul, thon art beside thyself -- To talk of Men's rising
from the Dead! And of a Jew's enlightening not only his own Nation, but the
polite and learned Greeks and Romans! Nay, Fesins, it is thou that art beside
thyself: That strikest quite wide of the Mark. And no wonder: He saw that
Nature did not act in Paul; but the Grace that acted in him he did not see. And
therefore he took all this Ardor which animated the Apos^le, for a mere Start
of learned Frenzy.

V. 25. I am not mad, mest excellent Fesins -- The Style properly belonging to
a Roman Pr^pretor. How inexpressibly beautiful is this Reply? How strong! yet
how decent and respectful? Madman seldom call Men by their Names, and Titles of
Honor. Thus also St. Paul refutes the Charge. But utter the words of truth
(confirmed in the next verse) and sobriety, the very reverse of Madness. And
both these remain, even when the Men of GOD act with the utmost Vehemence.

V. 26. For the king knows of these things -- St. Paul having refuted Festus
pursues his Purpose, returning naturally, and as it were Step by Step, from
Festus to Agrippa. To whom I speak with freedom -- This Freedom was probably
one Circumstance which Festus accounted Madness.

V. 27. King Agrippa, Believe thon the prophets? -- He that believes these,
believes Paul, yea, and Christ. The Apostle now comes close to his Heart. What
did Agrippa seel, when he heard this? I know that thou believe? -- Here Paul
lays so fast hold on the King, that he can s^aree make any Resistance.

V. 28. Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a
Christian! -- See here, Festus altogether an Heathen, Paul altogether a
Christian, Agrippa halting between both. Poor Agrippa! But almost persuaded? So
near the Mark, and yet fall short! Another Step, and thou art within the V^il.
Reader, stop not with Agrippa; but go on with Paul.

V. 29. I would to God -- Agrippa had spoke of being a Christian, as a Thing
wholly in his own Power. Paul gently corrects this Mistake; intimating, it is
the Gift and the Work of GOD; that all that hear me -- It was Modesty in St
Paul, not to apply directly to them all; yet he looks upon them and observes
them; were such as I am -- Christians indeed; full of righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghist. He speaks from a full Sense of his own Happiness, and an
over^owing Love to all.

V. 30. And as he said this, the king rose up -- An unspeakably precious Moment
to Agrippa. Whether he duly improved it or no, we shall see in That Day.

V. 31. This man does nothing worthy of death, or of bonds -- They speak of his
whole Life, not of one Action only. And could ye learn nothing more than this,
from that Discourse? A favorable Judgment of such a Preacher, is not all that
GOD requires.

XXVII.
And when it was determined, to sail into Italy, they delivered Paul, and
certain other prisoners, to a centurion named Julius, of the Augu^^an cohort.
And going aboard a ship of Adramyttium, him to go to his friends, to take
refreshment. a city of Lycia. And the centurion finding a ship of Alexandria
there, them, Saying to them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with
injury and much damage, not only to the lading and the ship, but also to our
lives. there, which is an haven of Crete looking to the south-west and
north-west.

And as the south wind blew gently, Euroclydon. her drive. And running under a
certain island called Clauda, us, all hope of our being saved was now taken
away.

But after long abstinence, so have avoided this injury and loss. any life
among you, only. For there stood by me this night an angel of the God, whose I
am, Wherefore, off the ropes of the boat, it, it to the sea, at the same time
loosing the rudder-bands, and hoisting up the stay-sail to the wind, they made
for the shore. hinder part was broken by the force of the waves. And the
counsel of the soldiers was to kill the prisoners, into the sea, broken pieces
of the ship; and so it came to pass, that they all escaped safe to land.

V. 1. As soon as it was determined to sail -- As being a shorter and less
expensive Passage to Rome.

V. 2. Adramyttium was a Seaport of Mysia. Aristarchus and Luke went with Paul
by Choice, not being ashamed of his Bonds.

V. 3. Julius treating Paul courteously -- Perhaps he had heard him make his
Defense.

V. 4. We sailed under Cyprus -- Leaving it on the Left Hand.

V. 7. C^^dus was a Cape and City of Car'a.

V. 8. The Fair Haveus still retain the Name. But the City of Las^a is now
utterly lost, together with many more of the bundred Cities, for which Crete
was once so renowned.

V. 9. The f^s^, or Day of Atonement, was kept on the tenth of Ti^^, that is
the 25th of September. This was to them an ill Time of sailing; not only
because Winter was approaching, but also because of the sudden Storms, which
are still common in the Mediterran^^^, at that Time of Year. Paul exhorted them
-- Not to leave Crete. Even in external Things, Faith exerts itself with the
greatest Presence of Mind, and Readiness of Advice.

V. 10. Saying to them -- To the Centurion and other Officers.

V. 11. The centurion regarded the master -- And indeed it is a general Rule,
Believe an Artificer in his own Art. Yet when there is the greatest Need, a
real Christian will often advise even better than Him.

V. 12. Which is an haven -- Having a double Opening, one to the South-west,
the other to the North-west.

V. 14. There arose against it -- The South Wind; a tempestuous wind, called in
those Parts Euroclydon. This was a kind of Hurricane, not carrying them any one
Way, but tossing them backward and forward. These furious Winds are now called
Levanters, and blow in all Directions from the North-cast to the South-east.

V. 16. We were hardly able to get masters of the boat -- To prevent its being
staved.

V. 18. They lightened the ship -- Casting the heavy Goods into the Sea.

V. 19. We cast out the tackling of the ship -- Cutting away even those Masts
that were not absolutely necessary.

V. 20. Neither sun nor stars appeared for many days -- Which they could the
less spare, before the Compass was found out.

V. 21. This loss -- Which is before your Eyes.

V. 23. The God, whose I am, and whom I serve -- How short a Compendium of
Religion! Yet how full! Comprehending both Faith, Hope, and Love.

V. 24. God has given -- Paul had prayed for them. And GOD gave him their
Lives; perhaps their Souls also. And the Centurion, subserving the Providence
of GOD, gave to Paul the Lives of the Prisoners. How wonderfully does his
Providence reign in the most contingent Things? And rather will many bad Men be
preserved with a few good, (so it frequently happens) than one good Man perish
with many bad. So it was in this Ship: So it is in the World. Thee -- At such a
Time as this, there was not the same Danger, which might otherwise have been,
of St. Paul's seeming to speak out of Vanity, what he really spoke out of
Necessity. All the souls -- Not only all the Prisoners, as Julius afterward
did, ver. 4^. Ask for Souls, they shall be given thee; yea more than thou
hopest for; that sail with thee -- So that Paul in the Sight of GOD, was the
Master and Pilot of the Ship.

V. 27. The fourteenth night -- Since they lest Crete, ver. 18, 19. In the
Adriatic sea -- So the Ancients called all that Part of the Mediterranean,
which lay South of Italy.

V. 30. The Sailors were attempting to flee out of the ship -- Supposing the
Boat would go more safely over the Shallows.

V. 31. Unless these Mariners abide in the ship -- Without them ye know not how
to manage her, ye cannot be saved -- He does not say, We. That they would not
have regarded. The Soldiers were not careful for the Lives of the Prisoners:
Nor was Paul careful for his own.

We may learn hence, to use the most proper Means for Security and Success,
even while we depend on Divine Providence, and wait for the Accompli^hment of
GOD's own Promise. He never designed any Promise should encourage rational
Creatures to act in an irrational Manner; or to remain inactive, when he has
given them Natural Capacities of doing, something at least, for their own
Benefit. To expect the Accomplishment of any Promise, without ex^rting these,
is at best vain and dangerous Presumption, if all Pretense of relying upon it,
be not profane Hypocrisy.

V. 33. Ye continue fasting, having taken nothing -- No regular Meal; through a
deep Sense of their extreme Danger. Let (...) not wonder then, if Men who have
a deep Sense of the extreme Danger of everlasting Death, for a Time forget even
to eat their Bread, or to attend their worldly Affairs. Much less let us
censure that as Madness, which may be the Beginning of True Wisdom.

V. 34. This is for your preservation -- That ye may be the better able to swim
to Shore.

V. 36. Then were they all encouraged -- By his Example, as well as Words.

V. 38. Casting out the wheat -- So firmly did they now depend on what St. Paul
had said.

V. 39. They did not know the land -- Which they saw near them: Having a level
shore.

V. 40. Loosing the rudder-bands -- Their Ships had frequently two Rudders, one
on each Side. These were fastened while they let the Ship drive; but were now
loosened, when they had need of them to steer her into the Creek.

V. 41. A place where two seas met -- Probably by reason of a Sandbank running
parallel with the Shore.

V. 42. The counsel -- Cruel, unjust, ungrateful.

V. 44. They all escaped safe to land -- And some of them doubtless received
the Apostle as a Teacher sent from GOD. These would find their Deliverance from
the Fury of the Sea, but an Earnest of an infinitely greater Deliverance, and
are long e're this, lodged with him in a more peaceful Harbor than Malta, or
than Earth could afford.

XXVIII.
it, because of the present rain, murderer, whom, though he has escaped the
sea, vengeance has not suffered to live.

And near that place was the estate of the chief man of the island,

And after three months we sailed in a ship of Alexandria, sign was Castor and
Pollux. there three days, Whence coasting round, we came to Rhegium, and the
south wind rising after one day, we came the next to Puteoli: some as far as
Appii Forum, and others to the Three Taverns, whom, when Paul saw he thanked
God and took courage.

And when we were come to Rome, me, because there was no cause of death in me,
it, I was constrained to appeal to Caesar; not that I had any thing to accuse my
nation of. it is on account of the hope of Israel, that I am bound with this
chain.

And having appointed him a day, Isaiah vi. 9, etc. Mat. xiii. 14. John xii. 40.
Go to this people and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand,
and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For the heart of this people
is waxed gross, their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
hearts, and should be converted and I should heal them.

And he continued two whole years in his own hired house,

V. 1. Melita or Malta, is about twelve Miles broad, twenty long, and sixty
distant from Sicily to the South. It yields Abundance of Honey, (whence its
Name was taken) with much Cotton, and is very fruitful, though it has only
three Feet Depth of Earth, above the solid Rock. The Emperor Charles the Fifth
gave it, in 1530, to the Knights of Rhodes driven out of Rhodes by the Turks.
They are a thousand in Number, of whom five hundred always reside on the Island.

V. 2. And the Barbarians -- So the Romans and Greeks termed all Nations but
their own. But surely the Generosity shown by these uncultivated Inhabitants of
Malta, was far more valuable than all the Varnish which the politest Education
could give, where it taught not Humanity and Compassion.

V. 4, And when the Barbarians saw -- they said -- Seeing also his Chains,
Doubtless this man is a murderer -- Such rarely go unpunished even in this
Life; Whom vengeance has not suffered to live -- They look upon him as a dead
Man already.

It is with Pleasure we trace among these Barbarians the Force of Conscience,
and the Belief of a particular Providence: which some People of more Learning
have stupidly thought it Philosophy to despise. But they erred in imagining,
that Calamities must always be interpreted as Judgments. Let us guard against
this, lest, like them, we condemn not only the Innocent, but the Excellent of
the earth.

V. 5. Having shaken off the venomous animal be suffered no harm -- The Words
of an eminent modern ^^storian are, No venomous Kind of Serpent now breeds in
Ma^t^ neither hurts if it be brought thither from another Place. Children are
seen there handling and playing even with Scorpions: I have seen one eating
them. If this be so, it seems to be fixed by the Wisdom of GOD, as an eternal
Memorial of what he once wrought there.

V. 6. They changed their minds, and said, he was a god -- Such is the
Stability of human Reason! A little before he was a Murderer; and presently ^e
is a God: (Just as the People of Ly^;^ra; one Hour sacrificing, and the next
storing) Nay, but there is a Medium. He is neither a Murderer, not a God, but a
Man of GOD. But natural Men never run into greater Mistakes, than in judging of
the Children of GOD.

V. 7. The chief man of the island -- In Wealth, if not in Power also. Three
days -- The first three Days of our Stay on the Island.

V. 11. Whose sign was -- It was the Custom of the Ancients, to have Images on
the Head of their Ships, from which they took their Name, Castor and Pollux --
Two Heathen Gods, who were thought favorable to Mariners.

V. 15. The brethren -- That is, the Christians came out thence to meet us --
It is remarkable that there is no certain Account by whom Christianity was
planted at Rome. Probably some Inhabitants of that City were at Jerusalem on
the Day of Pentecost, ( Acts ii. 10.) and being then converted themselves,
carried the Gospel thither at their Return. App^^ Forum was a Town fifty-one
Miles from Rome; the Three Taverns about thirty. He took courage -- He saw
Christ was at Rome also, and now forgot all the Troubles of his Journey.

V. 16. With the soldier -- To whom he was chained, as the Roman Custom was.

V. 17. And after three days -- Given to Rest and Prayer, Paul called the chief
of the Jews together -- He always sought the Jews first; but being now bound,
he could not so conveniently go round to them. Though I have done nothing --
Seeing him chained, they might have suspected he had. Therefore he first
obviates this Suspicion.

V. 19. When the Jews opposed it -- He speaks tenderly of them, not mentioning
their repeated Attempts to murder him. Not that I had an^ thing to accuse my
nation of -- Not that I had any Design to accuse others, but merely to desend
myself.

V. 20. The hope of Israel -- What Israel hopes for, namely, the Messiah and
the Resurrection.

V. 21. We have neither received letters concerning thee -- There must have
been a peculiar Providence in this, nor has any of the brethren -- The Jews,
related -- Professedly, in a set Discourse, or spoke -- Occasionally, in
Conversation, any evil of thee -- How must the Bridle then have been in their
Mouth!

V. 22. This sect we know is every where spoken against -- This is no Proof at
all of a bad Cause, but a very probable Mark of a good one.

V. 23. To whom he expounded, testifying the kingdom of God, and persuading
them concerning Jesus -- These were his two grand Topies, 1. That the Kingdom
of the Messiah was of a spiritual, not temporal Nature: 2. That Jesus of
Nazareth was the very Pers^n foretold, as the Lord of that Kingdom. On this
Head, he had as much need to persuade as to convince, their Will making as
s^rong a Resistance as their Understanding.

V. 24. And some believed the things that were spoken -- With the Heart, as
well as Understanding.

V. 25. Well spoke the Holy Ghost to your fathers -- Which is equally
applicable to you.

V. 26. Hearing ye shall hear -- That is, ye shall most surely hear, and shall
not understand -- The Words manifestly denote a judicial Blindness, consequent
upon a wilful and obstinate Resistance of the Truth. First they would not,
afterward they could not believe.

V. 28. The salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles -- Namely, from this Time.
Before this no Apostle had been at Rome. St. Paul was the first.

V. 29. And Paul continued two whole years -- After which this Book was
written, long before St. Paul's Death, and was undoubtedly publi^ed with his
Approbation by St. Luke, who continued with him to the last, 2 Timothy iv. 11. And
re^cived all that came to him -- Whether they were Jews or G^ntiles. These two
Years completed twenty-five Years after our Savior's Passion. Such Progress
h^d the Gospel made by that Time, in the Parts of the World which lay W^st of
Jerusalem, by the Ministry of St. Paul among the Gentiles. How far Eastward the
other Apostles had carried it in the same Time, History does not inform us.

V. 31. No man forbidding him -- Such was the Victory of the Word of GOD.
Whilst Paul was preaching at Rome, the Gospel shone with its highest Luster.
Here therefore the Acts of the Apostles end; and end with great Advantage.
Otherwise St. Luke could cosily have continued his Narrative to the Apostle's
Death.

NOTES ON ST. PAUL's Epistle to the ROMANS.
MANY of the Writings of the New Testament are written in the Form of Epistles.
Such are not only those of St. Paul, James, Peter, Jude, but also both the
Treatises of St. Luke, and all the Writings of St. John. Nay, we have seven
Epistles herein, which the LORD Jesus Himself sent by the Hand of John to the
seven Churches: Yea, the whole Revelation is no other than an Epistle from Him.

Concerning the Epistles of St Paul, we may observe he writes in a very
different Manner, to those Churches which he had planted himself, and to those
who had not seen his face in the flesh. In his Letters to the former, a loving
or sharp Familiarity appears, as their Behavior was more or less suitable to
the Gospel, To the latter, he proposes the pure, unmixt Gospel, in a more
general and abstract Manner.

As to the Time wherein he wrote his Epistles, it is probable he wrote, about
the Year of Christ according to the common Reckoning: 48 from Corinth the
Epistle to the Thessalonians: 49 from Phrygia to the Galatians: 52 from Ephesus
the first to the Corinthians: from Troas the first Epistle to Timothy: from
Macedonia the second to the Corinthians, and that to Titus: from Corinth to the
Romans: 57 from Rome to the Philippians, to Philemon, to the Ephesians, and
Colossians: 58 from Italy to the Hebrews: 66 from Rome the second to Timothy.

As to the General Epistles, it seems St. James wrote a little before his
Death, which was A. D. 63 St. Peter, who was martyred in the Year 67, wrote his
latter Epistle a little before his Death, and not long after his former. St.
Jude wrote after him, when the Mystery of Iniquity was gaining Ground swiftly.
St John is believed to have wrote all his Epistles a little before his
Departure. The Revelation he wrote A. D. 96.

That St. Paul wrote this Epistle from Corinth we may learn, from his
commending to the Romans Phebe a Servant of the Church of Cen^^rca (chapter xvi.
1.) a Port of Corinth, and from his mentioning the Salutations of Cains and
Erastus (chapter xvi. 23.) who were both Corinthians. Those to whom he wrote, seem
to have been chiefly Foreigners, both Jews and Gentiles, whom Business drew
from other Provinces; as appears, both by his writing in Greck, and by his
Salutations of several former Acquaintance.

His chief Design herein is to show, 1. That neither the Gentiles by the Law of
Nature, nor the Jews by the Law of Moses, could obtain Justification before
GOD: And that therefore it was necessary for both to seek it from the free
Mercy of GOD by Faith. 2. That GOD has an absolute Right, to ^ew mercy on what
Terms he pleases, and to with hold it from those who will not accept of it on
his own Terms.

This Epistle consists of five Parts,
I. The Introduction, C.i.1 -- 15 II. The Proposition, briefly proved, 1.
Concerning Faith and Just^fication, 2. Concerning Salvation, 3. Concerning the
Equality of Believers, Jews, or Gentiles, 16 -- 17 To these three Parts,
whereof The First is treated of C.i.18 -- iv. The Second C.v. -- viii. The
Third C.ix. -- xi. not only the Treatise itself, but also the Exhortation
answers in the same Order. III. The Treatise, 1. Concerning Justification,
which is 1. Not by Works, for C.i. -- 18 The Gen isles, C. ii. 1 -- 10 The Jews,
and 11 -- 29 Both together are under Sin, C. iii. 1 -- 20 2. But by Faith, 21
-- 31 as appears by the Example of Abraham, and the Testimony of David, C.iv. 1
-- 25 2. Concerning Salvation, C.v. -- viii. 3. Concerning the equal Privileges
of Jewish and Gentile Believers, C.ix. -- xi. V. The Exhortation, C. xii. 1 --
2 1 Concerning Faith and its Fruits, Love and practical Holiness, 3 -- 21 C.
xiii. 1 -- 10 2. Concerning Salvation, 11 -- 14 3. Of the Conjunction of Jews
and Gentiles, C.xiv. 1 -- xv. 13 The Conclusion, 14 -- xvi. 25

To express the Design and Contents of this Epistle, a little more at large.
The Apostle labors throughout, to fix in those to whom he writes, a deep Sense
of the Excellency of the Gospel, and to engage them to act suitably to it. For
this Purpose, after a general Salutation, (chapteri. 1-7.) and Profession of his
Affection for them (ver. 8. 15.) he declares he shall not be ashamed openly to
maintain the Gospel at Rome, seeing it is the powerful Instrument of Salvation,
both to Jews and Gentiles, by Means of Faith. (ver 16, 17.) And in order to
demonstrate this, he shows,

1. That the World greatly needed such a Dispensation, the Gentiles being in a
most abandoned State; (ver. 18-32.) and the Jews, though condemning others,
being themselves no better: (chapter ii. 1-29.) As, notwithstanding some Cavils,
which he obviates, (chapter iii. 1-8.) their own Scriptures testify. (9-19.) So
that all were under a Necessity of seeking Justification by this Method.
(20-31.)

2. That Abraham and David themselves sought Justification, by Faith, and not
by Works, (chapter iv. 1-25.)

3. That all who believe are brought into so happy a State, as turns the
greatest Afflictions into Matter of Joy. (chapter v. 1-11.)

4. That the evils brought on Mankind by Adam, are abundantly recompensed to
all that believe in Christ. (12-21.)

5. That far from dissolving the Obligations to practical Holiness, the Gospel
increases them by peculiar Obligations, (chapter vi. 1-23.)

In order to convince them of these Things the more deeply, and to remove their
Fondness for the Mosaic Law, now they were married to Christ by Faith in him,
(ch vii. 1-6.) he shows how unable the Motives of the Law were to produce that
Holiness, which Believers obtain, by a living Faith in the Gospel; (chapter v.i.
7-25. viii. 1, 2.) and then gives a more particular View of those Things, which
rendered the Gospel effectual to this great End. (ver 3-39.)

That even the Gentiles, if they believed, should have a Share in these
Blessings; and that the Jews, if they believed not, should be excluded from
them, being a Point of great Importance, the Apostle bestows the 9th, 10th, and
11th Chapters in settling it. He begins the 9th Chapter by expressing his
tender Love and high Esteem for the Jewish Nation, (ver. 1-5.) and then shows,

1. That GOD's rejecting great Part of the Seed of Abraham, yea, and of Isaac
too, was undeniable Fact (6-13.)

2. That GOD had not chosen them to such peculiar Privileges, for any Kind of
Goodness either in them or their Fathers (14-24.)

3. That his accepting the Gentiles, and rejecting many of the Jews, had been
foretold both by Hosea and Isaiah. (ver. 25-33.)

4. That GOD had offered Salvation to Jews and Gentiles on the same Terms,
though the Jews had rejected it. (chapter x. 1.-21.)

5. That though the Rejection of Israel for their Obstinacy was General, yet it
was not Total: there being still a Remnant among them who did embrace the
Gospel. (chapter xi. 1-10.)

6. That the Rejection of the rest was not Final, but in the End all Israel
should be saved. (ver. 11-31.)

7. That mean time even their Obstinacy and Rejection served to display the
unsearchable Wisdom and Love of GOD. (ver. 32-36.)

The Rest of the Epistle contains practical Instructions and Exhortations He
particularly urges, 1. An entire Consecration of themselves to GOD, and a Care
to glorify Him by a faithful Improvement of their several Talents: (chapter xii
1-11.) 2. Devotion, Patience, Hospitality, mutual Sympathy, Humility, Peace,
and Meekness; (ver. 12-21.) 3. Obedience to Magistrates, Justice in all its
Branches, Love the fulfilling of the Law, and universal Holiness: (chapter xiii.
1-14.) 4. Mutual Candor between those who differed in Judgment, touching the
Observance of the Mosaic Law; (chapter xiv. 1-23. xv. 1-17.) in enforcing which he
is led to mention the Extent of his own Labors, and his Purpose of visiting
the Romans, in the mean Time recommending himself to their Prayers, (ver.
18-33.) And after many Salutations, (chapter xvi. 1-16) and a Caution against those
who caused Divisions, he concludes with a suitable Blessing and Doxology. (v.
17-27.)

ROMANS.
I.
PAUL, to be an apostle, separated to the gospel of God, Deuteronomy. xviii. 18. Isa.
ix. 6, 7. Chap. liii. and lxi. Jer. xxii. 15.
Which he had promised before, according to the flesh; But declared the Son of
God with Power, according to the spirit of holiness, who are beloved of God,
called and holy, Grace to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ.

First, the whole world. and me. revealed therein from faith to faith; as it is
written, Hab. ii. 4.
The just shall live by faith.

For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, is to be known of God is
manifest in them; for God has showed it to them. him as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their reasonings, and their foolish heart was
darkened. Professing to be wise, the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped
and served the creature above the creator, who is blessed for ever! their
knowledge, Who knowing the righteous judgment of God,

V. 1. Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ -- To this Introduction the Conclusion
answers. (chapter xv. 15. etc.) Called to be an apostle -- And made an Apostle by
that Calling. While GOD calls, He makes what He calls As the Judaizing Teachers
disputed his Claim to the Apostolical Office, it is with great Propriety that
he asserts it in the very Entrance of an Epistle, wherein their Principles are
entirely overthrown. And various other proper and important Thoughts are
suggested in this short Introduction: Particularly, the Prophecies concerning
the Gospel, the Descent of Jesus from David, the great Doctrines of his Gedhead
and Resurrection, the sending the Gospel to the Gentiles, the Privileges of
Christians, and the Obedience and Holiness to which they were obliged, in
Virtue of their Profession. Separated -- By GOD, not only from the Bulk of
other Men, from other Jews, from other Disciples, but even from other Christian
Teachers, to be a peculiar Instrument of GOD in spreading the Gospel.

V. 2. Which he promised before -- Of old Time, frequently, solemnly. And the
Promise and Accomplishments confirm each other.

V. 3. Who was of the seed of David, according to the flesh -- That is, with
regard to his human Nature. Both the Natures of our Savior are here mentioned:
But the human is mentioned first, because the divine was not manifested in its
full Evidence till after his Resurrection.

V. 4. But powerfully declared to be the Son of God, according to the spirit of
holiness -- That is, according to his Divine Nature. By the resurrection from
the dead -- For this is both the Fountain and the Object of our Faith: and the
preaching of the Apostles was the Consequence of Christ's Resurrection.

V. 5. By whom we have received -- I and the other Apostles, Grace and
apostleship -- The Favor to be an Apostle, and Qualifications for it. For
obedience to the faith in all nations -- That is, that all Nations may embrace
the Faith of Christ. For his name -- For his Sake, out of Regard to Him.

V. 6. Among whom -- The Nations brought to the Obedience of Faith, are ye also
-- But St. Paul gives them no Pre-eminence above others.

V. 7. To all that are in Rome -- Most of these were Heathens by Birth, (ver.
13.) though with Jews mixed among them. They were scattered up and down in that
large City, and not yet reduced into the Form of a Church. Only some had begun
to meet in the House of A^uila and Priscilla. Beloved of God -- And from his
free Love, not from any Merit of yours, called by his Word and his Spirit to
believe in Him, and now through Faith, holy, as He is holy. Grace -- The
peculiar Favor of GOD, and Peace -- All Manner of Blessings, temporal,
spiritual, and eternal. This is both a Christian Salutation and an Apostolic
Benediction, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ -- This is the
usual Way wherein the Apostles speak GOD the Father, GOD our Father. Not do
they often in speaking of Him, use the Word LORD, as it implies the proper Name
of GOD, JEHOVAH. In the Old Testament indeed, the holy Men generally said, the
LORD our GOD. For they were then as it were Servants, whereas now they are
Sons. And Sons so well know their Father, that they need not frequently mention
his proper Name. It is one and the same Peace, and one and the same Grace,
which is from GOD and from Jesus Christ. Our Trust and Prayer fix on GOD, as He
is the Father of Christ, and on Christ as He presents us to the Father.

V. 8. I thank -- In the very Entrance of this one Epistle, are the Traces of
all spiritual Affections; but of Thankfulness above all; with the Expression of
which almost all St. Paul's Epistles begin. He here particularly thanks GOD,
that what otherwise himself should have done, was done at Rome already. My God
-- This very Word expresses Faith, Hope, Love, and consequently all true
Religion: through Jesus Christ -- The Gifts of GOD all pass through Christ to
us, and all our Petitions and Thanksgivings pass through Christ to GOD, that
your faith is spoken of -- In this Kind of Congratulations, St. Paul describes
either the whole of Christianity, as Col. i. 3, etc. or some Part of it, as 1
Cor. i. 5 Accordingly here he mentions the Faith of the Romans, suitably to his
Design. (ver. 12, 17.) Through the whole world -- This joyful News spreading
every where, that there were Christians also in the Imperial City. And the
Goodness and Wisdom of GOD established Faith in the chief Ci^^ies; in Jerusalem
and Rome particularly, that from thence it might be diffused to all Nations.

V. 9. God whom I serve -- As an Apostle, in my spirit -- Not only with my
Body, but within my inmost Soul, in the gospel -- By preaching it.

V. 10. Always -- In all my solemn Addresses to GOD, If by any means now at
length -- This Accumulation of Particles declares the Strength of his Desire.

V. 11. That I may impart to you -- Face to Face, by laying on of Hands,
Prayer, preaching the Gospel, private Conversation, some spiritual gist -- With
such Gifts the Corinthians, who had enjoyed (...) Presence of St. Pan^.
abounded. (1 Cor. i. 7. xii. 1. xlv. i.) So did the Galatians likewise. ( Gal.
iii. 5) And indeed all those Churches which had had the Presence of any of the
Apostles, had peculiar Advantages in this kind, from the laying on of their
Hands ( Act xix. 6. viii. 17. etc. 2 Timothy i 6.) But as yet the Romans were
greatly inferior to them in this Respect for which Reason the Apostle in the
12th Chapter also says little if any thing, of their Spiritual Gifts. He
therefore desires to impart some, that they might be established; for by those
was the testimony of Christ conformed among them. That St. Peter had no more
been at Rome than St. Paul, at the Time when this Epistle was written, appears
from the General Tenor thereof, and from this Place in particular. For
otherwise what St. Paul wishes (...) impart to the Romans, would have been
imparted already by St. Peter.

V. 12. That is, I long to be comforted -- by the mutual faith both of you and
me -- He not only associates the Romans with, but even prefers them before
himself. How different is this Style of the Apostle, from that of the Modern
Court of Rome!

V. 13. Brethren -- A frequent, holy, simple, sweet, and yet grand Appellation.
The Apostles but rarely address Persons by their N^unes, as. O ye Corinthians;
O Timothens. St. Paul generally uses this Appellation, Brethren; sometimes in
Exhortation, My beloved; or, My beloved brethren: St. James, Brethrens My
brethren, My beloved brethren: St. Peter and Jude always, Beloved. St. John
frequently, Beloved; once, Brethren: oftener than once, My little children.
Though I have been hindered hitherto -- Either by Business, (s^ chapter xv. 22.) or
Persecution, (1 T^ess ii. 2.) or the Spirit. ( Acts xvi. 7.) That I might have
some fruit -- Of my ministerial Labors: even as I have already had from the
many Churches I have planted and watered among the other Gentiles.

V. 14. To the Greets and the Barbarians -- He includes the Romans under the
Greeks; so that this Division comprizes all Nations. Both to the wise and the
unwise -- For there were unwise even among the Greeks, and wise even among the
Barbarians. I am a debtor to all -- ^m bound, by my Divine Mission to preach
the Gospel to them.

V. 16. For I am not ashamed of the gospel -- To the world indeed it is Folly
and Weakness. (1 Cor. i. 18.) Therefore in the Judgment of the World he ought
to be a^med of it; especially at Rome, the Head and Theater of the World. But
Paul is not ashamed; knowing it is the power of God unto salvation, to every
one that believes -- The great and gloriously powerful Means of saving all who
accept Salvation in GOD's own Way. As St. Paul comprizes the Sum of the Gospel
in this Epistle, so he does the Sum of the Epistle in this and the following
Verse. Both to the Jew and the Gentile -- There is a noble Frankness, as well
as a comprehensive Sense in these Words, by which be on the one Hand shows the
Jews their absolute Need of the Gospel, and on the other, tells the politest
and greatest Nation in the World, both that their Salvation depended on
receiving it, and that the first offers of it were in every Place always to be
made to the despised Jews.

V. 17. The righteousness of God -- This Expression sometimes means, GOD's
eternal, essential Righteousness, which includes both Justice and Mercy, and is
eminently shown, in condemning Sin^ and yet justifying the Sinner. Sometimes it
means that Righteousness, by which a Man, through the Gift of GOD is made and
is righteou^ And that both by receiving Christ through Faith, and by a
Conformity to the essential Righteousness of GOD. St. Paul, when treating of
Justification, means hereby, the Righteousness of Faith: therefore called The
Righteousness of GOD, because GOD found out and prepued, reveals and gives,
approves and crowns it. In this Verse the Expression means, The whole Benefit
of GOD through Christ for the Salvation of a Sinner. Is revealed -- Mention is
made here, and ver. 18. of a two-sold Revelation, of Wrath and of
Righteousness: the former, little known to Nature, is revealed by the Law; the
latter, wholly unknown to Nature, by the Gospel. That goes before and prepares
the Way; this follows: Each, the Apostle says, is revealed, at the present
Time, in Oppos^ion to the Times of Ignorance. From faith to faith -- By a
gradual Series of still clearer and clearer Promises. As it is written -- St.
Paul had just laid down three Propositions, 1. Righteousness is by Faith (ver.
17.) 2. Salvation is by Righteousness, (ver. 19.) 3. Both to the Jews and to
the (...), (ver. 16.) New all those are confirmed by that single Sentence, The
justi^^^ live by faith -- Which was primarily spoken, (...) those who preserved
their Lives, when the Chaldeans besieged ^erusalem, by believing the
Declarations of GOD, and acting according to them. Here it means, He shall
obtain the favor of GOD, and continue therein by believing.

V. 18. For -- There is no other Way of obtaining Life and Salva^^^^ Having
laid down his Proposition, the Apostle now enters upon the Proof of it. His
first Argument is, The Law condemns all Men as being under Sin. None therefore
is justified by the Works of the Law. This is treated of to chapter iii 20. And
hence he infers, T^erefore Justification is by Faith. The wrath of God is ^aled
-- Not only by frequent and signal Interpositions of Divine Providence, but
likewise in the Sa^red Oracles, and by us, his Messagers. From heaven -- This
speaks the Majesty of him whose Wr^th is revealed, his all-seeing Eye and the
Extent of his Wrath: Whatever is under Heaven, is under the Effects of his
Wrath, Be^evers in Christ ex^epted. Against all (...) and u^rightcousness --
These two are treated of ver. 23 etc. of men -- He is speaking here of the
Gentiles, and chiefly the wisest of them; who detain the truth -- For it
straggles against their Wickedness, in unright^ousness -- The Word here
includes Ungodliness also.

V. 19. For what is to be known of God -- Those great Principles which are in
dispensably necessary to be known is manifest in them, for God has showed it
to them -- By the Light which enlightens every Man that comes into the World.

V. 20. For those things of him which are invisible are seen -- By the Eye of
the Mind, being understood They are seen by them, and them only, who use their
Understanding.

V. 21. Because knowing God -- For the wiser Heathens did know, that there was
one supreme GOD; yet from low and base Considerations, they conf^rned to the
Idolatry of the Valgar, They did not ^lorify him as God, neither were trans^om.
-- They neither thanked Him for his benefits, nor glor^fied Him for his Divine
Perfections; ^ut became vain -- Like the Idols they wor^ipped, In their
reasonings -- Various, under ^in, fooli^. What a terrible Instance have we of
this, in the W^tings of Lu^rctius? Wh^ vain Reasonings, and how dark a lieart,
amidst so pompon, Professions of Wisdom?

V. 23. And chan^ed -- With the utmost Folly! Here are three Degrees of
Ungodliness and of Pan^ment. The First is described, ver. 21-2^. The Second,
ver. 25-27. The Third, in the (...) and following Verses. The Punishment in
each Case is expr^st by God gave them no. If a Man will not worship GOD as GOD,
he is so left to himself, that he throws away his very Manbood. Rent^les -- Or
erceping Things: As Bectses, and various kinds of Serpents.

V. 24. Wherefore -- One Punishment of Sin is from the very Nature of it, as
ver. 27. Another as here, is from vindictive Justice. Unleanness -- Ungod^iness
and Uncleanness are frequently joined; (1. T^ess iv. 5) as are the Knowledge of
GOD and Purity. God gave them up -- By withdrawing his restraining Grace.

V. 25. Who changed the truth -- The true Worship of GOD, into a lie -- ^als^e,
abominable Idolatries, and worshipped -- Inwardly, and served -- Outwardly.

V. 26. Therefore God gave them up to vile affections -- To which the Heathen
Romans were then abandoned to the last Degree; and none more than the Emperors
themselves.

V. 27. Reveiving the just recompense of their error -- Their Idolatry: Being
punished with that unnatural Lust, which was as horrible a Di^onour to the
Body, as their Idolatry was to GOD.

V. 28. God gave them up to an undis^erning mind -- Treated of ver. 32, to do
things not expedient -- (Even the vilest Abominations) treated of ver. 29-31.

V. 29. Filled with all injustice -- This stands in the first Place,
Un^nereisulness in the last. Fornication -- Includes here every Species of
Uncleanness. Malicionsness -- The Greek Word properly implies a Temper, which
delights in hurting another, even without any Advantage to itself.

V. 30. Whisperers -- Such as secretly desame Others. Backhiters -- Such as
speak against others behind their back. Haters of God -- That is, Rebels
against Him; Deniers of his Providen^ce, or Accusers of his Justice in their
Adversities. Ye^, having an inward Heart-En^ity to his Justice and Holiness.
Inventers of evil things -- Of new Pleasures, new Ways of Gain, new Arts of
Hurting, particularly in War.

V. 31. Covenant-breakers -- It is well-known, the Romans, as a Nation, from
the very Beginning of their Common wealth, never made any Scruple of vacating
altogether the most solemn Eng^gement, if they did not like it, though made by
their supreme Magistrate, in the Name of the whole People. They only gave up
the General who had made it, and then supposed themselves to be at full
Liberty! Without natural affection -- The Custom of exposing their own newborn
Children to perish by Cold. Hunger, or wild Beasts, which so generally
prevailed in the Heathen World, particularly among the Greeks and Romans, was
an amazing Instance of this; as is also that of killing their aged and helpless
Parents, now common among the American Heathens.

V. 32. Not only do the same, but have pleasure in these that practice them --
This is the highest Degree of Wickedness. A Man may be hurried by his Passions
to do the Thing he hates. But he that has Pleasure in those that do Evil, loves
Wickedness for Wickedness Sake. And hereby he encourages them in Sin, and heaps
the Guilt of others upon his own Head.

II.
of God leads thee to repentance? Prove. xxiv. 12.
render to every one according to his works: shall be indignation and wrath,
Even upon every soul of man who works evil, of the Jew first, shall be to
every one who works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile.

For there is no respect of persons with God. For as many as have sinned
without the law, are just with God, them,

But if thou art called a Jew, his will, and discernest the things that differ,
being instructed out of the law: man should not steal, Is^ ^ii. 5.
as it is written, Circumcision indeed profits, if thou keep the law; but
if thou art a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision is become
uncircumcision. is that circumcision which is apparent in the flesh. is a Jew,
who is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the Heart, in the spirit, not
in the letter; whose praise is not from men, but from God.

V. 1. Therefore -- The Apostle n^w makes a Transition from the Gentiles to the
Jews, till at ver. 6. he comprizes both. Then art inexenseable -- Seeing
Knowledge without Practice only in^reases Guilt. O man -- Having before spoken
of the Gentile in the Third Person, he addresses the Jew in the Second Person.
But he calls him by a common Appellation, as not acknowledging him to be a Jew
(See ver. 17, (...).) Whosoever then art that jud^est -- Ceasurest, condemnest;
for in that thou judge the other -- The Heathen; thou conden^est thyself; for
thou dest the same things -- In effect; in many Instances.

V. 2. For we know -- Without thy Teaching; that the judgment of God -- Not
thine, who exceptest thyself from its Sentence, is according to truth -- Is
just, making no Exception, (ver 5, 6, 11.) and reaches the Heart, as well as
the Life. (ver. 16)

V. 3. That thou shall escape -- R^t^er than the Gentile.

V. 4. Or desvisest thou -- Do thou go farther still, from hoping to escape
his Wrath, to the Abuse of his Love? The riches -- The Abundance -- of his
goodness, for^ca^ance, and long-suffering -- Seeing thou both have sinned, do
sin, and wilt sin. All these are afterward comprised in the single Word
Goodness: leads thee -- That is, is designed of GOD to lead or encourage thee
to it.

V. 5. Treasurest up wrath -- Although thou think thou art treasuring up all
good Things. O what a Treasure may a Man lay up either Way, in this (...) ort
Day of Life! To thyself -- Not to him whom thou judge: In the day of wrath,
and revelation, and righteous judgment of God -- Just opposite to the goodness,
and for^carance, and longsnssering of God. When GOD shall be revealed, then
shall also be revealed the Secrets of Men's Hearts, ver. 16. Forbearance and
revelation respect GOD, and are opposed to each other, long suffering and
righteous judgment respect the Sinner; goodness and wrath are Words of a more
general Import.

V. 7. To them that seek for glory -- For pure Love does not exclude Faith,
Hope, Desire, 1 Cor. xv. 58.

V. 8. But to them that are contentious -- Like thee, O Jew, who thus sightest
against GOD. The Character of a false Jew is Disobedience, Stubbornness,
Impatience. Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish -- Alluding to Psalm
lxxviii. 49. He cast upon them -- The Egyptians, the sierceness of his anger,
wrath and indignation, and trouble; and finely intimating, that the Jews would
in the Day of Venge nee be more severely punished, then even the Egyptians
were, when GOD made their Plagues so wonderful.

V. 9. Of the Jew first -- Here we have the first express Mention of the Jews
in this Chapter. And it is introduced with great Propriety. Their having been
trained up in the true Religion, and having had Christ and his Apostles first
sent to them, will place them in the foremost Rank of the Criminals that obey
not the Truth.

V. 10. But glory -- (Just oppos^e to wrath) from the Divine Approbation,
honor, (opposite to indi^nation) by the Divine Appointment, and peace new and
for ever, opposed to tribulation and an^uish.

V. 11. For there is no respect of persons with God -- He will reward every one
according to his Works. But this is well consistent with his distributing
Advantages and Opportunities of Improvement, according to his own good Pleasure.

V. 12. For as many as have sinned -- He speaks as of the Time past, for all
Time will be past at the Day of Judgment. Without the law -- Without having any
written Law; shall also perish without the law -- Without Regard had to any
outward Law; being condemned by the Law written in their Hearts. The Word also
shows the Agreement of the Manner of Sinning, with the Manner of Suffering.
Perish -- He could not so properly say, Shall be judged without the Law.

V. 13. For not the hearers of the law are even now just before God; but the
doers of the law shall be justified -- Finally acquitted and rewarded. A most
sure and important Truth; which respects the Gentiles also, though principally
the Jews. But St. Paul speaks of the former, ver. 14. etc. of the latter, ver.
17, etc. Here is therefore no Parenthesis; for the 16th Verse also depends on
the 15, not on the 12th.

V. 14. For when the Gentiles -- That is, any of them. St. Paul having refuted
the perverse Judgment of the Jews concerning the Heathens, proceeds to show the
just Judgment of God against them. He now speaks directly of the Heathens, in
order to convince the Heathens. Yet the Concession he makes to these, serves
more strongly to convince the Jews. Do by nature -- That is, without an outward
Rule; though this also, strictly speaking, is by preventing Grace. The things
contained in the law -- The Ten Commandments being only the Substance of the
Law of Nature. These not having the written law, are a law unto themselves --
That is, what the Law is to the Jews, they are (by the Grace of God) to
themselves; namely a Rule of Life.

V. 15. Who show -- To themselves, to other Men, and in a Sense, to God
Himself; the work of the law -- The Substance, though not the Letter of it;
written on their hearts -- By the same Hand which wrote the Commandments on the
Tables of Stone: Their conscience -- There is none of all its Faculties which
the Soul has less in its Power than this; bearing witness -- In a Trial, there
are the Plaintiff, the Defendant, and the Witnesses. Conscience and Sin itself,
are Witnesses against the Heathens. Their thoughts sometimes excuse, sometimes
condemn them. Among themselves -- Alternately, like Plaintiff and Defendant.
Acensing, or even defending them -- The very manner of speaking shows that they
have far more Room to accuse than to defend.

V. 16. In the Day -- That is, who show this in the Day -- Every thing will
then be shown to be what it really is. In that Day will appear the Law written
in their Hearts, as it often does in the present Life; when God shall judge the
secrets of men -- On secret Circumstances depends the real Quality of Actions,
frequently unknown to the Actors themselves, (ver. 29.) Men generally form
their judgments, even of themselves, merely from what is apparent. According to
my Gospel -- According to the Tenor of that Gospel, which is committed to my
Care. Hence it appears that the Gospel also is a Law.

V. 17. But if thou art called a Jew -- This highest point of Jewish glorying
(after a farther Description of it interposed, ver. 17 -- 20. and refuted, ver.
21 -- 24.) is itself refuted ver. 25, etc. The Description consists of twice
five Articles: Of which the former five (ver. 17, 18.) show what he boasts of
in himself; the other five (ver. 19, 20.) what he glories in, with respect to
others. The first Particular of the former five, answers to the first of the
latter; the second to the second, and so on. And restest in the law --
Dependest on it, though it can only condemn thee; and gloriest in God -- As thy
GOD: and that too, to the Exclusion of others.

V. 19. Blind -- in darkness -- Ignorant -- babes -- These were the Titles
which the Jews generally gave the Gentiles.

V. 20. Having the form of knowledge and truth -- That is, the most accurate
Knowledge of the Truth.

V. 21. Then do not teach thyself: -- He does not teach himself, who does not
practice what he teaches. Do thou steal: -- commit adultery: -- commit
sacrilege -- Sin grievously against thy Neighbor, thyself, GOD. St. Paul had
shown the Gentiles, first their Sins against GOD, then against themselves, then
against their Neighbors. He now inverts the Order. For Sins against GOD are
the most glaring in an Heathen; but not in a Jew. Thou that abhorrest idols --
Which all the Jews did, from the time of the Babylonish Captivity: thou
committest sacrilege -- D^est what is still worse, robbing Him who is God over
all of the Glory which is due to Him.

None of these Charges were rashly advanced against the Jews of that Age. For
(as their own Historian relates) some even of the Priests lived by Rapine, and
others in gross Uncleanness. And as for sacrilegiously robbing GOD and his
altar, it had been complained of ever since Malachi. So that the Instances are
given with great Propriety and Judgment.

V. 25. Circum^ision indeed profits -- He does not say, justifies. How far it
profited is shown in the 3d and 4th Chapters: Thy circumcision is become
uncircumcision -- Is so already, in Effect. Thou will have no more Benefit by
it, than if thou had never received it. The very same Observation holds with
regard to Baptism.

V. 26. If the uncircumcision -- That is, a Person uncircumcised, keep the law
-- Walk agreeably to it -- shall not his uncircumcision be counted for
circumcision -- In the Sight of GOD?

V. 27. Yea, the uncircumcision that is by nature -- Those who are, literally
speaking, uncircumcised, fulfilling the law -- As to the Substance of it, shall
judge thee -- Shall condemn thee in that Day: who by the letter and
circumcision -- Who having the bare, literal, external Circumcision,
transgresses the law.

V. 28. For he is not a Jew -- In the most important Sense, that is, one of
GOD's beloved People, who is one in outward show only; neither is that the
true, acceptable circumcision, which is appareat in the flesh.

V. 29. But he is a Jew -- That is, One of GOD's People who is one inwardly --
In the secret Recesses of his Soul; and the acceptable circumcision is that of
the heart, [referring to Deuteronomy. xxx. 6.] the putting away all inward Impurity.
This is seated in the spirit, the inmost Soul renewed by the Spirit of GOD, and
not in the letter, not in the external Ceremony: Whose praise is not from men;
but from God -- The only Searcher of the Heart.

III.
is the advantage of the Jew, or what the profit of the circumcision? Psalm.
li. 4.
That thou might be justified in thy saying, and might overcome when thou
art judged. Is not God unjust, who takes vengeance? say) do evil, that good
may come? Whose condemnation is just.

What then? than they? In no wise: for we have before proved all, both Jews and
Gentiles, Psalm xiv. 1, etc.
There is none righteous, Psalm v. 9.
Their throat is an open sepulchie; with their tongues they have used deceit;
the Psalm cxl. 3.
poison of asps is under their lips. Psalm x. 7.
Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; Isaiah lix. 7, 8.
Their feet are swift to shed blood; Psalm xxxvi. 1.
The fear of God is not before their eyes. to them that are under the law; that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become guilty before God.

But now the righteousness of God is manifested without the law, in Christ
Jesus: I say, of his righteousness in this present time, that he might be just,
and yet the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

Where is boasting then? Is God the God of the Jews only, and not also of the
Gentiles? Surely of the Gentiles also: it is one God who will justify the
circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through the same faith.

V. 1. What then, may some say, is the advantage of the Jew, or of the
circumcision -- That is, those that are circumcised, above the Gentiles?

V. 2. Chiefly in that they were entrusted with the oracles of God -- The
Scriptures, in which are so great and precious Promises, Other Prerogatives
will follow, chapter ix. 4, 5. St. Paul here singles out this, by which, after
removing the Objection, he will convict them so much the more.

V. 3. Shall their unbelief disannul the faithfulness of God? -- Will He not
still make good his Promises to them that do believe?

V. 5. But, it may be farther objected, if our unrighteousness be subservient
to GOD's Glory, is it not unjust in Him to punish us for it? I speak as a man
-- As human Weakness would be apt to speak.

V. 6. God forbid -- By no means. If it were unjust in GOD to punish that
Unrighteousness, which is subservient to his own Glory; how should God judge
the world? -- Since all the Unrighteousness in the World, will then commend the
righteousness of God.

V. 7. But, may the Objector reply, if the truth of God has abounded -- Has
been more abundantly shown, through my lie -- If my Lie, that is Practice
contrary to Truth, conduces to the Glory of GOD, by making his Truth shine with
superior Advantage, why am I still judged as a sinner? -- Can this be said, to
be any Sin at all? Ought I not to do what would otherwise be evil, that so much
good may come? To this the Apostle does not deign to give a direct Answer, but
cuts the Objector short with a severe Reproof.

V. 8. Whose condemnation is just -- The Condemnation of all who either speak
or act in this Manner. So the Apostle absolutely denies the Lawfulness of doing
Evil, any Evil, that Good may come.

V. 9. What then? -- Here he resume; what he said, ver. 1. Und^rsin -- Under
the G^ilt and Power of it: The Jews by transgressing the written Law; the
Gentiles by transgressing the Law of Nature.

V. 10. As it is written -- That all Men are under Sin, appears from the Vices
which have raged in all Ages. St. Paul therefore rightly cites David and
Isaiah, though they spoke primarily of their own Age, and expressed what manner
of Men GOD sees when he looks down from heaven, not what he makes them by his
Grace. There is none righteous -- That is the general Proposition. The
Particulars follow; their Dispositions and Designs, ver. 11, 12. their
Discourse, ver. 13, 14. their Actions, ver. 16 -- 18.

V. 11. There is none that understands -- The Things of GOD.

V. 12. They have all turned aside -- From the good Way. They are become
unprofitable -- Helpless, impotent, unable to profit either themselves or
others.

V. 13. Their threat -- Is noisome and dangerous as on open sepuldre. Observe
the Progress of evil Discourse, proceeding out of the Heart, through the
Throat, Tougue, L^ps, till the whole Mouth is filled there with. The poison of
asys -- Infectious, deadly Backbiting, Talebearing, Evil-speaking, is under
(for Honey is on) their lips. An Asp is a venomous kind of Serpent.

V. 14. Cursing -- Against GOD: Bittern^ss -- Against their Neighbor.

V. 17. Of peace -- Which ^^n only spring from Righteousness.

V. 18. The fear of God is not ^re their eyes -- Much l^ss is the Love of GOD
in their Heart.

V. 19. Whatsoever the law -- The Old Testament, says, it says to them that
are under the law -- That is, to those who own its Authority; to the Jews, and
not the Gentiles. St. Paul quoted no Scripture against them, but pleaded with
them only from the Light of Nature. Every mouth -- Full of Bitterness, ver. 14.
and yet of Boasting, ver. 27. may become guilty -- may be fully convicted, and
apparently liable to most just Condemnation. These Things were written of old,
and were quoted by St. Paul, not to make Men criminal, but to prove them so.

V. 20. No flesh shall be justified -- None shall be forgiven and accepted of
GOD, by the works of the law -- On this Ground, that he has kept the Law. St.
Paul means chie^y, the Moral Part of it, (ver. 19, 9. chapter ii. 21, etc. 2^.)
which alone is not abolished. (ver. 31.) And it is not without Reason, that he
so often mentions the Works of the Law, whether Ceremonial or Moral. For it was
on these only the Jews relied, being wholly ignorant of those that spring from
Faith. For by the law is only the knowledge of sin -- But no Deliverance either
from the Guilt or Power of it.

V. 21. But now the righteousness of God -- That is, the Manner of becoming
righteous which GOD has appointed, without the law -- Without that previous
Obedience which the law requires; without Reference to the Law, or Dependence
on it; is manifested -- In the Gospel; being attested by the law itself, and by
the prophets -- By all the Promises in the Old Testament.

V. 22. To all -- The Jews, and upon all -- The Gentiles, that believe; for
there is no difference -- Either as to the Need of Justification, or the Manner
of it.

V. 23. For all have sinned -- In Adam, and in their own Persons; by a sinful
Nature, sinful Temp r^, and sinful Actions; and are fallen short of the glory
of God -- The supreme End of Man; short of his Image on Earth, and the
Enjoyment of Him in Heaven.

V. 24. And are justified -- Pardoned and accepted, freely -- Without any Merit
of their own, by his grace -- Not their own Righteousness or Works, through the
redemption -- The Price Christ has paid. Freely by his grace -- One of these
Expressions might have served to convey the Apostle's Meaning: But he doubles
his Assertion, (...) order to give us the fullest Conviction of the Truth, and
to impress us with a Sense of its peculiar Importance. It is not possible to
find Words that should more absolutely exclude all Consideration of our own
Works and Obedience; or more emphatically ascribe the whole of our
Justification to free, unmerited Goodness.

V. 25. Whom God has set forth -- Before Angels and Men, a propitiation -- To
appease an offended GOD. But if, as some teach, GOD. never was offended, there
was no Need of this Propitiation. And if so, Christ died in vain To declare his
righteousness -- To demon^rate not only his Clemency, but his Justice; even
that vindictive Justice, whose essential Character and principal Office is, to
punish Sin: By the remission of past sins -- All the Sins antecedent to their
believing.

V. 26. For a demonstration of his righteousness -- Both of his Justice and
Mercy, that he might be just -- Showing his Justice on his own Son; and yet the
more full justifier of every one that believes in Jesus. That he might be just
-- Might evidence Himself to be strictly and inviolably righteous in the
Administration of his Government, even while He is the merciful Justifier of
the Sinner that believes in Jesus. The Attribute of Justice must be preserved
inviolate. And inviolate it is preserved, if there was a real Infliction of
Punis^ment on our Savior. On this Plan, all the Attributes harmonize. Every
Attribute is glorified; and not one superseded, no nor so much as clouded.

V. 27. Where is the boasting then of the Jew against the Gentile? It is
excluded. By what law? Of works? Nay, This would have left room for boasting;
but by the law of faith: Since this requires all, without Distinction, to apply
as guilty and helpless Sinners, to the free Mercy of GOD in Christ. The Law of
Faith, is that Divine Constitution which makes Faith, not Works, the Condition
of Acceptance.

V. 28. We conclude then, that a man is justified by faith -- And even by this,
not as it is a Work, but as it receives Christ, and consequently has something
essentially different from all our Works whatsoever.

V. 29. Surely of the Gentiles also -- As both Nature and the Scriptures show.

V. 30. Seeing it is one God who -- Shows Mercy to both, and by the very same
Means.

V. 31. We establish the law -- Both the Authority, Purity, and the End of it;
by defending that which the Law attests: By pointing out Christ, the End of it,
and by showing how it may be fulfilled, in its Purity.

Chap. iv. Having proved it by Argument, he now proves by Example, and such
Example as must have greater Weight with the Jews than any other, 1. That
Justification is by Faith; 2. That it is free for the Gentiles.

IV.
he has not in the fight of God. Genesis xv. 6.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed to him for righteousness. Psalm.
xxxii. 1, 2.
Happy are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; is
the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Comes this happiness then on the
circumcision only, or on the uncircumcision also? For we say that faith was
imputed to Abraham for righteousness. he had in uncircumcision, that he might
be the father of all who believe in uncircumcision, that righteousness may be
imputed to them also, was not to Abraham or to his seed by the law, are heirs,
faith is made void, and the promise of no effect. there is no transgression.
Therefore it is of faith, it might be of grace, that the promise might be firm
to all the seed; not only to that which is of the law, but to that also which
is of the faith of Abraham, Genesis xvii. 5.
I have appointed thee a father of many nations) before God in whom he
believed, as quickening the dead, and calling the things that are not, as though
they were: Genesis xv. 5.
So shall thy seed be. if we believe on him who raised up Jesus our Lord from
the dead,

V. 1. That our father Abraham has found -- Acceptance with GOD; according to
the ficsh -- That is, by Works.

V. 2. The Meaning is; if Abraham had been justified by Works, he would have
had room to glory. But he had not room to glory. Therefore he was not justified
by Works.

V. 3. Abraham believed God -- That Promise of GOD concerning the Numerousness
of his Seed, Genesis xv. 5, 7. But especially the Promise concerning Christ. Genesis
xii. 3. Through whom all Nations should be blessed: And it was imputed to him for
righteousness -- GOD accepted him, as if he had been altogether righteous.

V. 4. Now to him that works -- All that the Law requires, the Reward is no
Favor, but an absolute Debt.

These two Examples are selected and applied with the utmost Judgment and
Propriety. Abraham was the most illustrions Puttern of Piety among the Jewish
Patriarchs. David was the most eminent of their Kings. If then neither of these
was justified by his own Obedience; if they both obtained Acceptance with GOD,
not as upright Beings who might claim it, but as sinful Creatures who must
implore it, the Consequence is glaring. It is such as must strike every
attentive Understanding, and must affect every individual Person.

V. 5. But to him that works not -- It being impossible he should without
Faith, but believes -- his faith is imputed to him f^righteousness --
Therefore GOD's affirming of Abraham, that Faith was imputed to him for
righteousness, plainly shows, that he worked not; or in other Words, that he
was not justified by Works, but by Faith only. Hence we see plainly, how
groundless that Opinion is, that Holiness or Sanctification is previous to our
Justification For the Sinner being first convinced of his Sin and Danger by the
Spirit of GOD, stands trembling before the awful Tribunal of divine Justice;
and has nothing to plead, but his own Guilt and the Merits of a Mediator.
Christ here interposes. Justice is satisfied: The Sin is remitted, and Pardon
is applied to the Soul, by a Divine Faith wrought by the Holy Ghost, who then
begins the great Work of inward Sanctification. Thus GOD Justifies the ungodly;
and yet remains just, and true to all his Attributes! But let none hence
presume to continue in Sin. For to the impenitent GOD is a consuming fire. On
him that justifies the nagodly -- If a Man could possibly bemade holy before
he was justified, it would entirely set his Justification aside; seeing he
could not, in the very Nature of the Thing, be justified, if he were not, at
that very Time ungedly.

V. 6. So David also -- David is sitly introduced after Abraham, because he
also received and delivered down the Promise. Affirms -- A Man is justified
by Faith alone, and not by Works. Without works -- That is without regard to
any former good Works supposed to have been done by him.

V. 7. Happy are they whose sins are covered -- With the Veil of divine Mercy.
If there be indeed such a Thing as Happiness on Earth, it is the Portion of
that Man whose iniquities are forgiven, and who enjoys the Manifestation of
that Pardon, Well may he endure all the Afflictions of Life with Cheerfulness,
and look upon Death with Comfort. O let us not contend against it, but
earnestly, pray, that this Happiness may be ours.

V. 9. This happiness -- Mentioned by Abraham and David. On the circumcision --
Those that are circumcised only. Faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness
-- This is fully consistent with our being instified, that is pardoned and
accepted by GOD upon our believing, for the Sake of what Christ has done and
suffered. For though this and this alone be the meritorious Cause of our
Acceptance with GOD, yet Faith may be said to be imputed to us for
righteousness, as it is the sole Condition of our Acceptance. We may observe
here, Forgiveness, not ^puting sin, and imputing righteousness, are all one.

V. 10. Not in circumcision -- Not after he was circumcised: For he was
justified, before Is^mael was born; ( Genesis xv.) But he was not circumcised till
Is^mael was thirteen Years old. ( Genesis xvii. 25.)

V. 11. And -- After he was justified: he received the sign of circumcision --
Circumcision, which was a Sign or Token of his being in covenant with GOD: a
seal -- An Assurance on GOD'S Par, that he accounted him righteous, upon his
believing, before he was circumcised. Who believe in uncircumcision -- That is,
though they are not circumcised.

V. 12. And the father of the circumcision -- Of those who are circumcised and
believe as Abraham ^^d. To those who believe not, Abraham is not a Father,
neither are they his Seed.

V. 13. The promise that he should be the heir of the world -- Is the same as,
That he should be the Father of all Nations; namely of those in all Nations,
who received the Blessing. The whole World was promised to him and them
conjointly. Christ is the Heir of the World, and of all Things; and so are
called Abraham's Seed, all that believe in Him with the Faith of Abraham

V. 14. If they only who are of the law, who have kept the whole Law are heirs,
faith is made void; no Blessing is to be obtained by it. And so the promise is
of no effect.

V. 15. Because the law -- Considered apart from that Grace, which though it
was in fact mingled with it, yet is no Part of the legal Dispensation, is so
difficult, and we so weak and sinful, that instead of bringing us a Blessing,
it only works wrath; it becomes to us an Occasion of Wrath, and exposes us to
Punishment as Transgressors. Where there is no law -- In force, there can be no
transgression of it.

V. 16. Therefore it -- The Blessing, is of faith, that it might be of grace --
That it might appear to flow from the free Love of GOD, and that the promise
might be firm, sure, and effectual, to all the spiritual Seed of Abraham; not
only Jews but Gentiles also, if they follow his Faith.

V. 17. Before God -- Though before Men nothing of this appeared, those Nations
being then unborn: as ^^^kning the dead -- The dead are not dead to Him. And
even the Things that are not, are before God -- And calling the things that are
not -- Summoning them to rise into Being, and appear before Him. The Seed of
Abraham did not then exist. Yet GOD said, So shall thy Seed be. A Man can say
to his servant actually existing, Do this; and he does it. But GOD says to the
Light, while it does not exist, Go forth; and it goes.

V. 18.-21. The Apostle shows the Power and Excellence of that Faith, to which
he ascribes Justification Who against hoo^ -- Against all Probability, believed
and hoped in the Promise. The same Thing is apprehended both by Faith and Hope;
by Faith, as a Thing which GOD has spoken; by Hope, as a good Thing which GOD
has promised to us. So shall thy seed be -- Both Natural and Spiritual, as the
Stars of Heaven for Multitude.

V. 20. Giving GOD the glory of his Truth and Power.

V. 23. On his account only -- To do personal Honor to him.

V. 24. But on ours also -- To establish us in seeking Justification by Faith,
and ^ot by Works. And to afford a full Answer to those who say, that to be
justified by Works means only, By Judaism: To be justified by Faith means, By
embracing Christianity, that is, the system of Doctrines so called. Sure it is
that Abraham could not in this Sense be justified either by Faith or by Works:
And equally sure, that David (taking the Words thus) was justified by Works,
and not by Faith. Who raised up Jesus from the dead -- As He did in a manner
both Abraham and Sarah. If we believe on him who raised up Jesus -- GOD the
Father therefore is the proper Object of justifying Faith. It is observable,
that St. Paul here, in speaking both of our Faith and of the Faith of Abraham,
puts a Part for the whole. And he mentions that Part, with regard to Abraham,
which would naturally affect the Jews most.

V. 25. Who was delivered -- To Death, for our offenses -- As an Atonement for
them; and raised for our justification -- To empower us to receive that
Atonement by Faith.

V.
so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works
patience, which is given unto us. so, but we also glory in God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the reconciliation.

Therefore as by one man sin entered into the world, figure of him that was to
come. is the free gift. For if by the offense of one many died, much more the
grace of God, and the gift by grace, that of one man, Jesus Christ, has
abounded unto many. the loss by one that sinned, so is the gift; for the
sentence was by one offense to condemnation; but the free gift is of many
offenses unto justification. even Jesus Christ. the sentence of death came upon
all men to condemnation, so also by one righteousness, the free gift came upon
all men to justification of life. But the law came in between,

V. 1. Being justified by faith -- This is the Sum of the preceding Chapters,
we have peace with (...) -- Being Enemies to GOD no longer, (ver. 10.) neither
fearing his Wrath (ver. 9) We have Peace, Hope, Love, and Power over Sin, the
Sum of the 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th Chapters. These are the Fruits of justifying
Faith: Where these are not, that Faith is not.

V. 2. Into this grace -- This State of Favor.

V. 3. We glory in tribulations also -- Which we are so far from esteeming a
Mark of GOD'S Displeasure, that we receive them as Tokens of his fatherly Love,
whereby we are prepared for a more exalted Happiness. The Jews objected to the
persecuted State of the Christians as inconsistent with the People of the
Messiah. It Is therefore with great Propriety, that the Apostle so often
mentions the Blessings arising from this very Thing.

V. 4. And patience works more experience of the Sincerity of our Grace, and of
GOD'S Power and Faithfulness.

V. 5. Hope shameth us not -- That is, gives us the highest Glorying. We glory
in this our Hope, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts -- The
divine Conviction of GOD'S Love to us, and that Love to GOD, which is both the
Earnest, and the Beginning of Heaven: By the Holy Ghost -- The Efficient Cause
of all these present Blessings, and the Earnest of those to come.

V. 6. How can we now doubt of GOD'S Love? For when we were without strength --
Either to think, will, or do any good, in d^e time -- Neither too soon nor too
late; but in that very Point of Time which the Wisdom of GOD knew to be more
proper than any other, Christ died for the ungodly -- Not only to set them a
Pattern, or to procure them Power to follow it. It does not appear, that this
Expression of dying for any one, has any other Signification, than that
rescuing the Life of another, by laying down our own.

V. 7. A just man -- One who gives to all what is strictly their Due: The good
man -- One who is eminently holy, full of Love, of Compassion, Kindness,
Mildness, of every heavenly and aimable Temper. Perhaps -- one -- would -- even
-- dare to die -- Every Word in^reas^s the Strangeness of the Thing, and
declares even this to be something great and unusual.

V. 8. But God recommendeth -- A most elegant Expression. Those are wont to be
recommended to us who were before either unknown to, or alienated from us, wh^^
we were sinners -- So far from being good, that we were not even just.

V. 9. By his blood -- By his Blood shedding we shall be saved from wrath
through him -- That is, from all the Effects of the Wrath of GOD. But is there
then Wrath in GOD? Is not Wrath an human Passion? And how can this human
Passion be in GOD? We may answer this by another Question. Is not Love an human
Passion? And how can this human Passion be in GOD? But to answer directly.
Wrath in Man, and so Love in Man, is an human Passion. But Wrath in GOD is not
an human Passion; nor is Love, as it is in GOD. Therefore the inspired Writers
ascribe both the one and the other to GOD, only in an analogical Sense.

V. 10. If -- As sure as. So the Word frequently signifies; particularly in
this and the 8th Chapter. We shall be saved -- Sanctified and glorified,
through his life -- Who ever lives to make intercession for us.

V. 11. And not only so, but we also glory -- The whole Sentence, from the 3d
to the 11th Verse, may be taken together thus: We not only rejoice in hope of
the glory of God, but also in the midst of Tribulations, we glory in GOD
Himself, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
reconciliation.

V. 12. Therefore -- This refers to all the preceding Discourse; from which the
Apostle infers what follows: He does not therefore properly make a Digression,
but returns to speak again of Sin and of Righteousness As by one man -- Adam;
who is mentioned and not Eve, as being the Representative of Mankind. Sin
entered into the world -- Actual S^n, and it is Consequence, a sinful Nature:
and Death -- With all it^s Att^ndants. It entered into the world, when it
entered into Being; or till then it did not exist, by sin -- Therefore it could
not enter before Sin. Even so -- Namely by one Man, in that -- So the word is
used also: 2 Cor. v. 4. all sinned -- In Adam. These Words assign the Reason,
why Death came upon all men: Infants themselves not excepted, in that all
sinned.

V. 13. For ^ntil the law, sin was in the world -- All I say had sinned, for
sin was in the world long before the written Law; but, I grant, sin is not so
much imputed, nor so severely punished by GOD, where there is no express law to
convince Men of it. Yet that all had sinned even then appears, in that all died.

V. 14. Death reigned -- And how vast is his Kingdom! Scarce can we find any
King who has as many Subjects, as are the Kings whom he has conquered! Even
over them that had not sinned after the likeness of Adam's transgression --
Even over Infants who had never sinned, as Adam did, in their own Persons: And
over others, who had not, like him, sinned against an express Law. Who is the
figure of him that was to come -- Each of them being a public Person, and a
Federal Head of Mankind. The one, the Fountain of Sin and Death to Mankind by
his Offense; the other, of Righteousness and Life by his free Gift.

Thus far the Apostle shows the Agreement between the First and Second Adam:
Afterward he shows the Differences between them. The Agreement may be summed up
thus: As by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; so by one Man
Righteousness entered into the World, and Life by Righteousness. As Death
passed upon all Men, in that all had sinned; so Life passed upon all Men (who
are in the Second Adam by Faith) in that all are justified. And as Death
through the Sin of the First Adam, reigned even over them who had not sinned
after the likeness of Adam's transgression: So through the Righteousness of
Christ, even those who have not obeyed, after the Likeness of his Obedience,
shall reign in Life. We may add, As the Sin of Adam, without the Sins which we
afterward committed brought us Death: So the Righteousness of Christ, without
the good Works which we afterward perform, brings us Life: Although still
every good, as well as evil Work, will receive its due Reward.

V. 15. Yet not -- St. Paul now describes the Difference between Adam and
Christ; and that much more directly and expressly than the Agreement between
them. Now the Fall and the free Gift differ, 1. In Amplitude, (ver. 15.) 2. He
from whom Sin came, and He from whom the free Gift came, (termed also the Gift
of Righteousness) differ in Power, (ver. 16.) 3. The Reason of both is
subjoined, (ver. 17.) 4. This premised, the Offense and the free Gift are
compared, with regard to their Effect, ver. 18, and with regard to their Cause,
ver. 19.

V. 16. The sentence was by one offense to Adam 's condemnation -- Occasioning
the Sentence of Death to pass upon him, which by consequence overwhelmed his
Posterity: but the free gift is of many offenses unto justification -- Unto the
purchasing it for all Men, notwithstanding many Offenses.

V. 17. There is a Difference between Grace and the Gift. Grace is opposed to
the Offense, the Gift to Death, being the Gift of Life.

V. 18. Justification of life is that Sentence of GOD, by which a Sinner under
Sentence of Death is adjudged to Life.

V. 19. As by the disobedience of one man, many (that is, all Men) were
constituted sinners -- Being then in the Loins of their first Parent, the
common Head and Representative of them all; So by the obedience of one -- By
his Obedience unto Death; by his dying for us; many -- All that believe, shall
be constituted righteous -- Justified, pardoned.

V. 20. The law come in (...) -- The Offense and the free Gift, that the
offense might abou^^ -- That is, the Consequence (not the Design of the Law's
coming in, was, not the taking away of Sin, but the Increase of it; yet where
sin abounded, ^ra^e did much more abound Not only in the Rem^ssion of that Sin
which Adam brought on us, but of all our own; not only in Remission of Sins,
but Infusion of Holiness: Not only in Deliverance from Death, but Admission to
everlasting Life; a far more noble and excellent Life than that which we lost
by Adam's Fall.

V. 21. That as sin had reigned so grace also might reign -- Which could no
reign before the Fall; before Man had sinned. Through righteousness to eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord -- Here is pointed out the Source of all
our Blessings, the rich and free Grace of GOD. The meritorious Cause; not any
Works of Righteousness of Man, but the alone Merits of our Lord Jesus Christ
The Effect of End of all; not only Pardon, but Life; divine Life, leading to
Glory.

VI.
walk in newness of life. in the likeness of his resurrection: him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that we might no longer serve sin. as
instruments of unrighteousness; but present yourselves to God, as alive from
the dead, and your members to God, as instruments of righteousness. you; for ye
are not under the law, but under grace.

What then? be to God, that, whereas ye were the servants of sin, ye have now
obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine into which ye have been delivered.
righteousness, is death. is the wages of sin; but eternal life is the gift of
God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

V. 1. The Apostle here se^s himself more fully to vindicate his Doctrine, from
the Consequence above suggested (chapter iii. 7, 8.) He had then only in strong
Terms denied and renounced it. Here he removes the very Foundation thereof.

V. 2. Dead t^ sin ^reed both from the Guilt and from the Power of it.

V. 3. As many as have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into
his death -- In Baptism we (through Faith) are ingrafted into Christ. And we
draw new spiritual Life from this new Root, through his Spirit, who fa^ions us
like unto Him, and particularly with regard to his Death and Resurrection.

V. 4. We are buried with him -- Alluding to the ancient Manner of baptizing by
Immersion; that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory -- Glorious
Power, of the Father, so we also by the same Power should rise again: And as he
lives a new Life in Heaven, so we should walk in newness of life. This, says
the Apostle, our very Baptism represents to us.

V. 5. For -- Surely these two must go together; so that if we are indeed made
conformable to his Death, we shall also know the Power of his Resurrection.

V. 6. Our old man -- Coeval with our Being, and as old as the Fall; our evil
Nature; a strong and beautiful Expression for that entire Depravity and
Corruption, which by Nature spreads itself over the whole Man, leaving no Part
uninfected. This in a Believer is crucified with Christ, mortified, gradually
killed, by virtue of our Union with him: that the body of sin -- All evil
Tempers, Words, and Actions, which are the members of the old man, (Col. iii.
5.) might be destroyed.

V. 7. For he that is dead -- With Christ, is freed from the Guilt of past, and
from the Power of present sin, as dead Men from the Commands of their former
Masters.

V. 8. Dead with Christ -- Conformed to his Death, by dying to Sin.

V. 10. He died to sin -- To atone for and abolish it: He lives unto God -- A
glorious eternal Life, such as we shall live also.

V. 12. Let not s^ reign even in your mortal body -- It must be subject to
Death, but it need not be subject to Sin.

V. 13. Neither present your members to sin -- To corrupt Nature, a mere
Tyrant; but to God -- Your lawful King.

V. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you -- It has neither Right nor Power.
For ye are not under the Law -- A Dispensation of a Terror and Bondage, which
only shows Sin, without enabling you to conquer it; ^ut under grace -- Under
the merciful Dispensation of the Gospel, which brings complete Victory over it;
to every one who is under the powerful Influences of the Spirit of Christ.

V. 17. The form of doctrine into which ye have been delivered -- Literally it
is, The mould into which ye have been delivered: Which as it contains a
beautiful Allusion, conveys also a very instructive Admonition: Intimating that
our Minds, all pliant and ductile, should be conformed to the Gospel-Precepts,
as liquid Metals take the Figure of the Mould into which they are cast.

V. 18. Being then set free from sin -- We may see the Apostle's Method thus
far at one View. 1. Bondage to Sin, C. iii. 9. 2. The Knowledge of Sin by the
Law; a Sense of GOD'S Wrath: inward Death, C. iii. 20. 3. The Revelation of the
Righteousness of GOD in Christ through the Gospel, C. iii. 21. 4. The Center of
all, FAITH, embracing that Righteousness, C. iii. 22. 5. Justification, whereby
GOD forgives all past Sin, and freely accepts the Sinner, C. iii. 24. 6. The
Gift of the Holy Ghost: A Sense of GOD'S Love: New Inward Life, C. v. 5. C. vi.
4. 7. The free Service of Righteousness, C. vi. 12.


V. 19. I speak after the manner of men -- Thus it is necessary that the
Scripture should let itself down to the Language of Men; because of the
weakness of your flesh -- Slowness of Understanding flows from the Weakness of
the Flesh, that is, of Human Nature. As ye have presented your members servants
to uncleanness and iniquity, unto iniquity, so now present your members
servants of righteousness, unto holiness -- Iniquity (whereof uncleanness is an
eminent Part) is here opposed to righteousness. And unto iniquity is the
Opposite of unto holiness. Righteousness here is, A Conformity to the Divine
Will; Holiness, to the whole Divine Nature. Observe! they who are servants of
righteousness go on to holiness; but they who are servants to iniquity get no
further. Righteousness is Service, because we live according to the Will of
Another; but Liberty, because of our Inclination to it and Delight in it.

V. 20. When ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from Righteousness -- In
all reason therefore ye ought now to be free from Unrighteousness; to be as
uniform and zealous in serving GOD, as ye were in serving the Devil.

V. 21. Those things -- He speaks of them as afar off.

V. 23. Death -- Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal, is the due wages of sin. But
eternal life is the gift of God -- The Difference is remarkable. Evil Works
merit the Reward they receive; Good Works do not. The former demand Wages, the
latter accept a free Gift.

VII.
her husband while he is alive; but if her husband be dead, she is freed from
the law of her husband. are become dead to the law by the body of Christ; that
ye might be married to another, even to him who was raised from the dead, that
we may bring forth fruit to God.

What shall we say then? was dead. And I was once alive without the law; was
intended for life, this I found unto death.

Was then that which is good made death to me? sold under sin. it is good. Now
then it is no more I that do it, how to perform what is good, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. So then I myself with my mind serve the law of God, but with
my flesh the law of sin.

V. 1. The Apostle continues the Comparison between the former and the present
State of a Believer, and at the same Time endeavors to wean the Jewish
Believers from their Fondness for the Mosaic Law. I speak to them that know the
Law -- To the Jews chiefly here. As long -- So long, and no longer, as it
lives -- The Law is here spoken of (by a common Figure) as a Person, to which
as to an Husband, Life, and Death are ascribed. But he speaks indifferently o^
the Law being dead to us, or we to it, the Sense being the same.

V. 2. She is freed from the law of her husband -- From that Law which gave him
a peculiar Property in her.

V. 4. Thus ye also -- Are now as free from the Mosaic Law, as an Husband is,
when his Wife is dead. By the body of Christ -- Offered up; that is, by the
Merits of his Death, that Law expiring with him.

V. 5. When ye were in the flesh -- Carnally minded, in a State of Nature;
before we believed in Christ. Our Sins which were by the law Accidentally
occasioned, or irritated ^hereby. Wrought in our members -- Spread themselves
all over the whole Man.

V. 6. Being dead to that whereby we were held -- To our old Husband, the Law
that we might serve in newness of spirit -- In a new, spiritual Manner, and not
in the oldness of the letter -- Not in a bare literal, external Way, as we did
before.

V. 7. What shall we say then? This is a kind of Digression, (to the Beginning
of the next Chapter) wherein the Apostle, in order to show in the most lively
Manner the Weakness and Inefficacy of the Law, changes the Person and speaks as
of himself, concerning the M^sery of one under the Law. This St. Paul
frequently does, when he is not speaking of his own Person, but only assuming
another Character. ( Romans iii. 6.1. Cor. x. 30. chapter iv. 6.) The Character here
assumed, is that of a Man, first, ignorant of the Law, then under it, and
sincerely but ineffectually striving to serve GOD. To have spoken this of
himself, or any true Believer, would have been foreign to the whole Scope of
his Discourse; nay, utterly contrary there^o; as well as to what is expressly
asserted, chapter viii. 2. Is the law sin -- Sinful in itself, or a Promoter of
Sin. I had not known lust -- That is, Evil Desire. I had not known it to be a
Sin. Nay, perhaps I should not have known that any such Desire was in me. It
did not appear, till it was stirred up by the Prohibition.

V. 8. But Sin -- My inbred Corruption, taking occasion by the commandment --
Forbidding, but not subduing it, was only fretted, and wrought in me so much
the more all manner of evil desire. For while I was without the Knowledge of
the law, sin was dead; neither so apparent, nor so active; Nor was I under the
least Apprehensions of any Danger from it.

V. 9. And I was once alive without the law -- Without the close Application of
it. I had much Life, Wisdom, Virtue, Strength. So I thought. But when the
commandment (that is, the Law, a Part put for the Whole; but this Expression
particularly intimates its compulsive Force, which restrains, enjoins, urges,
forbids, threatens) came in its spiritual Meaning to my Heart, with the Power
of GOD, Sin revived, and I died -- My inbred Sin took Fire, and all my Virtue
and Strength died away. And I then saw myself to be dead in Sin, and liable to
Death eternal.

V. 10. The commandment which was intended for life -- Doubtless it was
originally intended by GOD, as a grand Me as of preserving and increasing
Spiritual Life, and leading to Life everlasting.

V. 11. Deceived me -- While I expected Life by the Law, Sin came upon me
unawares and slew all my Hopes.

V. 12. The commandment -- That is, Every Branch of the Law, is holy, just, and
good -- It springs from and partakes of the Holy Nature of GOD: It is every Way
just and right in itself. It is designed wholly for the Good of Man.

V. 13. Was then that which is good made the Cause of Evil to me? -- Yea, of
death, which is the greatest of Evils? Not so. But it was sin, which was made
Death to me, inasmuch as it wrought death in me even by that which is good --
By the good Law, so that sin by the commandment, became exceeding sinful -- The
Consequence of which was, that inbred Sin, thus driving furiously in spite of
the Commandment, became exceeding sinful; the Guilt thereof being greatly
aggravated.

V. 14. I am carnal -- St. Paul having compared together the past and present
State of Believers, that in the flesh, ver 5. and that in the spirit, ver. 6.
In answering two Objections ( Is the^ the law sin? ver 7. and Is the law death?
ver. 13.) interweaves the whole Process of a Man reasoning, groaning, striving,
and escaping from the Legal to the Evangelical State. This be does from ver. 7.
to the End of this Chapter. Sold under sin -- Totally enslaved, Slaves bought
with Money were absolutely at their Master's Disposal.

V. 16. It is good -- This single Word implies all the three that were used
before ^ver. 12^ Holy, just, and good.

V. 17. It is no more I that can properly be said to do it, but rather She that
dwells in me: that makes, as it were, another Person, and tyra^^izes over me.

V. 18. In my flesh -- The Flesh here signifies the whole Man as he is by
Nature.

V. 21. I find then a law -- An inward, constraining Power, slowing from the
Dictate of corrupt Nature.

V. 22. For I delight in the law of God -- This is more than I consent to, ver.
10. The Day of Liberty draws hear, The inward man -- Called the mind, ver. 23,
and 25.

V. 23. But I see an^ (...) law (...) my members -- Another inward constraining
Power of evil Inclinations and bod^ly Appetites, warring against the law of any
(...) -- The Dictate of my ^ind, which delights in the Law of GOD, and
captivating me -- In spite of all my Resistance.

V. 24. Wretched man that I am! -- The Struggle is now come to the Height: And
the Man finding there is no Help in himself, begins almost unawares to pray,
Who shall deliver me? He then seeks and looks for Deliverance, till GOD in
Christ appears to answer his Question. The Word which we translate deliver,
implies Force. And indeed without this there c^n be no Deliverance. The body of
this death -- That is, this Body of Death; this Mass of Sin, leading to Death
Eternal, and cleaving as close to me, as my Body to my Soul. We may observe,
the Deliverance is not wrought yet.

V. 25. I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord -- That is, GOD will deliver
me through Christ. But the Apostle (as his frequent Manner is) beautifully
interweaves his Assertion with Thanksgiving: The Hymn of Praise answering in a
Manner to the Voice of Sorrow, Wretched man that I am! So then -- He here sums
up the whole, and concludes what he began, ver 7. I myself -- Or rather that I
(the Person whom I am personating) till his Deliverance is wrought, serve the
law of God with my mind -- My Reason and Conscience declare for GOD; but with
my flesh the law of sin -- But my corrupt Passions and Appetices still rebel.
The Man is now utterly weary of his Bondage, and upon the Brink of Liberty.

VIII.
there is now no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh but after the Spirit. For the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus has freed me from the law of sin and death. has done: sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, to be a sacrifice for sin, he has
condemned sin in the flesh: Now to be carnally minded is death; is life and
peace: is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be. So then they who are in the flesh cannot please God. be in you,
the body indeed is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of
righteousness. And if the Spirit of him that ^ed up Jesus from the dead dwell
in you,

Therefore, flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds
of the flesh, him, that we may also be glorified with him. For I reckon that
the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us. it, In hope that the creation itself shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
children of God. they, but even we ourselves, who have the first fruits of the
Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, the
redemption of our body. is not hope: for what a man sees, how does he yet hope
for? is the mind of the Spirit: for he makes intercession for the saints
according to God.

And we know, called according to his purpose. he also glorified. be for us,
who can be against us? It is God that justifies, Who is he that condemns? It
is Christ that died, Psalm lxiv. 22.
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter.) nor things present,

V. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation -- Either for Things present or
past. Now he comes to Deliverance and Liberty. The Apostle here resumes the
Thread of his Discourse, which was interrupted, chapter vii. 7.

V. 2. The law of the Spirit -- That is, the Gospel, has freed me from the law
of sin and death -- That is, the Mosaic Dispensation.

V. 3. For what the law -- Of Moses, could not do, (in that it was weak through
the flesh -- Incapable of conquering our evil Nature) If it could, GOD needed
not to have sent his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh -- We with our
sinful Flesh were devoted to Death. But GOD sending his own Son, in the
Likeness of that Flesh, though pure from Sin, condemned that sin which was in
our flesh: Gave Sentence, that Sin should be destroyed, and the Believer wholly
delivered from it.

V. 4. That the righteousness of the law -- The Holiness it required described,
ver. 5 -- 11. might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit -- Who are guided in all our Thoughts, Words, and Actions, not by
corrupt Nature, but by the Spirit of GOD. From this Place St. Paul describes
primarily the State of Believers, and that of Unbelievers, only to illustrate
this.

V. 5. They that are after the flesh -- Who remain under the Guidance of
corrupt Nature; mind the things of the flesh -- Have their Thoughts and
Affections fixed on such Things as gratify corrupt Nature: namely on Things
visible and temporal; on Things of the Earth, on Pleasure (of Sense or
Imagination) Praise, or Riches, But they who are after the Spirit -- Who are
under his Guidance, mind the things of the Spirit -- Think of, relish, love
Things, invisible, eternal; The Things which the Spirit has revealed, which he
works in us, moves us to, and promises to give us.

V. 6. For to be carnally minded -- That is, to mind the Things of the Flesh,
is death -- The sure Mark of spiritual Death, and the Way to Death everlasting:
But to be spiritually minded -- That is, to mind the Things of the Spirit, is
life -- A sure Mark of spiritual Life, and the Way to Life everlasting; and
attended with peace -- The Peace of GOD, which is the Foretaste of Life
everlasting, and Peace with GOD, opposite to the Enmity mentioned in the next
Verse.

V. 7. Enmity against God -- His Existence, Power and Providence.

V. 8. They who are in the flesh -- Under the Government of it.

V. 9. In the Spirit -- Under his Government. If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ -- Dwelling and governing in him; he is none of his -- He is not a
Member of Christ: Not a Christian: Not in a State of Salvation. A plain,
express Declaration, which admits of no Exception. He that has Ears to hear,
let him hear!

V. 10. Now if Christ be in you -- Where the Spirit of Christ is, there is
Christ: the body indeed is dead -- Devoted to Death, because of sin --
Heretofore committed; but the spirit is life -- Already truly alive; because of
righteousness -- Now attained. From ver. 13. St. Paul having finished what he
had begun, chapter vi. 1, describes purely the State of Believers.

V. 12. We are not debtors to the flesh -- We ought not to follow it.

V. 13. The deeds of the flesh -- Not only evil Actions, but evil Desires,
Tempers, Thoughts. If ye mortify -- Kill, destroy these, ye shall live -- The
Life of Faith more abundantly here, and hereafter the Life of Glory.

V. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God -- In all the Ways of
Righteousness, they are the sons of God -- Here St. Paul enters upon the
Description of those Blessings, which he comprizes (ver. 30.) in the Word
Glorified: Though indeed he does not describe mere Glory, but that which is
still mingled with the Cross. The Sum is, Through Sufferings to Glory.

V. 15. For ye -- Who are real Christians, have not received the Spirit of
bondage -- The Holy Ghost was not properly a Spirit of Bondage, even in the
Time of the Old Testament. Yet there was something of Bondage remaining, even
in those who then had received the Spirit. Again -- As the Jews did before. We
All and every Believer, cry -- The Word denotes a vehement speaking, with
Desire, Confidence, Constancy. Abba, Father -- The latter Word explains the
former. By using both the Syriac and the Greek Word, St. Paul seems to point
out the Joint Cry both of the Jewish and Gentile Believers. The Spirit of
bondage here seems directly to mean, Those Operations of the Holy Spirit, by
which the Soul, on its first Conviction, feels itself in Bondage to Sin, to the
World, to Satan, and obnoxious to the Wrath of GOD. This therefore and the
Spirit of adoption are one and the same Spirit, only manifesting itself in
various Operations, according to the various Circumstances of the Persons.

V. 16. The same Spirit bears witness with our spirit -- With the Spirit of
every true Believer, by a Testimony distinct from that of his own Spirit, or
the Testimony of a good Conscience. Happy they who enjoy this clear and
constant.

V. 17. Joint-heirs -- That we may know it is a great Inheritance which GOD
will give us; for he has given a great one to his Son. If we suffer with him
-- Willingly and cheerfully, for Righteousness sake. This is a new Proposition,
referring to what follows.

V. 18. For I reckon -- This Verse gives the Reason, why he but now mentioned
Sufferings and Glory. When that Glory shall be revealed in us, then the Sons of
GOD will be revealed also.

V. 19. For the earnest expectation -- The Word denotes a lively Hope of
something drawing near, and a vehement Longing after it; of the creation -- Of
all visible Creatures (Believers excepted, who are spoken of apart.) Each kind,
according as it is capable. All these have been Sufferers through Sin. And to
all these (the finally impenitent excepted) shall Res^e meant redound from the
Glory of the Children of GOD. Upright Heathens are by no means to be excluded
from this earnest expectation: Nay, perhaps something of it may at some times
be found even in the vainest of Men; who (although in the Hurry of Life they
mistake Vanity for Liberty, and par^ly stifle, partly dissemble their Groans,
yet) in their sober, quiet, sleepless, afflicted Hours, pour forth many Sighs
in the Ears of GOD.

V. 20. The creation was made subject to vanity -- Abuse, Misery, and
Corruption, by him who subjected it -- Namely, GOD, Genesis iii. 17. v. 29. Adam
only made it liable to the Sentence, which GOD pronounced; yet not without Hope

V. 21. The creation itself shall be delivered -- Destruction is not
Deliverance. Therefore whatsoever is destroyed, or ceases to be, is not
delivered at all. Will then any Part of the Creation be destroyed? Into the
glorious liberty -- The excellent State wherein they were created.

V. 22. For the whole creation groaneth together -- With Joint-groans as it
were with one Voice. And travaiteth -- Literally, is in the pain of
childbirth; to be delivered of the Burden of the Curse: until now -- To this
very Hour, and so on till the time of Deliverance.

V. 23. And even ^e, who have the first fruits of the Spirit -- That is, the
Spirit who is the First Fruits of our Inheritance. The adoption -- Persons who
had been privately adopted among the Romans, were often brought forth into the
Forum, and there publicly owned as their Sons by those who adopted them. So at
the General Resurrection, wh^^ the Body itself is redeemed from Death, the Sons
of GOD shall be publicly owned by Him in the great Assembly of Men and Angels.
The redemption of our body -- From Corruption to Glory and Immortality.

V. 24. For we are saved by hope -- Our Salvation is now only in Hope. We do
not yet possess this full Salvation.

V. 26. Likewise the Spirit -- Nay, not only the Universe, not only the
Children of GOD, but the Spirit of GOD also himself, as it were, gro^^^th,
while He he^peth our infirmities or Weaknesses. Our Understandings are weak,
particularly in the Things of God; our Desires are weak, our Prayers are weak.
We kn^w not -- Many times, what we should pray for. Much less are we able to
pray for it as we ought: but the Spirit makes intercession for us -- In our
Hearts, even as Christ does in Heaven: with groaings -- The Matter of which is
from ourselves; but the Spirit forms them; and they are frequently
inexpressible, even by the Faithful themselves.

V. 27. But he who searches the hearts -- Wherein the Spirit dwells and
interceeds; knows -- Though Man cannot utter it, what is the mind of the
Spirit: for he makes intercession for the saints -- Who are near to GOD,
according to God -- According to his Will, as is worthy of GOD, and acceptable
to Him.

V. 28. And we know -- This in general; though we do not always know
particularly what to pray for; that all things -- Ease or Pain, Poverty or
Riches, and the ten thousand Changes of Life, work together for good --
Strongly and sweetly for spiritual and eternal Good; to them that are called
according to his purpose -- His gracious Design of saving a lost World by the
Death of his Son. This is a new Proposition. St. Paul being about to
recapitulate the whole Blessing contained in Justification (termed
Glorification, ver. 30) first goes back to the Purpose or Decree of GOD, which
is frequently mentioned in Holy Writ.

To explain this (nearly in the Words of an eminent Writer) a little more at
large. When a Man has a Work of Time and Importance before him, he pauses,
consult^, and contrives; and when he has laid a Plan, resolves or decrees to
proceed accordingly. Having observed this in ourselves, we are ready to apply
it to GOD also: and he in Condescension to us has applied it to Himself.

The Works of Providence and Redemption are vast and stupendous, and therefore
we are apt to conceive of GOD, as deliberating and consulting on them, and then
decreeing to act, according to the Counsels of his own Will. As if, long before
the World was made, he had been concerting Measures, both as to the making and
governing of it, and had then writ down his Decrees, which altered not, any
more than the Laws of the Medes and Persians. Whereas to take this consulting
and decreeing in a literal Sense would be the same Absurdity, as to ascribe a
real, human Body and human Passions to the ever blessed GOD.

This is only a popular Representation of his infallible Knowledge and
unchangeable Wisdom; that is, He does all Things as wisely as a Man can
possibly do, after the deepest Consultation, and as steadily pursues the most
proper Method, as one can do, who has said a Scheme beforehand. But then,
though the Effects be such as would argue Consultation and consequent Decrees
in Man, yet what Need of a Moment's Consultation in Him, who sees all Things at
one View?

Nor had GOD any more Occasion to pause and deliberate, and lay down Rules for
his own Conduct, from all Eternity, than He has now. What! Was there any Fear
of his mistaking afterward, if He had not beforehand prepared Decrees, to
direct Him, what He was to do? Will any Man say, He was wiser before the
Creation than since? Or had He then more Leisure? That He should take that
Opportunity to settle his Affairs, and make Rules for Himself, from which He
was never to vary?

He has doubtless the same Wisdom and all other Perfections at this Day which
he had from Eternity: And is now as capable of making Decrees, or rather has no
more Occasion for them now than formerly: His Understanding being always
equally clear and bright, his Wisdom equally infallible.

V. 29. Whom he foreknew he also predestined, conformable to the image of his
Son -- Here the Apostle declares, who those are whom He foreknew and
pred^stinated to Glory, namely, those who are conformable to the image of his
Son. This is the Mark of those who are foreknown and will be glorified, a Tim.
ii. 19. Phil. iii. 10, 21.

V. 30. Them he -- In due time, called by his Gospel and his Spirit: and whom
he called, when obedient to the heavenly calling, ( Acts xxvi. 9) he also
justified -- Forgave and accepted: And whom he justified -- Provided they
continued in his goodness, c. 11. 22. he in the End glorified -- St Paul does
not affirm, either here, or in any other Part of his Writings, That precisely
the same Number of Men, are called, justified, and glorified. He does not deny.
That a Believer may fall away and be cut off, between his special Calling and
his Glorification, ch xi. 22 Neither does he deny, That many are called who
never are justified. He only affirms, That this is the Method whereby GOD leads
us Step by Step toward Heaven. He glorified -- He speaks as one looking back
from the Goal, upon the Race of Faith. Indeed Grace, as it is Glory begun, is
both an Earnest and a Foretaste of Eternal Glory.

V. 31. What shall we say then to these things? -- Related in the 3d, 5th, and
8th Chapters? As if he had said, We cannot go, think, or wish any thing
farther. If God be for us -- Here follow four Periods, One General and three
Particular. Each begins with Glorying in the Grace of GOD, which is followed by
a Question suitable to it, challenging all Opponents; To all which, I am
persuaded, etc. is a general Answer. The General Period is, If God be for us,
who can be against us? The first Particular Period, relating to the past Time,
is, He that spared not his own Son, how shall he not freely give us all things?
The Second, relating to the present, is, It is God that justifies: who is he
that condemns? The third, relating to the future, is, It is Christ that died
-- who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

V. 32. He that -- This Period contains four Sentences. He spared not his own
Son, therefore He will freely give us all Things. He delivered him up for us;
therefore none can lay any thing to our Charge. Freely -- For all that follows
Justification is a Free Gift also. All things -- Needful or profitable for us.

V. 33. God's elect -- The above cited Author observes, That long before the
Coming of Christ, the Heathen World revolted from the true GOD, and were
therefore reprobated or rejected.

But the Nation of the Jews were chosen to be the People of GOD, and were
therefore styled, Deuteronomy. xiv. 1.
the children or sons of God, Chapter vii. 6. Chapter xiv. 2.
holy people, Deuteronomy. iv. 37.
chosen seed, Isa. lxi. 8, 9. Chapter xliii. 20.
the elect, the Isa. xlviii 12.
called of GOD. And these Titles were given to all the Nation of Israel,
including both good and bad.

Now the Gospel having the most strict Connection with the Books of the Old
Testament, where these Phrases frequently occur: And our LORD and his Apostles
being native Jews, and beginning to preach in the Land of Israel. the Language
in which they preached would of Course abound with the Phrases of the Jewish
Nation. And hence it is easy to see, why such of them as would not receive Him
were styled reprobated. For they no longer continued to be the people of GOD.
Whereas this and those other honorable Titles, were continued to all such Jews
as embraced Christianity. And the same Appellations which once belonged to the
Jewish Nation, were now given to the Gentile Christians also; together with
which they were invested with all the Privileges of the chosen people of GOD;
and nothing could cut them off from these, but their own wilful Apostaly.

It does not appear that even good Men were ever termed GOD'S Elect, till above
two thousand Years from the Creation. GOD'S electing or choosing the Nation of
Israel, and separating them from the other Nations, who were funk in Idolatry
and all Wickedness, gave the first Occasion to this sort of Language. And as
the separating the Christians from the Jews was a like Event, no Wonder it was
expressed in like Words and Phrases: Only with this Difference, The Term Elect
was of old applied to all the Members of the visible Church; whereas in the New
Testament it is applied only to the Members of the invisible.

V. 34. Yea rather, that is risen -- Our Faith should not stop at his Death,
but be exercised farther on his Resurrection, Kingdom, second Coming. Who
makes intercession for us -- Presenting there his Obedience, his Sufferings,
his Prayers, and our Prayers sanctified through Him.

V. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ toward us? Shall
affliction or distress -- He proceeds in Order, from less Troubles to greater:
Can any of these separate us from his Protection in it; and (if He sees good)
Deliverance from it?

V. 36. All the day -- That is, every Day, continually. We are accounted -- By
our Enemies; by ourselves.

V. 37. We more than conquer -- We are not only no Losers, but abundant Gainers
by all these Trials. This Period seems to describe the full Assurance of Hope.

V. 38. I am persuaded -- This is inferred from the 34th Verse, in an admirable
Order, Neither death shall hurt us; For Christ is dead: is risen: Nor life; Nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers; nor things present, nor things to come;
is at the right hand of GOD; Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature;
makes intercession for us. Neither death -- Terrible as it is to natural Men;
a violent Death in particular: (ver. 3^.) nor life -- With all the Affliction
and Distress it can bring; (ver. 35.) or a long, easy Life; or all living Men:
nor angels -- Whether good (if it were possible they should attempt it) or bad,
with all their Wisdom and Strength; nor principalities, nor powers -- Not even
those of the highest Rank, or the most eminent Power: nor things present --
Which may befall us, during our Pilgrimage, or the whole World, till it passes
away: nor things to come -- Which may occur either when our Time on Earth is
past, or when time itself is at an End, as the final Judgment, the general
Conflagration, the everlasting Fire: nor height, nor depth -- The former
Sentence respected the Differences of Times, This, the Differences of Places.
How many great and various Things are contained in these Words, we do not, need
not, cannot know yet. The height -- In St. Paul's sublime Style is put for
Heaven; the depth -- For the great Abyss: That is, neither the Heights, I will
not not say of Walls, Mountains, Seas, but of Heaven itself, can move us; nor
the Abyss itself, the very Thought of which might astonish the boldest
Creature. Nor any creature -- Nothing be ^ea^h the Almighty; visible Enemies he
does not even design to name; shall be able -- Either by Force (ver. 35.) or by
any legal Claim, (ver. 33,) etc. ^o separate us from the Love of God in Christ
-- Which will surely save, protect, deliver us who believe, in, and through,
and from them all.

IX.
my heart. is the adoption and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of
the law, and the worship of God, and the promises: are the fathers, and from
whom, according to the flesh, Christ came, who is, over all, are not Israel,
are they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called: Genesis xxi. 12.
That is, not the children of the flesh are the children of God, but the
children of promise are counted for the seed. is the word of the promise, Genesis
xviii. 10.
At this time I will come, and Sarah shall have a son. this, but when Rebecca
also had conceived by one man, The children being not yet born, neither having
done any good or evil (that the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of him that called,) Genesis xxv. 23.
The elder shall serve the younger. Mal. i. 2, 3.
I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau.

What shall we say then? Is there injustice with God? Enod. xxxiii. 19.
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on
whom I will have compassion. It is not therefore of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. For Exodus ix. 16.
this very thing have I raised thee up, that I may show my power in thee, and
that my name may be declared through all the earth. that formed it, Why have
thou made me thus? Jer. xviii. 6, 7.
Has not the potter power over the clay, his wrath, and to make his power
known, yet endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction? make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, whom
he had before prepared for glory? Even us whom he has called, Hosea ii. 23.
I will call them my people, who were not my people, and her beloved, who was
not beloved. Chapter i. 10.
And it shall come to pass, in the place where it was said to them, Ye are not
my people, there shall they be called the sons of the living God. Isaiah x. 22,
23.
Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, the
remnant only shall be saved. his account in righteousness; for the Lord will
make a short account upon earth. followed not after righteousness, have
attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is by faith: sought it,
not by faith, but as it were by works: for they stumbled at the stumbling
stone; Isaiah viii. 14.
Behold I lay in Sion a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense: and Chapter
xxviii. 16.
every one that believes on him shall not be ashamed.

Chap. ix. In this Chapter St. Paul, after strongly declaring his Love and
Esteem for them, sets himself to answer the grand Objection of his Countrymen,
namely, That the Rejection of the Jews, and Reception of the Gentiles, was
contrary to the Word of GOD. That he had not here the least Thought of personal
Election or Reprobation, is manifest, 1. Because it lay quite wide of his
Design, which was this, To show that GOD'S reje^ting the Jews, and receiving
the Gentiles, was consistent with his Word; 2. Because such a Doctrine would
not only have had no Tendency to convince, but would have evidently tended to
harden the Jews; 3. Because when he sums up his Argument in the Close of the
Chapter, he has not one Word, or the least Intimation about it.

V. 1. In Christ -- This seems to imply an Appeal to him. In the Holy Ghost --
Through his Grace.

V. 2. I have great sorrow -- A high Degree of spiritual Sorrow and of
spiritual Joy may consist together (chapter viii. 39.) By declaring his Sorrow for
the unbelieving Jews, who excluded themselves from all the Blessings he had
enumerated, he shows that what he was now about to speak, he did not speak from
any Prejudice to them.

V. 3. I could wish -- Human Words cannot fully describe the Motions of Souls
that are ^ull of GOD. As if he had said, I could wish to suffer in their Stead;
yea, to be an Anathema from Christ in their Place. In how high a Sense he
wi^^ed this, who can tell, unless himself had been asked and had resolved the
Question? Certainly he did not then consider himself at all, but only others
and the Glory of GOD. The Thing could not be; yet the Wi^ was pious and solid;
though with a tacit Condition, If it were right and possible.

V. 4. Whose is the adoption, etc. He enumerates six Prerogatives, of which the
first Pair respect GOD the Father, the second Christ, the third the Holy Ghost.
The adoption and the glory -- That is, Israel is the firstborn Child of GOD,
and the GOD of Glory is their GOD. Dent. iv. 7. Psalm cvi. 20. These are
relative to each other. At once GOD is the Father of Israel, and Israel as the
People of GOD. He speaks not here of the Ark, or any corporeal Thing. GOD
Himself is the glory of his people Israel. And the covenants, and the giving of
the law. The Covenant was given long before the Law. It is termed Covenants (in
the Plural) because it was so often and so variously repeated; and because
there were two Dispositions of it, ( Gal. iv. 24) frequently called Two
Covenants. The one, promising; the (...), exhibiting the Promise. And the
worship and the promises -- The true Way of worshipping GOD; and all the
Promises made to the Fathers.

V. 5. To the preceding, St. Paul now adds two more Prerogatives: The (...) The
Patriarchs and holy Men of old, (...) the ^ess^a Himself. Who is, over all,
God, blessed for ever -- The (...) Words imply, the Self existent, Independent
Being, who was s^, and is to come, Over ^^, the Supreme; as being GOD, and
consequently blessed for ever. No Words can more clearly express his Divine,
Supreme Majesty, and his gracious Sovereignty both over Jews and Gentiles.

V. 6. Not as if The Jews imagined that the Word of GOD must fail, if all their
Nation were not saved. This St. Paul now refutes, and proves, That the Word
itself h^d f ret^^d their alling away. The word of God -- The Promises of GOD
to Israel, had fallen to the ground -- This could not b^ Even ^ow, (...) the
Apostle, some enjoy the Promises; and hereafter all Israel shall be saved. This
is the Sum of the 9th, 10th, and 11th Chapters. For -- Here he enters upon the
Proof of it, all are not Israel, who are of Israel -- The Jews vehemently
maintained the contrary; namely, That all who were born Israelites, and they
only, were the People of GOD. The former Part of this Assertion is refut^d
^ere^ the latter, ver. 24, etc. The Sum is, GOD accepts all believers, and them
only: and this is no way contrary to his Word. Nay, He has declared in his
Word, both by Types and by express Testimonies, that Believers are accepted as
the children of the pro^is^, wh^^e Unbelievers are rejected, though they are
children after the flesh. All are not Israel -- Not in the Favor of GOD, who
are -- Lineally descended of Israel.

V. 7. Neither because they are lineally the seed of Abraham, will it follow,
that they are all children of God. This did not hold even in Abraham's own
Family; and much less in his remote Descendants. But GOD then said, I^ Isaac
shall thy Seed be called -- That is, Isaac, not Ishmael, shall be called thy
Seed; that Seed to which the Promise is made.

V. 8. That is, Not the children, etc. -- As if he had said, This is a clear
Type of Things to come; showing us, that in all succeeding Generations, not the
children of the flesh, the lineal Descendants of Abraham, but the children of
the promise -- They to whom the Promise is made, that is, Believers, are the
children of God.

V. 9. For this is the word of promise -- By the Power of which Isaac was
conceived, and not by the Power of Nature. Not whosoever is born of thee shall
be blessed, but At this time -- Which I now appoint, I will come, and Sarah
shall have a son -- And he shall inherit the Blessing.

V. 10. And that GOD'S Blessing does not belong to all the Descendants of
Abraham, appears not only by this Instance, but by that of Esau and Jacob, who
was chosen to inherit the Blessing, before either of them had done good or
evil. The Apostle mentions this to show, that neither were their Ancestors
^ccepted, through any Merit of their own. That the purpose of God, according to
election might stand -- Whose Purpose was, To elect or choose the promised Seed,
not of works, not for any preceding Merit in him he chose; but of him that
called of his own good Pleasure, who called to that Privilage whom he saw good.

V. 12. The elder -- Esau, shall serve the younger -- Not in Person, for he
never did; but in his Posterity. Accordingly the Edomites were often brought
into Subjection by the Israelites.

V. 13. As it is written -- With which Word in Genesis, spoken so long before,
that of Masac^ agrees, I have loved Jacob with a peculiar Love; that is, the
Israelites, the Posterity of Jacob; and I have comparatively hated Esau that
is, the Edomite^ the Posterity of Esau. But observe, 1 This does not relate to
the Person of Jacob or Esau, 2. Nor does it relate to the eternal State either
of them or their Posterity. Thus far the Apostle has been proving his
Proposition, namely, That the Exclusion of a great Part of the Seed of Abraham,
yea and of Isaac, from the special Promises of GOD, was so far from being
impossible, that, according to the Scriptures themselves, it had actually
happened. He now introduces and refutes an Objection.

V. 14. Is there injustice with God? -- Is it unjust in GOD to give Jacob the
Blessing rather than Esau? Or to accept Believers, and them only? God forbid --
In no wise: This is well consistent with Justice. For He has a Right to fix the
Terms on which He will show Mercy; according to his Declaration to Moses,
petitioning for all the People, after they had committed Idolatry with the
golden Calf, I will have merey on whom I will have mercy -- According to the
Terms I myself have fixed; and I will have comp^ssion on whom I will have
compassion Namely on those only who submit to my Terms, who accept of it in the
Way that I have appointed.

V. 16. It -- The Blessing, therefore is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs -- It is not the Effect either of the Will or the Works of Man,
but of the Grace and Power of GOD. The Will of (...) is here opposed to the
Grace of GOD, and Man's Running, to the divine Operation. And this general
Declaration respects not only Isaac and Jacob, and the Israelites in the Time
of Mose^, but likewise all the spiritual Children of Abraham, even to the End
of the World

V. 17. Moreover -- GOD has an indisputable Right to reject those who will not
accept the Blessings on his own Terms. And this he exercised in the Case of
Pharaoh: To whom, after many Instances of Stabbornness and Rebellion, he said
(as it is recorded in Scripture) For this very thing have I ra^^^d thee up --
That is, unless thou repent, this will surely be the Consequence of my raisin^
thee up, making thee a great and glorious King, that my power will be shown
upon thee (as indeed it was, by overwhelming him and his Army in the Sea) and
my name dec^ared through all the earth -- As it is at this Day. Perhaps this
may have a still farther Meaning. It seems that GOD was resolved to show his
Power, over the River, the Insects, other Animals, (with the natural Causes of
their Health, Diseases, Life, and Death) over the Meteors, the Air, the Sun,
(all of which were worshipped by the Egyptians, from whom other Nations learned
their Idolatry) and at once over all their gods, by that terrible Stroke, of
flaying all their Priests and their choicest Victims, the firstborn of M^n and
Beast: And all this with a Design, not only to deliver his People Israel (for
which a single Act of Omnipotence would have sufficed) but to convince the
Egyptians, that the Objects of their Worship were but the Creatures of Jehovah,
and entirely in his Power, and to draw them and the neighboring Nations, who
should hear of all these Wond is, from their Idolatry, to worship the one GOD.
For the Execution of this Design (in order to the Display of the divine Power,
over the various Objects of their Worship, in Variety of wonderful Acts, which
were at the same Time just Punishments for their cruel Oppression of the
Israelites) GOD was pleased to raise to the Throne of an absolute Monarchy, a
Man, not whom He had made wicked on Purpose, but whom He found so^ the
proudest, the most darin^ and obstinate of all the Egyptian Princes; and who
being incurr^^ible, well deserved to be set up in that Situation, where the
divine Judgments fell the heaviest.

V. 18. So then -- That is, Accordingly He does show mercy on his own Terms,
namely on them that believe: and whom he wills -- Namely them that believe
not, He hardens -- Leaves to the Hardness of their Hearts.

V. 19. Why does he still find fault -- The Particle still is strongly
expressive of the Objector's sour, moros^ Murmuring. For who has resisted his
will? -- The Word his likewise expresses his Su^^liness and Aversion to GOD,
whom he does not even deign to name.

V. 20. Nay, but who art thou. O man! -- Little, impotent, ignorant Man, that
reply against God -- That accusest GOD of Injustice; for Himself fixing the
Terms, on which he will show mercy? Shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, Why has^ then made me thus? -- Why have Thou made me capable of
Honor and Immortality, only by believing?

V. 21. Has not the potter power over the clay -- And much more has not GOD
Power over his Creatures, to appoint one vessel, namely the Believer, to
honor, and another, the Unbeliever, to dishonor.

If we survey the Right which GOD has over us, in a more general Way, with
regard to his intelligent Creatures, GOD may been considered in two different
Views, as Creator, Proprietor, and Lord of all, or as their moral Governor and
Judge.

GOD, as sovereign Lord and Proprietor of all dispenses his Gifts or Favors to
his Creatures with perfect Wisdom, but by no Rules or Methods of pr^ceeding
that we are acquainted with. The Time when we shall ex^st, the Country where we
shall live, our Parents, our Constitution of Body and Turn of Mind: These and
numberless other Circumstances are doubtless ordered with perfect Wisdom; but
by Rules that lie quite out of our Sight.

But GOD'S Methods of dealing with us, as our Governor and Judge, are clearly
revealed and perfectly known; namely, That He will finally reward every Man
according to his Works. He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes
not, shall be damned.

Therefore though He has mercy on whom he wills, and whom he wills he
hardens (that is, suffers to be hardened in consequence of their obstinate
Wickedness) yet his is not the Will of an arbitrary, capricious, or tyrannical
Being. He wills nothing but what is infinitely wise and good; and therefore his
Will is a most proper Rule of Judgment. He will show Mercy, as He has assured
us, to none but true Believers, nor harden any but such as obstinately refuse
his Mercy.

V. 22. What if God, being willing -- (referring to ver. 18, 19.) That is,
although it was now his Will, because of their obstinate Unbelief, to show his
wrath (which necessarily presupposes Sin) and to make his power known, (this is
repeated from the 17th Verse) yet endured -- As He did Pharaoh, with much
long-suffering -- Which should have led them to Repentance: the vessels of
wrath -- Those who had moved his Wrath by still rejecting his Mercy; fitted for
destruction -- By their own wilful and final Impenitence: Is there any
Injustice in this?

V. 23. That he might make known -- What if by showing such Long-suffering even
to the Vessels of Wrath, He did the more abundantly show the Greatness of his
glorious Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, on the Vessels of Mercy; on those whom he
had Himself by his Grace prepared for Glory: Is this any Injustice?

V. 24. Even us -- Here the Apostle comes to another Proposition, of Grace free
for all, whether Jew or Gentile -- of the Jews -- This he treats of v. ^. 25.
Of the Gentiles -- Treated of in the same Verse.

V. 25. Beloved -- As a Spouse; who once was not beloved -- Consequently, not
unconditionally elected. This relates directly to the final Restoration of the
Jews.

V. 26. There shall they be called the sons of God -- So that they need not
leave their own Country and come to Judea.

V. 27. But Isaiah testifies, That, (as many Gentiles will be accepted, so)
many Jews will be rejected: That out of all the thousands of Israel, a remnant
only shall be saved. This was spoken originally of the few that were saved from
the Ravage of Sennacherib's Army.

V. 28. For he is finishing or cutting short his account -- In rigorous
Justice, will leave but a small Remnant. There will be so general a
Destruction, that but a small Number will escape.

V. 29. As Isaiah had said before, (namely chapter i. 9. concerning those who were
besieged in Jerusalem by Renin and Pekah) Unless the Lord had left ^s a seed --
Which denotes, 1. The present Paucity, 2. The future Abundance: we had been as
Sodom -- So that it is no unexampled Thing for the main Body of the Jewish
Nation to revolt from GOD, and perish in their Sin.

V. 30. What shall we say then? -- What is to be concluded from all that has
been said but this, that the Gentiles who followed not after righteousness --
who a while ago had no Knowledge of, no Care or Thought about it, have attained
to righteousness (or Justification) even the righteousness which is by faith.
This is the first Conclusion we may draw from the preceding Observations. The
second is, That Israel (the Jews) although following after the law of
righteousness -- That Law which, duly used, would have led them to Faith, and
thereby to Righteousness, have not attained to the law of righteousness -- To
that Righteousness or Justification which is one great End of the Law.

V. 32. And wherefore have they not? Is it because GOD eternally decreed they
should not? There is nothing like this to be met with; but agreeable to his
Argument, the Apostle gives us this good Reason for it, Because they sought it
not by faith, whereby alone it could be attained; but as it were, in Effect, if
not professedly, by works. For they stumbled at that stumbling stone, Christ
crucified.

V. 33. As it is written -- Foretold by their own Prophet, Behold I lay in Sion
-- I exhibit in my Church, what, though it was in Truth the only sure
Foundation of Happiness yet will be in fact a stumbling stone and rock of
offense -- An Occasion of Ruin to many, through their obstinate Unbelief.

X.
have not submitted to the righteousness of God. is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes. Lev. xviii. 5.
The man who does these things shall live by them. But the righteousness which
is by faith speaks thus: Deuteronomy. xxx. 14.
Say not in thy heart who shall ascend into heaven, even in thy mouth, and in
thy heart; that is, the word of faith which we preach: raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man believes to righteousness,

For the scripture faith, Isaiah xxviii. 16.
Every one that believes on him shall not be ashamed. Joel il. (...).
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, Isaiah lii. 7.
How beautiful are the feet of them who bring the good tidings of peace, who
bring the glad tidings of good things!

But all have not obeyed the gospel. Isaiah liii. 1.
Lord, who has believed our report? Faith then comes by hearing, Yes verily;
Psalm xix. 4.
their voice is gone into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the
world. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 21.
will provoke you to jealousy by them that are not a nation; by a foolish
nation I will anger you. Isaiah lxv. 1, 2.
was found by them that sought me not: I was made manifest to them that asked
not after me.

V. 1. My prayer to God is, that they may be saved -- He would not have prayed
for this, had they been absolutely reprobated.

V. 2. They have a zeal, but not according to knowledge -- They had Zeal
without Knowledge. We have Knowledge without Zeal.

V. 3. For they being ignorant of the righteousness of God -- Of the Method God
has established for the Justification of a Sinner, and seeking to establish
their own righteousness -- Their own Method of Acceptance with GOD, have not
submitted to the righteousness of God -- The Way of Justification which He has
fixed.

V. 4. For Christ is the end of the law -- The Scope and Aim of it. It is the
very design of the Law, to bring Men to believe in Christ for Justification and
Salvation. And he alone gives that Pardon and Life which the Law shows the Want
of, but cannot give. To every one, whether Jew or Gentile, treated of ver. 11,
etc. that believetr, treated of ver 5, etc.

V. 5. For Moses describes the only righteousness which is attainable by the
law, when he faith, The man who does these things shall live by them -- That
is, he that perfectly keeps all these Precepts in every Point, he alone may
claim Life and Salvation by them. But this Way of Justification is impossible
to any, who have ever transgressed any one Law in any Point.

V. 6. But the righteousness which is by faith -- The Method of becoming
righteous by believing, speaks a very different Language, and may be
considered as expressing itself thus: (to accommodate to our present Subject
the Words which Moses speak, touching the Plainness of his Law) Say not in thy
heart, Who shall ascend into heaven, as if it were, to bring Christ down: or,
who shall descend into the grave, as if it were, to bring him again from the
dead Do not imagine that these Things are to be done now, in order to procure
thy Pardon and Salvation.

V. 8. But what faith he? (Moses) -- Even these Words. so remarkably applicable
to the Subject be^re us. All is done ready to thy Hand: The word is nigh thee:
Within thy Reach, easy to be understood, remembered, practiced. This is
eminently true of the word of faith, the Gospel, which we preach: The Sum of
which is, If thy Heart believe in Christ, and thy Life confess him, thou shall
be saved.

V. 9. If thou confess with thy mouth -- Even in Time of Persecution, when such
a Confession may send thee to the Lions.

V. 10. For with the heart -- Not the Understanding only, Man believes to
righteousness -- So as to obtain justification: and with the mouth confession
is made, so as to obtain final Salvation. Confession here implies the whole of
outward, as Believing does the Root of all inward Religion.

V. 12. The same Lord of all, is rich -- So that his Blessings are never to be
exhausted, nor is he ever constrained to hold his Hand. The great Truth
proposed in the 11th Verse, is so repeated here, and in the 13th, and farther
confirmed ver. 14, 15, as not only to imply, that whosoever calls upon him
shall be saved; but also that the will of God is, that all should savingly call
upon Him.

V. 15. But how shall they preach, unless they be sent? -- Thus by a Chain of
Reasoning, from GOD's Will, that the Gentiles also should call upon him, St.
Paul infers, that the Apostles were sent by GOD, to preach to the Gentiles
also. The feet -- Their very Footsteps, their Coming.

V. 17. Faith indeed ordinarily comes by hearing, even by hearing the word of
God.

V. 18. But their Unbelief was not owing to the Want of Hearing. For they have
heard, Yes verily -- So many Nations have already heard the Preachers of the
Gospel, that I may in some Sense say of them as David did of the Lights of
Heaven.

V. 19. But has not Israel known? -- They might have known, even from Moses
and Isaiah, that many of the Gentiles would be received, and many of the Jews
rejected. I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are not a nation -- As
they followed Gods that were not Gods, so He accepted in their Stead, a Nation
that was not a Nation, that is, a Nation that was not in Covenant with GOD. A
foolish nation -- Such are all which know not GOD.

V. 20. But Isaiah is very bold -- And speaks plainly what Moses but intimated.

V. 21. An unbelieving and gainsaying people -- Just opposite to whose, who
believed with their Hearts, and made Confession with their Mouths.

XI.
1 Kings xix. 10.
Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and dug down thy altars; and I am left
alone, and they seek my life. But what says the answer of God to him? not
bowed the knee to Baal. it is no more of works: else grace is no longer grace.
And if it be of works, then it is no more grace; else work is no longer work.
What then? Isaiah xxix. 10.
God has given them a spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and
ears that they should not hear, Psalm lxix. 22, 23.
Let their table become a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block, is come to
the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy. be the riches of the world, and
their loss the riches of the Gentiles, those who are my flesh, and save some of
them. be the reconciling of the world, what will the receiving of them be, be
holy, so is the lump: and if the root be holy, are the branches. And if some of
the branches were broken off, and thou being a wild olive tree were grafted in
among them, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree,
take heed left he also spare not thee. his goodness: branches, be grafted into
their own olive tree? Brethren, so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written,
Isaiah lix. 20.
The deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away iniquity from Jacob.
is my covenant with them, when I shall take away their sins. With regard to the
gospel, they are enemies for your sake; but as for the election, they are
beloved, for the sake of their fathers. are without repentance. are his
judgments, and his ways past tracing out! Isaiah xl. 13.
who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor? Who has
first given to him, are all things: to him be glory for ever! Amen.

V. 1. Has God rejected his whole people -- All Israel? In no wise. Now there
is a Remnant who believe. (ver. 5) And hereafter all Israel will be saved.
(ver. 26.)

V. 2. God has not rejected that Part of his people whom he foreknew --
Speaking after the Manner of Men. For in fact knowing and foreknowing are the
same Thing with GOD, who knows or sees all Things at once from everlasting to
everlasting. Know ye not -- That in a parallel Case amidst a general Apostasy,
when Elijah thought the whole Nation was fallen into Idolatry, GOD knew there
was a Remnant of true Worshippers?

V. 4. To Baal -- Nor to the Golden Calves.

V. 5. According to the election of Grace -- According to that gracious Purpose
of GOD, He that believes shall be saved.

V. 6. And if by grace, then it is no more of works -- Whether Ceremonial or
Moral: Else grace is no longer grace -- The very Nature of Grace is lost. And
if it be of works, then it is no more grace: else work is no longer work -- But
the very Nature of it is destroyed. There is something so absolutely
inconsistent, between the being justified by Grace, and the being justified by
Works, that if you suppose either, you of necessity exclude the other. For what
is given to Works is the Payment of a Debt; whereas Grace implies an unmerited
Favor. So that the same Benefit cannot, in the very Nature of Things, be
derived from both.

V. 7. What then? -- What is the Conclusion from the whole? (...) is this: That
Israel in general has not attained Justification; but those of them only who
believe; and the rest were blinded -- By their own wilful Prejudice.

V. 8. God has at length withdrawn his Spirit, and so given them up to a
Spirit of slumber; which is fulfilled unto this day.

V. 9. And David says -- In that prophetic Imprecation, which is applicable to
them, as well as to Judas; a recompense -- Of their preceding Wickedness. So
Sin is punished by Sin. And thus the Gospel, which should have fed and
strengthened their Souls, is become a Means of destroying them.

V. 11. Have they stumbled so as to fall -- Totally and finally? No, but by
their fall (or Slip; it is a very soft Word in the Original) salvation is come
to the Gentiles. See an Instance of this, Acts xiii. 46. to provoke them -- The
Jews themselves, to jealousy.

V. 12. The first Part of this Verse is treated of ver. 13, etc. the latter,
how much more their fullness (that is, their full Conversion) ver. 23, etc.

So many Prophecies refer to this Grand Event, that it is surprising any
Christian can doubt of it. And these are greatly confirmed, by the wonderful
Preservation of the Jews as a distinct People to this Day. When it is
accomplished, it will be so strong a Demonstration, both of the Old and New
Testament Revelation, as will doubtless convince many thousand Deists, in
Countries nominally Christian; of whom, there will of course be increasing
Multitudes among merely nominal Christians. And this will be a Means of swiftly
propagating the Gospel among Mahometans and Pagans: who would probably have
received it long ago, had they conversed only with real Christians.

V. 13. I magnify my office -- Far from being ashamed of ministering to the
Gentiles, I glory therein: The rather, as it may be a Means of provoking my
Brethren to Jealousy.

V. 14. My flesh -- My Kinsmen.

V. 15. Life from the dead -- Overflowing Life to the World, which was dead.

V. 16. And this will surely come to pass. For if the first fruits be holy, so
is the lump -- The Consecration of them, was esteemed the Consecration of all.
And so the Conversion of a few Jews is an Earnest of the Conversion of all the
rest. And if the root be holy -- The Patriarchs from whom they spring, surely
GOD will at length make their Descendants also holy.

V. 17. Thou -- O Gentile, being a wild olive tree -- Had the Graft been nobler
than the Stock, yet its Dependence on it for Life and Nourishment would leave
it no room no boast against it. How much less, when contrary to what is
practiced among Men, the wild Olive Tree is ingrafted on the Good?

V. 18. Beast not against the branches -- Do not they do this, who despise the
Jews? or deny their future Conversion?

V. 20. They were broken off for unbelief, and thou stand by says -- Both
conditionally, not absolutely; if absolutely, there might have been room to
boast, by faith -- The Free Gift of GOD, which therefore ought to humble thee.

V. 21. Be not high-minded, but fear -- We may observe, this Fear is not
opposed to Trust, but to Pride and Security.

V. 22. Else shall thou -- Also, who now stand by faith, be both totally and
finally cut off.

V. 24. Contrary to nature -- For according to Nature, we graft the fruitful
Branch into the wild Stock; but here the wild Branch is grafted into the
fruitful Stock.

V. 25. St. Paul calls any Truth known but to a few a Mystery. Such had been
the Calling of the Gentiles. Such was now the Conversion of the Jews. Lest ye
should be wise in your own conceits -- Puffed up with your present Advantages:
Dreaming that ye are the only Church; or that the Church of Rome cannot fail.
Hardness in part is happened to Israel, till -- Israel therefore is neither
totally nor finally rejected: the fullness of the Gentiles be come in -- Till
there be a vast Harvest amongst the Heathens.

V. 26. And so all Israel shall b^ saved -- Being convinced by the coming of
the Gentiles. But there will be a still larger Harvest among the Gentiles, when
all Israel is come in. The deliverer shall come -- Yea, the Deliverer is come,
but not the full Fru^ of his Coming.

V. 28. They are now enemies -- To the Gospel, to GOD, and to themselves, which
GOD permits for your sake: but as for the election -- That Part of them who
believe, they are beloved.

V. 29. For the gifts and the cali^ of God are without re^entance -- GOD does
not repent of his Gifts to the Jews, or his calling of the Gentiles.

V. 32. For God has shut up altogether in disobedience -- Suffering each in
their Turn to revolt from Him. First, GOD suffered the Gentiles in the early
Age to revolt, and took the Family of Abraham as a peculiar Seed to himself.
Afterward He permitted them to fall through Unbelief, and took in the
believing Gentiles. And he did even this to provoke the Jews to Jealousy, and
so bring them also in the End to Faith. This was truly a Mystery in the Divine
Conduct, which the Apostle adores with such holy Astonishment.

V. 33. O the depth of the riches, and wisdom, and knowledge of God! -- In the
ninth Chapter St. Paul had sailed but in a narrow Sea^ Now he is in the Ocean.
The depth of the riches is described. ver. 35. the depth of Wisdom, ver. 34.
the depth of Knowledge in the latter Part of this Verse. Wisdom directs all
Things to the best End: Knowledge sees that End. How unsearchable are his
judgments -- With regard to Unbelievers, his ways -- With regard to Believers!
His Ways are more upon a Level, his Judgments a great Deep. But even his Ways
we cannot trace.

V. 34. Who has known the mind of the Lord -- Before or any farther than he
has revealed it.

V. 35. Given to him -- Either Wisdom or Power?

V. 36. Of him, as the Creator; through him, as the Preserver; to him, as the
ultimate End, are all Things. To him be the glory of his Riches, Wisdom,
Knowledge. Amen! A concluding Word, in which the Affection of the Apostle, when
it is come to the Height, ^uts up all.

XII.
which is your reasonable service. is that good, and acceptable, of himself
above what he ought to think, but to think soberly, according as God has
distributed to every one the measure of faith. it be prophecy, let us prophecy
according to the analogy of faith: let us wait on our ministering; or he that
teaches, on teaching; or he that exhorts, on exhortation. let him do it with
simplicity; he that presideth, with diligence; he that shows mercy, with
cheerfulness.

Let love be without dissimulation. men. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 35.
Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says the Lord. Prove. xxv. 21, etc.
thy enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou
shall heap coals of fire upon his head.

V. 1. I exhort you -- St. Paul uses to suit his Exhortations to the Doctrines
he has been delivering. So here the general Use from the whole is contained in
the first and second Verses. The particular Uses follow, from the third Verse,
to the End of the Epistle. By the tender mercies of God -- The whole Sentiment
is derived from Chapters i -- v. The Expression itself is particularly opposed
to the ^rath of God, chapter i. 18 It has a Reference here to the entire Gospel, to
the whole Economy of Grace or Mercy, delivering us from the Wrath of God, and
exciting us to all Duty. To present -- (So chapter vi. 13. xvi 19) Now actually to
exhibit before GOD, your bodies -- That is, yourselves; a Part is put for the
Whole; the rather, as in the ancient Sacrifices, of Beasts, the Body was the
Whole. These also are particularly named, in opposition to that vile Abuse of
their Bodies, mentioned chapter i. 24. Several Expressions follow, which have
likewise a direct Reference to other Expressions in the same Chapter; a
sacrifice -- Dead to Sin, and living -- By that Life, which is mentioned chapter i.
17. chapter vi. 4, etc. Holy -- Such as the holy Law requires, chapter vii. 12.
Acceptable, chapter viii. 8. which is your reasonable service -- The Worship of the
Heathens was utterly unreasonable; (chapter i. 18, etc.) so was the glorying of the
Jews, (ch ii. 3, etc.) But a Christian acts in all Things by the highest
Reason, from the Mercy of GOD inferring his own Duty.

V. 2. And be not conformed -- Neither in Judgment, Spirit, nor Behavior; to
this world -- Which neglecting the Will of GOD, entirely follows its own; that
ye may prove -- Know by sure Trial; which is easily done by him who has thus
presented himself to GOD. What is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will
of God -- The Will of GOD is here to be understood of all the Preceptive Part
of Christianity, which is in itself so excellently good, so acceptable to GOD,
and so perfective of our Natures.

V. 3. And I say -- He now proceeds to show, what that Will of GOD is: through
the grace which is given to me He modestly adds this, lest be should seem to
forget his own Direction; to every out that is (...) -- Believers at Rome.
Happy, had they always remembered this! The measure of faith (Treated of in the
first and following Chapters) from which all other Gift, and Graces flow.

V. 5. So we -- All Believers, are one body -- Closely connected together in
Christ, and consequently ought to be helpful to each other.

V. 6. Having (...) according to the grace which is given us -- Gists are
various: Grace is one: whether it be prophecy -- This considered as an
extraordinary Gist, is that whereby Heavenly Mysteries are declared to Men, or
Things to come foret^ld But it seems here to mean the Ordinary Gift of
expounding Scripture: Let us prophecy according to the analogy of faith -- St.
Peter expresses it, As the oracles of God; According to the General Tenor of
them; according to that Grand Scheme of Doctrine which is delivered therein,
touching Original Sin, Justification by Faith, and present, inward Salvation.
There is a wonderful Analogy between all these; and a close and intimate
Connection, between the chief Heads of that Faith, which was once delivered to
the saints. Every Article therefore concerning which there is any Question,
should be determined by this Rule: Every doubtful Scripture interpreted,
according to the grand Truths which run through the whole.

V. 7. Ministering -- As Deacons. He that teaches Catechumens; for whom
particular Instructor; were appointed. He that exhorts -- Whose peculiar
Business it was, to urge Christians to Duty, and to comfort them in Trials.

V. 8. He that presideth -- That has the Care of a Flock. He that shows
mercy -- In any Instance, with chearsulness -- Rejoicing that he has such an
Opportunity.

V. 9. Having spoken of Faith and its Fruit, (ver. 3, etc.) he comes now to
Love. The 9th, 10th, and 11th Verses refer to Chapter the Seventh; the 12th
Verse to Chapter the Eighth; the 13th Verse, of communicating to the saints,
whether Jews or Gentiles, to Chapter the Ninth, etc. Part of the 16th Verse is
repeated from chapter xi. 25 Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good
-- Both inwardly and outwardly, whatever Ill Will or Danger may follow.

V. 10. In honor preferring one another -- Which you will do, if you
habitually confider what is good in others, and what is evil in yourselves.

V. 11. Whatsoever ye do, do it with your Might: In every business, diligently
and fervently serving the Lord; doing all to GOD, not to Man.

V. 12. Rejoicing in hope -- Of perfect Holiness and everlasting Happiness.
Hitherto of Faith and Love: Now of Hope also. (See the 3th and 8th Chapters.)
Afterward, of Duty toward others: Saints, ver. 13. Persecutors, ver. 14.
Friends, Strangers, Enemies, ver. 15, etc.

V. 13. Communicate to the necessities of the saints -- Relieve all Christians
that are in Want. It is remarkable, that the Apostle, treating expressly of the
Duties flowing from the Communion of Saints, yet never says one Word about the
Dead. Pursue hospitality -- Not only embracing those that offer, but seeking
Opportunities to exercise it.

V. 14. Curse not -- No, not in your Heart.

V. 15. Rejoice -- The direct Opposite to Weeping is Laughter: But this does
not so well suit a Christian.

V. 16. Mind not high things -- Desire not Riches, Honor, or the Company of
the Great.

V. 17. Provide -- Think beforehand; contrive to give as little Offense as may
be to any.

V. 19. Dearly beloved -- So he softens the rugged Spirit, revenge not
yourselves, but leave that to GOD. Perhaps it might more properly be rendered,
Leave room for wrath -- That is, the Wrath of GOD, to whom Vengeance properly
belongs.

V. 20. Feed him -- With your own Hand: if it be needful, even put Bread into
his Mouth. Heap coals of fire upon his head -- That Part which is most
sensible. " So Artists melt the sullen Ore of Lead,
" By heaping Coals of Fire upon its Head:
" In the kind Warmth the Metal learns to glow,
" And pure from Dross, the Silver runs below. "


V. 21. And if you see no present Fruit, yet persevere. Be not overcome with
evil -- As all are who avenge themselves. But overcome evil with good --
Conquer your Enemies by Kindness and Patience.

XIII.
to themselves condemnation. ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but
also for conscience sake. is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor. there be any other commandment, it is summed up in this
saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. his neighbor: therefore love
is the fulfilling of the law.

And do this, it is high time now to awake out of sleep; for salvation is
nearer to us now, than when we first believed. The night is far spent; to
fulfill the desires thereof.

V. 1. St. Paul writing to the Romans, whose City was the Seat of the Empire,
speaks largely of Obedience to Magistrates And this was also in effect a
public Apology for the Christian Religion. Let every soul be subject to the
supreme powers -- An Admonition peculiarly needful for the Jews. Power, in the
Singular Number is, The Supreme Authority; Powers are they who are invested
with it. That is more readily acknowledged to be from GOD than these. The
Apostle affirms it of both. They are all from GOD, who constituted all in
general, and permits each in particular by his Providence. The powers that be,
are appointed by God -- It might be rendered, are subordinate to, or orderly
disposed under, GOD: Implying, That they are GOD's Deputies or Vicegerents;
and consequently, their Authority, being, in effect, His, demands our
conscientious Obedience.

V. 2. Whosoever resists the power -- In any other Manner than the Laws of
the Community direct, shall receive condemnation -- Not only from the
Magistrate, but from GOD also.

V. 3. For rulers are in the general, not withstanding some particular
Exceptions, a terror to evil works only. Would thou then not be afraid? --
There is one Fear which precedes evil Actions, and deters from them: This
should always remain. There is another Fear which follows evil Actions: They
who do well are free from this.

V. 4. The sword -- The Instrument of Capital Punishment which GOD authorizes
him to inflict.

V. 5. Not only for fear of wrath -- That is, Punishment from Man; but for
conscience sake -- Out of Obedience to GOD.

V. 6. For this cause -- Because they are the Ministers (Officers) of GOD, for
the public Good. This very thing -- The public Good.

V. 7. To all -- Magistrates; Tribute -- Taxes on your Persons or Estates;
Custom -- For the Goods exported or imported; Fear -- Obedience; Honor --
Reverence. All these are due to the Supreme Power.

V. 8. From our Duty to Magistrates he passes on to General Duties. To love one
another -- An eternal Debt, which can never be sufficiently discharged. But yet
if this be rightly performed, it discharges all the rest. For he that loves
another -- As he ought, has fulfilled the whole law -- Toward his Neighbor.

V. 9. If there be any other more particular commandment toward our Neighbor;
as there are many in the Law; It is summed up in this -- So that if you was not
thinking of it, yet if your Heart was full of Love, you would fulfill it.

V. 10. Therefore love is the fulfilling of the law -- For the same Love which
restrains from all Evil, incites us to all Good.

V. 11. And do this -- Fulfill the Law of Love, in all the Instances above
mentioned; knowing the season -- Full of Grace, but hasting away: that it is
high time to awake out of sleep -- How beautifully is the Metaphor carried on?
This Life, a Night: the Resurrection, the Day: the Gospel ^hining on the Heart,
the Dawn of this Day: we are to awake out of Sleep; to r^se up and throw away
our Nightclothes, fit only for Darkness, and put on New. And being Soldiers, we
are to arm, and prepare for Fight, who are encompassed with so many Enemies.

The Day dawns, when we receive Faith, and then Sleep gives Place. Then it is
Time, to rise, to arm, to walk, to work, left Sleep steal upon us again. Final
Salvation, Glory, is nearer to us now, then when we first believed. It is
continually advancing, flying forward upon the swiftest Wings of Time. And that
which remains between the present Hour and Eternity, is comparatively but a
Moment.

V. 13. Banqueting -- Luxurious, elegant Feasts.

V. 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ -- Herein is contained the whole of
our Salvation. It is a strong and beautiful Expression for the most intimate
Union with Him, and being clothed with all the Graces which were in Him. The
Apostle does not say, Put on Purity and Sobriety, Peacefulness and Benevolence.
But he says all this and a thousand Times more at once, in saying, Put on
Christ. And make not provision -- To raise foolish Desires, or when they are
raised already, to satisfy them.

XIV.
Him that is weak in the faith, receive; but not to doubtful disputations.
alike; let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. it to the Lord; and he
that regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it. He that eats,
eats to the Lord; for he gives God thanks; and he that eats not, to the
Lord he eats not, and gives God thanks. Isaiah xlv. 23.
As I live, faith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, is unclean of itself;
but to him that accounts any thing to be unclean, it is unclean. But if thy
brother is grieved by thy meat, thou no longer walk charitably. Destroy not
him by thy meat, for whom Christ died. Therefore let not your good be evil
spoken of. is acceptable to God, For meat destroy not the work of God. are
pure: but it is evil to that man who eats with offense. It is good, not to
eat flesh, neither to drink wine, nor to do any thing whereby thy brother
stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. Have thou faith? is he that condemns
not himself in that thing which he ^weth. it is not of faith; for whatsoever is
not of faith is sin.

V. 1. Him that is weak -- Through needless Scruples, receive -- With all Love
and Courtesy into Christian Fellowship: but not to doubtful Disputations --
About questionable Points.

V. 2. All things -- All Sorts of Food, though forbidden by the Law.

V. 3. Dese^se him that eats not -- As over-scrupulous, or superstitions.
Judge him that catet^ -- As pros^ne, or taking undue Liberties. For God ^^th
received him -- Into the Number of his Children notwithstanding this.

V. 5. One day above another -- As New Mons and other Jewish Festivals. Let
every man be jully persuaded -- That a Thing is lawful, before he does it.

V. 6. Regards it to the Lord -- That is, out of a Principle of Conscience
toward GOD. To the Lord he does not regard it -- He also acts from a (...) of
Conscience. He that eats not -- Flesh, gives God thanks -- For his Herbs.

V. 7. None of us -- Christians, in the Things we do, lives to himself Is at
his own Disposal; Does his own Will.

V. 10. Or why des^ th^^ desp^se thy brother? -- Hitherto the Apostle ha
addressed the weak Brother Now he speaks to the stronger.

V. 11. A^ I live -- At Call proper to him, because he only posses^ Live (...)
and ^dependent. It is Christ, who is here termed (...) GOD, is it is (...) to
whom we live, and to whom we die Every tongue shall confess to God -- Shall own
him as their rightful LORD: Which shall then only be accomplished in its full
Extent. The Lord grant we may find Mercy in that Day! And may it also be
imparted to those who have differed from us! Yea, to those who have censured
and condemned us, for Things which we have done from a Desire to please him, or
refused to do, from a Fear of offending him.

V. 13. But judge this rather concerning ourselves, not to lay a
stumbling block -- By moving him to do as thou do, though against his
Conscience; or a scandal -- Moving him to hate or judge thee.

V. 14. I am assured by the Lord Jesus -- Perhaps by a particular Revelation,
that there is nothing -- Neither Flesh nor Herbs, unclean of itself -- Unlawful
under the Gospel.

V. 15. If thy brother is grieved -- That is, wounded, led into Sin. Destroy
not him for whom Christ died -- So we see, he for whom Christ died may be
destroyed! With thy meat -- Do not value thy Meat, more than Christ valued his
Life.

V. 16. Let not then your good and lawful Liberty be evil spoken of -- By being
offensive to others.

V. 17. For the kingdom of God -- That is true Religion, does not consist in
external Observances; but in righteousness, the Image of GOD stamped on the
Heart, the Love of GOD and Man, accompanied with the Peace that passes all
Understanding, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

V. 18. In these -- Righteousness, Peace, and Joy. Men -- Wise and good Men.

V. 19. Peace and Edification are closely joined. Practical Divinity tends
equally to Peace and to Edification. Controversial Divinity less directly tends
to Edification, although sometimes, as they of old, we cannot build without it,
Neh. iv. 17.

V. 20. The work of God -- Which he builds in the Soul, by Faith, and in the
Church by Concord. It is evil to that man who eats with offense -- So as to
offend another thereby.

V. 21. Thy brother stumbleth -- By imitating thee against his Conscience,
contrary to Righteousness; or is offended at what thou do, to the Loss of his
Peace; or made weak; hesit^ing between Imitation and Abhorrence, to the Loss of
that Joy in the LORD which was his Strength.

V. 22. Have thou faith? -- That all Things are pure, have it to thyself before
God -- In Circumstances like these, keep it to thyself, and do not offend
others by it. Happy is he that condemns not himself -- By an improper Use of
even innocent Things. And happy he who i^ free from a doubting Conscience: He
that has this, may allow the Thing, yet cond^ himself for it.

V. 23. Because it is not of s^^th -- He does not believe it lawful. And in all
these Cases, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin -- Whatever a Man does, without
a full Persuasion of its Lawfulness, it is ^n to him.

XV.
his neighbor, his good, to edification. Psalm lxix. 9.
The reproaches of them that reproached thee, that we, through patience and
consolation of the scriptures, one with another, according to Christ Jesus,
That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. made to the fathers: his mercy, as it is written, Psalm xviii. 49.
For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy
name. D^^t. xxxii. 43.
Rejoice, ye Gentiles, Psalm cxvii. 1.
Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles, and laud him, all ye people. And again
Isaiah says, Isaiah xi. 10.
There shall be the root of Jesse, and he that arises to rule over the
Gentiles: in him shall the Gentiles hope.

And I myself also am persuaded of you, should build upon another man's
foundation. Isaiah lii. 15.
They to whom he was not spoken of, shall see; and they that have not heard,
shall understand. company.

But I am now going to Jerusalem, will go by you into Spain. your prayers to
God for me, be with you all.

V. 1. We who are strong -- Of a clearer Judgment, and free from these
Scruples. And not to please ourselves -- Without any Regard to others.

V. 2. For his good -- This is a general Word; Edification is one Species of
Good.

V. 3. But bore not only the Infirmities, but reproaches of his Brethren, and
so fulfilled that Scripture.

V. 4. Aforetime -- In the Old Testament; that we through patience and
consolation of the Scriptures may have hope -- That through the Consolation
which GOD gives us by these, we may have Patience and a joyful Hope.

V. 5. According to the Power of Christ Jesus.

V. 6. That ye -- Both Jews and Gentiles, believing with one mind, and
confessing with one mouth.

V. 7. Receive ye one another -- Weak, and strong, with mutual Love.

V. 8. Now I say -- The Apostle here shows, How Christ received us: Christ
Jesus -- Jesus is the Name, Christ the Surname. The latter was first known to
the Jews, the former to the Gentiles. Therefore he is styled Jesus Christ, when
the Words stand in the common, natural Order. When the Order is inverted, as
here, the Office of Christ is more solemnly considered: was a servant -- Of his
Father; of the circumcision -- For the Salvation of the Circumcised, the Jews.
For the truth of God -- To manifest the Truth and Fidelity of GOD.

V. 9. As it is written -- In the 18th Psalm, where the Gentiles and Jews are
spoken of, as joining in the Worship of the GOD of Israel.

V. 12. There shall be the root of Jesse -- That Kings and the Messiah should
spring from his House, was promised to Jesse before it was to David. In him
shall the Gentiles hope -- Who before had been without hope, Ephesians. ii. 12.

V. 13. Now the God of hope -- A glorious (...) of GOD; but till now unknown to
the Heathens, For their Goddess Hope, like their other Idols, was (...); whose
Temple at Rome was burnt by Lightning. (...) indeed b^^^ again not long after,
but was again burnt to the Grou^^d.

V. 14. There are several Conclusions of this Epistle. The first ^igins, at
this Verse the second, chapter xvi. 1 the third, ver. 17. the ^utch, ver. 21. and
the 5th, ver. 23 Ye are fail of goodness -- By being crented ^n^w, and sil^ed
with all knowledge -- By long Exper ence of the Things of God: to admonish --
To instruct and confirm.

V. 15. Because of the grace -- That is, because I am an apostle of the
Gentiles.

V. 16. The offering up of the Gentiles -- As living Sacrifices.

V. 17. I have whereof to glory, through Jesus Christ -- All my Glorying is in
and through Him.

V. 18. By ward By the Power of the Spirit, by Deed -- Namely, through mighty
signs and wonders.

V. 20. Not where Christ had been named -- These places he generally dee^ned
(though not altogether) having an holy Ambition, (so the Greek Word means) to
make the first Proclamation of t^^ Gospel, in Places where it was quite unheard
of, inspire of all the Difficulty and Dangers that attended it, lest (...)
should only ^n^ld upon another man's foundation -- The Providence (...) God
seemed in a special Manner, generally, to prevent this (though not entirely) lest
the Enemies of the Apostle, who sought every Occ^sion to set light by him,
should h^v^ had room to say, that he was beh^^d other Apostles, not being
sufficient for plaining of Churches himself, but only for preaching where
others had been already; or that he declined the more difficult Part of the
Ministry.

V. 22. Therefore I have been long hindered from coming to you -- Among whom
Christ had been named.

V. 23. Having no longer place in these parts -- Where Christ has now been
preached in every City.

V. 24. Into Spain -- Where the Gospel had not yet been preached. If first I
may be somewhat satisfied with your company -- How remarkable is the Modesty
with which he speaks ^ They might rather desire to be satisfied with his.
Somewhat satisfied Intimating the Shortness of his Stay. Or perhaps, that
Christ alone can thoroughly satisfy the Soul.

V. 26. The poor of the saints that are in Jerusalem -- It can by no means be
inferred from this Expression, that the Community of Goods among the Christians
was then caused All that c^h be gathered from it is, that in this Time of
extreme Dearth ( Acts xi 2^, 29) some of the Church in Jerusalem were in Want;
the rest being barely able to subsist themselves, but nor to supply the
Necessities of their Brethren.

V. 27. It has pleased them, and they are their debtors -- That is, they are
bound to it, in Justice as well as Mercy, Spiritual things -- By the Preaching
of the Gospel: carnal things -- Things needful for the Body.

V. 28. When I have sealed to them this fruit -- When I have safely delivered
to them, as under Seal, this Fruit of their Brethren's Love. I will go by you
into Spain -- Such was his Design. But it does not appear, that Paul went into
Spain. There are often holy Purposes in the Minds of good Men, which are
overruled by the Providence of God, so as never to take effect. And yet they
are precious in the Sight of GOD.

V. 30. I beseech you -- by the love of the Spirit -- That is, by the Love
which is the genuine Fruit of the Spirit. To strive together with me in your
prayers -- He must pray himself, who would have others strive together with him
in Prayer. Of all the Apostles, St. Paul alone is recorded to desire the
Prayers of the faithful for himself. And this he generally does in the
Conclusions of his Epistles; yet not without making a Difference. For he speaks
in one Manner to them whom he treats as his Children, with the Gravity or even
Severity of a Father, (such as Timothy, Titus, the Corinthians and Galatians)
in another, to them whom he treats rather like Equals, such as the Romans,
Ephesians, Thessalonians, Colossians, Hebrews.

V. 31. That I may be delivered -- He is thus urgent from a Sense of the
Importance of his Life to the Church. Otherwise he would have rejoiced, to
decart, and to be with Christ. And that my service may be acceptable -- In
spite of all their Prejudices; to the end the Jewish and Gentile Believers may
be knit together in tender Love.

V. 32. That I may come to you -- This refers to the former, with joy -- To the
latter Part of the preceding Verse.

XVI.
also. fellow laborers in Christ Jesus: Salute also the church that is in
their house. Salute my beloved Epenetus, who is the first fruits of Asia unto
Christ. of the family of Aristobulus. of the family of Narcissus, who are in
the Lord. Salute Tryphena and Tryphora, who labor in the Lord. Salute the
beloved Persis, who has labored much in the Lord.

Now I beseech you, wise with regard to that which is good, and simple with
regard to that which is evil. be with you.

Timotheus my fellow laborer, be with you all.

Now to him who is able to stablish you, according to the commandment of the
eternal God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith.) be glory
through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen!

V 1. I commend unto you Phebe -- The Bearer of this Letter. A servant -- The
Greek Word is a Deaconess, of the Church in Cenchrea -- In the apostolic Age,
some grave and pious Women were appointed Deaconnesses in every Church. It was
their Office not to teach publicly, but to visit the Sick, the Women in
particular, and to minister to them both in their temporal and spiritual
Necessities.

V. 2. In the Lord -- That is, for the LORD's Sake, and in a Christian Manner.
St. Paul seems fond of this Expression.

V. 4. Who have for my life, as it were laid down their own (...) That is,
exposed themselves to the utmost Danger, but likewise all the churches of the
Gentiles -- Even that at Rome, for preserving so valuable a Life.

V. 5. Salute the church that is in their house -- Aquila had been driven from
Rome in the Reign of Claudius, but was now returned, and performed the same
Part there, which Cains did at Cor^th, (C^^^^wi. 23.) Where any Christian had a
large House, there they all ^^^mbled together: Though as yet the Christians at
Rome had neither Bishops nor Deacons. So far were they from any Sh^dow of Papal
Power. Nay, there does not appear to have been then in the whole City any more
than the of these domestic Churches. Otherwise there can be no Doubt, but St.
Paul would have saluted them also. Epenctus -- Although the Apostle had never
been at Rome, yet had he many Acquaintance there. But here is no Mention of
Linus or Clemens, whence it appears, they did not come to Rome till after this.
The first fruits of Asia -- The first Convert in the Proconsular Asia.

V. 7. Who are of note among the apostles -- They seem to have been some of the
most early Converts: Fellow prisoners -- For the Gospel-sake.

V. 9. Our fellow laborer -- Mine and Timothy's, ver. 21.

V. 11. Those of the family of Aristobulus and Narcissus, who are in the Lord
-- It seems only Part of their Families were converted. Probably some of them
were not known to St. Paul by Face, but only by Character. Faith does not
create Moroseness but Courtesy, which even the Gravity of an Apostle did not
hinder.

V. 12. Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa -- Probably they were two Sisters.

V. 13. Salute Rufus -- Perhaps the same that is mentioned Mark xv. 21, and his
mother and mine -- This Expression may only denote the tender Care which
Rufus's Mother had taken of him.

V. 14. Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, etc. He seems to join those together, who
were joined by Kindred, Nearuess of Habitation, or any other Circumstance. It
could not but encourage the Poor especially, to be saluted by Name, who perhaps
did not know that the Apostle ever heard of them. It is observable, that whilst
the Apostle forgets none who are worthy, yet he adjusts the Nature of his
Salutation to the Degrees of Worth, in those whom he salutes.

V. 15. Salute all the saints -- Had St. Peter been then at Rome, St. Paul
would doubtless have saluted him by Name; since no one in this numerous
Catalogue, was of an Eminence comparable to his. But if he was not then at
Rome, the whole Roman Tradition, with regard to the Succession of their
Bishops, fails in the most fundamental Article.

V. 16. Salute one another with an holy kiss -- Termed by St. Peter, The Kiss
of Love. (1 Pet. v. 15.) So the ancient Christians concluded all their solemn
Offices, the Men saluting the Men, and the Women the Women. And this
apostolical Custom seems to have continued for some Ages, in all Christian
Churches.

V. 17. Mark them who cause divisions -- Such there were therefore at Rome
also. Avoid them -- Avoid all unnecessary Intercourse with them.

V. 18. By good words -- Concerning themselves, making great Promises, and fair
speeches -- Concerning you, praising and flattering you. The harmless -- Who
doing no Ill themselves, are not upon their Guard against them that do.

V. 19. But I would have you -- Not only obedient, but discreet also, wise with
regard to that which is good -- As knowing in this as possible, and simple with
regard to that which is evil -- As ignorant of this as possible.

V. 20. And the God of peace -- The Author and Lover of it, giving a Blessing
to your Discretion, Shall bruise Satan under your feet -- Shall defeat all the
Artifices of that Sower of Tares, and unite you more and more together in Love.

V. 21. Timotheus my fellow laborer -- Here he is named even before St. Paul's
Kinsmen. But as he had never been at Rome, he is not named in the Beginning of
the Epistle.

V. 22. I Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you -- Tertius, who wrote
what the Apostle dictated, inserted this, either by St. Paul's Exhortation, or
ready Permission. Caius -- The Corinthian (1 Cor. i. 14.) my host, and of the
whole church -- Who probably met for some Time in his House.

V. 23. The chamberlain of the city -- Of Corinth.

V. 25. Now to him who is able -- The last Words of this Epistle exactly answer
the first: Chap. i. 1 -- 5 in particular, concerning the Power of GOD, the
Gospel, Jesus Christ, the Scriptures, the Obedience of Faith, all Nations, to
establish you -- Both Jews and Gentiles, according to my gos^el and the
preaching of Jesus Christ -- That is, according to the Tenor of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which I preach: According to the re^elation of the mys^ery -- Of
the Calling of the Gentiles, which as plainly as it was foretold in the
Prophets, was still hid from many even of the believing Jews.

V. 26. According to the commandment -- The Foundation of the apostolical
Office. of the eternal God -- A more proper Epithet could not be. A new
Dispensation infers no Change in GOD. Known unto Him are all his Works, and
every Variation of them, from Eternity, made known to all Nations -- Not barely
that they might know, but enjoy it also, through obeying the faith.

V. 27. To the only wise God -- Whose manifold Wisdom is known in the Church
through the Gospel. ( Ephesians. iii 10.) To him who is able, and to the wise God are
joined, as 1 Cor. i. 24 where Christ is styled the Wisdom of God, and the Power
of God. To him be glory through Christ Jesus for ever. And let every Believer
say, Amen!

NOTES ON St. PAUL's First Epistle to the Corinthians.
CORINTH was a City of Acha^a, situate on the Isthmus which joins Peloponnesus,
now called The Morea, to the r^st of Greece. Being so advantageously situated
for Trade, the (...) bitants of it abounded in Riches, which, by too natural ^
Consequence, led them into Luxury, Lewdness, and all manner o^ (...).

Yet even here St. Paul planted a numerous Church, chi^^ly of Heathen Converts;
to whom, about three Years after he be^ left Corinth, he wrote this Epistle
from Ephesus: As well to correct various Disorders of which they were guilty,
as to answer some Questions which they had proposed to him.

The Epistle consists of
I. The Inscription, C.i. 1 -- 3 II. The Treatise itself, in which is 1. An
Exhortation to Concord, beating down all Glorying in the Flesh, 4 -- C. iv. 21
2. A Reproof, 1. For not excommunicating the incestuous Person, C. v. 1 -- 13
2. For going to Law before Heathen Judges, C. vi. 1 -- 11 3. A Dissuasive from
Fornication, 12 -- 20 4. An Answer to the Questions they had proposed,
concerning Marriage, C. vii. 1, 10, 25, 36, 39 5. Concerning Things sacrificed
to Idols, C. viii. 1 -- C ix. 1 6. Concerning the Veiling of Women, 2-16 7.
Concerning the LORD's Supper, 17-34 8. Concerning spiritual Gifts, C. xii.
xiii. xiv. 9. Concerning the Resurrection, C. vi. 1-58 10. Concerning the
Collection for the Poor; the Coming of himself; of Timothy; of Ap^llos; the Sum
of all, C. xvi. 1, 5, 10, 12, 13, 14 III. The Conclusion, 15, 17, 19-24

I. CORINTHIANS.
I.
to be an apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will of God, and Sosthenes the
brother, and holy, with all that in every place call upon the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours: be unto you, and peace from God our Father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

in all knowledge, that ye may be blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus
Christ. God is faithful,

Now I exhort you, that there be no schisms among you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together, in the same mind and in the same judgment. of the family of
Chloe, that there are contentions among you. Of Cephas,

For Christ did not send me to baptize, but not with wisdom of speech, lest the
cross of Christ should be made of none effect. Isaiah xxix. 14.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and abolish the understanding of the
prudent. Isaiah xxxiii. 18.
Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world?
Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? Behold your calling, are
called: Jer. ix. 23, 24.
He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

V. 1. Paul called to be an apostle -- There is great Propriety in every Clause
of the Salutation, particularly in this, as there were some in the Church of
Corinth, who called the Authority of his Mission in Question, through the will
of God -- Called the commandment of God, 1 Timothy i. 1. This was to the Churches,
the Ground of his Authority; to Paul himself, of an humble and ready Mind. By
the Mention of GOD, the Authority of Man is excluded, ( Gal. i. 1.) by the
Mention of the Will of GOD, the Merit of Paul (chapter xv. 8, etc.) And Sosthenes
-- A Corinthian, St. Paul's Companion in Travel. It was both Humility and
Prudence in the Apostle, thus to join his Name with his own, in an Epistle
wherein he was to reprove so many Irregularities. Sosi^^^es the brother --
Probably this Word is emphatical; as if he had said, Who from a Jewish Opposer
of the Gospel became a faithful brother.

V. 2. To the church of God which is in Corinth -- St. Paul writing in a
familiar Manner to the Corinthians, as also to the Thessa^onians and Galatians,
uses this plain Appellation To the other Churches he uses a more solemn
Address. Sanctified through Jesus Christ -- And so undoubtedly they were in
general, not withstanding some Exceptions; called -- Of Jesus Christ, Rom i. 6.
and -- As the Fruit of that Calling, made holy. With all that in every place --
Nothing could ^etter suit that catholic Love, which St. Paul labors to promote
in this Epistle, than such a Declaration of his good Wishes for every ^rue
Christian upon Earth. Call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ -- This
plainly implies, that all Christians pray to Christ, as well as to the Father
through Him

V. 4. Always -- Whenever I mention you to GOD in Prayer.

V. 5. In all utterance and knowledge^ Of divine Things. These Gifts the
Corinth^ans particularly admired. Therefore this Congra^ulation naturally
tended to soften their Spirits, and make Way for the Reproofs which follow.

V. 6. The testimony of Christ -- The Gospel, was confirmed among you -- By
these Gifts attending it. They knew they had received these by the hand of
Paul: And this Consideration was highly proper, to revive in them their former
Reverence and Affection for their spiritual Father.

V. 7. Waiting with earnest Desire for the glorious revelation of our Lord
Jesus Christ -- A sure Mark of a true or false Christian. To long for, or dread
this Revelation.

V. 8. Who will also, if you faithfully apply to him, confirm you to the end --
In the day of Christ -- Now it is our Day, wherein we are to work out our
Salvation. Then it will be eminently the day of Christ, and of his Glory in the
Saints.

V. 9. God is faithful -- To all his Promises: And therefore to him that has
shall be given: By whom ye are called -- A Pledge of his Willingness to save
you unto the uttermost

V. 10. Now I exhort you -- Ye have Faith and Hope: Secure Love also by the
endearing name of our Lord Jesus Christ -- Infinitely preferable to all the
human Names in which ye glory, that ye all speak the same thing -- They now
spoke different Things -- ver. 12.) and that there be no schisms among you --
No Alienation of Affection from each other. Is this Word ever taken in any
other Sense in Scripture? But that ye be joined in the same mind -- Affections,
Desires, and judgment -- Touching all the grand Truths of the Gospel

V. 11. It has been declared to me by them of the family of Chlot^ -- Which
some suppose to have been the Wife of St^phenas, and the Mother of Fortunatus
and Achai^^s. By these three the Corinthians had sent their Letters to St.
Paul, chapter xvi. 17. that there are contentions -- A Word equivalent with Schisms
in the preceding Verse.

V. 12. Now this I say -- That is, What I mean is this There are various
Parties among you, who set themselves, one against Mother, in Behalf of the
several Teachers they admire. And I of Christ -- They spoke well; if they had
not on this Pretense despised their Teachers, (ch iv. 8) Perhaps they valued
themselves on having heard Christ preach in his own Person.

V. 13. Is Christ divided? -- Are not all the Members still under one Head? Was
not He alone crucified for you all? And were ye not all baptized in his Name?
The Glory of Christ then is not to be divided, between him and his Servants:
Neither is the Unity of the Body to be torn asunder, seeing Christ is One still.

V. 14. I thank God, (a pious Phrase for the common one I rejoice) that in the
Course of his Providence, I baptized none of you, but Crispus (once the Ruler
of the Synagogue) and Cains.

V. 15. Lest any should say, that I had baptized in my own name -- In order to
attach them to myself.

V. 16. I know not -- That is, It does not at present occur to my Memory, that
I baptized any other.

V. 17. For God did not send me to baptize -- That was not my chief Errand;;
those of inferior Rank and Abilities could do it: (Though all the Apostles were
sent to baptize also, Mat. xxv^ii. 19.) but to preach the ^ospel -- So the
Apostle slides into his General Proposition: But not with wisdom of speech --
With the artificial. Ornaments of Discourse, invented by human Wisdom, lest the
cross of Christ should be made of none effect -- The whole Effect of St. Paul's
Preaching was owing to the Power of GOD accompanying the plain Declaration of
that great Truth, Christ bore our Sins upon the Cross. But this Effect might
have been imputed to another Cause, had he come with that wisdom of speech
which they admired.

V. 18. To them that perish -- By obstinately rejecting the only Name whereby
they can be saved. But to us who are saved -- Now saved from our Sins, and in
the Way to Everlasting Salvation, it is the great Instrument of the Power of
GOD.

V. 19. For it is written -- And the Words are remarkably applicable to this
great Event.

V. 20. Where is the wise? etc. The Deliverance of Judea from Sennacherib, is
what Isaiah refers to in these Words; in a bold and beautiful Allusion to
which, the Apostle in the Clause that follows, triumphs over all the
Oppositions of Human Wisdom, to the victorious Gospel of Christ. What could the
wise Men of the Gentiles do against this? Or the Jewish Scribes? Or the
disputers of this world? Those among both, who, proud of their Acuteness, were
fond of Controversy, and thought they could confute all Opponents. Has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world? -- That is, shown it to be very
Foolishness?

V. 21. For since in the wisdom of God -- According to his wise Disposals,
leaving them to make the Trial, the world, whether Jewish or Gentile, by all
its boasted wisdom knew not God -- Though the whole Creation declared its
Creator, and though He declared Himself by all the Prophets; it pleased God by
a Way which those who perish count mere foolishness, to save them that believe.

V. 22. For whereas the Jews demand of the Apostles, as they did of their LORD,
more Signs still, after all they have seen already: And the Greeks or Gentiles
seek wisdom -- The Depths of Philosophy, and the Charms of Eloquence.

V. 23. We go on to preach, in a plain and historical, not rhetorical or
philosophical Manner, Christ crucified, to the Jews a siumbling-block, just
opposite to the signs they demand, and to the Greeks foolishness, a silly Tale,
just opposite to the wisdom they seek.

V. 24. But to them that are colled -- And obey the heavenly Calling -- Christ,
with his Cross, his Death, his Life, his Kingdom. And they experience, first,
that He is the power, then that He is the wisdom of God.

V. 25. Because the foolishness of God -- The Gospel-Scheme, which the World
judge to be mere Foolishness is wiser than the Wisdom of men, and weak as they
account it, stronger than all the Strength of men.

V. 26. Behold your calling -- What Manner of Men they are whom GOD calls; that
not many wise men after the flesh -- In the Account of the World, not many
mighty -- Men of Power and Authority.

V. 28. Things that are not -- The Jews frequently called the Gen^^les, them
that are not, Esdr. vi. 56, 57. In so supreme Contempt did they hold them. The
things that are -- In high Esteem.

V. 29. That no flesh -- A fit Appellation. Flesh is fair, but withthing as
Grass, may glory before God. In GOD we ought to glory.

V. 30. Of him -- Out of his Free Grace and Mercy, are ye -- Intrasted into
Christ Jesus, who is made unto us that believe Wisdom, who were before utterly
foolish and ignorant; R^hteousness, the s^le Ground of our Justification, who
were before under the Wrath and Curse of GOD; Sanctification, a Principle of
Universal Holiness, whereas before we were altogether dead in Sin; and
Redemption, that is, Complete Deliverance from all Evil, and Eternal Bliss both
of Soul and Body.

V. 31. Let him glory in the Lord -- Not in himself, not in the Flesh not in
the World.

II.
weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. And my speech and my preaching
was not with the persuasive words of human wisdom,

Yet we speak wisdom among the perfect: it, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory. Isaiah lxiv. 4.
Eye has not seen, nor has ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man, what things God has prepared for them that love him. them to us by his
Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, words. can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned. Isaiah xl. 13.
For who has known the mind of the Lord,

V. 1. And I accordingly came to you, not with loftiness of speech or of wisdom
-- I did not affect either deep Wisdom or Eloquence, declaring the testimony of
God -- What GOD gave me to testify concerning his Son.

V. 2. I determined not to know any thing -- To wave all my other Knowledge,
and not to preach any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified -- That is,
what He did, suffered, taught. A Part is put for the whole.

V. 3. And I was with you -- At my first Entrance, in weakness of Body, 2 Cor.
xii. 7. and in sear -- Lest I should offend any; and in much trembling -- The
Emotion of my Mind affecting my very Body.

V. 4. And my speech in private, as well as my public preaching, was not with
the persuasive words of human wisdom, such as the wise Men of the World use;
but with the demonsiration of the Spirit and of power -- With that powerful
kind of Demonstration, which flows from the Holy Spirit; which works on the
Conscience, with the most convincing Light and the most persuasive Evidence.

V. 5. That your faith might not be built on the wisdom or Power of man, but on
the Wisdom and power of God.

V. 6. Yet we speak wisdom -- Yea, the truest and most excellent Wisdom, among
the perfect -- Adult, experienced Christians. By Wisdom here he seems to mean,
not the whole Christian Doctrine, but the most sublime and abstruse Parts of
it. But not the wisdom admired and taught by the Men of this world, nor of the
rulers of this world, Jewish or Heathen, that come to naught -- Both they and
their Wisdom, and the World itself.

V. 7. But we speak the mysterious wisdom of GOD, which was hidden for many
Ages from all the World; and is still hidden even from babes in Christ; much
more from all Unbelievers. Which God ordained before the world -- So far is
this from coming to naught, like wordly Wisdom, for our glory -- Arising from
the Glory of our LORD, and then to be revealed, when all worldly Glory vanishes.

V. 8. Had they known it -- That Wisdom, they would not have crucified --
Punished as a Slave, the Lord of glory -- The giving Christ this august Title,
peculiar to the great Johovah, plainly shows him to be the Supreme GOD. In like
manner the Father in styled The Father of glory, (Ephesians. i. 17.) and the Holy
Ghost, the Spirit of glory, (1. Pet. iv. 14) The Application of this Title to
all the Three, shows that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are the God of glory:
As the only true GOD is called Psalm xxix. 3. and Acts vii. 2.

V. 9. But this Ignorance of theirs fulfils what is written concerning the
Blessings of the Messiah's Kingdom. No natural Man has either seen, heard, or
known the things which God has prepared, says the Prophet, for them that love
him.

V. 10. But God has revealed (yea, and freely given, ver. 12.) them to us;
even inconceivable Peace and Joy unspeakable, by his Spirit -- Who intimately
and fully knows them: for the Spirit searches even the great things of God. Be
they ever so hidden and mysterious, the Depths both of his Nature and his
Kingdom.

V. 11. For what man knows the things of a man -- All the inmost Recesses of
his Mind: Although Men are all of one Nature, and so may the more easily know
one another. So the things of God knows no one but the Spirit -- Who
consequently is GOD.

V. 12. Now we have received not the spirit of the world -- This Spirit is not
properly received. For the Men of the World always had it. But Christians
receive the Spirit of GOD, which before they had not.

V. 13. Which also we speak, as well as know, in words taught by the Holy
Spirit -- Such are all the Words of Scripture. How high a Regard ought we then
to retain for them? Explaining spiritual things by spiritual words -- Or,
adapting spiritual words to spiritual things -- Being taught of the Spirit to
express the Things of the Spirit.

V. 14. But the natural man -- That is, Every Man who has not the Spirit, who
has no other Way of obtaining Knowledge, but by his Senses and Natural
Understanding, receives not -- Does not understand or conceive, the things of
the Spirit -- The Things revealed by the Spirit of GOD, whether relating to his
Nature or his Kingdom. For they are foolishness to him -- He is so far from
understanding, that he utterly despises them. Neither can he know them -- As he
has not the Will, so neither has he the Power; because they are spiritually
discerned -- They can only be discerned by the Aid of that Spirit, and by those
spiritual Senses which he has not.

V. 15. But the spiritual man -- He that has the Spirit, discerns all the
things of GOD whereof we have been speaking, yet he himself is discerned by no
man -- No natural Men. They neither understand what he is, nor what he says.

V. 16. Who -- What natural Man. We -- Spiritual Men, Apostles in particular;
have -- Know, understand, the mind of Christ -- Concerning the whole Plan of
Gospel-Salvation.

III.
to bear it: nor are ye now able. For ye are still carnal: there is among you
emulation, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, am of Apollos; are ye
not carnal?

Who then is Paul, is Apollos, bat ministers by whom ye believed, even as the
Lord gave to every man? but God gave the increase. is Jesus Christ: it: for it
is revealed by fire; yea the fire shall try every one's work, shall God
destroy: for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. Job v. 13.
He takes the wise in their own craftiness. Psalm xciv. 11.
The Lord knows the reasonings of the wise, that they are vain. are Christ's,
and Christ is God's.

V. 1. And I, brethren -- He spoke before, (chapter ii. 1.) of his Entrance, now of
his Progress among them; could not speak to you as unto spiritua -- Adult,
experienced Christians; but as unto Men who were still in great Measure carnal;
as unto babes in Christ -- Still weak in Grace, though eminent in Gifts. (chapter
i. 5)

V. 2. I fed you as Babes with milk; the first and plainest Truths of the
Gospel. So should every Preacher suit his Doctrine to his Hearers.

V. 3. For while there is among you emn^ation in your Hearts, sirife in your
Words, and actual divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk according to man? --
As more Men? not as Christians, according to GOD

V. 4. I am of Apollos -- St. Paul named himself and Apollos, to show that he
would condemn any Division among them, even though it were in Favor of
himself, or the dearest Friend he had in the World. Are ye not carnal? -- For
the Spirit of GOD allows no Party-Zeal.

V. 5. Ministers, or Servants, by whom ye believed, as the Lord the Master of
those Servants, gave to every man.

V. 7. God that gives the increase is all in all; without Him neither planting
nor watering avails.

V. 8. But he that planteth and he that waters are one -- Which is another
Argument against Division. Though their Labors are different, they are all
employed in one General Work, the saving Souls. Hence he takes Occasion to
speak of the reward of them that labor faithfully, and the awful Account to be
given by all. Every one shall receive his own peculiar reward, according to his
own peculiar labor -- Not only according to his Success. But he who labors
much, though with small Success, shall have a great Reward.

Has not all this Reasoning the same Force still? Ministers are still barely
Instruments in GOD'S Hand, and depend as entirely as ever on his Blessing, to
give the Increase to their Labors. Without this they are nothing; with it,
their Part is so small, that they hardly deserve to be mentioned. May their
Hearts and Hands be more united! And retaining a due Sense of the Honor GOD
does them in employing them, may they faithfully labor, not as for themselves,
but for the great Pr. prietor of all, till the Day come when He will reward
them in full Proportion to their Fidelity and Diligence.

V. 9. For we are all fellow laborers -- GOD'S Laborers, and Fellow Laborers
with each other. Ye are God's husbandry -- This is the Sum of what went before:
It is a comprehensive Word, taking in both a Field, a Garden, and a Vineyard.
Ye are God's building -- This is the Sum of what follows.

V. 10. According to the grace of God given to me -- This he premises, lest he
should seem to ascribe it to himself. Let every one take heed how he builds
thereon -- That all his Doctrines may be consistent with the Foundation.

V. 11. For other foundation -- On which the whole Church, and all its
Doctrines, Duties, and Blessings may be built; can no man lay than what is laid
-- In the Counsels of Divine Wisdom, in the Promises and Prophecies of the Old
Testament, in the Preaching of the Apostles, St. Paul in particular; which is
Jesus Christ -- Who, in his Person and Offices, is the firm, immovable Rock of
Ages, every Way sufficient to bear all the Weight that GOD Himself, or the
Sinner, when he believes, can lay upon Him.

V. 12. If any one build gold, silver, costly stones -- Three Sorts of
Materials which will bear the Fire; true and solid Doctrines: Wood, hay,
stubble -- Three which will not bear the Fire. Such are all Doctrines,
Ceremonies, and Forms of human Invention, all but the substantial, vital Truths
of Christianity.

V. 13. The Time is coming, when every one's work shall be made manifest: for
the day of the LORD, that great and final Day, shall declare it to all the
World. For it is revealed -- What Faith beholds as so certain and so near, is
spoken of as a^ready present; by fire; yea, the fire shall try every one's
work, of what sort it is -- The strict Process of that Day will try every M^n's
D^ctrines, w^ether they came up to the Scripture-Standard or not. Here is a
plain Allusion to the flaming Light and confirming Hea^ of the General
Con^agration. But the Expression, when ^^plied to the trying of Doctrines, and
consuming those that are wrong, is evidently figurative; because no Material
Fire can have such an Effection what is of a Moral Nature And therefore it is
added, he wh^ b^ilds wood, hay, or stubble, shall be saved as through the fire;
or, as narrowly as a man escapes through the fire, when his House is all in
Flames about him.

This Text then is so far from establishing the Romish Purgatory, that it
utterly overthrows it. For the fire here mentioned does not exist, till the day
of Judgment: Therefore if this be the Fire of Purgatory, it follows, That
Purgatory does not exist, before the Day of Judgment.

V. 14. He shall receive a reward -- A peculiar Degree of Glory. Some Degree
even the other will receive; seeing he held the Foundation; though through
Ignorance he built thereon what would not abide the Fire.

V. 15. He shall suffer loss -- The Loss of that peculiar Degree of Glory.

V. 16. Ye -- All Christians, are the Temple of God -- The most noble kind of
Building, ver. 9.

V. 17. If any man destroy the temple of God -- D^^^roy a real Christian, by
Schisms, or Doctrines fundamentally wrong, him shall God destroy -- He shall
not be saved at all; not even as through the fire.

V. 18. Let him become a fool in this world -- Such as the World accounts so;
that he may become wise -- In GOD'S Account.

V. 19. For all the boasted wisdom of the world is more foo^ishness in the
Sight of GOD. He takes the wise in their own craftiness -- not only while they
think they are acting wisely; but by their very Wisdom, which itself is their
Snare and the Occasion of their Destruction.

V. 20. That they are but vain -- Empty, foolish; they and all their Thoughts.

V. 21. Therefore -- Upon the whole, let none glory in men -- So as to divide
into Parties on their Account, For all things are yours -- And we in
particular. We are not your Lords, but rather your Servants.

V. 22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas -- We are all equally yours to
serve you for Christ's sake, or the world -- This Leap from Peter^ the world
greatly ^nlarges the Thought, and argues a kind of Impatience of enumerating
the rest. Peter and every one in the whole World, however excellent in Gifts,
or Grace, or Office, are also your Servants for Christ's sake; or life, or
death -- These, with all their various Circumstances, are disposed as will be
most for your Advantage; or things present on Earth, or things to come in
Heaven. Contend therefore no more about these little Things, but be ye united
in Love, as ye are in Blessings.

V. 23. And ye are Christ's -- His Property, his Subjects, his Members, and
Christ is God's -- As Mediator he refers all his Services to his Father's Glory.

IV.
man be found faithful.

These things, of men above Chapter iii. 7.
what is here written, that ye may not be puffed up for one against another.
from another? And what have thou which thou have not received? But if thou have
received it, why do thou boast, it? Now ye are full: now ye are rich: ye have
reigned as kings without us. are fools for Christ's sake; but ye are wise in
Christ: we are weak; but ye are strong: are honorable; but we without honor.
Even to this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain abode, this day. you. have ye not many fathers;
for I have begotten you in Christ Jesus through the gospel. is not in speech,

V. 1. Let a man account us as servants of Christ -- The original Word properly
signifies, such Servants as labored at the Our in Rowing Vessels. And
accordingly intimates, the Pains which every saithful Minister takes in his
LORD'S Work. O GOD, where are these Ministers to be found? LORD, thou know^st.
And stew^^^'s of the mysteries of God -- Dispensers of the mysterious Truths of
the Gospel.

V. 3. Yea, I judge not myself -- My final State is not to be determined by my
own Judgment.

V. 4. I am not conscious to myself of any thing evil. yet am I not hereby
justified -- I depend not on this, as a sufficient Justification of myself in
GOD'S Account: But he that judges me is the Lord -- By his Sentence I am to
stand or fall.

V. 5. Therefore judge nothing before the time -- Appointed for judging all
Men; until the Lord come, who in order to pass a righteous Judgment, which
otherwise would be imp^ssible. will b^th bring to light the things which are
now covered with impe^etrable darkness, and manifest the most secret springs of
Action, the Principles and Intentions of every Heart. And then shall every one,
every faithful Steward, have praise of God.

V. 6. These things -- Mentioned chapter i. 10, etc. I have by a very obvious
figure transferred to myself, and Apollos, and Cephas, instead of naming those
particular Preachers at Corinth, to whom ye are so fondly attached, that ye may
learn by us -- From what has been said concerning us, (who, however eminent we
are, are mere Instruments in GOD'S Hand) not to think of any Man above what is
here written, or above what Scripture warrants.

V. 7. Who makes thee to differ -- Either in Gifts or Graces! As if thou had
not received it -- As if thou had it originally from thyself.

V. 8. Now ye are full -- The Corinthians abounded with spiritual Gifts. And so
did the Apostles. But the Apostles, by continual Want and Sufferings were kept
from Self-compl^cency. The Corinthians suffering nothing, and having Plenty of
all Things, were pleased with and applauded themselves. And they were like
Children, who being raised in the World, disregard their poor Parents. Now are
(...): (says the Apos^le, in a beautiful Gradation) ye are rich, ye have
^^igned as kings -- A proverbial Expression, denoting the most splendid and
plentiful Circumstances, without any Thought of us. And I would ye did reign --
In the best Sense: I would ye had attained the H^ght of Holiness: that we might
reign with you -- Having no more Sorrow on your Account, but sharing in your
Happiness.

V. 9. God has set forth us last, as appointed to death -- Alluding to the
Roman Custom, of bringing forth those Persons last on the Stage, either to
fight with each other, or with wild Beasts, who were devoted to death: so that
if they escaped one Day, they were brought out again, and again, till they were
killed.

V. 10. We are fools in the Account of the World, for Christ's sake: but ye are
wise in Christ -- Though ye are Christians, ye think yourselves wise, and ye
have found Means to make the World think you so too. We are we^k -- In
Presence, in Infirmities, in Sufferings: but ye are strong -- In just opposite
Circumstances.

V. 11. And are naked -- Who can imagine a more glorious Triumph of the Truth,
than that which is gained in these Circumstances? When St Paul, with an
Impediment in his Speech, and a Person other contemptible than graceful,
appeared in a mean, perhaps tattered Dr^ss, before Persons of the highest
Distinction, and yet commanded such Attention, and made such deep Impressions
upon them!

V. 12. We bless -- suffer it -- entreat -- We do not return Revilings,
Persecution, Defamation: Nothing but Blessing.

V. 13. We are made as the filth of the world, and offscouring of all things
-- Such were those poor Wretches among the Heathens, who were taken from the
Dr^gs of the People, to be offered as Expiatory Sacrifices, to the Infernal
Gods. They were loaded with Curses, Affronts and Injuries, all the Way they
went to the Altars. And when the Ashes of those unhappy Men were thrown into
the Sea these very Names were given them in the Ceremony.

V. 14. I do not write these things to shame you, but as my beloved children I
warn you -- It is with admirable Prudence and Sweetness the Apostle adds this,
to prevent any unkind Construction of his Words.

V. 15. I have begotten you -- This excludes not only Apollos his Successor,
but also Silas and Timothy his Companions. And the Relation between a Spiritual
Father and his Children brings with it as inexpressible Nearness and Affection.

V. 16. Be ye followers of me -- In that Spirit and Behavior, which I have so
largely declared.

V. 17. My beloved son -- Elsewhere he styles him brother; (2 Cor. i. 1.) but
here paternal Affection takes Place. As I teach -- No less by Example than
Precept.

V. 18. Now some are puffed up -- St. Paul saw by a divine Light, the Thoughts
which would arise in their Hearts. As if I would not come -- Because I send
Timothy.

V. 19. I will know -- He here shows his fatherly Authority, not the big empty
speech of these vain Boasters, but how much of the power of GOD attends them.

V. 20. For the kingdom of God -- Real Religion, does not consist i^ Words, but
in the power of GOD ruling the Heart.

V. 21. With a red -- That is, with Severity.

V.
It is commonly reported, that there is fornication among you, and such
fornication, as is not even among the heathens, that one should have his
father's wife. And are ye puffed up? is not good: know ye not, that a little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump? even Christ: Therefore let us keep the feast;
leaven, nor with the leaven of wickedness and malignity, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

I wrote to you an epistle,

V. 1. Fornication -- The original Word implies criminal Conversation of any
Kind whatever. His father's wife -- While hi^ Father was alive.

V. 2. Are ye puffed up? Should ye not rather have mourned, have solemnly
humbled yourselves, and at that time of sole ^n Mourning have expelled that
notorious Sinner from your Communion?

V. 3. I verily, as present in spirit -- Having a full (it seems a miraculous)
View of the whole Fact, have already, as if I were actually present, judged him
who has so scandalously done this.

V. 4. And my spirit -- Present with you, with the power of the Lord Jesus
Christ -- To confirm my Sentence.

V. 5. To deliver such an one -- This was the highest Degree of Punishment in
the Christian Church. And we may observe, the passing this Sentence was the Act
of the Apostle, not of the Corinthians: To Satan -- Who was usually permitted
in such Cases, to inflict Pain or S^^kness on the Offender: for the destruction
-- Though slowly and g^nd^^lly, of the f^esh -- Unless prevented by speedy
Repentance.

V. 6. Your glorying -- Either in your Gifts or Prosperity, at such a Time as
this, is not good. Know ye not, that a little leaven -- One Sin or one Siun^r,
leaveneth the whole lump -- Diffuses Guilt and Infection through the whole
Congregation?

V. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven -- Both of Sinners and of Sin, that
ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened -- That is, that being unleavened ye
may be a new lump. Holy unto the LORD. For our passover is slain for us -- The
Jewish Passover, about the Time of which this Epistle was wrote, (chapter v. 11.)
was only a Type of this. What exquisite Skill both here and every where
conducts the Zeal of the ins^^red Writer? How surprising a Transition is here?
And yet how perfectly Natural? The Apostle speaking of the incestuous Criminal,
slides into his darling Topic, a crucified Savior. Who would have expected it
on such an Occasion? Yet when it is thus brought in, who does not see and
admire both the Propriety of the Subject, and the Delicacy of its Introduction?

V. 8. Therefore let us keep the feast -- Let us feed on Him by Faith. Here is
a plain Allusion to the LORD'S Supper, which was instituted in the room of the
Passover; not with the old leaven -- Of Heathenism or Judaism. Malignity is
Stubbornness in Evil. Sincerity and Truth seem to be put here, for the Whole of
true, inward Religion.

V. 9. I wrote to you in a former (...) -- And doubtless both St. Paul and the
other Apostles wrote many Things which are not extant now. Not to converse --
Familiarly; not to contract any Intimacy or Acquaintance with them, more than
is absolutely necessary.

V. 10. But I did not mean, that you should altogether refrain from conversing
with Heathens, though they are guilty in some of these Respects. Covetous,
rapacious, idolaters -- Sinners against themselves, their Neighbor, GOD. For
then ye must go out of the World -- Then all civil Commerce must cease. So that
going out of the world, which some account a Perfection, St. Paul accounts an
utter Absurdity.

V. 11. Who is named a brother -- That is, a Christian, especially if a Member
of the same Congregation; rapacious -- Guilty of Oppression, Extortion, or any
open Injustice No, not to eat with him -- Which is the lowest D^gree of
Familiarity.

V. 12. I speak of Christians only. For what have I to do to judge Heathens?
But ye as well as I, judge those of your own Community.

V. 13. Them that are without, God will judge. The passing Sentence on these he
has reserved to himself. And ye will take away -- that wicked person -- This
properly belongs to you.

VI.
Dare any of you, having a matter against another, refer it to the unjust, and
not to the saints? Know ye not, your brethren. Know ye not that the unjust
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? effeminate,

All things are lawful for me; are for the belly, is not for fornication, but
for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. Genesis ii. 24.
For they two, says he, shall be one flesh. one Spirit.

V. 1. The unjust -- The Heathens. A Christian could expect no Justice from
these. The saints -- Who might easily decide these smaller Differences, in a
private and friendly Manner.

V. 2. Know ye not -- This Expression occurs six Times in this single Chapter.
And that with a peculiar Force. For the Corinthian, knew, and gloried in it:
but they did not practice; that the sa^nts -- (...) After having been judged
themselves, shall jud^e the world -- Shall be Affe^sors, with Christ, in the
Judgment where^n He shall condemn all the Wicked, as well Angels as Men, Mat.
xix. 23, Rev. xx. 4.

V. 4. Them who are of no esteem in the church -- That is, Heathens, who, as
such, could be in no Esteem with the Christians.

V. 5. Is there not one among you, who are such Admirers of Wisdom, that is
wise enough to decide such Causes?

V. 7. Indeed there is a fault, that ye quarrel with each other at all, whether
ye go to Law or no. Why do ye not rather suffer w^ong? -- All Men cannot, or
will not receive this Saying. Many aim only at this, "I will neither do wrong,
nor suffer it." These are honest Heathens, but no Christians.

V. 8. Nay, ye do wrong -- Openly, and defraud -- Privately. O how powerfully
did the Mystery of Iniquity already work!

V. 9. Id^^atry is here placed between Fornication and Adu^t^ry, because they
generally accompanied it Nor the effeminate -- Who ^ive in an easy, indolent
Way, taking up no Cross, enduring no Hardship.

But how is this? These good-natured, harmless People, are ranked with
Idolaters and Sodomites! We may le^rn hence, That we are never secure from the
greatest Sins, till we g^ard against those which are thought the least, nor
indeed, till we think no Sin is little; su^ce every one is a Step toward Hell.

V. 11. And such were some of you. But you are washed -- From those gross
Abominations; nay, and ye are inwardly sanctified, not before, but in
Consequence of your being justified, in the name -- That is, by the Merits of
the Lord Jesus, through which your Sins are forgiven, and by the Spirit of our
God, by whom ye are thus washed and sanctified.

V. 12. All things, which are lawful for you, are lawful for me: but all things
are not always expedient -- Particularly when any Thing would offend my weak
Brother; or w^^n it would enslave my own Soul. For though all things are lawful
for me, yet I will not be ^^ought under the power of any -- So as to be uneasy
when I abstain from it. For if so, then I am under the Power of it.

V. 13. As if he had said, I speak this, chiefly with regard to Mea^: (And
would to GOD all Christians would consider it!) Particularly with regard to
those offered to Idols, and those forbidden in the ^sa'c Law. These, I grant,
are all indifferent, and have their Use; though it is only for a Time; then Meats
and the Organ, which receive them, will altogether moulder into Dust. But the
Case is quite otherwise with Fornication. This is not indifferent, but at all
Tim's evil For the body is for the Lord -- Designed only for his Service: And
the Lord, in an important Sense for the body, being the Savior of this as well
as of the Soul; in Proof of which GOD has already raised Him from the Dead.

V. 17. But he that is joined to the Lord -- By Faith, is one spirit with him
-- And shall he make himself one Flesh with an Harlot?

V. 18. Flee fornication -- All unlawful Commerce with Women, with Speed, with
Abhorrenes, with all your Might. Every sin that a man commits against his
Neighbor, terminates upon an Object out of himself, and does not so
immediately pollute his Body, though it does his Soul: But ^e that comm^tteth
for^^^ation, sin^^th against his own body -- Pollutes, dishonours, and degrades
it to a Level with Brute Beasts.

V. 19. And even your Body is not, strictly speaking, your own. Eve^ this is
the temple of the H^^^ Ghost -- Dedicated to Him, and inhabited by Him. What
the Apostle calls elsewhere the ^mple of God (chapter iii. 16, 17.) and the temple
of the living God (2 Cor. vi. 16.) he here styles the temple of the Holy Ghost;
plainly showing, that the Holy Ghost is the living God.

V. 20. Glorify God with your body and your spirit -- Yield your Bodies and all
their Members, as well as your Souls and all their Faculties, as Instruments of
Righteousness to GOD. Devote and employ all ye have, and all ye are, entirely,
unreservedly, and for ever to his Glory

VII.
It is good for a man, not to touch a woman. to avoid fornication, let every
man have his own wife: and let every woman have her own husband. his own body,
it be by consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to prayer, and may
come together again, lest Satan tempt you through your incontinence.

But to the unmarried and the widows I say,

The married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Mat. v. 32.
That the wife depart not from her husband. But if she depart, put her away.
cases; called; being a bondman? care not for it: but if thou can be made
free, it rather. For he that is called by the Lord, being a bondman, is the
Lord's freeman; and in the like manner, he that is called being free,

Now concerning virgins, it is good for a man to continue as he is. the flesh;
world,

The wife is bound as long as her husband lives;

V. 1. It (...) good for a man -- Who is Master of himself, not to touch a
woman -- That is, not to marry. So great and many are the Advantages of a
single Life.

V. 2. Yet, when it is needful in order to avoid fornication, let every man
have his own wife: His own; for Christianity allows no Polygamy.

V. 3. Let not married Persons fancy, that there is any Perfection in living
with each other, as if they were unmarried. The debt -- This ancient Reading
seems far more natural than the common one.

V. 4. The wife -- the husband -- Let no one forget this, on pretense of
greater Purity.

V. 5. Unless it be by consent, for a time -- That on those specia and solemn
Occasions, ye may entirely give yourselves up to the Exercises of Devotion;
lest -- If ye ^ould long remain separate, Satan tempt you -- To unclean
Thoughts, if not Actions too.

V. 6. But I say this -- Concerning your separating for a Time, and coming
together again. Perhaps he refers also to ver. 2.

V. 7. For I would that all men were herein even as I -- I would that all
Believers who are now unmarried, would remain ^^unchs for the kingdom of
heave^'s sake. St. Paul having tasted the Sweetness of this Liberty, wi^hed
others to enjoy it, as well as himself; but every one has his proper gift from
God -- According to our LORD'S Declaration, All men cannot receive this saying,
save they, the happy Few, to whom it is given, Mat. xix. 11.

V. 8. It is good for them if they remain even as I -- That St. Paul was then
single is certain. And from Acts vii 58 compared with the following Parts of
the History, i^ seems probable, that he always was so. It does not appear, that
this Declaration (any more than ver. 1.) has any Reference at all to a State
of Persecu^ion.

V. 10. Not I -- Only, but the Lord -- Christ -- By his express Command, Mat.
v. 32.

V. 11. But if she depart -- Contrary to this express Prohibition. And let not
the husband put away his wife -- Except for the Cause of Adultery.

V. 12. To the rest -- Who are married to Unbelievers, speak I -- By Revelation
from GOD; though our LORD has not left any Commandment, concerning it. Let him
not put her away -- The Jews indeed were obliged of old to put away their
idolatrous W^^es, ( Ezra 1.^. But their Case was quite different. They were
absolutely forbid to marry idolatrous Women. But the Persons ^ere spoken of
were married, while they were both in a State of Heathenism.

V. 14. For the unbelieving husband hat^ in many Instances been sanctified by
the wife Else your children would have been brought up He thens, whereas (...)
they are Christians. As if he had said, Ye see the Proof of it before your Eyes.

V. 15. A brother or a (...) -- A Christian Man or Woman, is not ins^a^^ -- Is
at full Liberty in such (...). But God has called us to peace -- To live peace
b^y with them, if it be possible.

V. 17. But as God has d^str^uted The (...) Stations of Life, and various
Relations to (...), let him take (...) to dis^^rge his Duty th^re^. The Gos^el
disannu^ (...) we of these: And thus Lordship in all the (...) -- As a Point of
the highest Concern.

V. 19. (...), and uncircumcision is not^in^ Will neither prom^^te (...)
obstruct our Salvation The one Point is, (...) the commandment of God; faith
working by love.

V. 20. Is the calling -- The outward State wherein he is, when (...). Let ^im
not seek to change this, without a clear (...) from Providence.

V. 21. Car^ not for it -- Do not anxiously seek Liberty, but if thou can be
free, use it rather -- Embrace the Opportunity.

V. 22. Is the Lord's freeman -- Is free in this respect. The Greek Word
implies, one that was a Slave, but now is free, is the bondman of Christ --
Not free in this respect, not at liberty to do his own Will.

V. 23. Ye are bought with a price -- Ye belong to GOD, therefore, where it can
be avoided, do not become the bondslaves of men -- Which may expose you to
many Temptations.

V. 24. Therein ab^de with God -- Doing all things as unto GOD, and as in his
immediate Presence. Th^^ who thus ab^de with God, preserve an holy Indifference
with regard to outward Things.

V. 25. Now concerning virgins of either Sex, I have no commandment from the
Lord -- By a particular Revelation Nor was it necessary he should; for the
Apostles wrote nothing which was not divinely inspired. But with this
Difference; sometimes they had a particular Revelation, and a special
Commandment; at other times they wrote from the divine Light which abode with
them, the standing Treasure of the Spirit of GOD. And this also was not their
private Opinion, but a divine Rule of Faith and Practice. As one whom GOD has
made faithful in my apostolic Office; who therefore faithfully deliver what I
receive from Him

V. 26, 27 This is good for the present distress -- While any Church is under
Persecution, for a man to out^une as he is -- Whether married or unmarried St.
Paul does not here urge the present Disiress, as a Reason for Celibacy, any
more than for Marriage; but for a Man's not seeking to alter his State,
whatever it be, but making the best of it.

V. 26, 27 This is good for the present distress -- While any Church is under
Persecution, for a man to cont^une as he is -- Whether married or unmarried St.
Paul does not here urge the present Disiress, as a Reason for Celibacy, any
more than for Marriage; but for a Man's not seeking to alter his State,
whatever it be, but making the best of it.

V. 28. Such will have trouble in the flesh -- Many outward Troubles. But I
spare you -- I speak as little and as tenderly as possible.

V. 29. But this I say, brethren -- With great Confidence: the time of our
Abode here is short. It plainly follows, that even those who have wives, by as
serious, zealous, active, dead to the World, as devoted to GOD, as holy in all
manner of Conversation, as if they had none. By so easy a Transition does the
Apostle slide from every thing else to the one Thing needful; and forgetting
whatever a Temporal, is swallowed up in Eternity.

V. 30. And they that weep, as if they wept not -- Though sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; they that rejoice, as if they rejoiced not -- Tempering their Joy
with godly Fear: they that buy, as if they possessed not -- Knowing themselves
to be only Stewards, not Proprietors.

V. 31. And they that use this world, as not abusing it -- Not seeking
Happiness in it, but in GOD. using every Thing therein only in such a Manner
and Degree as most tends to the Knowledge and Love of GOD: For the whole Scheme
and fashion of this world -- This Marrying, Weeping, Rejoicing, and all the
rest, not only will pass, but now passes away is this Moment flying off like a
Shadow.

V. 32. Now I would have you, for this flying Moment, without carefulness,
without any Encumbrance of your Thoughts. The unmarried man, if he understand
and use the Advantage he enjoys, cares only for the things of the Lord, how he
may please the Lord.

V. 33. But the married cares for the things of the world, (and it is his Duty
so to do, so far as becomes a Christian) how he may please his wife, and
provide all Things needful for her and his Family.

V. 34. There is a difference also between a wife and a virgin -- Whether the
Church be under Persecution or not. The unwarried woman -- If she know and use
her Privilege, cares only for the things of the Lord All her Time, Care, and
Thoughts center in this, How she may be holy both in body and spirit This is
the standing Advantage of a single Life, in all Ages and Nations. But who makes
a suitable Use of it?

V. 35. Not that I may cast a snare upon you -- Who are not able to receive
this Saying; but for your profit -- Who are able, that ^e may resolutely and
perseveringly wait upon the Lord -- The Word translated wait signifies sitting
close by a Person, in a good Posture to hear. So Mary sat at the feet of Jesus,
(Luke x. 39) without distraction -- Without having the Mind drawn any Way from
its Center, from its close Attention to GOD, by any Person, or Thing, or Care,
or Encumbrance whatsoever.

V. 36. But if any Parent think, he should otherwise act indecently, unbecoming
his Character toward his virgin Daughter, if she be above age, (or of full Age)
and need so require, ver. 9. let them marry -- Her Suitor and she.

V. 37. Having no necessity -- Where there is no such Need; but having power
over his own will -- Which would incline him to desire the Increase of his
Family, and the strengthening it by new Relations.

V. 38. Does better -- If there be no Necessity.

V. 39. Only in the Lord -- That is, only let Christians marry Christians: A
standing Direction, and one of the utmost Importance.

V. 40. I also- As well as any of you, have the Spirit of God -- Teaching me
all Things. This does not imply any Doubt; but the strongest Certainty of it,
together with a Reproof of them, for calling it in question. Whoever therefore
would conclude from hence, that St. Paul was not certain he had the Spirit of
Christ, neither understands the true Import of the Words, nor considers how
expressly he lays Claim to the Spirit both in this Epistle (chapter ii. 1^. xiv.
37.) and the other (chapter xiii. 3.) Indeed it may be doubted whether the Word
here and elsewhere translated think, does not always imply the fullest and
strongest Assurance; see chapter x. 12.

VIII.
is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one. For though there be
that are called gods, there is but one God, are all things, and we for him; and
one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. there is not in
all men this knowledge; for some do even until now, with consciousness of the
idol, eat it as sacrificed to the idol, and their conscience, being weak, is
defiled.

But meat commends us not to God; if we eat, are we the better, nor if we eat
not, are we the worse.

V. 1. Now concerning the next Question you proposed, all of us have knowledge
-- A gentle Reproof of their Self-conceit, Knowledge without Love always
puffs up. Love alone edifies -- Builds us up in Holiness

V. 2. If any man think he knows any thing -- A right, unless so far as he is
taught by GOD, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know -- Seeing there is no
true Knowledge without divine Love.

V. 3. He is known -- That is, approved, by him. Psalm i. 6.

V. 4. We know that an idol is nothing -- A mere nominal God, having no
Divinity, Virtue, or Power.

V. 5. For though there be that are called gods -- By the Heathens, both
celestial (as they style them) terrestrial and infernal Deities.

V. 6. Yet to us Christians there is but one God -- This is exclusive, not of
the One Lord, as if he were an inferior Deity; but only of the Idols, to which
the One GOD is opposed; from whom are all things -- By Creation, Providence,
and Grace: and we for him -- The End of all we are, have, and do: and one Lord
-- Equally the Object of Divine Worship: by whom are all things -- Created,
sustained, and governed; and we by him -- Have access to the Father, and all
spiritual Blessings.

V. 7. Some eat, with consciousness of the idol -- That is, fancying it is
something, and that it makes the Meat unlawful to be eaten; and their
conscience being weak -- Not rightly informed, is defiled -- Contracts Guilt by
doing it.

V. 8. But meat commends us not to God -- Neither by eating, nor by
refraining from it. Eating and not eating are in themselves Things merely
indifferent.

V. 10. For if any one see thee who have knowledge -- Whom he believes to have
more Knowledge than himself, and who really have this Knowledge, that an Idol
is nothing -- sitting down to an Entertainment in an idol-temple. The Heathens
frequently made Entertainments in their Temples, on what had been sacrificed to
their Idols. Will not the conscience of him that is weak -- Scrupulous, be
encouraged -- By thy Example, to eat -- Though with a doubting Conscience.

V. 11. And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom
Christ died -- And for whom thou will not lose a Meal's Meat, so far from dying
for him! We see, Christ died, even for them that perish.

V. 12. Ye sin against Christ -- Whose Members they are.

V. 13. If meat -- Of any Kind. Who will follow this Example? What Preacher or
private Christian will abstain from any thing lawful in itself, when it offends
a weak Brother?

IX.
My answer to them who examine me is this. Deuteronomy. xxv. 4.
Thou shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn. ought to be a
partaker of his hope. is it a great matter, if we shall reap your carnal
things? do not we rather? Yet we have not used this power: but we suffer all
things, lest we should give any hindrance to the gospel of Christ. Mat. x. 10.
ordained, that they who preach the gospel, should live of the gospel. it were
better for me to die, than that any man would make this my glorying void. For
if I preach the gospel, yet a dispensation is entrusted to me. is my reward?
that when I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel without charge, that I
abuse not my power in the gospel. gain the Jews: to them that are under the
law, a^ under the law, that I might gain them that are under the law: you. I so
fight, not as one that beats the air. it into subjection, lest by any means,
after having preached to others, I myself should become a reprobate.

V. 1. Am I not free? Am I not an Apostle? -- That is, Have not I the Liberty
of a common Christian? Yea. that of an Apostle? He vindicates his Apostle^ip,
ver. 1 -- 3; his apostolical Liberty, ver. 4 -- 19. Have I not seen Jesus
Christ? -- Without this he could not have been one of those first grand
Witnesses. Are not ye my work in the Lord? -- A full Evidence that GOD has
seat me? And yet some, it seems, objected to his being an Apostle, because he
had not asserted his Privilege, in demanding and receiving such Maintenance
from the Churches, as was due to that Office.

V. 2. Ye are the seal of my apostleship -- Who have received not only Faith by
my Mouth, but all the Gifts of the Spirit by my Hands.

V. 3. My answer to them who examine me -- Concerning my Apostleship, is this
-- Which I have now given.

V. 4. Have we not power -- I and my Fellow Laborers, to eat and to drink --
At the Expense of those among whom we labor?

V. 5. Have we not power to lead about with us a sister, a wife, and to demand
Sustenance for her also? As well as the other apostles, (who therefore it is
plain did this) and Peter? Hence we learn, 1. That St. Peter continued to live
with his Wife, after he became an Apostle; 2. That he had no Rights as an
Apostle, which were not common to St. Paul.

V. 6. To forbear working -- With our Hands.

V. 8. Do I speak as a man? -- Barely on the Authority of human Reason? Does
not GOD also say, in effect, the same thing? The ox that treads out the corn
-- This was the Custom in Judea, and many Eastern Nations: In several of them
it^ retained still. And at this Day, Horses tread out the Corn in some Parts of
Germany.

V. 9. Does God in this Direction take care for oxen only? Has he not a
farther Meaning? And so undoubtedly He has, in all the other Mosaic Laws of
this Kind.

V. 10. He who ploweth ought to plow in hope -- Of reaping. This seems to be a
proverbial Expression; and he that thrasheth in hope -- Ought not to be
disappointed, ought to eat the Fruit of his Labors. And so ought they who
labor in GOD'S Husbandry.

V. 11. Is it a great matter, if we shall reap as much of your carnal things as
is needful for our Sustenance? Do you give us Things of greater Value than
those you receive from us?

V. 12. If others -- Whether true or false Apostles, partake of this power --
Have a right to be maintained, do not we rather, on account of our having
labored so much more? L^st we should give any ^indrance to the gospel -- By
giving an Occasion of Cavil or Reproach.

V. 15. It were better for me to die, than -- To give Occasion to them that
seek Occasion against me, 2 Cor. xi. 12.

V. 17. Willingly -- He seems to mean, without receiving any thing. St. Paul
here speaks in a Manner peculiar to himself. Another might have preached
willingly, and yet have received a Maintenance from the Corinthians. But if he
had received any thing from them, he would have termed it preaching
unwillingly. And so in the next Verse; another might have used that Power
without abusing it. But his own using it at all, he would have termed abusing
it. A dispensation is entrusted to me -- Therefore I dare not refrain.

V. 18. What then is my reward? -- That circumstance in my Conduct, for which I
expect a peculiar Reward from my great Master? That I abuse not -- Make not an
unseasonable Use of my power which I have in preaching the gospel.

V. 19. I made myself the servant of all -- I acted with as self-denying a
Regard to their Interest, and as much Caution not to offend them, as if I had
been literally their Servant, or Slave. Where is the Preacher of the Gospel,
who treads in the same Steps?

V. 20. To the Jews I became as a Jew -- Conforming myself in all Things, to
their Manner of thinking and living, so far as I could with innocence. To them
that are under the law -- Who apprehend themselves to be still bound by the
Mosaic Law, as under the law -- Observing it myself, while I am among them. Not
that he declared this to be necessary, or refused to converse with those who
did not observe it. This was the very Thing which he condemned in St. Peter,
Gal. ii. 14.

V. 21. To them that are without the law -- The Heathens, as without the law --
Neglecting its Ceremonies. Being not without the law to God -- But as much as
ever under its Moral Precepts, under the law to Christ -- And in this Sense all
Christians will be under the law for ever.

V. 22. I became as weak -- As if I had been serupulous too. I became all
things to all men -- Accommodating myself to all, so far as I could consistent
with Truth and Sincerity.

V. 24. Know ye not, that -- In those famous Games, which are kept at the
Istir^us, near your City, they who run in the foot race all runs though but one
receives the prize? -- How much greater Encouragement have you to run? Since
ye may all receive the Prize of your high Calling?

V. 25. And every one that there contendeth, is temperate in all things -- To
an almost incredible Degree; using the most rigorous Self-denial in Food,
Sleep, and every other sen^ual Indulgence A corruptible crown -- A Garland of
Leaves, which must soon wither. The Moderns only have discovered that it is
^pal, to do all this and more for an eternal Crown, than they did for a
corruptible!

V. 26. I so run, not as uncertainly -- I look strait to the Go^l; I (...)
strait toward it. I cast away every Wei^ht, regard not any that stand by. I
fight, not ^s one that becateth the air -- This is a prov^r^ial Expression for
a Man's missing his blow, and spending his Strength, not on his Enemy, but on
empty Air.

V. 27. But I keep under my body -- By all Kinds of Self-denial, and bring it
into subjection -- To my Spirit and to GOD. The Words are strongly figurative,
and signify the Mortification of the body of sin, by an Allusion to the Natural
Bodies of those, who were bruised or subd^ed in Combat. L^st by any means after
having preached -- The Greek Word means, After having discharged the Office of
an Herald (still carrying on the Allusion) whose Office it was, To proclaim the
Conditions, and to display the Prizes. I myself should become a reprobate --
Disapproved by the Judge, and so falling s^ort of the Prize. This single Text
may give as a just Notion of the Scriptural Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation, and clearly shows us, that particular Persons are not in Ho^ly
Writ represented, as elected absolutely and unconditionally to Eternal Life, or
predestined absolutely and unconditionally to Eternal Death: But that
Believers in general are elected, to enjoy the Christian privileges on Earth,
which, if they abuse, those very elect Persons will become reprobate. St. Paul
was certainly an elect Person, if ever there was one. And yet he declares, it
was possible he himself might become a repr^bate. Nay, he actually would have
become such, if he had not thus kept his Body under, even though he had been so
long an elect Person, a Christian, and an Apostle.

X.
Exodus xiii. 21.
under the cloud, and all Chapter xiv. 22.
passed through the sea, Chapter xvi. 15.
all ate the same spiritual meat, Chapter xvii. 6.
all drank the same spiritual drink (for they drank out of the spiritual rock
which followed them; and that rock was Christ) Yet, Numb. xi. 4.
as they desired. Neither be ye idolaters, were some of them, as it is written,
Exodus xxxii. 6.
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Numb. xxv. 1, 9.
some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Numb.
xxi, 4, etc.
some of them also tempted, and were destroyed by serpents. Numb. xiv. 1.36.
Neither murmur ye, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed by the
destroyer. is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above your
ability, but will with the temptation make also a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it. Wherefore, we are all partakers of the one bread. Psalm xxiv.
1.
For the earth is the Lord's, you, This has been sacrificed to an idol, eat
not, for his sake that showed thee, and for conscience sake. Conscience I say,
For if I by grace am a partaker,

V. 1. Now that ye may not become Reprobates, consider how highly s^voured your
Fathers were, who were GOD'S elect and peculiar People, and nevertheless were
rejected by Him. They were all under the cloud, that eminent Token of GOD'S
gracious Presence, which skre^ned them from the Heat of the Sun by Day, and
gave them Light by Night; and all passed through the sea -- GOD opening a Way
through the Midst of the Waters.

V. 2. And were all as it were baptized unto Moses -- Initiated into the
Religion which he taught them, in the cloud and in the sea -- Perhaps sprinkled
here and there with Drops of Water from the Sea or Cloud, by which Baptism
might be the more evidently signified.

V. 3. And all ate the same Manna, termed spiritual meat, as it war typical, 1.
Of Christ and his spiritual Benefits; 2 Of the sacred Bread which we eat at his
Table.

V. 4. And all drank the same spiritual drink (typical of Christ, and of that
Cup which we drink) For they drank out of the spiritual or mysterious rock, the
wonderful Streams of which followed them in their several Journeyings, for many
Years, through the Wilderness. And that rock was a manifest Type of Christ, the
Rock of Eternity, from whom his People derive those Streams of Blessings, which
follow them through all this Wilderness.

V. 5. Yet -- Although they had so many Tokens of the Divine Presence, they
were overthrown -- With the most terrible Marks of his Displeasure.

V. 6. Now these things were our examples -- Showing what we are to expect, if
enjoying the like Benefits, we commit the like Sins. The Benefits are set down
in the same Order, as by Moses in Exodus: The Sins and Punishments in a
different Order: Evil Desire first, as being the Foundation of all; next
Idolatry, ver. 7, 14. then Fornication, which usually accompanied it, ver. 8.
the tempting and murmuring against GOD, in the following Verses. As they
desired -- Flesh, in Contempt of Manna.

V. 7. Neither be ye idolaters -- And so, Neither murmur ye -- (ver. 10) The
other Cautions are given in the First Person: But th^se in the Second. And with
what exquisite Propriety does he vary the Person? It would have been improper
to say, Neither let us be Idolaters; for he was himself in no Dan^er of
Idolatry; nor probably of murmuring against Christ, or the Divine Providence.
To play -- That is, To dance, in Honor of their Idol.

V. 8. And fell in one day three and twenty thousand -- Beside the Princes who
were afterward hanged, and those whom the Judges flow; so that there died in
all four and twenty thousand.

V. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ -- By our Unbelief. St. Paul enumerates five
Benefits, ver. 1 -- 4. of which the fourth and fifth were closely connected
together; and five Sins, the fourth and fifth of which were likewise closely
connected. In speaking of the fifth Benefit, he expressly mentions Christ; and
in speaking of the fourth Sin, he s^ews it was committed against Christ. As
some of them tempted him. This Sin of the People was peculiarly against Christ.
For when they had so long drank of that Rock, yet they murmured for Want of W^.

V. 10. The destroyer -- The destroying Angel.

V. 11. On whom the ends of the ages are come -- The Expression has great Force
All Things meet together, and come to a Crisis, under the last, the
Gospel Dispensation, both Benefits and Dangers, Punishments and Rewards. It
remains, that Christ come as an Avenger and Judge And even these Ends include
various Periods, succeeding each other.

V. 12. The common Translation runs, let him that thinks he stands. But the
Word translated thinks, most certainly strengthens, rather than weakens the
Sense.

V. 13. Common to man -- or, as the Greek Word imports, proportioned to human
Strength. God is faithful -- In giving the Help which he has promised: And he
will with the temptation -- Provide for your Deliverance.

V. 14. Flee from idolatry -- And from all Approaches to it.

V. 16. The cup which we bless -- By setting it apart to a sacred Use, and
solemnly invoking he Blessing of GOD upon it: is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ -- The Means of our partaking of these invaluable Benefits,
which are the Purchase of the blood of Christ. The communion of the body of
Christ -- The Means of our partaking of those Benefits, which were purchased by
the body of Christ -- offered for us.

V. 17. For it is this Communion which makes us all one. We being many are yet,
as it were, but different Parts of one and the same broken bread, which we
receive to unite us in one Body.

V. 18. Consider Israel after the flesh -- Christians are the spiritual Israel
of GOD. Are not they who eat of the sacrifices, partakers of the altar? -- Is
not this an Act of Communion with that GOD to whom they are offered? And is not
the Case the same with those who eat of the Sacrifices which have been offered
to Idols?

V. 19. What say I then? -- Do I in saying this allow, That an idol is any
thing Divine? I aver, on the contrary, That what the Heathens sacrifice, they
sacrifice to devils. Such in reality are the Gods of the Heathens, and with
such only can you hold Communion in those Sacrifices.

V. 21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils -- You
cannot have Communion with both.

V. 22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy -- By thus caressing his Rivals? Are
we stronger than he? -- Are we able to resist, or to bear his Wrath?

V. 23. Supposing this were lawful in itself, yet is it not expedient; it is
not edifying to my Neighbor.

V. 24. His own only, but another's welfare also.

V. 25. The Apostle now applies this Principle to the Point in Question. Asking
no questions -- Whether it has been sacrificed or not?

V. 26. For GOD, who is the Creator, Proprietor, and Disposer of the Earth, and
all that is therein, has given the Produce of it to the Children of Men, to be
used without Scruple.

V. 28. For his sake that showed thee, and for conscience sake -- That is, for
the Sake of his weak Conscience, lest it should be wounded.

V. 29. Conscience I say, not thy own -- I speak of his Conscience, not thine.
For why is my liberty judged by another's conscience? -- Another's Conference
is not the Standard of mine, nor is another's Persuasion the Measure of my
Liberty.

V. 30. If I by grace am a partaker -- If I thankfully use the common Blessings
of GOD.

V. 31. Therefore -- To close the present Point with a General Rule, applicable
not ^nly in this, but in all Cases, Whatsoever ^e do -- In all Things
whatsoever, whether o^ a religious or civil Nature, in all the common as well
as sacred Actions of Life, keep ^h^ G^^ry of GOD in View, and steadily pursue
in all this One End of your Being, the planting or advancing, the vital
Knowledge and Love of GOD, first in your own Soul, then in all Mankind.

V. 32. Give no offense -- If, and as far as, it is possible.

V. 33. Even as I, as much as lioth in me, please all men.

XI.
Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ.

Now I praise you, them to you. is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
Every man praying or prophesying with his head covered, dishonors his head.
her head uncovered, dishonors her head; for it is the same as if she were
shaved. his head covered, being the image and glory of God; but the woman is
the glory of the man. also the woman ought to have a veil upon her head, And as
the woman was of the man, is by the woman; but all things are of God. Judge of
yourselves:

But in this which I declare, you not, that ye come together not for the
better, but for the worse. (and I partly believe it. another his own supper,
and one is hungry, another drinks largely. you not. And when he had given
thanks, it, and said, This is my body, which is broken for you; do this in
remembrance of me. he took the cup after he had supped, saying, This cup is the
new covenant in my blood: do this as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of
me. For as often as ye eat this bread, are sick and weak among you, judge
ourselves,

V. 2. I praise you -- The greater Part of you.

V. 3. I would have you know -- He does not seem to have given them any Order
before concerning this The head of every man, particularly every Believer, is
Christ, and the head of Christ is God. Christ as He is Mediator, acts in all
Things subordinately to his Father. But we can no more infer, That they are not
of the same Divine Nature, because GOD is said to be the Head of Christ, than
that Man and Woman are not of the same Human Nature, because the Man is said to
be the Head of the Woman.

V. 4. Every man praying or prophesying -- Speaking by the immediate Power of
GOD, with his head -- And Face covered eith^r with a Veil or with long Hair,
dishonors his head -- St. Paul seems to mean, As in these Eastern Nations,
veiling the Head is a Badge of Subjection, so a Man who prays or prophesies
with a Veil on his Head, reflects a Dishonor on Christ, whose Representative
he is.

V. 5. But every woman, who under an immediate impulse of the Spirit (for then
only was a Woman suffered to speak in the Church) prays or prophesies without a
Veil on her Face, as it were disclaims Subjection, and reflects Dishonor on
Man, her Head. For it is the same, in effect, as if she cut her Hair short, and
wore it in the distinguishing Form of the Men. In those Ages, Men wore their
Hair exceeding short, as appears from the ancient Statues and Pictures.

V. 6. Therefore if a woman is not covered -- If she will throw off the Badge
of Subjection, let her appear with her Hair cut like a Man's: But if it be
shameful for a woman to appear thus in Public, especially in a religious
Assembly, let her for the same Reason, keep on her Veil.

V. 7. A man indeed ought not to veil his Head, because he is the image of God,
in the Dominion he bears over the Creation, representing the Supreme Dominion
of GOD, which is his Glory. But the woman is only Matter of glory to the Man,
who has a becoming Dominion over her. Therefore she ought not to appear, but
with her Head veiled, as a tacit Acknowledgment of it.

V. 8. The man is not -- In the first Production of Nature.

V. 10. For this cause also a woman oright to be veiled in the public
Assemblies, because of the angels who attend there, and before whom they should
be careful not to do any Thing indecent or irregular.

V. 11. Nevertheless in the Lord Jesus, there is neither male nor female --
Neither is excluded; neither is preferred before the other in his kingdom.

V. 12. And as the woman was at first taken out of the man, so also the man is
now in the ordinary Course of Nature by the woman. But all things are of God,
the Man, the Woman, and their Dependence on each other.

V. 13. Judge of yourselves -- For what Need of more Arguments in so plain a
Case? Is it decent for a woman to pray to God, the Most High, with that bold
and undaunted Air, which the must have, when, contrary to the universal Custom,
she appears in public with her Head uncovered?

V. 14. For a man to have long hair, carefully adjusted, is such a Mark of
Effeminacy as is a disgrace to him.

V. 15. Given her -- Originally, before the Arts of Dress were in Being.

V. 16. We have no such custom here, nor any of the other churches of God --
The several Churches that were in the Apostles Time, had different Customs, in
Things that were not essential; and that, under one and the same Apostle, as
Circumstances, in different Places, made it convenient. And in all Things
merely indifferent, the Custom of each Place, was of sufficient Weight to
determine prudent and peaceable Men. Yet even this cannot overruled a
scrupulous Conscience, which really doubts whether the Thing be indifferent or
no. But those who are referred to here by the Apostle, were contentious, not
conscientious, Persons.

V. 18. In the church -- In the public Assembly. I hear there are schisms among
you, and I partly believe it -- That is, I believe it of some of you. It is
plain, that by Schisms is not meant any Separation from the Church, but
uncharitable Divisions in it. For the Corinthians continued to be one Church,
and not withstanding (...) their Strife and Contention, there was no Separation
of any one Party from therest, with regard to External Communion. And it is in
the same Sense that the Word is used. chapter 1.10. and chapter xii. 25. which are the
only Places in the New Testament beside this, where Church-Schisms are
mentioned. Therefore the indulging any Temper contrary to this tender Care of
each other, is the true scriptural Schism. This is therefore a quite different
Thing from that orderly Separation from corrupt Churches, which later Ages have
stigmatized as Schism; and have made a Pretense for the vilest Cruelties,
Oppressions, and Murders, that have troubled the Christian World. Both Heresies
and Schisms are here mentioned in very near the same Sense; unless by Schisms
be meant rather those inward Animosities which occasion Heresies; that is,
outward Divisions or Parties. So that whilst one said, I am of Paul, another, I
am of Apollos, this implied both Schism and Heresy. So wonderfully have later
Ages distorted the Word Heresy and Schism from their scriptural Meaning. Heresy
is not, in all the Bible, taken for "an Error in Fundamentals," or in any thing
else; nor Schism, for any Separation from the outward Communion of others.
Therefore, both Heresy and Schism, in the modern Sense of the Words, are Sins
that the Scripture knows nothing of; but were invented merely to deprive
Mankind of the Benefit of private Judgment, and Liberty of Conscience.

V. 19. There must be heresies -- Divisions, among you -- In the ordinary
Course of Things; and GOD permits them, that it may appear, who among you are,
and who are not, upright of Heart.

V. 20. Therefore -- That is, in consequence of those Schism, it is not eating
the Lord's supper -- That solemn Memorial of his Death, but quite another Thing.

V. 21. For in eating what ye call the LORD'S Supper, instead of all partaking
of one Bread, each Person brings his own Supper, and eats it, without staying
for the rest. And hereby the Poor, who cannot provide for themselves, have
nothing, while the Rich eat and drink to the full. Just as the Heathens use to
do, at the Feasts on their Sacrifices.

V. 22. Have ye (...) houses to eat and drink your common Meals in! -- Or de ye
despise the church of God? -- Of which the Poor are both the larger and the
better Part. Do ye act thus, in designed Contempt of them?

V. 23. I received -- By an immediate Revelation.

V. 24. This is my body which is broken for you -- That is, this broken Bread
is the Sign of my Body, which is even now to be pierced and wonnded for your
Iniquities. Take then and eat of this Bread, in an humble, thankful,
obediential Remembrance of my dying Love; of the Extremity of my Sufferings on
your Behalf, of the Blessings I have thereby procured for you, and of the
Obligations to Love and Duty, which I have by all this laid upon you.

V. 25. After supper -- Therefore ye ought not to confound This with a common
Meal. Do this in remembrance of me -- The ancient Sacrifices were in
Remembrance of Sin. This Sacrifice once offored is still represented in
Remembrance of the Remission of Sins.

V. 26. Ye show forth the Lord's death -- Ye proclaim, as it were, and openly
avow it, to GOD and to all the World, till he come -- In Glory.

V. 27. Whosoever shall eat this bread unworthily -- That is, in an unworthy,
irreverent Manner, without regarding either Him that appointed it, or the
Design of its Appointment, shall be guilty of profuning that which represents
the body and blood of the Lord.

V. 28. But let a man examine himself -- Whether he know the Nature and the
Design of the Institution, and whether it be his own Desire and Purpose,
thoroughly to comply therewith.

V. 29. For he that eats and drinks so unworthily as those Corinthians did,
eats and drinks judgment to himself -- Temporal Judgments of various Kinds
(ver. 30.) not distinguishing the sacred Tokens of the Lord's body -- From his
common Food.

V. 30. For this cause -- Which they had not observed, many sleep -- In Death.

V. 31. If we would judge ourselves -- As to our knowledge, and the Design with
which we approach the LORD'S Table, we should not be thus judged -- That is,
punished by GOD.

V. 32. When we are thus judged, it is with this merciful Design, that we may
not be finally condemned with the world.

V. 33. The rest -- The other Circumstances relating to the LORD'S Supper.

XII.
gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant. as no one speaking by the
Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed; so no one can say, Jesus is the Lord,
but by the Holy Ghost. but the same Spirit.

But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to each, diverse kinds of tongues;
to another the interpretation of tongues.

For as the Body is one, is Christ. For we are all baptized by one Spirit into
one body, whether we are Jews or Gentiles, whether slaves or freemen; and we
have all drank of one Spirit. were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole
were hearing, were the smelling? But now has God set the members, every one in
the body, as it has pleased him. were the body? are indeed many members,
members of the body, which appear to be weaker, are much more necessary. parts
of the body, these we surround with more abundant honor, and our uncomely
parts have more abundant comeliness. parts have no need; but God has tempered
the body together, giving more abundant honor to that which lacked: that the
members might have the same care for each other:

And God has set in the church, different kinds of tongues. Are all Apostles?
Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Have all miraculous powers?

V. 1. Now concerning spiritual gifts -- The abundance of the^^ in the Churches
of Greece strongly refuted the idle Learning of the Greek Philosophers. But the
Corinthians did not use them wisely, which occasioned St. Paul's writing
concerning them. He describes, 1. The Unity of the Body, ver. 1-27. 2. The
Variety of Members and Offices, ver. 27-30. 3. The Way of exercising Gifts
rightly, namely, by Love, ver. 31. chapter xiii. throughout: and adds, 4. A
Comparison of several Gifts with each other, in the 14th Chapter.

V. 2. Ye were heathens -- Therefore whatever Gifts ye have received, it is
from the free Grace of GOD, carried away -- By a blind Credulity, after dumb
idols -- The blind to the dumb: Idols of Wood and S^one, unable to speak
themselves, and much more to open your Mouths, as GOD has done; as ye were led
-- By the Subtlety of your Priests.

V. 3. Therefore -- Since the Heathen Idols cannot speak themselves, much less
give spiritual Gifts to others, these must necessarily be among Christians
only: As no one speaking by the spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed -- That
is, as none who does this (which all the Jews and Heathens did) speaks by the
Spirit of God, is actuated by that Spirit, so as to speak with Tongues, heal
Diseases, or cast ont Devils; so no one can say, Jesus is the Lord -- None can
receive Him as such, (for in the Scripture Language, to say, or to believe,
implies an experimental Assurance) but by the Holy Ghost. The Sum is, None have
the Holy Spirit but Christians: All Christians have this Spirit.

V. 4. There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit -- Diverse Streams,
but all from one Fountain. This Verse speaks of the Holy Ghost, the next of
Christ, the 6th of GOD the Father. The Apostle treats of the Spirit, ver. 7,
etc. of Christ, ver. 12. etc. of GOD, ver. (...), etc.

V. 5. Administrations -- Offices. But the same Lord appoints them all.

V. 6. Operations -- Effects produced. This Word is of a larger Extent than
either of the former. But it is the same God who works all these Effects in
all the Persons concerned.

V. 7. The manifestation -- The Gift whereby the Spirit manifests itself; is
given to each for the Profit of the whole Body.

V. 8. The word of wisdom -- A Power of understanding and explaining the
manifold Wisdom of GOD in the grand Scheme of Gospel-Salvation. The word of
knowledge -- Perhaps an extraordinary Ability to understand and explain the Old
Testament Types and Prophecies.

V. 9. Faith may here mean, an extraordinary Trust in GOD under the most
difficult or dangerous Circumstances. The gift of healing need not he wholly
confined to the healing Diseases with a Word or a Touch. It may exert itself
also, though in a lower Degree, where natural Remedies are applied. And it may
often be this, not superior Skill. which makes some Physicians more successful
than others. And thus it may be with regard to other Gists likewise. As after
the Golden Shields were lost, the King of Judah put brazen in their Place, so
after the pure Gifts were lost, the Power of GOD exerts itself in a more covert
Manner, under human Studies and Helps: and that the more plentifully, according
as there is the more room given for it.

V. 10. The working of other miracles -- Prophecy -- Foretelling Things to
come; the discerning -- Whether Men be of an upright Spirit or no. Whether they
have natural or supernatural Gifts for Offices in the Church. And whether they
who profess to speak by Inspiration, speak from a divine, a^natural, or a
diabolical Spirit.

V. 11. As he wills The Greek Word does not so much imply arbitrary Pleasure,
as a Determination founded on wise Counsel.

V. 12. So is Christ -- That is, the Body of Christ, the Church.

V. 13. For by that one Spirit which we received in Baptism, we are all united
in one Body, whether Jews or Ge^s -- Who are at the greatest Distance from each
other by Nature; whether slaves or freemen -- Who are at the greatest Distance
by Law and Custom: We have all drank of one Spirit -- In that Cup received by
Faith, we all imbibed one Spirit, who first inspired and still preserves the
Life of GOD in our Souls.

V. 15. The foot is elegantly introduced, as speaking of the hand, the car of
the eye, each of a Part that has some Resemblance to it. So among Men, each is
apt to compare himself with those whose Gifts someway resemble his own, rather
than with those who are at a Distance, either above or beneath him. Is it
theresure not of the body (...) Is the Inference good? Perhaps the foot may
represent private Christians; the hand Officers in the Church; the eye
Teachers; the ear Hearers.

V. 16. The ear -- A less noble Part, the eye -- The most noble.

V. 18. As it has pleased him -- With the most exquisite Wisdom and Goodness.

V. 20. But one body -- And it is a necessary Consequence of this Unity, that
the several Members need one another.

V. 21. Nor the head -- The highest Part of all, to the foot -- The very lowest.

V. 22. The members which appear to be weaker -- Being of a more delicate and
tender Structure. Perhaps the Brains and Bowels; or the Veins, Arteries, and
other minute Channels in the Body.

V. 23. We surround with more abundant honor -- By so carefully covering them;
more abundant comeliness -- By the help of Dress.

V. 24. Giving more abundant honor to that which lacked. -- As being cared for
and served by the noblest Parts.

V. 27. Now ye -- Corinthians, are the body and members of Christ: Part of
them, I mean, not the whole Body.

V. 28. First, apostles -- Who plant the Gospel in the Heathen Nations:
Secondly, prophets -- Who either foretell Things to come, or speak by
extraordinary Inspiration, for the Edification of the Church: Thirdly,
teachers, who precede even those that work miracles. Under Prophets and
Teachers, are comprised Evangelists and Pasters, (Ephesians iv. 11.) helps,
governments -- It does not appear that these mean distinct Offices. Rather, any
Persons might be called Helps, from a peculiar Dexterity in helping the
distressed, and Governments, from a peculiar Talent for governing or presiding
in Assemblies.

V. 31. Ye covet earnestly the best gifts -- And they are worth your Purshit,
though but few of you can attain them. But there is a far more excellent Gift
than all these: And one which all may, yes must attain, or perish.

XIII.
at sounding brass, and is kind; love envieth not; love acts not rashly, is
not puffed up: Rejoiceth not at iniquity, there be prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, part,
is love.

Chapter xiii. The Necessity of Love is shown ver. 1-3. The Nature and Properties,
ver 4-7 The Duration of it, ver. 8-13.

V. 1. Though I speak with all the tongues which are upon Earth, and with the
Eloquence of an Angel, and have not love -- The Love of GOD, and of all Mankind
for his Sake, I am no better before GOD, then the sounding Instruments of
brass, used in the worship of some of the Heathen Gods. Or a tinkling cymbal --
This was made of two Pieces of hollow Brass, which being struck together, made
a Tinkling, out with very little Variety of Sound

V. 2. And though I have the gift of prophecy -- Of foretelling future Events,
and understanding all the mysteries both of GOD's Word and Providence, and all
knowledge of Things divine and human, that ever any Mortal attained to: And
though I have the highest Degree of Miracle-working faith, and have not this
love, I am nothing.

V. 3. And though I deliberately, Piece by Piece, give all my goods to feed the
poor, yea, though I deliver up my body to be burned, rather than I would
renounce my Religion, and have not the Love hereafter described, it profits
me nothing. Without this, whatever I speak, whatever I have, whatever I know,
whatever I do, whatever I suffer, is nothing.

V. 4. The Love of GOD, and of our Neighbor for GOD's Sake, is patient toward
all Men. It suffers all the Weakness, Ignorance, Errors, and Infirmities of the
Children of GOD: All the Malice and Wickedness of the Children of the World:
And all this, not only for a Time, but to the End. And in every Step toward
overcoming Evil with Good, it is kind; soft, mild, benign It inspires the
Sufferer at once with the most amiable Sweetness, and the most fervent and
tender Affection Love acts not rashly Does not hastily condemn anyone; never
passes a severe Sentence, on a slight or sudden View of Things. Nor does it
ever act or behave in a violent, headstrong, or precipitate Manner. Is not
puffed up -- Yea, humbles the Soul to the Dust.

V. 5. It does not behave indecently -- Is not rude, or willingly offensive to
any. It renders to all their due, Suitable to Time, Person, and all other
Circumstances. Seeking not her own -- Eas^, Pleasure, Honor, or temporal
Advantage. Nay, sometimes the Lover of Mankind seeks not, in some Sense, even
his own spiritual Advantage: Does not think of himself, so long as a Zeal for
the Glory of GOD and the Souls of Men swallows him up. But though he is all on
Fire for these Ends, yet he is not provoked to Sharpness or Unkindness toward
any one. Outward Provocations indeed will frequently occur. But he triumphs
over all. Love thinks no evil -- Indeed it cannot but see and hear evil
Things, and know that they are so. But it does not willingly think evil of any;
neither infer Evil, where it does not appear. It tears up, Root and Branch, all
imagining of what we have not Proof. It casts out all Jealousies, all evil
Surmises, all Readiness to believe Evil.

V. 6. Rejoiceth not in iniquity -- Yea, weeps at either the Sin or Folly of
even an Enemy, takes no Pleasure in hearing or in repeating it, but desires it
may be forgotten forever. But rejoiceth in the truth -- Bringing forth its
proper Fruit, Holiness of Heart and Life. Good in general is its Glory and Joy,
wherever diffused in all the World.

V. 7. Love covers all things -- Whatever Evil the Lover of Mankind sees,
hears, or knows of any one, he mentions it to none; it never goes out of his
Lips, unless where absolute Duty constrains to speak. Believes all things --
Puts the most favorable Construction on every thing; and is ever ready to
believe whatever may tend to the Advantage of any one's Character. And when
item no longer believe well, it hopes whatever may excuse or extenuate the
Fault which cannot be denied. Where it cannot even excuse, it hopes GOD will at
length give Repentance unto life. Meantime it endures all things -- Whatever
the Injustice, the Malice, the Cruelty of Men can inflict. He can not only do,
but likewise suffer all Things, through Christ who strengthens him.

V. 8. Love never fails -- It accompanies to, and adorns us in Eternity; it
prepares us for, and constitutes Heaven; but whether there be prophecies, they
shall fail. -- When all Things are fulfilled, and GOD is all in all: Whether
there be tongues, they shall cease -- One Language shall prevail among all the
Inhabitants of Heaven, and the low and imperfect Languages of Earth be
forgotten. The Knowledge likewise which we now so eagerly pursue, shall then
vanish away. As Starlight is lost in that of the Midday Sun, so our present
Knowledge in the Light of Eternity.

V. 9. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part -- The wisest of Men have
here but short, narrow, imperfect Conceptions, even of the Things round about
them, and much more of the deep Things of GOD. And even the Prophecies which
Men deliver from GOD are far from taking in the whole of future Events, or of
that Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD which is treasured up in the Scripture
Revelation.

V. 10. But when that which is perfect is come -- At Death and in the Last Day,
that which is in part shall vanish away -- Both that poor, low, imperfect,
glimmering Light, which is all the Knowledge we now can attain to: And these
slow and unsatisfactory Methods of attaining, as well as of imparting it to
others.

V. 11. In our present State we are mere Infants in Point of Knowledge,
compared to what we shall be hereafter. I put away childish things -- Of my own
Accord, willingly, without Trouble.

V. 12. Now we see even the Things that surround us, but by means of a glass or
Miror, which reflects only their imperfect Forms, in a dim, faint, obscure
Manner; so that our Thoughts about them are puzzling and intricate, and every
Thing is a kind of Riddle to us. But then we shall see, not a faint Reflection,
but the Objects themselves face to face -- Distinctly. Now I know but in part
-- Even when GOD Himself reveals Things to me, great Part of them is still kept
under the Veil. But then shall I know, even as also I am known -- In a clear,
full, comprehensive Manner; in some measure like GOD, who penetrates the Center
of every Object, and sees at one Glance through my Soul and all Things.

V. 13. Faith, Hope, Love, are the Sum of Perfection on Earth: Love alone is
the Sum of Perfection in Heaven.

XIV.
gifts; but especially that ye may prophesy. unknown tongue, speaks not to
men, but to God; for no one understands him, though by the Spirit he speaks
mysteries: unknown tongue, edifieth himself; but he that prophesies, is
greater than he that speaks with tongues, unless he interpret, that the
church may receive edification. in them, to the edifying of the church. unknown
tongue, unknown tongue, my Spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful.
my duty? I will pray with the Spirit; but I will pray with the understanding
also; I will sing with the Spirit; but I will sing with the understanding also.
unknown tongue. Isaiah xxviii. 11.
in foreign tongues and with foreign lips will I speak to this people; and
neither so will they hear me, says the Lord. is not for unbelievers, unknown
tongues, and there come in ignorant persons, or unbelievers, will they not say,
that ye are mad? Whereas if all prophesy, his face, he will worship God, and
declare that God is among you of a truth.

What a thing is it, unknown tongue, let it be by two or three at most, and
that by course, let one interpret. But if there be no interpreter, any thing be
revealed to another that sits by, the author of confusion, but of peace, as
in all the churches of the saints. Genesis iii. 16.
the law also says. And if they desire to learn any thing, let them ask their
own husbands at home: for it is indecent for a woman to speak in the assembly.

V. 1. Follow after love -- With Zeal, Vigor, Courage, Patience; else you can
neither attain nor keep it. And in their Place, as subservent to this, desire
spiritual gifts: but officially, that ye may prophesy. The Word here does not
mean foretelling Things to come; but rather opening and applying the Scripture.

V. 2. He that speaks in an unknown tongue, speaks, in effect, not to men,
but to God, who alone understands him.

V. 4. Edifi^th himself only, on the most favorable Supposition; the church --
The whole Congregation.

V. 5. Greater -- That is, more useful. By this alone are we to estimate all
our Gifts and Talents.

V. 6. Revelation -- Of some Gospel-Mystery, Knowledge-Explaining the an^en^
Types and Prophecies. Propriety -- Foreteling same future Event. Doctrine To
regulate your Tempers and Lives. Perhaps this may be the S^nse of these obscure
Words.

V. 7. How shall it be known what is piped or harped? -- What Masie can be
made, or what End answered?

V. 8. Who will prepare himself for the lattle? -- Unless he understand what
the Trumpet sounds? Suppose, a Retreat, or a March?

V. 9. Unless ^e utter by the tongue -- Which is miraculously given you, ^ords
easy to be understood -- By your Hearers, ye will speak to the air (a
prov^^bial Expression) will utterly lose your Labor.

V. 11. I shall be (...) to him -- Shall seem to talk unintelligible Gibberish.

V. 13. That he may be able to interpret -- Which was a distinct Gift.

V. 14. If I pray in an unknown tongue -- The Apostle (as he did at the 6th
Verse) transfers it to himself, my Spirit prays, by the Power of the Spirit,
I understand the Words myself, but my understanding is unfruitful -- The
Knowledge I have is no Benefit to others.

V. 15. I will pray with the Spirit, but I will pray with the understanding
also -- I will use my own Understanding, as well as the Power of the Spirit. I
will not act so absurdly, as to utter in a Congregation, what can edify none
but myself.

V. 16. Otherwise, how shall he that fills the place of a private person --
That is, any private Hearer, say Amen -- Assenting and confirming your Words,
as it was even then usual for the whole Congregation (...) do.

V. 19. With my understanding -- In a rational Manner; so as not only to
understand myself, but to be understood by others.

V. 20. Be not children in understanding -- This is an admirable Stroke of true
Oratory! to bring down the Height of their Spirits, by representing that
wherein they prided themselves most, as mere Folly and Childishness. In
wickedness be ye infants -- Have all the Innocence of that tender Age, but in
understanding be ye grown men -- Knowing Religion was not designed to destroy
any of our natural Faculties, but to exalt and improve them, our Reason in
particular.

V. 21. It is written in the law -- The Word here (as frequently) means the old
Testament. In foreign tongues will I speak to this people -- And so He did. He
spoke terribly to them by the Babylonians, when they had set at naught what. He
had spoken by the Prophets, who used their own Language. These Words received a
farther Accomplishment on the Day of Pentecost.

V. 22. Tongues are intended for a sign to unbelievers -- To engage their
Attention, and convince them the Message is of GOD. Whereas Prophecy is not so
much for unbelievers, as for the Confirmation of them that already believe.

V. 23. Yet sometimes Prophecy is of more Use even to Unbeliever^ than speaking
with Tongues. For Instance: if the whole church be met together -- On some
extraordinary Occasion. It is probable, in so large a City, they ordinarily met
in several Places: And there come in ignorant persons -- Men of Learning might
have understood the Tongues in which they spoke. It is observable St. Paul says
here ignorant persons or unbelievers; but in the next Verse, an unbeliever or
an ignorant person. Several bad Men met together, hinder each other by evil
Discourse. Single Persons are more easily gained.

V. 24. He is convicted by all -- Who speak in their Turns, and speak to the
Heart of the Hearers: he is judged by all -- Every one says something to which
his Conscience bears Witness.

V. 25. The secrets of his heart are made manifest -- Laid open, clearly
described; in a Manner which to him is most astonishing and utterly
unaccountable. How many Instances of it are seen at this Day? So does GOD still
point his Word.

V. 26. What a thing is it, brethren -- This was another Disorder among them.
Every one has a psalm -- That is, at the same Time one begins to sing at salm;
another to deliver a doctrine; another to speak in an unknown tongue; another
to declare what has been revealed to him, another to interpret what the former
is speaking^ Every one probably gathering a little Company about him, just as
they did in the Schools of the Philosophers. Let all be done to edification --
So as to profit the Hearers.

V. 27. By two or three at most -- Let not above two or three speak at one
meeting; and that by course -- That is, one after another; and let one
interpret -- Either himself (ver. 13) or (if he have not the Gift) some other,
into the vulgar Tongue. It seems, the Gift of Tongues was an instantaneous
Knowledge of a Tongue till then unknown, which he that received it, could
afterward speak when he thought fit, without any new Miracle.

V. 28. Let him speak that Tongue, if he find it profitable to himself in his
private Devotions.

V. 29. Let two or three of the prophets (not more, at one Meeting) speak, one
after another, expounding the Scripture.

V. 31. All -- Who have that Gift, that all may learn, both by speaking and by
hearing.

V. 32. For the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets -- But what
Enthusiast considers this? The Impulses of the Holy Spirit, even in Men really
inspired, so suit themselves to their rational Faculties, as not to divest them
of the Government of themselves, like the Heathen Priests under their
diabolical Possession. Evil Spirits threw their Prophets into such ungovernable
Ecstasies, as forced them to speak and act like Madmen But the Spirit of GOD
left his Prophets the clear Use of their Judgment, when and how long it was sit
for them to speak, and never hurried them into any Improprieties, either as to
the Matter, Manner, or Time of their speaking.

V. 34. Let your women be silent in the churches -- Unless they are under an
Extraordinary Impulse of the Spirit. For in other Cases, it is not permitted
them to speak -- By Way of teaching in public Assemblies; but to be in
subjection -- To the Man, whose proper Office it (...) to lead and to instruct
the Congregation.

V. 35. And even if they desire to learn any thing, still they are not to speak
in public, but to ask their own husbands at home. That is the Place, and those
the Persons to enquire of.

V. 36. Are ye of Corinth either the first or the only Christians? If not,
conform herein to the Custom of all the Churches.

V. 37. Or spiritual -- Endowed with an extraordinary Gift of the Spirit: Let
him prove it, by acknowledging, that I now write by the Spirit.

V. 38. Let him be ignorant -- Be it at his own Peril.

V. 39. Therefore -- To sum up the whole.

V. 40. Decently -- By every Individual: in order -- By the whole Church.

XV.
Moreover, brethren, I declare to you the gospel which I preached to you, which
also ye received, Isaiah liii. 8, 9
according to the scriptures, Psalm xvi. 10.
according to the scriptures: And that he was seen by Cephas, part remain until
now, but some are fallen asleep. After this he was seen by James, was with me.
is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. not, is vain; ye are still
in your sins. came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. comes
the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father,
when he shall have abolished all rule and all authority and power. Psalm cx. i.
till he has put all enemies under his feet. that is destroyed is death. Psalm
viii. 7.
For he has put all things under his feet. him, it is manifest that he who did
put all things under him, is excepted. be all in all. this to your shame.

But some one will say, corn: But God gives it a body as it has pleased him,
and to each of the seeds, is not the same flesh; but there is one kind of flesh
of men, another of beasts, another of birds, another of fishes. There are also
heavenly bodies, and there are earthly bodies: but the glory of the heavenly is
one, There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another
glory of the stars: and one star differs from another star in glory. is the
resurrection of the dead: it is sown in corruption, Genesis ii. 7.
The first Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam is a quickening Spirit.
Yet the spiritual body was not first, was from the earth, earthy; the second
man is the Lord from heaven. was the earthy, such are they also that are
earthy, and as was the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.

But this I say, Isaiah xxv. 8.
Death is swallowed up in victory. Hos. xiii. 14.
O Death, where is thy sting? is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and
the strength of sin is the law. be to God, who has given us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

V. 2. Ye are saved, if ye hold fast -- Your Salvation is begun, and will be
perfected, if ye continue in the Faith: Unless ye have believed in vain --
Unless indeed your Faith was only a Delusion.

V. 3. I received -- From Christ Himself. It was not a Fiction of my own.

V. 4. According to the Scriptures -- He proves it first from Scripture, then
from the Testimony of a Cloud of Witnesses.

V. 5. By the twelve -- This was their standing Appellation: But their full
Number was not then present.

V. 6. Above five hundred -- Probably in Galilee: A glorious and incontestable
Proof! The greater part remain alive.

V. 7. Then by all the apostles -- The twelve were mentioned ver. 5. This Title
here therefore seems to include the Seventy; if not all those likewise whom GOD
afterward sent to plant the Gospel in Heathen Nations.

V. 8. An untimely birth -- It was impossible to abase himself more, than he
does by this single Appellation. As an abortion is not worthy the Name of a
Man, so he affirms himself to be not worthy the Name of an Apostle.

V. 9. I persecuted the church -- True Believers are humbled all their Lives,
even for the Sins they committed before they believed.

V. 10. I labored more than they all -- That is, more than any of them, from a
deep Sense of the peculiar Love GOD had shown me. Yet to speak more properly,
it is not I, but the Grace of God that is with me. This it is which at first
qualified me for the Work, and still excites me to Zeal and Diligence in it.

V. 11. Whether I or they, so we preach -- All of us speak the same Thing.

V. 12. How say some -- Who probably had been Heathen Philosophers.

V. 13. If there be no resurrection -- If it be a Thing flatly impossible.

V. 14. Then is our preaching -- From a Commission supposed to be given after
the Resurrection, vain -- Without any real Foundation.

V. 15. If the dead rise not -- If the very Notion of a Resurrection, be, as
they say, absurd and impossible.

V. 17. Ye are still in your sins -- That is under the Guilt of them. So that
there needed something more than Reformation, (which was plainly wrought) in
order to their being delivered from the Guilt of Sin: Even that Atonement, the
Sufficiency of which GOD attested, by raising our great Surety from the Grave.

V. 18. They who sleep in Christ -- Who have died for Him, or believing in Him,
are perished -- Have lost their Life and Being together.

V. 19. If in this life only we have hope -- If we look for nothing beyond the
Grave. But if we have a Divine Evidence of Things not seen, if we have an Hope
full of Immortality, if we now taste of the Powers of the world to come, and
see the Crown that fades not away: Then notwithstanding all our present
Trials, we are more happy than all Men.

V. 20. But now -- St. Paul declares, That Christians have hope, not in this
life only. His Proof of the Resurrection lies in a narrow Compass, ver. 12-19.
Almost all the rest of the Chapter is taken up in illustrating, vindicating and
applying it. The Proof is short, but solid and convincing, that which arose
from Christ's Resurrection. Now this not only proved a Resurrection possible,
but as it proved him to be a Divine Teacher, proved the Certainty of a General
Resurrection, which be so expressly taught. The first fruits of them that slept
-- The Earnest, Pledge, and Insurance of their Resurrection who slept in him:
Even of all the righteous. It is of the Resurrection of these, and these only,
that the Apostle speaks throughout the Chapter.

V. 22. As through Adam all, even the righteous di^, so through Christ all
these shall be made alive -- He does not say, Shall revive (as naturally as
they die) but shall be made alive, by a Power not their own.

V. 23. Afterward -- The whole Harvest. At the same time the Wicked shall rise
also. But they are not here taken into the Account.

V. 24. Then -- After the Resurrection and the General Judgment, comes the end
of the World; the grand Period of all those wonderful Scenes that have appeared
for so many succeeding Generations; when he shall have delivered up the kingdom
to the Father, and he (the Father) shall have abolished all adverse, Rule,
Authority, and Power. Not that the Father will then begin to reign without the
Son, nor will the Son then cease to reign. For the Divine Reign both of the
Father and Son is from everlasting to everlasting. But this is spoken of the
Son^s M^diatorial Kingdom, which will then be delivered up, and of the
immediate Kingdom or Reign of the Father, which will then commence. Till then
the Son transacts the Business which the Father has given him, for those who
are his, and by them as well as by the Angels, with the Father, and against
their Enemies. So far as the Father gave the Kingdom to the Son, the Son shall
deliver it up to the Father. ( John xiii. 3.) Nor does the Father cease to
reign, when he gives it to the Son; neither the Son, when he delivers it to the
Father: But the Glory which he had before the world began, ( John xvii 5 Heb.
i. 8.) will remain even after this is delivered up. Nor will he cease to be a
King even in his Human Nature. ( Luke i. 33.) If the Citizens of the New
Jerusalem shall reign for ever, (Rev. xxii. 5.) how much more shall be?

V. 25. He must reign -- Because so it is written; till he -- The Father has
put all his enemies under his feet.

V. 26. The last enemy that is destroyed is death -- Namely, after Satan ( Heb.
ii. 14.) and Sin (ver. 56.) are destroyed. In the same Order they prevailed.
Satan brought in Sin, and Sin brought forth Death And Christ, when he of old,
engaged with these Enemies, first conquered Satan, then Sin, in his Death; and
lastly Death, in his Resurrection. In the same Order he delivers all the
Faithful from them, yea, and destroys these Enemies themselves. Death he so
destroys, that it shall be no more, Sin and Satan, so that they shall no more
heart his People.

V. 27. Under him -- Under the Son.

V. 28. The Son also shall be subject -- Shall deliver up the Mediatorial
Kingdom, that the Three One GOD may be all in all. All Things, ^consequently
all Persons) without any interruption without the Intervention of any Creature,
without the Opposition of any Enemy, shall be subordinate to GOD. All shall
say, "My GOD, and my All." This is the End. Even an inspired Apostle can see
nothing beyond this.

V. 29. Who are baptized for the dead. -- Perhaps baptized in Hope of Blessings
to be received after they are numbered with the Dead, Or, Baptized in the room
of the dead -- Of them that are just fallen in the Cause of Christ: Like
Soldiers who advance in the room of their Companions, that fell just before
their Face.

V. 30. Why are we -- The Apostles, also in danger every hour? -- It is plain
we can expect no Amends in this Life.

V. 31. I protest by your rejoicing, which I have -- Which Love makes my own: I
die daily -- I am daily in the very Jaws of Death. Beside that I live, as is
were, in a daily Martyrdom.

V. 32. If to speak after the manner of men, that is, to use a proverbial
Phrase, expressive of the most eminent Danger. I have sought with wild beasts
at Ephesus -- With the savage Fury of a lawless multitude. ( Acts xix. 29, etc)
This seems to have been but just before. Let us eat, etc. We might on that
Supposition, as well say, with the Epicurcans, Let us make the best of this
short Life, seeing we have no other Portion.

V. 33. Be not deceived -- By such pernicious Counsels as this. Evil
Communications corrupt good manners -- He opposes to the Epicurcan Saying, a
well known Verse of the Poet Menander. Evil communications -- Discourse
contrary to Faith, Hope or Love, naturally tends to destroy all Holiness.

V. 34. Awake -- An Exclamation full of Apostolical Majesty Shake off your
Lethargy! To righteousness -- Which flows from the true Knowledge of GOD, and
implies, that your whole Soul be broad awake; and sin not -- That is, and ye
will not sin. Sin supposes Drowsiness of Soul. There is need to press this; for
some among you have not the knowledge of God -- With all their boasted
Knowledge, they are to^ ignorant of what it most concerns them to know. I speak
this to your shame -- For nothing is more shameful, than sleepy Ignorance of
GOD, and of the Word and Works of GOD; in these ^specially, considering the
Advantages they had enjoyed.

V. 35. But some one possibly will say, How are the dead raised up, after their
whole Frame is dissolved? And with what kind of bodies do they come again,
after these are mouldered into Dust?

V. 36. To the Enquiry concerning the Manner of rising, and the Quality of the
Bodies that rise, the Apostle answers first by a Similitude, ver. 36 -- 42. and
then plainly and directly, ver. 42, 43. That which thou sowest, is not
quickened into new Life and Verdure, except it die^ Undergo a Dissolution of
its Parts, a Change analogous to Death. Thus St. Paul inverts the Objection; as
if he had said, Death is so far from hindering Life, that it necessarily goes
before it.

V. 37. Thou sowest not the body that shall be -- Produced from the Seed
committed to the Ground, but a bare, naked Grain, widely different from that
which will afterward rise out of the Earth.

V. 38. But God -- Not thou, O Man, not the Grain itself, gives it a body as
it has pleased him, from the Time he distinguished the various Species of
Beings; and to each of the seeds, not only of the Fruits, but Animals also (to
which the Apostle rises in the following Verse) its own body; not only peculiar
to that Species, but proper to that Individual, and arising out of the
Substance of that very Grain.

V. 39. All flesh -- As if he had said. Even earthy Bodies differ from earthy,
and heavenly Bodies from heavenly. What wonder then, if heavenly Bodies differ
from earthy? Or the Bodies which rise, from those that lay in the Grave?

V. 40. There are also heavenly bodies -- As the Sun, Moon, and Stars; and
there are earthy -- As Vegetables and Animals. But the brightest Luster which
the latter can have, is widely different from that of the former.

V. 41. Yea, and the heavenly Bodies themselves differ from each other.

V. 42. So also is the resurrection of the dead -- So great is the Difference
between the Body which fell, and that which rises. It is sown (a beautiful
Word) committed, as Seed, to the Ground, in corruption -- Just ready to
putrify, and by various Degrees of Corruption and Decay, to return to the Dust
from whence it came. It is raised in incorruption -- Utterly incapable of
Dissolution or Decay.

V. 43. It is sown in d'shonour -- Shocking to those who loved it best: Human
Nature in Disgrace! It is raised in glory -- Clothed with Robes of Light, fit
for those whom the King of Heaven delights to honor. It is sown in weakness --
Deprived even of that feeble Strength which it once enjoyed: It is raised in
power -- Endued with Vigor, Strength and Activity, such as we cannot now
conceive.

V. 44. It is sown in this World* a merely animal body -- Maintained by Food,
Sleep, and Air, like the Bodies of Brutes: But it is raised of a more refined
Contexture, needing none of these Animal Refreshments, and endued with
Qualities of a spiritual Nature, like the Angels of God.

V. 45. The first Adam was made a living Soul -- GOD gave him such Life as
other Animals enjoy: But the last Adam, CHRIST, is a quickening Spirit. -- As
he has life in himself, so ^e quickens whom he will; giving a more refined
Life to their very Bodies at the Resurrection.

V. 47. The first man was from the earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord
from heaven -- The first man being from the Earth, is subject to Corruption and
Dissolution, like the Earth from which he came. The second man St. Paul could
not so well say. Is from Heaven, heavenly: Because though Man owes it to the
Earth, that he is earthy, yet the LORD does not owe his Glory to Heaven* He
Himself made the Heavens, and by deseending from thence ^ewed Himself to us as
the LORD Christ was no^ the second man in Order of Time, but in this Respect
That as Adam was a p^ic Person, who ^cted in the stead of all Mankind, so was
Christ ^s Adam was the first General Representative of Men, Christ was the
Second and the last. And what they severally did, terminated not in themselves,
but affected all whom they represented.

V. 48. They that are earthy -- Who continue without any higher Principle: They
that are heavenly -- Who receive a Divine Principle from Heaven.

V. 49. The image of the heavenly -- Holiness and Glory.

V. 50. But first we must be entirely changed; for such flesh and blood as we
are clothed with now, cannot enter into that Kingdom which is wholly spiritual:
Neither does this corruptible Body inherit that incorruptible Kingdom.

V. 51. A mystery -- A Truth hitherto unknown; and not yet fully known to any
of the Sons of Men. We -- Christians. The Apostle considers them all as one, in
their succeeding Generations; shall not all die -- Suffer a Separation of Soul
and Body; but we shall all -- Who do not die, be changed -- So that this Animal
Body shall become Spiritual.

V. 52. In a moment -- Amazing Work of Omnipotence! And cannot the same Power
now change us into Saints in a Moment? The (...) shall (...) -- To awaken all
that sleep in the Dust of the Earth

V. 54. Death is swallowed up in victory -- That is, totally conquered,
abolished for ever.

V. 55. O death, where is thy sting? -- Which once was full of b^ish Poison. O
Hades, the R^centacle of separate Souls, where is thy victory? -- Thou art now
robbed of all thy Spoils; all thy Captives are set at liberty. Hades literally
means the invisible World, and relates to the Soul; Death to the Body. The
Greek Words are found in the Septuagint Translation of Hos. xiii. 14.

V. 56. The sting of death is sin -- Without which it could have no Power. But
this Sting none can resist by his own Strength. And the strength of sin is the
law -- As is largely declared Romans vii. 7, etc.

V. 57. But thanks be to God, who has given us the victory, over Sin, Death,
and Hades.

V. 58. Be ye steadfast -- In yourselves; unmovable -- By others, continually
increasing in the Work of Faith and Labor of Love. Knowing your Labor is not
vain in the Lord -- Whatever ye do for his Sake, shall have its full Reward in
that Day.

Let us also endeavor, by cultivating Holiness in all its Branches, to
maintain this Hope in its full Energy; longing for that glorious Day, when in
the utmost Extent of the Expression, Death sword^ be swallowed up for ever, and
Millions of Voices after the long Silence of the Grave, shall burst out at once
into that triumphant Song, O death, where is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy
victory?

XVI.
day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store according as he has
been prospered, that there may be no collections when I come. that I also
should go, they shall go with me. Now I will come to you, are many adversaries.

But if Timotheus come, our brother Apollos, I besought him much, to come to
you with the brethren; yet he was by no means willing to come now; but he will
come when it shall be convenient.

And I beseech you, as ye know the household of Stephanas, that it is the
first fruits of Achaia, and that they have devoted themselves to serve the
faints, us and labors. I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas,

The salutation of me Paul with my own hand. be with you. be with you all in
Christ Jesus.

V. 1. The saints -- A more solemn and a more affecting Word, than if he had
said The poor.

V. 2. Let every one -- Not the Rich only: Let him also that has little gladly
give of that little; according as he has been prospered -- Increasing his
Alms, as GOD increases his Substance. According to this lowest Rule of
Christian Prudence, if a Man when he has or gains One Pound; gives a Tenth to
GOD, when he has or ^ains an Hundred, he will give the Tenth of this also. And
yet I show unto you a more excellent Way. He that has Ears to hear let him
hear. Stint yourself to no Proportion at all. But lend to GOD all you can.

V. 4. They shall go with me -- To remove any possible Suspicion.

V. 5. I pass through Macedonia -- I purpose going that Way.

V. 7. I will not se^ you now -- Not till I have been in Macedonia.

V. 8. I will stay at Ephesus -- Where he was at this Time.

V. 9. A great door -- As to the Number of Hearers; and effectual -- As to the
Effects wrought upon them: And there are many adversaries -- As there must
always be, where Satan's Kingdom shakes. This was another Reason for his
staying there.

V. 10. Without fear -- Of any one's desp^sing him for his Youth; for he
works the work of the Lord -- The true Ground of Reverence to Pastors. Those
who do so, none ought to despise.

V. 11. I look for him with the brethren -- That accompany him.

V. 12. I besought him much to come to you with the brethren -- Who were then
going to Corinth. Yet he was by no means willing to come now -- Perhaps lest
his Coming should increase the Divisions among them.

V. 13. To conclude. Watch ye -- Against all your seen and unseen Enemies.
Stand fast in the faith -- Seeing and trusting Him that is invisible. Acquit
yourselves like men -- With Courage and Patience. Be strong -- To do and suffer
all his Will.

V. 15. The first fruits of Achaia -- the first Converts in that Province.

V. 16. That ye also in your Turn submit to such -- So repaying their free
Service, and to every one that works with us and labors -- That labors in
the Gospel, either with or without a Fellow Laborer.

V. 17. I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus --
Who were now returned to Corinth; but the Joy which their Arrival had
occasioned, remained still in his Heart. They have supplied what was wanting on
your part -- ^hey have performed the Offices of Love, which you could not, by
reason of your Absence.

V. 18. For they have refreshed my spirit and yours -- Inasmuch as you share in
my Comfort; such therefore acknowledge -- With suitable Love and Respect.

V. 19. Aquils and Priscilla had formerly made some abode at Corinth, and there
St Paul's Acquaintance with them began, Acts xviii. i. 2.

V. 21. With my own hand -- What precedes having been wrote by an Amanuensis.

V. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ -- If any be an Enemy to his
Person, Offices, Doctrines, or Commands, let him be Anathema: Maranatha --
Anathema signifies a Thing devoted to Destruction. It seems to have been
customary with the Jews of that Age, when they had pronounced any Man an
Anathema, to add the Syria^ Expression Maranatha, that is. The Lord comes;
namely, to execute Vergeance upon him. This weighty Sentence the Apostle chose
to write with his own Hand: And to insert it between his Salutation and solemn
Benediction, that it might be the more attentively regarded.

NOTES ON St. PAUL's Second Epistle to the Corinthians.
IN this Epistle, written from Macedonia, within a Year after the former, St.
Paul beautifully displays his tender Affection to ward the Corinthians, who
were greatly moved by the seasonable Severity of the former, and repeats
several of the Admonitions he had there given them. In that he had written
concerning the Affairs of the Corinthians; in this he writes chiefly concerning
his own, but in such a Manner, as to direct all he mentions of himself, to
their spiritual Profit. The Thread and Connection of the whole Epistle is
historical; other Things are interwoven only by way of Digression.

It contains,
I. The Inscription, C. i. 1, 2. II. The Treatise itself. 1. In ASIA I was
greatly pressed; but GOD comforted me; as I acted uprightly; even in this that I
have not yet come to you; who ought to obey me. 3. C. ii. 11. 2. From TROAS I
hastened to Macedonia, spreading the Gospel every where, the glorious Charge of
which I execute, according to its Importance, 12. C. vii. 1. 3. In MACEDONIA I
received a joyful Message concerning you, 2 -- 16. 4. In this Journey I had a
Proof of the Liberality of the Macedonians, whose Example ye ought to follow, C
viii. 1 -- C. ix. 13. 5. I am now on my Way to you, armed with the Power of
Christ. Therefore obey. C. x. 1 -- C. xiii. 10. III The Conclusion, 11 -- 13.

II. CORINTHIANS.
I.
PAUL an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timotheus our
brother, To the church of God that is in Corinth, with all the saints that are
in all Achaia: be to you from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is for your comfort
and salvation; or whether we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which is
effectual in the patient enouring the same sufferings which we also suffer. our
strength, so that we despaired even of life. bestowed upon us, by means of many
persons, thanks may be given by many on your behalf.

F^ this is our rejoicing, things to you, but what ye know and acknowledge, and
I trust will acknowledge even to the end. are ours, in the day of the Lord
Jesus. As God is faithful, our word to you has not been yea and nay. are yea
in him, and amen in him, has anointed us is God:

But I call God for a record on my soul,

V. 2. Timotheus, a brother -- St. Paul writing to Timotheus, styled him his
Son; writing of him, his Brother.

V. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ -- A solemn and
beautiful Introduction, highly suitable to the apostolical Spirit; the Father
of merci^, and God of (...) -- Mere^es^re the Fountain of Comfort, Comfort is
the outward Expression of Mercy. GOD shows Mercy in the Affliction itself. He
gives Comfort both in and after the Affliction. Therefore is He termed, The God
of all comfort. Blessed be this GOD!

V. 4. Who comfort us in all our affliction, that we may be able to comfort
them who are in any affliction -- He that has experienced one Kind of
Affliction on, is able to comfort others in that Affliction. He that has
experienced all Kinds of Affliction, is able to comfort there in all.

V. 5. For the sufferings of Christ abound in us -- The Sufferings endured on
his Account; so our comfort also abounds through Christ -- The Sufferings
were many, the Comfort one: and yet not only equal to, but overbalancing them
all.

V. 6. And whether we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation --
For your present Comfort, your present and future Salvation: or whether we are
comforted, it is for your comfort -- That we may be the better able to (...)
you; which is (...) in the (...) the same userings (...) we also suffer --
Through the l^fficacy of which ye patiently endure the shine Kind of Sufferings
with us

V. 7. And our hope concerning you -- Grounded on your Patience in suffering
for Christ's Sake, is steadfast.

V. 8. We would not have you ignorant, brethren, of the trouble which befell us
in Asia -- Probably the same which is described in the 19th Chapter of the
Acts. The Corinthians knew before, that he had been in Trouble. He now declares
the Greatness and the Fruit of it. We were exceedingly pressed, above our
strength -- Above the ordinary Strength even of an Apostle.

V. 9. Yea, we had the seatence of death in ourselves -- We ourselves expected
Nothing but Death.

V. 10. We trust, that he will still deliver -- That we may at length be able
to come to you.

V. 11. You likewise -- As well as other Churches, helping with us by prayer,
that for the gift -- Namely, my Deliverance, bestowed upon us by means of many
persons -- Praying for it, thanks may be given by many.

V. 12. For I am the more emboldened to look for this, because I an conscious
of my Integrity: Seeing this is our rejoicing -- Even in the deepest Adversity,
the testimony of our conscience -- Whatever others think of us, that in
simplicity -- Having one End in View, aiming sig^y at the Glory of GOD, and
godly sincerity -- Without any Tine^re of Guile, Dissimulation, or Disguise,
not with carnal wisdom, but by the grace of God -- Not by natural but divine
Wisdom, we have (...) our conversation in the world -- In the whole World; in
every Cre^stance.

V. 14. Ye have acknowledged us in part -- Though not so fully as ye will do,
that we are your rejoicing -- That ye rejoice in having known us, as ye also
are ours -- As we also rejoice in the Success of our Labors among you; and we
trust shall rejoice therein, in the day of the Lord Jesus.

V. 15. In this confidence -- That is, being confident of this.

V. 17. Did I use levity? -- Did I lightly change my Purpose? Do I purpose
according to the flesh? -- Are my Purposes grounded on carnal or worldly
Considerations? So that there should be with me yea and nay -- Sometimes one,
sometimes the other; that is, Variableness and Inconstancy.

V. 18. Our word to you -- The whole Tenor of our Doctrine, has not been yea
and nay -- Wavering and uncertain.

V. 19. For Jesus Christ, who was preached by us -- That is, our Preaching
concerning Him, was not yea and nay -- Was not variable and inconsistent with
itself: but was yea in him -- Always one and the same centering in Him.

V. 20. For all the promises of God are yea and amen in him -- Are surely
established in and through Him. They are yea, with respect to GOD promising;
amen, with respect to Men believing: Yea, with respect to the Apostles; amen,
with respect to their Hearers.

V. 21. I say, to the glory of God, -- For it is GOD alone that is able to
fulfill these Promises; that establishes us -- Apostles and Teachers, with you
-- All true Believers, in the Faith of Christ; and has anointed us -- With the
Oil of Gladness, with Joy in the Holy Ghost, thereby giving us Strength both to
do and suffer his Will.

V. 22. Who also has sealed us -- Stamping his Image on our Hearts, thus
marking (...) s^a^ing us as his own Property: and given us the earnest of his
Spirit -- There is a Deference between an Earnest and a Pledge. A Pledge is to
be restored when the Debt is paid; but an Earnest is not taken away, but
completed. Such an Earnest is the Spirit. The first fruits of it we have, (Romans
vin. 23) And we wait for all the Fullness.

V. 23. I call God for a record upon my soul -- Was not St. Paul now speaking
by the Spirit? And can a more solemn Oath be conceived? Who then can imagine
that Christ ever designed to forbid all Swearng^ T^t to spear you, I came not
yet to C^rinth -- Left I should be obliged to use Severity. He says elegantly
To Corinth, not to you, when he is intimating his Power to punish.

V. 24. Not that we have dominion over your faith -- This is the Prerogative of
GOD alone: but are helpers of your joy -- And Faith from which it springs. For
by faith ye have stood -- To this day.

We see the Light in which Ministers should always consider themselves, and in
which they are to be considered by others: Not as having dominion over the
faith of their People, and having a Right to dictate by their own Authority,
what they shall believe, or what they shall do, but as helpers of their joy, by
helping them forward in Faith and Holiness In this view, how amiable does their
Office appear? And how friendly to the Happiness of Mankind? How far then are
they from true Benevolence, who would expose it to Ridicule and Contempt?

II.
the joy of you all. tears, not that ye might be grieved, but that ye might
know the abundant love which I have toward you.

And if any have caused grief, is this ponishment inflicted by many. ye should
rather forgive and comfort him, lest such an one should be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow. your love toward him. For to this end also did I write,
forgive also; and what I have forgiven, if I have forgiven any thing, it is for
your sakes, in the person of Christ:

Now when I came to Troas, preach the gospel of Christ, and a door was opened
to me by the Lord, not find Titus my brother; so taking leave of them I went
forth into Macedonia.

Now thanks be to God, is sufficient for these things?

V. 1. In grief -- Either on Account of the particular Offender, or of the
Church in general.

V. 2. For if I grieve you, who is he that cheereth me, but he that is grieved
by me? -- That is, I cannot be comforted myself, till his Grief is re^oved.

V. 3. And I wrote thus to you -- I wrote to you before in this Determination,
not to come to you in grief.

V. 4. From muck anguish, I wrote to you, not so much, that ye might be
grieved, as that ye might know by my Faithful Admonition, my abundant love
toward you.

V. 5. He has grieved me but in part -- Who still rejoice over the greater
Part of you. Otherwise I might burden you all.

V. 6. Sufficient for such an one -- With what a remarkable Tenderness does St.
Paul treat this Offender? He never once mentions his Name. Nor does he here so
much as mention his Crime. By many -- Not only by the Rulers of the Church: The
whole Congregation acquiesced in the Sentence.

V. 10. To whom ye forgive -- He makes no Question of their complying with his
Direction, any thing -- So mildly does he speak even of that heinous Sin, after
it was repented of. In the person of Christ -- By the Authority where with he
has invested me.

V. 11. Lest Satan -- To whom he had been delivered, and who sought to destroy
not only his Flesh, but his Soul also, get an advantage over us -- For the Loss
of one Soul is a common Loss.

V. 12. Now when I came to Troas -- It seems in that Passage from Asia to
Macedonia, of which a short Account is given, Acts xx. 1.2. Even though a door
was opened to me -- That is, there was free Liberty to speak, and many were
willing to hear: Yet,

V. 13. I had no rest in my spirit -- From an earnest Desire to know how my
Letter had been received: Because I did not find Titus -- In his Return from
you, so I went forth into Macedonia -- Where being much nearer, I might more
easily be informed concerning you. The Apostle resumes the Thread of his
Discourse, chapter vii. 2. interposing an admirable Digression, concerning what he
had done and suffered elsewhere, the Profit of which he by this means derives
to the Corinthians also: And this as a Prelude to his Apology against the false
Apostles.

V. 14. To triumph implies not only Victory, but an open Manifestation of it.
And as in triumphal Procestions, especially in the East, Incense and Perfumes
were burnt near the Conqueror, the Apostle beautifully alludes to the
Circumstances in the following Verse: As likewise to the different Effects
which strong Perfumes have upon different Persons; some of whom they revive,
which they throw others into the most violent Disorders.

V. 15. For we -- The Preachers of the Gospel, are to God a sweet ^dour of
Christ -- GOD is well pleased with this Perfume diffused by us both in them
that believe and are saved (treated of chapter iii. 1. chapter iv. 2.) and in them that
obstinately disbelieve, and consequently perish, (treated of chapter iv. 3 -- 6.

V. 16. And who is sufficient for these things? -- No Man living, but by the
Power of GOD's Spirit.

V. 17. For we are not as many who adulterate the word of God -- Like those
Vintners (so the Greeh Word implies) who mix their Wines with baser Liquors:
but as of sincerity -- Without any Mixture; but as from God -- This rises still
higher; transmitting his pure Word, not our own, in the sight of God -- Whom we
regard as always present, and noting every Word of our Tongue, speal we -- The
Tongue is ours, but the Power (...) GOD's, in Christ -- Words which He gives,
approves, and blesses.

III.
Do we again begin to recommend ourselves? Unless we need as some do,
recommendatory letters to you, or recommendatory letters from you? Ye are our
letter written on our hearts, is from God: his face, was glorious, much more
that which remains is glorious. Having therefore such hope, who put a veil
over his face, so that the children of Israel could not look steadfastly to the
end of that which is abolished. But their understandings were blinded; in
Christ. is,

V. 1. Do we begin again to recommend ourselves? -- It is needful? have I
nothing but my own Word to recommend me? St. Paul hiefly here intends himself;
though not excluding Timetheus, Titus, and Silvanus. Unless we need -- As if he
had said, Do I indeed want such Recommendation?

V. 2. Ye are our recommendatory letter -- More convincing than bare Words
could be, (...) our hearts -- Deeply engraven there, and plainly legible to all
around us.

V. 3. Manifestly declared to be the letter of Christ -- Which He has formed
and published to the World; ministered by us -- Whom He has used herein as his
Instruments; therefore ye are our letter also: Written not in takes of stone --
Like the Ten Commandments, but in the tender, living tables of their hearts;
GOD having taken away the Hearts of Stone, and given than Hearts of Flesh.

V. 4. Such trust have we in God -- That is, we trust in GOD that this is so.

V. 5. Not that we are sufficient of ourselves -- So much as to think one good
Thought, much less, to convert Sinners.

V. 6. (...) also has mad^ us able ministers of the New covenant -- Of the
New, Evangelical Dispensation. Not of the Law, fitly called the letter, from
GOD's literally writing it on the two Tables, but of the Spirit. Of the Gospel
Dispensation, which is written on the Tables of our Hearts by the Spirit. For
the letter -- The Law, the Musaic Dispensation, kills -- Seals in Death those
who still cleave to is; but the Spirit -- The Gospel, conveying the Spirit to
those who receive it, gives life -- Both Spiritual and Eternal. Yea, if we
adhere to the literal Sense even of the Moral Law, if we regard only the
Precept and the Sanction as they stand in themselves, not as they lead us to
Christ, they are doubtless a killing Ordinance, and bind us down under the
Sentence of Death.

V. 7. And if the ministration of death -- That is, the Mosaic Dispensation,
which proves such to those who prefer it to the Gospel, the most considerable
Part of which was engraven on those two stones, was attended with so great
Glory.

V. 8. The ministration of the Spirit -- That is, the Christian Dispensation.

V. 9. The ministration of condemnation -- Such the Mosaic Dispensation proved
to all the Jews who rejected the Gospel. Whereas through the Gospel (hence
called the ministration of righteousness) GOD both imputed and imparted
Righteousness to all Believers. But how can the moral Law (which alone was
engraven on stone,) be the ministration of condemnation, if it requires no more
than a sincere Obedience, such as is proportioned to our infirm State? If this
is sufficient to justify us, then the Law ceases to be a ministration of
condemnation. It becomes (flatly contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine) the
ministration of righteousness.

V. 10. It has no glory in this respect, because of the glory that excels
-- That is, none in Comparison of this more excellent Glory. The greater Light
swallows up the less.

V. 11. That which remains -- That Dispensation which remains to the End of
the World; that Spirit and Life which remain for ever.

V. 12. Having therefore this hope -- Being fully persuaded of this.

V. 13. And we do not act as Moses did, who put a veil over his face -- Which
is to be understood with regard to his Writings also: So that the children of
Israel could not look steadfastly to the end of that Dispensation, which is now
abolished. The End of this was Christ. The whole Mosaic Dispensation tended to,
and terminated in him. But the Israelites had only a dim, wavering Sight of
Him; of whom Moses spoke in an obscure, covert Manner.

V. 14. The same veil remains on their Understanding unremoved -- Not so much
as folded back (so the Word implies) so as to admit a little, glimmering Light,
on the public reading of the Old Testament -- The Veil is not now on the Face
of Moses or of his Writings, but on the reading of them, and on the Heart of
them them believe not, which is taken away in Christ -- That is, from the Heart
of them that truly believe on Him.

V. 16. When it -- Their Heart, shall turn to the Lord -- To Christ, by living
Faith, the veil is taken away -- That very Moment, and they see, with the
utmost Clearness, how all the Types and Prophe^^es of the Law are fully
accomplished in Him.

V. 17. Now the Lord -- Christ, is that Spirit of the Law whereof I speak, to
which the Letter was intended to lead: and where the Spirit of the Lord --
Christ, is, there is liberty -- Not the Veil, the Emblem of Slavery. There is
Liberty from servile Fear, Liberty from the Guilt and from the Power of Sin,
Liberty to behold with open Face the Glory of the LORD.

V. 18. And accordingly all we that believe in Him, beholding as in a class --
In the Mirror of the Gospel, the glory of the Lord -- His glorious Love, are
transformed into the same image -- Into the same Love, from one Degree of this
glory to another, in a Manner worthy of his almighty Spirit.

What a beautiful Contrast is here! Moses saw the Glory of the LORD, and it
rendered his Face so bright, that he covered it with a Veil, Israel not being
able to bear the reflected Light. We behold his Glory in the Glass of his Word,
and our Faces shine too. Yet we veil them not, but diffuse the Luster which is
continually increasing, as we fix the Eye of our Mind more and more steadfastly
on his Glory displayed in the Gospel.

IV.
But if our gospel also is veiled, us with the knowledge of the glory of God,
in the face of Jesus Christ.

But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, We are troubled on every side,
yet not crushed; perplexed, Psalm cxvi. 10.
I believed, and therefore have I spoken, we also believe, us with you. For all
things are for your sakes, that the overflowing grace might through the
thanksgiving of many abound to the glory of God. ward man is renewed day by
day. and eternal weight of glory: are temporal, but the things that are not
seen are eternal.

V. 1. Therefore having this ministry -- Spoken of chapter iii. 6 as me have
received mercy -- Have been mercifully supported in all our Trials, we faint
not -- We desist not in any Degree from our glorious Enterprise.

V. 2. But have renounced -- Set at open Defiance, the hidden things of shame
-- All Things which Men need to hide or be ashamed of; not walking in
crastiness -- Using no Disguise, Subtlety, Guile; nor privily corrupting the
pure Word of God, by any Additions or Alterations, or by attempting to
accommodate it to the Taste of the Hearers.

V. 3. But if our gospel also -- As well as the Law of Moses.

V. 4. The god of this world -- What a sublime and horrible Description of
Satan! He is indeed the God of all that believe not, and works in them with
inconceivable Energy, has blinded -- Not only veiled, the Eye of their
Understanding. Illumination is properly the Reflection or Propagation of Light,
from those who are already enlightened, to others, Who is the image of God --
Hence also we may understand, how great is the Glory of Christ. He that sees
the Son, sees the Father in the Face of Christ. The Son exactly exhibits the
Father to us.

V. 5. For the Fault is not in us, neither in the Doctrine they hear from us We
preach not ourselves -- Astable either to enlighten, or pardon, or sanctify
you, but Jesus Christ -- As your only Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification:
And ourselves your servants -- Ready to do the meanest Offices, for Jesus' sake
-- Not for Honor, Interest, or Pleasure.

V. 6. For God -- has shined in our hearts -- The Hearts of all those whom the
God of this World no longer blinds: GOD, who is himself our Light, not only the
Author of Light, but also the Fountain of it; to enlighten us with the
knowledge of the glory of God -- Of his glorious Love, and of his glorious
Image; in the face of Jesus Christ -- Which reflects his Glory in another
Manner than the Face of Moses did.

V. 7. But we -- Not only the Apostles, but all true Believers, have this
treasure -- Of divine Light, Love, Glory, in earthen Vessels In frail, feeble
perishing Bodies. He proceeds to show That Afflictions, yea, Death itself are
so far from hindering the Ministration of the Spirit, that they even further
it, sharpen the Ministers, and increase the Fruit, that the excellency of the
power which works these in us, may undeniably appear to be of GOD.

V. 8. We are troubled, etc. The four Articles in this Verse respect Inward the
four in the next. Outward Afflictions. In each Clause the former Part shows the
earthen Vessels, t^^ ^^at or the encellence of the Power. Not crushed -- Not
swallowed up in Care and Anxiety: Perplexed -- What Course to take, but never
despairing of his Power and Love, to carry us through.

V. 10. Always -- Wherever we go, hearing about in the body the dying of the
Lord Jesus -- Continually expecting to lay down our Lives like him; that the
life also of Jesus might be manifested in our body -- That we may also rise and
be glorified like him.

V. 11. For we who yet live -- Who are not yet killed for the Testimony of
Jesus, are always delivered unto death -- Are perpetually in the very Jaws of
Destruction; which we willingly submit to, that we may obtain a better
Resurrection.

V. 12. So then death works in us, but life in you -- You live in Peace; we
die daily. Yet living or dying, so long as we believe, we cannot but speak.

V. 13. Having the same spirit of faith -- Which animated the Saints of old:
David in particular when he said, I believed, and therefore have I spoken,
(that is, I trusted in GOD, and therefore He has put this Song of Praise in my
Mouth) We also speak -- We preach the Gospel, even in the midst of Affliction
and Death, because we believe that GOD will raise us up from the Dead, and will
present us -- Ministers, with you -- All his Members, faultless before his
presence with exceeding joy.

V. 15. For all things -- Whether adverse or prosperous, are for your sakes --
For the Profit of all that believe, as well as all that preach, that the
overflowing grace -- Which continues you alive both in Soul and Body might
abound yet more through the thanksgiving of many -- For Thanksgiving invites
more abundant Grace.

V. 16. Therefore -- Because of this Grace, we faint not. The out ward man --
The Body; the inward man -- The Soul.

V. 17. Our light affliction -- The Beauty and Sublimity of St. Paul's
Expressions here, as descriptive of Heavenly Glory, opposed to Temporal
Afflictions, surpass all Imagination, and cannot be preserved in any
Translation or Paraphrase, which after all must sink infinitely below the
astonishing Original.

V. 18. The things that are seen -- Men, Money, Things of Earth; the things
that are not seen -- GOD, Grace, Heaven.

V.
this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building from God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens. this tabernacle groan, being burdened; not
that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that what is mortal may be
swallowed up of life. is God, who has also given us the earnest of the Spirit.
we always behave undauntedly; knowing that while we are sojourning in the body,
we are absent from the Lord: (for we walk by says, not by sight.) I say, and
are willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord.

Therefore we are ambitious, answer them, who glory in appearance, and not in
heart. it is to God; if we are sober, it is for your sakes. that he died for
all, that they who live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him
who died for them, him so no more. be in Christ, there is a new creation: the
old things are passed away; are from God, who has reconciled us to himself
through Jesus Christ, and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation: you,
in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. made the righteousness of God
through him.

V. 1. Our earthly house -- Which is only a Tabernacle or Teur, not designed
for a lasting Habitation.

V. 2. Desiring to be clothed upon -- This Body (which is now covered with
flesh and blood) with the glorious House which is from Heaven. Instead of Flesh
and Blood, which cannot enter Heaven, the rising Body will be clothed or
covered with what is analogous thereto, but incorruptible and immortal.
Macarius speaks largely of this.

V. 3. If being clothed -- Is with the Image of GOD while we are in the Body,
we shall not be found naked -- Of the Wedding Garment.

V. 4. We groan being burdened -- The Apostle speaks with exact Propriety. A
Burden naturally expresses Groans. And we are burdened with numberless
Afflictions, Infirmities, Temptations, Sins. Not that we would be unclothed --
Not that we desire to remain without a Body Faith does not understand that
Philosophical Contempt of what the wise Creator has given; but clothed upon --
With the glorious immortal, incorruptible, spiritual Body, that what is mortal
-- This present mortal body, may be swallowed up of life -- Covered with that
which lives for ever.

V. 5. Now he that has wrought us to this very thing -- This longing for
Immortality, is God: For none but GOD, none less than the Almighty, could have
wrought this in us.

V. 6. Therefore we behave undauntedly -- But most of all when we have Death in
view; knowing that our greatest Happiness, lies beyond the Grave.

V. 7. For we cannot clearly see Him in this Life, wherein we walk by faith
only: An Evidence indeed that necessarily implies a kind of seeing Him who is
invisible; yet as far beneath what we shall have in Eternity, as it is above
that of bare, unassisted Reason.

V. 8. Present with the Lord -- This demonstrates that the Happiness of the
Saints is not deferred till the Resurrection.

V. 9. Therefore we are ambitions -- The only Ambition which has place in a
Christian, whether present -- In the Body, or absent -- From it.

V. 10. For we all -- Apostles as well as other Men, whether now present in the
Body, or absent from it, must appear -- Openly, without Covering, where all
hidden Things will be revealed, probably the Sins even of the Faithful, which
were forgiven long before. For many of their Good Works, (as their Repentance,
their Revenge against Sin) cannot otherwise appear. But this will be done at
their own Desire, without Grief, and without Shame. According to what he has
done in the body, whether good or evil -- In the Body he did either Good or
Evil. In the Body he is recompensed accordingly.

V. 11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we the more earnestly
persuade men to seek his Favor: And as GOD knows this, so I trust, ye know
it (...) your own Consciences.

V. 12. We do not By this, as if we thought there was any need of again
recommending ourselves to you, but to give you an occasion of rejoicing and
praising GOD, and to furnish you with an answer to those false Apostles, who
glory in appearance, but not in heart, being condemned by their own Consciences.

V. 13. For if we are transported beyond ourselves -- Or at least, appear so to
others, (treated of ver. 15 -- 21.) speaking or writing with uncommon
Vehemence, it is to God -- He understands (if Men do not) the Emotion which
Himself inspires. If we be sober -- (Treated of chapter vi. 1 -- 1^.) if I proceed
in a more calm, sedate Manner, it is for your sake^ ^ven good Men bear this,
rather than the other Method in their Teachers. But these must obey GOD,
whoever is offended by it.

V. 14. For the love of Christ to us and our Love to Him, constrains us --
Both to the one and the other; bears us on with such a strong, steady,
prevailing Influence, as Winds and Tides exert when they waft the Vessel to its
destined Harbor; while we thus judge, that if Christ died for all, then are
all, even the best of Men, naturally dead -- In a State of spiritual Death, and
liable to Death eternal. For had any Man been otherwise, Christ had not needed
to have died for him.

V. 15. And that he died for all -- That all might be saved, that they who live
-- That all who live upon the Earth, should not henceforth -- From the Moment
they know Him, live unto themselves -- Seek their own Honor, Profit, Pleasure,
but unto him -- In all Righteousness and true Holiness.

V. 16. So that we from this time -- That we knew the Love of Christ, know no
one -- Neither ourselves, nor you, neither the rest of the Apostles, ( Gal. ii.
6.) nor any other Person after the flesh -- According to his former State,
Country, Descent, Nobility, Riches, Power, Wisdom. We fear not the Great. We
regard not the Rich, or Wise. We account not the least less than ourselves. We
consider all, only in order to save all, Who is he, that thus knows no one
after the flesh? In what Land do these Christians live? Yea, if we have known
even Christ after the flesh -- So as to love Him b^r^ly with a natural Love, so
as to glory in having conversed with Him on Earth, so as to expect only
temporal Benefits from Him.

V. 17. Therefore if any one be in Christ -- A time Believer in Him, there is a
new creation -- Only the Power that makes a World, can make a Christian. And
when he is so created, the old things are past away -- Of their own Accord,
even as Snow in Spring. Behold! the present, visible, undeniable Change! All
things are become new -- He has new Life, new Senses, new Faculties, new
Affections, new Appetites, new Ideas and Conceptions. His whole Tenor of Action
and Conversation is new, and he lives, as it were, in a new World. GOD, Men,
the whole Creation, Heaven, Earth, and all therein, appear in a new Light, and
stand related to him in a new Manner, since he was created anew in Christ Jesus.

V. 18. And all these new things are from God, considered under this very
Notion, as reconciling us -- The World (ver. 19.) to himself.

V. 19. Namely -- The Sum of which is, God -- The whole Godhead, but more
eminently GOD the Father, was in Christ, reconciling the world -- Which was
before at Enmity with GOD, to himself -- So taking away that Enmity, which
could no otherwise be removed than by the Blood of the Son of GOD.

V. 20. Therefore we are ambassadors for Christ -- we beseech you in Christ's
stead -- Herein the Apostle might appear to some transported beyond himself. In
general, he uses a more calm sedate kind of Exhortation, as in the Beginning of
the next Chapter. What unparallelled Condescension and divinely tender Mercies
are displayed in this Verse? Did the Judge ever beseech a condemned Criminal,
to accept of Pardon? Does the Creditor ever beseech a ruined Debtor, to receive
an Acquittance in full? Yet our Almighty LORD and our Eternal Judge, not only
vouchsafes to offer these Blessings, but invites us, entreats us, and with the
most tender Importunity, solicits us, not to reject them.

V. 21. He made him a sin-offering, who knew no sin -- A Commendation peculiar
to Christ: for us -- Who knew no Righteousness, who were inwardly and outwardly
nothing but Sin; who must have been consumed by the Divine Justice, had not
this Atonement been made for our Sins, that we might be made the righteousness
of God through him -- Might through him be invested with that Righteousness,
first imputed to us, then implanted in us, which is in every Sense the
Righteousness of God.

VI.
as fellow laborers, do also exhort you, not to receive the grace of God in
vain. Isaiah xlix 8.
I have heard thee in an accepted time, and in a day of salvation have I
succored thee; behold, now is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day of
salvation.) Giving no offense in any thing, armor of righteousness on the
right hand and the left:

O ye Corinthians, my children) be ye also enlarged. what communion has light
with darkness? Lev xxvi. 11, etc.
I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a people. Isa. lii. 11. Zeph. iii. 19, 20.
Therefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the
unclean person, says the Lord, and I will receive you, Isa. xliii. 6.
And will be to you a Father, and ye shall be to me sons and daughters, says
the Lord Almighty.

V. 1. We then -- not only beseech, but as fellow laborers with you, who are
working out your own Salvation do also exhort you, not to receive the grace of
God, which we have been now describing, in vain. We receive it by Faith; and
not in vain, if we add to this, persevering Holiness.

V. 2. For he says -- The Sense is, As of old there was a particular Time,
wherein GOD was pleased to pour out his peculiar Blessing, (...) there is now.
And this is the particular Time: This is a Time of peculiar Blessing.

V. 3. Giving as far as in us lies no offense, that the ministry be not b^^ned
on our Account.

V. 4. But approving ourselves as the ministers of God -- Such as his Ministers
ought to be, in much patience, shown. 1. In afflictions, necessities,
distresses, (all which are General Terms.) 2. In stripes, imprisonments,
tumults, (which are particular Sorts of Affliction, Necessity, Distress.) 3. In
labors, watchings, fastings, voluntarily endared. All these are expressed in
the Plural Number, to denote a Variety of them. In Afflictions, several Ways to
escape may appear, though none without Difficulty; in Necessities, one only,
and that a difficult one; in Distresses, none at all appears.

V. 5. In tumults -- The Greek Word implies such Attacks as a Man cannot stand
against, but which bear him hither and thither by Violence.

V. 6. By prudence -- Spiritual, Divine; not what the World terms so. Worldly
Prudence is the practical Use of worldly Wisdom: Divine Prudence is the due
Exercise of Grace, making spiritual Understanding go as far as possible. By
love unfeigned -- The chief Fruit of the Spirit.

V. 7. By the convincing and converting power of God, accompanying his Word;
and also attesting it by diverse Miracles. By the ar^our of righteousness on the
right hand and the left -- That is, on all Sides, the Panoply or whole Armor
of GOD.

V. 8. By honor and dishonor -- When we are present; by evil report and good
report -- When we are absent Who could bear Honor and good Report, were it not
balanced by Dishonor? As deceivers -- Artful, designing Men. So the World
represents all true Ministers of Christ; yet true -- Upright, sincere, in the
Sight of GOD.

V. 9. As unknown -- For the world knows us not as it knew him not; yet
well-known -- To GOD, and to those who are the Seals of our Ministry As dying,
yet behold -- Suddenly, unexpectedly! GOD interposes, and we live.

V. 10. As sorrowing -- For our own manifold Imperfections, and for the Sins
and Sufferings of our Brethren; yet always rejoicing -- In present Peace, Love,
Power, and a sure Hope of future Glory. As having nothing, yet possessing all
things -- For all Things are ours, if we are Christ's. What a Magnificence of
Thought is this!

V. 11. From the Praise of the Christian Ministry (which he began chapter ii. 14.)
he now draws his affectionate Exhortation. O ye Corinthians -- He seldom uses
this Appellation. But it has here a peculiar Force. Our mouth is opened toward
you -- With uncommon Freedom, because our heart is enlarged in Tenderness.

V. 12. Ye are not straitened in us -- Our Heart is wide enough to receive you
all: but ye are straitened in your own bowels -- Your Hearts are shut up, and
so not capable of the Blessings ye might enjoy.

V. 13. Now for a recompense of the same -- Of my paternal Tenderness, ( I
speak as to my children -- I ask nothing hard or grievous) be ye also enlarged
-- Open your Hearts, first to GOD, and then to us: (So chapter viii. 5.) that GOD
may dwell in you, chapter vi. 16. -- vii. 1. and that ye may receive us, chapter vii. 2.

V. 14. Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers -- Christians with Jews or
Heathens. The Apostle particularly speaks of Marriage. But the Reasons he urges
equally hold against any needless Intimacy with them. Of the five Questions
that follow, the three former contain the Argument; the two latter, the
Conclusion.

V. 15. What concord has Christ -- Whom ye serve with Belial -- To whom they
belong?

V. 16. What agreement has the temple of God with idols? -- If GOD would not
endure Idols in any Part of the Land wherein he dwelt, how much less, under his
own Roof? He does not say, With the temple of idols. For Idols do not dwell in
their Worshippers. As God has said -- To his ancient Church, and in them to
all the Israel of GOD: I will dwell in them, and walk in them -- The former
signifying his perpetual Presence; the latter, his Operation; and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a people -- The Sum of the whole
Gospel Covenant.

V. 17. Touch not the unclean person -- Keep at the utmost Distance from him;
and I will receive you -- Into my House and Family.

V. 18. And ye shall be to me for sons and for daughters, says the Lord
Almighty -- The Promise made to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 6. is here applied to
all Believers: As the Promise made particularly to Joshua, is applied to them,
Heb. xiii. 5. Who can express the Worth, who can conceive the Dignity, of this
Divine Adoption? Yet it belongs to all who believe the Gospel, who have Faith
in Christ They have Access to the Almighty; such free and welcome Access, as a
beloved Child to an indulgent Father. To Him they may fly for Aid in every
Difficulty, and from Him obtain a Supply in all their Wants

VII.


Receive us. you; for I have said before, that ye are in our hearts, to live
and to die with you. is my freedom of speech toward you; great is my glorying
over you: I am filled with comfort, I exceedingly abound with joy, over all our
affliction. were fightings, were fears. But God who comfort them that are
brought low, comforted us by the coming of Titus. by us in nothing. it was not
for his sake who has done the wrong, nor for his sake who had suffered it, but
for the sake of manife^ting to you in the sight of God our diligent care over
you.

V. 1. Let us cleanse ourselves -- This is the latter Part of the Exhortation,
which was proposed chapter vi 1. and resumed ver. 14. from all pollution of the
flesh -- All outward Sin, and of the spirit -- All inward. Yet let us not rest
in Negative Religion, but perfect holiness -- Carrying it to the Height in all
its Branches, and enduring to the End in the loving Fear of God, the sure
Foundation of all Holiness.

V. 2. Receive us -- The Sum of what is said in this, as well as in the Tenth
and following Chapters. We have hurt no man -- In his Person, we have corrupted
no man -- In his Principle, we have defrauded no man -- Of his Property. In
this he intimates like wise the Good he had done them, but with the utmost
Modesty, as it were not looking upon it.

V. 3. I speak not to condemn you -- Not as if I accused you of laying this to
my Charge. I am so far from thinking so unkindly of you, that ye are in our
hearts, to live and die with you -- That is, I could rejoice to spend all my
Days with you.

V. 4. I am filled with comfort -- Of this he treats, ver. 6, etc. of his Joy,
ver. 7, etc. of both, ver. 13.

V. 5. Our flesh -- That is, we ourselves, had no rest: from without -- From
the Heathens, were fightings -- Furious and cruel Oppositions: from within --
From our Brethren, were fears -- Lest they should be seduced.

V. 7. Your earnest Desire -- To rectify what had been amiss; your grief -- For
what had offended GOD, and troubled me.

V. 8. I did repent -- That is, I felt a tender Sorrow for having grieved you,
till I saw the happy Effect of it.

V. 10. The sorrow of this world -- Sorrow that arises from worldly
Considerations, works death -- Naturally tends to work, or occasion Death,
Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.

V. 11. How great diligence it wrought in you -- Sh^wn in all the following
Particulars Yea, clearing of yourselves -- Some had been more, some less
faulty; whence ar^se those v^rio^s Affections. Hence their (...) and
Indignation, with respect to themselves; their Fear and Desire, with respect to
the Apostle; their Zeal and Reve^^e, with respect to the Offender, yea, and
themselves also. Clearing of yourselves -- From either sharing in, or approving
of his Sin; indignation -- That ye had not immediately corrected the Offender;
fear -- Of GOD'S D^s^le^sure, or lest I should come w^^h a Rod; ve^^ment Desire
-- To see me again; zeal -- For the Glory of GOD, and the So^l of that Sinner;
yea, revenge -- Ye took a kind of holy Revenge upon yourselves, being s^^rce
able to forgive yourselves. In all things ye -- As a Church, have approved
yourselves to be pure -- That is, free from Blame, since ye received my Letter.

V. 12. It was not only or chiefly, for the sake of the incestuous Person, or
of his Father; but to show my Care over you.

VIII.
their power, I testify, and beyond their power, they were willing of
themselves, it to the saints. this they did, not as we hoped; but first gave
themselves to the Lord, and to us by the will of God: see, that ye abound in
this grace also. I speak not by way of command, but that by the diligence of
others, I may prove the sincerity of your love. my advice: for this is
expedient for you, who have began a year ago, not only to do, but also to do it
willingly. there was a ready will, so there may be also a performance, in
proportion to what ye have. what he has, not according to what he has not.
For I do not mean, let your abundance be at this time a supply to their want;
that their abundance also may be a supply to your want, Exodus xvi. 18.
He that had gathered the most, had nothing over; and he that had gathered the
least did not lack.

But thanks be to God, so, but he was also appointed by the churches to be a
fellow-traveller with us, with this gift, which is administered by us, to the
glory of the Lord himself, and for the declaration of our ready mind) Avoiding
this, any enquire concerning Titus, he is my partner, and fellow laborer with
respect to you, or concerning our brethren, they are the messengers of the
churches, the glory of Christ.

V. 1. We declare to you the grace of God -- Which evidently appeared by this
happy Effect.

V. 2. In a great trial of affliction -- Being continually persecuted,
harrassed, and plundered.

V. 4. Praying us with much entreaty -- Probably St. Paul had lovingly
admoni^hed them, Not to do beyond their Power.

V. 5. And not as we hoped -- That is, beyond all we could hope; they gave
themselves to us, by the will of God -- In Obedience to his Will, to be wholly
directed by us.

V. 6. As he had begun -- When he was with you before.

V. 9. For ye know -- And this Knowledge is the true Source of Love, the grace
-- The most sincere, most free, and most abundant Love. He became poor -- In
becoming Man, in all his Life; in his Death: rich -- In the Favor and Image of
GOD.

V. 12. A man -- Every Believer, is accepted -- With GOD, according to what he
has -- And the same Rule holds universally. Whoever acknowledges himself to be
a vile, guilty Sinner, and in Consequence of this Acknowledgment, flies for
Refuge to the Wounds of a crucified Savior, and relies on his Merits alone for
Salvation, may in every Circumstance of Life, apply this indulgent Declaration
to himself.

V. 14. That their abundance -- If need should so require, may be -- At another
Time, a supply to your want, that there may be an equality -- No Want on one
Side, no Superfluity on the other. It may likewise have a further Meaning: That
as the temporal Bounty of the Corinthians did now supply the temporal Wants of
their poor Brethren in Judea: so the Prayers of these might be a Means of
bringing down many spiritual Blessings on their Benefactors. So that all the
spiritual Wants of the one might be amply supplied; all the temporal of the
other.

V. 15. As it is written, He that had gathered the most, had nothing over; and
he that had gathered the least, did not lack -- That is, in which that
Scripture is in another Sense fulfilled.

V. 17. Being more forward -- Than to need it, though he received it well.

V. 18. We -- I and Timothy, the brother -- The Ancients generally supposed
this was St. Luke, whose praise -- For faithfully dispensing the ^ospel, is
through all the churches.

V 19 He was appointed by the Churches -- Of Macedonia, with this ^ift -- Which
they were carrying from Macedonia to Jerusalem: for the declaration of our
ready mind -- That of Paul and his Fellow-Traveller, ready to be the Servants
of all.

V. 22. With them -- With Titus and Luke; our brother -- Perhaps Apollos.

V. 23. My partner -- In my Cares and Labors; the glory of Christ -- Signal
Instruments of advancing his Glory.

V. 24. Before the churches -- Present by their Messengers.

IX.
a matter of covetousness. And this I say, shall reap also bountifully: Let
every man do as he chooses in his heart, not grudgingly, or of necessity: Prove.
xxii. 9.
God loves a cheerful giver. And God is able to make all grace abound toward
you, that having always all sufficiency in all things, ye may abound to every
good work: Psalm cxii. 9.
He has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor; his righteousness
remains for ever. Isa. lv. 10.
And he who supplieth seed to the sower, your food, will supply and multiply
your seed sown, and increase the units of your righteousness:) Being enriched
in every thing to all bountifulness, be to God for his unspeakable gift.

V. 1. To write to you -- Largely.

V. 2. I boast to them of Macedonia -- With whom he then was.

V. 3. I have sent the abovementioned brethren before me.

V. 5. Spoken of before -- By me, to the Macedonians Not as a matter of
covetousness -- As wrung by Importunity from covetous Persons.

V. 6. He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; he that sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully -- A general Rule. GOD will proportion the
Reward to the Work, and the Temper whence it proceeds.

V. 7. Of necessity -- Because he cannot tell how to refuse.

V. 8. How remarkable are these Words! Each is loaded with Matter, and
increases all the Way it goes. All grace -- Every Kind of Blessing, that ye may
abound to every good work -- GOD gives us every thing, that we may do good
therewith, and so receive more Blessings. All Things in this Life, even
Rewards, are to the Faithful, Seeds in order to a future Harvest

V. 9. He has scattered abroad -- (A generous Word) With a full Hand, without
any anxions Thought, which Way each Grain falls. His righteousness -- His
Beneficence, with the blessed Effects of it, remains for ever -- Unexhausted,
GOD still renewing his Store.

V. 10. And he who supplieth seed -- Opportunity and Ability to help others,
and bread -- All Things needful for your own Souls and Bodies, will continually
supply you with that seed, yea multiply it to you more and more, and increase
the fruits of your righteousness -- The happy Effects of your Love to GOD and
Man.

V. 11. Which works by us thanksgiving to God -- Both from us who distribute,
and them who receive your Bounty.

V. 13. Your avowed subjection -- Openly testified by your Actions, to all men
-- Who stand in need of it

V. 15. His unspeakable gift -- His outward and inward Blessings, the Number
and Excellence of which cannot be uttered.

X.
am base among you, but b^ing ab^e^am b^ld toware you, entreat you, by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, are not carnal, but mighty through God to
the throwing down of strongholds.)

Do ye look at the outward appearance of things? is Christ's, so are we also.
his letters indeed, say they, are weighty and strong; but his bodily presence
is weak, and his speech contemptible. are we also in deed, when we are present.

For we presume not to equal or to compare ourselves with some of those who
recommend themselves: our measure; but according to the measure of the province
which God has allotted us, do not extend ourselves excessively, as not
reaching to you; for we are come even to you, in the gospel of Christ: our
measure, in the labors of others; but having hope, now your faith is
increased, to be enlarged by you, yet still within our province, abundantly.

V. 1. Now I Paul myself -- A strongly emphatical Expression, who when present
am base among you -- So probably some of the false Teach^rs affirmed; copying
after the meekness and gentleness of Christ, entreat, though I might command
you.

V. 2. Do not constrain me when present to be bold -- To exert my apostolical
Authority, who think of us as walking after the flesh -- As acting in a
cowardly or crafty Manner.

V. 3. Though we walk in the flesh -- In mortal Bodies, and consequently are
not free from human Weakness, yet we do not war -- Against the World and the
Devil, after the flesh -- By any carnal or worldly Methods. Though the Apostle
here and in several other Parts of this Epistle, speaks in the plural Number,
for the Sake of Modesty and Decency, yet he principally means himself. On him
were these Reflections thrown, and it is his own Authority which he is
vindicating.

V. 4. For the weapons of our warfare -- Those we use in this War, are not
carnal -- but spiritual, and therefore mighty to the throwing down of strong
holds -- Of all the Difficulties which Men or Devils can raise in our Way.
Though Faith and Prayer belong also to the Christian Armor, ( Ephesians. vi. 15,
etc.) yet the Word of GOD seems to be here chie^ly intended.

V. 5. Destroying all vain reasonings, and every high thing which exalts
itself -- As a Wall or Rampart, against the knowledge of God, and bringing
every thought, or rather Faculty of the Mind into captivity to the obedience of
Christ -- Those evil Reasonings are destroyed. The mind itself being overcome
and taken captive, lays down all Authority of its own, and entirely gives
itself up, to perform, for the Time to come, to Christ its Co^queror, the
obedience of Faith.

V. 6. Being in readiness to revenge all disobedience -- Not only by spiritual
Censure, but miraculous Punishments: when your obedience is fulfilled -- When
the sound Part of you have given Proof of your Obedience, so (...) I am in no
Danger of punishing the Innocent with the Guilty.

V. 7. Do ye look at the outward appearance of things? -- Does any of you judge
of a Minister of Christ, by his Person, or any outward C^^^umstance? Let him
again think this of himself -- Let him learn it (...) his own Re^lection,
before I convince him by a severer Method.

V. 8. I should not be ashamed -- As having said more than I could make good.

V. 9. I say this that I may not seem to terrify you by letters -- Threatening
more than I can perform.

V. 10. His bodily presence is weak -- His Stature (says St. Chrysostom) was
low, his Body crooked, and his Head bald.

V. 12. For we presume not -- A strong Irony to equal ourselves -- As Partners
of the same Offense, or to compare ourselves -- As Partakers of the same
Labor! They among themselves limiting themselves -- Chasing and limiting their
Provinces according to their own ^ancy.

V. 13. But we will not -- Like them, boastingly extend ourselves beyond our
measure, but according to the measure of the province which God has allotted
us -- To me, in particular, as the Apostle of the Gentiles, a measure which
reaches even unto you. God allotted to each Apostle his Province, and the
measure, or Bounds thereof.

V. 14. We are come even to you -- By a gradual regular Process, having taken
the intermediate Places in our Way, in preaching the gospel of Christ.

V. 15. Having hope, now your faith is increased -- So that you can the better
spare us, to be enlarged by you abundantly -- That is, enabled by you to go
still further.

V. 16. In the regions beyond you -- To the West and South, where the Gospel
had not yet been preached

XI.
you as as chaste virgin to Christ. if ye receive another Spirit, which ye have
not received, or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear
with him. I am unskilful in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have been
thoroughly made manifest to you in all things. of them to serve you: and when I
was present with you and wanted, I was chargeable to no man. For the brethren
who came from Macedonia supplied my want; myself. As the truth of Christ is in
me, are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
Apostles of Christ. it is no great thing, if his ministers also be transformed
as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works.
you, if he take from you, if he exalt himself, if he smite you on the face. am
I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? am I Are they
ministers of Christ? (I speak foolishly) I more: in labors more abundantly, in
stripes more exceedingly, in prisons more abundantly, in deaths often. stripes
save one. with a guard, being determined to apprehend me.

V. 1. I wish ye would bear -- So does he pave the way, for what might
otherwise have given Offense: With my ^oly -- Of commending myself; which to
many may appear Folly; and really would be so, were it not on this Occasion
absolutely necessary.

V. 2. For -- The Cause of his seeming Folly is expressed in this and the
following Verse; the Cause why they should bear with him, ver. 4.

V. 3. But I fear -- Love is full of these Fears, lest as the Serpent -- A most
apposite Comparison, deceived Eve -- Simple, ignorant of Evil, by his subtlety
-- Which is in the highest Degree dangerous to such a Disposition; so your
minds -- We might therefore be tempted, even if there were no Sin in us, might
be corrupted -- Losing their virginal Purity, from the simplicity that is in
Christ -- That Simplicity which is lovingly intent on Him alone, seeking no
other Person or Thing.

V. 4. If indeed -- Any could show you another Savior, a more powersul Spirit,
a better Gospel, ye might well bear with him -- But this is impossible.

V. 6. If I am uns^ilful in speech -- If I speak in a plain, unadorned Way,
like an unlearned person. So the Greek Word properly signefies.

V. 7. Have I committed an offense -- Will any turn this into an Objection, in
humbling myself -- To work at my Trade, that ye might be exalted -- To be
Children of GOD?

V. 8. I spoiled other churches -- I, as it were took the spoils of them: It is
a military Term, taking wages (or Pay, another military Word) of them -- When I
came to you at first. And when I was present with you and wanted -- My Work not
quite supplying my Necessities, I was chargeable to no man -- Of Corinth.

V. 9. For I chose to receive Help from the poor Macedonians, rather than the
rich Corinthians! Were the Poor in all Ages more generous than the the Rich?

V. 10. This my boasting shall not be stopped -- For I will receive nothing
from you.

V. 11. Do I refuse to receive any thing of you, because I love you not? God
knows that is not the Case.

V. 12. Who desire any occasion -- To censure me; that wherein they boast, ^^ey
may be ^^und even as we -- They boasted of being burdensome to no man. But it
was a vain Boast in them, though not in the Apostle.

V. 14. Satan himself is transformed -- Uses to transform himself; to put on
the fairest Appearances.

V. 15. Therefore it is no great, no strange thing -- whose end --
Notwithstanding all their Disguises, shall be according to their works.

V. 16. I say again -- He premises a new Apology to this new Commendation of
Himself. Let no man think me a fool -- Let none think I do this, without the
utmost Necessity. But if any do think me foolish herein, yet bear with my Folly.

V. 17. I speak not after the Lord -- Not by an Express Command from Him;
though still under the Direction of his Spirit: but as it were foolishly -- In
such a Manner, as many may think foolish.

V. 18. After the flesh -- That is, in external Things.

V. 19. Being wise -- A beautiful Irony.

V. 20. For ye suffer -- Not only the Folly, but the gross Abuses of those
false Apostles, if a man enslave you -- Lord it over you in the most arbitrary
manner, if he devour you -- By his exorbitant Demands, (notwithstanding his
Boast of not being burdensome) if he take from you -- By open Violence, if he
exalt himself -- By the most unbounded Self-commendation, if he smite you on
the face -- (A very possible Case) under Pretense of divine Zeal.

V. 21. I speak with regard to reproach, as though we had been weak -- I say,
Bear with me: Even on Supposition that the Weakness be real, which they
reproach me with.

V. 22. Are they Hebrews, Israelites, the seed of Abraham -- These were the
He^ds on which they boasted.

V. 23. I am more so than they. In deaths often -- Surrounding me (...) the
most dreadful Forms.

V. 24. Five times I received from the Jews forty stripes save one -- Which was
the utmost that the Law allowed. With the Romans he sometimes pleaded his
Privilege as a Roman. But from the Jews he suffered all things.

V. 25. Thrice I have been shipwrecked -- Before his Voyage to Rome. In the
deep -- Probably floating on some Part of the Vessel.

V. 27. In cold and nakedness -- Having no Place where to lay my Head; no
convenient r^iment to cover me: Yet appearing before Noblemen, Governors,
Kings; and not being ashamed.

V. 28. Beside the things which are from without -- Which I suffer on the
Account of others; namely, the care of all the churches -- A more modest
Expression than if he had said, the care of the whole church. All -- Even those
I have not seen in the Flesh. St. Peter himself could not have said this in so
strong a Sense.

V. 29. Who -- So he had not only the Care of the Churches, but of every Person
therein, is weak and I am not weak? -- By Sympathy as well as by Condescension.
Who is offended -- Hindered in, or turned out of the good Way, and I burn not
-- Being pained as though I had Fire in my Bosom.

V. 30. I will glory of the things that concern my Infirmities -- Of wh^t ^hews
my Weakness, rather than my Strength.

V. 32. The Governor under Aretas -- King of Arabia and Syria, o which Damascus
was a chief City, willing to oblige the Jews, kep the City, Setting Guards at
all the Gates Day and Night.

V. 33. Through a window -- Of an House which stood on the City Wall.

XII
Surely it is not expedient for me to boast: yet I will come to visions and
revelations of the Lord. should resolve to boast, I should not be a fool; for I
speak the truth: but I forbear, lest any one should think of me above what he
sees me, or hears from me.

And lest I should be lifted up with the abundance of the revelations, for when
I am weak, but ye have compelled me: for I ought to have been com^ended by you:
for in nothing have I fallen short of the very chief apostles, though I am
nothing.

Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you,

Think ye that we again excuse ourselves to you? lest I should be found by you
such as ye would not: lest there should be contentions, envyings, wraths,
strifes, backbitings,

V. 1. It is not expedient -- Unless on so pressing Occasion. Visions are seen,
Revelations heard.

V. 2. I knew a man in Christ -- That is, a Christian. It is plain from ver. 6,
7, that he means himself, though in Modesty he speaks as of a third Person,
whether in the body, or ou^ of the ^^d, I know not -- It is equally possible
with GOD, to present distant Things to the Im^gination in the Body, as if the
Soul were absent from (...) and present with them; or to transport both Soul
and Body for what Time he pleases to Heaven; or to transport the Soul only
thither for a Season, and in the mean Time to preserve the Body fit for its
Re-entrance. But since the Apostle himself did not know, whether his Soul was
in the Body, or whether one or both were actually in Heaven, it would be vain
Curiosity for us to attempt determi^ing ^t. The third heaven -- Where GOD is;
far above the a^real and the starry Heaven. Some suppose it was here the
Apostle was let into the Mystery of the future State of the Church; and
received his Orders to turn from the Jews, and go to the Gentiles.

V. 3. Yea, I knew such a man -- That at another Time.

V. 4. He was caught up into paradise -- The Seat of happy Spirits in their
separate State, between Death and the Resurrection. Things which it is not
possible for man to utter -- Human Language being incapable of expressing them.
Her he anticipated the joyons R^st of the Righteous that die in the LORD. But
this Rapture did not precede, But follow after his being caught up to the third
Heaven. A strong Intimation, that he must first discharge his Mission, and then
enter into Glory. And beyond all Doubt, such a Foretaste of it served to
strengthen him in all his After-Trials, when he could call to Mind the very Joy
that was prepared for him.

V. 5. Of such an one I will. -- I might, glory: but I will not glory of myself
-- As considered in myself.

V. 6. For if I should resolve to glory (referring o, 'might glory) of such a
glorious Revelation, I should not be a fool -- That is, it could not justly be
accounted Folly to relate the naked Truth. But I forbear -- I speak sparingly
of these Things, for fear any one should think ^oo highly of me -- O where is
this Fear now to be found? Who is a raid of this?

V. 7. There was given me. -- By the wise and gracious Providence of GOD, a
thorn in the flesh-A Visitation more painful than any Thorn sticking in the
F^e^h, a messenger or Angel of Satan to buffet me -- Perhaps both visibly and
invisibly: And the Word in the Original express^^ ^he present as well as the
past Time. All Kinds of Affliction had befallen the Apostle. Yet none of those
did he deprecate. But here he speaks of one, as above all the rest, one that
macerated him with Weakness, and by the Pain and Ignominy of it, prevented his
b^ing lifted up more, or at least no^ less, th^n the most vehement Head-^^h
could have done; which many of the Ancients say he labored under. St. Paul
seems to have had a fresh Fear of these buffetings every Moment, when ^e so
frequently repress^^ himself in his Boasting, though it was extorted from him by
the utmost Necessity.

V. 8. Concerning this -- He had now forgot his being lifted up, I besought the
Lord thrice -- As our LORD besought his Father.

V. 9. But he said to me -- In answer to my third Request, My grace is
sufficient for thee -- How tender a Repulse! We see there may be Grace where
there is the quickest Sense of Pain My strength is more illustriously displayed
by the Weakness of the Instrument. Therefore I will glory in my weaknesses,
rather than my Revelations, that the strength of Christ may rest upon me. The
Greek Word properly means, may cover me all over li^e a tent. We ought most
willingly to accept whatever tends to this End, however contrary to Flesh and
Blood.

V. 10. Weaknesses -- Whether proceeding from Satan or Men: for when I am weak
-- Deeply conscious of my Weakness, then does the Strength of Christ rest upon
me.

V. 11. Though I am nothing -- Of myself.

V. 14. The third time -- Having been disappointed twice. I seek not yours --
Your Goods, but you -- Your Souls.

V. 15. I will gladly spend -- All I have, and be spent -- Myself.

V. 16. But some may object, Though I did not burden you, though I did not take
any Thing of you myself, yet being crafty I caught you with guile -- I did
secretly by my Messengers, what I would not do openly, or in Person.

V. 17. I answer this lying Accusation by appealing to plain Fact. Did I make a
gain of you by Titus -- Or any other of my Messengers? You know the contrary.

It should be carefully observed, that St. Paul does not allow, but absolutely
denies, that he had caught them with guile -- So that the common Plea for
Guile, which has been often drawn from this Text, ^s utterly without Foundation

V. 18. I desired Titus -- To go to you.

V. 19. Think ye, that we again excuse ourselves? -- That I speak this for my
own Sake? No. I speak all this for your Sakes.

V. 21. Who had sinned before -- My last coming to Corinth. Uncleanness -- Of
married Persons; Lasciviousness -- Against Nature.

XIII.
I am coming to you this third time: every word shall be established by the
mouth of two or three witnesses. you before, and do tell beforehand (though
now absent, as if I were present the second time) those who had sinned before,
and all the rest, that, know that we are not reprobates. even your perfection.
Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I should u^e
severity, according to the power which the Lord has given me, for edification,
and not for destruction.

Finally, be with you all.

V. 1. I am coming this third time -- He had been coming twice before, though
he did not actually come.

V. 2. A^ the rest -- Who have since then sinned in any of these Kinds. I will
not spare -- I will severely punish them.

V. 4. He was crucified through weakness -- Through the Impotence of human
Nature. We also are weak with him We appear weak and despicable by partaking of
the same Sufferings for his Sake; but we shall ^ive with him -- Being raised
from the Dead, by the power of God in you -- By that Divine Energy which is now
in every Believer. (ver 5.)

V. 5. Prove yourselves -- Whether ye are such as (...), or such as cannot bear
the test This is the proper Meaning of the Word, which we translate Reprobates.
Know ye not yourselves, That Jesus Christ is in you? -- All Christian Believers
know this, by the Witness and by the Fruit of his Spirit. Some translate the
Words, Jesus Christ is (...) you, that is, in the Church of Corinth, and
understand them of (...) miraculous Gifts, and the Power of Christ which
attended the Censures of the Apostle.

V. 6. And I trust ye shall know -- By proving yourselves, not by putting my
Authority to the Proof.

V. 7. I pray God, that ye may do no evil -- To give me Occasion of showing my
Apostolical Power I do not desire to appear approved -- By miraculously
punishing you; but that ye may do that which is good though we should be as
reprobates -- Having no Occasion to give that Proof of our Apostleship.

V. 8. For we can do nothing against the truth -- Neither against that which is
just and right, nor against those who walk according to the Truth of the Gospel.

V. 9. For we rejoice when we are wea^ -- When we appear so, having no Occasion
to show our Apostolic Power. And this we wish even your perfection -- In the
Faith that works by Love.

V. 11. Be perfect -- Aspire to the highes^ Degree of Holiness: Be of good
comfort -- Filled with Divine Consolation: Be of one mind -- Desire, labor,
pray for it, to the utmost Degree that is possible.

V. 13. The grace -- Or Favor of our Lord Jesus Christ -- By which alone we
can come to the Father, and the love of God -- Manifested to you, and abiding
in you, and the communion -- Or Fellowship of the Holy Ghost -- In all his
Gifts and Graces.

It is with great Reason that this comprehensive and instructive Blessing is
pronounced at the Close of our solemn Assemblies. And it is a very indecent
Thing to see many quitting them, or getting into P^s^ures of Remove, before
this short Sentence can be ended.

How often have we heard this awful Benediction pronounced? Let us study it
more and more, that we may value it proportionably, that we may either deliver
or receive it with a becoming Reverence; with Eyes and Hearts lifted up to GOD,
who gives the Blessing out of Sion, and life for evermore.

NOTES ON St. PAUL's Epistle to the Galatians.
THIS Epistle is not written, as most of St. Paul's are, to the Christians of a
particular City, but to those of a whole Country in Asia Minor, the Metropolis
of which was A^^yra. These readily embraced the Gospel; but after St. Paul had
left them, certain Men came among them, who (like those mentioned Acts xv.)
taught, That it was necessary to be circumcised, and to keep the Mosaic ^^aw.
They affirmed, That all the other Apostles taught thus: That St. Paul was
inferior to them: And that even he sometimes practiced and recommended the Law,
though at other times he opposed it

The first P^rt therefore of this Epistle is spent in vindicating himself and
his Doctrine, proving, 1. That he had it immediately from Christ himself, and
that he was not inferior to the other Apostles; 2. That it was the very same
which the other Apostles preached: And 3. That his Practice was consistent with
his Doctrine.

The Second contains Proofs drawn from the Old Testament, that the Law and all
its Ceremonies were abolished by Christ.

The Third contains practical Inferences, closed with his usual Benediction.

To be a little more distinct.

This Epistle contains, I. The Inscription, C. i. 1 -- 5. II. The calling the
Galatians back to the true Gospel; wherein ^e 1. Reproves them for leaving it,
6 -- 10. 2. Asserts the Authority of the Gospel he had preached, who 1. Of a
Persecutor was made an Apostle by an immediate Cal^^^ Heaven, 11 -- 17. 2. Was
no way inferior to Peter himself, 18 -- C. ii. 21. 3. Defends Justification by
Faith, and again reproves the Galatians, C. iii 1-iv. 11 4. Explains the same
Thing, by an Allegory taken out of the Law itself, 12-31 5. Exhorts them to
maintain their Liberty, C. v. 1-12 Warns them, not to abuse it, and admonishes
them to walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, 13-C. vi. 10 III. The
Conclusion, 11-18

GALATIANS.
I.
be to you, and peace from God the Father,

I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him who called you by the grace of
Christ,

But I certify you, it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. me by his grace,
To reveal his Son in me, save James,

V. 1. Paul an apostle -- Here it was necessary for St. Paul to assert his
Authority. Otherwise he is very modest in the Use of this Title. He seldom
mentions it when he mentions others in the Salutations with himself, as in the
Epistles to the Philippians and Thessalonians: Or when he writes about secular
Affairs, as in that to Philemon: Nor yet in writing to the Hebrews; because he
was not properly their Apostle; not of men -- Not commissioned from them; but
from GOD the Father, neither by man -- Neither by any Man as an Instrument, but
by JESUS CHRIST; who raised him from the dead -- Of which it was the peculiar
Business of an Apostle to bear Witness.

V. 2. And all the brethren -- Who agree with me in what I now write.

V. 4. That he might deliver us from the present evil world -- From the Guilt,
Wickedness, and Misery wherein it is involved, and from its vain and foolish
Customs and Pleasures; according to the will of God -- Without any Merit of
ours. St. Paul begins most of his Epistles with Thanksgiving, but writing to
the Galatians, he alters his Style, and first sets down his main Proposition.
That by the Merits of Christ alone, giving himself for our sins, we are
justified: Neither does he term them (as he does others) either Saints, Elect,
or Churches of God.

V. 5. To whom be glory -- For this his gracious Will.

V. 6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed -- After my leaving you, from him
who called you by the grace of Christ -- His gracious Gospel, and his gracious
Power.

V. 7. (...) -- indeed -- is not -- properly -- another Gospel. For what ye
have now received is no Gospel at all. It is not glad, but heavy T^dings, as
setting your Acceptance w^^h GOD upon Terms impossible to be performed. But
there are some that trouble you -- The some Wo^d occurs, Acts xv. 24. and would
-- If they were able, subvert or overthrow the gospel of Christ -- The better
to effect which, they suggest, that the other Apostles, yea, and I myself
insist upon the Observance of the Law.

V. 8. But if we -- I and all the Apostles; or an Angel from Heaven -- If it
were possible; preach another gospel, let him be accursed -- Cut off from
Christ and GOD.

V. 9. As -- He speaks upon mature Deliberation; after pausing, it seems,
between the two Verses, we -- I and the Brethren who are with me; have said
before -- Many Times, in Effect, if not in Terms. so I say -- All those
Brethren knew the Truth of the Gospel. St. Paul knew the Galatians had received
the true Gospel.

V. 10. For -- He adds the Reason why he speaks so confidently; do I now
satisfy men? -- Is this what I aim at in preaching or writing? If I still --
Since I was an Apostle, pleased men -- Studied to please them, if this were my
Motive of Action: Nay, if I did in fact please the Men who know not GOD, I
should not be the servant of Christ -- Hear this, all ye who vainly hope to
keep in Favor both with GOD and with the World?

V. 11. But I certify you, brethren -- He does not till now give them even this
Appellation: that the gospel which was preached by me -- Among you -- is not
according to man -- Not from Man, not by Man, not suited to the Taste of Man.

V. 12. For neither did I receive it -- At once, nor was I taught it -- Slowly
and gradually, by any Man; but by the revelation of Jesus Christ -- Our LORD
revealed to him at first, his Resurrection, Ascension, and the Calling of the
Gentiles, and his own Apostleship: And told him then, there were other things
for which he would appear to him.

V. 13. I persecuted the church of God -- That is, the Believers in Christ.

V. 14. Being zealous of the unwritten traditions -- Over and above those
written in the Law.

V. 15. But when it pleased God -- He ascribes nothing to his own Merits,
Endeavors, or Sincerity, who separated me from my mother's womb -- Set me
apart for an Apostle, as he did Jeremiah for a Prophet, ( Jer. i. 5) Such an
unconditional Predestination as this, may consist both with GOD's Justice and
Mercy, and ^alled me by his grace -- By his free and Almighty Love, to be both
a Christian and an Apostle.

V. 16. To reveal his Son in me -- By the powerful Operation of his Spirit, (2.
Cor iv. 6) as well as to me, by the heavenly Vision; that I might preach him to
others -- Which I should have been il^ qualified to do, had I not first known
Him myself: I did not confer with flesh and blood -- Being fully satisfied of
the Divine Will, and determined to obey, I took no Counsel with any Man,
neither with my own Reason or Inclinations, which might have raised numberless
Objections.

V. 17. Neither did I go up to Jerusalem -- The Residence of the Apostles, but
I immediately went into Arabia, and returned again to Damascus -- He
presupposes the Journey to Damascus, in which he was converted, as being known
to them all.

V. 18. Then after three years -- Wherein I had given full Proof of my
Apostleship, I went to visit Peter -- To converse with him.

V. 19. But other of the apostles I saw none, save James the brother (that is,
the Kinsman) of the Lord. -- Therefore when Barnabas is said to have brought
him in to the Apostles, Acts ix. 27. only St. Peter and St. James are meant.

V. 22. I was unknown by face to the churches of Judea -- Except to that of
Jerusalem.

V. 24. In me -- That is, on my Account.

II.
into bondage: but whatsoever they were, it is no difference to me: God
accepts no man's person) they who undoubtedly were something, with that of
the circumcision: should go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision: they
desired that we would be mindful of the poor, which very thing I also was
forward to do. them all, If thou being a Jew, live after the manner of the
Gentiles, and not of the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to judaize? who
are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, not justified by the works
of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ) have believed in Christ Jesus,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
law; because by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified. is Christ
therefore the minister of sin? God forbid. Christ lives in me, and the life
that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me
and delivered up himself for me. is by the law, then Christ died in vain.

V. 1. Then fourteen years after -- My first Journey thither, I went up again
to Jerusalem -- This seems to be the Journey mentioned Acts xv. Several
Passages here referring to that great Council, wherein all the Apostles showed,
that they were of the same Judgment with him.

V. 2. I went up -- Not by any Command from them, but by an express revelation
from GOD, and laid before them -- The chief of the Church in Jerusalem, the
gospel which I preach among the Gentiles -- ( Acts xv. 4.) Touching
Justification by Faith alone: Not that they might confirm me therein, but that
I might remove Prejudice from them. Yet not publicly at first, but severally
to those of eminence -- Speaking to them one by one, lest I should run, or
should have run in vain -- Lest I should lose the Fruit either of my present or
past Labors. For they might have greatly hindered this, had they not been
sully satisfied both of his Mission and Doctrine. The Word run beautifully
expresses the swift Progress of the Gospel.

V. 3. But neither was Titus who was with me -- When I conversed with them,
compelled to be circumcised -- A clear Proof that none of the Apostles insisted
on the circumcising Gentile Believers. The Sense is, And it is true, some of
those false brethren, would fain have compelled Titus to be circumcised. But I
utterly refused it.

V. 4. Because of false brethren -- Who seem to have urged it, introduced
unawares -- Into some of those private Conferences at Jerusalem, who had
slipped in, to spy out our liberty -- From the Ceremonial Law, that they might
-- if possible bring us into that bondage again.

V. 5. To whom we did not yield by submission -- Although in Love he would have
yielded to any. With such wonderful Prudence did the Apostle use his Christian
Liberty: Circumcising Timothy ( Acts xvi. 3.) because of weak Brethren, but not
Titus, because of false Brethren; that the truth of the gospel -- That is the
true genuine Gospel, might continue with you -- With you Gentiles. So we
defend, for your Sakes, the Privilege which you would give up.

V. 6. And they who undoubtedly were something -- Above all others, ( What they
were -- How eminent soever, it is no difference to me -- So that I should alter
either my Doctrine or my Practice: God accepts up man's person -- For any
Eminence in Gi^ts or outward Prerogatives) in that Conference added nothing to
me -- Neither as to Doctrine, nor Mission.

V. 7. But when they saw -- By the Effects which I laid before them, (ver. 8.
Acts xv. 12.) that I was entrusted with the gospel of the uncircumcision --
That is, with the Charge of Preaching it to the uncircumsed Heathens.

V. 8. For he that wrought effectually in Peter for the apostleship of the
circumcision -- To qualify him for, and support him in, the Discharge of that
Office to the Jews, wrought likewise effectually in and by ^^e, for and in the
Discharge of my Office toward the Gentiles.

V. 9. And when James -- Probably named first, because he was Bishop of the
Church in Jerusalem, and Cephas -- Speaking of him at Jerusalem, he calls him
by his Hebrew Name, and John -- Hence it appears, that he also was at the
Council, though he is not particularly named in the Acts: Who undoubtedly were
pillars -- The principal Supporters and Defenders of the Gospel; knew -- After
they had heard the Account I gave them, the grace -- Of Apostleship, which was
given me, they -- In the Name of all; gave to me and Barnabas -- My
Fellow Laborer, the right-hands of fellowship -- They gave us their Hands, in
Token of receiving us as their Fellow Laborers, mutually agreeing, that we --
I and those in Union with me, should go to the gentiles -- Chiefly, and they --
With those that were in Union with them, chiefly to the circumcision -- The
Jews.

V. 10. Of the poor -- The poor Christians in Judea, who had lost all they had
for Christ's sake.

V. 11. But -- The Argument here comes to the Height. Paul reproves Peter
himself. So far was he from receiving his Doctrine from Man, or from being
inferior to the chief of the Apostles, when Peter -- Afterward, came to
Antioch -- Then the chief of all the Gentile Churches, I withstood him to the
face, because he was to be blamed -- For Fear of Man, ver. 12. for
Dissimulation, ver. 13. and for not walking uprightly, ver. 14.

V. 13. And the other believing Jews -- Who were at Antioch, dissembled with
him; so that even Barnabas was carried away with their dissimulation -- Was
borne away as with a Torrent, into the same ill Practice.

V. 14. I said to Cephas before them all -- See Paul single against Peter and
all the Jews! If thou being a Jew, yet live in thy ordinary Conversation,
after the manner of the Gentiles -- Not observing the Ceremonial Law, which
thou know to be now abolished, why compellest thou the Gentiles -- By
withdrawing thyself, and all the Ministers from them; either to judaize, to
keep the Ceremonial Law, or to be excluded from Church Communion?

V. 15. We -- St. Paul, to spare St. Peter, drops the first Person Singular,
and speaks in the Plural Number. Ver. 18. he speaks in the first Person
Singular again by a Figure, and without a Figure, ver. 19, etc. who are Jews by
nature -- By Birth, not Proselytes only, and not sinners of the Gentiles --
That is, not sinful Gentiles; not such gross, enormous, abandoned Sinners, as
the Heathens generally were.

V. 16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law -- Not even
of the Moral, much less the Ceremonial Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ --
That is, by Faith in Him. The Name Jesus was first known by the Gentiles; the
Name Christ by the Jews. And they are not always placed promiscuously, but
generally in a more solemn Way of speaking, the Apostle says Christ Jesus, in a
more familiar, Jesus Christ, even we -- And how much more most the Gentiles,
who have still less Pretense to depend on their own Works? Have believed
Knowing there is no other Way Because -- Considering the Demands of the Law,
and the State of human Nature, it is evident, that by the works of the law --
By such an Obedience as it requires, shall no flesh living -- No human Creatur^
Jew or Gentile, be justified. Hitherto St. Paul had been considering that
single Question, "Are Christians obliged to observe the Ceremonial Law?" But he
here insensibly goes farther, and by citing this Scripture shows, That what he
spoke directly of the Ceremonial, included also the Moral Law. For David
undoubtedly did so, when he said ( Psalm. cxliii. 2. the Place here referred to)
In thy sight shall no man living be justified: Which the Apostle likewise
explains, Romans iii. 19, 20. in such a Manner, as can agree to none but the
Moral Law.

V. 17. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we ourselves are still
found sinners -- If we continue in Sin, will it therefore follow, That Christ
is the minister or Countenancer of sin?

V. 18. By no means! For If I build again -- By my sinful Practice, the things
which I destroyed -- By my preaching, I only make myself -- Or show myself, not
Christ, to be a transgressor; the whole Blame lies on me, not Him or his
Gospel. As if he had said, The Objection were just, if the Gospel promised
Justification to Men continuing in Sin. But it does not. Therefore if any who
profess the Gospel, do not live according to it, they are Sinners, it is
certain; but not justified, and so the Gospel is clear.

V. 19. For I through the law -- Applied by the Spirit to my Heart, and deeply
convincing me of my utter Sinfulness and Helplessness, ^m dead to the law -- To
all Hope of Justification from it, that I may live to God -- Not continue in
Sin. For this very End am I (in this Sense) freed from the Law, that I may be
freed from Sin.

V. 20. The Apostle goes on to describe, How he is freed from Sin; how far he
is from continuing therein. I am crucified with Christ -- Made conformable to
his Death; the body of sin is destroyed, (Romans vi. 6.) and I -- As to my
corrupt Nature, live no longer -- Being dead to sin: But Christ lives in me --
Is a Fountain of Life in my inmost Soul, from which all my Tempers, Words, and
Actions flow. And the life that I now live in the flesh -- Even in this mortal
Body, I live by Faith in the Son of God -- I derive every Moment from that
supernatural Principle; from a Divine Evidence and Conviction, that He loved
me, and delivered up himself for me.

V. 21. Meantime I do not make void -- In seeking to be justified by Faith; the
grace of God -- The free Love of GOD in Christ Jesus. But they do, who seek
Justification by the Law: For if Righteousness is by the law -- If Men might be
justified by their Obedience to the Law, Moral or Ceremonial, then Christ died
in vain -- Without any Necessity for it, since Men might have been saved
without his Death; might by their own Obedience have been both discharged from
Condemnation, and entitled to Eternal Life.

III.
it be yet in vain? do it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?
As Abraham Genesis xv. 6.
believed God, Genesis xii. 3.
In thee shall all the nations be blessed. Deuteronomy. xxvii. 26.
Cursed is every one who continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the law, is evident; for Hab. ii. 4.
the just shall live by faith. Lev. xviii. 5.
he that does them, shall live by them. Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, Deuteronomy. xxi. 23.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree:) That the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, that we might receive the
promise of the Spirit through faith. Genesis xxii. 18.
And to thy seed, be by the law, it is no more by promise; but God gave it to
Abraham by promise. was the law? It was added because of transgressions, till
the seed should come to whom the promise was made: and it was ordained by
angels, in the hand of a mediator. a mediator of one; Is then the law against
the promises of God? God forbid. But if there had been a law given which could
have given life, verily righteousness would have been by the law. free, there
is neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. are Christ's,
then are ye the seed of Abraham, and heirs according to the promise.

V. 1. O thoughtless Galatians -- He breaks in upon them, with a beautiful
Abruptness, who has bewitched you -- Thus to contradict both your own Reason
and Experience, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been as evidently set forth
-- By our Preaching, as if He had been crucified among you

V. 2. This only would I learn of you -- That is, this one Argument might
convince you. Did ye receive The Witness and the Fruit of the Spirit, by
performing the works of the law, or by hearing of and receiving faith?

V. 3. Are ye so thoughtless? -- As not to consider what you have yourselves
experienced? Having begun in the Spirit -- Having set out under the Light and
Power of the Spirit by Faith; do ye now, when ye ought to be more spiritual,
and more acquainted with the Power of Faith, expect to be made perfect by the
flesh? Do you think to complete either your Justification or Sanctification, by
giving up that Faith, and depending on the Law, which is a gross and carnal
Thing when opposed to the Gospel?

V. 4. Have ye suffered -- Both from the zealous Jews and from the Heathens, so
many things -- For adhering to the Gospel, in vain -- So as to lose all the
Blessing which ye might have obtained, by enduring to the End, if it be yet in
vain -- As if he had said, I hope better Things, even that ye will endure to
the End.

V. 5. And at the present Time, Does he that ministers the Gift of the Spirit
to you and wor^eth miracles among you, do it by the works of the law? -- That
is, in Confirmation of his preaching Justification by Works? Or of his
preaching Justification by Faith?

V. 6. Doubtless in Confirmation of that grand Doctrine, That we are justified
by Faith, even as Abraham was. The Apostle both in this and in the Epistle to
the Romans, makes great Use of the Instance of Abraham: The rather, because
from Abraham the Jew drew their great Argument (as they do th^s Day) both for
their own Continuance in Judaism, and for denying the Gentiles to be the Church
of GOD.

V. 7. Know then, that they who are partakers of his faith, these, and these
only, are the sons of Abraham; And therefore Heirs of the Promises made to him.

V. 8. And the Scripture -- That is, the Holy Spirit, who gave the Scripture,
foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles also by faith, declared before
-- So great is the Excellency and Fullness of the Scripture, that all the Things
which can ever be controverted, are therein both foreseen and determined. In or
through thee -- As the Father of the Messiah, shall all the Nations be Blessed.

V. 9. So then all they, and they only, who are of faith -- Who truly believe,
are blessed with faithful Abraham -- Receive the Blessing as he did, namely, by
Faith.

V. 10. They only re^^ive it; for as many as are of the works of the law -- As
GOD deals with on that Footing, only on the Terms the Law proposes, are under a
curse; for it is written, Cursed is everyone, who continues not in all the
things which are written in the law -- Who continues not in all the things --
So it requires what no Man can perform; namely, perfect, uninterrupted and
perpetual Obedience.

V. 11. But that none is justified by his Obedience to the law in the sight of
God -- Whatever may be done in the Sight of Man, is farther evident from the
Words of H^ba^kuk, The just shall live by faith -- That is, the Man who is
accounted just or righteous before GOD, shall continue in a State of
Acceptance, Life and Salvation, by Faith. This is the Way GOD has chosen.

V 12. And the law is not of faith -- But quite opposite to it. It does not
say, Be l^ve, but Do.

V. 13. Christ -- Christ alone. The Abruptness of the Sentence shows an holy
Indignation at those who reject so great a Blessing, has redeemed us Whether
Jews or Genti^es, at an high Price, from the curse of the law -- The Curse of
GOD, which the Law denounces against all Transgressors of it, being made a
curse for us -- Taking the Curse upon Himself, that we might be delivered from
it, willingly submitting to that Death, which the Law pronounces peculiarly
accursed.

V 14. That the blessing of Abraham -- The Blessing promised to him, might come
on the Gentiles -- Also, that ^e, who believe, whether Jews or Gentiles, might
receive the promise of the Spirit -- Which includes all the other Promises,
through faith -- Not by Works; for Faith looks wholly to the Promise.

V. 15. I speak after the manner of men -- I illustrate this by a famili^r
Instance, taken from the Practice of Men. Though it be but a man's covenant,
yet if it be once legally confirmed, none -- No, not the Covenanter himself,
(unless something unforeseen occur, which cannot be the Case with GOD)
disannul^eth or adds thereto -- Any new Conditions.

V. 16. Now the promises were made to Abraham and his seed -- Several Promises
were made to Abraham. But the chief of all, and which was several Times
repeated, was that of the B^^ssing through Christ. He -- That is, GOD, says
not, And to seeds, as of many -- As if the Promise were made to several Kinds
of Seed; but as of one -- That is, one Kind of Seed, one Posterity, one Kind of
Sons And to all these the Ble^^ing belonged by Promise, which is Christ --
Including all that believe in Him.

V. 17. And this I say -- What I mean is this. The covenant which was before
confirmed of God -- By the Promise itself, by the Repetition of it, and by a
solemn Oath, concerning the Blessing all Nations through Christ, the law which
was four hundred and thirty years after -- (Counting from the Time when the
Pro^ise was first made to Abraham, Genesis xii. 2, 3,) does not disan^^, so as to
make the promise of no effect -- With regard to all Nations, if only the Jewish
were to receive it: Yea, with regard to Them also, if it was by works, so as to
supersede it, and introduce another Way of obtaining the Blessing.

V. 18. And again -- This is a new Argument. The former was drawn from the
Time, this from the Nature of the Transaction, if the eternal ^nheritance be
obtained by keeping the law, it is no more by virtue of the free promise. These
being just opposite to each other But it is by Promise. Therefore it is not by
the Law.

V. 19. It (the ceremonial Law) was added -- To the Promise, because of
transgressions -- Probably, the Yoke of the ceremonial Law was in^licted as a
Punishment for the national Sin of Idolatry: ( Exodus xxxii 1.) at least the
more grievous P^rts of it: And the whole of it was a prophetic Type of Christ.
The mora^ L^w was added to the Promise, to discover and to restrain
Transgressions, and to convince Men of their Guilt and Need of the Promise, and
give some check to Sin. And this Law passes not away: But the ceremonial Law
was only introduced till Christ, the seed to o^ through whom the promise was
made, should come. And it was ordain^ by angels in the hand of a mediator -- It
was not given to Israel, like the Promise to Abraham, immediately from GOD
Himself, but was conveyed by the Ministry of Angels to Moses, and delivered
into his Hand as a Mediator between GOD and them, to remind them of the great
Mediator.

V. 20. Now the mediator is not a mediator of one -- There must be two Partie^,
or there can be no Mediator between them: But GOD wh^ made the free Promise to
Abraham, is only one of the Parties. The other, Abraham, was not present at the
T^^e of Moses. Therefore in the Promise Moses had no^^^ng to do. The Law,
wherein he was concerned, was a Transaction of quite another Nature.

V. 21. Will it follow from hence, that the law is against -- Opposite to the
promises of God? By no means. They are well consistent But yet the Law cannot
give Life, as the Promise does. If there had been a law which could have given
life -- Which could have entitled a Sinner to Life, GOD would have spared his
own Son, and righteousness, or Justification, with all the Blessings consequent
upon it, would have been by that Law.

V. 22. But on the contrary the scripture, wherein that Law is written, has
concluded a^l under sin -- Has shut them up together (so the Word properly
signifies) as in a Prison, under Sentence of Death, to the end, that all being
cut off from expecting Justification by the Law, the promise might be freely
given to them that believe.

V. 23. But before faith -- That is, the Gospel Dispensation, came, we were
kept -- As in close Custody, under the law -- The Mosaic Dispensation, shut up
unto the faith which was to be revealed -- Reserved and prepared for the
Gospel Dispensation.

V. 24. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster unto Christ -- It was designed
to train us up for Christ. And this it did both by it is Commands, which showed
the need we had of his Atonement, and its Ceremonies, which all pointed us to
Him.

V. 25. But faith -- That is, the Gospel Dispensation, being come, we are no
longer under that schoolmaster, the Mosaic Dispensation.

V. 26. For ye -- Christians, are all adult sons of God -- And so need a
Schoolmaster no longer.

V. 27. For as many of you as have testified your Faith, by being baptized in
the Name of Christ, have put on Christ -- Have received Him as your
Righteousness, and are therefore Sons of GOD through Him.

V. 28. There is neither Jew nor Greek -- That is, there is no Difference
between them; they are equally accepted through Faith. There is neither male
nor female -- Circumcision being laid aside, which was peculiar to Males, and
was designed to put a Difference, during that Dispensation, between Jews and
Gentiles.

V. 29. If ye are Christ's -- That is, Believers in Him.

IV.
no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through
Christ.

Brethren, am; for I also am as ye were: ye have not injured me at all. of God,
it is good to be zealous in a good thing always, and not only while I am
present with you.

Tell me, Genesis xxi. 2, 9.
Abraham had two sons, one by the bondwoman, another by the freewoman. are
the two covenants; one from mount Sinai, bearing children to bondage, Isaiah
live. 1.
Rejoice thou barren, that bear not; break forth and cry, thou that
travailest not; for the desolate has many more children than she that has an
husband.) that was born after the Spirit, it is now also. But what says the
scripture? Genesis xxi. 1.
Cast out the bondwoman and her son; for the son of the bondwoman shall not
be heir with the son of the freewoman.

V. 1. Now -- To illustrate by a plain Similitude the Pre-eminence of the
Christian over the legal Dispensation, the heir as long as he is a child -- As
he is under Age, differs nothing from a servant -- Not being at Liberty
either to use or enjoy his Estate, though he be lord -- Proprietor of it all.

V. 2. But is under tutors -- As to his Person, and stewards -- As to his
Substance.

V. 3. So we -- The Church of GOD, when we were children -- In our Minority,
under the legal Dispensation, were in bondage -- In a Kind of servile State
under the elements of the word -- Under the typical Observances of the Law,
which were like the first Elements of Grammar, the A B C of Children; and were
of so gross a Nature, as hardly to carry our Thoughts beyond this World.

V. 4. But when the fullness of the time -- Appointed by the Father (ver. 2) was
come, God sent forth -- From his own Bosom, his Son, miraculously made of the
Substance of a woman -- A Virgin, without the Concurrence of a Man, made under
the law -- Both under the Precept, and under the Curse of it.

V. 5. To redeem those under the law -- From the Curse of it, and from that
low, servile State that we -- Jews who believe, might receive the adoption --
All the Privileges of adult sons.

V. 6. And because ye -- Gentiles who believe, are also thus made his adult
sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts likewise
crying Abba, Father -- Enabling you to call upon GOD both with the Confidence,
and the Tempers of dutiful Children The Hebrew and Greek Word are joined
together, to express the joint Cry of the Jews and Gentiles.

V. 7. Wherefore thou -- Who believe in Christ, art no more a servant -- Like
those who are under the Law, but a son -- Of mature Age, and if a son, then an
heir of all the Promises, and of the all-sufficient God Himself.

V. 8. (...) then when ye knew not God, ye served them that by nature -- That
is in Reality, are no gods -- And so were under a far worse Bondage than even
that of the Jews. For they did serve the true GOD though in a low, slavish
Manner.

V. 9. But now being known of God -- As his beloved Children, how turn ye back
to the weak and poor elements -- Weak, utterly unable to purge your Conscience
from Guilt, or to give that filial Confidence in GOD: poor-Incapable of
enriching the Soul with such Holiness and Happiness as ye are Heirs to. Ye
desire to be again in bondage -- Though of another Kind; now to these Elements,
as before to those Idols.

V. 10. Ye observe days -- Jewish Sabbaths, and months -- New Moons, and times
-- As that of the Passover, Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles, and years
-- Annual Solemnities. It does not mean Sabbati^ Years. These were not to be
observed out of the Land of Canaan.

V. 11. The Apostle here dropping the Argument, applies to the Affections, (ver
11 -- 20.) and humbles himself to the Galatians, with an inexpressible
Tenderness.

V. 12. Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am -- Meet me in mutual Love; for I am
as ye were -- I still love you as affectionately as ye once loved me. Why
should I not? Ye have not injured me at all -- I have received no personal
Injury from you.

V. 13. I preached to you, notwithstanding infirmity of the flesh -- That is,
notwithstanding bodily Weakness, and under great Disadvantage from the
Despicableness of my outward Appearance.

V 14. And ye did not slight my temptation -- That is, ye did not ^light or
disdain me for my Temptation, my thorn in the flesh.

V. 15. What was then the blessedness ye spoke of? -- On which ye so
congratulated one another?

V. 17. They -- The judaizing Teachers who are come among you, zealously af^ect
you -- Express an extraordinary Regard for you; but not well -- Their Zeal is
not according to Knowledge, neither have they a single Eye to your spiritual
Advantage; yea, they would exclude you From me and from the Blessings of the
Gospel, that ye might affect Love and esteem them.

V. 18. In a good thing -- In what is really worth our Zeal. True Zeal is only
^ervent Love.

V. 19 My little children -- He speaks as a Parent, both with Authority, and
the most tender Sympathy, toward weak and sickly Children, of whom I travel in
birth again -- As I did before, ver 13. in ve^ement Pain, Sorrow, Desire,
Prayer, till Christ be forced in you -- Till there be in you, all the Mind that
was in Him

V. 20. I could wish to be present with you now -- Particularly in this
Exigence, and to change -- Variously to attem^er, my voice He writes with much
Softness; but he would speak with more. The Voice may more easily be varied
according to the Occasion than a Letter can; for I stand in doubt of you* -- So
that I am at a L^ss how to speak at this Distance.

V. 21. Do ye not hear the law -- Regard what it says?

V. 23. Was born after the flesh* -- In a natural Way, by promise -- Through
tha^ supernatural Strength, which was given Abraham in consequence of the
Promise.

V. 24. Which things are an allegory -- An Allegory is, a figurative Speech,
wherein one Thing is expressed, and another intended: For those two Sons are
Types of the two Covenants. One Covenant is tha^ given from mount S^nai, which
bears children to bondage -- That is, all who are under this, the Jewish
Covenant, are in Bondage; which Covenant is typified by Agar.

V. 25. For this is mount Sinai, in Arabia -- That is, the Type of Mount Sinai,
and answers to Resembles Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage -- Like
Agar, both to the Law and to the Romans.

V. 26. But the other Covenant is derived from Jerusalem that is above, which
is free, like Sara -- From all inward and outward Bondage, and is the Mother of
us all -- That is, all who believe in Christ, are free Citizens of the New
Jerusalem.

V. 27. For it is written -- Those Words in the primary Sense promise a
flourishing State to Judea, after its Desolation by the Chaldeans. Rejoice thou
barren that bear not -- Ye Heathen Nations, who, like a barren Woman, were
destitute for many Ages, of a Seed to serve the LORD. Break forth and cry aloud
for joy, thou that in former Time travailedst not: for the desolate has many
more children than she that has an husband -- For ye that were so long utterly
desolate shall at length bear more children, than the Jewish Church which was
of old espoused to GOD.

V. 28. Now we -- Who believe, whether Jews or Gentiles, are children of the
^^omise -- Not born in a natural Way, but by the supernatural Power of GOD. And
as such, we are Heirs of the Promise made to believing Abraham.

V. 29. But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit, so it is now also -- And so it will be in all Ages and
Nations to the End of the World

V. 30. But what says the scripture -- Showing the Consequence of this: Cast
out the bondwoman and her son -- Who mocked Isaac. In like manner will GOD
cast out all who seek to be justified by the Law, especially if they persecute
them who are his Children by Faith.

V. 31. So then -- To sum up all, we who believe are not children of the bond
woman -- Have nothing to do with the servile Mosaic Dispensation; but of the
free -- Being tree from the Curse and the Bond of that Law, and from the Power
of S^n and Sa^an.

V.
comes not from him that called you. his judgment, whosoever he be.

Brethren, use not this liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve
one another. Levit. xix. 18.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.

I say then, desires against the flesh (these are contrary to each other) that
ye may not do the things which ye would. these, adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,

V. 1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty -- From the ceremonial Law,
wherewith Christ has under us -- And all Believers, free, and be not entangled
again with the yoke of legal bondage.

V. 2. If ye be circumcised -- And seek to be justified thereby, Christ -- The
Christian Instruction will profit you nothing -- For you hereby disclaim
Christ, and all the Blessings which are through Faith in Him.

V. 3. I testify to every man -- Every Gentile that is circumcised -- He
thereby makes himself a debtor -- Obliges himself at the Peril of his
Salvation, to do the whole law.

V. 4. Therefore Christ is become of no effect to you -- Who seek to be
justified by the law. ^e are fallen from grace -- Ye renounce the n^w Covenant
Ye disclaim the Benefit of this gracious Dispensation

V. 5. For we -- Who believe in Christ, who are under the Gospel. Dispensation,
through the Spirit -- Without any of those carnal Ordinances, want so -- In
sure Confidence of attaining the hope of righteousness -- The Righteousness we
hope for, and full Reward of it. This Righteousness we receive of GOD through
Faith; and by faith we shall obtain the Reward.

V. 6. For in Christ Jesus -- According to the Institution which he has
established, according to the Tenor o^ the Christian Covenant, neither
circumcision -- With the most punctual Observance of the Law, nor
uncircumcision -- With the most exact Heathen Morality, avails any thing --
Toward present Justification or eternal Salvation, but faith alon^; even that
Faith which works by love -- All inward and outward Holiness.

V. 7. Ye did run well -- In the Race of Faith. Who has hindered you -- In
your Course, that ye should not still obey the truth?

V 8. This your present persuasion comes not from God, who called you -- To
his Kingdom and Glory.

V. 9. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump -- One Troubler; (ver. 10.)
troubles all.

V. 10. Yet I have confidence that -- After ye have read this, ye will been
otherwise minded -- Than I am and ye were. But he that troubles you It seems
to have been one Person ch^^^ly who endeavored to seduce them, shall bear his
judgment -- A heavy Burden, already hanging over his Head.

V. 11. But if I still preach circumcision -- As that Troubler seems to have
affirmed, probably taking occasion from his having circumcised Timothy, why do
I still suffer persecution? Then is the offense of the cross ceased The grand
Reason why the Jews were so offended at his preaching Christ crucified, and so
bitterly persecuted him for it, was, that it implied the Abolition of the Law.
Yet St. P^^ did not condemn the conforming, out of Condescension to the
Weakness of any one, even to the ceremonial Law: But he did absolutely condemn
those who taught it as necessary to Justification.

V. 12. I would they were even cut off -- From your Communion, cast out of your
Church, that thus trouble you

V. 13. Ye have been called to liberty -- From Sin and Misery, as well as from
the ceremonial Law. Only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh -- Take
not Occasion from hence to gratify corrupt Nature, but by love serve one
another -- And hereby show that Christ has made you free.

V. 14. For all the law is fulfilled in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thyself -- Inasmuch as none can do this, without loving GOD, 1 John iv. 12. and
the L^ve of GOD and Man includes all Perfection.

V. 15. But if -- On the contrary, in Consequence of the Divisione which those
Troublers have occasioned among yea, (...) bite one another -- By
Evil-speaking, and (...) another -- By Railing and Clamor, take ^^ed ^e be not
^onsumed one of another -- By Bitterness, Strife, and Contention, our Health
and Strength both of Body and Soul are consumed, as well as our Substance and
Reputation.

V. 16. I say then -- He now expl^^ns what ^e proposed, ver. 13. Walk by the
Spirit -- Follow his Guidance in all things, and fulfill not -- In any Thing,
the desire of the flesh -- Of corrupt Nature

V. 17. For the flesh desires against the spirit -- Nature desires what is
quite contrary to the Spirit of GOD but the spirit against the flesh -- But the
Holy Spirit on his P^r^ opposes your evil Nature: ( th^se are contrary to ea^^
other -- The Flesh and the Spirit; there can ^e no Agreement between them) tha^
ye may not do the (...) which ye would That being thus strengthened by the
Spirit, ye may not fulfill the Desire of the Flesh, as otherwise ye would do.

V. 18. But if ye are led by the spirit -- Of Liberty and Love, into all
Holiness, ye are not under the law -- Not under the Curse or Bondage of it, not
under the Guilt or the Power of Sin.

V. 19. Now the works of the flesh -- By which that inward Principle is
discovered, are manifest -- Plain and undeniable. Works are mentioned in the
Plural, because they are distinct from, and often inconsistent with each other.
But the fruit of the Spirit is mentioned in the Singular (ver. 22.) as being
all consistent and connected together, which are these -- He enumerates those
works of the flesh to which the Galatians were most inclined; and those Parts
of the fruit of the Spirit, of which they stood in the greatest Need;
lasciviousness -- The Greek Word means, any thing inward or outward, that is
contrary to Chastity, and yet short of actual Uncleanness.

V. 20. Idolatry, witchcraft -- That this means Witchcraft, strictly speaking
(not poisoning) appears from its being joined with the Worship of Devil gods,
and not with Murder. This is frequently and solemnly forbidden in the Old
Testament. To deny therefore that there is or ever was any such Thing, is by
plain Consequence, to deny the Authority both of the Old and New Testament.
Divisions -- In domestic or civil Matters, heresies -- Are Divisions in
religious Communities.

V. 21. Revellings -- Luxurious Entertainments. Some of the Works here
mentioned, are wrought principally, if not entirely, in the Mind. And yet they
are called, Works of (...) flesh -- Hence it is clear, the Apostle does not by
the flesh mean the Body, or sensual Appetite; and Inclinations only, but the
Corruption of human Nature, as it spreads through all the Powers of the Soul,
as well as all the Members of the Body: Of which I tell you before -- Before
the Event, I forewarn you.

V. 22. Love -- The Root of all the Rest: gentleness -- Toward all Men;
ignorant and wicked Men in particular: goodness -- The Greek Word means all
that is benign, so^t, winning, tender, either in Temper or Behavior.

V. 23. Meekness -- Holding all the Affections and Passions in even Balance.

V. 24. And they that are Christ's -- True Believers in Him, have thus
^^ncified the flesh -- Na^^ed it, as it were, to a Cross, whence it has no
power to break loose, but is continually weaker and weaker; with its affections
and desires -- All its evil Passions, Appetites, and Inclinations.

V. 25. If we live by the Spirit -- If we are indeed raised from the Dead, and
are alive to GOD, by the Operation of his Spirit let us wa^^ by the Spirit --
Let us follow his Guidance, in all our Tempers, Thoughts, Words, and Actions.

V. 26. Be not desirous of vain glory -- Of the Praise or Esteem of Men. They
who do not carefully and closely follow the Spirit, easily slide into this: The
natural (...), Provoking to Envy them that are beneath us, and envying them
that are above us

VI.
thou also be tempted. for in due season we shall reap,

Ye see how large a letter I have written to you with my own hand. new
creation. be upon them, and upon the Israel of God.

From henceforth let none trouble me; be with your Spirit. Amen.

V. 1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in any fault -- B^ Surprise, Ignorance,
or Stress of Temptation, ye who are spiritual -- Who continue to liv^ and wal^
by the Sp^ri^, (...) By Reproof, Instruction, or Exhortation. Every one who
can, ought to help herein: Only, in the Spirit of meekness. This is essential
to a spiritual man. And in this lies the whole Force of the Cure: considering
thyself -- The Plural is beautifully c^^nged into the Singular. Let each take
heed to himself: l^st (...) also be tempted -- Temptation easily and swiftly
passes from one to another; especially if a Man endeavors to cure another,
without preserving his own Meekness.

V. 2. Bear ye one another's burdens -- Sympathize with and assist each other
in all your Weaknesses, Grievances. Trials; and so fulfill the law of Christ The
Law of Christ (a^ uncommon Expression) is the Law of Love, This our LORD
peculiarly recommends: This (...) makes the distinguishing Mark of his
D^sciples.

V. 3. If any one think himself to be something -- Above his Brethren; or, by
any Strength of his own; when ^e is nothing, ^e deceives himself He alone will
bear their Burdens, who knows himself to be nothing.

V. 4. But let every man try his own work -- Narrowly examine all he^, and all
he do^^: and then he shall have rejoicing in himself He will find (...) himself
Matter of rejoicing, if his Works are right before GOD; and ^o in another --
Not in glorying over others.

V. 5. For very (...) ^is own burden -- In that Day; shall give an Ac^ (...)
himself ^o GOD

V. 6. Let him that is taught impart to him that teaches all such temporal
good things as he st^n is in need of.

V. 7. God is not mocked Although they attempt to mock Him, who think to reap
otherwise than they sow.

V. 8. For ^e that now sows to the flesh -- That follows the Desires of
corrupt Nature, shall hereafter of the flesh -- Out of this very Seed, reap
corruption -- Death everlasting: But he that sows to the Spirit -- That
follows (...) Guidance in all his Tempers and Conversation, shall of the Spirit
-- By the Free Grace and Power of GOD, reap life everlasting.

V. 9. But let us not be weary in well doing -- Let us persevere in sowing to
the Spirit; for in due season -- When the Harvest is come, we shall reap, if we
faint not.

V. 10. Therefore as we have opportunity -- At whatever Time or Place, and in
whatever Manner we can. The Opportunity in general is, our Lifetime; but there
are also many particular Opportunities. Satan is quickened in doing Hurt, by
the Short^ is of the Time. ( Rev. xii. 12.) By the same Consideration let us be
quickened in doing Good. Let us do good -- In very possible Kind, and in every
possible Degree; unto all men -- Neighbors or Strangers, Good or Evil, Friends
or Enemies; but especially to them who are of the household of faith -- For all
Believers are but one Family.

V. 11. Ye see how large a letter -- St. Paul had not yet written a larger to
any Church, I have written with my own hand -- He generally wrote by an
Amanuensis.

V. 12. As many as desire to make a fair appearance in the flesh -- To preserve
a fair Character, these constrain you -- Both by their Example and Importunity,
to be circumcised -- Not so much from a Principle of Conscience, as lest they
should sufer persecution. -- From the unbelieving Jews, for the cross of Christ
-- For maintaining, That Faith in a crucified Savior, is alone sufficient for
Justification

V. 13. For neither they themselves keep the whole law -- So far are they from
a real Zeal for it. But yet they desire to (...) ^ou circumcised, that they may
glory in ^our flesh -- That they may b^ast of you as their Proselytes, and make
a Merit of this with the other Jews.

V. 14. But God forbid that I should glory -- Should boast of any thing I have,
am, or do; or rely on any thing for my Acceptance with GOD, but what Christ
has done and suffered for me; by means of which the world is crucified to me
-- All the Things and Persons in it are to m^ as nothing, and I unto the world
-- I am dead to all worldly Pursuits, Cares, Desires, and Enjoyments.

V. 15. For neither circumcision is any thing nor uncircumcision -- Neither of
these is of any Account, but a new creation -- Whereby all Things in us become
new.

V. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule -- 1. Glorying only in the
Cross of Christ; 2. Being crucified to the World; and 3. Created anew: Peace
and mercy be on them and upon the Israel; that is, the Church, of God: Which
consists of all those, and those only, of every Nation and Kindred, who walk by
this Rule.

V. 17. From henceforth let none trouble me -- By Quarrels and Disputes, for I
bear -- And Affliction should not be added to the Afflicted; in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus -- The Scars, Marks, and Brands of my Sufferings for
him.

NOTES ON St. PAUL's Epistle to the Ephesians.
EPHESUS was the chief City of that Part of Asia, which was a Roman Province.
Here St. Paul preached for three Years, ( Acts xx. 31.) and from hence the
Gospel was spread throughout the whole Province, ( Acts xix. 10.) At his taking
Leave of the Church there, he forewarned them both of great Persecutions from
without, and of diverse Heresies and Schisms, which would arise among
themselves. And accordingly he writes this Epistle (nearly resembling that to
the Colossians, written about the same Time) to establish them in the Doctrine
he had delivered, to arm them against false Teachers, and to build them up in
Love and Holiness, both of Heart and Conversation.

He begins this, as most of his Epistles, with Thanksgiving to GOD, for their
embracing and adhering to the Gospel. He s^ews the inestimable Blessings and
Advantages they received thereby, as far above all the Jewish Privileges, as
all the Wisdom and Philosophy of the Heathens. He proves, that our LORD is the
Head of the whole Church: Of Angels and Spirits, the Church Triumphant, and of
Jews and Gentiles n^w equally Members of the Church Militant. In the three last
Chapters he exhorts them to various Duties, civil and religious, personal and
relative, suitable to their Christian Character. Privileges, Assistances, and
Obligations.

In this Epistle we may observe, I. The Inscription, C. 1. 1. 2 II. The
Doctrine pathetically explained, which contains 1. Praise to GOD for the whol^
Gospel Blessing, 3 -- 14 With Thanksgiving and Pr^yer for the Saints, 15 -- C.
ii. 10 2. A more particular Admonition, concerning their once miserable, but
now happy Condition. 11 -- 22 A Prayer for their Establishment, C. iii 1 -- 19
A Doxology, 20, 1 III. The Exhortation, 1. General, to walk worthy of their
Calling, agreeably to 1. The Unity of the Spirit, and the Diversity of his
Gifts, C. iv. 1 -- 16 2. The Difference between their former and their present
State, 17 -- 24 2. Particular. To avoid, 1. Lying, 25 2. Anger, 26, 27 3.
Theft, 28 4. Corrupt Communication, 29, 30 5. Bitterness, 31 -- Chapter v. 2 6.
Uncleanness, 3 -- 14 7. Drunkenness, 15 -- 21 With a Commendation of the
opposite Virtues. To do their Duty, as 1. Wives and Husbands, 22 -- 33 2.
Children and Parents, C vi. 1 -- 4 3. Servants and Masters, 5 -- 9 3. Final: To
war the Spiritual Warfare, 10 -- 20 IV. The Conclusion, 21 -- 24

EPHESIANS.
I.
be to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in heavenly things
through Christ, our sins, according to the riches of his grace, one in Christ
all things which are in heaven, and which are on earth, believed, after ye had
heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in whom after ye had
believed, ye were also sealed by that Holy Spirit of promise,

Wherefore I also, in the Lord Jesus, places, and dominion, and every name that
is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. to be head
over all things to the Church. who is the fullness of him that fills all in
all.

V. 1. By the will of God -- Not by any Merit of my own, to the saints who are
at Ephesus -- And in all the adjacent Places. For this Epistle is not directed
to the Ephesians only, but likewise to all the other Churches of Asia.

V. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who bath blessed
us -- GOD'S blessing us is his bestowing all spiritual and heavenly Blessings
upon us. Our blessing GOD is the paying Him our solemn and grateful
Acknowledgements, both on account of his own essential Blessedness, and of the
Blessings which he bestows upon us. He is the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
Man and Mediator: He is his Father, primarily with respect to his Divine
Nature, as his only-begotten Son; and secondarily, with respect to his Human
Nature, as that is personally united to the Divine; with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things -- With all Manner of spiritual Blessings, which
are heavenly in their Nature, Original, and Tendency, and shall be completed
in Heaven: Far different from the external Privileges of the Jews, and the
earthly Blessings they expected from the Messiah.

V. 4. As he has chosen us -- Both Jews and Gentiles, whom He foreknew as
believing in Christ, 1 Pet. i. 2.

V. 5. Having predestined us to the adoption of Sons -- Having foreordained
that all who afterward believed should enjoy the Dignity of being Sons of GOD,
and Joint heirs with Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will --
According to his free, fixed, unalterable Purpose, to confer this Blessing on
all those, who should believe in Christ, and those only.

V. 6. To (...) praise of the glory of his grace -- His glorious, free Love,
without any Def^rt on our Part.

V. 7. By whom we -- Who believe have from the Moment we believe, redemption
from the Guilt and Power of Sin, through his blood -- Through what he has done
and suffered for us; according to the riches of his grace -- According to the
Abundant Overflowings of his free Mercy and Favor.

V. 8. In all wisdon -- Manifested by GOD in the whole Scheme of our Salvation
and prudence -- Which he has wrought in us, that we may know and do all his
acceptable and perfect Will.

V. 9. Having made known to us -- By his Word and by his Spirit, the mastery of
his will -- The gracious Scheme of Salvation by Faith, which depends on his own
Sovereign Will alone. This was but darkly discovered under the Law; is now
totally hid from Unbelievers: And has Heights and Depths which surpass all the
Knowledge of true Believers.

V. 10. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times -- In this last
Administration of GOD'S fullest Grace, which took Place when the Time appointed
was fully come, he might gather together into one in Christ -- Might
recapitulate, reunite, and place in order again under Christ, their common
Head, all things which are in beaven and on earth -- All Angels and Men,
whether living or dead in the Lord.

V. 11. Through whom we -- Jews, also have obtained an inheritance -- The
glorious Inheritance of the heavenly Canaan, to which, when Believers, we were
predestined, according to the purpose of him that works all things after
the counsel of his own will -- The unalterable Decree, He that believes shall
be delivered: Which Will is not an arbitrary Will, but ^owing from the ^ec^^^de
of his Nature: Else, what Security would there be, that it would be his Will,
to keep his Word even with the Elect?

V. 12. That we -- Jews, who first believed -- Before the Gentiles. So did some
of them, in every Place. Here is another Branch of the true Gospel
Predestination: He that believes is not only elected to Salvation (if he
endures to the and) but is fore-appointed of GOD to walk in Holiness, to the
praise of his glory.

V. 13. In whom ye -- Gentiles, likewife believed, after ye had heard the
gospel -- Which GOD made the Means of your Salvation, in whom after ye had
believed -- Probably some Time after their first believing, ye were s^aled by
that Holy Spirit of ^remis -- Holy both in his Nature and in his Operations,
and promised to all the Children of GOD. The s^aling seems to imply, 1. A full
Impression of the Image of GOD on their Souls; 2. A full Assurance of receiving
all the Promises, whether relating to Time or Eternity.

V. 14. Who thus sealing us, is an earnest -- Both a Pledge and a Foretaste of
our Inheritance, till the redemption of the purchased possession -- Till the
Church which he has purchased with his own Blood, shall be fully delivered from
all Sin and Sorrow, and advanced to everlasting Glory, to the praise of his
glory -- Of his glorious Wisdom, Power, and Mercy.

V 15. Since I heard of your faith and love -- That is, of their Perseverance
and Increase therein.

V. 16. I cease not -- In all my solemn Addresses to GOD, to give thanks for
you, making mention of you in my prayers -- So he did of all the Churches, Col.
i. 9.

V. 17. That the Father of that infinite Glory which shines in the Face of
Christ, from whom also we receive the glorious Inheritance, (ver. 18) may give
you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation -- The same who is the Spirit of
Promise, is also in the Progress of the Faithful the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation; making them wise unto Salvation, and revealing to them the deep
Things of GOD. He is here speaking of that Wisdom and Revelation, which are
common to all real Christians.

V. 18. The eyes of your understanding -- It is with these alone that we
discern the Things of GOD, being first opened, and then enlightened By his
Spirit, that ye may know what is the hope of his Calling -- That ye may
experimentally and delightfully know, what are the Blessngs which GOD has
called you to hope for, by his Word and his Spirit and what is the riches of
the glory of his inheritance in the saints -- What an immense Treasure of
Blessedness he has provided as an Inheritance for holy Souls.

V. 19. And what the exceeding greatness of his power, toward us who believe --
Both in quickening our dead Souls, and pre^erving them in spiritual Life,
according to the power, which he exerted in Christ, rais^^^ him from the dead
-- By the very same Almighty Power, whereby he raised Christ; for no less would
suffice.

V 20. And he has seated him at his own right hand -- That is, he has exalted
him in his Human Nature, as a recompense for his Sufferings, to a quiet,
everlasting Possession of all possible Blessedness, Majesty and Glory

V. 21. ^ar above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion -- That
(...) GOD has ^nvested him with uncontrollable Authority, over all D^m^^n^ in
Hell, all Ang^ls in Heaven, and all the Princes and Potentates on Earth, and
ever; name that is named -- We know the King is above all, though we cannot
name all the Officers of his Court. So we kn^w that Christ is above all, though
we are not able to name all his Subjects; not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come The World to come is so styled, not because it does not
yet exist, but because it is not yet visible. Principalities and Powers are
named now But those also who are not even named in this world, but shall be
revealed in the world to come, are all subject to Christ.

V. 22. And he has given him to be head over all things to the church -- An
Herd both of Guidance and Government, and likewise of Life and Influence to the
whole and every Member of it. All these stand in the nearest Union with him,
and ^ave as continual and effectual a Communication of Activity, Growth and
Strength from him; as the Natural Body from its Head.

V. 23. The fullness of him that fills all in all -- It is hard to say, in
what Sense this can be spoken of the Church. But the Sense is easy and natural,
if we refer it to Christ, who is the fullness of the Father.

II.
he has quickened you, who were dead in trespasses and sins, Wherein ye
formerly walked, in the sons of disobedience: us up together, places through
Christ Jesus: his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. it is the gift of
God:

Wherefore remember, being formerly Gentiles in the flesh (who were called the
uncircumcision, by that which is called the circumcision performed with hands
in the flesh.) in the world. his decrees, that he might form the two into one
new man in himself, so making peace: And might reconcile both in one body to
God through the cross, foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of
the household of God,

V. 1. And he has quickened you -- In the 19th and 20th Verses of the
preceding Chapter, St. Paul. spoke of GOD'S working in them by the same
Almighty Power whereby he raised Christ from the dead. On the mention of this
^e, in the Fullness of his Heart, runs into a Flow of Thought, concerning the
Glory of Christ's Exaltation, in the three following Verses. He here resumes
the Thread of his Discourse; who were Dead -- Not only diseased, but dead;
absolutely void of all Spiritual Life; and as incapable of quickening
yourselves, as Persons literally dead, in trespasses and sins -- Sins seem to
be spoken chiefly of the Gentiles who knew not GOD: Trespasses of the Jews who
had his Law, and yet regarded it not (ver. 5.) The latter herein obeyed the
Flesh; the former the Prince of the Power of the Air.

V. 2. According to the course of this world -- The Word translated course,
properly means a long Series of Times, wherein one courrupt Age follows
another, according to the pri^^^ of the power of the ai^ -- The Effect of which
Power all may perceive, though all do not understand the Cause of it: A Power
unspeakably penetrating and widely diffused; but yet as to its baneful
Influences, beneath the O^^ of ^elievers. The evil Spirits are un^^ed under one
Head, the Seat of whose Dominion is in the Air. Here he sometimes raises
Storms, sometimes makes Visionary Representations, and is continually roving to
and fro; the spirit that now works -- With mighty Power, and so he did and
does in all Ages, in the sons of disobedience -- In all who do not believe and
obey the Gospel.

V. 3. Among whom we -- Jews, also formerly had our conversation (...) doing
the wi^^ of the stesh -- In gross, brutal Sins, and of the mind -- By
Spiritual, Diabolical Wickedness. In the former Clause Flesh denotes the whole
^vil Nature; in the latter, the Body opposed to the Soul: And were by nature --
That is, in our Natural State, chi^dren of wrath -- Having the Wrath of GOD
abiding on us, even as the Gentiles. This Expression, by nature occurs also Ga^
iv. 8. Romans ii. 14. and thrice in the 11th Chapter. But in n^ne of these Places
does it signify by custom, or practice, or customary practice, as a late Writer
affirms. Nor can it mean so here. For this would make the Apostle guilty of
gross Tautology, their castomary Sin^^^^ having been expressed already, in the
former Part of the Verse. But all these Passages agree in expressing what
belongs to the Nature of the Persons spoken of.

V. 4. Mercy removes Misery: Love confers Salvation.

V. 5. He has quickened us together with Christ -- In Conformity to him, and
by Virtue of our Union with Him. By grace ye are saved -- Grace is both the
Beginning and End. (The Apostle speaks indifferently either in the first or
second Person, the Jews and Gentiles being in the same Circumstance both by
Nature and by Grace.) The Text lays the A^ to the very Root of spiritual Pride,
and all glorying in ourselves. Therefore St. Paul, foreseeing the Back wardness
of Mankind to receive it, yet knowing the absolute Necessity of its being
received, again asserts the very same Truth, ver. 8. in the very same Words.

V. 6. And has raised us up together -- Both Jews and Gentiles already in
Spirit: And ere long our Bodies too will be raised, and made us all sit
together in heavenly places -- This is spoken by Way of Anticipation. Believers
are not yet possessed of their Seats in Heaven: But each of them has a Place
prepared for him.

V. 7. The ages to come -- That is, all succeeding Ages.

V. 8. By grace ye are saved through faith -- Grace, without any respect to
human Worthiness, confers the glorious Gift. Faith, with an empty Hand, and
without any Pretense to personal Desert, receives the heavenly Blessing, and
this -- Is not of yourselves. This -- refers to the whole preceding Clause:
That ye are saved through faith, is the gift of God.

V. 9. Not by works -- Neither this Faith nor this Salvation is owing to any
Works you ever did, will, or can do.

V. 10. For we are his workmanship -- Which proves both that Salvation is by
Faith, and that Faith is the Gift of GOD, created unto good works -- That
afterward we might give ourselves to them, which God had before prepared --
The Occasions of them: So we must still ascribe the whole to GOD, that we might
walk in them -- Though not be justified by them.

V. 11. Wherefore remember -- Such a Remembrance strengthens Faith, and
increases Gratitude; that ye being formerly Gentiles in the flesh -- Neither
circumcised in Body nor in Spirit, who were accordingly called the
un^ircumcision -- By way of Reproach, by that which is called the cir^umcision
-- By those who call themselves the Circumcised, and think this a Proof that
they are the People of GOD; and who indeed have that outward Circumcision,
which is performed by hands in the flesh.

V. 12. Were at that time without Christ -- Having no Faith in, or Knowledge of
Him; being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel -- Both as to their Temporal
Privileges and Spiritual Blessings, and strangers to the covenants of promise
-- The Great Promise in Both the Jewish and Christian Covenant was the MESSIAH;
having no ^ope -- Because they had no Promise, whereon to ground their Hope;
and being without God -- Wholly ignorant of the true GOD, an^ so in effect
Atheists. Such in Truth are, more or less, all Me^^^n all Ages, till they know
GOD, by the Teaching of his own Spirit, in the world -- The wide, vain World,
whereby ye wandered up and down, unholy and unhappy.

V. 13. Far off -- From GOD and his People, nigh -- Intimately united to both.

V. 14. For he is our peace -- Not only as be purchased it, but as he is the
very Bond and Center of Union: He who has wade both, Jews and Gentiles, one
Church. The Apostle describes, 1. The Conjunction of the Gentiles with Israel,
(ver. 14, 15.) and 2 The Conjunction of Both with GOD, ver. 15 -- 18 Each
Description is subdivided into two Parts. And the former Part of the one,
concerning abolishing the enmity, answers the former Port of the other; the
latter Part of the one, concerning the Evang^lical Decrees, the latter Part of
the other, and has broken down the middle wall of partition -- Alluding to
that Wall of old, which s^p^^^ted the Court of Israel from the Court of the
Gentiles. Such a Wall was the ceremonial Law, which Christ had now taken away.

V. 15. Having abolished by his Suffering in the f^^sh the Cause of Enmity
between the Jews and Gentiles, even the law of ceremonial commandments, through
his decrees Which offer Mercy ^o all; (see Col. ii. 14.) that he might form the
two -- Jew and Gentile, into one new man -- One mystical Body.

V. 16. In one body -- One Church, having s^ain -- By his own Death on the
Cross, the enmity -- Which ^ad been between Sinners and GOD.

V. 17. And he came -- After his Resurrection, and preac^ed peace -- By his
Ministers and his Spirit, to you -- Gentiles, that were afar off -- At the
utmost Distance from GOD; and to them that were (...) -- To the Jews who were
comparatively nigh, being his visible Church.

V. 18. For through him, we both -- Jews and Gentiles, have access -- Liberty
of approaching, by the Guidance and Aid of one Spirit to GOD as our Father.
Christ, the Spirit, and he Father, the Three-One GOD, stands frequently in the
same Order.

V. 19. Therefore ye are no longer (...), but citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem; no longer foreigners, but received into the very family of God.

V. 20. And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets -- As
the Foundation sustains the Building, so the Word of GOD, declared by the
Apostles and Prophets, sustains the Faith of all Believers. GOD laid the
Foundation by them; but Christ himself is the chief cornerstone of the
Foundation. Elsewhere He is termed, the Foundation itself. 1 Cor. iii. 11.

V. 21. On whom all the building fitly framed together -- The whole Fabric of
the universal Church, rises up like a gr^^t Pil^ of living Ma^^ ^s ^^to an holy
(...) in the Lord -- Dedicated to Christ and inhabited by Him in which he
displays his Presence, and is worshipped and glorified. What is the Temple of
Diana of the Ephesians, whom ye formerly worshipped, to this?

III.
am the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles; Gentiles are joint-heirs,
and of the same body, and joint-partakers of his promise by Christ through the
gospel, is the fellowship of the mystery, which was hidden from eternity by
God, who created all things by Jesus Christ: places, in heaven and earth is
named) That he would give you according to the riches of his glory, be glory in
the church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

V. 1. For this cause -- That ye may be so built together, I am a prisoner for
you Gentiles -- For your Advantage, and for asserting your Right to these
Blessings. This it was which so enraged the Jews against ^im.

V. 2. The dispensation of the grace of God given me in your behalf -- That is
the Commission to dispense the gracious Gospel; to you Gentiles in particular.
This they had heard from his own Mouth.

V. 3. The mystery -- Of Salvation by Christ alone, and that both to Jews and
Gentiles, as I wrote before -- Namely, chapter i. 9, 10; the very Words of which
Passage he here repeats.

V. 5. Which in other -- In former, ages was not -- so clearly or fully made
known to the sons of men -- To any Man, no, not to Ezekiel, so often styled Son
of man, nor to any of the ancient Prophets. Those here spoken of are
New Testament Prophets.

V. 6. That the Gentiles are joint heirs -- Of GOD, and of the same body --
Under Christ the Head, and joint-partakers of his promise -- The Communion of
the Holy Ghost.

V. 7. According to the gi^t of the grace of God -- That is, the Apostleship
which He has graciously given me, and which He has qualified me for, by the
effectual working of his power -- In me and by me.

V. 8. Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given
-- Here are the noblest Strains of Eloquence to paint the exceeding low Opinion
the Apostle had of Himself, and the Fullness of unfathomable Blessings which are
treasured up in Christ.

V. 9. What is the fellowship of the mystery -- What those mysterious Blessings
are, whereof all Believers jointly partake, which was in great Measure hidden
from eternity by God, who -- To make Way for the free Exercise of his Love,
created all things -- This is the Foundation of all his Dispensations.

V. 10. That the manifold wisdom of God might be made known by the church -- By
what is done in the Church, which is the Theater of the divine Wisdom.

V. 12. By whom we have free access, such as those Petitioners have, who are
introduced to the royal Presence by some distinguished Favorite, and boldness
-- Unrestrained Liberty of Speech, such as Children use in addressing an
indulgent Father, when without fear of offending they disclose all their Wants,
and make known all their Requests.

V. 13. The not fainting is your glory.

V. 15. Of whom -- The Father, the whole family of Angels in heaven. Saints in
Paradise, and Believers on earth is named: Being the children of God (a more
honorable Title than children of Abraham) and depending on Him as the Father
of the Family.

V. 16. The riches of his glory -- The immense Fullness of his glorious Wisdom,
Power and Mercy; the inner man -- The Soul.

V. 17. Dwell -- That is, constantly and sensibly abide.

V. 18. That being rooted and grounded -- That is, deeply fixed and firmly
established in love, ye may comprehend -- So far as an human Mind is capable,
what is the breadth of the love of Christ -- Embracing all Mankind, and length
-- From everlasting to everlasting, and depth -- Not to be fathomed by any
Creature, and height -- Not to be reached by any Enemy.

V. 19. And to know -- But the Apostle corrects himself, and immediately
observes, it cannot be fully known. This only we know, that the Love of Christ
-- surpasses all Knowledge, that ye may be filled -- Which is the Sum of all,
with all the fullness of God -- With all his Light, Love, Wisdom, Holiness,
Power and Glory. A Perfection far beyond a bare Freedom from Sin.

V. 20. Now to him -- This Doxology is admirably adopted to strengthen our
Faith, that we may not stagger at the great Things the Apostle had been praying
for as if they were too much for GOD to give, or for us to expect from him,
that is able -- Here is a most beautiful Gradation. When He has given us
exceeding, yea abundant Blessings, still we may ask for more. And He is able to
do it. But we may think of more than we have asked. He is able to do this also.
Yea, and above all this: above all we ask; above all we can think: Nay,
exceedingly, abundantly above all, that we can either ask or think.

V. 21. In the church -- On Earth and in Heaven.

IV.
There is one body and Spirit, as ye are also called in one hope of your
calling; is above all, and through all, and in us all. Psalm lxviii. 18.
Having ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men. (Now
this expression, ascended also, far above all the heavens, that he might fill
all things. even Christ: From whom the whole body fitly joined together and
compacted; by that which every joint supplieth according to the effectual
working in the measure of every member, makes an increase of the body, to the
edifying of itself in love.

This therefore I say and testify in the Lord, desires:

Wherefore putting away lying, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with
all malice.

V. 1. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord -- Imprisoned for his Sake and for
your Sakes: For the Sake of the Gospel which he had preached amongst them. This
was therefore a powerful Motive to them, to comfort him under it by their
Obedience.

V. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit -- That mutual Union and
Harmony, which is a Fruit of the Spirit. The bond of peace is Love.

V. 4. There is one body -- The universal Church, all Believers throughout the
World, One Spirit, one Lord, one God and Father -- The ever-blessed Trinity,
One hope -- Of Heaven.

V. 5. One outward Baptism.

V. 6. One God and Father of all -- That believe, who is above all -- Presiding
over all his Children, operating through them all by Christ, and dwelling in
all by his Spirit.

V. 7. According to the measure of the gift of Christ -- According as Christ is
pleased to give to each.

V. 8. Wherefore he says -- That is, in Reference to which GOD says by David,
Having ascended on hi^h, he led captivity captive -- He triumphed over all his
Enemies, Satan, Sin, and Death, which had before enslaved all the World:
alluding to the Custom of ancient Conquerors, who led th^se they had conquered
in Chains after them: and, as they also used to give Donatives to the People,
at their Return from Victory, so he gave gifts to men -- Both the ordinary and
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit.

V. 9. Now this expression, He ascended, what is it but that he descended --
That is, does it not imply, that He descended first? Certainly it does, on the
Supposition of his being GOD. Otherwise it would not: Since all the Saints will
ascend to Heaven, though none of them descended thence, into the lower parts of
the earth -- So the Womb is called, Ps^^^ cxxxix. 15 the Grave Psalm lxiii 9.

V. 10. He that descended That thus amazingly humbled Himself, is the same that
ascended. That was so highly exacted, that he might fill all things -- The
whole Church, with his Spirit, Presence, and Operations.

V. 11. And among other his free Gifts, he gave some apostles -- His chief
Ministers and special Witnesses, as having seen Him after his Resurrection, and
received their Commission immediately from Him, and some prophets, and some
evangelists -- A Prophet testifies of Things to come; an Evangelist of Things
past: And that chie^ly, by preaching the Gospel before or after any of the
Apostles. All these were extraordinary Officers: The ordinary were, some
persons -- Watching over their several flocks, and some teachers -- Whether of
the same, or a lower Order, to assist them ^s Occasion might require.

V. 12. In this Verse is noted the Office of Ministers; in the next the Aim of
the Saints; in the 14th, 15th, 16th, the Way of growing in Grace* And each of
these has three Parts, standing in the same Order: for the perfecting the
saints -- The completing them both in Number, and their various Gifts and
Graces: for the work of the ministry -- The serving GOD and his Church, in
their various Ministrations, to the edifying of the body of Christ -- The
building up this his mystical Body in Faith, Love, Holiness.

V. 13. Ti^l we a^l -- And every one of us, come to the unity of the faith and
knowledge of the Son of God -- To both an exact Agreement in the Christian
Doctrine, and an experimental Knowledge of Christ as the Son of God; to a
perfect man -- To a State of Spiritual Manhood both in Understanding and
Strength, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ -- To that
Maturity of Age and spiritual Stature wherein we shall be filled with Christ,
so that He will be all in all.

V. 14. Fluctuating to and fro -- From within, even when there is no Wind; and
carried about with every wind -- From without; when we are assaulted by others,
who are unstable as the Wind, by the slight o^ men By their cogging the dice;
so the original Word implies.

V. 15. Into him -- Into his Image and Spirit, and into a full Union with Him.

V. 16. From whom the whole mystical body fitly joined together -- All the
Parts being fitted for and adapted to each other, and most exactly harmonizing
with the whole, and compacted -- Knit and cemented together with the utmost
Firmness, makes increase by that which every joint supplieth -- Or by the
mutual Help of every Joint, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every member -- According as every Member in its Measure effectually works,
for the Support and Growth of the whole. A beautiful Allusion to the human
Body, composed of different Joints and Members, knit together by various
Ligaments, and furnished with Vessels of Communication from the Head to every
Part.

V. 17. This therefore I say -- He returns thither where he begun, ver. 1 and
testify in the Lord -- In the Name and by the Authority of the Lord Jesus, in
the vanity of their mind -- Having lost the Knowledge of the true GOD, Romans i.
21. This is the Root of all evil walking.

V. 18. Having their understanding darkened, through the ignorance that is in
them -- So that they are totally void of the Light of GOD, neither have they
any Knowledge of his Will, being alienated from the life of God -- Utter
Strangers to the divine, the spiritual Life, through the hardness of their
hearts -- Callous and Senseless. And where there is no Sense, there can be no
Life.

V. 19. Who being past feeling -- The original Word is peculiarly significant.
It properly means past feeling pain. Pain urges the Sick to seek a Remedy,
which where there is no Pain, is little thought of, having given themselves up
-- Freely, of their own Accord. Lasciviousness is but one Branch of
Uncleanness, which implies Impurity of every Kind.

V. 20. But ye have not so learned Christ -- That is, ye cannot act thus, now
ye know Him, since you know the Christian Dispensation allows of no Sin.

V. 21. Seeing ye have heard him -- Teaching you inwardly by his Spirit, as the
truth is in Jesus -- According to his own Gospel.

V. 22. The old man -- That is, the whole Body of Sin. All sinful Desires are
deceitful; promising the Happiness which they cannot give.

V. 23. The spirit of your mind -- The very Ground of your Heart.

V. 24. The new man -- Universal Holiness, after -- In the very Image of God.

V. 25. Wherefore -- Seeing ye are thus created anew, walk accordingly, in
every Particular. For we are members one of another -- To which intimate Union
all Deceit is quite repugnant.

V. 26. Be ye angry, and sin not -- That is, if ye are angry, take heed ye sin
not. Anger at Sin is not evil; but we should feel only Pity to the Sinner* If
we are angry at the Person, as well as the Fault, we sin. And how hardly do we
avoid it? Let not the sun go down upon your wrath -- Reprove your Brother, and
be reconciled immediately. Lose not one Day. A clear express Command. Reader,
Do you keep it?

V. 27. Neither give place to the devil -- By any Delay.

V. 28. But rather let him labor. Lest Idleness lead him to steal again. And
whoever has sinned in any Kind, ought the more zealously to practice the
opposite Virtue; that he may have to give -- And so be no longer a Burden and
Nuisance, but a Blessing to his Neighbors

V. 29. But that which is good -- Profitable to the Speaker and Hearers, to the
use of edifying -- To forward them in Repentance, Faith, or Holiness, that it
may minister grace -- Be a means of conveying more Grace into their Hearts.
Hence we learn, what Discourse is corrupt, as it were stinking in the Nostrils
of GOD; namely, all that is not profitable, not edifying, not apt to minister
grace to the hearers.

V. 30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit -- By any Disobedience, particularly by
corrupt Discourse; or by any of the following Sins. Do not force him to
withdraw from you, as a Friend does whom you grieve by unkind Behavior. The
day of redemption -- That is, the Day of Judgment, in which our Redemption will
be completed.

V. 31. Let all bitterness -- The Height of settled Anger, opposite to
kindness, (ver. 32.) and wrath -- Lasting Displeasure toward the Ignorant, and
them that are out of the Way, opposite to tender-heartedness: and anger -- The
very first Risings of Disgust at those that injure you, opposite to forgiving
one another: and ^lamour -- Or Bawling. "I am not angry, says one, but it is my
Way to speak so." Then unlearn that Way. It is the Way to Hell: and evil
speaking -- Be it in ever so mild and soft a Tone, or with ever such
Professions of Kindness. Here is a beautiful Retrogradation, beginning with the
highest, and descending to the lowest Degree of the want of love.

V. 32. As God -- Showing himself kind and tenderhearted in the g^est Degree,
has forgiven you.

V.
ye are light in the Lord: fruit of the light is in all goodness, and
righteousness and truth: is the will of the Lord. hearts unto the Lord;

Wives, let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing. it by the
washing of water) through the word: be holy and unblameable. Genesis ii. 24
this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined to his
wife;

V. 1. Be ye therefore followers -- Imitators of God -- In forgiving and
loving. O how much more honorable and more happy, to be an Imitator of GOD,
than of Homer, Virgil, or Alexander the Great!

V. 3. But let not -- Any impure Love, be even named or heard of among you.
Keep at the utmost Distance from it, as becomes saints.

V. 4. Nor foolish talking -- Tittle-tattle, talking of nothing, the Weather,
Fashions, Meat and Drink, or jesting -- The Word properly means, Wittiness,
Facetiousness, esteemed by the Heathens an Half Virtue. But how frequently even
this quenches the Spirit, those who are tender of Conscience know: which are
not convenient -- For a Christian; as neither increasing his Faith, nor
Holiness.

V. 6. Because of these things -- As innocent as the Heathens esteem them, and
as those Dealers in vain words would persuade you to think them.

V. 8. Ye were once darkness -- Total Blindness and Ignorance. Walk as children
of light -- Suitably to your present Knowledge.

V. 9. The fruit of the light -- Opposite to the unfruitful works of darkness,
(ver. 11.) is in -- That is, consists in, goodness, and righteousness, and
truth -- Opposite to the Sins spoken of chapter iv. 25. etc.

V. 11. Reprove them -- To avoid them is not enough.

V. 12. In secret -- As flying the Light.

V. 13. But all things which are reproved, are thereby dragged out into the
Light, and made manifest -- Shown in their proper Colors, by the light, for
whatsoever does ma^e manifest is light -- That is, for nothing but Light, (yea
Light from Heaven) can make any thing manifest.

V. 14. Wherefore he -- GOD, says -- In the general Tenor of his Word, to all
who are still in Darkness, Awake thou that sleep -- In Ignorance of GOD and
thyself, in stupid Insensibility, and arise from the dead -- From the Death of
Sin, and Christ shall give thee light -- Knowledge, Holiness, Happiness.

V. 15. Circumspectly -- Exactly, with the utmost Accuracy, getting to the
highest pitch of every point of Holiness, not as fools -- Who think not where
they are going, or do not make the best of their Way.

V. 16. With all possible Care redeeming the time -- Saving all you can, for
the best Purposes; buying every possible Moment out of the Hands of Sin and
Satan, out of the Hands of Sloth, Ease, Pleasure, worldly Business: The more
diligently, because the present are evil days, Days of the grossest Ignorance,
Immorality and Profaneness.

V. 17. What the will of the Lord is -- In every Time, Place, and Circumstance.

V. 18. Wherein is excess -- That is, which leads to Debauchery of every Kind,
but be ye filled with the spirit -- In all his Graces, who gives a more noble
Pleasure than Wine can do.

V. 19. Speaking to each other -- By the Spirit, in the Psalms -- Of David, and
hymns, -- Of Praise, and spiritual songs -- On any divine Subject. By there
being no inspired Songs, peculiarly adapted to the Christian Dispensation, as
there were to the Jewish, it is evident that the Promise of the Holy Ghost, to
believers in the last Days, was by his larger Effusion, to supply the Lack of
it, singing with your hearts -- As well as your Voice, to the Lord -- Jesus who
searches the Heart.

V. 20. Giving thanks -- At all Times and Places, and for all things Prosperous
or adverse, since all work together for Good, in the name of -- Or through our
Lord Jesus Christ -- By whom we receive all good Things.

V. 22. In the following Directions concerning relative Duties, the Inferiors
are all along placed before the Superiors, because the General Proposition is
concerning Submission. And Inferiors ought to do their Duty, whatever their
Superiors do. Wives submit yourselves to your own husbands -- unless where GOD
forbids. Otherwise, in all indifferent Things, the Will of the Husband is a Law
to the Wife, as unto the Lord -- The Obedience a Wife pays to her Husband, is
at the same Time paid to Christ Himself; he being head of the wife, as Christ
is head of the church.

V. 23. The head -- The Governor, Guide, and Guardian of the Wife. And he is
the Savior of the body -- The Church, from all Sin and Misery.

V. 24. In every thing -- Which is not contrary to any Command of GOD.

V. 25. Even as Christ loved the Church -- Here is the true Model of conjugal
affection. With this Degree of it, and to this End, should Husbands love their
Wives.

V. 26. That he might sanctify it through the word -- The ordinary Channel of
all Blessings, having cleansed it -- From the Guilt and Power of Sin, by the
washing of Water -- In Baptism, if with the outward and visible Sign. we
receive the inward and spiritual Grace.

V. 27. That he might present it -- Even in this World, to himself, -- As his
Spouse, a glorious church -- All glorious within, not having spot -- Of
Impurity from any Sin, or wrinkle -- Of Deformity from any Decay.

V. 28. As their own bodies -- That is, as themselves. He that loves his wife,
loves himself -- Which is not a Sin, but an indisputable Duty.

V. 29. His own flesh -- That is, himself; nourishes and cherishes -- That
^s, feeds and clothes it.

V. 30. For ^e -- The Reason why Christ nourishes and cherishes the Church, is
that close Connection between them, which is here expressed in the Words of
Moses, originally spoken concerning Eve, are members -- Are as intimately
united to Christ, in a spiritual Sense, as if we were literally flesh of his
flesh and bone of his bone.

V. 31. For this cause -- Because of this intimate Union.

VI.
Children, obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right. Exodus xx. 20.
Honor thy father and mother (which is the first commandment with a promise)
That is may be well with thee,

Servants, your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of your heart, as unto the Lord: he be a servant or free. And ye
masters do the same things to them, forbearing threatening, knowing that your
own master is in heaven, and there is no respect of persons with him.

Finally, flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against
the rulers of the world, of the darkness of this age, against wicked spirits in
heavenly places. Above all, supplication for all the saints,

But that ye also may know my affairs, be to the brethren, and love with faith,
from God the father and the Lord Jesus Christ. be with all that love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

V. 1. Children, obey your parents -- In all Things lawful the Will of of the
Parent is a Law to the Child, in the Lord -- For his Sake, for this is right --
Manifestly just and reasonable.

V. 2. Honor -- That is, ^^ve, reverence, obey, assi^^ in all Things. The
Mother is particularly mentioned, as being more liable to be slighted than the
Father; which is the first Commandment with a promise -- For the Promise
implied in the second Commandment, does not belong to the keeping that Command
in particular, but the whole Law.

V. 3. That thou may live long upon the earth -- This is usually fulfilled
to eminently dutiful Children. And he who lives long and well, has a long
Seed-time for the eternal Harvest. But this Promise, in the Christian
Dispensation, is to be understood chiefly in a more exalted and spiritual Sense

V. 4. And ye fathers -- Mothers are included; but Fathers are named, as being
more apt to be stern and severe: provoke not your children to wrath -- Do not
needlessly fret or exasperate them; but bring them up -- With all Tenderness
and Mildness, in the instruction and discipline of the Lord -- Both in
Christian Knowledge and Practice.

V 5 Your masters according to the flesh -- According to the present State of
Things: Afterward, the Servant is free from his Master. With fear and trembling
-- A proverbial Expression, implying the utmost Care and Diligence, in
singleness of heart -- With a single Eye to the Providence and Will of GOD.

V. 6. Not with eye-service -- Serving them better when under their Eye than at
other times, but doing the will of God from the heart -- Doing whatever you do,
as the Will of GOD, and with your Might.

V. 7. Unto the Lord, and not to men -- That is, rather than to Men: And by
making every Action of common Life a Sacrifice to GOD; having an Eye to him in
all Things, even as if there were no other Master.

V. 8. He shall receive the same -- That is, a full and adequate Recompense for
it.

V. 9. Do the same things to them -- That is, act toward them from the same
Principle; forbearing threatening -- Behaving with Gentleness and Humanity, not
in a harsh or domineering Way.

V. 10. Brethren -- This is the only Place in this Epistle where he uses this
Compellation. Soldiers frequently use it to each other in the Field. Be strong
-- Nothing less will suffice for such a Fight. To be weak, and remain so, is
the Way to perish: in the power of his might -- A very uncommon Expression;
plainly denoting what great Assistance we need. As if his might would not do:
It must be the powerful exertion of his Might.

V. 11. Put on the whole armor of God -- The Greek Word means a complete Suit
of Armor. Believers are said to put on the Girdle, Breast Plate, Shoes; to
take the Shield of Faith and Sword of the Spirit. The whole armor -- As if the
armor would scarce do: It must be the whole Armor. This is repeated, (ver.
13.) because of the Strength and Subtilty of our Adversaries; and because of an
evil Day of sore Trial being at Hand.

V. 12. For our wrestling -- Is not only, not chiefly against flesh and blood
-- Weak Men, or fleshly Appetites, but against principalities, against powers
-- The mighty Princes of all the infernal Legions* And great i^ their Power,
and that likewise of those Legion, whom they command, against the rulers of the
world -- Perhaps these Principalities and Powers remain mostly in the Citadel
of their Kingdom of Darkness. But there are other evil Spirits who range
abroad, to whom the Provinces of the World are committed, of the darkness --
This is chiefly Spiritual Darkness; of this age -- Which prevails during the
present State of Things, against wicked spirits who continually oppose Faith,
Love, Holiness, either by Force or Fraud; and labor to infuse Unbelief, Pride,
Idolatry, Malice, Envy, Anger, Hatred, in heavenly places -- Which were once
their Abode, and which they still aspire to, as far as they are permitted.

V. 13. In the evil day -- The War is perpetual: But the Fight is one Day less,
another more violent. The evil day is either at the Approach of Death or in
Life; may be longer or shorter, and admits of numberless Varieties. And having
done all, to stand^ That ye may still keep on your Armor, still stand upon
your Guard, still watch and pray: And thus ye will be enabled to endure unto
the End, and stand with Joy before the Face of the Son of Man.

V. 14. Having your loins girt about -- That y^ may be ready for every Motion,
with truth -- Not only with the Truths of the Gospel, but with truth in the
inward parts -- for without this all our Knowledge of divine Truth, will prove
but a poor Girdle in the evil day. So our LORD is described, Isai. xi. 5. And
as a girded Man is always ready to go on; so this seems to intimate an obedient
heart, a ready Will. Our LORD adds to the loins girded, the lights burning,
(Luke xii. 35.) showing that watching and ready obedience are the inseparable
Companions of faith and love, and having on the breastplate of righteousness --
The Righteousness of a spotless Purity, in which Christ will present us
faultless before GOD, through the Merit of his own Blood. With this breastplate
our LORD is described, Isai. lix. 17. In the Breast is the S^^t of Conscience,
which is guarded by Righteousness. No Armor for the Back is mentioned. We are
always to face our Enemies.

V. 15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel -- Let this be
always ready to direct and confirm you in every Step. This Part of the Armor,
for the feet is needful, considering what a Journey we have to go: what a Race
to run. Our feet must be so shod, that our footsteps slip not. To order our
Life and Conversation aright, we are prepared by the Gospel Blessing, the Peace
and Love of GOD ruling in the Heart, ( Col. iii. 14.15.) By this only can we
tread the rough Ways, surmount our Difficulties, and hold out to the End.

V. 16. Above or over all -- As a Sort of universal Covering to every other
Part of the Armor itself continually exercise a strong and lively Faith* This
you may use as a Shield, which will quench all the fiery d^r^^, the furious
Temptations, violent and sudden Injections of the Devil.

V. 17. And take for an helmet the Hope of Salvation -- (1 T^^ss. v. 8.) The
Head is that Part which is most carefully to be defended. One Stroke here may
prove fatal. The Armor for this is the Hope of Salvation. The lowest Degree of
this Hope is a Confidence that GOD (...) work the whole Work of ^aith in us:
The highest is a fu^^ Assurance of ^uture Glory added to the experimental
knowledge of pardoning Love* Armed with this Helmet (the Hope of the Joy set
before ^im) Christ endured the Cross and despised the Shame. Heb. xii. 2. and
the sword of the Spirit, the word of God -- This Satan cannot withstand, when
it is edged and wielded by Faith. Till now our Armor has been only defensive.
But we are to attack Satan, as well as secure ourselves: The ^^^d in one Hand,
and the sword in the other. Whoever fights with the Powers of Hell will need
both. He that is covered with Armor from Head to Foot, and neglects this, will
be foiled after all* This whole Description ^^^ws us how great a Thing it is to
be a Christian. The Want of any one Thing makes him in^^^^^e. Though he has his
loins girt with truth, righteousness for a breastplate, his feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel, the (...) of (...), the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit: yet one Thing he wants after all. What is that? It follows,

V. 18. Praying always -- At all Times, and on every Occasion, in the midst of
all Employments, inwardly praying without ceasing; by the Spirit -- Through the
In^^^^ of the Holy Spirit, with all prayer -- With all sort of Prayer, public,
private, mental, vocal. Some are careful in respect of one kind of Prayer, and
negligent in others. If we would have the Petitions we a^k, let us use all.
Some there are who use only mental Prayer or Ejaculations, and think they are
in a State of Grace and use a Way of Worship, far superior to any other;: But
such only fancy themselves to be above what is really above them; it requiring
far more Grace to be enabled to pour out a fervent and continued prayer, than
to offer up mental Aspiration; and supplication -- Repeating and urging our
Prayer, as Christ did in the Garden and watching -- Inwardly attend upon GOD to
know his Will, to gain Power to do it, and to attain to the Blessings we
desire, with all perseverance -- Continuing to the End in this holy Exercise,
and supplication for all the saints -- Wrestling in fervent continued
Intercession for others especially for the Faithful, that they may do all the
Will of GOD, and be steadfast to the End. Perhaps we receive few Answers to
Prayer, because we do not intercede enough for others.

V. 19. By the opening my mouth -- Removing every inward and every outward
Hindrance.

V. 20. An ambassador in bonds -- The Ambassadors of Men usually appear in
great Pomp. How differently does the Ambassador of Christ appear?

V. 21. Ye also -- As well as others.

V. 22. That he might comfort your hearts -- By relating the Supports I find
from GOD, and the Success of the Gospel.

V. 23. Peace -- This Verse recapitulates the whole Epistle.

V. 24. In sincerity -- Or in incorruption; without corrupting his genuine
Gospel, without any Mixture of corrupt Affections. And that with Continuance,
till Grace issue in Glory.

The End of the Second Volume.

