SOME OF THE EXERCISES OF A BELIEVING SOUL DESCRIBED; IN A SHORT ANSWER TO
TWELVE Serious and important QUESTIONS.

See Contents in the next Page.



BY EUNICE SMITH, of Ashfield. Author of Mary and Martha.

Boston: Printed by E. Russell near Liberty-S^^m^, for (...) King, in Conway.
1792. Price 8d.

CONTENTS.
QUESTION I. What raises your admiration, when grace is in exercise in your
soul? QUES. II. What is your sorrow and mourning? QUEST. III. What is your joy
and rejoicing? QUEST. IV. What do you hate? QUEST. V. What do you love? QUEST.
VI. What are your fears? QUEST. VII. What do you hope for? QUEST. VIII. What
are your desires? QU. IX. What enemies have you to fight against? Q X. How can
you have any hopes of being an overcomer, seeing you have no strength? QUEST.
XI. What should you aim at, and what should be the motive of all your thoughts,
words and actions? QUEST. XII. What is the difference between this life and the
eternal World, to which you are going?
SOME OF THE EXERCISES, etc.
QUESTION I.
What raises your admiration, when grace is in exercise in your soul?

ANS. GREAT is the mystery of godliness! My admiration often rises beyond
expression. But I will try to express some of my ideas as well as I can. I
greatly admire I should be made to hear and know the joyful sound! I, that was
far off! I, that was an enemy to King JESUS! I, that was by nature a child of
wrath even as others! Why was it I that was taken, while others are left! I
cannot resolve this mystery; it still remains a wonder! I must leave it with
thanksgiving in the hands of GOD, as my blessed Savior did, saying, Even so,
Father, for so it seemed good in thy fight.

BUT that which raises my admiration the highest is, the way that mercy reaches
sinners; that GOD should be manifest in the flesh: That the King of Heaven
should die for his rebellious subjects! That the Creator should bear the
punishment due to his poor, sinful creatures! O this is astonishing love and
condescension! I wonder and admire! O this excellent way of redemption! The
love of GOD passes all understanding. I can see and know but little of the love
of GOD that passes knowledge: But what I see thereof looks very wonderful: Yet
I wonder at my own stupidity, that I am so little affected with this wonderful
love of GOD. Why don't my admiration rise vastly higher than ever it did yet? I
wonder that my tho'ts are so flat and low, while I hope I am redeemed from
eternal death by the precious blood of CHRIST.

Amazing love! Unbounded grace!
How bright it shines in JESUS' face!
Where justice stern, and mercy free
To save poor sinners do agree.
QU. II. What is your sorrow and mourning?
ANS. I Mourn that I have sinned, and am still a sinner against the LORD of
GLORY: That I am so unlike to CHRIST: That when I would do good evil is present
with me: That my heart is so evil, so vain and so stupid, and that I can do no
more service for GOD and his children. It causes sorrow and mourning when I see
that my sins have pierced the Son of GOD. O this is a sorrowful sight! What
have I done? Did my sins torment the blessed King of Glory? I cannot but mourn
to think of this; and that any of my sins, the murderers that wounded the heart
of JESUS, should be entertained in my heart. -- I mourn for the precious sons
and daughters of Zion, when I see them mourning under various troubles; their
sorrow is my sorrow. I mourn to see the cause of GOD wounded at any time by any
of its professed friends; and to see many going on to all appearance in the
broad way that leads to destruction, slighting the blood of the Lamb of GOD.
Grace teaches me to mourn for sin wherever I see it, whether in myself or
others.

My sorrows here are manifold,
Which cannot be in order told:
But soon I hope through grace to see
The end of all that troubles me.
QUES. III What is your joy and rejoicing?
ANS. I Rejoice in the LORD, and joy in him who is the rock of my salvation. I
rejoice in what the LORD has done. He has made me glad through his work, and I
will triumph in the work of his hands. When I have a view of the glorious
perfections of GOD, I give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness. Though I am
a mourning sinner, yet I rejoice that the LORD makes me mourn, and that he has
promised comfort to those that mourn: Thus I see he gives grace for grace. I
rejoice in hope of the glory of GOD, and of the fulfillment of all the exceeding
great and precious promises which will be the perfection of holiness, the
destruction of sin, the end of all sorrow and the perfection of all joy. I
rejoice to see and hear of subjects being born to King JESUS: I love to hear
them speaking Canaan's sweet language, and their joy is my joy. Grace teaches
me to rejoice in the LORD's work wherever I see it, and to rejoice in nothing
but what is the LORD's. Whatsoever the King does pleases all the people that
are governed by his grace. My various joys are too numerous to reckon up in
order, and I expect they will never end, but increase and endure forever. My
joys are now but just budded; the beginning is small, but the latter end shall
greatly increase. Some drops of joy have now entered into my soul; but I hope
soon to enter into the joy of my LORD.

Glory to GOD for all my joy,
O may his praise my tongue employ!
Now whilst I live, and when I die,
And to a long eternity.
QUES. IV. What do you hate?
ANS. I Hate sin; especially the sins of my own heart: The pride, unbelief and
vanity that lurks within are my hateful enemies. There is nothing so hateful as
sin, whether it shows itself in thought, word or deed. The grace of GOD teaches
me to hate whatsoever the LORD hates.

I hate the vanity and sin,
The foolish thoughts that lurk within,
And often lead my soul astray
From JESUS CHRIST my holy way.
QUESTION V. What do you love?
ANSWER. GRACE teaches me to love whatsoever is like the altogether lovely
JESUS; he is the center of love. GOD is love, and to him all true love will
fly. The Father, Son and Holy Ghost make one essential GOD of love, manifested
to us in a most familiar, condescending manner by the Son of GOD, who became
the son of man, that we might become the children of GOD. O glorious beauty!
Essential love! How should my heart forever burn with love to this lovely One!
Well may it be said, He is altogether lovely: The full perfection of all that
is excellent shines in his lovely face. How sweet are all his commands! They
are a perfect law of liberty, and are very lovely to me. For JESUS' sake I love
my fellow creatures, though I hate the ways of sinners. But I have a special
love to the Saints, the excellent, in whom I take delight. They are more lovely
than others, because they have received a measure of the lovely Spirit of GOD.
They resemble the King in some measure: They can talk his language, and the
more they are like him the more lovely they are. We ought to love one another
as JESUS has loved us, and yet love the LORD our GOD with all our heart, soul,
mind and strength. All my love to creatures should be for his sake, from whom
all loveliness proceeds; so that let me love whom or what I will, still all my
love should be set upon GOD. I see here is a sweet mystery and loving harmony,
which looks very beautiful and lovely to me.

All glory to the GOD of love,
Whose love descends from above!
And then ascends up again,
Where love forever will remain.
QUESTION VI. What are your fears?
ANS. PErfect love casts out fear: But still the fear of the LORD is the
beginning of wisdom. I am subject to many fears through imperfection, and for want
of more love; which fears cause a degree of torment. When love grows cold I
fear I shall at last perish by my enemies, and that I do not belong to the
family of CHRIST; that I do not love him nor his children as true-hearted
Christians do; that all my love is self-love, and that I shall at last be
forever separated from CHRIST and the Saints, etc. I also fear the faces of
mortals. And many outward dangers cause fears: Without are fightings, and
within are fears. But all these fears, and many more of the same nature, cannot
stand before the love of JESUS. These are the fears that perfect love will cast
out; and the true fear of the LORD will banish them from the soul. Grace
teaches me only to fear the LORD, with a pleasant loving fear: Fearing to sin
against GOD, or to break the least of his commandments. The true fear of the
LORD is in sweet agreement with love, and there is no torment therein.

O may I always fear the LORD,
And love and keep his holy Word!
And never let a mortal's face
Make me afraid to speak his praise.
QUEST. VII. What do you hope for?
ANSW. I Hope for unspeakable blessings. I hope that my LORD's kingdom will
advance until it fills the whole earth, and my GOD will subdue all things to
himself, and the loftiness of all flesh will be brought down, and every knee
will bow to King JESUS, and the LORD alone shall be exalted. When all this
comes to pass my hopes will all be accomplished. I hope for complete
deliverance from sin, and to be made perfectly holy: Then I hope to see and
know what GOD has laid up for them that love him. -- Above all I hope that
mine eyes shall see the King in his beauty, by whose death I have hopes of
eternal life: And when I see him as he is, I hope I shall be like unto him* and
also see all his blessed family together. O what a glorious company I hope to
see, all looking like the lovely JESUS! I hope for wonderful things which I see
not, and I desire with patience to wait for them. CHRIST is my hope; therefore
I expect my hope will never make me ashamed. He is in all his children the hope
of glory; which hope is as an anchor to the soul, sure and steadfast. Glory of
GOD for my hope: I might as justly been in keen despair, where hope could never
come.

CHRIST JESUS is the only One
To fix a hope of Heaven upon;
He is the Rock and will abide
When all things else away will slide.
QUEST. VIII. What are your desires?
ANS. MY desires are as large and extensive as my hopes, and are very numerous,
which cannot all be told; but some of them I will mention, which may comprehend
them all. -- I desire all that I hope for. I have such large desire^ ^ha^ all
the riches of the earth cannot satisfy me. My soul thirsts for GOD, for the
living GOD. I can desire nothing greater, and nothing less can give me
satisfaction. O how long must I remain at such a distance from GOD? How long
must I remain a sinner? I long to be perfectly holy. I never shall be fully
satisfied until I awake in the likeness of CHRIST. I greatly desire to be an
instrument used in the hands of GOD, to show forth his praises; to be a vessel
fitted for the blessed Master's use and service; to know and do his will
continually. I desire to bear much fruit, that thereby the heavenly Father may
be glorified: And the same blessings I desire for my own soul I desire for all
the elect of GOD: I want to have them all bro't home to JESUS, and to have all
creatures bowing at his feet. I desire the fulfillment of all the promises, then
all that are excellent and lovely shall be together, and sing and eternal song
of praise to GOD and the Lamb; and never sin, nor never part to endless ages:
Every one casting the crown of all their joy, down before him who only is
worthy of all the glory. O what a glorious day is at hand when all the desires
that the LORD gives to all his children shall be more than granted!

Come blessed JESUS, quickly come,
And take thy longing Children home,
That all may in thy beauty shine,
And all the glory shall be thine.
QUESTION IX.
What enemies have you to fight against?
ANS. THere is a large army encamped against me, who are under three generals,
the world, the flesh and the devil: These with all their host I must resist
with spiritual weapons; and it will never be lawful nor prudent for me to yield
or flee before the enemy; but as I have listed in the King's service during
life, I must fight as long as I remain in the enemy's country. My King gives
all his soldiers a noble bounty and good wages, and sets open a full store,
where there is a plenty of weapons of proof, that never fail when well used, of
prevailing against the enemy: And a full store of provision, food well dressed
for all that are hungry: And raiment plenty, fit to wear in the palace of
glory: And his command and promise is, Be thou faithful unto the death and I
will give thee a crown of life. The world seeks to ruin my soul, sometimes by
flatteries and sometimes by frowns; but I must not regard it, but go strait
forward toward the heavenly world and never be conformed to this world, but
always seek to be transformed by the renewing of my mind, after the image of
GOD's dear SON. I must not fear them that can kill the body, and do no more.
The flesh is a subtle enemy and pleads hard to be indulged in sin: But I must
make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. These selfish
enemies do me the most damage. The world and satan with all their host could do
me but little hurt, if it was not for a number of deceitful foes within, always
ready to let in the enemy, and to crowd themselves into all my best company,
spoiling my meditation and conversation. The devil like a roaring lion goes
about seeking whom he may devour; yet every weak lamb is bound to resist this
lion steadfast in the faith. My enemies compass me about like bees; an army
without, and an army within: They are lively and strong, the weakest of these
enemies are too strong for me. But yet I must fight and never yield until they
are all overcome. I, that have destroyed myself, and am weak and faint, and
have no strength; I, must fight against an host that are set in battle array
against me; and I am commanded not to fear, but to withstand in the evil day,
and having done all still I must stand. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things.

The happy souls that conquer sin,
Shall everlasting glory win;
Shall see the end of war and pain,
And with the King of Glory reign.
QUES. X. How can you have any hopes of being an overcomer, seeing you have no
strength?
ANSW. THE LORD is my strength and song: He also is become my salvation: He
gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases
strength. Though an host encamp against me, I will not fear; for in the name of
the LORD I can destroy them. By my GOD I can run through a troop, and leap over
a wall. I can do all things through CHRIST who strengthens me. If I can but
set the LORD always before my face, I shall not be moved. As long as I trust in
the LORD I know I shall be safe; for his promises are sure to all that trust in
him. I must be always diligent in the work and warfare that the LORD has
appointed me: Rejoicing in CHRIST JESUS, and having no confidence in the flesh.
I must watch and pray, fight and wrestle against principalities and powers,
against spiritual wickedness in high places. And I trust the LORD will make me
triumph over sin, death and hell, with all their armies. Every enemy is
conquered by JESUS the glorious Captain of salvation. The serpent's head is
broke. My soul shall make her boast in the LORD, and in his name and strength I
hope to triumph over every enemy as young David did over Gol^ah.

O How safe I feel! My soul defies every enemy: Though I am as weak as grass,
yet my soul triumphs in her King. There is strength enough in JESUS. Take
courage O my soul and fight valiantly against every sin; especially against
pride of heart, which is spiritual wickedness in high places. The LORD hates an
high look and abhors a proud heart: But those who learn of him to be meek and
lowly shall find rest to their souls.

Arise my soul, with courage rise,
And fight against thine enemies;
Trust only in the LORD for strength,
And endless peace will come at length.
My JESUS is my strength and song;
My JESUS is my tower most strong;
My JESUS hears my feeble call;
My JESUS is my ALL in All.
Q. XI. What should you aim at, and what should be the motive of all your
tho'ts, words and actions?
ANSW. THE glory of GOD should always be my aim. Whether I eat or drink, or
whatever I do, I should do all to the glory of GOD. This is the most noble
motive that can be set before me. This I believe is the joyful work of the
shining armies in glory, to do all they do to the glory of GOD: Could I attain
to this a happy creature I should be. My joyful work should always be to
glorify my Father who is in Heaven. Herein will he be glorified, if I bear much
fruit. But my unbelieving heart says, What fruit can such a thorn as I am bear?
The LORD says, I am a green fir tree; from me is thy fruit found. Abide in me
and I in you: As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the
vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me." If I abide in CHRIST and keep his
commandments I shall bear good fruit. The fruit of the Spirit is exceeding
sweet and pleasant to the taste: What is sweeter than love, joy and peace?
Lovely and pleasant is the work my LORD calls me to do. Why should my evil
heart be backward or unwilling to do the work of Saints and Angels in glory. It
will be for my happiness to always be submitted to the will of GOD. I know his
will is for the best; and to constantly continue in his service; I know his
service is good and easy: And to cast all my care upon him. I know he will take
better care of me than I can of myself. O that I might be used as an instrument
for the glory of Him whose essential glory can never be increased by any of his
creatures. While the glory of GOD is the work I aim at, my soul can l^^k up and
rejoice. Then am I in a fit circumstance to find the truth of that promise of
the blessed JESUS, nothing shall by any means hurt you. Then let what will come
upon me, what need I care? If GOD is but glorified thereby, I have my heart's
desire. It will be happy living if I live unto the LORD, and it will be happy
dying if I die unto the LORD: If the LORD is but glorified by me all will be
well, whether in sickness or health, life or death. Our glorious Leader has
cast up a noble highway called the way of holiness, and the redeemed of the
LORD shall walk therein. The blessed Savior walked in this way himself, ^eting
us a bright example, and he says, Follow me. And the happy souls that follow
JESUS shall ran and not be weary; shall walk and not be faint: And go from
strength to strength, 'till in Zion every one shall appear before GOD. Then
shall all the glory be forever ascribed to Him who only is worthy of praise
from all his creatures, in a special manner from those that he not only made,
but redeemed from eternal misery, by his own most precious blood. -- Worthy is
the LAMB that was slain to receive all glory; blessing and honor, in time and
to eternity.

My greatest care, O LORD, should be
To glorify and honor thee I
O give me daily grace for grace,
Until I see thy lovely face!
How bright and pleasant is the way
That leads to everlasting day!
The way is marked and paved with love,
And leads to boundless joys above.
QUESTION XII. What is the difference between this life and the eternal World,
to which you are going?
ANSW. THIS is too hard a question for me to answer whilst I remain in the
tents of mortality: But I can tell some of my weak ideas. This life is short,
like a vapor that appears a little while and then vanishes away: So uncertain
when it will end, that I never know but that the last hour thereof is really
come. But the world to which I am going will never vanish away; there my state
will be forever fixed, nor shall I ever find the middle nor end thereof. Here I
am only as a stranger upon a journey, hastily passing through a narrow
wilderness, where I have no continuing city: But the world to which I am going
will be my home, my everlasting habitation; I shall not be a stranger there,
for I am going to my own People. All the enjoyments of this life are uncertain,
and may be all suddenly taken from me: I can call nothing my own, (except it be
that good part that Mary chose; if I have got that, it shall never be taken
from me, for it is an earnest of the inheritance to which I am going.) All the
riches of this world are of but small value, and will never do for a portion;
they cannot satisfy the soul: But all things are certain and enduring in the
heavenly world; treasures laid up there are of infinite value, and will fully
satisfy the desires of an immortal soul. The present life is a mixtue of good
and evil, joy and sorrow: Prosperity and adversity are set one over against the
other; but there will be no such mixture in the eternal world. The present life
is a state of war, where we should show our valor for our LORD the King, in the
land where his enemies dwell. A state of trial for a long eternity; a place for
the poor Saints to mourn and weep under the affliction of a body of sin and
death: But the world of glory where all the Saints are going, is a state of
triumphing over every enemy, a state of perfect peace, where all that are here
tried and come forth as gold, shall need no more trying but shall shine forth
as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. There shall be no mourning, sorrow
nor crying there; no more trouble with a body of sin and death. There shall be
given a free reward for all the free grace that the LORD enables his children
to improve to his glory in time. Here I have some desires to praise the blessed
JESUS; but find I can scarce touch upon the notes of that heavenly song. But I
hope I am going where I shall join with all the happy Singers, to praise my GOD
in a sweet melodious manner. Here I go mourning from day to day because of my
distance from the lovely spring of all my joys: But I hope I am going where I
shall be satisfied with nearness to the lovely JESUS, and with the company of
all his lovely children, who are now scattered like sheep in a wilderness, but
soon they will be all together, and never be scattered again. Here I am greatly
troubled with the monster sin, who is blowing his poison breath upon all I do,
spoiling my best duties: But I hope I am going where sin can never go. O what a
shout of praise I shall sing to my glorious Deliverer, if ever I get perfectly
free from sin! Here I can have but now and then a drop of heavenly pleasure,
just enough to encourage and strengthen me to press forward on my journey: But
when I get home I hope my LORD will make me drink of the River of his pleasure
forever. Here I am full of desires which are not yet satisfied. But I hope I am
going where I shall enjoy more than I can desire or wish for here. -- But what
can I conceive of the boundless joys that GOD has prepared for all that love
him? O how dark are all my ideas of the eternal world, to which I am hastily
going! Grace is a foretaste and earnest of the glorious inheritance, therefore
we may know enough thereof in time to ravish our hearts, and make us long to
reach our eternal Home.

The present life will soon decay;
Perhaps my time will end today:
Then may I find the happy Shore,
Where sin shall vex my soul no more.
All praise and glory may I sing
To GOD my everlasting King:
To him belongs eternal praise
From all the subjects of his grace.
Who can conceive what stores of love
Ly waiting for the Saints above;
Where they shall shine forever bright*
Like everlasting Sons of Light.
E ternal praise I hope to sing
U nto the LORD my glorious King.
N one but the LORD can banish grief*
I know he sends the poor relief,
C alls wretched sinners in distress,
E ternal glory to possess.
S weet is the voice that whispers peace;
M ore sweet than all the earth's increase.
I n JESUS every blessing flows,
T o banish all our various woes:
H ence forward O my soul a^ore
T he GOD of love forevermore.
An INVITATION to be constant in ^uning the CHRISTIAN RACE.
1. DEAR happy souls who have begun
The joyful work of praise,
O do not stop, but ever run
The blessed christian race.
2. When many powerful enemies
Do fill your souls with grief,
O do not stop, but raise your cries
To JESUS for relief.
3. When worldly cares beset you round,
To turn your feet astray,
O do not stop on earthly ground,
But run the heavenly way.
4. Though many shining vanities
May pass before your eyes,
O do not stop to look on these,
But run and take the prize.
5. All worldly bubbles soon will break,
They cannot long endure;
O do not stop, but run and make
Your lasting portion sure.
6. Let JESUS be your joy and strength,
Rely on him alone;
O do not stop, and you at length
Shall shine before his Throne.
7. There you shall find more pleasures sweet
Than here you can desire;
O do not stop until you meet
The whole redeemed Choir.
ASHFIELD, Jan. 1792.
(...) a vacant Page, the Editor has inserted the SPIRITUAL SOLDIER's UNIFORM.
By Mr. F -- n H -- y, of Boston, aet. 19.
Dressed Uniform CHRIST's Soldiers wear,
When duty calls abroad,
^ot purchased by their cost or care,
But by their Prince bestowed.
2. CHRIST's Soldiers to^ have Christlike bread
And regimental dress;
It Is linen white and faced with red,
It Is CHRIST's own righteousness.
A rich and costly robe it is,
And to the Soldier dear,
^o rose can learn to blush like this,
Nor lilly look so fair.
It Is wrought by JESUS' skilful hand.
And tinged with his own blood:
(...) the Cherubs gazing stand
(...) view this robe of GOD.
No art of man can weave this robe,
It Is of such texture fine;
^or could the wealth of all this globe,
By purchase make it mine.
^. It Is of one piece and wove throughout*
So curiously that none
^an dress up in this seamless coat,
'Till JESUS puts it on.
This vesture never waxes old,
Nor spot thereon can fall:
makes the Soldier brave and bold,
And dutiful withal.
8. This robe put on me LORD each day,
And it shall hide my shame;
'Twill make me fight, and sing and pray,
And bless my Captain's name.
9. How brave and bold CHRIST's Soldiers ar^
When dressed up in this robe!
They look like men equipped for war,
And like the Sons of GOD.
10. Their shield is says, their helmet hope.
And thus they march CHRIST's roa^
CHRIST's Spirit is their glittering sword
To play the man for GOD.
11. When dressed up in this Uniform,
In order march along,
CHRIST JESUS is their Leader now.
Redeeming love their song.
12. The trumpet blows at CHRIST's com^
A long and joyful sound;
While Soldiers shout and praise their
The walls fall to the ground.
At this OFFICE may be had, just published, the ^^COND EDITION of an excellent
and much (...) Pamphlet, wrote by the ingenious Miss EUN^^^ SMITH, Author of
the present Work* entitled*

SOME Arguments against Worldly-mindedness, and (...) Care and Trouble. With
some other useful Instructions. Represented by Way of a Dialogue or Discourse
between two, called by the Names of MARY and MARTHA.

Also, by the same Author, Practical Language interpret^^ In a Dialogue between
a Believer and an Unbeliever: In Parts: Representing a Believer under the
Influence of (...) speaking Canaan's Language. -- Also may be had Columbian
Tragedy: Containing an Official and (...) Account of the Ohio Battle. -- The
Minister (...) own Funeral Sermon. -- Christ's Letter to King (...).


