REASONS WHY THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS Cannot so fully unite with the
METHODISTS, IN THEIR MISSIONS TO THE NEGROES IN THE WEST INDIA ISLANDS AND
AFRICA, AS FREELY TO CONTRIBUTE THERETO: WITH A FEW Queries consonant therewith.

BY CATHARINE PHILLIP^

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY DANIEL LAWRENCE, NO. 33. NORTH 4th STREET,
NEAR RACE. M. DCC. XCII.

REASONS, etc.
AS some religious persons may misconceive the reasons which prevent Friends
from freely centributing (when called upon) to the expenses of the Methodist
missions, to the West India Islands and Africa, to instruct the Negroes in
Christianity; I have been induced to point out so many of them, for their
information, as may, I hope, convince impartial minds, that they are not
therein actuated by a spirit of bigotry; but, on the contrary, of religious
caution, lest they should any way contribute to Gal. ii.18.
build again those things which the Spirit of truth has destroyed in their
religious society.

There remains no doubt, that many of the preachers amongst the Methodists have
been instrumental to rouse sinful men from their beds of ease, and convince
them of the danger of their state, and of the impossibility of their attaining
salvation, even through the mediation of Christ, unless they are renewed up in
hm, through the purifying operation of his Holy Spirit, in righteousness and
inward holiness.

So far as this awakening work has advanced, and its consequent fruits of
renovation of mind and manners have been produced, the truly religious among
Friends have rejoiced therein; and have united in spirit with their
conscientious labors, so far as they have ministered in the ability which flows
from Christ, the holy Head of his own Church; as well as with the really
reformed members of the Society, who act agreeably to the light wherewith they
have been favored, and are concerned to attain a perfect knowledge of their
duty, and experience of salvation.

For these, Friends desire that they may witness an entire and steady
settlement under the government of God's pure Spirit, which is the alone
infallible teacher and leader, appointed of Christ to be so unto the end of
time. To him all instrumental ministers should direct those minds they have
been assisted to awaken, that they may know him to John xvi.13.
"guide them into all truth," consonant with the promise of Christ, who, by
this his own pure Spirit, is with his disciples and followers in their
respective stations and services, Matt. xxviii.20.
"always, even unto the end of the world;" bringing all his edifying sayings to
their remembrance, as their spiritual states require them, either for reproof,
instruction, or consolation; and opening their understandings into his holy
doctrines, and the glorious mystery of redemption through him, from
unrighteousness, that they may become purified unto God, Titus ii.14.
"a peculiar people, zealous of good works."

But, whereas it appears to Friends, that some of the principal leaders among
the Methodists, endeavor to fix the people in the observance of forms and
inefficacious ceremonies, which, in the apostatized state of the Christian
Church, were styled religious, they cannot therein unite with them. For out of
all these did the divine Spirit of Truth, lead their zealous and pious
predecessors, in their beginning as a people; and it does still convince the
truly enlightened among them, that, instead of establishing the mind in the
holy fear of God, and in a steady dependence upon him, they tend to deprive
him, in part, of the honor of his own glorious work in the soul, by leading to
a degree of reliance upon the Gal. iv 9.
"weak and beggarly elements" for assistance to perfect them in righteousness,
and on Romans i.25.
"the creature more than the Creator, who is God, blessed for ever, Amen," say
the souls who humbly wait upon him, and witness his Son revealed in them by his
Spirit, to be their King, Priest, and Prophet; their Rev. i.11.
"Alpha and Omega;" the beginner and ender of his own glorious work of
sanctification, by whom they are washed with the Titus iii.5.
"washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost;" and their souls are
fed with the bread of life, and refreshed with the new wine of his heavenly
kingdom.

These, seeing that the end is come upon the shadowy dispensations of the
Mosaic Law, and of John the Baptist, can no longer touch nor taste with them,
knowing, that when their appointed use in their season was fulfilled, they were
to cease, and that Christ's spiritual dispensation, of John i.
Light, Grace, and Truth, must stand alone and be exalted upon the top of all
mountains of high profession. This is confirmed by the answer given to these
peculiarly favored disciples, who, seeing Christ's transfiguration upon the
mount, and Matt. xvii.3, 4, 5. and 10 to 13.
"Moses and Elias talking with him," were overcome with the glory they had
beheld; and Peter requested of him allowance to "build three tabernacles, one
for him, one for Moses, and one for Elias," Matt. xi.14.
who is John the Baptist, not knowing what he said; he not having seen to the
end of all that was to be abolished. But the instruction from God was, "This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him." Thus the Father
condescended, immediately, to testify to his own last and most glorious
dispensation of grace and truth, through his Son to mankind, appointing him their
infallible and free teacher; not then leaving it to himself to testify to his
own office, although Col. ii.9.
"in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily."

Under a sense of the awfulness of this merciful manifestation of the will of
the Father, my mind is humbled; and desires are raised, that the Son, through
his own pure Spirit of light and life, may instruct and invigorate awakened
minds, to the perfecting them in true holiness of faith and practice.

When men set bounds to this holy Spirit of wisdom, and endeavor to fix the
people in the observance of what themselves acknowledge to be non-essentials,
Friends cannot unite with them herein; because in Christ's church nothing can
remain by his appointment, which is inefficacious.

All that is of human appointment, or which is retained of the former
dispensations, must be come out of: and let human reasoning support, as it may
for a time, the useless ceremonies which remain in the nominal Christian
Church; the true light will discover them to be but chaff, from which Christ
will purge his own spiritual Church. Therefore, religious minds should beware
how they hold fast or support that which he has appointed to be denied, as
being under his pure spiritual dispensation unclean unto them, and not to be
touched.

Friends have been instructed, that Christ as the holy, living, wise Head of
his Church, has the sole power and right to purify, qualify, call, send forth,
direct and assist his ministers; who, by the immediate operation of his Spirit
upon their spirits, are made in their respective measures 2 Cor. iii.6.7.
"able ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter which kills, but of
the Spirit which gives life." These, if obedient to him, are sent where he
pleases, speak at his command, and keep silence when he sees meet to appoint
silence; even in the solemn assemblies, and seasons set apart for worship;
wherein the attention of both ministers and hearers should be abstracted from
man, and fixed upon that pure spiritual teacher, whose constant language in the
soul is, WORSHIP GOD: and in holy silence, living acceptable worship is
performed unto him; although at other seasons, the master of these solemn
assemblies appoints his ministers, whether they are Ephesians. iv.11.
"apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors or teachers," to speak in his name;
and agreeably to their respective gifts 1 Pet. iv.11.
"minister in the ability which he gives;" and engage them verbally to
supplicate and praise God, the fountain of all good. And as in Christ Jesus Gal
iii.28.
"there is neither male nor female;" and Acts ii.17 18.
"his Spirit was poured forth upon both sexes," to qualify for these services;
so among Friends, liberty is given to women to speak Acts ii.4.
"as the Spirit gives utterance;" many of whom have spoken or prophesied 1
Cor. xiv.3.
"to the edification and comfort of their brethren,"

Now as Friends have believed in, and experienced this pure spiritual ministry
and worship, and have been commanded to testify against its contrary; and for
obedience to God therein have The Sufferings of Friends, in two volumes, by J.
Besse, and their History by W. Sewel.
suffered much; they cannot unite with the human appointments in the Methodist
Society, whereby their ministers are directed how and when to preach and pray,
where to go, and among what people to labor, any more than with the human
wisdom, which seeks qualifications to minister from human learning, and
ordination from men. They acknowledge that human learning may be made useful
under Divine direction; but they know that he who chose and qualified poor
illiterate fishermen, etc. to preach his gospel 1 Cor. ii.4.
"in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power," is able to do so still.
And if he call these who have not school learning into his service, it is not
for them to seek thereby to be perfected therein.

They have believed that ministers should not, in any degree, be excited to
engage in the ministry by a view to worldly interest or honor; and that
Christ's command to his ministers is yet in force, Matt. x.8.
"Freely ye have received, freely give;" therefore, they appoint no maintenance
for their ministers, nor contribute thereto, otherwise than when they are
engaged in gospel labors, to afford them such necessary accommodation, as they
may be free to accept; or, if they are poor, and cannot provide for themselves
and families, minister to their wants, as they maintain their other poor. Many
ministers among them, labor with their hands to provide for their necessities;
and others, accounting it more honorable to give than to receive (as did the
primitive gospel ministers) do give liberally to their poor brethren in their
various stations, and to other charitable purposes, as well as expend much in
the course of their labors, in the exercise of their ministry.

From the foregoing premises it must appear, that Friends cannot, consistently
with there own principles, freely unite with the leaders of the Methodist
Society, who establish all the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England,
and the maintenance of its ministers by tithes; the payment whereof, the truly
conscientious among Friends cannot submit to; because those being a part of the
Levitical law, are ended in Christ, as is the observance of all the ceremonies
of that dispensation, which were but a Heb. x.1.
"type (or figure) of these good (being purely spiritual) things which were to
come," and have been revealed and experienced under Christ's dispensation of
light and life.

They lament, that the reformation from the apostatized Romish Church, which
has made some progress in this nation, did not go forward to the full
accomplishment thereof, although many laid down their lives to effect it, so
far as they had seen; and are, doubtless, numbered with the glorified spirits
perfected through sufferings. -- Some of these faithful martyrs testified
against things which yet remain in the Church of England, and which its
ministers seek to uphold; but which must be destroyed when Christ by his pure
Spirit presides, and the Matt. iii.12.
"chaff is burnt up by the unquenchable fire" of his divine love and power,
which will effectually separate betwixt the precious and the vile; betwixt what
pleases and serves God, and what does not, although it may be practiced under
a religious show.

Now having, in a mind clothed with charity toward all truly religious
persons, whose understandings may not be so fully opened, as to see the end of
all which should be abolished in the nominal Christian Church, penned the
foregoing reasons: I proceed to state a few Queries consonant therewith, and
tending to discover whether some observances, approved and practiced by some of
the missionaries sent among the poor Negroes, may not tend to fix their
dependence upon what cannot profit them; and may confuse their weak judgments,
rather than establish them in the pure spiritual faith in Christ, and in the
exercise of a worship consistent therewith.

And First, Supposing these poor ignorant people, through preaching the
doctrines of sacred scripture, have been taught that it is absolutely necessary
to their salvation, that they should experience a change of nature; for whereas
man is a fallen creature, and as such, is by nature of the 1 Cor. xv.47.
"earth earthy," and has desires and inclinations agreeable to his depraved
earthly state, and has brought forth the condemnable fruits of the flesh; he
must be heavenly minded, experiencing his desires and inclinations to be after
bringing forth the fruits of righteosness, and knowing his spirit clothed with
true holiness; and that this necessary work of renovation, can only be effected
by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, in whose coming and suffering to save
them from sin, they have been entreated to believe. Now, if through the mercy
of God, a degree of living faith has been raised in the power of Christ, as the
head of, and alone sanctifier and perfecter of the members of his body or
Church; can it avail any thing to sprinkle a little water in their faces, and
cross their foreheads with the finger, using the customary words in the
performance of that ceremony, and thanking God for their See Baptism -- Church
of England Service.
regeneration, etc. If the Negroes reflect, what can they think of being thus
admitted into the communion of the Church? If it be said, that submitting to
water baptism is a public acknowledgment of their faith in Christ; I answer,
First, That sprinkling is not water baptism, but an innovated ceremony
substituted for it, introduced in a dark night of apostasy from the
spirituality of genuine Christianity: And Secondly, No proof can be deduced
from scripture, that Christ ever appointed Water Baptism in his Church;
although, to fulfill in his own person all the dispensations appointed of his
Father, he submitted to it, as he did to all the Mosaic rites, etc. and until
he had done so, and had offered up himself, as the one efficacious sacrifice
appointed of his Father for the sins of the whole world, agreeable to his own
testimony, Matt. v.18.
"not one jot nor one tittle was to pass from the law."

We read, that John iv.1, 2.
"his disciples baptized with water, but that he did not;" and the foregoing
quotation is a sufficient reason for his allowing them to do it, all not being
then fulfilled. But it appears to me, that his significant, and to men
eternally intersting words upon the cross, John xix.30.
"It is finished," not only respected his own sufferings, but also the full
accomplishment of the end of his coming and death; which, in part, was to
finish that weak shadowy dispensation Heb. ix.10.
"which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation;" and to introduce
another, which being pure, spiritual and powerful, is experimentally known Romans
xiv.17.
"to be righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost." And at his death the
use of the shadows of it ceased, although to this day, so many professing
Christianity, practice them under a different form and pretense; and it is to
be feared, not a few rest so satisfied in them, as never to attain the
substance, even the experimental knowledge of Col. i.27.
"Christ revealed in them the hope of glory."

The ministry of water by John the Baptist was a The Jews practiced immersion
in water, when they received a convert into their communion, and on many other
occasions.
Jewish rite, although doubtless in Divine Wisdom, particularly appointed to be
publicly used by John (accompanied with a solemn call to repentance) to point
out the cleansing Baptism of Christ; unto whom, and his superior Baptism by the
Holy Spirit, John testified, and directed the people unto him John i.29.
"the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world:" in whom if the
Negroes have believed, what edification or benefit can they acquire from this
ceremony? -- But it being recommended perhaps by the ministers, through whom
they have believed, may they not in their weak state suppose, that it is
somehow conducive to their eternal welfare, though they know not how? and being
then acknowledged Christians, may conclude themselves safe, and be the more
liable to center in a state of ease. And further, What can they think of this
ceremony being performed as a necessary rite upon infants who are incapable of
believing, and have committed no sin? If they are told that infants are
included in the fall, must they believe that by this ceremony they are raised
out of it, and are then and thereby really regenerated? Did not Christ die for
infants as well as for adults? and has he left the completion of the work of
their salvation (if they die in an infant state) to the option, and in the
power of men, who may perform it or not at their pleasure; and made it possible
that this work may be acomplished by a bad man as well as by a good one? Is not
this robbing Christ of his honor? Away with such mockeries from the nominal
Christian Church! and be it acknowledged, universally acknowledged, that the
way to heaven is as clear to infants from the cradle as from the Sweet infants
from the font who fly
Unsullied to the joys on high.
Brackenbury's Sacred Poems. I hope this author, who appears to be a pious,
enlightened man, does not believe, that their flight would have been less rapid
from their cots (a sort of cradle now pretty much in use) than from the font;
but why did he pen what may render it suspected?


font, and before what is called private Baptism is performed upon them, as it
is afterward.

Throughout the New Testament we do not find any precept or example for Infant
Baptism. But, alas! the poor Negroes must be taught, that it is necessary for
their children to be sprikled (baptized they are n^^ for, dying without it,
their souls are not safe. And the children when grown up may, as many in this
land do, avail themselves of being what is called baptized in their infancy,
and never seek after the alone saving Baptism 1 Peter iii.21.
"which is not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ," whereof he,
by his Holy Spirit, is the sole administrator throughout all ages.

Secondly, How can the Negroes conceive, that by eating a bit of bread, and
supping a little wine, they really participate spiritually of the body and
blood of Christ? The utmost that can be inferred from the words of Christ to
his disciples (as recited in Luke xxii.19 and 20, at the passover, when he
blessed and break the bread, and handed it as he did the cup to them, as the
sign of his body and blood being offered up for them) is, that "they did it in
remembrance of him, and thereby showed forth his death till he came." And
although to a truly religious person, who conscientiously observes this
ceremony, merely as a remembrance of him, there may a degree of solemnity
attend, under the consideration of his sufferings, and the merciful end of his
coming; I will venture to assert, that his body and blood is not spiritually
conveyed by the administering material bread and wine; nor does the communion
of the saints stand in any degree therein: nor is it necessary thereby to
revive the remembrance of Christ in those souls, who have experienced his
second coming unto their salvation from sin; for these sanctify him in their
hearts, and feed upon him, the living eternal word of God, with whom they have
sweet communion; and many of them see clearly the non-necessity of continuing
this (as the Church of England styles it) See Church of England Catechism.
"outward sign of an inward and spiritual grace:" for participating of the
substance, the shadow of it ceases to be of use. And may not those who are I
believe but few who observe this ceremony, suppose themselves to be so
unfaithful, as not to be benefited thereby.
not of the faithful, and yet are exercised in that which is acknowledged to be
but the shadow, abide therein, supposing it to be a means of conveying the body
and blood of Christ to their souls? Without breach of charity this may be
concluded to be the case of many, who partake of the outward bread and wine;
for they are too unclean to approach Christ's holy table, or to taste of his
supper, spiritually.

Thirdly, In regard to the outward mode of worship, some of the principal
leaders among the Methodists direct their followers to attend that of the
Church of England; and what can the Negroes think, when they see the minister
put on a white robe to read prayers in, and a William Fulk, that English
champion of the Protestants in the time of Queen Elizabeth, writes, "The
Priests of Baal had the name of Chemarims for their black garments, which they
did wear superstitiously." See Zeph. i.4. which Anthony Purver, in his
translation of the Old Testament, makes "Black ones." The critics have allowed
Purver to be a literal, though in some instances an inelegant transsator; but I
think, whoever reads him with attention will admit, that in many parts, the
sense of scripture is conveyed much more clearly, than in the common
translation.
black one to preach in? Again, how are they edified by the minister's going
from the pulpit or desk, to repeat a part of the service before the communion
table; and, at particular times, the people turning and praying toward the
east? What is meant by these changes of garments and attitudes in prayer, by
those who observe them, I know not; but suspect both to be retained from the
heathens, as the priests of Baal were wont to be clothed in black, and the
Romans prayed toward the east; probably because there the sun arose, as other
pagans (particularly the Persians) worshipped toward the rising sun. If any of
the Negroes in Africa pay adoration to that luminary, may not those in our
West India settlements, etc. who see this custom continued in the Church of
England liturgy, be pleased; and suppose that God, in a particular manner, is
present in that quarter of the heavens? Whereas the heaven of heavens cannot
contain him; yet his throne is established in a truly humbled heart, which is
also his temple and altar, cleansed and consecrated by the Holy Spirit to his
service. Oh! the humbling depth of his worship! -- did professing Christians
comprehend it, they would see how inconsistent the frequent varied postures,
sounds, and repetitions of words, wherein many of them are exercised, are
therewith; which, instead of adding to the solemnity of public worship, tend,
by a continual round of bodily exercises, to prevent the Spirit's entering in
the worship of God, in his "temple of the heart," whereinto when he is entered,
Habakkuk ii.20. I would be understood here, to mean all the imaginations and
contrivances of the earthly or carnal mind and will, which is too frequently
engaged in what has but the name of worship.
"Let all the earth keep silence before him!"

I might enlarge, but hope I have said enough to exculpate Friends from just
censure, for not contributing to the expenses of the beforementioned missions;
but am inclined here to add, that some enlightened minds of both clergy and
laity of the Church of England have lamented, that such observances should
remain therein, as tend to shade the luster of its fundamental principle, and
prevent many from uniting with them in the outward mode of worship.

Should the constraining power of gospel-love, engage ministers among Friends
to visit the Negroes, and endeavor to turn them from darkness to light, and
from Acts xxvi 18.
the power of Satan unto God, that they may, through Christ, receive remission
of their sins, and an inheritance among those who are sanctified; the expenses
attending their labors would be cheerfully borne, either by themselves or
their brethren and sisters; and they conceive this should be the case with the
various religious societies which take part in this work.

And, inasmuch as all ministers who conscientiously labor among the Negroes,
may not see alike in some points, yet may all of them concur in laboring, that
they may attain the necessary experience of faith in Christ, and regeneration
through his Spirit: Each of them should be careful not to invalidate the labors
of others, nor strive to fix the Negroes in observances which will not profit
them: ever bearing in mind the following apostolic injunctions, as necessary to
be observed by every gospel minister, viz.. James v.9.
"Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned; behold the
judge stand before the door;" and Collos. iii.14
"above all things put on charity:" which, as it is pure love to God and men,
will engage to labor simply for the settlement of these poor ignorant people in
what is really profitable, and necessary to be believed and practiced.

That the universal love of God, manifested in and through his Son Christ
Jesus, the alone Mediator and Advocate with him, the Father, for the whole bulk
of mankind, may be preached in the demonstration and power of the Divine Spirit
to the poor Negroes, and be by them believed and received, in the love of the
unmixed gospel of peace and salvation, is the desire of

CATHARINE PHILLIPS.
Redruth (in England) 12th of 6th Month, 1792.

