SERMONS TO YOUNG PERSONS, ON THE FOLLOWING SUBJECTS, viz.

I. The importance of the rising generation. II. Christ formed in the soul the
foundation of hope. III. A dissuasive from keeping bad company. IV. The young
Christian invited to an early attendance on the Lord's table. V. The orphan's
hope. VI. The reflections of a pious parent on the death of a wicked child.
VII. Youth reminded of approaching judgment.
BY P. DODDRIDGE, D. D.

THE SIXTH EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM YOUNG. NO 52, SECOND STREET THE CORNER OF
CHESNUT-STREET.

M,DCC,XCIII.

DEDICATION.
TO THE YOUNG PERSONS BELONGING TO THE DISSENTING CONGREGATIONS AT HINCKLEY,
HARBOROUGH, AND KIBWORTH IN LEICESTERSHIRE, AND AT ASHLEY, AND NORTHAMPTON.
My dear brethren and friends,
AT length, after a long and unexpected delay, I offer to your perusal a few
sermons which I promised the public some years ago; all which some or other of
you heard, and in which you are all concerned.

It is not material to tell you, on what account I have laid by some, which I
had transcribed for your service, and which you probably expected to have seen
with these. I have substituted in their room such, as I thought might, by the
divine blessing, be most useful to you.

I hope you will peruse them with candor; and the (...), considering they were
prepared for the press chiefly in some broken moments, while I was (...),
journeys, or some fragments of time at home, often taken from my sleep, as the
stated duties of my ^^lling require an attendance, which will not allow of any
long interruption. You would readily excuse what defects you may discover in
them. If you knew that tender concern for you pre^e^^ and future happiness, by
which every (...), and (...) page has been (...). They have (...) been mingled
with prayers and with tears (...) my heart is so full of (...) to you, that it
i^ with great difficulty, that I forbear enlarging, more than the proper limits
of such an address would admit.

As for you: my Leicestershire friends, amongst whom my ministry was opened,
and the first years of i^ were delightfully spent, I cannot forget, and I hope
you have not forgotten, that intimate and pleasing friendship, with which we
were once almost daily conversing; the sweet counsel we have often taken
together in private, as well as the pleasure with which we have gone to the
house of God in company. All these sermons, but the second and fifth of them,
were first drawn up for your service, and preached to you; and much of that
tenderness for you, which gave birth to them, has been rising fresh in my mind,
while I have been taking this review of them. I hope they were not then like
water unprofitably spilt on the ground, and that the perusal of them may revive
impressions made by the first hearing. Intermediate years have introduced new
scenes; and some of us who were then in the morning of life, are now risen up
to the meridian of it. Providence has conducted many of you into new relations;
and it is my pleasure to observe, in how honorable and how useful a manner
several of you are filling them up with their proper duties.

While you are yourselves instances of the happy consequences, which attend a
religions education, I hope you will be singularly careful, that your
decendents may share in the like advantages; and I shall heart^ly rejoice, if
those sermons, or those I have formerly published, may be of any assistance to
you in these pious cares. God has put an early period to the lives of some,
who, when I was amongst you, were the growing hopes of the respective
congregations to which they belonged. Several of them have died while these
sermons were (...). May the thought quicken you in the improvement of so
uncertain a life; and may divine grace render some things, peculiarly intended
for the use of those who are now beyond the reach of such an address,
serviceable to others, into whose hands they may fall!

Though I am providentially separated from you, may I still hear that you walk
worthy of the Lord; and may every advancing year, and revolving day of life,
ripen us more for that happiness, which we hope 'ere long to share with each
other, in the house of our heavenly father!

If any of you, who were once my care and my hope, have now forsaken the ways
and the God of your fathers, and turned aside to the paths of licentiousness
and folly, I now repeat the admonitions which I have formerly given you, that
these things will, to you, above all others, be bitterness in the end. And I
entreat you, that if you have any little regard still remaining, for one to
whom some of you have professed not a little, you would at least attentively
peruse the sixth of these discourses, as containing reflections, which must
sooner or later, pierce your hearts, with penitential remorse, or overlasting
despair. Oh, that divine grace might concur with it to prevent your ruin, and
might give me to see you as wife, as religious, and as happy, as those
excellent parents once wished you, whose eyes are now closed in the dust; (...)
precepts and examples, charges and tears, yea seem long since to have forgot!

As for you, my dear friends here at home, I have the pleasure of conversing so
often with you, that it is the less necessary now to address you at large. Yet
it is but jus^ice to you thus publicly to declare, that, amidst all that
goodness and mercy, which has followed me all my days, there is no providence,
which I more gratefully own, than that which brought me hither* nor does any
thing contribute more to make my ministry here comfortable, than the Spirit of
seriousness, which discovers itself in many young persons amongst us. Oh, that
it were as universal, as in some it is amiable and exemplary! Permit me to
remind you, that, as your remarkable importunity was the consideration, which
turned the scales for my coming hither, after they had long hovered in
uncertainty, so you are under some peculiar obligations to study the ease and
comfort of my life, which you can never so effectually secure, as by the holy
regularity of your own. Our aged friends are dropping away apace; nay, the
graves have swallowed up many, very many of your own age, who, but a few months
ago, promised long and extensive usefulness here. It is you that are to comfort
me under these sorrows. I can solemnly say, that I had much rather be numbered
amongst them, than live to see the glory of practical religion lost in this
society, while it is under my care. Remember, that, under God, you are its
support; and remember, that the high hopes you have given me, would make a
disappointment sit so much the heavier upon my heart.

But I will not conclude with any thing so uncomfortable, as the mention of a
disappointment from you; but rather with recommending you, and those to whom I
have formerly stood in the like relation, to the care of Christ, the great
shepherd of the sheep, and to the (...) of that gracious spirit, who can cause
you to grow in knowledge and piety like the grass, and like willows by the
watercourses. I hope you will not forget to pray for all that appear concerned
for your spiritual edification and eternal happiness, and more especially for

Your most affectionate and faithful friend, and Servant, P. DODDRIDGE.
Northampton, Dec. 30. 1734.
CONTENTS.
SERMON I. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE RISING GENERATION. PSALM xxii. 30, 31. A seed
shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation: they shall
come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be born,
that he has done this. Page 13. SERMON II. CHRIST FORMED IN THE SOUL THE ONLY
FOUNDATION OF HOPE FOR ETERNITY. GAL. iv. 19. My little children, of whom I
travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you. Page 40. SERMON III. A
DISSUASIVE FROM KEEPING BAD COMPANY. PROVE. iv. 14, 15. Enter not into the path
of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men; avoid it, pass not by it,
turn from it, and pass away. Page 68 SERMON IV. RELIGIOUS YOUTH INVITED TO
EARLY COMMUNION. ISAIAH xliv. 3 -- 5. For I will pour water on him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the d^y ground. I will pour my spirit upon thy seed,
and my blessing upon thine offspring; and they shall spring up as among the
grass, as willows by the water courses: one shall say I am the Lord's; and
another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe
with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. Page 94
SERMON V. THE ORPHAN'S HOPE. PSALM xxvii. 10. When my father and my mother
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. Page 122 SERMON VI. THE REFLECTIONS
OF A PIOUS PARENT ON THE DEATH OF A WICKED CHILD, CONSIDERED AND IMPROVED. 2 SAMUEL xviii. 33. And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over
the gate, and wept; and as he went, thus he said; O my son Absalom, my son, my
son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son! Page 147
SERMON VII. YOUTH REMINDED OF APPROACHING JUDGMENT. ECCLES Xi. 9. Rejoice, O
young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart (...) thee in the days of thy youth;
and walk in the ways of thine heart and in the sight of thine eyes: but know
thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment. Page 170
SERMONS, etc.
SERMON I.
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE RISING GENERATION.
PSALM xxii. 30, 31. A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord
for a generation: they shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a
people that shall be born, that he has done this.
IT is a very beautiful (...) ancient Jewish writer, Eccles. xiv.18.
which has its (...) amongst some of the finest of the Heathen Poets H^^^er.
Iliad. z. ver. 146 -- 149. p. ver. 463 -- 467. Mus. apud. Clem. Alex. Strom.
Lib. VI.
, that as of the green leaves on a thick tree, some fall, and others grow; so
of the generations of flesh and blood, one comes to an end, and another is
born. In this respect the resemblance is obvious; but there is another, in
which it will not always so evidently hold. We perceive not any remarkable
difference between the leaves of one year, and of another: they which open at
the return of the Spring, are commonly as large and fair as those which the
preceding (...) had destroyed. But it has been matter of long lamentation, that
the children of men are continually sinking into deeper and deeper degeneracy.
Solomon Eccles vii. 10.
denies not that the former days were better then the present, when he cautions
against too curious an inquiry into the reasons why such an alteration was
permitted: and those who (...) little else of the most celebrated writers of
antiquity, can quote their complaints on this melancholy occasion. They can
tell you, that Homer (...)
(...)
(...).
observed, that children are seldom better, but fre^^quently worse, than their
parents; and they often repeat that lively and comprehensive acknowledgment of
Horace AEtas parentum pejor avis tulit
(...)
(...)
Hor^t. I^ib. III. Quoth. VI. (...) ^6, etc.
: our Fathers, who fell short of the virtues of their Ancestors, have produced
us a generation worse than themselves; and our children will be yet more
degenerate than we.

THESE complaints and fore-bodings have been borrowed by every age since they
were published, and are to this day borrowed by us, as what we imagine more
applicable to ourselves than to those who wrote them, or to any who have
already (...) them. I will not say, there is universal cause for such an
application; but I am sure, the face of affairs in many families, and, may I
not add, in many churches too, is abundantly sufficient not only to excuse, but
to vindicate it.

IN the midst of this mournful survey, the heart of every pious Israelite will
tremble for the A^k of the Lord, and he will be ready to say, perhaps with an
excess of solicitude and of anguish. what will the end of these things be (...)
. Surely God will utterly abandon those who so basely desert him in contempt of
the cleared revelation of his gospel, and the most engaging (...) awakening
calls of his providence. The very memory of religion will at length be lost;
and when the Son of Man comes, he will not find faith on the earth (...)
.

Now there seems to be something in the very sound of the text which may
relieve our minds under these gloomy apprehensions. A seed shall serve him, it
shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation: they shall come, and declare
his name to a third succession; a people who shall be born of them. Here is an
evident promise or prediction, that the knowledge and the fear of God should be
propagated from one age and generation to another: and this must be an
agreeable assurance, whatever the particular occasion were on which it was
(...). Were this Psalm to be considered only (...) the calamities of David, and
the wonderful deliverance which God wrought out for him the words before us
might be improved for our own (...) on the justest principles of analogy: for
(...) salvation granted to him were to (...) so deep and so lasting an
impression on (...), and o^ future ages, how reasonably, (...) be expected from
that (...) and extensive salvation, which is (...) in the everlasting gospel?

BUT after all, the application of (...) scripture, to the purposes for (...)
i^, does not depend on so (...); for if we (...) and diligently survey the
(...) are described in the several parts of it, we must be obligest to confess,
that a greater than David is here. It contains a most lively and sublime
prophecy of the sufferings of the Messiah, and the exaltation with which they
were to be rewarded See particularly, ver, 7, 14, 16, 18, 27 and seq.
; and particularly mentions the calling of the gentiles into his church, and
the propagation of his religion to future ages Ver. 27 -- 31.
. All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord; and all the
kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee; all they who are fat upon
the earth, i. e. (by an usual Hebraism) persons of eminent rank and in
plentiful circumstances See Psalm lxxviii. 31. Isa. x. 16. Psalm. xvii. 10. and
compare Psalm. xiv. 12. lxxii. 10, 11. Isa. lx. 3, 5, 10, 13. Rev. xxi. 24. all
which ^exts speak of the submission of princes and great men to Christ.
, shall eat and worship, i. e. they shall pay their public homage to him, and
enter themselves solemnly into his covenant, as the Jewish votaries did by
eating of the sacrifices which were offered to him; and on the other hand,
those that go down to the dust, i. e. who are in the most indigent
circumstances, shall bow before them Compare Isa. xxvi. 19. Neh. iii. 18. 1 Samuel ii. 8
, even he that cannot keep alive his own soul So the French translate this
Clause, Memes celui qui ne peut garentir sa Vie; and so several famous
commentators explain it, particularly Rivetus; Fame^^^i, qui non babent quo
vitam ^as^ineant. Thus also Bu^^anan paraphrases on the words, Flect^t i^li
poplitem
Pauper sepu^^bri in limine,
Qui membra fessis (...) languentia
F^gi^^te v^^d vix trahit.


It is certain the phrase here translated, keep alive the soul, is so often
used for the preservation of the annual life; Genesis xix 19 1 Kings xx. 31 Ezekiel.
xiii. 19. And the m^^t, which was pur^l a^ed at so expensive a rate at the
siege of Jerusalem, is said to relieve, or restore, the soul, I am i. 11.


, who is so poor that wants the necessaries of life; as if it had been said,
there shall be an universal submission to him, in which the greatest and
meanest shall concur. And the text assures us, that his triumphs shall be as
lasting, as extensive: a future Seed shall serve him; they shall be accounted
to the Lord for a generation; i. e. being brought to the knowledge and the
profession of the true religion, they shall be owned by God as his people: and
it shall be their pious care, to declare this glorious display of his
righteousness Compare Rom iii. 25, 26.
to a people who shall be born of them, that he has done this; that it is the
hand of God which has wrought out this great salvation. And though there are
not many generations mentioned here, yet other scriptures assure us, that the
kingdom of the Messiah is to be of a perpetual duration, and consequently that
such promises as these are to be taken in their utmost extent. In his days
shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as the moon
endures: his name shall endure for ever; his name shall be continued as long
as the sun; and men shall be blessed in him Psalm. lxxii. 7, 17.
.

UPON the whole then, it appears, that the words of the text are a prophecy,
that the kingdom of Christ shall be perpetual, and extend itself to the latest
generations, as well as the remotest climates: and, through the divine
goodness, we must acknowledge, that this day is this scripture in part
fulfilled among us. We dwell in a country, which, with regard to Judea, lay at
the ends of the earth, and which was long overrun with barbarity and idolatry
yet we are now instructed in the knowledge of the God of Israel, and are this
day assembled for his worship; so that at the distance of more than two
thousand years from the publication of this prediction, we are the living
witnesses of its truth; being ourselves a seed who prosess to serve the Lord,
and accounted to him for a generation.

I HOPE it is the concern of many of us, that the concluding words may be
fulfilled in those who come after us; that his gospel righteousness may so be
declared to them, that they likewise might be engaged to serve the Lord not
only in the external forms of the true religion, but with the affections of the
heart, and the obedience of the life.

THAT this concern may be more (...) more active, and more universal, it will
be the business of my present discourse, to represent to you at large the
importance of the rising generation. And here I would aim, not merely at the
demonstration of a speculative truth, which may leave your minds as cold and as
irregular as it found them; but I would labor, by the divine assistance, to
possess you with such a sense of the (...), as may have a powerful influence on
your temper and behavior; that so our meditations on this excellent promise
may, through the concurrance of God, be the means of its more complete
accomplishment.

I AM now particularly concerned, that you, my younger brethren, may be
impressed with what I say: I shall therefore address myself directly to you,
and endeavor to show how important and desirable it is, that YOU be early
tinctured with a sense of religion, and heartily engaged in the service of God.

MAY the spirit of God, in the mean time, so speak to your hearts, as that life
and energy may be added to those convictions which, I am confident, your reason
will not be able to oppose!

Now I would entreat you, on this occasion, seriously to consider the
importance of your character and behavior, with regard both to yourselves and
others.

I. NOTHING can be of greater importance, with regard to yourselves, than your
being early engaged in the service of God.

IT is a consideration, which equally concerns you, and others of a more
advanced age, that religion is, generally speaking, the surest way we can take
to be happy in this world, and, through the merits and righteousness of a
Redeemer, the only way to glory in another; so that, as the apostle expresses
it, godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come 1 Timothy iv. 8.


ITS tendency to promote our present comfort and happiness, will abundantly
appear from the influence which it has on our external circumstances, and on
the temper of our minds. As to the former of these, I might enlarge on its
beneficial effects, with regard to health and reputation, estate and
friendship: and as to the latter, nothing is more obvious than that it tends to
secure the tranquillity and the pleasure of the soul, as it either suppresses
or moderates, those turbulent passions which throw it into anguish and
confusion, while it gives abundant exercise to those which are most sweet and
delightful. Such is the immediate blessedness of the man who fears the Lord,
and delights greatly in his commandments Psalm. cxii. 1
. And whosoever reflects on the evidence with which each of these particulars
is attended, must acknowledge, that the ways of wisdom are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace Prove. iii. 17.
.

To complete the argument, it is to be considered, that these pleasant and
peaceful paths lead up to the paradise of God: for invariable truth and
goodness has engaged, that to them who by patient continuance in well doing,
seek for glory, honor and immortality, he will render eternal life Romans ii. 7.
.

ON the other hand, if you go on in the neglect of God and religion, it is very
possible you may be undone for this world, as thousands have been, by
debauchery and folly: or, under some restraints of common prudence, which may
secure you from that, if you do not violently over bear the voice of
conscience, it will often disquiet and torment you by its remonstrances and
expostulations; till in a little time death will remove you to the seats of
horror, where the worm never dies, and the fire is never quenched Mark ix. 44.
. For God has solemnly declared, that he will render indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, to every soul of man that does evil Romans ii. 8, 9.
; when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on those that know not God, and obey not the gospel 2 These. i. 7, 8.
.

ARE not the youngest of you concerned in such declarations as these? And if
you are, let conscience say, whether you are to be despised? It evidently
appears, the question is this: shall you spend your days upon earth like
rational creatures, in the noblest enjoyment of God, and of yourselves, till
you rise to the glories and pleasures of the heavenly world? Or shall you live
like idiots and like brutes, in the amusements of a vain imagination, and the
indulgence of the meanest appetites, till you sink for ever under all the shame
and remorse of a polluted guilty mind, and the almighty vengeance of an
incensed God? And can you be so stupid as to imagine this question will bear a
debate, or that any of the little interests of time and sense are to be
regarded, while these things are forgotten? Surely I may say, with the utmost
propriety, as Moses to the children of Israel Deuteronomy. xxx. 19.
, I have this day been setting before you life and death, a blessing and a
curse, choose which shall be your portion; but make the choice as those that
remember, it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life Deuteronomy. xxxii.
47.
.

"IT is true," may you perhaps reply in your own minds, these are solid
arguments to prove, that religion is to be attended to, sooner or later; but,
it will not appear from them, that it is peculiarly the concern of the rising
generation I answer in one word, (as you have often heard more at large) if it
is to be regarded at all, it should be regarded immediately; because all the
futurity you presume upon is utterly precarious. The uncertainty of human life,
and our entire dependence on that sacred spirit, who is perfectly free in all
his operations, concur to demonstrate, beyond all possibility of contradiction,
the madness of delay; and the ruin of thousands bears testimony to it. I might
add, that there are many peculiar advantages of early piety, which render it
vastly preferable to a late repentance, even supposing it were as certain, as
it is dubious: but I shall not enter into the enumeration of them now, since I
intend them for the subject of a distinct discourse Mr Jennings's excellent
sermon on this subject, amongst his other discourses to young people, has
prevented the publication of the sermon here referred to. I hope my young
friends will furnish themselves with those condescending and useful pieces, i^
there be any of them have not yet done it.
. What I have already said may be sufficient to convince you, if you allow
yourselves to reflect, that your own present and future happiness is apparently
concerned in the case before us. I add,

II. THAT it is of great importance to the happiness of others, that you of the
rising generation be early tinctured with a sense of religion, or, in the
language of the text, be a seed who shall serve the Lord.

AND here I would show at large, -- that the happiness of all who converse with
you may be considerably influenced by your character and behavior; -- that the
comfort of your pious parents and ministers is peculiarly concerned in it; --
and that the propagation of religion to them who are yet unborn, does, under
God, most evidently depend upon you.

1. THE happiness of all who converse with you will be considerably influenced
by your character and behavior.

THEY who have any sense of religion themselves will be tenderly concerned for
your happiness. They will rejoice to see you going on in those ways which must
surely lead to it; and they will be heartily grieved to see you choosing your
own misery, and rejecting the counsel of God against yourselves Luke vii. 30.
. And others of a humane and generous temper, though destitute of the
principles of true piety, will be solicitous for the honor, the comfort, and
the usefulness of your lives.

BUT besides this pleasure or uneasiness, which will redound to such persons,
in consequence of these friendly and benevolent sentiments, you ought to
consider, that all who converse with you may find their happiness increased or
diminished, by your regard to religion, or your neglect of it, as your
behavior to them will be influenced by it.

IF you be early delivered into the mould of the gospel, you will quickly learn
you were not born for yourselves. The mercies of God, and the example of a
Redeemer, will teach you to exert yourselves to the utmost for the service of
mankind, and to do good to all as you have opportunity Gal. vi. 10.
And in how many instances may your pious and charitable cares be effectual for
the benefit of your fellow creatures! In the series of life, how many in the
depths of poverty may be relieved by your liberality! How many in perplexed and
intricate circumstances may be guided aright by your prudent counsel! How many
weeping eyes may be dried, and how many mourning hearts revived, by your tender
sympathy and friendly condolence! And if there be already in your natural
temper a tendency toward such expressions of humanity, how happily may it be
directed and enlivened, when divine and evangelical motives are brought in to
its assistance!

BUT farther, your christian charity will teach you to be, above all things,
solicituous for the spiritual and eternal happiness of those about you. And who
can say, how much you may promote it! How many more aged christians may be
excited to shake off their indolence, and quicken their pace when they observe
your ardency and zeal! And how happily might your piety tend to awaken, and
reclaim those, who are going on in the paths of the destroyer: how amiable
would the graces of christianity appear, as exemplified in you, amidst all the
insnaring allurements of childhood and youth! And how affecting might it be to
other young people, to hear religion recommended to them, not only by their
parents and ministers, but by their brethren and companions!

THUS useful might you be in your earliest years, and as you were advancing in
age and experience, your usefulness might be daily increasing; and if God
should spare you to the decline of life, you might bring forth much nobler
fruits in old age, than you could have done, if your entrance on a religious
life had been deferred to that unseasonable time.

THUS may the whole period of your life be filled up with eminent service. And
I will add, that your beneficial influence may extend far beyond the circle of
your personal converse: you may be blessings to your country, indeed to the
whole world, by drawing down the favor of God upon it, in part, as a crown of
your piety, and an answer to your prayers. But,

On the contrary, if you neglect religion, you will deprive the world of all
those benefits, which it may otherwise expect from you. If you are naturally
covetous, you will probably indulge that unworthy temper, so as to withold
relief from those to whom it is most justly due* or if you be of a liberal
disposition, your generosity will degenerate into prodigality; or perhaps you
will squander away so much of your estates in vanity and debauchery, as to
throw yourselves out of a capacity of assisting those whom you most sincerely
pity, and would gladly relieve. And as to the eternal happiness of others, it
is not to be imagined that you will have any regard to it while you are
negligent of your own.

NOR is this the worst; for, as hardly any are mere ciphers in life, it is much
to be feared, that instead of blessings, you may prove mischiefs to the world.
The licentiousness, to which corrupt nature will prompt you, may (...) you by
unthought of consequences, to insure and ^i^fraud, a^ (...) to grieve and
torment others. And where your behavior is most friendly, it may be most
pernicious. Instead of restoring and reclaiming the souls of your companions,
you may pervert and destroy them by sinful discourses and impious examples.
Thus you may draw down the vengeance of God on the places where you live, and
provoke him to send some public calamity, as a punishment, for that universal
degeneracy which you have abetted. So that, (to close the melancholy scene) at
the bar of God, and in the seats of torment, you may meet with multitudes of
unhappy creatures, who will cry out on you, as the fatal cause of their ruin in
this world, and their condemnation in that.

BY such a variety of arguments does it appear, that the happiness of those you
converse with will be considerably influenced by your temper and conduct. And
are you so utterly lost to all sentiments of honor and goodness, as to be
unconcerned at such a consideration as this? Again,

2. THE comfort and happiness of your religious parents does, in a great
measure, depend on your seriousness and piety.

WHAT I have just been saying on the former heads, will evidently prove the
truth of this observation. Your pious parents have a generous concern for the
happiness of others, and this will engage them earnestly to wish, that you may
be blessings, and not curses to the world about you. And their peculiar
affection for you, must tenderly interest them in a case, on which your
happiness, both in time and eternity, depends.

IF they see you under the influences of early piety, unknown pleasure will
arise in their minds: they will rejoice in it, not merely as it will be a
security to them of a respectful and grateful treatment from you; but as it
will, through grace, secure to you, their dear offspring, the entertainments of
a religious life, and the prospects of a glorious immortality.

THESE reflections will give them inexpressible pleasure in a variety of
circumstances. Their daily converse with you will be more agreeable to them,
than it could otherwise be, when they discern the lively impressions of
religion upon your spirits, and perceive that you have a relish for those
truths and promises of the gospel, which are their joy and song in the house of
their pilgrimage Psalm. cxix. 54.
. It will sometimes add a sweetness to the social exercises of devotion, to
think that your souls are engaged with theirs, and regaled with the same
sublime and transporting entertainments. And when they have reason to apprehend
that you are retired for the duties of the closet, it will cheer their hearts
to think, Now is my child with his heavenly Father. Now has he separated
himself from those vain amusements, which most of the same age pursue, that he
may converse with God and his own soul, and be prepared for the business and
the pleasures of Heaven. And I hope, God is smiling upon him, and teaching him,
by happy experience, that those pious labors are not in vain.

WITH such consolations will their hearts be supported in all the occurrences,
which providence may allot either to you, or them. If they meet with prosperity
in their worldly affairs, and have a prospect of leaving you in plentiful
circumstances, it will be a satisfaction to them to think that they shall not
consign their estates to those who will meanly hoard up the income of them, or
throw it away in foolish and hurtful lusts; but to persons who will consider
themselves as the stewards of God, and will endeavor to use what God has given
them for the honor of their Lord, and the good of mankind. Or, if they can
give you but little, this thought will relieve them, that they commend you to
the care of a guardian and a father, who is able abundantly to supply your
necessities, and who has engaged, by the promises of his covenant, that those
who fear him shall want no good thing Psalm. xxxiv. 9. lxxxiv. 11.
. They will have the pleasure to think, that, how low soever your outward
condition may be, you will be rich in grace, and in the entertainments of
religion now, and in the glories of the heavenly inheritance at last. When they
are themselves sinking under the decays of nature, their vigor and
cheerfulness will be renewed in yours: or should your parents be impaired by an
afflictive providence, they will have the satisfaction of believing, that those
afflictions proceed from a divine love, and shall at length turn to your
advantage. It will revive their hearts in their dying moments to think, that
when they are sleeping in the dust, you will stand up in their places, and
support the interest of God in the world, with a fidelity and zeal perhaps
superior to theirs. Or if an afflictive stroke should take you away before
them, they will not mourn over your grave, as those that have no hope 1 Thessalonians.
iv. 1^.
. Faith will teach them to mingle praises with their tears, while i^ assures
them that though dead to them, you are living with God in glory; that you are
preferred to an attendance on his throne above, where they may hope shortly to
meet you on the most advantageous terms.

THIS is but a faint and imperfect description of the satisfaction which your
parents would find in your early piety. And it follows from hence, as a
necessary consequence, that if they see you grow up in the neglect of religion,
it will pierce their hearts with proportionable sorrow.

IT is possible that you may arrive at such a daring degree of wickedness, as
to treat them with negligence and contempt, or perhaps to answer all their
melting expostulations with insults and rage. Such ungrateful and rebellious
monsters we have heard of; and would to God, that every parent in this assembly
could say, that he had only heard of them! But should you preserve some sense
of humanity and decency; nay, should you behave toward them in the most
dutiful and obliging manner, yet they must still mourn over you; and even your
tenderness and complaisance to them, would sometimes come in to add a more
sensible anguish to their affliction. It would cut them to the heart to think,
that such dear, and, in other respects, amiable children, were still the
enemies of God, and the heirs of destruction. When they heard the vengeance of
God denounced against sinners, and read the awful threatenings of his word, they
would tremble to think, that those terrible thunders were levelled against you.
How little could they rejoice in that health, or plenty, which they saw you
were abusing to your aggravated ruin! and how would they be terrified when any
distemper seized you, lest it should be the messenger to bear you away to
eternal misery! If they were themselves dying, how mournfully must they take
their leave of you, in an apprehension of seeing you no more till the day of
accounts, and seeing you then in ignominy and horror, at the left hand of the
judge! Or if they saw you removed by an early death, to what hopeless sorrows
would they be abandoned! With what unknown agonies would they adopt that
pathetic lamentation of David, Oh my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would
to God I had died for thee! Oh Absalom my son, my son 2 Samuel xviii.33.
!

BY such a variety of considerations does it appear, that the comfort and
happiness of your pious parents does very much depend upon your temper and
behavior. And the argument is confirmed by the repeated testimony of the
wisest of men, under the influences of the divine Spirit. He tells us again and
again, that a wise son makes a glad father Prove. x. 1. xv. 20.
; that whosoever loves wisdom rejoiceth his father xxix. 3.
; and that the father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice; and he that
begets a wise child, shall have joy of him xxiii. 24
. On the other hand, he tells us, that a foolish son is the heaviness of his
mother x. 1.
. And though the tenderness of her sex may make the mother peculiarly sensible
of the affliction, yet it is not confined to her; for he tells us elsewhere,
that a foolish son is a grief to his father, as well as bitterness to her that
bare him xvii. 25.
; yea, a foolish son is the calamity of his father xix. 13.
. And once more, he that begets a fool does it to his sorrow; and the father
of a fool has no joy xvii. 21.
; for the wickedness of his son impairs his relish for the other enjoyments of
life.

SUCH a multitude of passages to the same purposes seem intended to teach us
the importance, as well as the certainty of the argument. And it is more than
hinted at in those remarkable words; My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart
shall rejoice, even mine Prove. Xxi^^. 15. See the like emphatical form of
speaking, ver. 24, 25.
. As if he had said, make a serious pause, and diligently weigh the importance
of that thought, that thy piety will be an inexpressible joy to me, to thy
father. And then, as if that were not enough, it is immediately added, yea, my
reins also shall rejoice, (shall feel unutterable pleasure diffusing itself
through all the secret recesses of my soul), when thy lips speak right things
Prove. xxiii. 16.
, which may manifest an heart under the influence of prudence, and of religion.

AND let me entreat you, my friends, to reflect for a few moments on the weight
of the argument, that you may judge whether it will not bear all the stress
which Solomon lays upon it. The happiness of your parents is in question; and
can you slight that? Consider how much you owe to your parents, as they were
the instruments of your being, and have been, under God the principal support
of it. Think of the tenderness with which they watched around your cradles, and
of the many kind offices which they performed for you in your helpless infancy;
which parental tenderness made delightful to them, when hardly any thing else
could have made them tolerable. Think how liberally they have long contributed
toward the supply of your wants; and in how many instances they have denied
themselves, that they might gratify you. Think how they have rejoiced with you
in your joys, and mourned with you in your sorrows; how they have been
terrified at your real dangers; and perhaps often disquieted with those
timorous apprehensions, which fondness, rather than reason, has suggested to
them. And under the impression of these reflections, say, whether it may not
reasonably be expected, that you should have a most affectionate regard to
their repose and comfort, and think with horror of becoming their grief and
torment.

I MAY add, that as the parents of some amongst you are declining under the
infirmities of age, and on that account the objects of a respectful compassion
to all, they should be so especially to you who are their children; for it may
be these infirmities have been hastened upon them by an excess of tenderness
and concern for you. And will you add afflictions to the afflicted, and bring
down with sorrow to the grave Genesis xlii. 38.
those venerable hoary heads which you have perhaps made gray before their
time? Surely you must abhor the thought, or God and man must abhor you.

But I would not entertain so harsh a suspicion; I charitably hope, that you
are not only impressed with this consideration, but will likewise be somewhat
concerned, when you hear,

3. THAT the comfort and happiness of faithful ministers will be greatly
affected by the character of the rising generation.

ST. JOHN assures the elect lady, that he rejoiced greatly, when he found her
children walking in the truth 2 John ver. 4.
; and a variety of arguments concur to prove, that no pious minister can be
indifferent in the case before us.

IF we have any thing of humanity and generosity in our tempers, we must be
concerned for your seriousness, on account of that influence which it has on
the happiness of all about you, and particularly on that of your christian
parents. Many of them are the ornaments and glory of our assemblies, and the
most dear and intimate of our friends; we are obliged therefore to take part
with them in their sorrows and their joys, with relation to you their children,
It must sensibly afflict us to see, that while their wisdom and their piety
might command the reverence and the love of all that know them, enemies should
arise up against them out of their own houses, and even the children of their
bowels should prove their tormentors. Those dear children, from whom they
fondly promised themselves the delight and support of their declining years.
And when they come and tell us the tender story, when they freely open to us
their sorrows and their fears on your account, and earnestly beg our prayers
for you, that whatever they suffer, you may not be for ever undone, we are
hardly able to stand it; but nature, as well as religion, teaches us to echo
back their sighs and to return their tears.

THUS we are concerned that the rising generation, as we sympathize with those
whose happiness is apparently affected by it: but besides this you may easily
apprehend, that much of the comfort (...) our lives does immediately depend
upon it. And this will be peculiarly obvious with regard to those of us who are
in our younger years, and are entering on the work of God amongst you N. B.
This was the case of the author when this sermon was preached at Kibworth, May
18, 1724.
.

SHOULD God spare us to future years, we must expect to survive many of our
aged friends; and when your parents are gone, whither must we look for the
comfort of our remaining days, but to you their children? And must it not wound
us to the heart, to see a generation of vipers rising up, instead of those
pious friends, with whom we have taken sweet counsel together, and gone to the
house of God in company Psalm. lv. 14.
? Can we easily bear to see the temples and altars of God forsaken, or to see
them attended only by wretched hypocrites, who wear the form of godliness,
while they are strangers and enemies to the power of it 2 Timothy iii.5.
? Must we lose the pleasure of addressing you in public, as the christians, on
the most comfortable and joyful subjects of discourse; and be obliged
continually to speak to you in thunders, as those who have no right to the
consolations of the gospel! Or must we never have the satisfaction of
conversing with you in private, as our brethren in the Lord, and our companion
in the way to heaven?

WELL might it grieve us to be thus left alone in the midst of a degenerate
world; especially when we reflect, that the cause of God was sinking in the
time of our administration, and serious religion was lost amongst us, while the
cultivation of it was committed to our care. Shall we not be suspected of
unfaithfulness to God, and to you, if it die in our hands? That were dreadful
indeed. May the divine grace preserve us from that guilt! And I trust, my
brethren, that it will preserve us; and, in dependence upon that I plainly tell
you, that while God continues us in a capacity of doing it, we will honestly
warn you, we will seriously expostulate with you, we will earnestly pray for
you; and if it be all in vain, we will appeal to an omniscient God, that your
destruction is not chargeable upon us, but upon yourselves.

BUT in the mean time, it would be dreadful to reflect, that while we are thus
endeavoring to deliver our own souls, we are in effect heaping aggravated
damnation on yours; while every attempt is resisted by you, and so brings you
under a greater load of guilt. You may indeed be insensible of the load now,
but we foresee the day when you will sink under it. And here is the accent of
our sorrow; in such views as these we fear that when the ministers of former
generations shall appear before their judge with a train of happy souls; which
have been conducted to heaven by their means, it must be our melancholy part to
stand out as witnesses against our hearers, that we have stretched out our
hands all the day long to a disobedient and gainsaying people Romans x. 21
. Oh, how shall we be able to advance this dreadful testimony against the
children of our dearest friends, against those whom we tenderly loved, and
whose salvation we would have purchased with any thing, but our own! yet this
is our prospect with regard to you; and we may leave it to you to judge,
whether it must not sadden our souls.

Now pardon me, my friends, if I tell you, that we may reasonably expect, that
an argument of this nature should not be despised. I hope it is no breach of
modesty to say, that we have not deserved so ill at your hands, as that our joy
or our distress, should be indifferent to you. In all the common affairs of
life we would cheerfully serve you to the utmost of our power, and therefore at
least reasonably expect to stand on a level with the rest of your friends in
like circumstances. And our character as ministers, if we be careful to answer
it, give us some peculiar claim to your regard. For you we give up many more
splendid prospects in life, which, in other employments, we might possibly have
secured; for you we lay out our time and our strength, in study, in prayer, and
in preaching. We bear you upon our hearts in our public ministrations, and our
private retirements; (and God is witness with what sincerity). Nor would we
refuse those laborious services, which, in human probability, might hasten upon
us the infirmities of age, and the approach of death, if they might be the
happy means of your conversion and salvation. And is this the reward of all our
friendly care? to weaken our hands, to grieve our souls, and to behave in such
a manner, that the more tenderly we love you, the more deeply we must be
afflicted by you?

MANY of you treat us with a great deal of humanity and decency; with the
appearances of affection and esteem. You are ready to serve us on the common
offices of friendship, and would express your resentment if you saw us injured,
in actions, or in words. We thankfully acknowledge your goodness in such
instances as these; but permit us to ask you, why you will not be so kind and
so grateful to us, as to take care of your own souls, when nothing could oblige
us more than such a care, and nothing can afflict us more than the neglect of
them? Let me conclude this head with those pathetic words of the apostle, if
there be any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye your joy Phil. ii. 1. 2.
. And let me entreat you to consider, one more,

4. THAT the propagation of religion to future generations does, under God,
chiefly depend upon you.

FOR this reason the pious Israelites are represented, as resolving to declare
the wonderful works of God unto their children, that the generation to come
might know them, even the children that should be born that they might arise,
and, in their turn declare them unto their children Psalm lxxviii. 4 -- 6.
, and so the intail might be carried on to the remotest ages.

Now, my brethren, it is evident, that the propagation of religion to
succeeding generations does, humanly speaking, depend on you and others, who,
with you, are entering upon life. If you are under the influences of serious
godliness, you will carry them along with you to the end of your days; and when
God calls you into families of your own, it will be your desire that you and
your houses may serve him Josh* xxiv. 15.
. Family Prayer, and family-instruction will be maintained; you will be
teaching your children to know the Lord, and exhorting them to serve him, and
praying for a blessing on those endeavors: and who knows what a remarkable
blessing might attend them? Your children, under the impressions of such an
education, may be eminent for religion as you have been. They may be equally
diligent in the care of their posterity, and God may favor them with equal
success; and so there may be thousands of your remote descendants, who never
saw you, nor perhaps heard of your name, who yet, under God, may owe their
religion and their happiness to you. The prospect of it may now afford you a
sensible pleasure; and it is highly probable that when they meet you in the
regions of the invisible world, such an important obligation may engage them to
treat you with peculiar respect and affection; as surely all other obligations
will appear trifling, when compared with this.

ON the other hand, if you neglect religion yourselves, it cannot be thought
you will be much concerned to transmit it to others. You would hardly be at the
pains to give them good instructions; supposing you much more capable of doing
it than you can expect to be: or if you do attempt it, those instructions will
be likely to have little effect, when they are contradicted by the daily
language of your example. Nay, it is possible you may arrive at such a height
of wickedness, as directly to oppose practical godliness, and breed up your
children in the contempt of it; which is often to be seen, even in this
christian country. And what do you think will become of such children as these?
If you have been so wicked, notwithstanding all the restraints of a serious
education, what will they be, who miss of the advantages you enjoyed, and must
be exposed to numberless temptations from which you were free? Shall these be a
seed to serve the Lord? Shall these be accounted to him for a generation? It
might almost as well be expected, that a race of men should spring up in a
desert, where no human creature ever appeared before them, as that true
christianity should be propogated in the world by children of such an education.

AND have you, after all, so utter an indifference to the honor of that
Redeemer, into whose religion you were baptized, and whose name you bear, as
that you could be contented, should it be lost in the world? Was it for this,
that the Son of God descended from heaven that he might publish the gospel
covenant, and expired on the cross that he might establish it? Was it for this
that the pious labors of our ancestors have transmitted this religion to us
through so many succeeding ages; and so many martyrs have sealed it by their
sufferings, and their blood? Was it for this, that our sacred liberties have
been so courageously asserted by the best of men, and almost miraculously
defended by the hand of God? For this, that the precious intail should be cut
off by us, and this invaluable treasure, the charge and the glory of so many
former generations, should perish in our hands? That the name of christianity
should, for the future, be lost in the world; or which is altogether as bad,
that it should sink into an empty name, and a lifeless circle of unmeaning
forms? Yet, humanly speaking, this must be the consequence, if you, and others
of the rising generation, will not heartily engage in the interests of it.

SUCH a variety of arguments concur to prove the great importance of the rising
generation. They are so plain and so weighty, that I cannot but think, that
you, my brethren, to whom I have particularly applied them, are in your
consciences convinced, that they are not to be disputed.

How that conviction should work, I have not time largely to show you; but if
it be seriously and deeply impressed on your minds, you cannot long be at a
loss for proper directions, among so many pious friends, and excellent books;
especially if you consult the scripture, and seek for the teachings of the
blessed spirit. To these assistances I heartily recommend you, and omitting
many other reflections which would naturally arise, shall conclude my discourse
with one which I shall immediately address to another part of my auditory.

REFLECTION. How solicitous should we be in our endeavors for the religious
improvement of the rising generation, since its character appears of so great
importance!

WE have all our concern in the thought, but I would particularly recommend it
to those of you, who are parents and masters, or have the education of youth
under any other capacities; imagine not, my friends, that it is an
inconsiderable charge which is lodged in your hands. Providence has entrusted
to you the hopes and the fears, the joys, and the sorrows, of many hearts and
of many families. Future generations will have reason to applaud or detest your
memory, as your present duty is regarded or neglected; and, which is infinitely
more, the Father of the Spirits of all flesh will require a strict account of
those precious souls which he committed to your care.

IT is not for me, at this time, to direct you at large, as to the particulars
of your duty with regard to them Something of this kind I have since attempted
in the Sermons on the Religious Education of Children, which will now be
reprinted in the same form with these; though I have there been obliged to
repeat some thoughts which occur here, though in different words, and in a
different view.
. In the general you will easily apprehend that some methods are to be taken to
inform their minds with divine knowledge, and to impress them with an affecting
sense of what they know. And if you find the work attended with great
difficulty, I hope it will engage you thankfully to accept of the assistances
of ministers, and other christian friends, and earnestly to implore those
communications of the Spirit, which are absolutely necessary to make them
effectual.

AND if God have any mercy in store for so sinful a nation as ours, we may
humbly hope, that, in answer to our united supplications, he will revive his
work amongst us in the midst of the years Hab. iii. 2.
; and, according to the tenor of his promises, will pour out his spirit on our
seed, and his blessing on our offspring; so that they may spring up before him
as the grass, and as willows by the watercourse; and calling themselves by
the name of Jacob, and subscribing with their hands unto the Lord Isa. xliv. 3
-- 5.
, may be acknowledged by him as a generation of his people. AMEN.

SERMON II.
CHRIST FORMED IN THE SOUL, THE ONLY FOUNDATION OF HOPE FOR ETERNITY.
GAL. iv. 19. My little Children of whom I travail in Birth again, until Christ
be formed in you.
IT was the unhappy case of Agrippa, that though almost, he was only almost,
persuaded to be a christian Acts xxvi. 28.
; and I fear, it is now the case of many, and particularly of many young
persons, who have enjoyed the advantages of a religious education. I believe it
is difficult to find any amongst them, who have not been brought under some
serious impressions betimes. With regard to the internal operations of the
blessed spirit, as well as external means, the morning of life is generally to
them, in a peculiar sense, the day of their visitation; and they often seem to
know it, and in some measure to improve it: but in too many instances, we find
their goodness as a morning cloud, and as the early dew which soon passes away
Hos. vi. 4
. The blossoms open fair and beautiful, and give a very agreeable prospect of
the plentiful fruits of holiness in life, but too often when storms of
temptation and corruption arise, the goodly appearance is laid in ruins; the
blossoms do as it were fall to the ground, and leave the tree blasted and
naked; or at best only covered over with leaves of an external profession,
which, however green and flourishing they may for the present be, will not at
last secure it from being cut down, and cast into the burning. Though they for
a while had escaped the pollutions of the world through lust, they are
afterward entangled and subdued; and the consequence is, they prove a scandal
to religion, and a discouragement to others, till, in the end, they bring
aggravated destruction on themselves; so that on the whole, as the apostle most
justly observes, it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than thus, after they have known it, to turn aside from the holy
commandment 2. Pet. ii. 21.
.

THIS may be in a great measure owing to the mutability of human nature in
general, and particularly to the livity and inconsistency of youth, in
conjunction with the force of those temptations of life which continually
surround and press upon them. Yet I apprehend this is not all, but that it is,
in part to be charged on something defective, even in their best days, on their
resting in something short of real religion, and a true saving change. Solomon
had seen reason to say, there is a way that seems right to a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death Prove. xiv. 12.
: and I believe every considerate person will be ready to own, that in order to
prevent so fatal a delusion, and all the train of mischiefs which may follow
upon it, great care should be taken in slating this important question; What is
the true and solid basis, on which we may securely ground our eternal hopes? It
is a question of the highest importance, and the most universal concern, both
to the aged and the young; so that I trust I need not offer any apology for
complying with the request of a pious and judicious friend, who recommended
this subject to our consideration, at this time and on this occasion.

IN Prosecution of this design, I have made choice of these words of the
apostle, which I have now been reading, and which may, without offering any
violence to them, be very fairly and naturally accommodated to the present
purpose.

IT is plain, from many passages in this epistle, that the great apostle, who
had planted the christian church among the Galatians, had reason to fear, that
many, who were by profession its members, were not sufficiently established in
their holy faith. It is probable, that he himself had an opportunity of making
but a short stay among them; and, partly through their own negligence and
prejudices, and partly through the artful attempts of false teachers in the
absence of St Paul, they appear to have fallen into a set of notions, and a
conduct, which tended not only to impair the glory, but to subvert the very
foundation, of the gospel, and with it the foundation of their own eternal
hopes. Of this the apostle does, in a very awful manner, admonish them. He
tells them, in the very beginning of his epistle, that he marvelled that they
were so soon removed from him that called them, (and from the principles he had
taught them) into another gospel (...). i. 6.
. And afterward he uses these very free and emphatical words: O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched, or enchanted you, that you should not obey the
truth? Are you so foolish? having begun in the spirit (having professed to
embrace the gospel, and shown the appearances of some common zeal for it), can
you now hope to be made perfect by the flesh, or by the ritual and carnal
observances of the Mosaic institution? Is it thus that you disgrace all you
have done, and all you have borne for Christ? Have you then suffered so many
things in vain Gal. iii. 1 -- 4.
? On the whole, he tells them, he was ready to apprehend that all the agreeable
hopes, he had at once entertained concerning them, would be buried in
everlasting disappointment, and that it would appear, he had bestowed upon them
labor in vain Chap iv. 11.
. Thus did he stand in doubt of them Chap. iv. 20.
; and that doubt pierced his heart with the most tender concern, and brought
upon him, as it were a second time, those pangs of soul which he had felt on
their account, when he saw them in all the ignorance and wickedness of their
gentile state. He was hardly more solicitous that they might be turned from
dumb idols to the living God, than he was now, that they might give convincing
evidences that Christ was formed in them, i. e. that they had cordially
received and digested the gospel, and that their hearts were delivered into the
mould of it Romans vi. 17.
; which it did not appear they were, while they were thus making void the grace
of God, and the righteousness of faith, by adhering to the foolish and
pernicious doctrine of the necessity of seeking their justification, in part at
least, by the observation of the Mosaic law.

This seems to be the most natural sense of the words of the text, where such a
latitude of expression is used, as the apostle elsewhere seems to study, on
purpose to render his writings universally edifying and useful to them, whose
particular circumstances in life are widely different from those of the persons
to whom they were originally addressed. As to the introductory words, my little
children, we cannot imagine they refer to the age of those to whom the apostle
wrote. The evident design of them is, to express that kind of parental
tenderness which he entertained for them, like that which a mother has for an
infant with which she travails in birth. My little children, of whom I travail
in birth again, till Christ be formed in you.

It would be easy to multiply observations from the words. I might especially
take occasion to show, -- that it is possible, those that once seemed very
hopeful, and still maintain an external profession, may appear, after all, in
such dangerous circumstances, that judicious ministers, and other Christian
friends, may be thrown into a great deal of perplexity and agony on their
account; -- and that the great thing necessary to establish their safety, and
the comfort of those concerned for them, is, that the Lord Jesus Christ be
formed in them.

THAT I may more particularly illustrate and improve the text, and take in what
is most important in these remarks, I will I. CONSIDER several things, on which
men are ready to build a false confidence, which will bring them into danger,
and their judicious friends into perplexity upon their account. II. I WILL
endeavor to show you, what is the only solid foundation of their own hopes,
and the joys of others with regard to them; which is here expressed by Christ
formed in them. And then, III. I SHALL conclude with some more particular
improvement, in proper inferences from the whole


THESE are plainly matters of universal importance; but as I am now peculiarly
addressing (...) to young persons, I shall endeavor to fix on those thoughts
which may be most remarkable suitable to them: for I am much more concerned
that my discourse may be useful, than that it may be critically regular and
exact. I hope there are many amongst you, who are experimentally acquainted
with the vitals of christianity, and have received from above an incorruptible
seed (...). (...) 23.
. There are others, to whom I must say with the apostle to these Galatians, I
stand in doubt of you (...). iv. 20.
; and to such, I hope, I can apply myself in the language of the text, My
little children, of whom I travail in birth again, till Christ be formed in
you. Pardon me, if in this instance I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy
2 Cor. xi. 2^
. I would endeavor, with the sincerest and tenderest affection, and with such
freedom as the importance of the case requires, to guard you against those
sandy foundations, which will ^ury you and your hopes deep in eternal ruins;
and to direct you to the rock of ages, on which they who build shall never be
ashamed.

I THEREFORE entreat your serious attention, and would humbly ask, both for
myself and you, the teachings of that blessed Spirit, whose peculiar office it
is, in the most efficacious manner, to show us our danger and our remedy; to
aid the laboring minds of ministers, and to cause them to see with
satisfaction the travail of their s^^ls (...). liii. 11.
, while he gives to their hearers a new birth and immortal life, by forming
Christ in them.

I. I AM to caution you against several things on which young persons are
peculiarly prone to build a false and precarious confidence.

AND here let me particularly entreat you, as you love your souls, and value
your eternal hopes, -- that you trust not to the privileges of your birth, --
or the rectitude of your speculations in matters of religion, -- or the purity
and frequency of your forms of worship, -- or the warmth of your passions, --
or the morality of your conduct; for none of these apart, nor even all of them
united, can, according to the tenor of the gospel, be sufficient for your
security and happiness.

1. TRUST not to the privileges of your birth and education, as the foundation
of your eternal hopes.

YOU are, many of you, the seed of God's, servants, perhaps for several
succeeding generations You may be ready to plead, that you were born in his
house, that you were early devoted to him in baptism, and have been brought up
in the most regular and conscientious manner: you have been surrounded with
holy instructions and correspondent examples from your infancy; and repeated
servent prayers, both in the family and in secret, have been sent up to heaven
upon your account. These are indeed signal advantages, and you may justly
rejoice in them; for in these respects you are the children of the kingdom: but
rejoice with trembling, (...) our Lord has told us, that it is more than a
possible case, that the children of the kingdom may be cast out, and have their
portion in (...) Matt viii. 12.
. The peculiar regard shown to the seed of Abraham may perhaps be abused by
(...) as an encouragement to those presumptuous (...) But remember, that
Ishmael was the son of Abraham, and Esau of Isaac; and yet neither the^ one nor
the other, inherited the blessing of his father. Remember that beautiful, but
dreadful (...) which represents a wretched creature in Hell, that could cry,
Father Abraham, and yet in vain added, have mercy upon me, and send me but a
drop of water to cool my tongue Luke xvi. 20.
. Once more, remember those emphatical words of the Babtist, so expressly
levelled against this arrogant presumption: think not (says he) to say within
yourselves, we have Abraham for our father: for I say unto you, that God is
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham M^tt. iii. 9.
: as if he should have said, The promises made to those who are the children of
Abraham, respect not merely them who are lineally descended from him, but those
who are the heirs of his piety and his faith; for if God were to turn these
stones into men, and to form them by his grace to a holy character and temper,
such, though descended from no human parents at all, would, in the sense of the
promise, be children of Abraham. And it were more reasonable to expect such a
transmutation, than that God should acknowledge a generation of Vipers as his
people, because they were derived from holy ancestors. On the contrary, God
directly assures us, that if the son of the most religious father forsake the
way of virtue and holiness, and prove as the degenerate plant of a strange vine
Jer. ii. 21.
, in his trespass that he has (...) and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he die Ezekiel. ^^iii. 10 -- 13, 24.
* And surely herein the ways of the Lord are apparently equal; for it is most
evidence, that a long descent from God's people is a reproach and condemnation,
rather than an honor, to those who abandon that good old way in which their
ancestors have trod, and as it were, cut off that (...) piety which has been
the care and the glory of (...) generations.

2. TRUST not to the regularity of your sentiments, in matters of religion, as
the foundation of your eternal hopes.

So various are the workings of men's hearts, and the devices of Satan, that,
if I mistake not, there are some that place their considence in the strictness,
and others in the latitude, of their religious opinions, but the one, and the
other, will appear equally vain, when considered in the view now before us.

Some may possibly persuade themselves, that their condition is secure, because
their sentiments are orthodox. They live perhaps in the midst of the
unbelieving and profane, and see daily contempt and derision thrown upon the
blessed gospel, or its most glorious peculiarities; but through the influence
of a good education, or from some other principle short of true piety, they may
nevertheless not only hold fast the faith once delivered to the saints, but
even contend earnestly for it Jude ver. 3.
: nay, they are, perhaps, learned in the controversies of the times; and can
indeed pronounce concerning them in a very rational and accurate manner.

IF this, my friends, be the case with any of you, I congratulate you on the
happiness of a well-in-formed judgment, but must caution you against mistaking
it for a sanctified heart. The mystery of faith, as the apostle himself assures
us, is to be held with a good conscience 1 Timothy i. 19.
: and in vain do you profess to retain the one, while you make shipwreck of the
other. As precious a treasure as the knowledge of the truth is, if we go no
farther than mere speculation, it will be to you but as a talent of gold to a
man sinking in the sea, which only serves to plunge him so much the deeper in
ruin Dr. (...) Works, page 938.
.

THERE are others who err in the contrary extreme. Orthodox notions are their
banter, rather than their confidence. They pride themselves in having broke the
shackles in which others are confined, and in seeing through the mist in which
multitudes have been perplexed. They are sensible, that many things which
divide the world are merely controversies about words; and are not much
concerned about others in which there is a real difference, because they are
well aware, that the fundamentals of religion lie in a very little room. They
are confident of the innocence of error, and the safety of an honest mind under
those mistakes which have been branded by the severest names. A wicked life is,
in their esteem, the only dangerous heresy; and morality the only thing that is
worth contending about; charmed with their own wisdom and happiness in this
freedom of thought, they look down with pity on persons under the influence of
a contracted education and narrow sentiments, and possibly mingle their pity
with a great deal of scorn, not to say indignation. But they are indeed
themselves the objects of much juster pity, if, whilst they glory in their
freedom, they are the servants of corruption 2 Pet. ii. 19.
. It is certain, that the most generous speculations will no more save men of
unregenerate hearts, and unholy lives, than the most rigid and severe set of
notions. For notions and speculations are in their nature so far short of real
goodness, that if there be nothing more than these it, matters but little what
they are. Yet one cannot forbear observing a peculiar and most absurd
inconsistency in the conduct of those, who think so highly of themselves,
because they are possessed of this one speculation, that speculation in general
is a trifle, and morality is all; as if the whole of morality consisted in
bearing this testimony in its favor. I wish such a character were not almost
as common, as it is for men to be bigots in defense of catholicism, and
uncharitable in pleading the cause of charity. If this be the case with any of
you, out of your own mouth must you be condemned Luke xix. 22.
; and we may justly apply to you, in the midst of your self applauses, those
awful words of our Lord; If ye were, in this respect, blind, ye would
comparatively have no sin; whereas now you have no cloak, or excuse, for your
sin John ix. 41. xv. 22.
.

3. TRUST not in the external forms of devotion, as the foundation of your
great hopes for eternity.

YOU are, it may be, joined to a society, which not only wears the christian
name, but separates itself from many other professors, under the apprehension,
at least, of a more pure and scriptural worship. You, perhaps, so much approve
and esteem this worship, as to be diligent and constant in attending on the
public exercises of it, not only in its stated returns, but on occasional
opportunities. You fill your places here from time to time, not merely in
obedience to the commands of your parents and governors, but by your own
voluntary choice. And, it may be, to these you add the forms of family-devotion
morning and evening, and, possibly, a few moments of daily retirement for
reading and prayer. What can such religious persons have to fear? Nay, rather,
my brethren, what can you have to hope, if, while you draw near to God with
your mouths and your lips, you remove your hearts far from him Isa. xxix. 13.
? If while you come before him, as his people come, and present yourselves in
the posture of humble worshippers, your heart be going after your covetousness
Ezekiel. xxxiii. 31.
? God has for ever confounded such vain presumption, by declaring, that the
prayer of the wicked is an abomination to him Prove. xv. 8.
; and that his shall certainly be so, that turns away his ear from hearing the
law Prove. xxviii. 9.
, i. e. that refuses obedience to it. The servant that knew his Lord's will,
and did it not, became justly liable to be beaten with many stripes Luke xii.
47.
; and it is not to be wondered, if, in this sense, judgment begin at the house
of God 1 Pet iv. 17.
, and seize first on those who affront and profane his ordinances, by making
them to supersede the very things which they were originally appointed on
purpose to promote.

4. TRUST not to the warmth of your passions in matters of religion, as the
foundation of your most important hopes.

SOME of you, to whom I now speak, have perhaps experienced very bitter agonies
of conscience. You have been roused from the sleep of carnal security, as by an
earthquake, which has shook the very center of your soul; the flames of hell
have seemed, as it were, to flash in your faces; and all these mingled horrors
have compelled you to cry out, Woe is me, for I am undone! oh, what shall I do
to be saved Isa. vii. 5. (...) xvi. 30.
? And yet to allude the story of Elijah, the Lord has not been in the
earthquake, or in the fire 1 Kings xix. 11, 12.
. Consider to what purpose the inquiry after salvation has been made, and with
what resolution it has been pursued; otherwise you may be fatally deceived.
The murderers of Stephen were cut to the heart by his preaching Acts vii. 54.
; and we are sure that, if the most deep and terrifying convictions could have
secured a man's salvation, the traitor Judas would have been safe, who
undoubtedly ^elt the most violent convulsions of soul, before he proceeded to
that dreadful extremity, which sealed him up under everlasting despair.

BUT you may have been impressed with the sweeter and the nobler passions; you
have not only trembled at the thunder of the law, but rejoiced in the message
of gospel grace: the news of a Redeemer has been welcome to your souls, and the
feet of those messengers beautiful, that have come to publish peace in his name
Isa. lii. 7.
. You have, perhaps, been melted into tears of pleasure and tenderness, when
you have heard the representation of his dying love; and when the precious
promises, established by it, (...) been un^olded, and the prospects of eternal
glory displayed, your minds have been elevated and transported; so that you
have hung, almost with a trembling eagerness, on the lips of the speaker. -- I
readily acknowledge, that such as these are frequently the workings of the
blessed Spirit of God, upon the souls of his chosen people; and when found in a
due connection with the great effects they are designed to produce, are highly
to be esteemed and rejoiced in. But remember, I entreat you, that every tear of
tenderness, and every sally of joy, does not arise from so divine a spring. You
might weep at a mournful scene in a well-wrought tragedy, as you have done at
the the story of a Redeemer's sufferings; you might find yourselves transported
with a ^ine poetical description on a Pagan Elysium, or a Mohammedan Paradise,
just as you have been (...) the views of a Heavenly Canaan, which gospel*
ordinances have presented. Mere self love might be the foundation of such a joy
in the tidings of pardon and happiness, without the least degree of renewing
and sanctifying grace; as it probably was in those hearers, represented by the
stony ground, who immediately received the word with joy, but had no root, and
so endured but for a while Matt xiii. 20, 21.
.

BUT, perhaps, you will say, you are confident it is not merely self-love in
you, for you have often found your mind impressed with a grateful sense of the
divine Goodness; so that, when you own it before God in prayer, or converse
with his saints on the copious and delightful subject, your souls flow forth in
love to your great benefactor, and you look up to him in the most thankful
acknowledgements of his favors. -- If it be a gratitude, that captivates the
soul into a willing obedience, and engages you to yield yourselves living
sacrifices to God, then is Christ formed in your souls, and you are not the
persons to whom I would give the alarm: on the contrary, I would rather confirm
your hopes, and rejoice with you in them. -- But if your gratitude does not
rise to this; if it rest only in some tender emotion of mind, or some transient
external expression of that emotion, I must faithfully tell you, that I fear it
is only a nobler degree of that natural instinct which causes the ox to know
his owner, and the ass his master's crib Isa. i. 3.
. To find your spirit in this manner does indeed plainly prove that the day of
your visitation is not entirely past; it proves you have not sinned yourselves
into utter insensibility of soul; nay, it may possibly at length, through the
communications of sanctifying grace, lead you on to real religion, and to
eminent seize in it: but at present it falls far short. I have often told
you, (and one can hardly repeat it too often, or insist too earnestly upon it,)
that there is a very wide difference between a good state, and a good frame;
and that religion is not seated either in the understanding, or in the
passions, but principally in the will; which, in this disjointed state of human
nature, is far from being always in a due harmony with either. So that, on the
whole, those illuminations, or those affections, on which you are apt to lay so
great a stress, are, perhaps, at best, but the preparatory workings of the
Spirit upon your minds, which if they are improved aright, may leave you more
hard, and more miserable than they found you.

5. TRUST not to the morality of your behavior, as the foundation of your
eternal hopes.

MORALITY is certainly a very excellent thing, and it were scandalous indeed
for any professing christian to pour contempt upon it. Wherever this is
wanting, pretenses to faith and christian experience are not only vain, but
insolent and detestable. He that commi^^eth sin, is of the devil; and only he
that does righteousness is righteous 1 John iii. 7, 8.
: nor has the grace of God ever savingly appeared to that man, through
whatever uncommon scenes of thought he may have passed, who is not effectually
taught by it to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly Tit. ii. 10, 11, 12.
. But it will by no means follow from thence, that wherever there is a sober
and virtuous conduct, such a soul is passed from death to life. If the whole of
the gospel be wrapped up in the rules of morality, then is Christ dead in vain;
or, at least, it is in vain that the notices of his death are published to us.
Beware, I entreat you, of so pernicious an error. I think myself obliged more
earnestly to caution you against it, because, while the devil is attempting, on
the one hand, to engage some, under the specious pretenses of an evangelical
spirit, to turn the grace of God into wantonness Jude ver. 4.
, he seems to be insnaring others, by extolling the virtue which he hates, in
order to lead them into a neglect of Christ, and his righteousness, and all the
peculiarities of the gospel-scheme of salvation; so that it is difficult on the
whole to say, which of these devices is most destructive to the souls of men.

FROM my heart I rejoice to think, there are so many amongst you, my young
friends, whose character in life is fair and unblemished. You escape the
grosser pollutions of the world; you abhor brutal intemperance; you scorn the
mean artifices of deceit, and renounce the hidden things of dishonesty 2 Cor.
iv. 2.
; you honor your parents and subordinate governors; you treat the ministers of
Christ with respect and esteem; you are affable and courteous in your behavior
to all: and, on this account, we behold you and love you; we hope, and
conclude, you are not far from the kingdom of heaven Mark xli. 34.
. But, alas! if things rest here, you will never enter into it. All these
things had the young man in the gospel observed from his youth Mark x. 2^.
; and many of you have seen, in a very large and beautiful representation, how
lovely a youth was then perishing in sin Dr Watt's Scrm. Vol. 1. Ser. V. VI.
. He lacked one thing; and the lack of that was the ruin of his soul, as it
will be of yours, if you are destitute of it.

I KNOW that they are especially in danger of being deceived here, who converse
frequently with persons of an abandoned character; or who are themselves
reformed from some gross irregularities to which they were once addicted.
Comparing themselves with others, or with themselves in a more licentious and
corrupt state, they pronounce a favorable sentence, and conclude they are safe
and happy: but let me entreat you, my friends, that you would rather compare
your hearts and lives with that perfect law of God which cannot be repealed;
weigh yourselves in that balance, and see whether you are not found wanting
there. Review even the upright conduct of these days of your reformation, and
then say whether there be such a redundancy of merit in them, as will not only
answer present demands, but atone for your past offenses too. You will soon be
confounded on such a review. You will soon acknowledge on an impartial
examination, that the bed is shorter than a man can stretch himself upon, and
the covering narrower than he can wrap himself in Isa. xxviii. 20.
; that neither you, nor any living, can be justified by the works of the law
Romans iii. 20.
.

I WILL conclude this head with observing, that the instance of the blessed
apostle St. Paul serves well to illustrate and confirm our discourse, in each
of the particulars I have now mentioned -- Had the privileges of birth and
education been a sufficient security, Paul had been secure before his
conversion to christianity; for he was circumcised the eighth day, of the stock
of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, (which had not, like the rest, revolted
from the house of David); and by his mother's side, as well as his father's, a
Hebrew of the Hebrews Phil. iii. 5.
. -- If the exactest regularity in religious notions, or the strictest
formality in the externals of worship, could have secured a man, Paul had been
secure; for he was, (...) touching the law, a Pharisee; he lived according to
the rigor of that sect, and, both with respect to doctrines and ceremonies was
exceedingly zealous of the traditions of the fathers Gal. i. 14.
. -- If a transport of passion in the cause of God could have secured a man,
Paul had been secure; for, concerning zeal, or with regard that, he persecuted
the church, and wasted it beyond measure ver. 13.
. -- And, lastly; if morality of behavior could have done it, Paul had been
secure; for, touching the righteousness which is by the law, he was blameless
Phil. iii. 6 -- 8.
. In these things he was once so weak, and so wretched, as to place a great
deal of confidence; but when he was illuminated, and called by divine grace, he
assures us, that what things were gain unto him before, those he counted loss
for Christ, i. e. he most entirely renounced all dependence upon them. Yea
doubtless, says he, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Which naturally leads me to the second
general, where

II. I AM to consider, what will be a solid foundation for hope and joy when
all these precarious dependencies fail.

THIS is, with the utmost propriety, expressed in the text, by Christ formed in
the soul; which is exactly parrallel to that phrase in Colossians, Christ in
you, the hope of glory Col. i. 27.
, which is there mentioned as an epitome of the gospel, the riches of the glory
of the mystery preached among the Gentiles. When Paul could see that the
Galatians were brought to this, the pangs of his laboring mind would be ended,
and joy and confidence would succeed; which is plainly intimated in the words
of the text. And when you, my dear charge, are brought to it, parents and
ministers may rejoice over you, and you will have an everlasting spring of hope
and joy, a solid foundation on which to build for eternity.

PERMIT me, therefore, a little more particularly to explain it to you; and let
me entreat you to turn your thoughts inward, that you may judge whether you
have been experimentally acquainted with the temper and change which I shall
now describe, as signified by this remarkable expression in the text, Christ
formed in you.

Now, I think, it implies these three things: -- That some apprehensions of
Christ have taken hold of the heart; that the man is brought to an explicit
choice of him, and deliberately enters into covenant with him; -- and that, in
consequence of both these, something of the temper and spirit of Christ is, by
divine grace wrought in his soul. I will touch on each of these; but my time
will not allow me to manage them in so copious and particular a manner as they
well deserve.

1. To have Christ formed in the soul supposes, that some serious apprehensions
of Christ have taken hold of the heart.

IT evidently implies, that the external revelation of him has not only been
admitted as a speculative truth, but attended to as a matter of the highest
concern. Previous to the forming of Christ in the so^l, there must be a
conviction, that we are naturally without Christ, and that, in consequence of
this, we are in a most unhappy condition. And this conviction must strike deep
upon the heart; for till the evil of sin be felt, what can make the news of a
Savior welcome? since, as he himself has declared, the whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick Matt. ix. 12.
. The man in whose heart Christ is formed, has seen himself condemned by God's
righteous law; has seen himself equally unable to answer its demands, or to
bear up under the execution of its penalties. And feeling this to be no light
matter, but the very life of his own soul, he has then been engaged with the
greatest seriousness and earnestness, to cry out, Woe is me, for I am undone
Isa. vi. 5.
! Oh what shall I do to be saved Acts xvi. 30.
? I before told you, there may be these convictions and awakenings, where
Christ is never formed in the soul; and I now add, that the degree of them may
be various, according to the various tempers and circumstances of different
persons: but it is most evident, that something of this kind must make way for
the Redeemer's entrance, who comes to seek and to save that which was lost Luke
xix. 10.
; to bind up the brokenhearted Isa. lxi. 1.
; and to give rest to the weary and heavy-laden Matt. xi. 28, 29.
. And I the rather insist on this; because I am fully persuaded, that slight
thoughts of sin, and of the misery of our natural estate by it, have been the
principal cause of all the infidelity of the present age, and are daily ruining
a multitude of souls.

2. THE formation of Christ in the soul does farther imply an explicit choice
of him, and a deliberate entering into covenant with him.

WHEN such a soul hears of a Redeemer, and of the way of salvation by him,
exhibited in scripture, it cordially approves the scheme, as entirely worthy of
its divine Author; and though corrupt nature raises up a thousand proud
thoughts, in a vain and ungrateful rebellion against it, yet they are, by
Almighty Grace, subdued and brought into captivity 2 Cor x. 5.
. The man really sees such a suitableness, and such an amiableness, in the
blessed Jesus, under the character in which the gospel reveals him, that he
judges him to be the pearl of great price; and as God has laid him as the
foundation-stone, he is, in that view, inconceivably precious to him 1 Pet. ii.
6.
. Far from contenting himself with applauding this plan, as regularly
beautiful, and magnificent in general, the true believer is solicitous, that he
may have his own share in this edifice of mercy; and that, coming to Christ as
a living stone, he may himself be one of those, who shall, on him, be built up
for an habitation of God through the Spirit Ephesians. ii. 22.
. When he considers the Lord Jesus represented as standing at the door and
knocking Rev. iii. 20.
, it is with pleasure that he hears his voice, and opens to him, and, as
Zaccheus did, receives him joyfully Luke xix. 6.
. He regards him as a nail fastened in a sure place Isa. xxii. 23.
; on which he can joyfully fix all his eternal hopes, infinitely important as
he sees them to be. And while he thus anchors his soul on the righteousness,
the atonement, and the intercession of a Redeemer, he humbly bows to his
authority, as his Lord and his God John xx. 28.
. It is his desire to seat him on the throne in his heart, and as it were to
put into his hand the scepter and the sword, that all the powers of nature may
be governed, and all the corruptions of it destroyed by him. In a word, as he
knows that Christ was given for a covenant to the people Isa. xlix. 8.
, he deliberately sets his seal to that covenant, thereby devoting himself to
Christ, and, through him, to the father. Such are his views, his purposes, and
his engagements; and by divine grace he is enabled to be faithful to them.
Which leads me to add,

3. WHEN Christ is formed in any soul, something of the temper and character of
the blessed Jesus is, by divine grace, wrought there.

I MIGHT with ease multiply scriptures in proof of the absolute necessity of
this; but it is so obvious, that you must yourselves know, how expressly it is
required. You know, how plainly St. Paul has ^old us, that if any man have not
the spirit of Christ, he is none of his (...)
: and where the spirit resides Christ dwells in the heart (...). 17.
. The same mind, or temper, is in such an one, as was also in Christ Jesus
Phil. (...). ^.
; and as he professes to abide in him, it is his care so to walk, as Christ
also walked (...)
. On which account the true christian is said to have put on Christ (...)
, an allusion to the Hebrew phrase, of being clothed with any temper o^
affection, that greatly prevails or governs in the soul ^
.

IT is a very pleasing, as well as useful employment, to trace the (...) of the
temper and conduct of Christ in his people. Our Lord is in a peculiar sense the
son of God; but his people (...), through him, taken into the same relation,
for they have not received the spirit of bondage again unto fear, though
perhaps they were once subjected to it, but they have received the spirit of
adoption Romans viii. 15.
; and because they are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into
their hearts; crying, Abba, father Gal. iv. 6.
. By this spirit a filial temper is wrought in their own souls, by which their
obedience to their heavenly father is so animated, as to be most honorable and
grateful to him, as well as most easy and delightful to themselves. Under the
influences of this spirit, the Christian desires it may be his character now,
as he trusts it will be his happiness at last, to follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes Rev. xiv. 4.
; to follow that Jesus, who was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from
sinners Heb. vii. 26.
. He is indeed deeply sensible, that it is impossible for him, as the Lord did,
to fulfill all righteousness Matt. iii. 15.
; and therefore, when he has done all, he calls himself an unprofitable
servant Luke xvii. 10.
. Yet he sees so much of the eternal beauties of holiness, so much luster and
glory in the image of God, as drawn on the soul of man, that it is the great
concern of his heart, and labor of his life to pursue it. Nor would he only
abstain from grosser enormities, and practice those virtues which are most
honorable amongst men, and attended with the greatest secular advantage; but
he would, in every respect, maintain a conscience void of offense Acts xxiv. 16.
, and perfect holiness in the fear of God 2 Cor. vii. 1.
. He has so affectionate a sense of the riches of the divine grace, displayed
through a Redeemer, in adopting so unworthy a creature as himself to the
dignity and privilege of a son of God, that he often cries out, in raptures of
holy gratitude and joy, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward me Psalm. cxvi. 12.
? Inspired with this noble principle, he searches his father's will
impartially; and when he has discovered it, he obeys it cheerfully, and it
is his meat and his drink to perform it John iv. 34.
. He loves the Lord his God above all, and loves his fellow creatures for his
sake as well as their own, and entertains the highest veneration and affection
for those who most heartily resemble his father and their father, his God and
their God. It is his prayer and his endeavor, that he may go about doing good
Acts x. 38.
, and be useful to all as he has opportunity Gal. vi. 10.
; that he pass through the world with a holy moderation and superiority of
soul, to the things which are seen, and are temporal 2 Cor iv. 18.
; thankfully owing every mercy as proceeding from God's paternal love and care,
and serenely submitting to every affliction, as the cup which his father puts
into his hand John xviii. 11.
. In a word, he desires, that in all the varieties of life he may still be
intent on the views of an everlasting inheritance; humbly looking and longing
for that blessed hope Tit. ii. 13.
, yet willing patiently to wait his father's time: having this constant
expectation, and reviving assurance, that whether he lives, he shall live unto
the Lord, or whether he dies, he shall die unto the Lord; so that whether he
live or die, he shall be the Lord's Romans xiv. 8.
.

THIS is the christian; -- this is the man in whom Christ is formed; or,
rather, these are some faint lineaments of his character: and I will venture to
say, that he who cannot discern something in it, even as thus imperfectly
described, which is vastly superior to that morality and decency of behavior,
which arises merely from prudential views, or from the sweetness and gentleness
of a man's natural temper, is sunk below the boasted religion of nature, and
must take refug^^ (...) ^he wretched principles of Atheism, if he would pretend
to form any thing of a consistent scheme. But now,

III. I must conclude with hinting at some reflections and inferences, which my
time will not allow me to handle at large.

1. How important is it, that ministers should lead young persons into such
views as these!

OUR great and important business in life is to promote the eternal happiness
of our hearers, and to lay a solid foundation of hope and joy in their souls.
We have seen now what it is, and other foundation can no man lay than that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ 1 Cor. iii. 11.
. Here then let all our labors center. It is the good old way, in which our
fathers in the ministry went, and in which they prospered. Let us follow their
steps, and exert our most vigorous efforts here. Modern refinements may amuse
us in our closets, but they will never feed the souls of our hearers, nor
spread the triumphs of a gospel, which was the power of God to the salvation of
thousands, before they were ever dreamt of. I hope, God is my witness, that I
am heartily concerned for the interest of virtue, (if by that be meant the
advancement of practical religion); but I never expected to see it promoted by
the most philosophical speculations concerning its nature, or the finest
harrangues of it is innate beauties, when the names and peculiar doctrines of
Christ are thrown off, as unfashionable encumbrances of a discourse.
Experienced christians, who have tasted the bread of life, will not contentedly
be put off with such chaff: and if we imagine that the younger part of our
auditors may be trained up to a relish for it, we may, perhaps, succeed in the
attempt: but I much fear, that success will be the calamity of the church, and
the destruction of souls The author has taken a greater freedom on this head,
as the discourse was delivered before several (...) for the ministry, for whom
he had some peculiar concern.


2. WE may learn from hence, what are the most valuable proofs of parental
affection.

CERTAINLY there is no reason to esteem, as such that fond indulgence which
suffers ill habits to grow up in the young mind, and fears it is present
disturbance more than its future ruin: no, nor yet the more prudent care of
providing plentiful and agreeable accommodations, for the subsistence and
delight of your infant offspring, as they advance to maturity and settlement in
life. These things indeed are not to be neglected; but wretched are the
children, and I will add, the parents too, where this is the principle labor.
Would you express a wise and religious tenderness, for which your children
shall have reason to thank you in their dying moments, and to meet you with joy
in the interviews of the eternal world? do your utmost that Christ be formed in
their souls; and let them plainly see, that you even travail in birth again,
till this happy work be accomplished. But this leads me to add,

3. WHAT need is there of the work of the divine Spirit on the heart, in order
to the laying this great foundation?

THE language of the text, which speaks of Christ formed in us, naturally leads
our thoughts to some agent, by whom the work is done; and when you consider
what kind of a work it is, I appeal to your own consciences, whether it is to
be thought merely a human production? Were it only a name, a ceremony, a
speculation, or a passion, it would not be worth a moment's dispute, whether
you or we should have the glory of it. But as it is nothing less than the
transformation of a corrupt and degenerate creature into the holy image of the
son of God, it were impiety for either to arrogate it to ourselves.

LET us therefore, on the whole, learn our duty and our wisdom. Let the matter
be brought to a serious and immediate review, and let us judge ourselves by the
character described, as those that expect very shortly to be judged of the
Lord. -- If, on the examination, any of you have reason to conclude that you
are strangers to it, remember that the invinceable battery of the word of God
demolishes all the towering hopes you may have raised on any other foundation.
Let conscience then say, whether any amusement, or any business in life, be so
important, as to be attended to, even for one single day, in neglect of this
great concern, on which all the happiness of an immortal soul is suspended. If
nothing be indeed found of greater moment, apply yourselves seriously to this,
and omit no proper and rational method of securing it. Consider the ways by
which Christ uses to enter into a soul, and wait upon him in those ways.
Reflect seriously on your present condition; constantly attend the instructions
of his word, and the other solemnities of his worship; and choose to converse
intimately with those, in whom you have reason to think he is already formed.
But in all remember, that the success depends upon a divine cooperation, and
therefore go frequently into the presence of God by prayer; go into it this
day, or if possible this hour, and importunately entreat the regenerating and
sanctifying influences of his spirit, which when you earnestly desire them, the
gospel gives you such ample encouragement to expect. -- But if you have reason
to hope, that you have already received them, learn to what the praise should
be ascribed; and let it animate you to pray, that through farther
communications from the throne of grace, you may be made continually more and
more like to your Redeemer, till you are prepared for that world, where you
shall shine forth in his complete resemblance, and shall find it your complete
and eternal felicity. AMEN.

SERMON III.
A DISSUASIVE FROM KEEPING BAD COMPANY.
PROVE. iv. 14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way
of evil men: avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.
IF we have any regard to the judgment of the wisest of men, illuminated and
directed by the influences of the divine spirit, we must certainly own, that
ill company is a very dangerous snare, and that young persons should be
frequently and earnestly cautioned against it. The excellent collection, (...)
and religious precepts, contained in this book of Proverbs, was especially
intended to give subtilty or prudence to the simple, and to the young man
knowledge and discretion Prove. i. 4.
. And as the sacred author well knew, that he should plead the cause of wisdom
and piety in vain, while the voice of dissolute companions was heard, and their
conversation pursued, he begins his addresses to youth with repeated cautions
on this head: My son, says he, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not ver. 10.
. As he proceeds in his discourse, the address grows more lively and earnest;
and I am sure every attentive hearer will soon discover a peculiar energy in
the words of the text. This faithful and compassionate counselor does not
content himself with dissuading his young reader from joining with notorious
offenders in their crimes, but even from going in the way with them, or with
any other evil men; nay, from entering upon it, or even approaching it, so much
as to pass by it, if there were not a necessity of doing it. Enter not into the
paths of sinners, and go not in the way of evil men: avoid it, pass not by it,
turn from it, and pass away. As if he should have said, shun the very place
where such wretches assemble, as you would if it were infected with the most
malignant and dangerous disease: and if you have unwarily taken any steps
toward it, stop short, and direct your course another way.

SUCH lessons did Solomon teach; and such had he himself learnt from David his
father. That pious prince, in the very entrance on the book of Psalms describes
the good man as one that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
standing in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful Psalm.
i. 1.
. and he elsewhere speaks of the citizen of Zion, as one in whose eyes a vile
person, far from being chosen as an intimate companion, is contemned, while he
honors them that fear the Lord Psalm. xv. 4.
. Thus he delineates the holy and happy man; and he had a pleasing
consciousness that this character was his own: he therefore appeals to God as a
witness to it, that he had not himself sat with vain persons, and was
determined that he would not go in with dissemblers; nay, that he was so far
from seeking and delighting in their company, that he hated the congregation of
evildoers, and would not sit with the wicked psalm. xxvi. 4, 5.
: he resolutely drove them away from him, as one who knew their society would
be extremently injurious to the purpose he had formed of devoting himself to a
religious course: depart from me, ye evildoers; for I will keep the
commandments of my God Psalm. cxix. 115.
.

THE sacred writers of the new testament recommend to us, that we should have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness Ephesians. v. 11.
; that we should not be unequally yoked in any kind of intimate friendship with
unbelievers 2 Cor. vi. 14.
; and that if any do not obey the word, we should note such an one, and have no
company with him, that he may be ashamed 2 These. iii. 14.
.

CONSIDERING such passages of scripture, as well as the reason of the thing, I
think it proper at this time to pursue this subject at large. I well know, that
I may succeed in this particular address and yet leave you strangers to a
saving change, and far from the kingdom of God; but if I cannot prevail with
you to refrain from, and discard the company of sinners, I fear other
admonitions will turn to very little account. In the further prosecution of the
subject I will, I. BRIEFLY tell you, what I intend by that bad company which I
would caution you against, and how far I would urge you to avoid it. II. OFFER
some considerations to deter you from it; and then, III. CONCLUDE with a few
obvious inferences.


I. I AM briefly to show you, what I would now caution you against.

AND here surely I need not be large in telling you what I mean by bad company.
It is, in general, the conversation of those, who are apparently destitute of
the fear of God; and so it takes in, not only persons of the most dissolute and
abandoned characters, but those vain and worthless creatures who manifest a
neglect of religion, though free from gross and scandalous immoralities. So
that what I have to say will be applicable to all sinful companions whatever;
but the more notorious their vices are, the more evident will be the force of
each of those arguments, by which I shall now endeavor to fortify you against
their society.

NEITHER shall I use many words in telling you how far you are to avoid such
company; for to be sure you cannot imagine that I am endeavoring to dissuade
you from a necessary commerce with them in the common affairs of life, and the
business of your calling; since then, as the apostle expresses it, you must
needs go out of the world 1 Cor. v. 10.
, considering the state of religion and mortality in it. Nor would I lead you
to a neglect of any offices of humanity and civility to them; for such a
behavior, instead of adorning the gospel, would greatly prejudice their minds
against it. Least of all, would I hinder you from applying yourselves to them
by serious admonitions, in order to convince them of their sin and danger, and
to engage them to repentance and reformation. In these views the blessed Jesus
himself conversed freely with persons of the most infamous characters, though
they were perfectly holy, harmless, undefiled, and in that sense separate from
sinners Heb. vii. 26.
. The folly I would caution you against is, choosing irreligious persons for
your intimate friends, and delighting to spend your vacant hours in vain
conversation with them. My design does not require farther explication; the
great difficulty, I apprehend is, what I shall meet with while I am attempting,

II. To fortify you against the danger of such companions, and to ^^gage you
cautiously to avoid them.

WHEN I call this the most difficult part of my work, it is not because I am at
a loss for arguments, or apprehend those arguments to be either weak or
obscure. A variety of considerations immediately present themselves to my mind,
so plain, and yet so important, that I am confident were the matter to be
weighed in an equal balance, a few moments would be sufficient to produce a
rational conviction of what I am to prove. But oh, who can answer for the
effect of such a conviction? When I consider the unaccountable enchantment
which there seems to be in such company as I am warning you against; and
reflect on the instances, in which I have seen young persons of sense and
education, who once appeared to promise remarkably well, at length entangled,
and some of them ruined by it; I dare not presume on the success I might
otherwise expect. Nevertheless, I know, that the word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword; and I know, that if it be
guided by the hand of the blessed Spirit, it will be effectual to divide you
from your most delightful carnal associates; since it can separate things as
near to each other, as the (...) and (...), and (...) open the heart to so
clear (...) view, as that it shall seem to have discerned even (...) though
(...) Heb. iv. 1^.
.

(...) this (...) to (...) the attempt and I hope the difficulty and importance
of the case will not (...) large, but will also engage all, who have any regard
to the happiness of the rising generation, to lift up their hearts to God, that
he may assist and succeed me in pleading this weighty cause, in which the
interests of time and eternity are so apparently concerned.

GIVE me leave then to bespeak the most serious attention of all that hear me,
and especially of the younger part of my audience, while I urge on your
consciences such considerations as these -- Seriously reflect on the many
unhappy consequences which will attend your going in the way of sinners; --
Think on those entertainments and pleasures which you give up for the sake of
their society: and consider how little advantage you can expect from thence, to
counter-balance the pleasures you resign, and the evils you incur by it.

1. LET me entreat you seriously to reflect on the many unhappy consequences
which will attend your entering into the path of the wicked, and going in the
way of evil men.

YOU probably will by this means quickly wear out all serious impressions; --
you will be exposed to numberless temptations to sin and folly, -- and thrown
out of the way of amendment and reformation; -- and thus will be led into a
great many temporal inconveniences, -- till at last you perish with your sinful
companions, and have your eternal portion amongst them in hell.

(1) BY this means you will be in the ready way to lose all sense of religion,
and out-grow the impressions of a serious education, if providence have
favored you with it.

IF your hearts are not harder than the nether millstone, some such
impressions were surely made in your younger years; and I believe, few that
have been trained up in religious families have entirely escaped them. If these
are duly improved, they will end in conversion and glory; but, if they are
resisted, they lead to greater obstinacy in sin, and throw the soul still
farther from the kingdom of God. Now what can be more evident than the tendency
of vain and carnal conversation to quench the blessed Spirit of God, and hinder
the mind from falling in with his preparatory work upon it.

I AM persauded, that if they, who are under some prevailing sense of divine
things, consider how difficult they often find it to preserve those impressions
on their spirits, in the company of some who appear on the whole to be serious
people, even they will be afraid frequently to venture into the company of the
sensual and profane. As Mr. Bolton finely expresses it (...), for walking with
God. page 10.
, throw a blazing firebrand into snow or rain, and its brightness and heat will
quickly be extinguished; so let the liveliest christian plunge himself into
carnal company, and he will soon find the warmth of his zeal abated, (...) the
tenderness of his conscience prejudiced. Now, if it (...) detrimental to those
that have deliberately devoted themselves to the service of God, and have had
some experience of the goodness of his ways, judge how much more dangerous it
must be to him who has some feeble desires, and, as yet undetermined purposes,
in favor of it. Young people are extremely rash and credulous; and when you
see your favorite companions neglecting serious godliness, and, perhaps,
deriding it, it is a thousand to one, that you will not have the courage to
oppose them* you will probably, at first, be silent; and then, you will grow
ashamed of your former renderness; till at last, seduced by the craftiness of
them that lie in wait to deceive Ephesians. iv. 14.
, you may secretly censure religion, as an unnecessary and burdensome thing,
if you are not transported so far as openly to revile it, and join in the
senseless and impious cry against those that appear to be influenced by it.

AGAIN, when you have been used to the pleasures of such company, and, perhaps,
of that unbridled luxury which they may be ready to lead you into, you will, no
doubt, lose your relish for all the entertainments of devotion. The hours you
spend in the exercises of it in public, or in the family, will grow tedious,
and almost insupportable to you; and you will rejoice when the dull work is
over, that you may return to your beloved companions again. Thus will all
regard to religion be gradually worn out of your mind; and this seems to be the
argument suggested by St. Paul, to dissuade the Corinthians from being
unequally yoked with unbelievers. For what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? or what communion has light with darkness 2 Cor. vi. 14.
? This alone would be a very considerable evil; but it is far from being all
you have to fear; for, I add,

(2) BY frequenting ill company, you lay yourselves open to many temptations,
and (...) will be drawn into a great deal of guilt.

You know, there is a strong sorce in example "We are all," says Mr. Lock, a
kind of (...) lions, that take a tincture from that* which (...) near us
Locke's works, vol. iii. page. 13.
. So that, if you converse with wicked people, you will probably become like
them yourselves. It is an argument, which Solomon urg^^ against forming any
peculiar intimacy with those that are passionate: and it is equally applicable
to many other cases: make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious
man thou shall not go; lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul
Prove. xxii. 2^, 25.
.

ALAS, sinners, you are to too apt to be led into guilt by your own corrupt
hearts, even when you have the fairest advantages against it, amidst the wisest
instructions, and the holiest examples; how for^eably then will the temptation
assault you, when you see others, and those your most intimate friends, yield
to it without any appearance of remorse? and when, it may be, you hear them
pleading in favor of the compliance, and endeavoring to persuade you to join
in the practice, as what they have themselves found delightful and advantageous?

IT is no small evil for an immortal creature, who was sent into the world to
serve God, and to secure a happy immortality, to live in vain, and trifle away
hour after hour, in mere idleness and impertinence. Yet this is the least sin
that bad company leads a man into. Unhappy as this is, would to God that it
always rested here! the world would at least be more peaceful, and your
damnation, sinners, would be less intolerable. But daily observation undeniably
proves, that by evil examples, and wicked companions, people generally learn
gluttony and drunkenness, swearing and uncleanness. It engages them in foolish
quarrels, in which they blaspheme the name of God, and injure their neighbor;
and it habituates them to such extravagant ways of living, as they are forced
to support by secret dishonesty, and very often by open robbery. Thus they
gradually fall into those scandalous enormities, which at first they could not
have thought of without horror. Thia fatal effect is plainly hinted at in
Proverbs, where the wretch that abandoned himself to the society of sinners, is
represented as acknowledging, that he was almost in all evil, in the midst of
the congregation and assembly Prove. v. 14.
; i. e. he was so hardened in his various crimes, as not to be ashamed to
commit, or at least to avow them in the most public manner.

(3) BY frequenting sinful company, you will throw yourselves out of the way of
repentance and reformation.

I BEFORE observed, that you will by this means contract a disrelish for the
exercises of devotion; and this will probably be attended with the neglect of
those ordinances, which God has appointed as the great means of our conversion
and edification. And when these are neglected, how can you expect that God
should pursue you with uncommon interpositions of his grace? That when his word
is despised, and his house forsaken, he should seize you as it were by
violence, amongst your dissolute companions, and convert you in your midnight
revels? Your pious friends may indeed have some opportunities in private of
expostulating with you; but it will require a great deal of resolution to
attempt it; and when they do, they must take it as a peculiar favor, if you
give them a patient hearing, and don't affront and revile them for their
charitable endeavor of delivering your souls from the pit of destruction, and
plucking you as brand^ out of everlasting burnings Amos iv. 21.
.

But if we should allow, that their importunity, or any other consideration,
should sometimes b^ing you within the hearing of an (...), practice^^ sermon,
and some serious impression should be made upon your minds by it, it is very
probable all these convictions will wear off, as soon as you return to your
wicked companions again. One gay, licentious hour amongst them may undo the
labor of many days and weeks, and presently teach you to laugh at yourself for
the former alarm, as if every fear had been vain, and every purpose of
reformation needless. And thus your hearts, will be like tempered steel, which
gathers strength from every blow of the hammer, to make a more vigorous
resistance to the next; and you will harden to all the most mollifying methods
of providence and of grace, till at length you provoke the blessed spirit, so
often resisted, entirely to withdraw, and so you be sealed up under final
impenitency. Thus the poor foolish creature I mentioned before, who was so fond
of the society of sinners, is represented as reflecting too late that all the
wisest and kindest endeavors of his friends, for his reformation, had been
utterly ineffectual. How, says he, have I hated instruction, and my heart
despised reproof! I have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined my
ear to them that instructed me Prove. v. 12, 13.
. Thus incorrigibly disobedient will you be, if you enter into the path of
sinners, and go in the way of evil men. In consequence of this,

(4) YOU will undoubtedly find yourselves exposed to a great deal of present
inconvenience and calamity, with regard to your temporal assairs.

Now, methinks, this consideration should at least have its weight with you,
whose guilt it is, and whose r^in it too probably may be, to look only at those
things which are seen, and are temporal 2 Cor. iv. 18.
. I before observed, that by frequenting ill company, you will be under strong
temptations to idleness. And thus you will in all probability, waste your
substance, and shorten your days; and in the mean time lay a foundation for
many diseases, which may give you an utter disrelish for all the comforts and
entertainments of life, when you stand in the greatest need of relief from
them. I add, that it is not at all unlikely, that the foolish quarrels, into
which it may lead you, may be attended with cost or pain, and perhaps with
both. And as for your reputation, which to a generous spirit is one of the
dearest of all temporal enjoyments, I must plainly tell you, that if you
determine to take no care in the choice of your company, you must necessarily
give it up. For if, almost by a miracle, you should be kept from running, with
your sinful associates, into the same excess of riot and folly; yet the very
circumstance of taking pleasure in such sort of companions will be enough to
overthrow it, in the judgment of wise and considerate people.

SUCH arguments as these does Solomon use, when cautioning his young readers
against so dangerous an entanglement. He pleads the many temporal
inconveniences and evils which attend it, and many of which I have just been
mentioning. He observes, that it tends to impoverish them: he that follows
after vain persons, shall have poverty enough Prove. xxviii. 19.
: that however it may seem the cement of friendship, it often proves the
occasion of enmity and contention Chap. xxiii. 29, 30.
; for who has woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has babblings?
who has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long
at the wine with the partners of their midnight debaucheries. How much the
health is impared by it, is evidently suggested, when he represents the poor
creature as mourning at last, when his flesh and his body are consumed Prove. v.
11.
; and to add no more, he expressly tells us, that sinners, by these kinds of
confederacies, lay snares for their own blood, and lurk privily for their own
lives Prove. i. 18.
; which he uses as an argument against complying with their proposals, when
they seem most advantageous. And accordingly we see, that most of these unhappy
creatures, who are the victims of public justice, and fall by the hand of the
executioner, declare with their dying breath, that wicked company was the
occasion of their ruin.

(5) IF you choose the society of sinners, you will probably perish with them,
and have their company in hell, as you have had it upon earth.

THE probability of this dreadful consequence is but too apparent from what I
have said under the former heads of this discourse. If you lose those religious
impressions which were early made, if you are drawn into a great deal of sin,
and thrown out of the way of repentance and reformation, what can the end of
these things be? Or what can you reasonably expect, but that God should execute
upon you all the fierceness of his wrath? And to cut off your vain,
presumptuous hopes, and awaken you to that sense of danger, which is so
absolutely necessary for your deliverance, he has expressly threatened it; and
that not only in general with respect to all sinners, but particularly to such
as are fond of wicked company. And it is worth your while to observe, in what
language he threatens it: a companion of fools shall be destroyed Prove. xiii.
20.
. So that what Solomon says of one sort of sinful companions is justly
applicable to the rest. Their house is the way to hell, going down to the
chamber of death Prove. vii. 27.
.

Now let me entreat you to dwell upon this thought, till you feel something of
the weight and the terror of it. Be sometimes asking yourselves, How can we
dwell with the devouring fire? How can we lie down in everlasting burnings Isa.
xxxiii. 14.
? How can you endure those torments youselves? And in what temper, and with
what reflections, will you meet the partners of your guilt and folly there? And
in what manner will you converse together? Alas, my friends, in those seats of
horror and despair, all that rendered your intercourse on earth delightful,
will be come to an eternal period. There will be no opportunities for you and
them to gratify your sensual desires together: no delicious food, no
intoxicating liquors, no gay tales, no cheerful songs; but instead of these,
blackness of darkness for ever more Jude, ver. 13.
; weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth Matt. viii. 12.
; the worm that never dies, and the fire that cannot be quenched Mark ix. 44,
46, 48.
.

WILL it then be any relief to you, to look back on those days, which you
shared in luxury, and in sin? Will your friendship still continue? And will you
be endeavoring by tender condolences, and by obliging offices, to mollify and
alleviate the miseries of each other? Alas, sinners, Hell is not the seat of
friendship, but of everlasting enmity and rage. All the wretched inhabitants
will live in perpetual discord, and mutual abhorrence. And no doubt your
keenest resentments will burn against those, who have been your partners in
sin; as your aggravated damnation will be in part owing to them. And on the
same principles, will their indignations rise against you. And thus you will
lie forever, continually exercising all the enlarged capacities of your minds,
to increase the torments of each other. And perhaps it is the only instance, in
which your desires and your attempts will be effectual. Oh! sirs, when I think
of the air and form of some wicked creatures, when transported with passion,
when I observe how venomous their speeches, and extravagantly furious all their
actions are, methinks I see the most lively emblem of the society below: but
alas, how much more dreadful must it be, to stand exposed to the rage and
revenge of a damned spirit! yet this is like to be your lot; and if it be, the
most delightful of your companions in sin, will probably prove your fiercest
tormentors.

THERE is reason to apprehend, that these, and such as these, will be the
miserable consequences of wicked company with regard to yourselves. And I might
now infer from hence, that your frequenting it must be very grievous and
injurious to others. I might plead against it at large, from the alarms and
sorrows to which your parents and ministers will be exposed by your pursuing
it, and the mischievous influence it may have on the circumstances and
characters of your own domestics, if ever you appear as heads of families, as
well as of many others, with whom you be concerned. Solomon urges one of ^^^se
considerations, when he says, a companion of riotous men shameth his father
Prove. xxviii. 7.
. Here would be a large field of argument; but I wave it at present, lest my
discourse should swell beyond due bounds, as well as to avoid the repetition of
what I was laying before you on a former occasion See Sermon. I.
.

NEVERTHELESS, I hope you are abundantly convinced, by what has been already
said, that the pernicious and dangerous consequences are many and great: let me
entreat you farther to consider,

2. How much nobler entertainment and pleasure, you give up for a converse,
which is like to prove so fatal to you.

I WOULD fain persuade you, if already entangled, to burst these bands asunder,
and to cast away these cords from you, which will otherwise bind you as victims
to eternal wrath. And to engage you to it, I would say, as the wise man does,
forsake the foolish, and live Prove. ix. 6.
: it is not only necessary, to preserve your life; but you may likewise be
assured, it would most happily improve it, and bring you to another kind of
life than what you have yet known, in comparison of which your present way of
life is but a wild, distempered dream. The father of lies may, perhaps, has
persuaded your weak and unexperienced minds, that there is no such thing as
pleasure to be found out of this enchanted circle which he has drawn about you:
but did you know wherein true self-enjoyment consists, I might have declined
all those awful arguments which I have so largely been urging upon your
consciences. Oh! my friends, could I but this day be so happy, as to persuade
you to break the chain, and to abandon these insnaring companions, not merely
from prudential, but religious considerations, I should presently lead you into
a new world. Instead of being the associates of the idle, the intemperate, and
the profane, you would then converse with those who are indeed the excellent
of the earth Psalm. xvi. 3.
, and would be able to say with David, I am a companion of them that fear thee,
O Lord, and of them that keep thy precepts Psalm. cxix. 63.
. And is that a contemptible thought? What think you, if an angel were to
descend from heaven to make his abode on earth, or the Lord Jesus Christ
himself were to appear again in the infirmities of human flesh; with whom would
that angel, or that Redeemer, choose an intimate friendship, and as frequent
converse? Your own consciences tell you, that if he were ever found amongst
you, it would only be, as a physician visits an hospital, to cure others, not
to delight himself. And why should you esteem that society unworthy your
regard, which, you are sure, the Lord Jesus Christ would prefer? It is because
you imagine it gloomy and melancholy: but that imagination proceeds from
ignorance and mistake. Were you to be with them, when they are discoursing
together of the things of God, (as, through divine goodness, many of us have
been), you might frequently discern in their countenances such marks of sweet
serenity and composure, and sometimes of elevated hope, and sublime, angelic
joy, as would be an ocular demonstration of the pleasure, which a serious and
regular mind may find in such converse. And to this you might be admitted, if,
by forbearing to enter into the ways of sinners, you discover marks of a
teachable disposition. For, as Solomon declares, the ear that hears the
reproof of life, i. e. that reproof which tends to preserve life, and to make
it happy, abides among the wise Prove. iv. 31.
; and, as he chooses their company, he will readily be admitted to it.

I MIGHT add, that, on this supposition, you would also know what it is to be
good company to yourselves. Reflection, which is now your torment, would become
your pleasure. The review of a well-ordered mind, of a prudent and religious
conduct, would delight you more, than the most agreeable prospects, or
harmonious music; and instead of holding your happiness, as you now do, in a
servile dependence on the presence, nay, I may add, on the humor, of others,
even of such as are least to be depended upon, you would have it treasured up
in your own breast, and, like the good man described in scripture, would be
satisfied from yourselves Prove. xiv. ^.
.

NAY, which is still (...) more, you (...) humbly hope, through the (...) and
grace of the redeemer, that the (...) God, the (...) inexhaustible source of
happiness, would (...) light of his countenance (...) you, and (...) you
welcome into his gracious presence. (...) which St. Paul (...) in the (...) I
now mention it, when, (...) from forming any (...) pleads, that God has said,
Come out from (...) them, and be ye separate, (...) Lord (...) not the unclean
thing; and (...) will be a (...) you, (...) and (...) the Lord (...) God
forbid, that you should (...) ^ the favor and (...) of (...) be (...) of a
(...) Oh, that he would (...) you (...) of one moment; and (...): and you would
(...) th^r to (...) but th^^ and (...) but thee (...)
(...) that (...) thee; how much (...)

ONCE (...) now you (...) you will shortly (...) God above, and (...) with
(...) greatest and (...) of (...), as well a (...) (...)
noblest improvement, both in capacity, temper, and circumstances. Nor will you
there only meet your pious friends, with whom on earth you took sweet counsel
together, and perhaps went to the house of God in company Psalm. lv. 14.
; but you will form many new acquaintances with the most excellent and glorious
of created beings; you will come to the innumerable company of angels, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect; nay, you will dwell for ever with God the
judge of all, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant Heb. xii. 22, 23, 24.
. But surely you cannot expect a favorable reception into that blessed world,
or any of the preparatory felicities I have been describing, if you resolutely
adhere to foolish and wicked companions now. David would not have presumed to
pray, as he does, Gather not my soul with sinners, if he could not have said,
as in the preceding words, I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go
in with dissemblers; I have hated the congregation of evildoers, and will not
sit with the wicked Psalm. xxvi. 4, 5, 9.
. And if you think to reconcile such companions, with such enjoyments and
hopes, you delude yourselves with inconsistent dreams, in direct opposition to
the voice of reason, as well as of scripture. Give me leave, once more, to
entreat you to consider,

3. How little advantage you can receive from such society, to counterbalance
the damage you sustain, and the happiness you forfeit for it.

I AM sure it ought to be something very grand and important, for which you
grieve your friends, and provoke God; for which you cut yourselves off from the
most valuable enjoyments in this world and a better, and at length plunge
yourselves into everlasting destruction. And now show us, I entreat you, the
worthy prize; tell us what those friends are, whose company you purchase at so
dear a rate; and what important offices they can do for you, to make you amends
for all you must lose, and for all you must suffer, on their account? Poor
wretches! the most they can do, is to administer something which may gratify
your appetite, or amuse your imagination for a few transient moments. A
relishing meal, a cheerful cup, a thoughtless, noisy burst of laughter, are
some of the best things they can procure for you. And are these so great?
Surely, if it were reosonable in any case, it is peculiarly so in this, to say
of laughter, it is mad, and of mirth and luxury, what does it Eccl. ii. 2.
? It is but a poor entertainment while it lasts, which Solomon elegantly
compares to the useless momentary blaze of a few crackling thorns under a pot
Eccl. vii. 6.
: and there is a mixture of uneasiness often attending it from a view to the
consequences, which will often force itself on the mind; so that even in
laughter, the heart is sorrowful Prove. xiv. 13.
. But if the satisfaction it gave were ever so transporting, or ever so
complete, yet still it would be very contemptible, because its duration is so
short. Death is continually advancing toward you, which will very shortly
separate you from your chosen companions; and if the most beloved of them were
waiting round your bed, they could by no means deliver you from the grave, or
moderate the agonies which were bringing you thither. Even before your
trembling souls are dislodged from your bodies, your relish for their converse
will be entirely spoiled; so that you would think yourselves barbarously
insulted by them, if, in the midst of your anguish and distress, they should
offer you those entertainments which you once so fondly pursued together, and
which were the cement of your precarious and short-lived friendship. Judge then
whether those things are so highly valuable, which, in the near views of
eternity, you would behold with horror, rather than with pleasure; and whether
your most rational felicity in both worlds is to be sacrificed to such vanities
as these.

I FIRMLY believe, that, upon such reflections as these, you must be compelled,
even to your own condemnation, to confess, that, as Solomon declares, He that
follows vain persons, is void of understanding Prove. xii. 11.
. And if you are convinced of it, then let me entreat you, my dear unhappy
friends, who are entangled in this fatal snare, that, in the strength of divine
grace, you would immediately attempt an escape. It will indeed require
resolution: but, remember, it will amply reward it: and therefore determine
upon it this day, that you will go no more to their assemblies of vanity, and
of sin; and when they would entice you, consent not to them Prove. i. 10.
; but rather tell them plainly and seriously, that you know, and consider, that
your souls are at stake; and tell them, you avoid their company now, because
you dread it in hell. And who knows, but such a serious and lively admonition
from those who were once their brethren in iniquity, may do more to awaken
them, than many addresses from the pulpit? Who knows, but it may effectually
reclaim them, and be a means of forming them to such characters, as may make
their friendship as safe and as honorable, as ever it was dangerous and
infamous? At least, you will have delivered your own soul, and may comfortably
hope, that your life will be given you for a prey. With this solemn charge, as
in the name and presence of God, I dismiss you from this head, and proceed,

III. To those reflections and inferences, with which I shall conclude the
discourse.

1. IF so many evils and dangers attend the pursuit of wicked company, how
careful should parents and governors be, to keep young people out of the way of
it!

YOU see, from all I have been saying, how necessary this care is, if you
desire they should be happy in this world, or the next. It is a dreadful charge
that is brought against Eli, and a dreadful doom is pronounced upon him for it;
that his sons made themselves vile, and that he restrained them not 1 Samuel iii.
13.
. And therefore, as you love your own souls, and those of yours, endeavor,
with all possible resolution, to avoid being culpable yourselves on this
account.

AND here I would observe, that your care must begin very early, and that it
must take a great compass. You should endeavor betimes to lay in an antidote
against the future poison, by laboring to the utmost to possess their infant
minds with a sense of the divine presence, a desire of pleasing God, and a
dread of offending him. You should endeavor to inspire them with an abhorrence
of sin, and a love to the ways and people of God. Endeavor to find out
suitable company for them, and to make your own company as delightful (...) as
you can. Indulge them in such diversions, as duty and prudence will admit; for
too rigorous a restraint from th^se things makes them eager to pursue them,
wherever they are to be found. And if you see they begin to form an
acquaintance with such as you think likely to ensnare and corrupt them, first
gently warn them of it, and endeavor by the easiest methods to draw them off:
if those will not do, reason with them more largely on the head; lay before
them the various dangers they will be exposed to, and show them the instances
of those who have been injured and ruined by such company: instances, which, it
is to be feared, you will always have near at hand: and if all this be not
enough, interpose with the authority God has given you; absolutely forbid them
the place and company, and let them see, by your after-conduct, that you are in
good earnest in the prohibition. At the same time, endeavor to recommend
religion to them in the most amiable light, that they may be convinced it
carries its entertainment along with it, so that there is no need of seeking
pleasure in the paths of the destroyer. I know this is a matter of difficulty,
and requires a great deal of prudence and steadiness to conduct it aright; but
I am persuaded, if parents and masters were careful in this respect, few would
be ruined till they came to be at their own disposal, and the destruction of
multitudes would be entirely prevented. May God graciously give you wisdom to
know your duty, and faithfulness to perform it!

2. IF wicked company be so pernicious, as we have heard; then how cautious
should we be in the choice of a companion for life, if you are in such
circumstances, as to have that choice before you.

IT is evident, that, as all bad company is dangerous, so the nearer it is to
us, and the more frequent the opportunities of conversing with it, the greater
mischief will it probably do us. Those who are in the conjugal relation, should
make it their great business and care, to assist and animate each other in the
ways of God; and such is the prevalency of our sinful nature, and so many the
snares and temptations of life, that, with all possible advantages our progress
will be too slow, and too frequently interrupted. What then could you expect,
if you had those, not only in your houses, but in your arms too, from whom you
would hardly ever hear a serious word; and who would perhaps be unwilling to
give you the hearing, if you should attempt any such discourse: nay, might
possibly revile or banter you for it, and, by their impious language, and
wicked example, might greatly deaden religious sentiments in your heart, and
either prevent or frustrate your endeavors or communicating them to those
under your care? When christians of one sex or the other, choose such a
companion for life, they seem to lie under great difficulties, and will be in
imminent danger, either, on the one hand, of failing in a due affection and
regard, or on the other, of being perverted and ensnared by that very
affection, which both the duties of the relation, and the comfort of life so
evidently require. If any of you have taken this hazardous step, I have nothing
to do but to advise you, to be daily looking up to God for that extraordinary
prudence which your circumstances require. But this is such a situation, that I
cannot forbear praying, that, as for those of you who are yet single, no
considerations of beauty, wit, temper, or fortune, may ever prevail upon you to
bow your necks to so unequal a yoke.

3. How much reason have you to be thankful, if God has delivered you from the
snares of wicked company, and given you a relish for such as is good.

THINK how easily you might have been entangled and undone. Think how many, in
other respects, at least your equals in wisdom and capacity, are in this
instance making a foolish choice; and bless the Lord, who has given you counsel
Psalm. xvi. 7.
. It is his mercy, that gives you serious and useful friends, and gives you a
heart to value them. By their converse you may gain many advantages directly
opposite to the evils I have been describing. Be humbled, that you have
improved these advantages no better; and pray for the aids of divine grace,
that for the future they may be more diligently regarded. And if providence
ever lead you into the company of carnal sinners, which the most pious and
resolute cannot wholly avoid, labor that they may be something the better for
you, and you not the worse for them; and consider all the irregularities you
observe in them, as farther motives of thankfulness to God, for making a
difference betwixt them and you, and giving you company so much more amiable
than theirs. Once more,

4. Let young persons of a regular character take great heed, that they do not,
by insensible degrees, become dangerous companions to each other,

THAT social turn of mind which is natural to men, and especially to young
persons, may perhaps lead you to form yourselves into little societies,
particularly at this season of the year, to spend your evenings together. But
let me entreat you to be cautious how you spend them. If your games and your
cups take up your hours, till you entrench on the night, and, perhaps, the
morning too, you will, to be sure, quickly corrupt each other, and soon
degenerate into a club of rakes and dehauchees. Farewell then to prayer, and
every other religious exercise in secret. Farewell to all my pleasing hopes of
you, and to those hopes which your pious parents have entertained. You will
then become examples and instances of all the evils I have so largely been
describing. Plead not that these things are lawful in themselves, so are most
of those, in a certain degree, which by their abuse prove the destruction of
men's souls and bodies. If you meet, let it be for rational and christian
conversation; and let prayer and other devotions have their frequent place
amongst you. And if you say, or think, that a mixture of these will spoil the
company, it is high time for you to stop your career, and call yourselves to an
account; for it seems, by such a thought, that you are lovers of pleasure, much
more than lovers of God 2 Timothy iii. 4.
. (...) to have a tincture of (...) whether (in present circumstances N. B. The
substance of this sermon was first preached at Harborough, December 25, 1725;
and afterward at Northampton, on that day eight years.
) I could have proved myself fait^^^^ to you, and to him in whose name I speak,
if I had omitted the caution I have now been giving you. I shall only add,
that, had I loved you less tenderly, I had perhaps warned you more coldly of
this dangerous and deadly snare, May God render the admonition as successful,
as I am sure it is seasonable and necessary!

SERMON IV.
RELIGIOUS YOUTH INVITED TO EARLY COMMUNION.
ISAIAH xliv. 3 -- 5. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine offspring; and they shall spring up as among the grass, as
willows by the watercourse: one shall say, I am the Lord's; and another shall
call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand
unt^ the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel.
ON the first hearing of these words, you will easily apprehend, that they
afford abundance of very proper matter for a discourse to young people; but you
may perhaps be surprised when I tell you, that I shall take occasion from them
to address religious youth, with a large invitation to an (...) attendance on
the table of the Lord.

THIS is a surprise which I do not at all (...) to give: for to press in a
scripture to serve a purpose foreign to its original design, and to turn a mere
allusion into an argument, is, in its degree, to handle the word of God
deceitfully 2 Cor. iv. 2.
, and is indeed an injury to it, rather than an honor. So that I much fear,
that by thus attempting to make every thing of the scripture, we shall at
length come to make nothing of it: for those seemingly distant extremes
approach nearer to each other than some seem to be aware.

BUT I hope, my friends, you have learnt to judge of the pertinency of
scripture to any purpose in hand, not merely by the first ^ound of the words,
but by an attentive view of its sense and connection; and when the words I have
been reading are diligently examined, they may appear more suitable to my
design than you at first apprehended.

THOUGH God had before been reproving Israel with great severity, and setting
their sins in order before them Psalm. ^. 21.
, he intimates purposes of grace and mercy, which he yet entertained toward
them, unworthy as they were Isa. xliii. 22 -- 23.
. And, in order to prepare them for farther favors, he promises, in the words
of the text, to pour out upon them an abundant effusion of the blessed spirit.
Now we well know, by a multitude of scriptures, which I must not particularly
enumerate, that it was to be in the ^atter day, i. e. the gospel times, that
this glorious promise was most eminently to be fulfilled Compare Ezekiel. xxxvi.
25, 26. Zech. xii. 10. Joel ii. 28. Acts ii. 17. John vii. 38, 39.
.

THE blessed effects, which were to attend its accomplishment, are described in
great variety and elegance of language. They are represented by the refreshment
which water gives to him that is thirsty, and which plentiful floods of it
a^^ord to the dry ground, when scorched with the summer's heat, Accordingly, it
is said, that they, and their offspring too, should flourish in religion, like
the grass when thus abundantly refreshed, or like willows by the watercourse,
the verdure of which is so delightful, and the growth so speedy, that no more
proper emblem could have been chosen. Thus should the souls of the children
flourish, through the divine blessing, on the instructions of pious parents,
and other methods appointed by God for their religious improvement. And in the
next words the prophet uses still greater plainness of speech, to let us know
that their number should be considerable, and their resolutions for God firm
and determinate. One and another, this man and that, should come and own his
relation to God, should publicly enter himself into the engagements of his
covenant, and put in an humble claim to the important blessing it was intended
to convey. One shall say, I am the Lord's; and another shall call himself by
the name of the Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord,
and surname himself by the name of Israel.

SOME very celebrated translators and critics understand the words, which we
render. Subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, in a sense a little different
from that which our English version has given them. They would rather render
them, "Another shall write upon his hand, I am the Lord's The Hebrew is (...)
translate (...)
;" and they suppose it refers to a custom which formerly prevailed ^n the East,
of (...) the name of the general on the (...) Si^^t milites ^
, or that of the master on the slave Servi etiam olim stigma manui inustum
ferebant, ex quo ag^^s^erentur. Mercator. See Hammond, on Rev. xiii. 15.
. As this name was sometimes borne on the forehead, so at other times on the
hand; and it is certain that several scriptures, which may easily be
recollected, are to be explained as alluding to this Thus it is said, Rev.
xiii. 16, 17. That all men, -- ^^nd and free, received the mark of the beast in
their righthand, or in their foreheads; and that without it none might buy or
sell. And, in another place, we read of an angel, that had the seal of the
living God, -- to seal his servants in their foreheads, (Rev. vii. 2, 3). In
allusion to this also our Lord promises, Rev. iii. 12. I will write upon him
that overcomes, the name of my God, and my new name. On this account
christians are said to be sealed by the Spirit unto the day of redemption;
(Ephesians. iv. 30.) as by his operations God owns them as his, and secures them to
himself; and to ^his God seems to refer, in those condescending words, Isaiah
xlix. 16. I have graven Zion on the palms of my hands. See also Ezekiel. ix. 4. To
this custom some think St. Paul alludes, when (...) speaks of the marks of
Christ, which he ^are in his body, Gal. vi. 17. Potter's Gr. An^iq. Vol. ii.
page 7.
. Now from hence it seems to have grown into a custom amongst some idolatrous
nations, when solemnly devoting themselves to the service of any deity, to be
initiated into it by receiving some marks in their flesh, which might never
wear out (...) Deo asicu^ consecra^rant and ^^^^abant, (...) inurebant. P^^ise
(...). And (...) says Certis notis compung^^^^ (...): in service, etc. The
manner of doing it is described by Prudentius, (...), ^075, etc. And many
commentators suppose this (...) to be referred to Lev. xix. 28. Ye shall not
print any marks upon you. See Pool's Syno^^. (...) loc and (...) ii. cap. 14.
. This interpretation the original will certainly bear; and it here makes a
very strong and beautiful sense, since every true christian has a sacred and an
indelible character upon him which shall never be erased. But if we retain our
own version, it will come to nearly the same, and evidently refers to a
practice which was sometimes used among the Jews Neh. ix. 38. x. 29.
, and which is indeed exceeding natural, of obliging themselves to the service
of God, by setting their hand to some written articles emphatically expressing
such a resolution. So that you see it must imply, that they who were, by the
influences of divine grace, brought to a serious sense of religion, should, in
a public and solemn manner, express their subjection to God, and their
readiness to enter into covenant with him; and whatever rites should by him be
appointed as the (...) of such a resolution, the text must intimate a cheerful
compliance with them. For it would be most unreasonable to imagine that any, of
such a character, and in such circumstances, would prefer any (...) invented by
themselves, or dictated merely by human prudence, to the express ordinance and
institution of God. Now, forasmuch as it is evident, that, under the christian
dispensation, the Lord's supper is appointed to such purposes, the next must
imply an attendance upon it; and when we see young christians presenting
themselves at this holy solemnity, and joining themselves to God and his church
in it, we may properly say, they subscribe with their hand to the Lord, and
surname themselves by the name of Israel; just as we may say, in the old
testament phrase, that incense is offered, and a pure offering Mal. i. 11.
, when holy souls are pouring out their prayers and supplications before the
throne of grace, though odours and victims no longer accompany their devotions.

I HAVE surely said enough, and perhaps more than enough, to account for my
choosing these words to introduce the discourse I have in view; in which I am to
press those young persons, whose hearts God has touched by his sanctifying
grace, to subscribe, as it were, with their hand, by entering themselves early
into christian communion, and eating and drinking with our Lord at his table.
In order to which, I shall, I. PROPOSE some plain and important arguments, to
engage such to an early attendance on this sacred institution. II. ANSWER some
objections, which are most frequently urged to excuse the neglect of it: and,
III. CONCLUDE with hinting at some reflections and inferences, which seem
naturally to present themselves.


MAY divine grace render this attempt the means of leading many young persons
into a conviction of their duty and interest, and of adding unto the church
such as shall be saved Acts ii. 47.
!

I. I AM to offer some plain and important arguments to engage religious youth
to an early attendance on the supper of the Lord.

AND, before I enter on these, I must entreat you to remember, that it is to
religious youth only, that I address the invitation. I well know, my friends,
that the sacred institution I am now recommending, is a most awful and solemn
thing. I know it was intended, not only as the commemoration (...) a Redeemer's
dying love, but as a seal of our covenant engagements to God through him; so
that to attend upon it without a sincere desire of receiving Christ Jesus the
Lord and devoting ourselves to him, is a profanation that renders us, in some
degree, guilty of the body and blood of the Lord 1 Cor. xi. 27.
. I am very sensible that for any to approach it in so unworthy a manner, is
not only in itself a sinful action, but may, in its consequences, prove a snare
to their own souls, a stumbling to others, and a dishonor to the church. And
therefore, far from encouraging such persons to come, I should think it a very
necessary duty to labor to the utmost to dissuade them from it, and, if
providence gave me an opportunity, to prevent their admittance.

BU^ I have frequently found, and I believe it has been the experience of many
of my brethren in the ministry, that young persons, not only of a very sober
and regular conduct, but even those who have appeared most deeply impressed
with the concerns of their souls, and experimentally acquainted, so far as we
can judge, with regenerating grace, have, in many instances, shown a strange
coldness to this blessed institution; and we have known not a few who have
grown old in the neglect of it. I apprehend therefore, that a regard to the
authority and glory of my great master, to the comfort and improvement of your
souls, and to the edification and joy of the church in general, concur to
require, that I (...) you, my younger friends, some public admonitions on this
head; to which I now desire your very serious attention.

AND here permit me more largely to plead the weight of a dying Redeemer's
command, as well as the honor, the pleasure, and the various advantages of an
early compliance with it.

1. THE ordinance to which I now invite you, is the known command and
institution of a dying Redeemer.

I NEED not enlarge on the proof of what is so apparent. You undoubtedly know
that Matthew and Mark, and Luke, agree in giving us the history of its
institution Matt. xxvi. 26 -- 27. Mark xiv. 22 -- 24. Luke. xxii. 19, 20.
And St. Paul afterward received it by express revelation from Christ 1 Cor.
xi. 2^ and seq.
, and accordingly relates it in a very circumstantial and pathetic manner;
telling us not only that Christ commanded that this should be done in
remembrance of him, but also that, by an attendance upon it, our Lord's death
is showed forth till he come; plainly intimating thereby, (what the ends of the
ordinance do farther evince), that it was to continue in the church to its
remotest ages. So that, on the whole, you exceedingly mistake if you imagine
this to be mere matter of choice, in any other sense, than as all the duty of a
rational creature is so. Our Lord has plainly determined the matter by his own
sacred authority, leaving this ordinance in charge to all his followers. I say
to all, for there is no limitation as to the age of those that should attend
it. It is a command to young and old, as well as to rich and poor; and all,
that are capable of understanding it, are obliged to comply with it, and
thereby to do their homage to their exalted sovereign, and express their
gratitude to their most generous friend. And can you in reason refuse your
compliance? Methinks the name of the son of God should carry along with it an
authority too great to be despised, and the name of your redeemer a
constraining love too forcible to (...) withstood; especially the name of a
dying Redeemer. Surely, my friends, if a dying parent, or brother, had given
you a charge almost with his expiring breath, you could not lightly have acted
contrary to it. How much greater regard do you owe to what the blessed Jesus
appointed (as the apostle most pertinently observes (the same night in which he
was betrayed 1 Cor xi. 23.
! Had it been some hard thing that he had then enjoined, and had the reason of
it been unknown, so that it had appeared as a mere arbitrary constitution, the
neglect of it had been foolish and ungrateful. Had it been a more painful rite
than that of initiation amongst the Jews, more laborious than their frequent
journies to Jerusalem, and more costly than the sacrifices they offered there,
the precept of our dying Lord had carried in it an abundant answer to all that
ease or interest could have pleaded against it: how much more, when the reason
is so evident, and the observation, in all respects, so easy! Judge, I pray
you, whether it would be neglected. Judge, whether it be a decent thing, that
when we are sitting down to break and eat bread, and to pour forth and drink
wine, that we may represent the breaking of Christ's body, and the pouring
forth of his blood, and seal our covenant-engagements with him, more than one
half of the professing, christians in the assembly should rise, and either
leave the place, or withdraw to a distance from the holy table. What is this
but to say, We will now have nothing to do with the memorials of a crucified
Savior? Will you, my friends, thus separate yourselves from us? What if others
were to learn of you, and to imitate your example? Where would the ordinance
quickly be? Nay, where would it already have been, had this temper prevailed?
Where, but in our bibles? For there it would still have stood, to condemn our
ungrateful disobedience, as it condemns yours.

2. AN early attendance upon this ordinance will be truly honorable to you.

I WISH I could say that the omission of it were, in the repute of the
generality of professing christians, so dishonorable as it ought; but it is
now grown so common, that much of the just infamy of it is worn off.
Nevertheless, if we will seriously consider it, we must own, that where reason
and duty require any practice, (which I have already proved to be the case
here,) the more frequently it is neglected, the more honorable is a regard to
it; as it argues a laudable fortitude of mind, to oppose a prevailing evil, by
which multitudes are borne away. And who, that has any sense of generosity and
goodness, would not wish to signalize himself on such an occasion as this?

I APPEAL to your own hearts, my brethren, even when you have divested
yourselves of every sentiment of ostentation and pride, (which I would not
desire to press into the service of the sanctuary), would is not afford you a
rational and pious pleasure to reflect, that your fellow christians might say
with regard to you, These are the persons who are happily distinguished from
most of their companions, by obedience to God and gratitude to their Redeemer;
they dare stand up for the honor of his institutions, and of his name, in the
midst of all the languor, and all the impiety of a degenerate age. Far from
running with others to the same excess of riot 1 Pet. iv. 4.
, they do not only secretly retire, that they may converse with God, and devote
themselves to him, but they have the courage openly to appear in so good a
cause. Far from being ashamed of Christ, or of his words, in this adultrous and
sinful generation Mark viii. 38.
, they readily expose themselves to all the glorious reproach of a determinate
adherence to him. Thus do they publicly declare, that their hearts are touched
with a sense of his love, and inspired with resolution for his service. And as
they are thus planted in the house of the Lord Psalm. x^^i. 1^, 14.
, We hope they will flourish to old age there; so that generations, which (...)
yet unborn, shall be refreshed by their shade, and nourished by their fruit.
Thus will you, like Jabez (...) iv. 9, 10.
, he more honorable than all your brethren, if, like him, you call upon the
name of the Lord, or, in the language of the text, subscribe with your hand
unto him.

3. LET me plead the pleasure which this ordinance affords, as a farther
argument for an early attendance upon it.

IF your hearts have been touched by regenerating grace, you must surely know,
that communion with God through a mediator is unutterably delightful: and must
own, that when you enjoy it, your souls are satisfied, as with marrow and
fatness (...)
. If this be the case, I am sure you would look with an holy scorn on any
sensual gratification that could be brought in comparison with those sublime
and sacred entertainments. Now, when you consider the Lord's supper as an
ordinance of divine appointment, you have just reason to hope, that God will
honor it with his gracious presence; nay, when you consider the nature and
design of the institution, you may probably (...) some peculiar sweetness and
delight in it beyond what you have hitherto known. I say not, (...) you can be
absolutely secure of your finding it; for it becomes the sovereignty of the
ever blessed God, not to confine himself invariably to any method of operation;
le^t his agency should at length be disregarded in it, and the honor
transferred to the instrument: but I speak of what may probably be found; and I
think I might here appeal to all considerate persons, who know anything of the
workings of the human mind; for I persuade myself they would be compelled to
allow, that a regular attendance on such a solemnity has a direct tendency to
produce the most delightful sensations in a soul deeply impressed with the
great principles of our christian faith.

OH, my friends, what a scene is there opened, when, by these lively memorials
of his dying love, the Lord Jesus Christ, is evidently set forth as crucified
among us Gal. iii. 1.
! Surely the spectacle must be delightful, even to creatures who are themselves
perfectly innocent and holy! Surely the angels, who probably are present in the
churches while the solemnity is performed, must attend it with a pleasing
mixture of admiration, and of joy! "Thus," may they be ready to say to each
other thus was the great design accomplished! In such sufferings did the son of
God expire! By such surprising steps of condescension and of love, were
apostate creatures recovered to their God: thus was the ^^aming vengeance of
the divine majesty atoned! and now he is graciously smiling upon them; and
these happy souls are sitting, as around their father's board, and anticipating
the entertainments of our celestial world.

BUT the guest, who is called to sit down at such a banquet, may well be
supposed to feel some tender and transporting pleasure, beyond that of such an
angelick spectator. "These," oh my soul, may the believer say, when the bread
is broken, and the wine poured out, these were the painful sufferings, which
the blessed Redeemer endured for such a wretch as I am: for he loved me, and
gave himself for me ^al. ii. 20.
: he was wounded for my transgressions, he was bruised for mine iniquities Isa
li^i. 5.
. All these dreadful conflicts of nature did he pass through to avert from me
that weight of wrath, which would otherwise have overwhelmed me beyond all hope
of deliverance. And here are the emblems of his dying love and his living care.
Here are the precious seals of that everlasting covenant established in his
blood, which, as it is well ordered in all things, and sure, is all my
salvation, and all my desire 2 Samuel xxiii. 5.
. By these tokens does a faithful God assure me, that my sins are pardoned,
that I am admitted into his family, and entitled to all the invaluable
blessings of of his children. Delightful thought! I have nothing now to do, but
quietly to sit down, and wait with a holy sense and tranquillity of soul for the
imitations of his father's will, till he calls me to dwell in his house above.
Yet a little while, oh my soul, and thou shall rise to nobler enjoyments than
even these; for the bread thou have been eating, and the wine thou have been
drinking, are pledges of a divine banquet above, in the visible and immediate
presence of the blessed founder of the sacred feast. The security of the
covenant I have this day been sealing, will continue in full force when the
bands of nature are dissolved: if I drink no more with my Savior of this fruit
of the vine here, I shall drink it new with him in his father's kingdom Matt.
xxvi. 29.
; and therefore may encounter death in the triumphant accents of good old
Simeon Luke. ii. 29, 30.
, now, L^^^, let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation.

THROUGH the divine goodness, I hope we can say, we speak what we know John
iii. 11.
; and testify, not only what we have heard from the experience of others, but
what we have ourselves tasted and felt. Thus is God visiting and refreshing our
souls, while we are attending at the blessed ordinance; and why will you not
come and share with us in the entertainments, so sincerely and so freely
offered? is he not saying unto you, Eat, oh my friends; and drink, yea drink
abundantly, oh my beloved Cant. v. 1.
? Why then do you wrong your own souls, as well as affront his goodness, by
neglecting the invitation? Would you come th^^ early, you might promise
yourselves a peculiar welcome, and a peculiar pleasure. Many painful
reflections might by this means, be prevented, and the evidence of your
sincerity be more happily secured; not to say, that while your spirits are
brisk ^^d active, you may feel the impression of those sacred passions, which
are so suited to this occasion, with greater energy, and greater tenderness,
than could be expected under the decays of nature, in the evening of life.

I SHALL only add, that these sublime pleasures are not limited to the happy
moments which you spend in an immediate attendance on this feast of love; but
they may be renewed, and perhaps sometimes increased, by reflection? whereas
that often brings a sting along with it, more than sufficient to balance all
the sweetness to be found in irregular, sensual delights.

4. AN early attendance on the Lord's supper would be very useful, as well as
entertaining.

It may probably be useful, both to yourselves, and others I say,

(1) It might be useful to yourselves in a variety of respects.

I CONSIDER, that I am now speaking to them that look upon improvement in
religion as their highest interest; and therefore shall only endeavor to show
you, what a tendency this ordinance has to assist you therein; and that is so
evident, that I need not dwell largely on particulars, which, when suggested in
a few words, may furnish you with matter of ample meditation. I shall but
mention then the following hints.

THE preparatory exercises of devotion might be very awakening and edifying to
you. The review of your conduct, which you would be taking on the approach of
these solemn seasons; the prayers and praises you would then be addressing to
God, and the meditations in which your minds would be employed, would rouse you
out of that lethargy into which you may be ready to sink, and which the best of
men find too frequently prevailing.

THE views of a bleeding Redeemer, of a reconciled God, of a confirmed
covenant, and of a world of approaching glory, which this ordinance so
naturally exhibit, would strengthen, as well as delight, your souls; and, by
virtue of the refreshments received at these solemnities, you might be enabled
to go on your way rejoicing, and to make a sensible progress in your journey
toward the heavenly Canaan.

THE remembrance of those solemn engagements, with which you would then be
binding your souls unto the Lord, would be a ready answer in hours of future
temptations. You would start back with horror at the thought of alienating your
services from a God, to whom you had so seriously and publicly devoted them;
and of returning to th^se folli^s and ^^ns, which you had in a peculiar manner
co^^nanted against: for this would appear to be adding sacrilege and perjury to
the guilt of all your other offenses.

I SHALL only add here, that, by entering thus early into the communion of a
church, you will be brought under the more immediate inspection of the pastor
of it, and likewise of your christian brethren; whose faithful and tender
admonitions may be of great assistance to your unexperienced youth, and happily
promote your progress, both in the paths of prudence, and of holiness. Nay, the
very thoughts of having drawn upon you the eyes of a society, and of others
too, would engage you to some more than ordinary care, that you might not incur
their censure, or disappoint the expectations which many have raised of you.
And, in confirmation of all this, I cannot but observe, that many of the most
eminent christians I have ever known, were found amongst those, who in their
early days took this method of giving themselves to God and his people. -- I
might farther show you,

(2) THAT your compliance with the exhortation I am now enforcing, might be
useful to others, as well as to yourselves.

THIS is indeed, in part of consequence of the former; for, the more your own
souls are advanced in knowledge and holiness, the more capable, and the more
ready will you be, to promote the interest of Christ in the world, and to do
good to those that are round about you. But I would especially lead you to
consider, that your attendance itself, separate from these remoter consequences
of it, might probably be useful to others.

OTHER young persons would, very probably, be awakened to a sense of their duty
by your example; and those who are more advanced in years may be shamed out of
their neglect, when they see those, who are so far below them in age, getting
the start of them here. Nor have instances been wanting within the circle of
our own acquaintance, where parents have been stirred up to a holy emulation,
by the early zeal of their own children in this respect. It will be joy to all
that wish well to the cause of a Redeemer to see that God is giving him youth,
like the drops of morning-dew Psalm. cx. (...).
, and causing converts to flock to him, like doves unto their windows Isa. lx.
8.
: but ministers will have a peculiar share in the pleasure, when they see of
the travail of their soul chapter liii. 11.
, and find, that there are at least some instances, in which they do not labor
in vain, and spend their strength for naught chapter xlix. 4.
. Especially shall those of us, who are entering on the work of the Lord N. B.
This Sermon was first preached several years ago, April 14, 1725.
rejoice to meet our younger brethren at this ordinance, as it will give us
encouragement to hope, that religion will not die in our hands, and be buried
in the graves of our more aged friends; but will be supported and adorned by
you and transmitted to those that are yet unborn. The joy of our heart on this
occasion may add vigor, as well as pleasure, to our labors; and so, through
the concurrence of almighty grace, may have a tendency to render them still
more successful.

LET me then entreat and conjure you, by the authoriy of the King of glory and
of grace, and by a regard to the honor, the pleasure and the usefulness, of
your lives, that you no longer persist in the neglect of an ordinance so sacred
and noble, so delightful and advantageous.

I AM persuaded, you must know and own, that the arguments I have urged are
both evident and weighty; and yet I fear, you will find something to oppose to
them, which if it be not examined, may prevent or at least diminish their
success. I proceed therefore,

II. To obviate some objections, which may be offered in excuse for a longer
delay.

AND ^ere I shall not raise difficulties merely to canvass them, but confine
myself to such objections as I have heard some urge on this occasion; and shall
briefly suggest some hints, by way of answer to them. And if the enumeration be
not so large, or the reply so full as you could wish, you know where you will
be always welcome to propose your scruples as freely, and to state them as
amply, as you please.

1. THE most obvious reply to the preceding address is, that you fear you are
not prepared for this ordinance, and therefore apprehend, that your attendance
would prove dangerous, rather than beneficial.

TO this I answer; if the case be indeed thus, I have already told you, that
you are not the persons to whom I have been addressing. Nevertheless, give me
leave to remind you, that you ought not rashly to form such a conclusion
against yourselves. I am sure the matter requires a very attentive examination;
and perhaps, on such a review, you may find things are not so bad as you
imagine.

YOU say, you are not prepared: but I hope you know that there is a great deal
of difference between the nature and importance of an actual and habitual
preparation. It is plain, that actual preparation consist in those
extraordinary devotions, which, when opportunity permits, we should use in our
approach to this sacrament; and therefore supposes such an approach to be
determined, and consequently there can be no room, in the present case, to
object the want of that.

BUT you fear, that you are not habitually prepared, i. e. that you are not
persons of such a temper and character as Christ, the great Lord of the feast,
has invited, and will welcome to it. To determine that, consider the purposes
for which the ordinance was appointed, and observe how far your present temper
corresponds to them. It was appointed to commemorate the death of Christ, and,
in this view, all are fit for it, who regard him as the great atoning
sacrifice, and desire that their hearts may be affected, and their lives
influenced, by a sense of his dying love. It is a pledge of our mutual
affection to each other, even to all our brethren in the Lord; and in this
respect, all are prepared for it whose hearts are divested of all turbulent and
unfriendly passions, and overflow with undissembled charity and diffusive
benevolence. True, will you perhaps say; but is it not also designed as a seal
of the covenant of grace^ It certainly is; and it must be a very criminal
profanation to attend it, while an alien from that covenant: your
determination therefore must turn on the answer which conscience will make, as
to your readiness to enter yourselves into it. For if this be your prevailing
desire, and steadfast resolution, you have not only a right to the ordinance,
though it b^ a seal of the covenant; but its being appointed by Christ, in this
view, is an additional and very weighty argument for your immediate and
frequent attendance upon it. And here the question is in short this; do you
sincerely desire to make an unreserved surrender of yourselves to God, as your
owner, rul^^, and supreme felicity, with a humble dependence on the mediation
of his son, and the enlivening and sanctifying influences of his spirit? If
this be your prevailing desire, and sincere purpose, you may assure yourselves
of the kindest welcome, though your graces may be attended with a great deal of
imperfection and weakness. But if you are strangers to such a desire, I must
allow the objection in its full force, and own, that you have no business at
the table of the Lord

NEVERTHELESS I cannot part with you so. Oh my friends, is there nothing
mournful, and, I will add, is there nothing dreadful, in such a conclusion as
this? I have no business at the table of the Lord* I have no part in this
blessed repast, because I have no part in that Redeemer, whose death is
commemorated there: and therefore I am shut out, by his own appointment shut
out! and is not that a sad intimation with respect to what is yet to come? When
I enter on the invisible and eternal state, as I this night may, will he admit
me to live and reign with him in a world of glory, who would not allow me so
much as an approach to his table on earth? Oh my soul, it is too plain, thou
must be separated from his blissful presence, and driven to an eternal
distance, whence thou will behold with despairing eyes those pious souls, who
have eaten and drank with him here, sitting down with (...) his kingdom. This
will not seem a (...) then: oh that it might now be duly regarded!

FROM all this it will appear, that if this objection from an unprepared temper
be true, it ought not to be lightly passed over, but should rather be seriously
considered, and the removal of it, through divine assistance, immediately
attempted; since, till you are prepared for this sacrament, you cannot be
prepared for heaven; and consequently are in circumstances of the extremest
danger, and daily walk on the precipice of eternal ruin.

BUT I would hope, many of you, on inquiry, find this is not your character and
case. The unfitness you object will amount to no more than this; that you find
grace weak and languid in your souls, though you have reason to hope you are
not wholly destitute of it. And is this a just excuse for absenting yourselves
from so confirming and edifying, as well as so delightful an ordinance? It is
just as reasonable, as if you were to plead, I am very faint, and therefore I
will not take the most noble, reviving cordial. I am very weak, and therefore I
will refuse the most nourishing and strengthening food. Thus much for the first
objection. It is more than ^^me that I proceed to those that remain.

2. OTHERS fear, that the the society of christians, to which they would join
themselves, may be unwilling to admit them to such a relation.

Now I must own, that if this objection be made by persons who have been
notorious on account of their immoralities, and who are but lately recovered to
a sense of divine things, it will not admit of an immediate answer; nor can I
invite such to this sacred ordinance, till they give evidence of the reality of
a change in their heart, by an apparent reformation of life, and some steady
and prevalent resolution in a religious course: in the mean time, a regard to
the ho^our of a christian society may oblige the church to be a little reserved
toward such persons, and such a reserve is consistent with the greatest
tenderness toward them, and the most affectionate concern, that they may not
break the bruised reed, or quench the smoking flax Matt. xii. 20.
.

BUT as for such young persons, or others, who have been preserved from such
irregularities, whose conduct has been fair and honorable, and who have not
only arrived at a competent knowledge of the great truths of christianity, but
have for some time been impressed with them, so that they have formed a
determinate resolution for the service of God, and, it may be, for some years
made trial of his ways* far be it from us, my brethren, to say one word to
discourage your approach. On the contrary, we would rather invite it; for we
know it is most evidently reasonable, that when the spirit appears to say, Come
Rev. xxii. 17.
, the bride, i. e. the church, should echo back the call^* We know, my friends,
that we are not the maste^^ of this holy feast: we know, that it is not for us
to set bounds of our own about this sacred table, and say, "Thus low must you
bow to us, before you take your seats there." This is a conduct, which we not
only abhor, as inhumanity to you, but dread, as an insolent usurpation on the
rights of our common Lord. If you have indeed tasted that the Lord is gracious,
you will not sure be unwilling, with meekness and modesty, to give some reason
of the hope that is in you 1. Pet. iii. 15.
: and blessed be God, we have not so learned Christ Ephesians. ix. 20.
, as to make our own phrases, or forms, or any thing singular in our own
experiences, or the customs of our own society, the standard by which we judge
either of the faith, or the piety of our brethren.

3. YOU may, perhaps, farther, plead, that you fear, lest, if you should enter
into the church, you should dishonor it by an unsuitable behavior, which
might bring a reproach on religion, and its blessed author.

BUT give me leave to say, that this very fear argues such a tenderness, and
such a humility of soul, as may in a great measure answer itself. I hope you go
forth in the strength of the Lord, as well as making mention of his
righteousness alone Psalm. lxxi. 16.
: and you must know, that if a bare possibility of falling into sin were to
exclude from this ordinance, the most confirmed christian upon earth could not
dare to approach it. But while you see your own weakness, and maintain, on the
one hand, such a jealousy over yourselves, and, on the other, such a zeal for
the honor of religion, it is a certain evidence, that you are not yet left of
God, and a most comfortable sign, that he will never forsake you. Nay, I will
add that I know none more likely to prove the ornaments of a society, than
those who have such humble apprehension, lest they should prove its reproach.

4. OTHERS may be ready to excuse their absenting themselves from this
ordinance, because it is so commonly neglected by professing christians.

Now as for this, I bless God, it is far from being a singular thing amongst
us, to see the table of the Lord furnished with guests, and young christians
taking their places there. I speak it with great pleasure and thankfulness. But
suppose it were otherwise; what if the neglect of this institution were much
more common, both amongst the aged and the young, than it is in most
worshipping assemblies; could you have the heart to draw an argument from
^hence? My dearest friend, my most gracious benefactor, is generally neglected;
his dying command, his dying love, is in a great measure forgotten; and
therefore I will forget him, and I will neglect him. Say, christians, could a
generous mind reconcile itself to such a thought? Could a pious soul draw such
a consequence as this? Methinks the argument lies quite the contrary way:
therefore, oh my compassionate Savior, will I attend with the greater
solicitude, that I may, if possible, shame others out of their neglect; or at
least, may in part supply their lack of service, and bear my own testimony
against an ungrateful generation, who call themselves thy disciples, and
neglect this distinguishing badge of their profession, this garcious memorial
of thy dying love.

5. OTHERS may plead the apprehensions of aggravated guilt, and ruin, if, after
sacramental engagements, they should apostatize from God.

To this I answer, that I hope you, my friends, are not so unacquainted with
the nature of this ordinance, and the constitution of the gospel, as to imagine
that it consigns us over to certain damnation, if in any instance we afterward
deviate from the paths of our duty; for, if it were so, who then could be saved
Mat. xix. 25.
? But it is probable, your fears refer to total apostasy. If so, I readily own
that, should this be the case, it would in a dreadful degree inflame your
guilt, and aggravate your misery, that you had not only known the way of
righteousness 2 Pet. ii. 21.
, but that you had eaten and drank in the presence of the Lord Luke xiii. 26.
. But have you any thoughts of drawing back from him, that you are thus
cautious to avoid an instituted ordinance, merely because, in that ^ase, it
would aggravate your ruin? So would every prayer you offer, and every sermon
you hear; but should that thought prevent your coming to the throne of grace,
or drive you from the house of God?

NAY, to strike home; I will add, that with regard to you, my friends, the
caution comes too late. I speak of those, who have not only tasted of the good
word of God, and of the powers of the world to come Heb. vi. 5.
, but have made trial of the ways of wisdom and piety, and have had some
experience in them; and as for you, I must plainly and faithfully declare, that
it is not for you, of all people in the world, to think of gentle flames, and
tolerable damnation. No, my brethren, that hope, wretched as it is, if you
shall fall away, is unavoidably cut off from you; and all your schemes must be
for nothing less than certain salvation, and exalted glory. And (...) let (...)
you, that though (...) is always the duty of him, that thinks he (...) heed
lest he fall 1 Cor. x. 12.
; yet you have all imaginable reason to trust the promises of an everlasting
covenant, and to rely upon the great Redeemer, who has declared, that he will
give unto his sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of his hand John (...). 28.
, or be able to separate them from his love Romans viii. 39.
. If then you fear the dreadful consequences of apostasy, which would, indeed,
be dreadful beyond all your fears, keep near to him as the great shepherd; and
let those very fears rather engage you to an early and diligent attendance on
this, and every other appointed method of approach, than drive you away from
it. It is most reasonable to say, Since there are so many professors, that draw
back even to perdition Heb. x. 39.
, I will wait upon the Lord, that I may renew my strength Isa. xl. 32.
, and so be enabled to endure to the end Matthew. xxiv. 13.
, that I may receive the end of my faith in the salvation of my soul 1 Pet. i.
9.
If your fears operate thus, they may be a means of preventing the evil, of
which you are so apprehensive.

ON the whole, I hope, that when you weigh all I have been saying, and compare
it with whatever can be objected against it, you will be convinced of your
duty, and engaged to an immediate compliance with it. I have enlarged so
copiously on these things, that, in the last place.

III. I CAN only mention two or three inferences, which will naturally arise
from what I have been laying before you.

From hence we might infer, that great care ought to be taken to instruct youth
in the principles of religion; that they may not be destitute of such an
acquaintance with them, as is one necessary part of preparation for this
ordinance, though far from being alone sufficient.

WE may also infer, that more aged christians ought carefully to cultivate
serious impressions, which may be made on the minds of their children,
servants, and others of the rising generation, that they may be engaged to an
early compliance with their duty; while, on the other hand, great care ought
surely to be taken, that there be nothing rigorous and severe in the terms of
admission, which may bear hard upon that modesty and tenderness of spirit,
which is generally to be found in young christians, and most eminently in those
of the most hopeful and amiable characters.

As for those of a more advanced age, who have lived in the neglect of this
great and excellent institution, I hope they have long before this inferred the
guilt and folly of their omission, which so evidently appears from all I have
been saying, and it is attended with many other aggravations, which my time
will not now permit me to mention.

I SHALL therefore conclude with observing, that those young persons, who,
through grace, have been convinced of their duty in this instance, and brought
to an early compliance with it, have abundant reason to reflect upon it with
pleasure and thankfulness. I think it is one of the most important blessings of
my life, that there are many such in the church here; many who, through the
divine goodness, have lately been added to it. It would not be easy for me, my
dear brethren and friends, to say how great pleasure your presence and society
adds to my sacrament-days; or what a delightful prospect it gives me, not only
as to the comfort of my own more advanced age, but as to the support of
religion here, when I am no longer amongst you. I, and our more aged friends,
have reason to rejoice on this occasion; but surely you yourselves have much
greater reason. Permit me to remind you, that it will be a most proper
expression of your thankfulness, to labor with the utmost care to engage other
young persons, your brethren and companions, to come and share with you in this
feast. I hope, your own experience of the pleasure, and advantage which attends
it, may be added to the other arguments I have been pleading. As for your own
conduct, let me most affectionately entreat, and most solemnly charge you, not
only by all other arguments, but by your sacramental vows; by the eyes of God,
and of man, that are upon you; by all our expectations from you, and all your
engagements to us; that as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so you
would walk in him Col. ii. 6.
. And may almighty grace strengthen and quicken you in your progress; and crown
that fair morning, which is opening upon us in so hopeful, in so delightful a
manner, with a long, a bright, and a prosperous day! AMEN.

SERMON V.
THE ORPHAN'S HOPE.
PSALM. xxvii. 10. When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will
take me up N. B. This sermon was preached at Ashley in North-amptonshire, March
6, 1725, to some young persons, whose father, mother and sister, had all died
of the smallpox a few days before.
.
THERE are few precepts of the gospel, which will appear more easy to a humane
and a gerous mind, than that, in which we are required to weep with them that
weep Romans xii 15.
. And surely there are few circumstances of private life, which will more
readily command our mournful sympathy, than those of that afflicted family, to
the poor remains of which you will naturally, on the first hearing of these
words, direct your thoughts, and, perhaps, your eyes to. The circumstances, of
a family, which God has broken with breach upon breach Job xvi. 14.
; of those distressed children, whose father and mother have forsaken them,
almost at once; and who have since been visited with another stroke, which, if
alone, had been very grievous, and when added to such a weight of former
sorrows, is I fear, almost insupportable.

I BELIEVE all of you, who are acquainted with the case sincerely pity them,
and wish their relief; but I am under some peculiar obligations to desire and
attempt it; not only on account of my public character, but as I know the heart
of an orphan, having myself been deprived of both my parents, at an age, in
which it might reasonably be supposed a child should be most sensible of such a
loss. I cannot recollect any scripture, which was then more comfortable, as I
think none could have been more suitable to me, than this which is now before
us; and I the rather choose to insist upon it, as it will naturally lead me into
some reflections, which I hope, by the divine blessing, may be of general use.
"When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up."

As for the Psalm from whence these words are taken, we are told in the title,
that it was composed by David, but are left to conjecture to the particular
occasion of it. Dr. Patrick refers it to the latter end of his time, and to the
combat that he had with the Philistines in his declining age; when we are told,
that David waxed faint, and was in great danger of being killed by a giant, if
Abishal, the brother of Joab, had not seasonably rescued him; upon which it is
added, that his subjects swear, He should no more go out to battle, lest he
should quench the light of Israel 2 Samuel xxi. 15, 17.
. To these words David is suppposed to allude, when he says, The Lord is my
light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? -- Mine enemies come upon me to eat
up my flesh; -- and I had fainted, unless I had believed Psalm. xxvii. 1, 2, 13.
. But I am rather inclined to conjecture, that this Psalm was composed by him
in his younger years, when he was under persecution from Saul. There is not a
line in it, which does not agree with this supposition; and there are several
verses, which cannot so well be accommodated to the other; especially the 12th,
in which he represents his dangers as arising from false witnesses. Now it is
not easy to imagine, what mischief they could have done him amongst the
Philistines who opposed him in a national, rather than a personal quarrel; but
he expressly declares elsewhere, that the lying words of some treacherous
persons had exasperated Saul against him 1 Samuel, xxiv. 9.
; and complains of false tongues, in those Psalms, which are, by their title,
fixed to this period of his history Psalm. lii. (...), 3, 4. -- lvii. 4, and
^^x. 12.
. I might add, that the words of the text seem to favor this supposition; for
David does not here say, that his father and mother had already forsaken him,
but only speaks of it as what might happen. Now, as we are elsewhere told, that
when David was but a lad, his father was an old man 1 Samuel xvii. 12.
, it is very improbable, that both Jesse and his wife should have been living
at the time of this Philistine war, when David himself was grown old and feeble.

IF this argument be of weight to six the general occasion of the Psalm, it is
proable that this verse may lead us to the particular time of its composure We
are told, that when David had taken shelter at Adullam, from the violence of
Saul, and had raised a band of (...) for his defense, he conveyed his father
and mother to the king of Moab chap. xxii. 3.
, desiring that, till providence had brought his affairs to a determination,
that prince would shelter them from the fury of Saul, which might otherwise
have proved fatal to them, as it had just before done to the priests of the
Lord. Perhaps this was the pious reflection of David, about the time his
parents were to remove: When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord
will take me up. As if he should have said, Though an host of my enemies be
encamping against me, and the nation be rising in arms to oppose me; and though
I be forced to dismiss my aged parents, at a time when I have the greatest
occasion for their prudent advice, and their tender consolations; yet this my
comfort, that God is with me. He will supply what I lose in them; he will take
me up, and nourish me as his own child, when their parental tenderness can
afford me no farther support.

THE Words will naturally afford us these two plain remarks, which, with the
improvement of them, will be the foundation of the present discourse.

I. THE dearest of our relatives, and the most valuable of our friends, may
possibly forsake us. II. When good men are abandoned by their dearest friends,
they may find more in God than they have lost in them. -- When my father and my
mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.
I. The dearest of our relatives, and the most valuable of our friends, may
possibly forsake us.

YOU see David speaks of it, as at least a supportable case, with regard to
himself, that not only his followers, his companions, and his brethren, but
even his father and his mother might forsake him. All the intimacy of relation,
all the endearment of affection, could not secure him from being deserted by
them. And this may be our own ^ase; -- our friends may abandon us through their
own unkindness, -- or God may remove them by the stroke of his providence.

1. OUR dearest friends may abandon us through their own unkindness.

IT is the remarkable saying of one, who had made many serious reflections on
th^^ head Mr. Baxter.
; If you put so much confidence in any friend, as not to consider, that it is
possible he may become your enemy, you know man but little, and perhaps may be
taught to know him better to your cost. Change of circumstances, contrariety
(...) interest, our own mistakes, the misrepresentatives of others, and
sometimes mere caprice, and inconstancy of temper, render those indifferent,
and perhaps averse to each other, who were (...) united in the bonds of the
most (...) friendship. Nay, it is certain, that sometimes an immoderate and
ungoverned fondness on both sides, may not only justly provoke God to
disappoint our hopes from each other; but may prove, in its natural
consequences, an occasion of mutual disgust, and perhaps of separation. For,
when the mind (...) under this disorder, it contracts a kind of ^^^kly
peevishness, which turns every tri^^ing neglect into an offense, and every
offense into a crime; so that men find the extremes of love and hatred more
nearly connected, than they could once have believed. Sudden fear, will drive
away some friends when we are in danger; and a much meaner principle will lead
others, who, in better days, have called themselves our friends, to abandon,
and, perhaps, to censure u^, when, we are reduced to low circumstances, and so
have the greatest need of their assistance.

Seen is the vanity of human friendship. And I will add, that neither, on the
one hand, the sincerity of our affection, nor the worth of our character, nor
the (...) of our affairs; nor, on the other hand, the former appearance of
goodness in them, nor the highest obligations of gratitude; nor yet, the (...)
of blood, or alliance, can secure us from dissappointment in this tender
article. David and Job under the Old Testament, and Paul, and even his blessed
master, under the N^w, though all such excellent persons, were forsaken, and in
several respects injured by their friends* nay I may say, as to most of them,
by pious friends too. Such treatment therefore may we meat with from ours, even
from those to whom we are related in the bonds of nature as well as affection.
-- What union can be more strict and (...), than that of marriage? Yet you
know, Job complains, while he was in circumstances which might have drawn tears
from the eyes of a stranger, that his wi^e seemed to have forgot, not only the
tenderness of her sex, and the intimacy of her relation, but even all sense of
common humanity toward him: My breath, says he, is strange to my wife, though
I entreated her for the children's sake of mine own body Job. xix. 17.
. -- From whom could we expect greater tenderness, than from parents to their
children, especially from mothers to their ins^^nt offspring? Yet God expressly
declares, what h^s indeed been seen in some amazing instances, that (...) may
fail. Can a woman forg^t her sucking child, that she should not have compassion
on the child of her womb? The little tender creature that she has borne in her
body, that she has been used to lay in her bosom; the poor innocent, that never
offended her, that has all his dependence upon her; whom nature would therefore
prompt her most resolutely to defend, most tenderly to cherish; can she forget
it? Yea, they may forget, faith the Lord Isa. xlix. 15.
. This strange case may happen; it may happen in repeated instances. -- Thus
may our dearest friends, and even our parents themselves, abandon us through
their own unkindness. But be they ever so constant and affectionate, it is
certain,

2. THEY may be taken away from us by the stroke of divine providence.

WHILST we are in the most delightful manner conversing with our friends, God
may bring us into such circumstances, that we shall see ourselves obliged in
duty to quit the dearest of them, possibly even contrary to their judgment and
advice, as well as their importunate entreaties; or they may see themselves
obliged, on the same principles, to quit us; so that we may seldom have the
opportunity of seeing each other, and enjoying the pleasure of mutual converse.

BUT the severest trial is, when God sees fit to remove them by death. When
that awful messenger gives the summons, we must part, though ever so desirous
of continuing together. None can by any means deliver his brother from going
down to the grave, nor give to God a ransom for him Psalm. xlix. 7, 8.
, though he should offer his own life under that view. Our fathers, where are
they Zech. (...) 5.
? And I may add, where are many of our brethren of the same age, and once in
the same stations of life with ourselves? What multitudes of them are already
removed by death! Perhaps, more than are left behind. We have followed them to
the grave, we have left them in the dust, and their places that knew them, know
them no more Job vii. 10.
. And if we are not quickly taken ourselves, we must expect, that our breaches
will soon be multiplied upon us; and that nothing will remain of those dear
creatures, whom we now behold with tenderness, and with transport, but a
mournful remembrance that we once enjoyed them, and a despair of recovering
them again, till we meet in the eternal world.

I WILL only add one very obvious reflection upon this head, and then proceed
to the next.

MAY the dearest of our friends so soon forsake us? Then how careful should we
be, that we do not value them too highly, and love them too fondly?

WE find in scripture, that the inconstancy, and the mortality of human nature,
are each of them urged as an argument against trusting in man. Thus we are
cautioned to take heed every one of his neighbor, and trust not in any
brother; for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk
with slanders Jer. ix. 4.
. And elsewhere we are bid to cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils;
for wherein is he to be accounted of Isa. ii. 22.
? And how indeed can we reckon on any thing as certain, which is suspended on
so uncertain a life? The words of Solomon are applicable to friends, as well as
to riches, when he says, Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for
they make themselves wings, and flee away; often swiftly and irrecoverably, as
an eagle toward heaven Prove. xxiii. 5.
. To set them up as idols therefore, in the place of God, is the readiest way
to provoke him to remove or i^bitter them: and then our own iniquity in this
respect, will correct us Jer. ii. 19.
. Our confident expectation from them will increase our perplexity and our
shame, if they should ^orsake us through their own unkindness; our excessive
fondness for them will add new pangs to the agonies of a last separation. One
way, or other, they will prove broken reeds, that will not only fail and sink
under us, but will go into our hand, and pi^rce it Isa. xxxvi. (...).
with a wound, which will be deep and painful, in proportion to the stress with
which we have (...) upon them. On the whole, then, let us love our friends
heartily, but let us love them cautiously, as changeable, and as mortal
creatures: and, from a conviction that it is possible they may forsake (...)
let us make it our greatest care to secure an interest in such consolations, as
may be a support to us when they do. Which leads me to the second observation:

II. THAT when good m^n are abandoned by their dearest friends, they may find
more in God than they have lost in them.

So David, in the text, declares his assurance, that when his father and his
mother (...) him, then the Lord (...) take him up; i. e. would approve himself
a friend and a father to him. And if we (...) indeed, we may promise ourselves,
all that tenderness and (...) him, which David, and other saints (...) old,
expected and found. He has said to every one of us, I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee ((...); and for our peculiar ^^pport under the loss of the
dearest and most useful relatives, he has more particularly added, it father of
the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation Psalm.
lx^iii. 5.
.

WHEN our friends are dead, we are generally more sensible of their value than
we were before: but let the tenderest heart, under the immediate impression of
this severe calamity, set itself to paint the character of a departed friend in
all its most amiable colors; let it reckon up all the advantages, which
fondness could have taught it to hope for; and I will answer for it, that all
this, and a great deal more, is to be found in God. Let the dejected orphan,
that is even now weeping over the dust of a parent, yea, of both its parents,
say, what these parents, in the greatest supposable advantages of character and
circumstance, could have done for its support, and its consolation; and the
complaints of the most pathetic sorrow shall suggest thoughts which may serve,
in a great measure, to answer themselves, and to engage the mind joyfully to
acquiesce in the divine care, though deserted by the best of parents, or any
other friends, however hopeful or useful.

"ALAS," will a dutiful and affectionate child be ready to say, in such a
circumstance, do you ask what my parents were? They were my dearest, my
kindest, my most valuable friends: -- Their counsels guided me; -- their care
protected me; their daily converse was the joy of my life; -- their tender
condolence revived me under my sorrows; -- their liberal bounty supplied my
necessities. Is it to be inquired, what they were? Say rather, what were they
not? And now they are gone, where must I seek such friends? And how justly may
I say, that my dearest comforts and hopes lie buried with their precious
remains?

LET us more particularly survey each of these thoughts, and consider, with how
much greater advantage each of these particulars is to be found in the paternal
care and favor of God.

1. COULD your parents have advised you in difficulties and perplexities? God
is much more able to do it.

YOU will perhaps say, Our poor giddy unpractised minds have been hurried with
a variety of schemes and projects, and we have soon found ourselves bewildered
and lost: but then it has been the greatest pleasure to us to apply to our
parents, from whose more advanced age, and riper experience, we might well hope
for considerable assistance. We were sure they would (...) upbraid our
ignorance, or despise us for our weakness; but would give us their best advice,
with endearing tenderness, and a cordial concern for our welfare. I allow, my
friends, that if they were wise and good, (which we now suppose,) they were
valuable counselors indeed; and that it was your duty, and your happiness, to
use them as such while living, and to use them as such now they are no more.
Yet were they ever so prudent, you must still acknowledge they were fallible
creatures. They could only form probable conjectures concerning the future
consequences of things; and as those conjectures were always precarious, so, no
doubt, they were sometimes erroneous; and you were, perhaps, in some instances,
misled by their mistaken apprehensions. But the only wise God knows the end
from the beginning; his views of the most distant futurities are not
conjectural, but certain; and his wisdom is far more superior to that of the
most sagacious and experienced mortal, than the wisdom of such a mortal can be
superior to that of an infant. It is he that teaches man knowledge Psalm. xciv.
10.
, in whatever degree he possesses it. He instructed our parents, that they
might instruct us; and he has expressly promised his direction to all those
that humbly seek it. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he
teach his way Psalm. xxv. 9.
. You may therefore, according to his own instruction and command, cry unto
him, My father, thou art the guide of my youth Jer. iii. 4.
; and you will find him such a guide, as can give wisdom to the simple, and to
the young man knowledge and discretion. Prove. i. 4.
.

2. COULD your earthly parents have protected you from injuries? God is much
more able to do it.

NATURE has implanted even in irrational animals, such a regard to the safety
of their offspring, that many of the most weak and timorous of them become
strangely courageous in their defense. The little bird, that will at other
times sly from every noise and every motion, will hover over her young, when
they are assaulted with danger; and, rather than she will forsake them, will
share in their ruin. It is easy to perceive the spirit of parents, naturally
rise on the least injury that is offered to their children, even sometimes when
it is only accidental, and undesigned; and all the professed enemies of their
children, they of course reckon to be their own. Nor do they only watch over
them in their infancy and childhood, to defend them from the many dangers which
surround those tender days; but in more advanced years, they are ready to use
all their power and their influence, to shelter them from the unworthy usage
which they might otherwise expect from an ill natured world: and I own, it is a
very melancholy thing for young people to lose such, a guard, at a time when
they are most exposed.

BUT surely the defense of the Almighty must be a much juster and nobler
confidence. It is amazing to observe, in how condescending a manner he
expresses his care for the protection of his people. In one place, he says, He
that touches you, touches the apple of his eye Zech. ii. 8.
; and elsewhere, He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings
shall thou trust Psalm. xci. 4.
; i. e. he shall defend thee, as the bird shelters her little helpless brood,
from the assault of any thing that would injure or destroy them. And could we
desire a better guard? There are many seasons, when our earthly parents must of
necessity be separated from us; and a thousand calamities might overtake and
destroy us, even in their presence, while they stood by helpless and amazed:
but God is always with his children, and as there is no danger of ours unseen
by him, there can be none, from which he is not able to deliver us. When David
was forsaken by his father and mother, and surrounded with a whole army of
inhuman enemies, he speaks of this as his comfort, The Lord is my light, and my
salvation: whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life: of whom
shall I be afraid? Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not
fear; though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident Psalm.
xxvii. i. 3.
: for in his help I shall be safe, though I stood single against united legions.

3. DID you hope for agreeable entertainment in the company of our earthly
parents? You may expect far nobler pleasure in conversing with God.

I ACKNOWLEDGE there is something peculiarly delightful in the company of a
wise, a pious, and an indulgent parent; and I doubt not, but many of us can
easily recollect it. Even in our infant-days, when we were fondly prattling to
them, we, perhaps, often saw smiles of complacency (...) on their cheeks, and
even tears of tenderness and pleasure rising in their eyes; especially if, with
the dawnings of reason, they discovered in our minds, any early impressions of
religion: we can perhaps recollect the condescending air with which they talked
to us, and the kind caresses which they intermingled with their discourse. And
as he grew up to a ^iper understanding, we were still more charmed with the
company of such parents. We had not only the manly pleasure of rational
converse, but there was a mixture of reverence and of gratitude in our hearts,
which much increased the delight. We were assured of their candor toward
their children, and their prejudice in favor of what we might say; and that
inspired us with spirit and cheerfulness. We were encouraged to attempt to
please them, because we concluded we might easily do it* and the sense we had
of the superiority on their parts, made every expression of their kindness so
much the more sweet and obliging.

THE loss of such conversation is indeed to b^ greatly lamented, and it would
argue a strange mixture of stupidity and inhumanity to be unaffected with it.
But still remember, that though your parents are gone, you are not left
entirely (...) for, not to mention other surviving friends, your heavenly
father is with you, if it be your prevailing desire still to be with him.
Though your father and your mother be removed, and you can no longer go to
them, unless it ^e to (...) over their grave, and to mingle your tears with
their (...); yet you may go to God, and with pleasure pour out your (...)
before him. And what you find in him, may give a more transporting exercise to
those sweet affections which added a relish to the conversation of your earthly
parents. The first imperfect accents of prayer and praise will be a pleasing
offering to him. Great and glorious as he is, he will bow down an indulgent
ear, through Jesus, your dear elder brother; he will smile upon your souls, and
allow you a holy freedom in all the endearments of ^^lial converse.

YOUR earthly parents were not always at leisure, nor always in temper to
receive your visits; but wherever you are, and whatever you are doing, God's
gracious eye is always (...) children; (...) indulgent ^ar is always open to
their addresses. You may come and tell him how heartily you love him, how
affectionate a sense you have of his favors, how sincerely you are (...) for
his interest in the w^^ld, and how earnestly (...) to advance it* how (...) you
are sati^fied with his (...) care, and (...) to his wi^e and (...). Our Lord
intimates* (...) with God, (...) he (...).

4. (...) (...)
(...)
may you expect from God, if you apply to him under the character of a father.

IT is natural for a child, when any thing grieves it, to go to its parents,
and complain to them; and if they cannot redress the grievance, at least they
will be ready to condole it. Now we are expressly told in the word of God,
that, like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear
him Psalm. (...)
: And how much more valuable are the companions of a God, than those of our
earthly parents could possibly have been! In many (...) theirs was only a
mourning pity, and all that they could often do for our relief, was to sit down
and weep over us; to afflict themselves with us; and to give us their company
in distress: but the compassions of an almighty God can redress the grievances
which he commiserates. Be our afflictions ever so many, or ever so great; in
sickness and in pain; in the agonies of conscience, or the agonies of death;
when parents and other friends are but miserable comforters (...)
, he alone can support the soul; can s^^th it into serenity and peace; and can
exalt it to the most triumphant joy.

5. Could your earthly parents have supplied your wants, (...) have made
provision for your future (...)? God is infinitely more able, and ready to do
it for his children.

IN our years of infancy, though we had hardly any thing we could call (...),
we (...) in this, that our parents ^ould (...) and sometimes the circumstances
(...) such, that their (...) is almost all (...) can wonder, that it is
considered as a great (...) of the loss. But surely, when God proclaims himself
a father to the fatherless psalm. lxviii. 5.
, he intends to suggest some encouragement to such helpless orphans as these;
and it becomes them to take the comfort of it.

EARTHLY parents may sometimes be so indigent that they cannot, and sometimes
so unkind that they will not, relieve their children, at least in such a
proportion as their necessities require. But the most high God is the possessor
of heaven and earth Genesis xiv. 1^.
, and his goodness is as extensive as his dominion; we may therefore conclude,
that he will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish. Prove. x. 3.
. There is not one parent in ten thousand so unnatural, as that he could stand
by, and see his child perish for hunger, while it was in the power of his hand
to relieve him. Now our Lord has taught us to argue thus, if ye, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
heavenly father give good things unto them that ask him Mat. vii. 11.
?

God has the estates, and the hearts of all in his hands; and therefore can,
with the utmost ease, raise up friends to us in the most abandoned
circumstances, who shall act the part of parents to us, and do more for us than
they could have done. And it is farther to be remembered, that the bounties of
God are far more excellent, than those of any mortal friend could possibly be.
Their bounty, be it ever so great, cannot reach beyond the grave; but it is our
father's good pleasure to give us a kingdom Luke xii. 32.
, incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fad^th not away I Pet. i. 4.
: in the believing, though distant views of which, we are rich amidst the
extremest poverty, and happy in the most miserable circumstances that can be
consistent with such a hope.

You see then, on the whole, how much more the good man may find in God, than
he can possibly lose in the most valuable earthly parents.

IT only remains that I conclude the discourse with a few reflections of this
second observation.

1. LET us thankfully acknowledge the gracious provision which God has made to
support his people under the loss of parents and friends.

WE should bless his name, that he does not leave us to sink under the burden;
or at best to collect some uncertain comfort from the precarious conclusions of
our unassisted reason; but that, through the blood and righteousness of his
son, he has given his plain and express promise for the encouragement of such
inconsiderable and undeserving creatures.

YOU, whose parents are living, ought to be thankful, that God has provided
such reviving cordials for you against the mournful time when they may be taken
away.

AND we, who have lost our parents, and have found relief in our extremities,
from such declarations as these, should recollect it with pleasure, and often
repeat our songs of grateful acknowledgement.

AND I will farther add, we ought not only to rejoice and to be thankful on our
own account, but also on account of those afflicted friends who may receive
support from such strong consolations. We pity children that have lost their
parents, and it is delightful to see other generous persons rising up to take
care of the orphans, and in some respect to make up their loss. But how much
more delightful it should be to us, to hear an Almighty God proclaiming himself
as their great guardian, and saying, that when their father and their mother
forsake them, he will graciously take them up. How should we rejoice, that when
we set ourselves to comfort and encourage them, we cannot only advance our own
conjuctures, but can thus speak to them in the language of God himself. And
indeed this reflection may be applied to all the other promises. We ought to
rejoice, that our pious friends have an interest in them, and that God has
consulted their support and consolation, as well as our own.

And surely, when we are reflecting upon such a promise as this, our
affectionate thoughts and praises should arise to him, in whom all the promises
of God are Yea and Amen 2 Cor. i 20.
. It is natural to say whence is it that thou, the holy majesty of heaven, wilt
appear under such endearing and tender characters to sinful mortals! that thou will speak of taking them up! of bestowing one gracious look upon them, and
much more of extending an arm of mercy to raise them from that helpless
condition, in which they naturally lie, like abandoned outcasts! Whence is it
that thou will take them into thy family now, and into thy kingdom at last?
(for all this is intimated in this expression). "Lord," may each of us say, I
humbly ascribe it to the riches of thy gospel grace. I would declare it to the
everlasting honor of Jesus thy son, that it is through him we have received
the adoption.

2. WHAT an engagement should this be to young persons, to ende^vour to secure
an interest in God through Christ*

YOU must own the consolations, which I have now been representing, to be far
from being small Job xv. 11.
; and surely, when you consider how soon the best of your mortal friends may
fail, you cannot but wish for an interest in them: but you wish it in vain,
unless you seek it in the gospel way; unless you deliberately and resolutely
choose God for your father in Christ, and devote yourselves to them in the bonds
of an everlasting covenant. If you refuse this, you have reason to regard hi^
under the character of an enemy; and to fear, that when he removes your
friends, it is in judgment that he visits you with such a blow. Your hearts may
justly meditate terror, if this be the ^ase; especially when your pious parents
are taken away. You are then deprived of their prayers, their exhortations,
their advices, and their examples; and to seem to be thrown farther out of the
way of repentance and reformation. And let me add, that if almighty grace does
not prevent it, the trouble which you now feel, in being separated from such
dear relations while you continue on earth, will be the smallest part of your
unhappiness; for you must finally be separated, not only from all the most
valuable persons you have ever known here, but, which is infinitely more, from
the presence of the blessed God himself; must fall unpitied victims of the
divine justice, and be delivered over to dwell with your father the devil whose
works you have chosen to do John viii. 44.
. And oh! how unutterably dreadful is it to think, that in the awful day, when
this sentence is to be pronounced and executed upon you, there will not be one
friend to plead in your favor! That though your pious parents be then present,
yet, in a most terrible sense, father and mother will then forsake you indeed;
and, instead of interposing their entreaties for you, will applaud the
righteous vengeance that dooms you as obstinate rebels to eternal death; to
those abodes of distinguished misery which are prepared for such as have broke
through all the peculiar advantages which will then be found chargeable to your
account.

3. LET what I have been saying be considered by parents, as an encouragement
cheerfully to leave their religious children in the hands of God, when
providence shall see fit to make the separation.

WHEN, through the riches of gospel grace, a christian parent sees his own
eternal concerns so safe in a Redeemer's hands, that he can say, with respect
to them, I desire to depart Phil. i. 23.
; yet sometimes he feels reluctance mingling itself with the holy desire, when
he considers that he must leave his dear children behind him; perhaps in a
destitute, and always, if they be very young, in a hazardous condition. And
this thought presses with peculiar weight on the minds of those who have lost
the companions of their lives; as, upon their decease, their children will
become entirely orphans. But may it not revive you, to hear, that God will be
their guardian, if they be willing to choose him as such? Surely you may be
abundantly satisfied with his care. Alas! what were you yourselves, with all
your parental tenderness, but instruments which God made use of for conveying
some few of his favors to them? And cannot he do that by others which he has
long been doing by you? Distrust not his power or his faithfulness; but turn
all your anxious care about future events, into a religious concern to do your
duty to your children, and, by all the most prudent and affectionate methods of
address, to lead them into the early knowledge of God in Christ; that so,
through the mercies of an everlasting covenant, they may stand entitled to the
special protection of an heavenly father, who can never be separated from them;
and who, as he is never unable, will never prove unwilling to help them. Once
more;

4. LET distressed orphans have an immediate and frequent recourse to such
supporting considerations as these; --

Do not allow yourselves to suspect the truth of these exceeding great and
precious promises (...) Pet. i. 4.
, which have now been set before you; and, for your father encouragement,
consider in how many instances they have been confirmed by experience.

THERE are, my friends, I am sure there are, those amongst us this day, who can
set their seal to the truth of what has now been spoken; and can say, in the
language of the text, that when our father and our mother did both of them
forsake us, then the Lord actually took us up, and proved a most gracious
parent to us. He supplied the breaches that he had made, and by a train of
providence, which we cannot but admire in the review, raised up other friends
for us; and, it may be, inspired almost with the tenderness of parents,
persons, who were ever unknown to us, when the last of our parents was taken
away. Nay, perhaps, some of us may say, that the death of a valuable parent,
which we feared would be our ruin, has proved, in some of its then unthought of
consequences, on the whole, a very great mercy to us.

LET such reflections as these encourage you, my young friends, for whose
admonition and consolation this discourse was peculiarly intended, to hope,
that as your afflictions are the same, your consolations will also be the same.
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid John xiv. 27.
. Your father and mother are dead, but your heavenly father can never die. I
would willingly hope, that it has been your early care to secure an interest in
him; and I would solemnly char^^ it upon you, as you value your present peace
or your eternal happiness, that it be the great business of your life to keep
close to him; and then you may assure yourselves with the most cheerful
confidence, that he will never fail nor forsake you Deuteronomy. xxxi. 8.
.

IF therefore your hearts are almost overwhelmed within you, in the melancholy
circumstances into which his providence has brought you, fly into his presence,
prostrat yourselves before him with humble importunity, and turn your tears of
sorrow into tears of devotion.

"BEHOLD, Oh most compassionate father," may you reasonably and confidently
say, Behold thou have plunged me even into the depths of distress; but blessed
be thy name, thou have not left me to sink in them, without any support. I have
this day received some kind assurances from thy word, and I now entreat thee to
remember that word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope
Psalm. cxix. ^^.
. My father and my mother have forsaken me: Lord, will thou not take me up?
Will thou indeed abandon me? Will thou add affliction to the afflicted? The
insupportable affliction of seeing myself deserted by thee, when I most
evidently need thy succor? That be far from thee, Oh Lord! and be the unworthy
suspicion far from me! -- I have lost my most prudent and faithful counselors,
but I look unto thee, as the guide of my youth* -- I have lost those who were
once my guardians and protectors; but I am come to take shelter under the
shadow of thy wings. Their eyes are closed, and their mouths are sealed up in
death: no longer can they look with compassion on my sorrows; no longer can
their converse cheer or delight me. Oh! may thy compassionate eye regard me,
and thy comforts delight my soul! Permit me, oh God! an humble freedom in
approaching to thee, and in pouring forth all my heart in thy presence. My
parents are now returned naked to their dust, and, should my wants be ever so
pressing, are now incapable of showing me any relief. May thy rich bounty
supply me, thy unwearied providence take care of me! But, above all, withold
not thy covenant blessings, and let me share in that eternal inheritance which
thou have prepared for all thy children in Christ.

IF these be the daily breathings of your souls before him, you have abundant
reason to hope, that he will return an answer of peace. In all your
difficulties be will wisely direct you; in all your sorrows he will
compassionately relieve you; in all your dangers he will powerfully protect
you; in all your wants he will bountifully supply you; in a word, you will be
conducted safely, and I hope, notwithstanding this gloomy prospect, you will be
conducted comfortably, through this mortal life, till you come at length to
your father's house in peace (...).
. And when you are arrived thither, and take a view of all the various
occurrences of the way, you will see (...) reason to acknowledge, what is now
so difficult to believe, that the present awful dispensation was sent with a
gracious design, and that all the paths of your heavenly father have been mercy
and truth to you Psalm. xxv. 10.
. Amen.

SERMON VI.
THE REFLECTIONS OF A PIOUS PARENT ON THE DEATH OF A WICKED CHILD CONSIDERED
AND IMPROVED.
2 SAMUEL xviii. 33. And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over
the gate, and wept; and as he went, thus ^e said; O my son Absalom, my son, my
son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!
AS the providence of God calls me this day particularly to address myself to
young persons, so the words I have been reading suggest some (...) awful
thoughts, which are well suited to such an occasion. And there is one
circumstance relating to this discourse which I cannot forbear ment^o^^ng to
you, because I hope it may be a means ^f enga^ing a more than common attention
to it, from the auditory to which I am now speaking N B. This sermon was
preached at Ki^worth in (...) beginning of the year 1^2^* about (...) death of
the Rev. Mr. John (...) minister ^here, and was author of (...) on Preaching
Christ, and Experimental (...) met with such great accept (...) home and (...).
.

IT is this: The substance of the sermon, which I am now to deliver, was drawn
up some time ago, at the desire of your late reverend and worthy pastor Mr.
Jennings, and preached to a society of young persons then under his charge i.
e. (...) Hinckley, May 7, 1723.
. The text was (...) by him; and his tender and obliging care to assist his
pupils in their first labors, engaged him to draw the plan of the discourse,
and to furnish me with several of the most important thoughts, which I am now
to offer.

So that, I think, I may properly say, that though your eyes will no more see
him, nor your ^ars any (...) his persuasive voice, which has so frequently, and
so affectionately, addressed you from this place, yet this day by me, he being
dead, yet speaks Heb. xi. 4.
, speaks to you, young persons; to many of whom, I ^ea^, he has often spoken
in vain. Let me, therefore, solemnly charge you, by your veneration for the
memory of so excellent a friend, as well as by the authority of God, and the
importance of your eternal interests, that you give these things a ^^ligent
hearing, a serious recollection, and a religious regard. And, indeed, if such a
subject, introduced by such a circumstance, will not command them all. I can
have very little hopes of impressing you by what I may say in the course of my
ordinary ministry amongst you.

THE words of the text are the pathetic lamentation of good old David, on the
death of Absalom; a favorite, but wicked son. His pious father had no doubt
given him a religious education; and it is very probable, that, considering the
remarkable beauty and gracefulness of his person, he was ready to hope, tha^ he
would be endowed with virtuous and holy dispositions of soul, the corresponding
beauties of the mind. But these hopes were dreadfully disappointed; for the
darling, the beautiful Absalom, proved a murderer and a rebel; he went in unto
his father's concubines, in the sight of all Israel 2 Samuel xvi. 22.
, and openly attempted to take away the life of him, from whom his own was
derived, and by whose indulgence it had been spared, even when forfeited to
justice. Yet nevertheless David had such paternal tenderness, as, under all
these crying provocations, expressly to order the generals of his army, to deal
gently with the young man Absalom, for his sake 2 Samuel xviii. 5.
. But the righteous vengeance of God determined it otherwise, and, not
withstanding all his father's fond precautions, brought him down to the grave
with infamy and blood. He was snatched away by a violent and very terrible
death, in the prime of his days, and the very act of his sin; and this was the
occasion of those moving words, O my son, Absalom, my son, my son, Absalom!
Would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!

WE may charitably, and I think very reasonably suppose, that they are not only
the expressions of David's natural affection, on the death of a son whom he
tenderly loved; but that they arose from the views of that state on which he
entered by death, which must certainly be very dreadful; so dreadful, that
David, whose eternal interests were secure^^y the promises of an everlasting
covenant, would have been willing even by his own death to have delivered him
from such complete and such hopeless ruin.

IT will be my business from these words.

I. To consider the reflections which may naturally arise in the mind of a
pious parent on the death of a wicked child. And, II. To draw some inferences
from such a survey. Oh! that all, and especially the degenerate children of
religious parents, would attend with a becoming seriousness!
I. I am to consider the reflections which may naturally arise in the mind of a
pious parent, on the death of a wicked child.

I CANNOT pretend to enumerate them all, or to describe them in such pathetick
language as a bleeding heart will speak itself on so bad an occasion; but
probably the chief of them may be such as these;

1. A PIOUS parent will reflect on such an occasion, that his expectations from
his child have been sadly disappointed in the past course of its life.

PARENTS are apt to flatter themselves with fond hopes from their
infant-offspring; they look upon them as the blossoms of future delight and
support. They comfort themselves under the other burdens of life, and the
additional cares and labors which a growing family brings upon them, by
looking forward to future years, and anticipating the pleasures hereafter to
arise from the duty, gratitude, and usefulness of their children. But alas!
will the good may say, Could I have seen what this poor creature would have
proved instead of rejoicing in his birth, I should have mourned over it as a
calamity to me and my family. I promised myself other things. My heart trembled
for him in the various dangers of infancy and childhood. I congratulated myself
on his arrival at a more confirmed age. But when I looked that this pleasant
plant should have brought forth grapes, behold it brought forth wild grapes
Isa. v. 4.
. Well did Solomon say, A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness
to her that bear him Prove. xvii. 25.
So, alas, have we found. Oh! how often has our authority been affronted, and
our love slighted, for a mere trifle? Or when he was treating us better, what a
thorn has it been it our very hearts, to think that our child was in a state of
spiritual death, and on the borders of that eternal ruin, into which we have
reason to fear he is now fallen. So that with regard to what is past, we have
cause to say, Blessed, in comparison of us, are the barren, that never bare,
and the breasts that never gave suck Luke xxiii. 29.
. These thoughts will be aggravated, when, in the next place,

2. THE pious parent reflects with concern on fruitless pains he has taken for
the reformation and conversion of his child.

"He that searches my heart," will the christian say, is witness, that next to
its concern for my own salvation, it knows not a more affectionate wish than
this, that Christ might be formed in the soul of my children Gal. iv. 19.
. That how little soever of this world I could give them, they might be the
children of God, and the heirs of glory. And with relation to this unhappy
creature, I was not entirely wanting in such endeavors as lay in my power.
What knowledge in the things of God I myself had, I was willing to communicate
to him: I urged them seriously upon him; I frequently reminded him of them;
and, to supply the defects of my personal instructions, I put the book of God
into his hands, and engaged him in an early and constant attendance on public
ordinances. When I saw him wandering in the paths of folly and sin, I
endeavored to convince him of the fatal consequences of such courses, and in
the most affectionate manner to dissuade him from them. I have again and again
urged him to pray for himself; and I have frequently been praying for him. I
have desired that he might be remembered in our worshipping assemblies; I have
borne him on my heart before God in the family and the closet, and God alone
knows with what overflowing tenderness. How importunately have I pleaded, and
how unwilling have I been to take any denial! But alas! all my prayers and my
tears have been like water on the ground; and in all the endeavors I have been
using for his conversion and salvation, I have been laboring in vain, and
spending my time and my strength for naught Isa. xlix. 4.
. Nay, as to him it has proved worse than in vain; for every instruction, and
every correction, every reproof, and every prayer, has aggravated his guilt,
and increased his misery; so that on the whole, while I thought I was acting
the kindest and most affectionate part, I was only treasuring up for my child
aggravated wrath and damnation. But this leads me to add,

3. THAT the pious parent, on such an occasion, cannot but deeply reflect on
that state of everlasting ruin, into which he has reason to fear that his child
is fallen.

"Oh!" will the afflicted christian say, how comparatively light would my
sorrows be, if, while I am looking on the breathless corpse, and mourning the
disappointment of my hopes as to the present life, I could by faith look
forward to a world of glory, and see the branch of my family which is cut off
from earth, transplanted thither, and flourishing there: joy would then mingle
itself with my parental sorrows, and praises with my tears. But alas! I have
reason to apprehend, it was cut down, that it might be cast into the burnings.
On the former supposition I might have comforted myself with the thought of
meeting my child again, of meeting him on terms of infinite advantage, no more
to be separated from him. But now alas! I have not only lost my child for a
while, but I have lost him for ever; for the unhappy creature died a stranger
to God and Christ, and therefore what can I imagine, but that he is fallen into
the hands of divine vengeance? Overwhelming thought! while he lived, my bowels
yearned for him when he was under any affliction; when I saw him struggling
with illness and pain, I pitied him, and I wept over him. Oh, how can I bear to
think, that he is now tormented in that flame Luke xvi. 24.
, and that God is pouring forth on him the vials of his wrath! Oh! that the
blood of the parent could redeem the soul of the child, how willingly, how
gladly, would I part with it! -- O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom!
Would to God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son! But once more,

4. THE pious parent cannot but be much distressed in such a circumstance as
this, at the thoughts of meeting his child at the tribunal of Christ.

"IT would be mournful," may the good man say, to think that I should see him
no more; yet, as the matter now stands, even that would be some alleviation of
my distress: but the immutable decrees of God forbid it. I know, that when all
the dead, small and great, stand before his throne Rev. xx. 1^.
, I and my child must appear together there; and oh! what a dreadful interview
will it be! when God committed his education to my care, he did, as it were,
put his soul into my hands, and at my hands will he require an account of it.
And when he comes to make the enquiry, what will the issue be? Will my son
accuse me? Or must I be a witness against him? How terrible an office! to bear
my testimony for the condemnation of one whom I tenderly loved, of one, whose
(...) I would have died to deliver! I know I shall not dare to interpose in his
favor, and plead the cause of my Savior's enemy; or, if I were so far
transported by the fondness of a father, I should plead in vain. Sooner, much
sooner, would the mountains be removed for me, or the earth carried out of its
place Job xviii. 4.
, than the sentence of Heaven, its final solemn sentence would be repealed. And
if it must not be repealed, how shall I bear to hear it pronounced, to see it
executed: to hear my own child separated by an everlasting curse from the
presence of the Lord; to see the ministers of divine wrath, hurrying away the
helpless creature, and dragging him down to unquenchable burnings? Oh that, if
no shelter must be allowed him, God would hide me in the grave till this
tremendous scene of his indignation be overpast; left the anguish of a parent
mingle itself with the joys of a rising saint, and, to me, overcast the
triumphs of the day! Hardly can a good man refrain from such sentiments as
these, though some of them be dictated by passion, rather than by reason.

AFTER this survey of the reflections, which such a sad event might naturally
produce, I would proceed to draw some inferences from it; yet I cannot but
delay them for a few moments, in compassion to the sorrows of those pious
parents, if any such be amongst us, whose case this has been. Are there any of
you, christians, that experimentally know the anguish of such thoughts as
these? Any of you, that have thus been mourning over your dead children, when
God has on a sudden called them to his bar, with all their follies and sins on
their head, without giving you any probable hope, that his grace had first
recalled them to himself, and washed their souls in the blood of a Redeemer?

It grieves me, my friends, to have been forced by a sense of duty, as I have
now been, so largely to represent a scene which must call up your sorrows
afresh. But permit me to remind you, that, even in this dreadful circumstance,
the consolations of God are not small Job xv. 11.
. Your hopes in your children have been sadly blasted; but you have hopes in
God, your heavenly father which nothing can shake. You have reason to fear,
their souls are lost; but it is nothing to you to reflect, that your own are
given you as a prey? And that though your house be not so with God, as in this
respect you could most affectionately with it, yet he has made with you an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure 2 Samuel xxiii. 5.
. As to these unhappy creatures who are now lost, you have indeed labored in
vain, and spent your strength for naught; but still your work is with the Lord,
and your reward with your God Isa. xlix. 4, 5.
; and you, like the faithful minister, may hope, that you shall be unto God a
sweet savor of Christ not only in them th^^ are saved, but even in them that
perish 2 Cor. ii. 15.
. And, as to the final interview, which appears so grievous in the prospect,
remember, that you are not to carry along with you the fond instincts of nature
into a world of perfection and glory. All your passions will then be refined;
your will so entirely resolved into the will of God, and your souls so
completely satisfied with his presence and his love, that no creature regards
will be able to disturb their sacred serenity. You will look on the whole
assembly of the enemies of God with so deep an apprehension of the malignity of
their character, and of the wisdom and equity of that divine sentence by which
they fall, that you will not distinguish any of them from the rest, by the
sentiments of a painful compassion. Nor will your concern for those of them,
who now lie nearest to your heart, prevent your concurrence in that song of
triumph, so proper to the solemnities of that awful day: Great and mavelous
are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou king of
saints Rev. xv. 3.
. In the mean time, let the expectation of so happy an improvement in your
temper, moderate the excess of your present sorrows; and when they are
moderated aright, the remainder of them will be a sadness of the countenance,
by which the heart may be made better Ecc^^s. vii. 3.
. And now,

II. I PROCEED to draw some inferences from the sad survey we have been taking,
of the pious parent's reflections on the death of a wicked child. And hence we
may infer,

1. THAT wicked children are acting a very cruel and unnatural part, while they
are exposing their pious parents to such reflections as these.

I SAY it with a sorrowful heart, but so it is, that I fear there are several
of you, my young friends, who live in the neglect of your own souls, and whose
consciences will presently charge it upon you. How soon that awful being, whom
you now forget, may cut off the number of your months in the midst Job xxi. 21.
, and add you to the number of the dead, you know not; but this is certain,
that if you die as you live, and your parents survive the stroke, they will
feel the weight of these terrible reflections; and even now they cannot but
fear them. Doubtless, if they be present here their hearts are bleeding whilst
I speak, and they are looking upon you with unknown anguish. And does not the
thought grieve you, and does it not shame you? Ungrateful creatures! are these
your returns for all their bounty for all their tenderness; to be a sword in
their bowels, and to pierce their very hearts? Alas, they did not expect such
scenes as these, when you hung about them with your infant arms; when you
answered their fond smiles, and lisped out the first broken accents of
endearment. I wonder how you can bear the thought! I wonder you are not ashamed
to be conversing with them daily, and daily receiving new favors from them;
while you are behaving in such a manner, that, the better they love you, the
more they must be afflicted and terrified for you. Oh, that you would have
compassion on them! or, if this will not move you, oh that you would have
compassion on yourselves! for your own interest is still much more nearly
concerned than theirs. Which leads me to add,

2. WE (...) farther infer, that a dreadful counterpart to those reflections
will be the portion of the ungodly child.

ALAS, sinners, if your pious parents weep thus for you, how bitterly will you
weep for yourselves! for if these things be done in a green tree, what will be
done in the dry Luke xxiii. 28, 31.
! if they, the children of God, perhaps even then under the smiles of their
heavenly father, and in the near views of their own complete salvation, may
utter their griefs in such melting accents, what agonies will take hold of your
hearts, when you are actually entered on those seats of horror and despair, to
which the righteous vengeance of God has doomed you? It is impossible fully to
describe them; yet something relating to them we may certainly infer from what
has been already said. Give me leave to offer it to your view, if peradventure,
through the agency of divine grace, to have heard of these reflections may be
the happy means of leading you to escape them.

YOUR parents may reflect on the disappointment of their expectations from you:
But oh, how heavy will the disappointment of your own hopes and expectations
then sit upon your souls! how will you then bear it, sinners, when you see all
your enjoyments, and all your prospects blasted in a moment, and irrecoverably
lost?

IT is true, you are lifting up your souls unto vanity Isa. xxiv. 4.
; but these vanities are your all. You pursue them with the utmost vigor and
intenseness of mind, and have a great many fond and chimerical schemes for
years of pleasure and happiness yet to come. But if God cut you off in the
prime of your life, and in the very flower of your hopes, in that day all your
thoughts will perish Psalm. cxlvi. 4.
. And how will you be confounded to see all the beautiful and enchanted scenes
that now charm you to the neglect of God and religion, vanish like the shadowy
glories of a dream, and your souls left naked and destitute upon an
inhospitable shore, where, in all your indigence and distress, there will be no
eye to pity you, no hand to relieve you!

AND it will be so much the more dreadful, as you will go down to these
melancholy regions with your appetites and your passions warm about you, and by
frequent indulgence strengthened and inflamed; so that, for want of their
proper objects, they will prey upon your heart, and an insatiable thirst will
continue, while you will not have one drop of satisfaction or comfort. Nay, I
may add, that as, in these unripened days, you have had little experience of
the vanities and disappointments of life, and have entertained a great many
fond and extravagant hopes of what you would never have found in it, your
regret, in being cut off from them, will not be in proportion to what they
really were, but to what your error and folly imagined them to have been.

YOUR pious parents will reflect upon it with unutterable anguish! that your
souls are for ever lost: But how much more sensibly will you yourselves feel
it! They, in their present situation on earth can have but a little faint and
imperfect notion of the horrors of the infernal prison; for to those we may
accommodate the language of the apostle on a very different occasion, and say,
that neither has eye seen them, nor ear heard them, nor has it entered into the
most terrified heart fully to conceive them 1 Cor. ii. 9.
. But how will the change affect you, when you are just entered on those realms
of woe! when you look round about you, and think, this is my last abode, my
only remaining inheritance? Alas, how will your hearts be overwhelmed, when you
compare that place of torment with all the cheerful scenes of the world from
whence you came; where you had been surrounded with so many delights; where it
had been your chief care to make provision for the flesh Romans xiii. 14.
; and where you had, perhaps, spent your days in mirth, till in a moment you
went down to the grave Job xxi. 13.
! when, instead of the light of the sun, you see nothing but the flames of the
divine indignation; when, instead of all that soothed and regaled your senses,
you feel the never dying worm, and exchange the gay and agreeable companions
that did surround you, for the society of devils and damned spirits!

I APPEAL to your consciences; can your hearts endure, or your hands be strong
Ezekiel. xxii. 14.
, in such a circumstance as this? You, that are so impatient of every little
anxiety of life; you, that cannot bear the fatigues of duty, nor the restraints
of religion, how will you bear the agonies of damnation? How will you live in
those doleful regions, where joy and cheerfulness are everlasting strangers,
and nothing remains but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth Mat. xiii. 42.
?

WERE this to be your case only for a thousand or a hundred years, how
miserable would you be! but oh, how much more miserable, when you think, that
it is an everlasting destruction 2 Thessalonians. i. 9.
! When your thoughts weary themselves in search of some distant point, where a
glimmering of hope may break in upon you, and you go onward, and onward, and
onward still, and find nothing but blackness of darkness for ever Jude, (...)
1^.
! when you feel yourselves plunged in a boundless ocean of distress, without a
bottom, and without a shore! Must the smoke of my torments ascend up for ever
and ever Rev. xiv. 11.
? Must I lie in this infernal prison, till I have paid the uttermost farthing
Mat. v. 26.
Surely then I must bear indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish (...)
, as long as an immortal soul can sustain it, as an eternal God can inflict it.

IT is almost insupportable, to think that this should be the case of any of
our fellow creatures. How much more insupportable must it then be, to feel that
it is your own!

AGAIN, your pious parents will lament that all their kind endeavors for your
salvation were in vain: But with what aggravated sorrow and despair will you
then reflect on those endeavors, and on all the other religious advantages you
enjoyed!

"ALAS" will you then be ready to say, If there could be any thought of comfort
in the midst of this dark gloom of desolation and horror, it would be to
transfer the blame of my rain upon another. Oh that I could I say, there was
some powerful, arbitrary being, by whose irresistible hand, I was forcibly
borne away, as by a mighty torrent, and swept into this burning gulf! Oh that
I could say, that I was wicked and miserable by a fatal necessity! But there is
not a 'wretch, amidst all the rage and blasphemy of such a dwelling as this,
who can dare to assert that to have been the case, how much less then can I
assert it!

"WHEN I look up," may you justly say, when I look up to yonder seats of
unapproachable glory, from whence I am now cast out, as an abominable branch
Isa. xiv. 13.
, why was not my portion there? Wretch that I am, I was once numbered among the
children of the kingdom; I was born in Emmanuel's land; I was educated in a
religious family: and oh, my parents and my ministers! how diligently did they
instruct me^ how awfully did they admonish me! how tenderly did they
expostulate with me! I had indeed line upon line, and precept upon precept Isa.
xxviii. 10.
; and therefore I have now stroke upon stroke, and wound upon wound. The blood
of a Redeemer was once offered me as a healing balm, and I despised it; and now
it is poured out as a burning corrosive on my bleeding soul. I was once lifted
up even to the gates of heaven, and now I am cast down to the very center of
hell: I am now looking with envy, and with rage, on the milder torments of Tire
and Sidon, of Sodom and Gomorrah Mat. xi. 21 -- 24.
. There, sinners, thou will perhaps curse the compassionate heart, which now is
almost sinking under this necessary representation of thy danger, and those
unavailing tears, which one or another of us may now be shedding, in the
distant views of thy ruin.

YET I must add once more, that as your pious parents will tremble at the view
of meeting you at the tribunal of God, so the thoughts of such an interview
must be insupportably dreadful to you.

IF satan now draw you from your allegiance to God, and harden your heart to
final impenitency, being partakers of his sins, you will be partakers likewise
of his plagues Rev. xviii 4.
, and like him, be reserved in chains of darkness to the judgment of the great
day (...) Pet. ii 4. Jude, ver. 6.
. And how will your haughty hearts brook it, when you are to be brought out to
that judgment? oh, how often will your anxious, foreboding thoughts anticipate
the shame and horror of that dreadful day!

I MUST stand forth, will you then say, I must stand forth before my in^xorable
judge; my sin and my folly must be publicly proclaimed before the assembled
world, and my parents too must be the witnesses of it. But oh, how shall I be
able to lift up my face before them, blackened with the marks of guilt and
despair! if I call, will there be any to answer me; or to which of the saints
shall I then turn Job. v. 1.
? Shall I turn to my parents and entreat them, by all their former tenderness
for the children of their bowels, to plead with the judge in my favor, if,
perhaps, they may mitigate the rigor of his wrath? Alas, I know him, and
myself, and them too well, to expect any such attempt, or to ask any such
favor. Will they not rather stand up as swift witness against me Mal. iii. 5.
, and call for an increase of wrath on my guilty head? Will not all their
former tenderness be turned into stern and awful severity? Will they not
upbraid me with their instructions, their reproofs, their prayers, and their
tears; and applaud the triumphs of the divine vengeance, in the condemnation of
so wicked, of so incorrigible a creature? -- With these awful remonstrances I
dismiss you, and conclude with a reflection of a more comfortable nature.

3. FROM this survey of the reflections of a pious parent on the death of a
wicked child, we may certainly infer, that the parents of religious children
have abundant reason of thankfulness.

They have reason of thankfulness, both as they are free from such melancholy
reflections and apprehensions; and as a foundation is laid of other views, as
full of cheerfulness and joy, as these are of terror and distress. My brethren,
I congratulate the happiness of those of you, who can say, through grace that
God has established his covenant, with you, and with your seed after you, for
an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto you, and unto them G^n. xvii. 7.
. It is the joy of my heart, to think how much it must be the joy of yours, to
see your children walking in the truth 2 John ^^r. 4.
; and to see them flourishing in the courts of your God Ps^^. x^ii. 1. 3.
, as well as growing like olive plants round your own tables (...). ^xxviii.
(...).
; to see, that they have not only escaped the grosser corruptions, which are in
the world through lust (...) 4.
, but subscribe with their hand unto the Lord, and surname themselves by the
name of Israel, his people (...) xl^v. 5.
. With what sweet tranquillity may you look forward to all the uncertainties of
life and death, for yourselves, and for your children, while you have such a
joyful persuasion, that you leave them in the hand of your father, and of their
father, of your God, and of their God John xx. 17.
!

AND give me leave, on so natural an occasion, to address myself to you, my
dear friends, from whom the great sovereign of life has been pleased to take
away pious and promising children, by (what we are apt erroneously to call) an
immature death. You are ready to say, with a peculiar accent, that you are the
persons that have seen affliction Lam. iii. 1.
. The images of those lovely creatures rise in your memory on scuh a hint as
this, and crowd into your minds afresh. You saw them growing up, and
flourishing under you^ care; growing up, perhaps, to ripeness of years, and
flourishing in some remarkable degrees of knowledge and of grace. And you
fondly promised yourselves, from what you saw in them, that they would not only
have been the comfort and delight of your declining, broken age, but the
support and honor of the church, when you were here no more: and now all these
pleasing prospects are vanished, all these important hopes are buried with
their dear dust.

NAY, perhaps, God has, in this respect, broken you with breach upon breach
Job xvi. 14.
, has taken away one desirable branch of your family after another, till all
the branches are lopped off, and you stand, like the naked trunks of trees
which were once diffusing a thick and extensive shade. Yes, I am aware, there
are some of you, that know the peculiar agony, (to all but such as yourselves
probably unknown), of following your last child to the grave. I fear, I come
(...) near you, and that some of your wounds are bleeding anew. Would the balm
of sympathetic tears administer any relief to them, how easy would it be to
pour it out in abundance! but, in a case like yours, there is a much more
efficacious and sovereign relief.

I AM speaking to christians. You sometimes plead the indications of wisdom and
piety, which you discerned in your children as an aggravation of your sorrow
for the loss of them; and I acknowledge, in one view, they are indeed so: but
in another view, how greatly do they extenuate it!

YOU saw them, it may be, when they were under a languishing distemper, for
some time, as it were, daily dying before your eyes: but did you not likewise
see the divine rod and staff comforting them Psalm. xxiii 4.
! It may be, sometimes to such a degree, that you regretted not so much, that
they were going off the stage, as that you were not accompanying them in the
same way, and with the same spirit. You heard their expiring groans, but did
you not also hear some songs of praise mingled with them? perhaps, you heard
them strengthening their feeble voices, and summoning up all their little
remainder of spirits, to say, as from their very soul, my flesh and my heart
fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion forever Psalm.
lxxiii. 26.
Some, into whose hands these discourses will probably fall, know that these
were not imaginary circumstances; and cannot but remember, they have since
attended the death of some of those young persons to whom this sermon was first
preached.
. And does the recollection afford you no pleasure? or does your pleasure
terminate even here?

YOUR dear children are now dead to you; but do you not believe, that they live
to God Luke xx. 38.
, and live with him? What if they had been still continued on earth, answering
all your schemes, and possessing all that you intended or desired for them? How
low had those services been, and how worthless those possessions, in comparison
to the services which they now render, with the riches and glory which they no
inherit!

METHINKS it should be, and surely, christians, it sometimes is, matter of
rejoicing to you, to reflect, that the desolation of your houses is, in some
degree, the prosperity and joy of that celestial society, to which you are more
intimately allied, than to any thing here: to think, that your families should
have been nurseries for heaven, and that God should have honored you so far,
as already to have taken some of your children to minister around the throne of
his glory, and so to be the associates of angels in their highest honor and
joy.

AND is it not most delightful to think of meeting them again? Had they still
survived, the the thoughts of leaving them might have sharpened the pangs of
dissolving nature, which now the remembrance of them may moderate. You had left
them in an insnaring, calamitous world; perhaps, some of you had left them in
circumstances of difficulty and distress. But now all those aprehensions are
over; and what could otherwise have been the stroke of painful separation, will
now be the means of ending your separation, and bringing you, once for all, to
the embraces of each other. And oh, with what mutual congratulations will the
converse be renewed; with what delightful overflowings of parental complacency
on one side, and of filial gratitude on the other! how thankfully will they
forever acknowledge your pious cares and early instructions, to which perhaps,
under God, they owe their first religious impressions, and, in some sense, even
the^ present glories! and in the great day of the Lord, with what unutterable
transports of holy joy will you stand forth, and say at once, in the most
literal and the most sublime sense, Here are We, and the children that our God
has graciously given us Heb. ii. 13. Gen xxxiii. 5.
!

SURELY, when you think of these things, your joys may abundantly
counterbalance your sorrows: and I appeal to your own hearts, even in the midst
of all this tender distress, whether such a circumstance as yours, supposing it
ever so aggravated, be not much more tolerable, than that, which we have been
describing; of a pious parent bewailing the death of a wicked child, or even
looking upon him in life and health under the tyranny of Satan, and of sin, and
in the probable way to everlasting misery.

AND thus I have finished my meditations on this pathetick and important
subject. Let me conclude with my most affectionate prayers to the God and
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of mercies 2 cor. i. 3.
, for all of you to whom the discourse has been addressed.

MAY young ones be brought, by the blessed spirit of God, to know, in this
their day, the things that belong to their eternal peace Luke xix. 42.
; that they may apply to Christ for life and salvation, and join themselves to
the Lord in an everlasting covenant Jer. l. 5.
! there all our applications to you center; there may all your attendances on
our ministrations issue!

MAY those, who have been effectually taught this lesson, who are the joy of
parents and ministers, and the hopes of the church, as to the rising age, be
very deeply sensible of the distinguishing grace of God to them! may they be
spared to rise up in the stead of their parents! and may they labor with great
success, to spread a spirit of seriousness amongst their companions, and to
maintain it continually in their own souls!

MAY the pious parents of pious children be suitably affected with the goodness
of God to them and theirs! and may the parents of others be stirred up, as they
value the souls of their children, and their own comfort and repose, to renew
those attempts which have hitherto proved unsuccessful, and to exert the most
vigorous efforts, for plucking the unhappy creatures, as brands out of the
burning Amos iv. 11. Zech. iii. 2.
!

IN a word, may divine grace so cooperate with all, that all of you, according
to your different relations and characters, may have reason to bless God for
those awful thoughts which I have now been laying before you; that such cutting
reflections, as I have so largely described, under the former heads, may never
be known by one parent or one child in the assembly, otherwise than by
description, by imagination, by reason and by faith! never may they be known by
heart-rending and overwhelming experience! on the contrary, may parents and
children be mutually growing joys and comforts to each other, in life and in
death, at your appearance before the solemn tribunal of Christ, and throughout
all the ages of a glorious eternity! AMEN.

SERMON VII.
YOUTH REMINDED OF APPROACHING JUDGMENT.
ECCLES. xi. 9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth; and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring
thee into judgment.
MY dear young friends! if it were possible for me, while I am speaking, to lay
open my whole heart before you, in such a manner as that you should be
witnesses to every secret sentiment of it with regard to you, I should do it
with a great deal of pleasure. You would see a tenderer concern for your
present and everlasting welfare than words can express, and a proportionable
desire of approving myself your faithful servant for Jesus sake Cor. ii. 4. 5.
. I know not, how far you may have considered what I have largely laid before
you. concerning the importance of the rising generation Sermon (...).
; but I am so thoroughly convinced of this importance, and so impressed with
the conviction of it, that there is no part of my public work, to which I arise
with a greater solicitude about the success, than I feel when I am thus
particularly applying myself to you; and there are no prayers which I offer to
God with greater earnestness, than that I may have the joy to see you walking
in the truth 3 John ver. 4.
, a seed to serve the Lord, which shall be accounted to him for a generation
Psalm. xxii. 30.
.

THIS is what I wish, and pray, with regard to all of you. It is with
inexpressible pleasure that I see so evidently, as to many, that my prayers and
my labors are not in vain. Many of you are my joy now, and I trust, through
divine grace, will be my crown, in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming (...) These. ii. 19.
. But would to God there were none of whom I had occasion to say, I stand in
doubt of you Gal. iv. 20.
! would to God, I could see that spirit of serious piety universally prevailing
amongst you, which, wherever it does prevail in young ones, is such a token of
good to themselves, to their friends, and to the church of Christ!

WHERE it is otherwise, I look upon you with compassion and sorrow; but blessed
be God, not with despair. I am not without hope, that God has purposes of love
and grace to serve on many of you; especially those who have been the hearers
of so many good instructions, and so many prayers as I have reason to believe
many of you are; and who can tell, but this is the day, and this the ordinance,
in which these gracious purposes are to take place!

I KNOW that the first step to your safety is a sense of your danger. We live
in a world so full of snares, that the righteous scarcely are saved 1 Pet. iv.
18.
; and yet I fear, some of you have very little apprehension of this danger,
very little concern about the whole armor of God (...). vi. 11.
, so necessary to preserve you from it. And therefore, not to give you any vain
and groundless alarm, but to produce, i^ possible, that holy caution and
solicitude of soul, which may be the happy means of your security and
preservation, I am now setting myself to discourse on some of the most awful
words which are any where in the whole book of God, addressed to persons of
your age. I hope you w^ll listen to them, and that God will make them as a kind
of solemn trumpet, whereby these that are spiritually dead may be awakened; so
awakened, as that the other trumpet to which they refer, and which will surely
awaken your sleeping (...), may be heard not with sorrow, but with delight.

It is observable, that Solomon had a great regard to young people in his
writings; and it is an evidence of his wisdom that he had so, for youth is the
age of discipline. He therefore gives them line upon line, and precept upon
precept. Sometimes ^e (...), and sometimes he rebukes; sometimes he (...) them
with paternal tenderness, and sometimes persuades them, as knowing the terrors
of the Lord 2 Cor. v. 11.
; and saves them as with fear, plucking them out of the fire J^^e, ver. 23.
. And this he ^^th in the words I have now been reading; Rejoice, O young man,
in thy youth, and let thine (...) in the days of thy youth; and walk in the
ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. But know thou, that for
all th^se thing* God will (...) thee into judgment.

IT will be my business -- to explain, and -- to enforce the caution, and then
-- to conclude with some (...) upon it. May the plain, but awful things I am to
deliver, be, as the words of the (...) like goads, to pierce and rouse your
minds, and like nails fastened in a sure place by the skilful master of
assemblies (...)
, which being given out from the one great shepherd, are succeeded by his
grace, and improved to his glory!

I. I AM to explain the words I have been reading.

AND, in order to fix the sense of them, I shall only observe, that some
understand them, as intimating Solomon's readiness to allow young people in the
innocent pleasures and gaieties of life; whilst others interpret the whole as a
solemn and a lively warning of the great danger they were in, of running into
the most fatal excess. I shall in a few words give you (...) ^easons, both why
I mention the former, and why I prefer the latter of th^se senses.

1. SOME understand these words, as an intimation of Solomon's readiness to
indulge young people in all the innocent entertainments (...) life.

THEY paraphrase the words in a soft (...) manner as if he had said* Do (...)
imagine, O^ young man that I give (...) of morality and piety in a gloomy
humor, or with any (...) and unkind design. Far (...) desiring to (...) thee
under any unnecessary restraint* I (...) ^^hort thee to rejoice in the (...) of
thy (...) those (...) in which the (...) are (...) lively, and all the powers
of (...). Wear (...) and indulge that gaiety which is so natural to the
spring-season of life; so natural, and indeed so decent. Walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. Seek out every innocent object of
amusement: gratify thy genius, thy temper, thy relish, in all the
particularities of it; provided only that thou do still remember thy future
account, acknowledging God in thy ways, and guarding against every abuse of his
goodness, every thing that would on the whole be offensive to him, and
detrimental to thyself.

MY brethren, I readily own, that there is nothing in this paraphrase of the
words which is unbecoming the piety and wisdom of the author, and that he has
in effect said the same in several passages of this very book. There is hardly
a sentiment, which he more frequently repeats than this. There is nothing, says
he, in express words, again and again, there is nothing better for a man than
that he should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of his labor Eccles. ii. 24.
iii. 12, 13, ^2.
. It is good and comely for one to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all
his labor that he takes under the sun; for it is his portion, and a heart to
rejoice in it is the gift of God chap. v. 18. 19.
. Go thy way, ^at thy bread with joy, and drink wine with a merry heart: let
thy garments be always white, and thine head lack no ointment Eccles. ix. 7, 8.
. And once more; I recommend mirth, because a man has no better thing under
the sun than to eat and drink, and to be merry chap. viii. 15.
. The sense of which, if we would find a sense worthy of the author, must no
doubt be this, that religion is far from forbidding a cheerful use of the
enjoyments of life; and that without such a use they are given to the possessor
in vain; who indeed can otherwise hardly be called the possessor, but rather
the steward and purveyor for the next heir, who may perhaps be as profuse, as
his predecessor was pernicious and insatiable.

AND I hope you will not imagine, that in what I have farther to say, I intend
any thing inconsistent with these observations and advices. To be devo^t, and
to be melancholy, are two very different things; and the greatest enemies of
religion could not call it by a more invidious and unjust name, than a walking
mournfully before the Lord of hosts Mal. iii. 14.
. Instead therefore of dissuading you from a life of true pleasure, I would
rather direct you to it, and only urge you to despise that which is visionary
and mean, to secure that which is solid and noble; in a word, to decline no
delights which will not interf^re with others much more valuable, none which
will not be mingled with regret, or followed by a lasting anguish, a thousand
times than an equivalent for them. And so far as these precautions will admit,
I will venture to say, even in this sense, Rejoice O young man, in thy youth,
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth. Nevertheless I am well
persuaded this is not, and cannot be, the original sense of the words; and
therefore add,

2. THEY are rather to be understood, as an awful and lively caution to young
persons, to be upon their guard against those gratifications whereby conscience
might be wounded, and God dishonored.

I SUPPOSE with the general stream of commentators, that the words are an
ironical way of expressing, in a more pointed and lively manner, the very
contrary to what they seem literally to speak* like that speech of Elijah
concerning Baal, when he said, Cry aloud, for he is a God I kings xviii. 27.
; or that of Micaiah to Ahab, Go up to Ramoth-Gilead, and prosper Mat. xxvi. 45.
; or that of our Lord to his disciples, Sleep on now, and take your rest I
Kings. xxii. 15.
: to which, I suppose, we may add that saying of God concerning Adam after his
fall, Behold the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil Genesis iii. 22.
. Thus do these words most strongly forbid what they seem to allow, and are as
if he had said, Thou poor thoughtless creature, who in this giddy intoxication
of youth, art so madly bent upon sensual pleasure, take thy fill of it, and
withhold not thine heart from any joy. Follow all the most impetuous appetites
of nature, and wantonly bound over every restraint of reason and piety, trample
on the admonition of all thy teachers, shake off the fetters of a strict
education, and burst the bonds of religion, like threads of flax when they are
touched by the flame. But think not, Oh sinner, that thou shall always carry it
off with that haughty triumph; know, that as thou have thy day, God will also
have his: a day of strict account, and of ample recompense. Know, that for all
these things, God will bring thee into judgment; and if thou can find out no
expedient, to conceal thee from an all-seeing eye, or to defend thee from an
omnipotent hand, a deluge of wrath will bear thee away to everlasting
destruction. Dearly shall thou then pay for every present indulgence, and every
sweet morsel shall then be turned bitter, and be as the gall of asps, within
thee.

THIS, I say, appears to be the evident meaning of these words. And that for
this plain reason; that some of the phrases made use of, are such as are never
taken in a good sense, and therefore cannot admit the former interpretation.
Solomon does indeed, as you have heard, exhort his readers to eat and drink,
and enjoy the good of their labors; but where can you find him, or any other
sacred writer, exhorting or allowing men to walk in the way of their heart, and
in the sight of their eyes? I am sure, that phrase generally signifies an
indulgence to the irregularities of appetite and passion, in the neglect of
reason and of scripture. Thus the Israelites are charged to wear fringes on
their garments Numb. xv. 39.
, that they might remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and
might not seek after their own heart, and their own eyes; that is, (as it
follows,) that they might not go a whoring from God after those gay and
luxurious idolatries, which regaled the senses, while they debauched the soul.
And thus the wicked Israelite, whom God would separate to evil out of all the
tribes, is represented as vainly and arrogantly saying De^t xxix. 19.
, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart: (that is,
as it follows,) to add drunkeness to thirst, or one riot to another. And once
more; to judge after the sight of the eyes (...) xi. 3.
, is a proverbial expression, to signify partial and corrupt judgment. We have
no reason therefore to imagine, that Solomon would vary the signification of a
phrase already so expressly (...) in some of (...) sacred writings, which he
was himself obliged not only to read, but to transcribe Deuteronomy xvii. 18, 19.
, as he undoubtedly did on his accession to the throne; where he had also read
it again and again, that the imagination of man's heart is only evil from his
youth Genesis vi. 5. viii. 21.
; and he had himself elsewhere said, that foolishness is so closely bound up in
the heart of a child, that not only words of admonition, but the rod of
correction is necessary to drive it away Prove. xxii. 15.
. To these general remarks on the usual signification of the phrases occuring
here, we may also farther add, that the connection of these words would lead us
to understand them as an ironical rather than a serious concession, since they
conclude with what seems a very awful menace. But know thou that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment: as he should have said, "Assure
thyself thou must answer for all." Which sense is farther illustrated by what
follows in the last verse of this, and the first of the next chapter, [which
are very unhappily divided from each other, (...) ^^veral other passages are,
which have a very cl^se and necessary connection;] Therefore remove sorrow from
thy heart, (i e. the regret which would follow these sensual indulgences, if
thou walk in the way of it), and put away evil from thy flesh, (i. e. those
carnal pleasures which religion forbids, or those punishments they would
certainly draw down upon thee); for childhood and youth are vanity; and
remember now thy creator in the days of thy youth Eccles, xi. 10. xii. 1.
instead of sacrificing them to vanity and folly. You easily see there is a
beautiful and lively opposition between the several parts of the period on this
interpretation, which on the other must be much injured, if not entirely
destroyed.

I WOULD farther observe, that the judgment, to which Solomon here refers, must
undoubtedly be that of a future state; since he had expressly asserted above,
that here all things come alike to all; and no man knows either love or
hatred, (i. e. the favor or displeasure of the Divine Being), by all that is,
before them Eccles ix. 1, 2.
. That there is a wicked man to whom it happens according to the event of the
righteous; and, on the other hand, many a righteous man to whom it happens
according to the event of the wicked chap. viii 14, vii. 15.
, i. e. that very bad men often prolong their live through a long series of
prosperity, while good men are cut off by an untimely stroke, or linger out
their days in a painful succession of sorrows. This led him to conclude, Surely
God will judge the righteous and the wicked chap. iii. 17.
; which in many of these cases could only be done in some invisible state, to
which both should be reserved. And of this judgment he solemnly warns the young
sinner, as a most powerful antidote against the baits of sensuality; as an
awful thought, which might six the most roving eye, and be a means of reducing
the most ungoverned heart to the dicipline of wisdom and piety.

As I conclude that this sense of the words is now sufficiently illustrated and
established, I proceed,

II. To enforce the admonition by such considerations, as are expressly
suggested in the text, or may naturally arise from it.

I IMPORTUNATELY beg your serious attention: for I say not these things, either
to grieve, or to shame you, but as my beloved brethren and children, I warn you
1 Cor. iv. 14.
. And here let me prevail upon you to consider, the depravation and corruption
of your own hearts, the many delusive charms which are continually offering
themselves to your eyes: -- Consider, that the blessed God is now the spectator
of your conduct, that he will certainly bring you to an account for it, an
account which will be inexpressibly strict and awful. These are the arguments,
which I shall more largely enforce; and if they make no deep impressions on
your mind, there is the utmost reason to fear, that you will go on hardened in
your evil ways, till you actually come to that tribunal which you now forget or
despise.

1. THINK of the depravation and corruption of your own hearts, to deter you
from walking in the ways of them.

THE heart of man is described by that God, who alone perfectly knows it, as
deceitful above all things, and desparately wicked Jer. xvii. 9.
. The imagination of it is, by him, said to be only evil, and that continually
Genesis vi. 5.
. It is a very sad truth, though perhaps you have never seriously considered
it, that a degenerate and corrupted nature is conveyed down from one generation
of men to another, so as still to leave room -- for that expostulation of Job,
What is man that he should be pure, and how can he be clean that is born of a
woman Job xv. 14. xxv. 4.
! -- for that confession of David, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me Psalm ii. 5.
! for that declaration of the Apostle, whether in his own name, or that of
another, In me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good thing Romans vii. 18.
. If you know not the plague of your own heart 1 kings viii. 38.
, it is a plain argument that you know little of God, or yourselves; and you
had need be seriously reminded it, lest, with Solomon's fool, you should trust
it Prove. xxviii. 26.
, and the blind lead the blind, till you fall into the pit of destruction Man
xv. 14.
.

Do you not know the degeneracy and corruption of your own hearts? I beseech
you to review what has passed there: think of the advantages which you have
enjoyed for knowing and serving God; of all the mercies you have received, of
all the instructions you have heard, of all the convictions you have sometimes
felt, and of all the good resolutions you have probably formed in consequence
of them. And then think, how little all this has produced, how you have
forgotten God, days and times without number (...)
, and started back from him like a deceitful bow Psalm. lx. viii. 57.
; how you have been delivered over, in a foolish circle, from one vanity to
another, wearied with the pursuit of trifles, and yet rising, after a little
respite, to pursue them again. Think, my friends, how you have overborne the
dictates of your own consciences, and grieve the Holy Spirit of God, when he
has been pleading with you in a most importunate manner, and saying unto you,
Oh, do not this abominable thing that I (...) J^^. xliv. (...).
. Yet you have done it, and sacrificed the repose of your own minds, and the
hopes of glory, to the mean, vile considerations, which you would be ashamed to
hear mentioned before an assembly, And this not in one instance, but again and
again. You have formed good purposes, and broken them? and formed them again,
and broken them again; and run such a round of folly and sin, that I am
persuaded many of you could not have suspected yourselves of such a conduct
some time ago, nor have believed, if one had told you, that you should act such
a part. And must these treacherous hearts still be trusted, and will you still
go on to walk in the ways of them; when they have already led you into so much
sin, when they have already plunged you into so much distress?

2. THINK how many delusive charms are daily offering themselves to your eyes,
that you may not heedlessly walk in the sight of them.

REMEMBER, sirs, I beseech you, that you are in a very dangerous situation, and
walk among snares. The most mortal poisons are often mingled with the sweetest
dainties, and the most dangerous enemies of our souls accost us in the fairest
forms. The fruit which undid our common mother, and brought death and a curse
upon us all, was a fruit which appeared to be good for food, and which she saw
to be pleasant to the eyes Genesis iii. 6.
.

IT is an awakening saying of one of the most lively and pathetick, as well as
of the most pious writers which our age has produced Law on Christian
Perfection, page 11
, That the condition of man in his natural state seems to be like that of a
person sick of a variety of diseases, knowing neither his distemper nor cure,
but unhappily enclosed in a place where he could hear, or see, or taste, or
feel nothing, but what tended to inflame his disorder.

NOT that the world in its original constitution, and ^^^sidered as the work of
God, is by any means to be blamed. The whole system of it is such, as would
lead a regular mind to wise and pious reflections; and its most pleasurable
scenes would be the natural occasion of exciting correspondent gratitude and
devotion to the great author of every good and perfect gift James i. 17.
. But our souls being corrupted, those things become dangerous to us, which
might otherwise have been innocent, and even beneficial; as some of the most
wholesome and nourishing foods are fatal to a person inflamed with a raging
fever.

I AM persuaded, that nothing is so like to make us truly wise, as observations
on fact: let me therefore beseech you, my young friends, seriously to consider
how many, within the compass of your own knowledge, have been ruined by the
blandishments of the senses; and, perhaps, some of them persons in other
respects, of no contemptible characters. We may indeed say of the world, that
specious harlot, She has cast down many wounded, and many strong men have been
s^ain by her Prove. vii. 26.
. Do not, therefore, walk in the sight of your eyes, lest you also be like the
bird, that, struck with some gay promising appearance, hasteneth eagerly t^ the
snare, and knows not that it is for his life Prove. vii. 2^.
. But endeavor to open the eye of the mind, and by faith to behold the great
realities of the invisible world, that you may govern your lives with a regard
to them, and so secure, not the deceitful forms, but the substance of true
happiness.

3. LET me seriously remind you that the blessed God is the spectator of all
your conduct.

THIS is strongly implied though it be not expressed in the text: for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment; and you cannot surely imagine, that
he is like earthly judges, who must have recourse to witnesses, to inform them
of what they would otherwise be ignorant of. He is not, he cannot be, far from
any one of us, seeing in him we live, and move, and have our being Acts xvii.
27, 28.
. Nor can we be concealed from his eye, should we fly on the wings of the
morning, and with the swiftness of light, to the uttermost ends of the earth:
for his hand must lead us thither, and his right hand support us there Psalm.
cxxxix. 9, 10.
. Remember this, my young friends, he sees you when you overlook him, sees
himself neglected by you, and his laws violated, and his grace despised: And
all for what? You have reason to blush and be confounded, when you think of
that: for every vanity that offers itself to your pursuit, for trifles lighter
than air, for which you would not violate the common rules of decency to a
fellow creature. As if it were to be taken for granted, that his favor is a
thing of no consequence, or that nothing can forfeit it. Oh, sirs, he hears me
while I am speaking to you; and sees, perhaps, that some of you hardly give me
an attentive hearing. He observes, how many admonitions are despised by you,
how many convictions are overborne, how many vows are broken, how many vain
words are spoken to him, in those formalities which you call your devotions;
and, perhaps, with regard to some of you, I may add, how many bold words are
spoken against him, when those mo^ths are set against the heavens, whose
tongues have walked through the earth Psalm. lxxiii. 12.
. All those ^lights of religion, which, (for want of understanding^ you may be
ready to call wit; all that licentious contempt which you throw on his sacred
word and ordinances, and fancy it is freedom of thought. You may go on, and
presume upon i^, that your lips are your own Psalm xii. 4.
; but I must tell you, that the Lord hearkens and hears, and a book of
remembrance Mal iii. 16.
is written for you likewi^e; -- a book, which will another day be thrown open,
and read to you with a voice of vengeance and terror; which leads me to urge
you,

4. To think how certain the judgment of God is, and your own personal
appearance before him.

YOU know, there is not any doctrine of the gospel more plain and evident than
this, That every one of us must give an account of himself to God Romans xiv. 12.
; and indeed it was a doctrine of the Jewish revelation, and even of the wiser
heathens: but I would desire you particularly to observe, how strongly it is
expressed in the words of the text, Know thou, that God will bring thee into
judgment! Thee, O young man, thee, O child, whoever thou art that hear me
this day, to thee is the word of this admonition sent, God will bring thee into
judgment. His trumpet will sound, his tribunal will set; thou will be summoned,
and thou must obey. In ^ain will be every attempt to conceal thyself, or to
excuse or dispute an immediate attendance. He will bring thee: his hand will be
strong upon thee Ezekiel. iii. 14.
, infinitely too strong for thy feeble resistance. And therefore the assembly
of the whole world before him is beautifully described, by driving together a
flock of sheep or of goats Man xxv. 32.
. Bear witness, Oh sinner, and let thy conscience record it, I warn thee of
this solemn, this dreadful day. I tell thee, that as surely as thou art now in
the house of God, thou shall then be standing before his bar. And how will you
stand? Look you to that. We are to give the warning, and knowing the terrors of
the Lord, are to persuade men 2 Cor. v. 11.
, Hear now therefore this admonition for yourselves, and know it for your good
Job v. 27.
. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in places, and there be
none to deliver Psalm. l 22.
. And to increase the weight and essicacy of the thought, reflect, once more,

5. How strict and awful this judgment will be* For all these things God will
bring thee into judgment; which naturally implies, that it will be particular
and final.

EVERY particular will be reviewed. All these things; or, as is it yet more
strongly expressed elsewhere, every work, and every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil L^^l^s. xii. 14.
. He has sworn by himself, that he will not forget any of thy works (...).
viii. 7.
. Poor thoughtless creatures! you sometimes conceal your irregularities from
parents and masters, or others to whom you are accountable; you disguise them
in so artful a manner, or form such excuses for them as may impose upon men:
and you value yourselves on the dexterity with which you do it. But be not
deceived, God cannot be thus mocked Gal. vi. 7.
. For all these things, and a thousand times more than you can remember;
actions and words, and thoughts of vanity, which passed with you unobserved in
the crowd, or, if at all observed, were forgotten in a moment; for all these,
will be reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes Psalm. l. 21.
, i. e. He will marshal them in dreadful array, as a ho^^ of enemies armed for
thy destruction. Have you never seen a criminal at the bar, how he is
confounded, when the force of evidence bears him down, and the sagacity of a
judge detects the idle, foolish pleas, with which he flattered himself before
him trial, and imagined he should easily come off with impunity? Then did you
see an emblem of yourselves, and your own state; thus will you, if you go on in
your sins, be entangled and silenced, and ashamed and condemned. All your
crimes will be produced, in all their circumstances of aggravation. Nor will
God forget this present admonition and expostulation, though you may forget it,
or though you should remember it only in scorn, and wonder what occasion there
is for all this earnestness and importunity. You may, if you please, make a
jest of divine judgment; but you will find it dreadfully serious. Nothing so
easy, as to despise it; but, oh sinner, nothing so hard, as to endure it: for I
add,

IT will be a final doom, and your eternal (...) will be fixed by it. It is no
light crime of (...) you will then be convicted, no less than wilful,
obstinate, incorrigible rebellion against the majesty of heaven, against the
God of your lives, and the father of all your mercies; and it will be no light
punishment to which you will be consigned, for following the way of your heart,
and the sight of your eyes, in opposition to all the authority of his law, and
all the methods of his recovering grace.

READ ^ver the sentence, as recorded from the lips of him by whom it is to be
pronounced. There is but one for those on the left hand, and hearken to it:
depart from me, ye cursed: -- sinner, thou must be separated from God. But that
perhaps you can bear: it is but calling him by some bold name; it is but
dressing him up in your imagination under some false odious character, and you
may perhaps think it is best to be at a distance from him. Wretched creature!
but thou must depart, as accursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels Mat. xxv. 41.
. And can thou reconcile thy mind to that? To dwell for ever in darkness and
horror, in such a scene, and with such associates! to have nothing to entertain
the eye, nothing to cheer the heart, nothing to divert painful reflection,
nothing to allay the most cutting remorse; to see every pleasurable object, for
which you forgot God, and sold yourselves to destruction, removed to an eternal
distance; to feel all the irregular passions of your own hearts let loose at
once, like so many hungry vultures to prey insatiably upon them; and hope, the
last of supports under the last of evils, shut out for ever! -- oh sirs, this
is the result of the judgment of God. Lo, this is the portion of the wicked,
and this the heritage appointed to him by God Job. xx. 29.
. It is a grief to a tender heart to think of it, to hear the very report. Oh
what will it be to you to meet it and feel it, in all its force and all its
terror! can your heart endure, or can your hands be strong, in the day, that
God shall deal with you Ezekiel. xxii. 14.
?

ALAS, my heart is pained for you, and my bowels yearn over you! methinks I see
all the haughtiness of your spirits broken, see you pale and trembling on the
very brink of that pit, from whence there is no redemption, and into which the
staming sword of divine justice is driving you. And can nothing be done to save
you? Alas, what should be done? Can any rescue you from the hand of
Omnipotence? Can any intercede for you with that then inexorable judge? It
cannot be. But he is not yet inexorable. He has not yet laid aside the
character of a Savior, of a compassionate friend to perishing creatures. And I
present these things to persuade you, if possible, in this your day, to know
the things that belong to your peace, before they be forever hid from your eyes
Luke xix. 42
. May divine grace effectually do it; and teach you so to judge yourselves,
that you may not then be condemned of the Lord 1 Cor. xi. 31, 32.
! and now,

III. IT only remains, that I conclude the discourse with some plain inferences
from it. And here,

1. THE young sinner has surely a great deal of reason to be thankful, that he
has not already been brought into judgment.

You have indeed the greatest cause to say, it is of the Lord's mercy, that you
are not consumed Isai. ii. 22.
, your breath is in your nostrils 1 Samuel xx. 3.
; and perhaps you can recollect times and circumstances, in which it seemed
just ready to take its flight, when you appeared to be in the extremest danger,
so that there was but a step between you and death Lam. iii. 22.
. And what if that little interval had been passed! where had you then been*
how low had you then fallen? Why it is most certain, as to some of you, that
had you (...) out off, the torrent had swept you away into eternal ruin. Even
n^w, while we are worshipping God in his horse, rejoicing in mercy and in hope,
your miserable spirits had been in the regions of the damned, ^eeling more than
mortal language can express, and fearing yet more, much more than you felt;
being, like the apostate angels, reserved in everlasting chains, under
darkness, unto the judgment of the great day Jude, ver. 6.
. Adore the divine patience and forbearance, that your case is so different;
for most happily different it is. I have the pleasure to testify to you this
day, in the midst of these terrible things which faithfulness to your souls
extorts from me, that the Lord waits that he may be gracious, and does, as it
were, raise himself u^ that he may have mercy upon you Isai. xxx. 18.
: he rises from his throne to stretch out the golden scepter to you, to open
his compassionate arms to embrace you, if you approach him as humble penitents.
Jesus the judge will become your friend; he will receive you, he will shelter
you and bless you; if, with believing hearts you seek his mercy, after having
so long dared his vengeance. This day do I testify, that he is ready to bestow
upon you far more valuable pleasures than those which he calls you to resign,
and to give you much greater satisfaction in contradicting the corruptions of
your heart, and controlling the impulse of your senses than you ever have
found, or could possibly find, in gratifying them. May you be persuaded to the
wise and happy exchange! then will the patience of God be salvation to you,
when his goodness leads you to repentance.

2. THE young christian has apparent reason to be thankful for that grace,
which has sanctified his heart, and turned away his eyes from beholding vanity.

MY brethren in the Lord! permit me to remind you, that you were sometimes
foolish and disobedient, serving diverse lusts and pleasures Tit. iii. 3.
: but there is now room for us to congratulate you, and say, blessed are your
eyes, for they see: and your ears, for they hear Mat. xiii. 16.
. You now know your true interest; the fear of the Lord is implanted in your
heart, and your eyes are directed heavenwards. You are experimentally
acquainted with the pleasure which religion brings, and see that you have
exchanged your tinsel for gold; your shadows for the most valuable substance;
the momentary blaze and crackling of thorns E^cles. vii. 6.
, for the steady light, and influence, and glory of the sun, which is shining
more and more unto the perfect day Prove. iv. 18.
.

LET me invite you to the most cheerful acknowledgments of the riches of divine
grace to you. Bless God for the new nature he has given you, for that heart of
flesh Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26.
into which the rock is transformed by a new creating power; for those new
hopes which he has opened upon you. Bless him, that you are now sheltered from
the storms of divine wrath, and that, instead of looking forward to the
judgment day, with the horrors of a malefactor, who is then to be condemned and
executed, you are rather lifting up your heads to meet the prospect with
triumph, as knowing that your complete salvation will then be manifested, and
your redemption be perfected Luke xxi. 28.
.

3. WE may farther infer, from what we have now been hearing, that the gospel
of the blessed Jesus gives us very great advantages for reclaiming young
persons from the snares of sensuality and ruin.

THE text abundantly intimates the importance of those considerations, which
are taken from the final judgment. Now it is certain, the gospel discovers this
in the strongest light. Therein is the wrath of God revealed against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men Rom i. 18.
; and some more awful views of judgment are given, than even the language of
the prophets, emphatical as it is, can furnish out. In the gospel, we are not
only told in general, that God will judge the world in righteousness, but
particularly assured, that he will do it by that man whom he has appointed
Acts xvii. 11.
, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who for that purpose shall descend from heaven,
in his own glory, and the glory of the father, and all the holy angels with him
Mat. xvi. 27. xxv. 21.
; that the trumpet shall found, and the dead shall be raised 1 Cor. xv. 52.
; that small and great shall stand before God Rev. xx. 12.
; while in the mean time the world is in flames around them, the sun being
darkened, and the moon not giving her light Ma^k xiii. 24
, the stars falling Mat. xxiv. 29.
, the heavens passing away with a great noise, the elements melting with
fervent heat, the earth with all things in it being burnt up 2 pet. iii. 10.
, and departing out of its place Rev. xx. 11.
. And can any thing be more awakening and awful than all this pomp of horror,
this conflagration and confusion of nature? Yes, sirs, there is one thing yet
more awakening; and it is that which the gospel expressly pronounces, that, in
consequence of all, the wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment, and
the righteous into life eternal M^t. xxv. 46.
. ETERNITY, eternity, my brethren, is the declaration of the gospel. Nature
might lead us to suspect it, the law might give some intimation of it, but the
gospel alone asserts it; and not only asserts it, but describes it too. It
lends to our faith that perspective by which we (...) the paradise of God, and
it lays (...) open before us, so that destruction has no covering Job xxvi. 6.
. The christian preacher may then say it, with an energy beyond what Solomon
could conceive, merely on the principles of the Jewish revelation, Rejoice, oh
young man, in thy youth, etc. but know thou, that for all these things, God
will bring thee into judgment.

NOR must I by any means omit that grand advantage which the gospel gives us in
these addresses, by the discovery of the blessed Jesus under the character of a
Savior. It displays him as the chief among ten thousand, and altogether
lovely; as inviting, as waiting, as pleading, as weeping over sinners, yea, as
bleeding and dying for them: as describing the terrors of judgment, that he may
awaken them to slay from it, and may gather them, as a hen gathers her chickens
under its compassionate protecting wings Mat. xxiii. 37
. But is this a simile that we may use, when speaking of him who is to appear
under the character of the worthy judge eternal? Yes, my friends, low as it may
seem, it is a simile that he himself uses, and perhaps uses it in part; it is
so low, that the language itself may be a specimen of that condescension which
it is intended to express.

SUCH is that wonderful contrast of what is most awful, and most engaging, in
the gospel; and this gospel, sirs, do you daily hear. To you is the word of
this salvation sent Acts, ^iii. 26.
; to you is the whole counsel of God declared. May you never be le^t to reject
it against yourselves, Luke vii. 30.
but may diving grace render it a Savor of life unto life 2 Cor. ii. 16.
(...) once more;

4. WE may farther infer, that the (...) thoughts of death must be very useful
to young persons, since judgment is so nearly connected with it.

IT is appointed unto all men once to die, and after death the judgment Heb.
ix. 27.
; and though the final solemnity of that judgment may be delayed to distant
ages, the state of the soul is in a moment unalterably fixed; and in this
sense, as the tree falls, so it must lie (...).
for there is no device, nor working in the grave Chap ix. 10.
.

Now a^ this is generally acknowledged, we may naturally conclude that those,
who remember death, will not forget judgment. Let me therefore, my young
friends, call down your thoughts to the grave; and methinks, among so many
monuments of mortality, it should not be difficult to do it.

RECOLLECT, I beseech you, what of that you have seen the year past. How many
of you have attended the funerals of youth like yourselves, of children much
younger than yourselves! they have given up the ghost, and where are they Job.
xiv. 10.
? What a change has death made! -- where are they? Why, perhaps what remains
of them, within the walls of this place, under the feet of some of you. Could
your eye penetrate a few feet of (...), you would see them; but oh, what
spectacles of horror would you discover! yet perhaps a year ago they were in
the number of the most am^able objects of your sight. And such is your bloom,
such i^ your (...)* And will you (...) upon it, presume so (...) to continue
exposed to all the terrors of divine judgment, in a vain dependence that some
years (...) you shall consider and escape it?

(...) that you were wise, that you understand this, that you would consider
your latter (...)! Deuteronomy. xxxii. 29.
oh that you would be willing to converse with the dying, and with the dead!
you will, no doubt, soon have renewed opportunities of doing it. Some will
probably be called away for lessons to the rest; and before the year rolls
round, you may perhaps see some pious youth going with joy and triumph to
glory, or some careless incorrigible creature dying in terror, or, which is yet
more dreadful, in a stupid insensibility of soul. Reflect, my brethren, on what
of this kind you have seen; attend to what you may farther see: and remember
that the house of mourning may prove a school of the most useful discipline, i^
the living will lay it to heart Eccles. vii. 3.
.

BUT why do I mention the house of mourning? You are perhaps going to that of
feasting N. B. This sermon was preached at Northampton, December 25, 1735.
. The leisure of the season invites to it; and custom has established it into
a law, to close the old year and begin the new with some peculiar vanities, in
some more than ordinary forgetfulness of all the important purposes for which
time and opportunities of i^ are given. Such is our wisdom, such is our
gratitude, such is our consistence with the name we bear, and the profession we
make!

You are perhaps some of you impressed with what you have heard: but I am much
afraid, there are those that within twelve days, or even twelve hours, will
have lost the impression, and be as unconcerned about this great judgment, as
if God's own hand had sent them a discharge from appearing at it. It is a
discouraging case, and it makes us your ministers almost dread this season,
cheerful as it is thought, as that in which former convictions will be worn
off, and the heart of unthinking youth will be steeled against those that might
otherwise be made: as the season, in which we do, as it were, see the infernal
lion bearing away the lambs of our flock, even before our faces.

But we will at least cry out for their deliverance, we will lift up our voice
like a trumpet Isa. (...)
; and may hope, that some of you will take the warning, and hide the word of
God in your heart Psalm. cxix. 11.
Sinners will no doubt be enticing you, to walk as they do in the way of the
heart, and according to the the sight of the eyes, but consent not Prove. i. 10.
to the solicitation, if you would not be destroyed with them, in that day,
when they shall appear, as they have now been represented, unable to stand in
the judgment Psalm. i. 5.
, and shall perish from this unhappy way which they have taken; and that in a
moment, when the wrath of him, whom they now despise, shall but begin to be
kindled against them Psa. ^ii. 12.
; for it shall be kindled with such terrors, that they shall say to the
mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that ^itteth
on the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb; for the great day of his wrath
is come; and who shall be able to stand Rev. vi. 16, 17.
? The Lord grant, that you may all find mercy of the Lord in that day (...) 18.
! AMEN.

FINIS.

