MEDICAL ADVICE TO SEAMEN; WITH DIRECTIONS FOR A MEDICINE CHEST.

NEW LONDON: PRINTED BY SAMUEL GREEN. MDCC,XCV.

MEDICAL ADVICE TO SEAMEN; WITH DIRECTIONS FOR A MEDICINE CHEST.
SEAFARING people are that class of mankind who are supposed to be in perfect
health when they enrol themselves for any particular voyage or cruise;
notwithstanding their hardiness, they are liable to many and numerous
excruciating maladies, during the prosecution of their respective voyages to
different parts of the world: Whatever, therefore has a tendency to meliorate,
or render comfortable the situation of the sick on board of vessels, must be an
acquisition truly important and useful to all navigators. I shall therefore, by
way of preface to the directions for a sea medicine chest, offer some general
outlines on the appearance and management of the principal diseases which occur
to seamen in different voyages and places. It has been a common practice to put
up medicine chests, with directions containing the doses and virtues (...)
article only. This cannot be of much service to the people, unless the master
or prescriber has a previous knowledge of diseases, or is a person of judgment
sufficient to discern the character of the disease, and thereby judge what
particular indication is best suited remove it.

Many sick people at sea have suffered much, and had their complaint prolonged,
in consequence of a too frequent, and often opposite repetition of medicines;
this is in consequence of the similarity there is in the symptoms of many
diseases, which in their respective natures, are diametrically opposite, and
which, without some general rule or guide, no man can make a necessary
distinction. The short system which I here present, will be brief and concise;
at the same time containing an illustration of circumstances, necessary to mark
the general characteristic, on which most of the diseases incident to seamen,
depend. Whereby the master may know on what grounds to prescribe his medicines,
and how he may judge of their effects, and conduct his applications through all
the variety of symptoms that occur, in general diseases.

Sailors are very apt to be careless of their health, especially while in port,
and expose themselves to every intemperance that can possibly produce the
occasional causes of diseases. It is therefore incumbent on the master to watch
his people closely, while under his care; and when sick, to make faithful
investigation respecting their conduct and habits, during a number of days
before the arrival of the disease.

ALL GENERAL DISEASES ARE DIVIDED INTO FOUR ORDERS, viz: -- FEVERS,
INFLAMMATIONS, FLUXES, AND DISEASES OF WEAKNESS.
ORDER I. FEVERS.
FEVERS, comprehend all those diseases which are attended with the following
symptoms: viz. the patient complains first of a dull pain in the back and
limbs, weakness of the joints, especially of the knees, a heavy pain, load, and
disagreeable sensations at the stomach, with a natural aversion to move about
or exercise; a yawning, stretching, etc. succeeded by slight cold chills,
flying through the body, head ach, sickness at the stomach, the eye looks dull
and heavy, sometimes very red and prominent, as the cold chill advances the
skin is pale and shrivelled; these symptoms are next succeeded by heats
throughout the body, with the appearance of enlarged veins, quick, hard and
laborious pulse, striking from 70 to 100 strokes in a minute, sometimes the
pulse feels small, quick and trembling; sickness at the stomach, sometimes
occasions violent vo^^^^, and sometimes purgings; the patient is uneasy and
restless, but complains of no particular pain except in the head, which
sometimes occasions deliriums, a wildness, and incoherent speaking, pulling and
hauling the bed clothes, etc. These symptoms continue 6 or 8 hours, when they
abate a little, but return again toward night with their former violence, and
continue to observe these periods until the 9th, 11th, 14th, and sometimes run
on to the 20th and 24th day of the disease, before a solution terminates either
in death or health. These different periods of the disease vary according to
the climate, state of the patient's constitution, nature of the reigning
diseases of the place, and a variety of circumstances which often shorten or
lengthen a fever: It is to be observed that different people with different
constitutions will be differently affected with the same fever. Some are
attacked with all the above mentioned symptoms, with violent vomitings of black
matter, and bleeding at the nose, eyes and gums; others with the same fever, in
the same place and vessel, have all those symptoms mild, and a very clear head,
with quiet stomach and bowels; others again are seized with violent heat and
pains in the head and bones, and continue in the greatest tortures two or three
days, and die sudden. These last circumstances depend on the manner of living;
to frequent intoxication, and being late out in night air fogs, lying on deck
evenings; carousing in hot, close houses, and suddenly going into the air; the
nature of the prevailing sickness in port; being in (...), still rivers,
canals, marshy places, etc. etc.

These are the general marks of contagious and epid^^^^^al fevers, which sweep
off so many of our Amer^^^^ (...); but seamen are liable to fevers from
different (...), as sudden colds, with obstructed perspiration; from a foul and
weakened stomach, bad provisions, etc. etc. and many get fevers from their own
carelessness or negligence, as has been before mentioned; but they are all
cured much in the same manner; varying the modes in proportion to the violent
symptoms of the fever present.

METHOD OF CURE.
AFTER having examined the patient's constitution, his habits of living, and
the state of his stomach and bowels; and whether those symptoms mentioned
above, are actually present, the judgment will dictate what particular
evacuation will be most proper. If the sickness at stomach, with vomiting of
bile, is the most prevalent, it will be proper to give a vomit, No. 1. and
after the operation is finished, if the heat, thirst, quick pulse, and symptoms
of fever continue to rage, blood letting must be had recourse to, drawn freely,
and repeated as the symptoms require, having regard to the robust habit of the
patient, etc. It is to be remembered, that we cannot be too free with the
lancet in many climates, especially in the West Indies, and in our southern
states, among the fevers incident to those climates; after bleeding, a purge,
No. 3. is to be given, and should it not operate largely, it must be repeated
again. These three general evacuations are only to be depended upon in the cure
of fevers, and must be repeated as the symptoms of fever and violence of the
complaint indicate. For drink, the fever julep, No. 18. may be taken often, by
mixing it with water, barley tea cold, beverage, lemonade water, or fifteen or
twenty drops of No. 10. mixed with a pint of water, may be a drink constantly,
and is very proper in hot climates, where putrefaction is to be dreaded; crem.
Tartar water, etc. The patient must be kept cool, and suffered to breathe pure
air.

If notwithstanding the exhibition of these general indications of vomiting,
bleeding, purging, and cooling, the fever should run on till it terminates in a
putrid, dissolved state of the blood, which is known by an abatement of all
pains or uneasiness; a black, dry tongue, with a yellow streak across the
middle of it; stinking breath, and weakening, clammy sweats, hollow eyes, blood
starting from the gums, nose, bowels, and the recovery of his senses, you must
lay aside all those cooling medicines, and give freely of No. 4. No. 11.
brandy, wine, and wash the patient freely in good spirits and vinegar, keeping
his cabin well ventilated, etc. But in this stage of the business it will be
proper to have the advice of a physician.

ORDER II. INFLAMMATIONS.
UNDER this head are internal and external inflammations: The internal are
plenrisy, quinsey, rheumatism, gout, inflammation of the stomach, bowels,
kidneys, etc. etc. They are attended with the above symptoms of fever, heat,
quick and strong pulse; with a particular seated severe pain in those parts,
where the disorder fixes; at the side in pleurisy, throat in quinsies, etc.
etc. All internal inflammations attended with fever, proceed from great and
sudden colds, exposure to damp air when sweated, and also drinking largely of
cold water when warm, etc. etc.

External inflammations are painful swellings, with redness of the part,
tending to increase to large tumors, and suppuration.

Internal inflammations are cured by blood-letting, purging with salts, No. 2.
and powder, No. 3. drinking freely of barley and flaxseed tea, crem. Tartar
water, etc.

External inflammations are cured by applying the mineral water, No. 16. and
purging with salts and (...) powder, No. 3. bleeding, and if the swelling is
(...) and increases to maturate, poultices of (...) bread and milk, must be
applied warm, (...) repeated, till it is fit to be opened with a (...).

ORDER III. FLUXES, Such as Dysentery, Cholera Morbus, Diarrhaea, or common
Looseness, etc.
DYSENTERY or bloody flux, is cured by bleeding, if feverish, purging with
salts, No. 2. sometimes taking a vomit, if sick at the stomach; drinking freely
of barley tea; after the bowels are emptied, take twenty-five or thirty drops
of No. 5. every night, and drink barley and toasted bread made into paste, with
rice plentifully salted.

(...) morbus is cured by immediately taking large draughts of (...) broth, and
clysters of the same; sometimes it will be proper to give a vomit, No. 1. and
if the vomiting and purging still continue, give thirty or forty drops of No. 5.

A common looseness is often very salutary, therefore should never be stopped
too suddenly; it may be cured by taking warm burnt brandy, with eighteen or
twenty drops of No. 5. at going to bed.

ORDER IV. DISEASES OF WEAKNESS.
THOUGH they do not frequently occur at sea, yet many times seamen are liable
to lingering diseases, which require some of the master's skill; such as
scurvy, dropsical swellings, intermitting fevers, colics, rheumatisms without
fever, jaundice, etc.

Scurvy is cured by taking ten or fourteen drops of No. 10. in water, three
times a day, eating fruit vegetables, drinking lemonade, and if there are any
scurvy sores, and spongy, they must be cut out with a lancet, and dressed with
line, and salve, No. 7.

Dropsical swellings are cured by friction, taking bark, brandy, wine, and
nourishing diet; gentle exercise, etc.

Intermitting fever, commonly called fever and ague, is cured by taking a
vomit, No. 1. and when the fever (...) off, a tea spoonful of bark every two
hours, in (...), etc.

Colics are cured by taking clyster^, purging (...), No. 3. fomenting the belly
with flannels wrung out of boiling water, and applied warm to the belly.

Jaundice is cured by purging with No. 3. taking a pill of Castile soap two or
three times a day; exercise; good diet, bitters, No. 11. bark, No. 4. brandy,
wine, etc.

Sudden maladies, as convulsion fits, suppression of the urine, etc. often
occur at sea; the former requires thirty or forty drops of No. 5. every hour
till relief; the latter, fomenting the belly and bladder, as in colic, drinking
flaxseed tea, crem. Tartar water, etc. etc.

Wounds; such as cuts and bruises, are to be treated with some considerable
care: If an important part is cut deep, and large blood vessels are separated,
the bleeding must be stopped by compressing the edges of the wound together,
filling it with lint, and if it bleeds much, cover it with lint and flour, and
compress it close, letting the lint and flour remain on till the parts are
united: It is best to sew up an incised wound, when it can be done.

VENEREAL DISEASE.
A SIMPLE gonorrhoea or running, without any taint in the blood, may be cured
by taking a powder, No. 3. every other morning, till the patient has taken
three; by injecting sweet oil into the yard two or three times a day; this is
highly recommended.

When the virus of the disease has entered the blood, and occasioned scaldings,
swellings, pains, etc. etc. then the general cure is to be attempted: Let the
patient first be purged two or three times with salts, and purging powders, No.
3. then begin and take a table spoonful of No. 14. morning and evening. Let his
diet be rather spare, and to eat no salted or greasy provisions; drink brandy
and gin only; and purge every fourth day till he is well, etc. Buboes, or
swellings in the groin, must be carried away in their beginning, if possible;
rub on them at going to bed, the ointment, No. 8. taking care not to get any
cold, etc.

MEDICINES.
No. I. VOMITS.
TAKE one of these powders, and dissolve it in six table spoonfuls of cold
water, then take four spoonfuls down, and wait fifteen minutes; if it does not
then operate, take one spoonful every fifteen minutes, till it does; then work
it off with warm water, and after the operation is over, take fifteen drops of
No. 5. in some toast water.

No. II. SALTS.
DOSE a table spoonful to three dissolved in water.

No. III. PURGING POWDERS.
TAKE one of these mixed in molasses or syrup, drinking gruel only till it
operates.

No. IV. PERUVIAN BARK.
DOSE a tea spoonful every two hours, in warm water, wine, gin, or molasses:
Care must be taken not to administer this in the paroxysms of a fever.

No. V. LAUDANUM.
DOSE from twenty-five to sixty drops, as the emergency of the case may
require; this medicine is proper to procure sleep, rest and ease from pains, to
stop looseness of the bowels, and good in cases as before directed.

No. VI. SMELLING DROPS.
TO be used and taken five or eight drops in water, when faint, in fevers,
every three or four hours.

No. VII. HEALING SALVE.
TO heal and digest wounds or ulcers, having care to extirpate all proud fungus
flesh, by the use of No. 17.

No. VIII. MERCURIAL OINTMENT.
TO be rubbed in the groin, etc. as directed in venereal disease; good to kill
lice, etc.

No. IX. TURLINGTON BALSAM.
SEE the printed directions.

No. X. ELIXIR VITRIOL.
DOSE from eight to fifteen drops three times a day; besides its uses mentioned
before, it is good to create an impaired appetite, strengthening to the system,
etc.

No. XI. BITTERS.
TWO large table spoonfuls of this put into a quart of good spirit or brandy,
make an excellent bitter; which is good to take after a fever, or to prevent
the catching of fevers in sickly places; to strengthen the stomach and bowels;
good in jaundice, dropsy, and all diseases of weakness, etc.

No. XII. ENGLISH BARLEY.
SEE fevers.

No. XIII. SPANISH FLIES.
BLISTERS are indicated in pleurisies; deliriums in fevers, after bleeding, and
many other diseases. Take a piece of leather, cloth, or brown paper, and spread
a plaster with No. 7. and strew it over with these flies, and press it into
the plaster till it is covered, then rub the part with vinegar and apply the
plaster, and when it has raised a blister, let it out, and keep on the
plaster till it has done running; afterward dress it with a thin plaster of
No. 7.

No. XIV. VENEREAL POWDERS.
WHEN you wish to cure the disease as before mentioned, take one of these
powders and put it into one quart of brandy, or wine, and when dissolved, take
as before directed. N. B. Be careful that these powders do not get misplaced,
or taken instead of vomit, No. 1. Death would be a consequence.

No. XV. CREM. TARTAR.
SEE fevers.

No. XVI. MINERAL WATER,
IS made thus: Take a half pint of pure water and drop of this into it. Shaking
the water until it becomes nearly as white as milk, then use it as before
directed.

No. XVII. PRECIPITATE.
TO eat proud flesh, etc.

No. XVIII. FEVER JULEP.
TAKE one pint of water and put into it a powder, No. 1. and take a table
spoonful every two hours; this is an excellent julep in the bilious
inflammatory fevers of the hot climates.

Auctori. S. H. P. LEE, PHYSICIAN.

MEDICAL ADVICE in Physic and Surgery, particularly in the Venereal Disease,
with good attendance, may be had of the subscriber at his house, opposite Union
Bank, and Printing-Office: Where also are sold wholesale and retail, Drugs and
Medicines, Surgeon's Instruments, etc. Medicine Chests for sea and families,
put up with care and precision, by SAMUEL H. P. LEE, M. D. and APOTHECARY.

NEW LONDON, (Connecticut,) 1795.

