THE BLIND CHILD, OR ANECDOTES OF THE WYNDHAM FAMILY.

WRITTEN FOR THE USE OF YOUNG PEOPLE.

BY A LADY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY H. and P. RICE, No. 50 HIGH STREET, AND J.
RICE and CO. MARKET-STREET, BALTIMORE.

1795.

PREFACE.
IT has always been my opinion, that a person of genius, who dedicates superior
talents to the instruction of young people, d^serves the highest applause and
the most enthusiastic admiration. To write with a constant attention to the
limited understanding or information of children; to restrain a lively
imagination, and employ a mind capable of the most brilliant pursuits o^
subjects of a puerile kind, seems to be a sort of heroic sacrifice of
gratification to virtue, which I cannot doubt is acceptable to the Supreme
Being.

We have, in the present age, many striking examples of this kind. The names of
Barbauld and Genlis will be sufficient to prove this, although with them many
others might undoubtedly claim that immortal honor, which the union of genius
with virtue ought always to bestow.

To rank with such characters as these, however it may be my ambition, will, I
fear, never be my lot! But a noble emulation, whether or not it be successful,
can never be despicable; and whatever are my talents, the desire of making them
subservient to the cause of virtue, will, at least be approved by the candid
and the good: to them I dedicate the following simple pages, happy, most happy,
if they serve to awaken, in the rising generation, that lively wish for
goodness they were intended to inspire.

My principal aim, it will be seen, is to repress that excessive softness of
heart, which too frequently involves its possessor in atrain of evils, and
which is by no means true sensibility, that exquisite gift of heaven, which no
one can esteem more highly than myself, though its abuse every day serves more
and more to convince me, it can never be sufficiently discouraged and
condemned. With this short explanation of the motives which have induced me to
give this Work to the Public, I resign it with implicit obedience to the
decrees of these who are much more able than myself to judge of its merits.

Yet while I hail the sympathy Divine,
Which makes, O man! the wants of others thine:
I mourn (...) justice scarcely owned,
And principle for sentiment dethroned!
While feeling boasts her ever tearful eye,
Stern truth, firm faith, and manly virtue fly!
-- As this strong feeling tends to good or ill,
It gives fresh power to vice or principle*
It Is not peculiar to the wise and good,
It Is passion's flame, the virtue of the blood.
But to divert it to its proper course,
There wisdom's power appears, there reason's force.
If ill directed it pursues the wrong,
It adds new strength to what before was strong;
Breaks out in wild irregular desires,
Disordered passions* and illicit fires.
But if the virtuous bias rule the soul,
This lovely feeling then adorns the whole,
Sheds its sweet sunshine on the moral part,
Nor wastes on fancy what should warm the heart.
SENSIBILITY. -- By Miss More^ THE BLIND CHILD.
MR. WYNDHAM, of whose family I am about to relate some Anecdotes, was an
eminent merchant. He married an amiable woman, by whom he had four children.
Their residence, during the winter, was in one of the best streets in the city
of London, and in the summer months, at his fine estate in the country, on
which he had built an elegant house, and where the riches his industry, and
that of his father, had gained, were partly employed in decorating his ^rounds,
and partly distributed with a liberal hand among the neighboring poor. But it
is not of Mr. Wyndham only I mean to speak, though his benevolence, his
probity, and various virtues, might well employ a more able historian than
myself. It is true, he will sometimes appear to great advantage in the
following pages: but since I address myself to a yout^^^^ class of readers, it
is pro^a^^e they will be more interested in what respects his children. It is
their dispositions, their conduct, their manners, I mean to descri^e, and Mr.
Wyndham will appear in a more amiable light as their father than any other. As
a good mother too, Mrs. Wyndham will, I doubt not, excite many grateful
comparisons in my young friends, who will read in her character those virtues
which have been exerted by their own mothers; and not one sentiment of regret
will, I hope, be awakened by a review of her actions, except in that feeling
youthful bosom, which mourns the loss of an indulgent parent.

Mr. Wyndham's eldest child was a daughter, named Emily. She was, at the time
when this history commences, just turned of fourteen, and at that age gave
promise of every amiable and virtuous quality; I say gave promise, because at
that time of life, the character cannot be decided. Neither had she been
injudiciously brought forward according to the fashion of the times, which,
hastening the summer of life, shortens the spring, and consequently denies a
proper time for the unfolding of the s^lken bud, and forces an immature fruit,
neither fair to the sight, nor pleasing to the taste. This reflection, excited
by my subject, may, I hope, be excused; for, should my young readers pass it
over as unimportant now, it may hereafter recur to their memory, as neither
untrue nor uninteresting.

Emily, with a form of the most delicate order, had been accustomed so early to
habits of industry and exercise, that her frame had acquired a strength which
nature had denied, and her countenance a bloom, which enlivened it with the
most graceful vivacity. She was not a beauty, but she was perfectly agreeable.
Her healthy appearance, her intelligent and modest smile, the ingen^ious
candor that shone in her eyes, gave he^ charms infinitely preferable to a cold
regularity of features, because they were graces which rose from the heart, and
could not have existed without a corresponding sweetness of disposition. In the
mild countenance and elegant manners of Emily, you might read the excellence of
her temper, and the intelligence of her soul. In her eyes, as in a mirror, you
saw reflected every motion of her heart: she was without disguise; and her
natural graces were infinitely preferable to any which art and affectation
could have taught her. But her character will reveal itself; and my young
readers, though charmed with Emily, may be impatient to hear more of her brother
and sisters. Mrs. Wyndham's second child was a son, near twelve years of age.
He was named Arthur, and he deserved equally with Emily the affection of his
parents. He was naturally of a bold, impetuous disposition, which they had
taken the utmost pains to keep within due bounds, and had so far succeeded,
that, except in a very few instances, his behavior was perfectly becoming.
Sometimes, indeed, his natural impatience subjected him to inconvenience; but
that Mr. and Mrs. Wyndham did not much regret, because it served to convince
him how right they were, when they warned him against yielding to the eagerness
of his temper. He had an excellent sense, great tenderness of heart, and a most
^^^^ctionate disposition, which showed itself to peculiar advantage (...)
behavior to his sisters. -- To the second of them, he was (...) more mindful
than to the other. Alas! ^he most needed h^s attention. She was nine years old.
Her name was Helen; and when she was about a year old, (...) had the misfortune
of (...) ^^r sight by a violent cold, so that she was now entirely blind; her
(...) dark e^es turned mournfully round without receiving a single ray of
light. -- She had become blind so young, that she had no idea of the objects
(...) her: she knew not what was meant by the sun, the (...) or any thing that
was (...) of (...) beautiful; and what (...) more affected her tender heart,
^he knew not the cou^ten^^ (...) of her father and mother! What grief to them
was this sad affliction! with what anguish did they perceive the impossibility
of giving her equal advantages of education with their other children! with
what ardour did they pray for the restoration of her sight.

The youngest child was also a girl. She was about seven years old, and was
named Maria. She was very pretty, very gentle, and sweet in her temper, and
entirely the favorite of all the family. Thus would Mr. and Mrs. Wyndham have
been completely happy in their children, but for the misfortune of poor Helen;
for which, however, they were partly consoled, by the tenderness and compassion
it excited in her brother and sisters. At the time I have chosen for the
commencement of these Anecdotes, Mr. Wyndham's family had just passed the
winter in London, and were preparing for their remove to Belle-Ville, their
seat in the country. The children were all extremely rejoiced and delighted
with the thoughts of so pleasing an exchange. They were all busily employed in
packing up their clothes, except Helen, who sat on a window seat in the
nursery, attending to their conversation.

ARTHUR. Emily, sha'n't you be very glad to see your birds again?


EMILY. Yes indeed, brother: I hope the hard winter has destroyed none of them.
I charged Jenny to throw the crumbs into the filbert-tree-walk; and I hope we
shall find it well stocked with as many little pensioners as usual. But I have
a much greater pleasure in expectation.


ARTHUR. What is that, Emily?


EMILY. Can you not guess, Arthur?


ARTHUR. Oh, I Will be hanged if you don't mean seeing little Charlotte Neville!


EMILY. But there can be no occasion for your saying you would be hanged, brother,
even if you were wrong in your guess.


HELEN (laughing.) I Am glad you told him of that ugly saying, sister, I don't
like to hear him use it.


ARTHUR. If I like it, that is enough; you need not trouble yourselves to
correct my language.


HELEN. But I say, Arthur, that Papa does not choose you should use those words.


ARTHUR. Well, then, Papa can tell me of it without your assistance.


HELEN. But not --


EMILY. Hush, my dear Helen. Arthur don't be angry. Come, what were we talking
of?


MARIA. Oh, of Charlotte Neville; -- and I shall be very glad to see her too. I
shall then show her my new doll, and this pretty coach Mr. Jones gave me, and
this new book -- look, what nice pictures there are in it -- "This is the house
that Jack built." -- Who was Jack, sister?


HELEN. How her little tongue runs.


ARTHUR. But, Emily, to ask you rather a more important question than Maria's,
do you know how Mrs. Neville is?


EMILY. Ah, Mamma's last letter says, she is very ill indeed.


ARTHUR. And is not Mamma very sorry?


EMILY. Certainly, for you know they have always loved each other. To lose Mrs.
Neville, would be the same thing to Mamma, as it would be to Helen if I were to
die; they have always loved like sisters.


HELEN. To die! I don't understand that; I never could have thought of it!


EMILY ( to Arthur, with tears in her eyes.) Poor thing, how she affects me!
She means, she can have no idea of it. Alas! how many ideas m^st she want in
consequence of her blindness!


HELEN. But, Emily, you don't answer me. Tell me, (...) what it is to (...)*


EMILY. You ask too hard a question for me to answer, my dear Helen; I can only
tell you, that when a person dies, they have no longer any sense: they seem as
if they were asleep, except that they do not breathe, and they wake no more.


HELEN. I do not quite understand; -- but I know enough to be sure, that it
cannot be the same thing to Mamma, if Mrs. Neville was to die, as it would be
to me if you died; for if you were always asleep, you could not lead me about
-- you could not tell me such amusing stories. Now Mamma can walk by herself,
and read stories, and what you call work. I can do none of all this. Oh, it is
quite another thing!


ARTHUR. Don't talk so, my dear Helen; you make us all sad.


MARIA. And Emily is crying.


HELEN. Where, where is she? lead me to her, Maria.


EMILY. I will come to you, my dear sister. --


Emily then ran to her, embraced her, and here the conversation ceased for that
time: the next morning they all set off for Belle-Ville, which they reached in
the evening, and were too much tired to stir from the house that night. The
next morning they rose very early: the three girls were soon dressed; and then
they rapped at Arthur's door, which he opened, and they all went down together.
Arthur, impatient and eager, in a few minutes found himself several yards
before her sisters. He was closely followed by little Maria, who ^kipped from
place to place like a young bird, and made many thousand exclamations about
flowers and trees. Emily, with Helen leaning on her arm, continued to walk more
slowly on the terrace, which commanded a beautiful view, and where they held
the following conversation:

HELEN. I feel the air very warm and and pleasant; and how sweetly the birds
sing.


EMILY. It Is a glorious morning; the spring returns in all its beauty, and the
birds enjoy the young leaves.


HELEN. So, Arthur and Maria are run away! I no longer hear their voices; and
you, my dear Emily, how good you are to remain with me. If you will lead me to
a bench, I will set down, and you may run also.


EMILY. No, my dear, I feel no inclination to do so.


HELEN. That is so good! You say so, because you would not have me feel sorry
for keeping you here. -- Yes, yes, I understand that; and I ought never to feel
unhappy, since I have such kind relations. But, Emily, you said just now, it is
a glorious morning; why cannot I have any notion of a glorious morning? You
talk of the sun, you say how bright he shines: why does he shine, as you call
it, in vain only for me? I cannot help sighing when I think of it!


EMILY (embracing her.) It makes me sigh too, my dear girl; it makes me as sad
as it does you. But do not say the sun shines in vain for you: it is true, you
cannot see him; but it is by his assistance the air is warmed and purified,
that the birds are enlivened and caused to sing; that these flowers which you
smell, are produced: thus, then, he shines not in vain even for you.


HELEN. That is true; I ought not to be unhappy. But there are so many things I
do not understand, so many words which have no meaning to me -- The other day
when you le^t the room, Mr. Thomson said to Mamma, "Miss Wyndham grows very
handsome -- she is charming." No, Sir, Mamma said, she is not very handsome,
but she is a very good girl. What did he mean by handsome? and why did Mamma
say you were not so?


EMILY. Mamma was in the right: he said so because he thought she would be
pleased with it.


HELEN. But how is that? Would Mamma be pleased with you for being handsome?
why then are you not?


EMILY. No, Mamma is too just; she would not love me the better for being
handsome; only foolish people are pleased with that.


HELEN. Ah, then, Mr. Thomson I guess is not very wise to take Mamma for a
foolish person! -- But how is it you cannot be handsome?


EMILY. My dear, I can no more make myself handsome, than you can make yourself
see. To be handsome, we must have regular ^eatures, a good complexion, and a
^ine shape. It is only God who can give these. They are given to many persons;
but these are not always the most happy. They frequently become vain or proud
with their beauty; they attend to nothing but its improvement; they learn
nothing but how to dress themselves; they are idle, frivolous, and useless:
while children, they are inattentive to their parents; when parents, they are
careless of their children. These are my mother's ideas, almost her words. But
this picture is not universal; some people render beauty more pleasing by good
sense, by accomplishments, and by virtue.


HELEN. I understand you in part; but I can have no notion of beauty.


EMILY. Smell this flower, you can receive pleasure from its scent.


HELEN. Yes, I can; it is delightful.


EMILY. That bird -- do you not like to hear him sing?


HELEN. Yes, surely.


EMILY. Well, then, the eye has sensations something like these; when it sees
any thing beautiful, it receives the same pleasure which you have in a pleasant
scent, or an agreeable sound.


HELEN. You have given me a very good notion of it, at least I think so. If
ever it should please God to give me my ^ight, I will tell you whether you had
ever before given me any idea of its advantages.


She pronounced these wo^ds in so a^^e^^ing a to^e, that Emily could not help
shedding tears; and Helen, softe^ed by their conversation, w^pt also. At that
insta^^t they were joined by Arthur and Maria; they had run themselves out of
breath, and were both laughing; but their mirth was changed in an instant into
gravity, when they saw the melancholy of their sisters.

MARIA. What, you have been crying because we ran away from you; is not that
it? Well, then, be comforted, you shall run too; I will lead Helen.


ARTHUR. Hold your peace, simpleton; would they cry because we left them? No,
no, we only disturb them!


EMILY. How! why do you think so?


ARTHUR. Because we are such chatter-pies, and you are so grave and so good.
Come, what is all this about? Have you been weeping over the lamentable tale of
Blue Beard, or the melancholy history of Cinderilla?


EMILY. What nonsense is that you are talking?


ARTHUR. But you laugh -- Well, that is all I wanted, so my nonsense has
succeeded; and Helen laughs too, that is right. Do you know it is almost
breakfast time? I fancy we shall be expected. Come, Helen, lean on me; Emily,
take the other arm. Run before, little kitten, and tell them we are coming in
grand procession.


HELEN. Arthur makes me laugh, he is so droll.


They then went into the house, and after breakfast was over, the children gave
an account of their morning ramble. Helen was gone out of the room, and Emily
remained silent. Mrs. Wyndham observing this, asked her how she found her birds
and bees?

EMILY. I did not see them, Ma'am.


MRS. WYNDHAM. How happened that, my dear?


EMILY. I was walking on the terrace with Helen, Ma'am, and she did not seem
disposed to run to the filbert-tree-walk, it was so far, and we rose later than
usual.


MRS. WYNDHAM. What, then you were the only one with Helen: Arthur and Maria
had run away; was it not so?


EMILY. Yes, Ma'am, but --


MRS. WYNDHAM. Nay, my dear, I shall not speak of this as a serious matter; I
dare say their vol^tile spirits only were the cause of their inattention. They
should, however, have considered that you, who are particularly fond of the
birds and bees, no doubt wi^^ed to see them as much as they could; they ought,
therefore, to have offered their assistance to Helen. Had you been as
inconsiderate, the poor child would have been alone.


ARTHUR. But, indeed, Ma'am, I thought Emily and Helen would have followed us.


EMILY. Yes, I am sure you did, Arthur; and so we should, had we not insensibly
engaged in an interesting conversation, which pleased me better than seeing my
birds; therefore, pray, Ma'am, do not be displeased with my brother and sister.


ARTHUR (with warmth.) You are too good to us, Emily. As to Maria, she is
excus^able, as being a child; but I ought to have known better. I said, indeed,
I thought you would have followed us; but the real truth is, I believe, that I
did not think any thing about it.


MR. WYNDHAM. That is right, Arthur; I like this candid avowal.


MRS. WYNDHAM. It Is a thousand times better than any excuse. Let no more be
said on the subject, except that I give you a general caution to imitate the
attention of Emily to Helen. Restrain, my dears, those lively spirits, which I
delight to see, when they do not interfere with her enjoyments. Poor thing, she
is blind! and is thereby circumscribed in her pleasures: they all depend on our
attention; and let me entreat you in this, as in all other circumstances, to do
as you would be done by.


At the words, "Poor thing, she is blind," and the pathetic manner in which
Mrs. Wyndham pronounced them, the tears started into the eyes of Emily and
Arthur, they each kissed a hand of their mother, and she uttered the promise
their hearts made her, never to neglect the helpless object of their cares. --
Helen just then returned, and they entered immediately on the employment of the
morning. -- Emily and Maria worked, while Arthur read aloud; and Helen, who by
great attention had been taught to knot, employed herself with that, and
listened to her brother. He then withdrew to take his Latin and other lessons
with his father. Emily then took a book, and afterward Maria; then Miss
Wyndham practiced for an hour on the harpsichord, to which Helen listened with
great delight: she was excessively fond of music, had an agreeable voice, and
could sing several songs. While they employed themselves thus, Maria wrote with
her Mamma. The children were then dressed, and Mrs. Wyndham ordered the
carriage, and with her three daughters set out for an airing. She bade the
coachman drive to Mrs. Neville's, whom she was imp^tient to see, as the
children were to embrace their little play-fellow, for whom they had brought
several toys from London.

When the coach stopped at Mrs. Neville's door, little Charlotte came running
out, and in an instant the young Wyndham's were out of the coach, they eagerly
embraced her. -- "Oh, I am so glad to see you," exclaimed Charlotte: Mamma said
she thought you would call today. -- How is your Mamma today, my dear? said
Mrs. Wyndham. Oh, very poorly indeed, the little girl replied; she is very weak
too, and now she cannot walk with me at all! -- Mrs. Wyndham sighed deeply, and
taking little Charlotte by the hand, was led by her into the parlour, where
they found Mrs. Neville. Mrs. Wyndham embraced her with that cordiality which
their long friendship demanded. -- Tears started into the eyes of each. -- Mrs.
Neville's arose from the satisfaction she felt in seeing her friend; Mrs.
Wyndham's, from grief for the sad alteration a few months had made in Mrs.
Neville's countenance. The children, struck by its mournful and interesting
paleness, kept a pensive silence, and Emily's eyes were filled with tears; she
leaned down and caressed Charlotte. At length Mrs. Wyndham, conquering her
emotion, broke silence.

MRS. WYNDHAM. You expected me, my dear friend?


MRS. NEVILLE. Yes; I knew your kindness would lead you to me as soon as
possible. How happy it makes me to see you! I have a thousand things to say.


MRS. WYNDHAM. I am also impatient to converse with you; but do no fatigue
yourself; our arrival has flurried you. Tell me whether you think the children
grown? That, you know, is one of the first questions a mother asks.


MRS. NEVILLE (smiling.) I know it by experience. My dear Emily, come to me;
how you are grown and improved!


EMILY. You are always too good to me, my dear Ma'am; it delights me to see you
and my dear Charlotte.


MRS. NEVILLE. Charlotte is happy, my dear girl, in your affection. But let me
not forget my other friends.

She then kissed Maria and Helen, while Mrs. Wyndam took Charlotte on her knee.


MRS. NEVILLE. With what pleasure do I see her in your arms! -- Ah, my friend!
--


She stopped, interrupted by a sudden emotion, and Charlotte's little
countenance was overspread with sadness, when she beheld her Mamma in tears. --
"Why do you cry, Mamma?" said she; you said you should be happy when Mrs.
Wyndham came. -- Ha^h, little (...), Mrs. Wyndham said in a low voice. Mrs.
Neville then recovering herself, proceeded --

MRS. NEVILLE. My dear friend, I have so much to say to you, and my mind will
be so much easier when it is said, that you must gratify my impatie^ce by
allowing me to converse with you immediately.


MRS. WYNDHAM. That shall be as you please; but will not the fatigue --


MRS. NEVILLE. No, no; I feel myself quite equal to it now. I know not how long
it shall be so; we ought never to de^er till the next hour what we can do in
this, especially when ^he hours of our life promise to be few.


She spoke this with a sweet smile; but Mrs. Wyndham, overcome by the feelings
of humanity, turned aside to conceal her tears.

MRS. NEVILLE. Charlotte, will you take Miss Helen and Miss Maria into your
play-room? you have several new toys.


MARIA. Oh, and we have brought several new ones for her; have we not, Emily?
They are in that basket, Mamma; may I open it?


MRS. WYNDHAM. Take them with you, my dear, and open the basket in the next
room.


Little Charlotte se^^ed Maria by the hand, and skipping about, led her into
the play-room. -- Emily arose to assist Helen.

MRS. NEVILLE. Miss Wyndham, when you have led your sister into the next room,
will you return hither?


EMILY. If you desire it, Ma'am, and Mamma has no objection.


MRS. NEVILLE. I wish it much.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Return, then, my dear.


Emily curtsied, and returned in a few minutes.

Mrs. Neville paused a minute -- She trembled, changed color, and seemed so
much affected, that Emily's heart beat with apprehension for (...). Mrs.
Wyndham pressed (...) friend's hand, which she held in her own, and led her
into discourse by talking of Charlotte's growth and improvement.

MRS. NEVILLE. She is, indeed, all my happiness in this world, the only tie,
your friendship excepted, which holds me to it. My dear Emily, for how many
years has your affection been one of my first delights! With what pleasure do I
still recollect a thousand instances of it! Have I not been sometimes
ungrateful, petulant, and unkind? If I have, forgive me now!


MRS. WYNDHAM. Ah, Charlotte! my friend, my dear friend!


MRS. NEVILLE. My heart has ever understood yours; it does so still! But I
distress you. My dear Miss Wyndham, I requested you to stay, because I am
convinced your discretion exceeds your years. -- You have a good and feeling
heart; cherish its kind affections. You are gr^eved to see me thus wasted by
disease, thus on the brink of another world. But, my dear young friend, to me
the prospect is not dreadful! Let the lesson I now give you, sink deep into
your heart: let it chasten and confirm your better thoughts. -- The prospect of
death is no longer terrible to me. The consolations of religion are my support!


She stopped, exhausted by speaking; for both Mrs. Wyndham and her daughter were
too much affected to reply. She resumed her discourse, after an instant's pause.

MRS. NEVILLE. Forgive me for speaking so much of myself; it is to reconcile
you to an event which soon, very soon must take place. My dear Emily, be not so
affected; recover yourself.


MRS. WYNDHAM (embracing her with tears.) Ah, Charlotte, why do you speak thus?
Let me still hope that much may be done for you.


MRS. NEVILLE. No, do not hope it. And why should you even wish it? why recall
me to a world which, thank heaven, I am now prepared to quit? Who knows if I
might be so some years hence? Be assured, however, nothing has been neglected:
but all the medicine in the world can avail me no longer!


Emily, through her tears, stole a glance at her mother, and saw her change
color so often, that she dreaded her fainting. A sudden motion alone spoke her
apprehensions. Mrs. Wyndham saw it, and waved her hand to forbid her rising;
then, by an immediate (...) of fortitude, she said* ^^^^ly, Let me not disturb
your tranquillity, my dear friend! M^^ God ^^ant me the same at the hour of my
death!

^^^ily's young heart, struck by these words, seemed to die within her; she hid
her face with her hands, and burst into a flood of ^^^rs. Mrs. Wyndham and Mrs.
Neville looked at each other* but took no notice of her emotion, which she soon
conquered by a wish to emulate the virtuous fortitude of her mother. When they
were all rather more composed, Mrs. Neville said:

Allow me a few words more, though it distresses me to agitate you. One regret
alone stands between me and a better world -- my little Charlotte* She stopped,
and Mrs. Wyndham regarded her with earnest attention.

MRS. NEVILLE. She is so young, that my loss will be but for a short time
lamented. but, alas! hereafter how severely may she feel it! The loss of a
mother to a girl, is infinitely greater than she can conceive till she is
herself a mother. Ah, who shall shield her innocence from deceit, and her youth
from anguish!


MRS. WYNDHAM. Ah, Charlotte! have you not a friend to whom you might confide
this sacred and precious deposit?


MRS. NEVILLE. I have, Indeed; but will she, can she accept --


MRS. WYNDHAM. Can you doubt it? Have you not read my heart? Have you not
always known the extent of its affections for you?


MRS. NEVILLE. I have never doubted it; but you have already so many duties, so
much to employ you!


MRS. WYNDHAM. By increasing our duties, if we discharge them properly, we
increase our means of happiness. Beside, Emily is getting beyond childhood; she
will, I know, be happy to share with me the care of your dear child.


Emily hastily arose; she threw herself with irresistible emotion on her knees
before Mrs. Neville and her mother.

Hear me, Oh, my dear Mamma! she exclaimed; suffer me, for I dare do nothing
without your advice, suffer me to promise to be a mother to my Charlotte. -- Do
not thin^ ^^e presumptuous; I am young, it is true, but my heart, in this
affecting scene, has been chastened and improved, more than it could have been
by the experience of years. I promise, my heart promises, the most unlimited
attention, the tenderest love!

Mrs. Neville, affected beyond expression, caught the charming girl in her
arms; and her mother, eagerly snatching her from them, pressed her to her bosom.
"But, Emily," said she, repressing her emotion, do you seriously reflect on
what you say? Recollect, that in future years your situation may change, you
may be involved in difficulty; shall you still be able to keep your promise?

EMILY. Ah, Mamma, I shall be her mother! and who knows better than you the
extent of those du^^^^ that sacred name imposes? If I am happy, Charlotte shall
(...) my ^elicity; if I am in distress, will she refuse to divide my ca^es? Ah,
no! I am sure of (...) for will she not be my daughter?


MRS. WYNDHAM. I here no longer any doubts. We have only to obtain Mrs. (...).
My dear (...), it is true, Emily is young, but her heart is good, and Charlotte
will (...) be under (...).


MRS. NEVILLE. Oh, do not suspect me of the slightest hesitation. This
conversation has rendered me perfectly tranquil: it has removed a weight from
my mind! but where shall I find words to thank both my dear friends?


MRS. WYNDHAM. Cease, my dear friend, I beg you to cease such expressions. --
Never, never talk of thanks to us who are most happy to give you one moment of
comfort. -- But this conversatinn has been too much for us all. Go, Emily, take
a turn in the garden, and then return to us with your sisters.


Emily obeyed. -- She returned in about a quarter of an hour; Helen, Maria, and
little Charlotte came with her. Mrs. Wyndham requested her to take care of them
home, and excuse her to Mr. Wyndham, as she meant to spend the remainder of the
day with Mrs. Neville. -- They, therefore, took their leave, and as soon as
they were in the coach, Emily placed little Charlotte on her knees, and kissed
her with the tenderest affection: she asked her, if she would always love her,
and received her promise to do so with extreme pleasure.

END OF THE FIRST PART.
PART THE SECOND.
MRS. WYNDHAM returned in the evening, grave but not melancholy; her affection
f^^ (...) husband and her childrens (...) not allow her to render the^^
uncomfortable, by indulging the grief she really felt for the increasing
illness of her friend; she exerted herself to promote their innocent
enjoyments, and while they s^t ^ound the work table at their different
e^^^^^^ments as usual, she would not ^^dden by a sigh their affectionate
hearts; this was true sensibility, very different from that false and (...)
feeling in which weak minds are so apt to indulge themselves. Sec on a subject
similar to this, the admirable story of Mr. Wentworth, No. 27 of the Mirror;
which, for the convenience of the reader, we have added it at the latter end of
this book.


In the evening Emily generally took her French lesson; she was reading the
history of Charles the XIIth. King of Sweden, in French, and came at length to
a very striking anecdote, which Mrs. Wyndham desired her to read again in
English -- this she did very readily, as it was a common practice with her
mother, to make her translate any remarkable passage as she read it -- After a
description of a battle, which the King of Sweden had gained over the armies of
the Czar of M^scovy, which greatly exceeded the number of his own, this
anecdote follows:

"The Muscovites, who were in number about thirty thousand, passed one by one
before less than seven thousand Swedes. The soldiers in passing by the King,
threw down their arms, and the officers laid down their ensigns and colors.
Charles permitted all th^se men to repass the river, without retaining a single
soldier prisoner. Then he entered victorious into Narva, accompanied by the Duc
de Croi and the other Muscovite officers; he returned to them all their swords;
and knowing that they wanted money, and that the merchants of Narva would let
them have nothing on credit, ^e sent a thousand ducats to the Duc de Croi, and
five hundred to each of the other Muscovite o^^icers, who were astonished at
this treatment, of which they could not have formed an idea. -- At Narva was
written an account of this victory, to send to Stockholm and to the allies of
Sweden, but the King retrenched with his own hand all that was too advantageous
to him, and too injurious to the Czar."

MR. WYNDHAM. Emily is much improved; she reads French much better than she
did, and translates with spirit. That is the great thing to be desired in
learning a language; as to little commonplace phrases, or mere conversation,
they may be amusing, and they may at times be serviceable; but a language can
never be entirely useful, till one can translate it liberally and easily.


MRS. WYNDHAM. I am quite (...) our opinion, and I dare say, Arthur will study
Latin with the same idea.


MR. WYNDHAM. I hope so -- he already ceases to (...), and begins to translate;
besides, to a dead language, what I have said, applies still more than to a
living one.


HELEN. Papa, what do you mean by a dead language?


MR. WYNDHAM. A language, my dear, which is no longer spoken by (...) formerly,
Latin and Greek were the common languages of large countries; at present, they
are only spoken by the learned of different nations, therefore they are called
dead languages. -- A living language means a (...) commonly used by a whole
people -- Such as at this time is the French, the ^^^^lish, the Italian, the
German, and some others.


HELEN. Thank you, Papa, I understand very well now.


MRS. WYNDHAM. You are ri^ht to (...), my dear; always request to have (...)
plained what you do not comprehend; and if it be worth knowing, you will be
(...) of the best answer we can give you.


MRS. WYNDHAM. But, (...), ^^ll (...) which you (...) ^ait, in the (...) his
^^^d?


ARTHUR. That, Mamma, where the Muscovites lay down their arms before a very
small number of Swedes.


MRS. WYNDHAM. And you, Emily, what say you?


EMILY. I differ from Arthur; I admire most the generosity and modesty of
Charles.


MRS. WYNDHAM (with a smile). I am of your opinion, perhaps, because we are
females. Among the men, indeed, courage or bravery may be deemed a preferable
quality to clemency and moderation.


MR. WYNDHAM. It is a more shining one at least, and I fancy has dazzled
Arthur's eyes; but, my boy, recollect how much more easy it is to be valient
than moderate. Valor is a sort of instinctive quality, few men are without it,
the noise and hurry of a battle alone would inspire it -- nay, even in the
weaker sex, a martial piece of music will frequently seem, for the time, to
raise that enthusiastic spirit, which is called courage. But after a hard
fought battle, to repress that sort of madness, to become immediately cool,
temperate, forgiving, and generous; oh, my boy! what an empire over the
passions does this show! What an equal and heroic frame of mind!


MRS. WYNDHAM. What enhances the merit of Charles is, that he was very young;
this was his first victory of any consequence. I should scarcely have wondered,
had circumstances so seducing and inflammatory put his moderation to slight.


ARTHUR. I feel that I was wrong; and I believe, as you say, Sir, that I was
indeed dazzled by the shining part of the story.


MR. WYNDHAM. While you atone for a hasty decision, by a candid allowance of
its impropriety, there is no harm done; but accustom yourselves, children, not
to judge of actions for yourselves. Ask always if they are just; be not deluded
by a glaring outside; ask if no ^aith ^e infringed -- if the laws of humanity
are not broken. How seldom can the answer be in the affirmative when we are
reading the lives of those who are called heroes! History is often a dangerous
study, it is apt to instill false principles; there are few that a young person
should read alone. Emily has always read with her mother, therefore her
decisions are generally right.


Emily was delighted with her father's praises, but she showed her pleasure
only by a modest animated blush, and down-cast eyes; she threw not a single
glance of exultation on Arthur, who seemed a little hurt. Mr. Wyndham then
produced some excellent ^^^ps of Sweden, Muscovy, and Denmark, in which they
traced the routes of the Swedish and R^s^^an armies; during which Helen and
Maria went to bed, Emily and Arthur sat an hour longer, and then retired. Mr.
and Mrs. Wyndham spent the rest of the exciting in talking over the events of
the day. Mrs. Wyndham related, as well as her emotions would permit, Emily's
behavior in the morning, and they mutually rejoiced in the amiable and happy
dispositions of their children. What felicity, to them thus to gratify the
hearts of their parents! What misery to those wretched beings, who plant sorrow
in the breasts of an indulgent father or mother!

After the children had taken their accustomed ramble the next morning, Emily
went to call her Mamma, whom she was rather surprised, not to have found in the
breakfast-room; Mrs. Wyndham was almost dressed, and the following conversation
passed between them:

EMILY. Good morning to you, my dear Mamma, I fear you are not ^^ite well this
morning, as you are later than usual.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Thank you, my dear child, I have no material complaint, only
having slept ill; I fell into a dose when I ought to have risen.


EMILY. Nevertheless, Mamma, you look not quite well; if my Father would have
permitted me to make his breakfast, you need not have risen.


MRS. WYNDHAM. He would, I am sure, my love, but I did not wish it; I shall be
quite well when I have breakfasted.


EMILY. Allow me to say, Mamma, that I fear you exert yourself too much for our
sakes; I know you are always anxious to give us our lessons, but if you are not
well --


MRS. WYNDHAM. You are too anxious, my dear, I am really not indisposed. The
uneasiness of my mind alone prevented my sleeping, and that will be rather
lessened than increased by attending you.


EMILY. Ah, Mamma! --


MRS. WYNDHAM. What, my child? Speak plainly all your thoughts.


EMILY. I know not if it is not a degree o^ impropriety to express them all.
Perhaps I should intrude too much into what ought to be sacred to me, your
sorrow and your reserve.


MRS. WYNDHAM. No, my dear; since the proof you gave me of sensibility and
goodness of heart yesterday, I consider you no longer as a child, you are
worthy to be called my friend -- speak, then, without hesitation.


EMILY (Kissing her Mother's hands.) With what gratitude am I penetrated with a
title so dear! Ah, Mamma, if ever I should render myself unworthy of it, what
punishment would be great enough for me?


MRS. WYNDHAM. You would find one in your heart!


EMILY. But, Mamma, suffer me, then, to ask, how it is possible for you to
preserve your tranquillity, your composure of mind, when I am sure you suffer so
much? If I am distressed, I shed tears, I am unable to attend to any thing.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Yet, Emily, you are less overcome than you have seen Miss
Somerville.


EMILY. That is true, Mamma; when her little brother was ill, she lay all day
on the bed, she cried and took no nourishment, repeating continually, that she
was distracted with grief.


MRS. WYNDHAM. In the mean time, Mrs. Somerville sat continually by her sick
child, she allowed herself no time to rest, she attended to every thing
respecting him herself. She had no assistant in whom she could confide. Tell
me, Emily, had you been Miss Sonerville, what should you have done?


EMILY. Certainly, Mamma, I should have stifled my grief, and end^vo^red to
assist and comfort m^ mother.


MRS. WYNDHAM. I trust you would have done so; thus you see, in a
well-regulated mind, duty is superior to feeling. We ought never to indulge the
one at the expense of the other. Miss Somerville has lived a good deal with an
aunt of hers, who has praised and inflamed that nervous kind of sensibility you
have observed; thus her mind is weakened, her tears flow upon the most trifling
occasion; she does not endeavor to restrain them, she even believes them
meritoriou^; and thus she wears away her own constitution, and rende^^ herself
a helpless burden on ^he stronger minds of her fri^^ds. This is a character
against which I would have you ^e particularly guarded, as it arises from the
over indulgence of our best feelings, and the line is easily passed before we
are aware.


EMILY. Ah, Mamma! I am in no danger of falling into error, while I take you
for my example.


MRS. WYNDHAM. I strive, at least, to give you the best in my power; it is the
duty of a mother so to do. -- Come, my dear, your father will want his
breakfast.


After breakfast, Mrs. Wyndham sent a servant to know how Mrs. Neville did; and
heard, with pleasure, she found herself something better; and, therefore,
proposed to Mr. Wyndham, that they should spend the afternoon with their
neighbors, Mr. and Mrs. Sidney: she intended to take only Emily and Arthur
with her, leaving Helen and Maria with an old faithful servant, who was
accustomed to take care of them when Mr. and Mrs. Wyndham were absent.

This plan was accordingly put into execution; they ^a^led on Mrs. Nevillein
their way, whom they found tolerably well. -- About half past six o'clock they
reached Mr. Sidney's house, and on entering the drawing room, found only Mr.
and Mrs. Sidney, neither of their children (they had two) were present. In a
few minutes Mrs. Sidney rung the bell, and ordered the servant to send Edward
and Harriet into the drawing room, as their visitors were come. Presently Miss
Sidney ran into the room, and without regarding either Mrs. or Miss Wyndham,
exclaimed: "Mamma, Ned says he will not come!"

MRS. SIDNEY. Very pretty, indeed! pray what is he doing?


HARRIET. He is making a ca^t, and when it is do^e, we are going to draw it
about the court full of stones.


MRS. SIDNEY. We! What, have you been helping him?


HARRIET. Yes, I have, and you cannot think how droll it will be.


MRS. SIDNEY. However that is, you will please to sit down now; don't you see
Miss Wyndham I


HARRIET (pouting.) Yes, but I want to go and finish the cart!


MRS. SIDNEY. ^ie, fie! I am ashamed of you! Come and speak to Miss Wyndham.


Emily rose to meet her, but Miss Sidney hung down her head, and would not
speak; her frock was dirty, her hair looked as if it had not been disentangled
for a week, her face was heated, and a very pretty little girl looked extremely
plain and disagreeable.

MRS. SIDNEY. Do, Mr. Sidney, speak to her; you see she does not mind me.


MR. SIDNEY. How now, Miss! What Is here to do! Why don't you do as your mother
bids you? I shall take you in hand presently, if you don't behave better. Don't
speak to her, Miss Wyndham; she is not worth your notice.


Miss Sidney then muttered a few words to Emily, who felt quite confused for
her; they sat down together, and Emily tried, in vain, to make Miss Sidney
speak. In about ten minutes the door burst open, and in rushed young Sidney,
with a ^ace like ^^a^l^t, and crying violently.

MR. SIDNEY. What Is the matter, Ned? What do you cry for?


NED. Oh, my mouse! my mouse!


MR. SIDNEY. Well, what is the matter with your mouse?


EDWARD. Oh, Papa, Jack Williams has s^atch^d it away!


MR. SIDNEY. Jack Williams snatched your (...) away! I Will Jack Williams(...) a
young ^^^eal! Where is he?


EDWARD. Run down the lane, Papa!


MR. SIDNEY. Come, my dear, don't cry, and I Will soon ^etch it back again, if
Mr. Wyndham will excuse me for a few minutes.


EDWARD. An I Will go too, Papa; and give him a good threshing; when you are
there he will not dare to strike again.


MRS. SIDNEY. Hark'ye, Ned; bring none of your nasty mice here, I hate the very
^ight of them. Don't you want to go, Miss Harriet? I suppose you would help
your brother to beat Jack Williams.


Harriet looked very sulky at this -- and as the tea was then over, Mrs. Sidney
desired her to take Miss Wyndham into her play-room; though I suppose, added
she, you have done with toys now, Miss Wyndham.

MRS. WYNDHAM. Emily is always happy to do whatever her young companions like.


MRS. SIDNEY. Ay, Ma'am, you seem very happy in your children; I am sure I can
never keep mine in order, though, I believe, I take as much pains, and scold
them as much as any body.


Mrs. Wyndham could not help smiling at her idea of educating children;
however, she was too polite to say any thing, so the two young ladies went into
the playroom, where the following conversation passed:

HARRIET. How cross Mamma is! she always scolds so when any body's there. Don't
you think she was very ill-natured?


EMILY. Pardon me for contradicting you; I do not think so indeed.


HARRIET. What! not ill-natured, to hinder me from doing the cart, when it
would have been so nice and so pretty?


EMILY. Probably she thought you would overheat yourself. Besides, she wished
me to have the pleasure of talking with you.


HARRIET. Oh, but she knows I hate to (...) with (...). I don't so much c^^e
^ow you and I are together: but you looked so grave when I came in, I thought I
should not (...) you! I am sure if I had been you, I should have laughed!


EMILY. At what should I have laughed?


HARRIET. Oh, to hear Mamma scold so, and to see me look so like a ^ool.


EMILY. I deed, I was very sorry, it is such a sad thing to incur the
displeasure of one's mother.


HARRIET. Oh, not at all; I don't care, she will not say any more to me; and if I
had cried then, I knew she would let me go; but I was ashamed, because you and
your Mamma were there; besides, I was a little afraid of Papa. -- Does your
Papa humor your brother more than he does you?


EMILY. I hardly know what you mean; Papa humors neither of us.


HARRIET. Why he looks very good-na-tured?


EMILY. He is indeed, much too goodnatured to humor his children; he is
uniformly kind and indulgent when we behave well, and constantly strict and
resolute when we deserve his displeasure.


HARRIET. Well, that seems very odd! As to Ned, Papa never contradi^ts him, nor
Mamma neither; but he does me, and is as angry as can be sometimes.


They then talked about the books and play-things; the latter, indeed, were in
general uninter^^^ing, to Miss Wyndham, who was too well informed to derive
much amus^ment from mere toys; she was, however, also too wellbred and too
humble to show the l^^st contempt for any thing her companion thought
entertaining. Amongst the books, she found several with which she was well
acquainted; but though they were sadly abused, Miss Sidney said she had not
read any of them; and thus all conversation respecting their merits was
precluded. Having looked them over, Emily w^^^^d to the window to examine a
(...) which hung there in a (...) some ^a^e.

EMILY. What a pretty bird! It is a ^old^inch, I see.


HARRIET. Yes, and a fine songster I assure you.


EMILY. Did you take him from the nest?


HARRIET. No; he was about a year old when I had him. Ned caught him in a trap
in the winter.


EMILY. Poor thing, was he not very uneasy when he was first con^ined?


HARRIET. Oh, I don't know; he used to ^^utter about sometimes, but we did not
mind that.


EMILY. He is very tame now; he does not seem at all disturbed when I stand by
the cage.


HARRIET. That is because he does not see you.


EMILY. Not see me! How is that?


HARRIET. Because he is blind.


EMILY. Blind! Ah, poor little creature. By what accident did that happen to
him?


HARRIET. No accident at all; Ned did it on purpose.


EMILY. On purpose! Oh, how could he be so cruel?


HARRIET. He did it to make him sing the better, with a red-hot knittingneedle.


EMILY (pale and shuddering.) Oh, how shocking! Were you not grieved?


HARRIET. Not I; I liked it, because it is my bird. If I had not liked it, it
should not have been done, I promise you.


EMILY. Is it possible you should have given your consent! Oh if you knew how
melancholy it is to be blind!


HARRIET. La! Why a bird does not mind, you know!


EMILY. Not mind! Do you think, then, they do not feel? Do you think they have
no pleasure in seeing the light? Why, then, do they sing when it first dawns?


HARRIET. Oh, that is because it is natural to them.


EMILY. Yes, to rejoice in the daylight! Ah, poor little wretch! Would I could
restore you to sight!


HARRIET. But you cannot think how much better he sings!


EMILY. I should not wish to hear him: I should think every note a melancholy
expression of his sorrow, or a reproach to me for having caused it!


HARRIET. What odd notions you have? Where did you pick them up?


EMILY. If you mean the notion of hurting no creature whatever, I gained it, as
I did all I know from my father and mother. -- Besides that, I never had the
least desire to hurt any thing; and as to blinding any poor creature, I know
too well how dreadful it must be, to be capable of doing it.


HARRIET. Why, how do you know any thing about it?


EMILY. Alas! I have a sister who is blind!


HARRIET. Poor thing, I should be sorry for her.


EMILY. Then why are you not sorry for your bird?


HARRIET. Oh, because a bird is not like a little girl.


EMILY. That is true, they are not parallel cases, but there is a resemblance.
The bird does not feel so much; but that does not prove it does not feel at all.


HARRIET. Well, I declare I am sorry; but nobody ever told me it was cruel, so
how should I know?


Here they were interrupted by a knocking at the window, which Harriet opened;
it was Master Sidney, who called to her to come round to the drawing room
window, where she would see something "monstrous droll."

Harriet scampered away, and Emily followed her; they found young Edward and
Mr. Sidney standing at the window; Arthur was quietly seated by his father, who
with Mrs. Wyndham and Mrs. Sidney, were at another part of the room.

HARRIET. Ned, what have you got to show me?


NED. Oh, my mouse; Papa got it (...) from Jack Williams, but its leg was
broken, so I gave it to the cat -- see how she tosses it about.


HARRIET. Where, where? Oh, I see her! (...), it is running away!


MR. SIDNEY. No, she has caught it again; look how still she is now.


Emily, shuddering to see the poor little animal so tormented, retired from the
window. Mrs. Sidney then asked Arthur why he did not go and look at the mouse;
and he, who generally spoke his thoughts, sometimes not very politely, said:
Because I think i^ both cowardly and cruel.

MRS. SIDNEY. How so, my d^^^?


ARTHUR. It is cruel to suffer any thing to be tormented, and cowardly, because
the poor creature is lame, and without that defense which nature intended it to
have.


MRS. SIDNEY. Oh, but a mouse is such a nasty creature; I never care how they
are tormented, because I hate them to such a degree. -- Besides, one must have
them destroyed.


ARTHUR. Yes, Ma'am, but then I would have it with the least pain possible; and
especially I would not give them to the cat when they are lame.


MRS. WYNDHAM. But, Arthur, you are not very polite.


MRS. SIDNEY. Oh, I like him the better for that; I hate a boy that is afraid of
speaking his mind.


MRS. WYNDHAM. But then he should not do it at the risk of offending any one.


After a little more talk about the mouse, whose distress seemed to afford
great amusement to the party at the window, Mr. Wyndham's carriage was
announced, and that amiable family, with pleasure, took leave of a circle so
different from themselves. In their way home they talked of their visit -- and
when Mrs. Wyndham heard of the poor goldfinch, she warmly expressed her
abhorrence of such extreme cruelty; soon after the coach stopped, and nothing
more was said on the subject. -- The next morning, however, as it proved wet,
the children, instead of playing in the garden, amused themselves in the same
room where their mother sat at work, and here the following conversation passed:

HELEN. Come, Emily, tell us what you did at Mr. Sidney's last night?


EMILY. Nothing agreeable, I can assure you. I went with Miss Sidney into her
play-room, but her books were torn to pieces, and then we came back into the
drawing room to see the cat play with a mouse.


MARIA. The cat play with a mouse; but did she not hurt it? Mamma always says
"poor thing," when old Tom catches one.


EMILY. Oh yes, she hurt it enough, I believe, but they did not mind that, as
Miss Sidney said, when I asked her if her goldfinch was not unhappy when they
first confined him.


HELEN. Not mind hurting any thing! I fancy this Miss Sidney is not very good?


EMILY. No, truly; for if you had be^^ (...) when she first came into (...)!


HELEN. Why, what did she do?


EMILY. Her cap was torn half off, her hair was tangled, and her face dirty;
and she came in bawling, just like this -- (mimicking) "Mamma, Ned says he
will not come!"


ARTHUR (laughing.) Ah! that is just like her, with her arms swinging, and her
mouth open.


HELEN. But did she not speak to you?


EMILY. No, nor to Mamma neither; and then she almost cried because she wanted
to help her brother to make a cart!


HELEN. To make a cart! Was that a proper employment for a young lady?


EMILY. No, indeed! and when she was told to speak to me, she came up with her
head poking down, and her finger in her mouth, muttering so -- "How do you do,
Miss?"


MARIA. Oh dear, how strange!


ARTHUR. Ah, that is exactly her; but now, Emily, tell us how she looked when
her Mamma asked her, if she would not like to help her brother to beat Jack
Williams?


EMILY. Oh, she pouted out her lips so; then she crammed her fingers into her
mouth; and then leered round to see if I was looking at her! but, Arthur, how
did Mr. Ned get his mouse again?


ARTHUR. Oh, you never saw such a cowardly fellow; when we overtook the boy who
had got it, Mr. Sidney gave him two or three blows, and took it from him; but
poor thing, one of its legs was broken, so then Mr. Ned cried like a mad thing,
and flew at the boy, beating and scratching him without mercy, and the boy did
not dare to strike again. At last Mr. Sidney said, Come away, Ned, let him
alone now; but if he affronts you again, I Will horsewhip him handsomely. -- Do
it now, Papa, said Ned, do it now! Fie, Master Sidney, said I, two against one
is not fair, Oh, who minds fair, said he, with such a beggar's boy as that! --
and Mr. Sidney never told him he was wrong.


MRS. WYNDHAM. In telling us that, Arthur, have you not told us the very reason
of Master Sidney's behavior?


ARTHUR. What, that his father did not teach him better? Yes, I believe so!


MRS. WYNDHAM. Tell me, then, is he most an object of ridicule or pity?


ARTHUR (after hesitating a moment.) Of pity, to be sure!


MRS. WYNDHAM. And, Emily, do you not think the same cause may have produced
the same effect in Miss Sidney?


EMILY. Yes, Ma'am, for she said nobody body had ever told her it was wrong to
torment her bird.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Then why have you ridiculed her?


EMILY. I -- I -- did not mean any harm, Mamma!


MRS. WYNDHAM. Did you not mean to make her appear an absurd, ridiculous
character? Did you not mean to make your brother and sisters laugh at her?


EMILY. Yes, Ma'am.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Could you, then, had you it in your power, do her greater
unkindness? In making people ridiculous, we injure them extremely. A nickname,
as it is called, given to children, grows up with them, they are known by it;
those who are not acquainted with them, form a light, if not a bad opinion of
their characters: in the mean time, perhaps, they correct the faults or the
follies that gave rise to it, but that is not known, while their nicknames
precede their entrance into every company. It is the same with every species of
ridicule; if your brother and sisters were to hear to Miss Sidney ten years
hence, they would connect with her name, the awkward, disagreeable idea you
have given them of her character; they might, perhaps, unguardedly, express the
opinion they had formed of her, and thus punish her for the faults she might
have long before have corrected. Do you perceive to what extent this might
injure her? It might deprive her of friends, perhaps of an establishment for
life!


EMILY. Oh, Mamma, I have, indeed, been very wrong; I beg of you to pardon me.


MRS. WYNDHAM. I allow to you that Miss Sidney's behavior was very blameable;
and, therefore to me in whom you have a perfect confidence, I admit you to
remark on it, but not to do it with ill nature o^ severity. I expected from the
goodness of your heart, pity and generous allowance for Miss Sidney, who wants
the advantages you are more happily possessed of. Do you believe, that without
better advice and example, you should have been better than Miss Sidney?


EMILY. Oh, no, indeed; I must be both ungrateful and presumptuous if I could
believe it.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Even were there no excuse to be made for Harriet Sidney's
faults, I could not allow you to employ ridicule to expose them. Personal
ridicule, in general, arises from envy or ill nature, a mean desire of lowering
those virtues we cannot reach, or a cruel wish to expose those follies we take
a malicious pleasure in observing. Who, indeed, is there in whom nothing
ridiculous can be found? The most perfect characters, by a little exaggeration,
may be made ridiculous.


EMILY. I see, Mamma, that I have been guilty of a very great fault, I am much
concerned for it, and willing to submit to any punishment you shall think
proper. But permit me to observe, since I do not do so out of perverseness, on
what you last said -- for instance, what is there ridiculous in you?


MRS. WYNDHAM. You pay me a great compliment, Emily, which for once I will
accept. But you will, perhaps, scarcely believe so striking a picture was once
drawn of me by a young mimic of my acquaintance, who was not aware of my seeing
her, that I could not help laughing at it myself. My little cough, the trick I
have of rather leaning my head when I speak, and the slow manner which I have
of talking were imitated, and made to appear ridiculous.


EMILY. Oh, Mamma, but these are not ridiculous!


MRS. WYNDHAM. Not in themselves, perhaps, but by a little exaggeration, which
a true mimic never spares, they become so; nay, Emily, even my tender attention
to my grandmother, who was very old, and required constant, assiduity, was set
in the same point of view; it was deemed a disturbing and importunate "rout
about nothing." an affectation of fondness and attention.


EMILY. Ah, Mamma, what an odious character! Were you not very angry?


MRS. WYNDHAM. By no means -- I pitied my young acquaintance very much; it had
been laughed at, and she was encouraged to mimic everybody, and no one had ever
told her it was wrong.


EMILY. Well, I shall never mimic any body again. But, Mamma, you used to laugh
very much at Mr. Harris, when he imitated some of the players in London.


MRS. WYNDHAM. That is true -- but that was not personal ridicule; he merely
imitated the particular style of speaking in each; some of them, you remember,
were not laughable only those of the comic actors, and that because they were
exactly like. He also imitated the manners of sailors and clowns, but that was
not personal ridicule, it was aimed at no one in particular.


EMILY. Then that is allowable?


MRS. WYNDHAM. Under certain circumstances it may be, but it requires a very
nice judgment to direct it, and in a woman it never can be right. It discovers
an inclination to set herself off; besides, it must be accompanied by a
self-possession, inconsistent with the modesty of the female character. Every
approach to what is called humor, ought to be discouraged in a woman; it puts
her too forward and too much upon a level with an actress; add to that, it
makes her many enemies. People who see how much she excells in general
imitation, believe she is equally capable of personal mimic^y, and that she is
only restrained by their presence. -- They fancy that when she is under no
restraint, she is less guarded, and think that they may be of the number of
those she ridicules; thus she is shunned and hated.


EMILY. I see, Mamma, the force of all you have urged, and I am quite
determined never more to be a mimic; but, at present, I hope you pardon me.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Since you have not been wilfully and obstinately wrong, I pardon
you, my dear; in the mean time, however, you have given me great pain, because
I had hoped you had more reflection; thus I find myself under the necessity of
imposing a punishment: I meant to have given you Smellie's Natural History to
read today, but the childishness you have shown, will prevent me from putting
it into your hands till a month from this time; if during that space you commit
no serious fault, I shall believe this was a mere temporary return to the
faults of infancy, and that you are capable of relishing the useful information
contained in that pleasing book; if, on the contrary, you again do wrong, I
shall still longer defer the pleasure I have promised you.


Emily felt excessively hurt and disappointed on the occasion; however, she
felt too much the constant justice of her mother to have murmured, even if she
had not been convinced that in this instance she deserved her punishment.

In the afternoon Mrs. Wyndham went to Mrs. Neville's, whom she found so
extremely ill, that she could not prevail on herself to quit her, but sent word
home, that she should remain with her friend that night. -- In the morning Mr.
Wyndham sent to know how Mrs. Neville was, and heard, with great concern, that
she could not live many hours; he communicated this intelligence to Emily, and
immediately went to Mrs. Neville's house, leaving Emily excessively distressed.
She felt the most restless anxiety, accompanied by ardent wishes, to alleviate
her mother's anguish; she had an incessant struggle to restrain her tears; but
a wish to emulate the fortitude and equanimity of her mother, prevailed on her
to repress them as much as possible, and to sit down with her sisters,
supplying, as well as she could, the place of Mrs. Wyndham. About four in the
afternoon, Mr. and Mrs. Wyndham returned, bringing with them little Charlotte
Neville. -- Mrs. Wyndham immediately retired to her own room, while Mr. Wyndham
led little Charlotte into the parlour, and sent for Emily, who, pale and
trembling, appeared immediately.

Mr. Wyndham was evidently much affected, and the following s^^^t dialogue
passed:

MR. WYNDHAM. Emily, have you seen your mother?


EMILY. No, Sir, she is gone to her own room.


MR. WYNDHAM. Do not then disturb her? you guess what has happened?


EMILY. I fear so, indeed!


MR. WYNDHAM. Charlotte is now your child!


CHARLOTTE (crying) My dear Emily, they will not let me see Mamma.


EMILY (embracing her with tears) You must not desire it.


CHARLOTTE. But Mamma will be uneasy if I do not go to her, she always chooses
to have me in her room.


MR. WYNDHAM. My dear child, you must ask to see your Mamma no more.


CHARLOTTE. So you told me before; but why? Let me see her; she will wake if I
call her.


EMILY. No, my dear, you cannot wake her, nor ought you to wish it; she is free
from pain, and gone to a better world, where she will be happy!


CHARLOTTE. Is Mamma happy? And will she never cry again, nor feel pain?


EMILY. Never.


CHARLOTTE. I am glad of that; but shall I not go to her? She used to say I
should.


MR. WYNDHAM. Yes, my dear, when God pleases.


CHARLOTTE. I hope it will please God to let me very soon.


MR. WYNDHAM. But it depends on yourself. -- If you are not good as long as you
live; if you do not pray to God always, you will never go to that happy world
where your Mamma is now.


CHARLOTTE. Oh teach me, then, to be very good, indeed I will try; and tell me
what I must say when I pray to God to let me go to Mamma?


MR. WYNDHAM. You must say: Grant, O God! that through life I may do thy will,
and when I die, be taken to thy everlasting happiness.


CHARLOTTE. Oh do not fear I shall forget it, I shall say it every day twenty
times.


Mr. Wyndham then left them, and Emily, though deeply affected, endeavored to
lead the little girl to other subjects, in which at times she succeeded; but
Charlotte frequently spoke of her mother, in a way which affected all who heard
her. -- Mrs. Wyndham remained alone till the evening, when she admitted Emily,
who remained with her till bed time. The next morning Mrs Wyndham returned to
her family, composed though deeply dejected, thus ennobling grief by not
yielding to its passionate impulses; though for many weeks it required a
violent struggle between her reason and her feelings, to appear with that
dignified serenity she so much wished to retain. Emily, struck by this example
of fortitude, determined to profit by it; it carried a lesson to her heart,
which she never afterward forgot. -- From this time she strove, with
undeviating attention, to correct her own faults, that she might be a worthy
pattern for Charlotte to follow; she ceased not to exert the utmost tenderness
and patience toward the little girl, who, in being an orphan, seemed to have a
sufficient claim on the affections of this amiable family, and shared equally
with Maria the fondness of them all. Helen became very much attached to her,
and Charlotte vied with her sisters in assiduous attendance on her.

Emily, however, notwithstanding her earnest wishes to do right, was too young
not to err sometimes, an instance of which occurred once every day, in her
expressing some (...) wish^^, and particularly (...) she could know what some
r^^^^ions of hers were doing who lived in a distant country; Mrs. Wyndham
smiled and told her, she would give her a story to read which had been written
by a friend for her on a similar occasion when she was a girl. -- Accordingly
in the evening, when her sisters were gone to bed, Emily read aloud the
following story.

END OF THE SECOND PART.
PART THE THIRD.
ELFRIDA, OR, THE MIRROR. A FAIRY TALE.
THE limitation of man's knowledge has been, in all ages, a theme equally
chosen by the moralist and the discontented. The first of these characters has
from thence deduced many profitable conclusions to the chastisement of our
present vanity, and the exaltation of our ^uture hope. -- While the last has
murmured at this confinement of his faculties, which reach not even to the
perfect understanding of those things more immediately under his inspection,
and are consequently very unequal to the discernment of future events or
distant circumstances. To check, in some degree, the dissatisfaction of the
latter, and to add strength to the reasonings of the former, the tale of
Elfrida shall attempt; nay more, in spite of its puerile appearance, it shall
strive to place the subject in another point of view, and consider the
narrowness of our capacity in this state of our existence, as one great source
of the comfort we enjoy.

Fashioned by the hand of nature with every charm to captivate the senses,
Elfrida possessed also a soul of the highest order: and that aspiring genius
which grasps eagerly at knowledge, and having received all that its instructors
have to bestow, like Alexander, weeps for more worlds of information to subdue.
Elfrida was the daughter of an English Baron, who was high in the favor of the
third brave Edward. In the various wars of that king, Elfrida's father took an
active part. She was now approaching the close of her sixteenth year, when
Fitz-Richard was summoned from his castle to attend his sovereign to the
Scottish wars. But a few months had he (...) freed from the weight of his
armor, yet he resumed it with alacrity, and felt a regret only in parting from
his fair and innocent child. -- He left her overwhelmed with grief under the
care of her governess and her women, for her mother had slept many years in the
silent tomb. Elfrida, who enthusiastically loved her father, and centered in
him all the affections of a very sensible heart, lamented his departure with
incessant regret. -- The solitude in which she had been educated, and which,
during his residence in it, had for her every charm, now became insipid. She
frequently wandered from her governess and her women to indulge her sorrow, and
waited for hours, at the extremity of the park, in the hope of sooner receiving
intelligence from the Baron. One day, when she had finished her morning
studies, which were become uninteresting to her, she retired from the heat of
the sun into a natural sort of grotto, formed in a rock* through which
perpetually ran a clear stream, and whose entrance was shaded by a luxuriant
growth of jessamine and honey suckles, which had been planted and reared by the
sportive labor of Fitz-Richard and Elfrida. This place recalled to her mind
the image of her father in all its force. -- "He has been gone," she exclaimed,
three weeks, and I have heard from him but once. Perhaps at this moment,
fatigued by toilsome marches, he faints beneath the heat of this burning sun.
In vain may ^e now wish for his Elfrida to prepare the simple fruits which she
has so often decorated with bands of flowers for his noontide refreshment.
While I am enjoying the luxurious coolness of his favorite retreat, to what
perils may my father be exposed? Shortly, too, new dangers will surround him;
the dangers of unsparing war! His valor will place him foremost in the ranks
of of battle, and who can tell. -- The suggestion which her heart inspired, her
tongue refused to express; a shower of tears fell from her eyes -- she trembled
and was silent. At length she proceeded -- Oh that I could be at this moment
informed of thy welfare, my father! that some beneficent being would instruct
me how thou art employed! Why, alas! has heaven denied the privilege of knowing
how those we love are situated during their absence from us* -- Elfrida had no
sooner pronounced these words, than she was struck with a sense of their
impropriety, and hastened to implore the pardon of Heaven for an expression
which her delicacy of feeling taught her immediately to renounce as
presumptuous. Still, however, her heart acknowledged a desire that a constant
information of her father's situations might be made consistent with the will
of Heaven.

Deeply engaged in these reflections, Elfrida scarcely heard a flight noise in
the back part of the cavern; but at length, imagining she heard the sound of
light footsteps, she raised her eyes, and started on beholding a figure, whose
appearance spoke it of a different order of beings. The stature of this form
scarcely exceeded a foot in height, and its dimensions were proportionably
small. Its features, however diminutive, were regularly beautiful, and its
countenance bespoke tender benevolence. -- On its head was placed a turban of
the finest blue, the texture of which seemed like the leaf of a flower. It was
ornamented with a circlet of precious stones, which, though small, was of
incredible brightness. Its garment was a sort of robe descending in folds to
the ground, of the most exquisite whiteness, and shining like the flight
threads which in the autumn are seen floating over the grass at sunset. In one
hand it held an ivory wand, and in the other a mirror of the most admirable
polish.

Elfrida, startled by this supernatural appearance, would have ^^ed, but was
withheld by a sort of irresistible impulse. Her eyes eagerly surveyed the
shining stranger, who, advancing, said: Be not alarmed, Elfrida; for innocence,
and goodness of heart like yours, have from me nothing to fear. You have heard,
and, with propriety, despised, a thousand idle tales of the fairies, which have
no existence but in imagination. You have rightly judged it inconsistent with
the wisdom of the Supreme Being to suffer a set of inferior agents to torment
mankind with impunity. But learn, fair Elfrida, that although they exist not
for purposes so vain, they yet do exist. Under the control of superior power,
they are permitted, by their invisible agency, to direct the smaller concerns
of man's life. Once in an age their personal appearance is allowed to some
favored mortal, who, like yourself, possesses a heart simple and unseduced by
the allurements of vice. I have heard your regret and your wishes, and to me it
is given, though I cannot remove the one, yet to fulfill the other. Your father
is gone on a service of danger, but it is also a service of glory. He is
himself perfectly satisfied with his situation, nor would he exchange it for
the inglorious repose of a peaceful station. The only allay to his satisfaction
is the necessity of quitting you, but he anticipates the time of his return
with hopeful pleasure. Be it your task to improve the interval of his absence
by an unremitting attention to your improvement in those accomplishments he
wished you to possess. Do not by vain regrets impair the health, and lavish the
sensibility on which Fitz-Richard depends ^^r his future happiness.

Elfrida, who had listened at first with some degree of terror, which
insensibly wore away, now hastened to assure the fairy, that she was perfectly
convinced of the propriety of her remarks, and to promise, that she would in
future more steadily endeavor to repress a too great sensibility. -- You say
well, gentle Elfrida, replied the fairy, and I read in your heart the sincerity
of your purposes. -- But why wander the eyes of my fair favorite? I see you
are curious to know more of me. I am the queen of the fairies, and to me is
particularly allotted the care of the young and beautiful. This wand is the
scarce of my power, and this mirror, Elfrida, shall be to you, if you still
wish it, all you have asked from Heaven. Tell me, do you yet seek to be
constantly informed of your father's situation? I see you do. -- Take, then,
this mirror: three times in every day, (with the interval of at least half an
hour between each time) for five minutes, it shall dep^^^ to you the exact
image and employment of your father.

Elfrida eagerly extended her hand, and for the first time losing her attention
to the fairy, she cast her eyes on the so-much desired gift. She there beh^ld
the image of her father, who walked conversing with a friend; his countenance
expressed health ^^d happiness. Elfrida's tears (...) with pleasure at the
sight, and when she had gazed on it till it vanished, she turned eagerly ^^und,
and thanked repeatedly (...) and generous fairy. -- You are then satisfied with
my gi^t, Elfrida? said she with a (...) smile; you persist in the determination
of accept^^^ it? Ah, mistaken -- but I ^^^ve you to experience the ^^^ice you
have made! If at any time you become tired of possessing the mirror, come
hit^er ^^am, and when you have dipped it in the water of this stream, I will
appear and receive it from you.

The ^a^^y then disappeared, (...) Elfrida, after pausing for a (...) minutes
to recover from her astonishment, returned to the eastle. To her governess
alone, in whom she had a perfect confidence, she repeated the circumstance of
this surprising vision; at first the governess treated it as a vapor of the
imagination* but on seeing the mirror, began to believe in the truth of the
story. Elfrida, that her mind might be perfectly satisfied, begged her to cast
her eyes on it at the same time with herself; the governess complied, and they
both saw the Baron Fitz-Richard. He was on horseback, and while they gazed, the
horse fell and thr^w his rider to the ground: Elfrida shrieked and dropped the
mirror! Instantly she caught it again from the earth; but, alas! in that moment
the picture had vanished! The excess of her anxiety and dread may, perhaps be
conceived; she wept, she trembled, and at intervals giving herself up to the
horrors of her imagination, she screamed aloud in agony. -- Thus passed the
allotted half hour which must intervene ere she could again see any thing; the
moment it expired, she seized the glass, and beheld her father extended on a
couch pale and languid, his arm was bound round by a scarf, and Elfrida
believed he had broken it; this was all that appeared, and Elfrida remained as
unsatisfied as ever. In this interval her governess endeavored to impress on
the mind of Elfrida the folly of seeking to know more than Providence had
revealed; but Elfrida, distracted with anxiety, heard her not, waiting, with
her eyes fixed on the mirror, till the allotted half hour should expire. At
length the heavy minute; departed, and the same scene was again presented to
her view. And now the mirror had for that day lost its power, and in vain
Elfrida wept and rejected sleep. Ere the night was spent, an express arrived,
who brought letters from the Baron. Elfrida opened them with impatience, they
were dated five days before, and though they gave the most satisfactory
accounts of his health at that time, Elfrida, who knew what had passed since,
received no pleasure from them. She threw them aside, and waited for the
morning dawn with a passionate impatience, which destroyed the natural
sweetness of her temper. Ere it arrived, however, sleep closed her weary eyes,
and she opened them in consequence of the sunbeams which darted through her
windows. Angry with herself for having slept she seized the mirror, and saw her
father at the door of his tent; he raised his hands in thankfulness to Heaven,
and Elfrida at once perceived that his arm had not been broken, and that by the
quickness of his recovery, in all probability, the accident had been
comparatively slight. She first ardently thanked Heaven for his escape, and
then exclaimed, Ah, mischievous present, what grief has it caused me! Had I not
accepted this mirror, these letters would have been to me a source of delight;
I should have known nothing of a circumstance which has been in itself of
little consequence, and which, even had it been worse, I could not have
remedied. I will return this mirror to the fairy, and henceforth content myself
with the gifts which Heaven has bestowed. Her governess applauded her resolve,
and Elfrida hastened to the grotto, she impatiently dipped the mirror into the
stream, and the fairy immediately appeared. -- Take back your fatal gift, said
the fair Elfrida, I have already proved the misery which attends it, already
have discovered the folly of my wishes. -- With pleasure I receive it, replied
the fairy, a pleasure which arises from the joy I feel in such an instance of
your prudence. I knew when I gave it to you, the sorrows which must accompany
the knowledge you desired, but scarcely hoped that you would have been so soon
convinced of its inefficacy to make you happy. -- It Is true, I might have made
the gift more perfect, but if it had continually reflected the image of your
father, you would have neglected every thing to gaze upon it, and your time
would have passed unmarked by improvement. I see you have no desire of the kind
remaining; but, Elfrida, although this gift is useless to you, yet the
experience it has brought will not prove so. Henceforth you will be convinced
when you are tempted to form wishes, that if granted, they would in all
probability conduce as little to your real happiness as this has done. None
could wear a more specious appearance than this, which seemed prompted by
filial affection; but suspect in future, Elfrida, that every desire of whatever
sort, is unreasonable and improper, if it leads to discontent.

The fairy ended, and Elfrida, after sincerely thanking her, returned to the
castle with a mind deeply impressed by the circumstances which had befallen her.

This story, and the comments it occasioned, employed the remainder of the
evening. Emily requested to know why her mother objected to Helen's and Maria's
hearing it, and Mrs. Wyndham explained to her the difficulty which such young
minds would have had to separate the fiction from the truth of the story.

A few days afterward, Emily and Helen were invited by a lady who lived near
them, to accompany Mrs. Wyndham to hear her concert, which she had formed at
her own house to celebrate the birthday of her son; this party they
anticipated with the greatest delight, they were both extremely fond of music,
and it formed, indeed, almost the only pleasure which Helen could enjoy without
imperfection; opportunities of hearing good music in the country are scarce,
and thus the two girls fixed all their wishes for several days before on the
accomplishment of this scheme. They were accordingly dressed to go, and the
carriage was ordered, when a message arrived from the lady to whose house they
were going, saying, that she was very sorry it was not in her power to receive
them, as she had just heard of the death of a relation, which obliged her to
renounce her intended plan for the evening. Emily immediately said, Poor Mrs.
Selwyn, how sorry am I for her! and seemed to forget her own disappointment in
concern for the cause; but Helen directly burst into tears, and seemed quite
overwhelmed with mortification. Mrs. Wyndham took no notice of her for a few
minutes, hoping she would of herself overcome the impatient sorrow into which
she had fallen; but perceiving she indulged it, and sullenly rejected the
soothings of her sisters, she spoke to her.

MRS. WYNDHAM. Helen, you both surprise and vex me! my dear child, you must not
suffer yourself to be thus overcome by such a trifle. Cease crying, Helen, and
speak to me.


Helen, however, continued crying with great violence, and as Maria attempted
to caress and console her, she pushed her away with an impatient air.

MRS. WYNDHAM. Oh, I see you are determined to be a naughty girl; go, then,
from me to the farthest part of the room, and when you are more quiet, and more
like a reasonable being, I will speak to you again. Lead her away, Emily, if
she does not push you from her.


These words seemed to make some impression on Helen, but passion again got the
better of her feelings, and she suffered herself to be led from her mother,
who, much hurt, desired Emily to change her dress, and then as the carriage was
ready, she would take a ride with her, as the evening was delightful -- Emily
cheerfully obeyed, and by the time she returned, Helen was once more quiet.
Mrs. Wyndham then called her to her, and said,

Now, Helen, tell me why you cried?

HELEN. Because, Mamma, I was so much disappointed.


MRS. WYNDHAM. But did you suppose that your tears would overcome Mrs. Selwyn's
just reason for not receiving us, or oblige me to have a concert to entertain
you?


HELEN. No, Mamma, but I could not help crying.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Helen, if we suffer ourselves to say we cannot help being
foolish and unreasonable, we shall soon become really incapable of avoiding it,
and thus throw away the best of our possessions, reason and self-command. Do
you suppose Emily was not disappointed?


HELEN. But not so much as I was.


MRS. WYNDHAM. How can you be sure of that? But even allowing it to be so, you
may suppose she was somewhat mortified; at least, then, you would have expected
her to appear dissatisfied.


HELEN. But Emily is older than I am.


MRS. WYNDHAM. That is true; but if Emily, from your age, had permitted herself
to fall into a passion on every disappointment, don't you suppose by this time
she would have been still more violent than you are? From an infant I have
accustomed Emily to bear disappointment patiently; and this is one instance out
of many in which she has found the advantage of it. She has neither fretted
herself sick, nor made me uncomfortable.


HELEN. Have I made you uncomfortable, Mamma?


MRS. WYNDHAM. Yes: a child can never do wrong without inflicting a pang on the
heart of a parent. Besides, in this instance, I have another reason for being
disturbed; the fear that I have been the first cause of your impatience:
knowing that your enjoyments were few, and your inconveniences many, I have
always endeavored to increase the first and remove the latter. I have always
studiously tried to prevent your being disappointed of any expected pleasure,
and have even taken pains to procure them for you, knowing after all my
endeavors, how limited they still must be!


HELEN. Oh, Mamma, how good you are!


MRS. WYNDHAM. But, Helen, if in return for my indulgence, I find that I have
injured your temper, and made you incapable of bearing the unavoidable
mortifications of life, so far from thinking myself good, I shall for ever
reproach myself with folly and imprudence! Hitherto I have hoped I had done my
duty with respect to my children. Oh, Helen! will you oblige me to endure the
bitter reproaches of my own heart for having mistaken it?


HELEN (with eagerness and tears.) Oh never, never! Forgive me, Mamma, I will
never again make you uneasy.


MRS. WYNDHAM. You also treated Maria unkindly.


HELEN. Maria, I beg you to pardon me. Will you let me kiss you?


MARIA (running to her.) Yes, my dear; I was only sorry, not angry with you;
Mamma forgives you, so do not be unhappy.


HELEN. Do you, Mamma, do you forgive me?


MRS. WYNDHAM. Yes, Helen.


HELEN. Call me, then, your child, and embrace me. You do not think me worthy
of it! Punish me, Mamma, in any way you think proper, but do not refuse to let
me be your child.


MRS. WYNDHAM (shedding tears.) Embrace me, my dear child.


HELEN. Oh, now then I am once more happy!


EMILY. You will permit Helen to go with us, Mamma?


MRS. WYNDHAM. No, my dear; though I have forgiven her, I cannot in justice
remit her punishment; she must remain at home.


EMILY. Then, Mamma, suffer me to remain with her; I cannot enjoy any pleasure
while she is unhappy.


HELEN. Yes, go, my dear Emily, I deserve to be punished.


MRS. WYNDHAM. That I may not deprive Emily of the pleasure she has so well
deserved, and as Helen is so truly sensible of her fault, I will forget what
has passed, and we will all go.


The children were excessively delighted, and setting out in the highest
spirits, they enjoyed their ride without any mixture of regret.

In the course of a day or two, Mrs. Wyndham went with her eldest daughter to
pay a visit in the neighborhood; there were three or four young people, and it
was proposed they should stroll a while in the garden; they did so, and on
their return, Mrs. Wyndham, accustomed to observe the looks of Emily, saw that
she returned dissatisfied with her companions, and much disturbed at something
which had happened. When they were seated in the carriage to return, Mrs.
Wyndham questioned her on the subject, and Emily replied thus:

It is true, Mamma, I was displeased with the behavior of the young ladies
with whom I walked.

MRS. WYNDHAM. How, my dear?


EMILY. When we first went into the garden, Miss Darnford said to me, You Will
excuse me, Miss Wyndham, if I walk with Miss Smithson, I have not seen her
before today, and I have a great deal to tell her. I thought this a little
strange, however I begged she would do as she liked best; and accordingly she
took Miss Smithson by the arm, walked on with her, and entered into a long
talk, laughing and speaking with so much agitation, that I concluded she must
have met with something remarkably droll and pleasing. Miss Martin, who walked
with me, said, I think Miss Darnford is very rude, when one of her friends, as
she calls them is with her. -- She appears, I said, to have something of
consequence to relate to Miss Smithson. -- Nonsense, replied Miss Martin, she
saw her last night, and she only behaves in this way to give herself an air to
to you of being very clever, and very fond of her friend. As to what she has to
tell her, I Will lay you a wager I know it beforehand; she told me before you
came a great deal about it, and her father would be very angry with her if he
knew she told.


MRS. WYNDHAM. I think, Emily, as you represent her, Miss Martin has a very
blunt, odd manner.


EMILY. Oh yes, Mamma, she used very odd expressions, and I thought spoke
strangely. She told me, then, that Miss Darnford was repeating a conversation
which had passed before her between her father and a gentleman on some
business, about which they had quarrelled. I was quite shocked to think she
should ever mention what had passed in her father's house! By this time the
story was ended, and the ladies joined us, Miss Darnford saying, Be sure you
don't mention it, Papa would be very angry if he should hear of it. They then
walked with us, and Miss Darnford began to ask me questions, how I employed
myself, whether I learned music and dancing, and whenever I answered, I saw she
looked at Miss Smithson, and they both seemed ready to laugh, which confused me
very much. At last Miss Darnford said, So you have no governess, and your Mamma
teaches you herself; well that is very odd! I asked her "Why?" and she said,
Oh, I don't know, only I hear she goes on quite different from the common way,
and that you and your sisters are to be vastly clever! -- Here both the ladies
laughed, and Miss Smithson said, Well, thank my stars, my Mamma has no such
whims -- she does not trouble her head much about us; why they say, Miss
Wyndham, that you never go out without your Mamma -- that you are employed all
day with her -- and that she makes you tell her every thing you know. I found
by this time, Mamma, that these young people were not well educated, nor very
amiable, so I said very coolly, You are misinformed, my mother is incapable of
whims, she is all goodness, I am never happy but when I am with her; and as to
telling her all I know, I never knew any thing with which she is not
acquainted. -- What, said Miss Darnford, do you tell her the secrets your
friends trust you with? -- I told her, I was too young to be entrusted with
secrets of any importance, and that I had no particular friends out of my own
family. -- How, no friends! said Miss Darnford, adding in an affected tone,
poor thing! How unhappy you must be! Oh, I pity you, since you never knew the
delight of perfect confidence. -- "Pardon me," I said, I talk with perfect
confidence to my mother! -- Oh, said she, that is impossible. And here, Mamma,
the conversation was stopped by our being called into the house. But will you
explain to me why these young ladies behaved so strangely?


MRS. WYNDHAM. I can do that easily, but it will take up some time, since
almost every word they spoke contained some false principle. I knew something
of the character of Miss Darnford, and had you been a year younger, or your
principles less fixed, I should not have permitted you to walk with them. In
the first part of her behavior to her friend, (a name abused by such an
application) Miss Darnford showed great want of good-breeding -- for politeness
forbids us, if ever so much attached, to single out the object of our
affections, as the sole object of our attention in any party; even if we are
wi^h two people whom we love in different degrees, we are not permitted to
mortify that person we love least, by excessive marks of attachment to the
person we love most; a real friendship needs not these constant testimonies of
love, it trusts in its friend, and believes her incapable of misconstruing our
attention to others. We ought, then, never to let any person have reason to
believe they are in our way, or that we wish their absence, because both
humanity and politeness forbid us to mortify any person so severely, who
certainly has not deserved it of us.


EMILY. I understand you, Mamma, and am quite of your opinion.


MRS. WYNDHAM. In the next place you may observe in Miss Darnford, an instance
of that hateful exaggeration, against which I have so often warned you. At
thirteen (Miss Darnford's age) it is not possible that the character should be
sufficiently formed, the understanding enough enlightened, to admit of our
choosing a real friend. At that age, in general, the imagination has most
power. A fine face, an interesting figure, are recommendations sufficiently
powerful to win the heart. Some young people are brought up, particularly at
schools, with the idea that they must form an intimacy with some one; thus they
select the first person who pleases their fancy, her only recommendation,
perhaps, what they call being very good-natured; they tell her all they know;
they detach themselves from their family; its secrets if they can learn them,
are divulged; a thousand ill consequences follow, of which you will one day, my
dear Emily, be more sensible than I can make you now. When you shall be of age
to judge, do not suppose I shall object to your forming a strict intimacy with
any one, whom you shall then believe worthy of your esteem -- at present I hope
your mother is your friend.


EMILY. Oh, the best, the dearest of my friends -- she must always be so!


MRS. WYNDHAM. You must have seen in Miss Darnford enough to disgust you with
that ridiculous affectation of friendship which at her age cannot exist. Young
people are too apt to deceive themselves on this point; they find the deceit at
last, and the next person they see at all agreeable, supplies the place of the
discarded friend; they have chosen lightly, again are deceived, and again
change their connection. Thus they contract a habit of sickleness and caprice;
they learn to exaggerate their feelings, the most dangerous of all errors. They
never consult their reason, never ask themselves whether they really love her
whom they call their friend, whether they are capable of painful sacrifices for
her sake, whether they really esteem her character. These are the only proofs
of real friendship, and judge, then, whether false intimacy and confidence are
worthy of the name.


EMILY. Oh, surely not! Besides, what becomes of the discarded friend, she must
think herself very ill treated.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Certainly; she did not, perhaps, seek, the connection, it was
forced upon her; if she is ungenerous, finding herself thus dismissed, she
believes herself at liberty to repeat all that has been said to her. At least
she makes the young person ridiculous, and if, like Miss Darnford, she has
dared to disclose the affairs of her family, think what dreadful consequences
may ensue. How many quarrels, how much hatred, how many horrid events have
flowed from these ill judged connexions! If, fearing these, a young person acts
more prudently, and does not discard the friend she no longer loves, think what
misery she has proposed for herself, to live in habits of intimacy which she
dares not break, with a person she has no regard for, whom, perhaps, her better
judgment even obliges her to despise! if the same lightness and inconstancy be
carried to a more advanced age (as it frequently is) when people have affairs
of their own, think what mischief it must do!


EMILY. I am convinced of the necessity of choosing a friend with attention and
caution, and I thank you, Mamma, a thousand times for saving me from this false
sensibility.


MRS. WYNDHAM. I think you need no caution to warn you against ever repeating
any thing you hear in your father's house. A child whose lips are not sealed
respecting all that reaches her of family affairs and opinions, is the most
dangerous enemy of her connexions: she is unsuspected, no one believes her
capable of so great an imprudence or so black a treachery, and thus to do much
evil is put into her power. As to what the young ladies said of me and my pl^^
of education, you have sense enough to pity it, as arising only from that
thoughtless folly which very often induces weak minds to form a hasty decision
on what they cannot comprehend.


EMILY. Atleast, Mamma, I shall draw one advantage from this visit. I shall
learn that it is my best and safest way always to tell you all that appears
strange to me, and so to preserve myself from the bad effects of ill example.


MRS. WYNDHAM. Such an observation does you credit, my dear; to draw the best
instruction we can from any event is always wise and good. Do not tell what has
passed ^to Helen and Maria, they are too young to understand it. Tell them only
that you walked in the garden, and that you did not much like your visit.


In regular attendance on their several studies, the Wyndhams passed the
summer; however, for the first time, they saw the approach of winter without
regret, as the oculist, whose advice they had taken, gave them hopes that by
that time he should be able to perform an operation on Helen's eyes, which
would, if any thing could, restore her to sight. We may judge with what extreme
anxiety the whole family awaited this important period; they took care not to
inform Helen of their hopes, left they should be disappointed, and she should
be more dejected than before. The autumn they spent very agreeably, enjoying
the settled serenity of the weather and the different scenes of harvest and
fruit-gathering, in all of which the children were permitted to assist. At the
end of October the whole family went to London, and in a week after that, Helen
was to submit to the decisive operation, from which they all hoped so much. Her
mother, with infinite feeling and tenderness, prepared her for it, and received
her promise to sit patiently and quietly. The day arrived, and the anxious
family assembled to witness the event, Charlotte Neville and Maria excepted,
whose vivacity they feared would interrupt the surgeon. Mrs. Wyndham, alike
unable to fee the operation, or to quit the room, retired to one end of it,
trembling, pale, her hands and her heart lifted up to God, but concealing her
face on the shoulder of Arthur, whose arms were thrown round his mother, while
his tears fell fast on her cheek. Emily, struggling with the extreme agitation
of her mind, but by a strong effort composed, knelt with her eyes fixed on
Helen, and one of her arms round her waist, while the other hand held both the
hands of Helen. It is not possible to describe the conflicting emotions which
were visible on her countenance; hope, fear, tenderness, and devotion, were
mingled in her eyes, which were now raised to Heaven, now fixed on her sister,
and at intervals seeking to penetrate the thoughts of the operator. Mr. Wyndham
stood on the other side of Helen, exhorting her to have courage, yet feeling on
his heart every touch of the instrument which the skilful and tender oculist
applied to the eyes of the patient, quiet Helen; behind whose chair stood two
female servants; hardly dared they breathe, le^t they should interrupt or
discompose the patient or the surgeon. In about ten minutes Helen gave a faint
shrick, and exclaimed -- Ah, my God! What is this! Do I see! -- At this
exclamation Mrs. Wyndham rose suddenly, but unable to endure her sensations,
she fainted. Mr. Wyndham by a sign, requested Emily not to quit her sister, and
ran to support his wife, whom, with Arthur's assistance, they conveyed out of
the room. Emily, her complexion changing every instant from white to crimson,
the tears streaming down her cheeks, could no longer suppress her anxiety. --
"Oh, Sir," she said, "does she see!" -- "Hush," replied the surgeon, and Emily
was again silent. Helen exclaimed in broken words, but the surgeon having
finished the operation, with the help of the servants covered her eyes, and
^o^bade them to remove the bandage, as every thing depended on her not being
suffered to use her eyes.

EMILY. To use her eyes! Does she then see?


SURGEON. Yes, I am sure of it. But, my good yood young lady, you are too much
disturbed.


SERVANT. Miss Emily, don't cry so, pray don't.


HELEN. Ah, this is Emily who weeps so! Do not my dear Emily; I shall see in
time. I had such an odd thought just now, I seemed to feel something with my
eyes.


Just then Mr. Wyndham returned. Emily rising, threw herself into his arms. Ah,
my dear Father, she whispered, Helen will see; she has seen! But my mother, --
Go to your mother, my dear, said Mr. Wyndham, she is b^^ter, but unable to
return hither; compose yourself, and prevail on her to be composed.

Emily then flew to her mother, she told her what had passed, and in about ten
minutes they were both composed enough to return to Helen, whom they found
lying on her own bed, with all the windows closed. -- The surgeon ordered that
she should be kept in darkness some days, and light be admitted only by
degrees: he bestowed on Emily the highest praises, for the united sensibility
and ^^^titude she had shown. "This," said he, is true sensibility; in the
course of my practice, I witness so much affectation, so much exaggerated
feeling; I see people unable to attend their nearest connexions when it is
absolutely necessary; running away from scenes of pain and inconvenience, with
so much selfishness, as quite sickens me sometimes of sensibility. But you, my
dear Miss Wyndham, have reconciled me to it, since I perceive you make it
assistant to, not destructive of your duties. Such scenes as that of today
seldom occur: nothing could be more trying, and it might very well have
happened that a delicate frame had sunk under the exertions of a strong mind.
-- What I principally allude to, is the common practice of people, who run from
the sick (...) of those whom they ought (...) sooth and comfort, because,
truly, they cannot bear to see them suffer! -- That, said Mrs. Wyndham, is
exactly what I have always warned Emily against. True sensibility is active and
useful; fal^^ ^^^nderness enervates the mind, and renders its best wishes
unavailing.

In the course of a few days, light was gradually admitted into the apartments
of Helen, and she was suffered to see those dear friends to whom she owed so
much. But no description can do justice to the circumstances of their meeting,
nor can any idea be given of the delight with which she gazed on the
countenances of her mother and sister. By degrees she became familiar with the
objects about her, which at first she knew not how to avoid in walking across
the room; nor was it for some time she could enjoy the beauties of nature,
scarcely understanding the meaning of her own sensations. By degrees, however,
her mind became more composed, and the sight of the (...) stars, the clouds, a
river, or a flower, were to her a source of delight for hours; her genius
expanded, and her mind was so shuck by these objects, at once so new and so
interesting, that every one observed her thoughts were more sublime, and her
language more expressive than those of other people. Even the singularity of
her expressions, the eagerness of her gestures, were interesting.

Restoration of her sight completed the happiness of her amiable family; when
her eyes were sufficiently strengthened to ad^^^t of it, she learned rapidly to
write and read; and for painting, she discovered a genius so remarkable, as
induced her father to give her the best masters. In both portraits and
landscapes she succeeded wonderfully. Attached with enthusiasm to her parents
and sisters, she never forgot their cares in her helpess state. If they were
sick, she devoted herself to them, saying frequently, Oh, can I ever repay your
attention to me when I was blind!

Emily remained the same excellent character. She attended entirely to the
education of Charlotte Neville, who became all she could wish her. Arthur and
Maria in the same manner fulfilled the wishes of their parents. Prosperity and
peace to the end of their lives attend this amiable family, who were constantly
employed in the performance of their several duties, and whose goodness was
recompensed by as much felicity as this life is capable of receiving.

APPENDIX.
THE STORY of MR. WENTWORTH. From the MIRROR, No. 27. [A periodical Paper, very
deserving of attention.]
There is a kind of mournful eloquence In thy dumb grief, which shames all
clamorous sorrow. LEE'S THEODOSIUS.
A VERY amiable and much respected friend of mine, whose real name I shall
conceal under that of Wentworth, had lately the misfortune of losing a wife,
who was not only peculiarly beautiful, but whose soul was the mansion of every
virtue, and of every elegant accomplishment. She was suddenly cut off in the
flower of her age, after having lived twelve years with the best and most
affectionate of husbands. A perfect similarity of temper and disposition, a
kindred delicacy of taste and sentiment, had linked their hearts together in
early youth, and each succeeding year seemed but to add new strength to their
affection. Though possessed of an affluent fortune, they preferred the
tranquillity of the country to all the gay pleasures of the capital. In the
cultivation of their estate, in cherishing the virtuous industry of its
inhabitants, in ornamenting a beautiful seat, in the society of one another, in
the innocent prattle of their little children, and in the company of a few
friends, Mr Wentworth and his Amelia found every wish gratified, and their
happiness complete.

My readers will judge then, what must have been Mr. Wentworth's feelings, when
Amelia was thus suddenly torn from him, in the very prime of her life, and in
the midst of her felicity. I dreaded the effects of it upon a mind of his nice
and delicate sensibility: and, receiving a letter from his brother, requesting
me to come to them, I hasted thither, to endeavor by my presence, to assuage
his grief, and prevent those fatal consequences of which I was so apprehensive.

As I approached the house, the sight of all the well-known scenes, brought
fresh into my mind the remembrance of Amelia; and I felt myself but ill
qualified to act the part of a comforter. When my carriage stopped at the gate, I
trembled, and would have given the world to go back. A heartfelt sorrow ^at on
the countenance of every servant; and I walked into the house without a word
being uttered. In the hall I was met by the old b^^ler, who was grown gray
headed in the family, and he hastened to conduct me up stairs. -- As I walked
up, I commanded firmness enough to say, Well, William, how is Mr. Wentworth*
The old man, turning about with a look that pierced my heart, said, Oh, Sir,
our excellent Lady! -- Here his grief overwhelmed him; and it was with
difficulty he was able to open to me the door of the apartment.

Mr. Wentworth ran and embraced me with the warmest affection; and, after a few
moments, assumed a firmness, and even an ease, that surprised me. His brother,
with a sister of Amelia's, and some other friends that were in the room,
appeared more over powered than my friend himself, who, by the fortitude of his
behavior, seemed rather to moderate the grief of those around him, than to
demand their compassion for himself. By his gen^^^ and kind attentions, he
seemed anxious to relieve their sorrow; and, by a sort of concerted
traquillity, strove to prevent their discovering any symptoms of the bitter
anguish which preyed upon his mind. His countenance was pale, and his eyes
betrayed that his heart was ill at ease; but it was that silent and majestic
sorrow which commands our reverence and our admiration.

The next morning after breakfast, I chanced to take up a volume of Metastasio,
that lay amongst other books upon a table; and, as I was turning over the
leaves, a slip of paper, with something written on it, dropped upon the floor.
-- Mr. Wentworth picked it up; and as he looked at it, I saw the tears start
from his eyes, and, fetching a deep sigh, he uttered, in a low and broken
voice, "My poor Amelia!" -- It was the translation of a favorite passage which
she had been attempting, but had left unfinished. As if uneasy le^t I had
perceived his emotion, he carelessly threw his arm over my shoulder, and
reading aloud a few lines of the page which I held open in my hand, he went
into some remarks on the poetry of that elegant author. -- Sometime after, I
observed him take up the book, and carefully replacing the slip of paper where
it had been, put the volume into his pocket.

Mr. Wentworth proposed that we should walk out, and that he himself would
accompany us. As we stepped through the hall, one of my friend's youngest boys
came running up, and catching his Papa by the hand, cried out with ^oy, that
Mamma's Rover was returned This was a spaniel, who had been the ^avourite of
Amelia, and had followed her in all her walks; but after her death, had been
sent to the house of a villager, to be out of the immediate sight of the
family. Having somehow made his escape from thence, the dog had that morning
found his way home; and, as soon as he saw Mr. Wentworth, leaped upon him with
an excess of fondness. I saw my friend's lips and cheeks quiver. He catched his
little Frank in his arms; and, for a few moments, hid his face in his neck.

As we traversed his delightful grounds, many different scenes naturally
recalled the remembrance of Amelia. My friend, indeed, in order to avoid some
of her favorite walks, had conducted us an unusual road; but what corner could
be found that did not bear the traces of her hand? Her elegant taste had marked
the peculiar beauty of each different scene, and had brought it forth to view
with such a happy delicacy of art, as to make it seem the work of nature alone.
As we crossed certain paths in the woods, and passed by some rustic buildings,
I could sometimes discern an emotion in my friend's co^ntenance; but he
instantly stifled it with a firmness and dignity that made me careful not to
seem to observe it.

Toward night, Mr. Wentworth having stolen out of the room, his brother and I
stepped out to a terrace behind the house. It was the dusk of the evening, the
air was mild and serene, and the moon was rising in all her brightness from the
cloud of the cast. The fineness of the night made us extend our walk, and we
strayed into a hollow valley, whose sides are covered with trees overhanging a
brook that pours itself along over broken rocks. We approached a rustic grotto,
placed in a sequestered corner, under a half-impending rock. My companion
stopped. "This," said he, was one of Amelia's walks, and that grotto was her
favorite evening retreat. The last night she ever walked out, and the very
evening she caught that fatal fever, I was with my brother and her, while we
sat and read to each other in that very place. -- While he spoke, we perceived
a man steal out of the grotto, and, avoiding us, take his way by a path through
a thicket of trees on the other side. "It is my brother," said young Wentworth;
he has been here in his Amelia's favorite grove, indulging that grief he so
carefully conceals from us.

We returned to the house, and found Mr. Wentworth with the rest of the
company. He forced on some conversation, and even affected a degree of gentle
pleasantry during the whole evening.

Such, in short, is the noble deportment of my friend, that, in place of
finding it necessary to temper and moderate his grief, I must avoid seeming to
perceive it, and dare scarcely appear even to think of the heavy calamity which
has befallen him. I too well know what he feels; but the more I know this, the
more does the dignity of his recollection and fortitude excite my admiration,
and command my silent attention and respect.

How very different is this dignified and reserved sorrow, from that weak and
teazing grief which disgusts, by its sighs and tears, and clamorous
lamentations? How much does such noble fortitude of deportment call forth our
regard and reverence? How much is a character in other respects estimable,
degraded by a contrary demeanor? How much does the excessive, the importunate,
and unmanly grief of Cicero, diminish the very high respect which we should
otherwise entertain for the exalted character of that illustrious Roman?

Writers on practical morality have described and analyzed the passion of
grief, and have pretended to prescribe remedies for restoring the mind to
tranquillity; but, I believe, little benefit has been derived from any thing
they have advised. To tell a person in grief, that time will relieve him, is
truly applying no remedy; and to bid him reflect how many others there may be
who are more wretched, is a very inefficacious one. The truth is, that the
excess of this, as well as of other passions, must be prevented rather than
cured. It must be obviated, by our attaining that evenness and equality of
temper, which can arise only from an improved understanding, and an habitual
intercourse with refined society. These will not, indeed, exempt us from the
pangs of sorrow, but will enable us to bear them with a noble grace and
propriety, and will render the presence of our friends (which is the only
remedy) a very effectual cure.

This is well explained by a philosopher, who is no less eloquent than he is
profound. He justly observes, that we naturally, on all occasions, endeavor to
bring down our own passions, to that pitch which those about us can correspond
with. We view ourselves in the light in which we think they view us, and seek
to suit our behavior to what we think their feelings can go along with. With
an intimate friend, acquainted with every circumstance of our situation, we
can, in some measure, give way to our grief, but are more calm than when by
ourselves. Before a common ^^quaintance, we assume a greater sedateness. Before
a mixed assembly, we affect a still more considerable degree of composure.
Thus, by the company of our friends at first, and afterward, by mingling with
society, we come to suit our deportment to what we think they will approve of;
we gradually abate the violence of our passion, and restore our mind to its
wonted tranquillity.

THE END.
FOR SALE, By the PRINTERS hereof:
1. Hymns for the amusement of children, by the Rev. Christopher Smart; to
which is added Wats's divine songs for children. 2. The history of Martin and
James, a moral tale. 3. The seven voyages of Sinbad the sailor, Alad^^^ and his
wonderful lamp; the story of little Hunchback; and the barber and his seven
brothers. 4. The Mother's Gift. 5. The Moving Market or new London Cries. 6.
The history of Little Jack; the history of the Little Queen; and the natural
historics of the Silkworm and the Be. 7. The English Hermit, or history and
adventures of Philip Quar^l, who has lived thirty years upon an uninhabited
island without any human assistance, still continues to reside, and will not
come away. 8. The Three Brothers, a moral tale; the Three Sisters, a moral
tale; and Courage inspired by Friendship, a moral tale; the whole embe^^^^hed
with a number of engravings.

