OVID's ART OF LOVE;

IN THREE BOOKS:

TOGETHER WITH HIS REMEDY OF LOVE:

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE, By several eminent Hands:

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, THE COURT OF LOVE, THE HISTORY OF LOVE, AND ARMSTRONG'S
ECONOMY OF LOVE.

NEW YORK Printed and sold by SAMUEL CAMPBELL, No. 124, Pearl Street* M,DCC,XCV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RICHARD, EARL OF BURLINGTON.
My LORD,
OUR Poet's rules, in easy numbers, tell
He felt the passion he describes so well.
(...) that soft art successfully refined
Though angry Caesar frowned, the fair were kind.
More ills from love, than tyrants' malice flow;
Jove's thunder strikes less sure than Cupid's bow.
Ovid both felt the pain, and found the ease;
Physicians study most their own disease.
The practice of that age in this we try;
Ladies should listen then, and lovers lie.
Who flattered most the ^air, were most polite;
Each thought her own admirer in the right;
To be but faintly rude was criminal,
But to be boldly so, atoned for all.
Breeding was banished for the fair one's sake;
The sex never gives, but suffers ours should take.
Advice to you, my Lord, in vain we bring.
The flowers never fail to meet the blooming spring.
Though you possess all nature's gifts, take care;
Love's queen has charms, but fatal is her snare.
On all, that goddess her false smiles bestows,
As on the seas she reigns, from whence she rose.
Young Zephyrs sing with fragrant breath, soft gales
Guide her gay barge, and swell the silken falls:
Each silver wave in beauteous order moves,
Fair as her bosom, gentle as her doves;
But he that once embarks, too surely finds
A sullen sky, black storms, and angry winds.
Cares, fears, and anguish, hovering on the coast,
And wrecks on wretches, by their folly lost.
When coming time shall bless you with a bride,
Let passion not persuade, but reason guide:
Instead of gold, let gentle truth endear:
She has most charms, who is the most sincere.
Shun vain variety, it is but disease:
Weak appetites are ever hard to please.
The nymph must fear to be inquisitive:
It Is for the sex's quiet to believe.
Her air an easy confidence must show,
And shun to find, what she would dread to know*
Still charming with all arts that can engage,
And be the JULIANA of the age.
INTRODUCTION.
OVID'S Art of Love, having lately appeared in French with Observations written
by the translator, which have been very well received in France; it has been
thought proper to add such of them as are most curious to this version, and to
make other new remarks in some places, where the English translators have given
another turn to the original. The introduction to these observations is
entirely the French author's; so are most of the reflections. It Is hoped those
that are not taken from him, will not be found to be of less importance than
those that are*

A great many people are mistaken in these books: and though they were made use
of as a pretense to drive the author from the court of Augustus, and confine
him to Tomos, on the frontiers of the Getae and Surmatae, yet they were not the
true cause of his confinement. They are very far from being so licentious as
the writings of several other poets, both Greek and Latin. However, we must own
he might have been a little more discreet, especially in some places.

That which offended the Romans most in this work, cannot touch us. It has
always been more dangerous in Italy to converse with women of honor, and
frequent their houses, than it is with us: Though there is more liberty, and
what in that country may be an occasion of debauchery, would not at all be so
in ours.

Notwithstanding all that has been said against these books of the Art of Love,
by some over-scrupulous persons, whose discretion has too much of affectation
in (...); they are not only necessary for the knowledge of the Latin tongue,
and the Roman history, concerning which they contain several things very
particular; but for the noble (...) we find in them, which the most grave and
(...) have thought worthy to be (...).

In a word, there is nothing in them that comes near the license of some
epigrams of Catullus Martial, and Ausonius, of some satyrs of Horace and
Juvenal, and several other pieces of ancient and modern authors which are read
and commented upon; and about which even celebrated Jesuits and other religious
persons, as eminent for their piety as their erudition, have employed their
studies. Yet who has condemned or complained of them? We must confess, such
things should be managed with address: and those of them who have meddled with
any of the authors I have named, have shown that it may be done so, by their
succeeding so happily in it.

As for this treatise of the Art of Love, for which the author has also
prescribed a remedy, as it is liable to be all interpreted by those whose pens
poison every thing they touch; so it may bear a good construction, by such as
know how to turn every thing to advantage.

I will yet say, this Art may be applied to those that intend to marry. There
is nothing sure against decency in all that. I agree, if you will have it so,
that it extends so far as to direct one to the means to gain a mistress. If
this was not lawful heretofore in Italy, on account of the jealous humor of
the Italians, we cannot, for the same reason only, say it ought to be forbidden
in our country, any more than in several others, provided we could be sure the
ladies modesty would not be offended, before whom youth should be always
careful not to exceed the bounds of the respect that is due to them.

Be it as it will, I have thought of endeavoring to apply all that is said in
those books of wanton love, to the art of loving the sciences. The emblem is
not disagreeable, neither is it impossible to explain all that Ovid has written
here upon the love of beauty by that of the arts. What do we not sometimes
understand by the loves of a shepherd and shepherdess? By a lover of
incomparable beauty, and his fair one passionately in love? But, keeping to the
fable, how often has the loves of Jupiter and Juno been moraliz'd upon, as well
as those of Apollo and Daphne, Mars and Venus, Myrrha and Cynaras, and several
others, the examples of which are almost infinite? Yet these things are seen
every day, all the world read and admire them. Though the outside of them is a
little strong, and the literal sense more suspected, than any of the precepts
laid down in Ovid's Art of Love are licentious.

But, to soften this thought a little, let us figure to ourselves, that the
poet is not only a gallant of the court of Augustus, but a philosopher of the
Portic and Lyceum; who proposes to us, as to his disciples, excellent rules to
acquire the virtues and sciences, represented under the name of the muses, or
ladies of various beauty, who may be met with every where, especially in great
academies, in the schools, in courts, in walks, and in holy places; figured by
cirques, theaters, galleries, portices, and the temples of the Roman deities,
where great assemblies were held. And when we have chosen that which pleases us
best, and is most agreeable to our nature; let us endeavor to gain its good
graces, and enjoy it, that we may become more wise, and more virtuous. Thus we
may deceive our imagination: and 'twill be easy for us to make the reading of
this treatise, not only pleasant, but profitable. We need not then have any
scruple upon us, because there is nothing unchaste in the expression, though
such things as are entirely gallant are not neglected; at least no farther than
modesty and decency required. I will, if I can, explain my thoughts in this
matter, according as occasion may offer.

Of the Art of Love. By this we ought to understand how we must love, or how we
must preserve the (...) of our love, when we have once acquired it. Otherwise
'twas useless to write an Art of love. For love is formed in the heart without
art, and all are without art susceptible of that passion. It generally
surprises us, and we know not from whence it comes, though we feel it very
sensibly. For this reason the poets so often endeavor to persuade us that love
is a potent god, who wounds every thing with his darts; and that there is no
creature able to resist him. We therefore need no art to teach us to love, or
even to love any thing reasonably; but it is of very great importance to each of
us, that, when we are inspired, the inspiration should be for a proper object,
and a good end, as I design to show you.

Ovid. This poet wrote these books a few years before his exile, under color
of which the decree of the senate for his banishment was procured* though they
certainly were not the cause of it; and indeed could not reasonably be so,
unless Ovid wrote them in favor of Augustus's granddaughter, whom he visited
with a little too much familiarity, and did it to please her. For she, no more
than her mother, Agrippa's wife, was not so modest as persons of quality and
high condition ought to be, as well for their own glory, as for an example to
others.

The two first books of the Art of Love, contain the precepts which the author
lays down for young men to follow in their courtship to the ladies, and the
third teaches the ladies how they ought to make themselves beloved. The
allegory is not uneasily applied to the sciences and the virtues, represented
as lovely women, after my way of imagining it.

OVID's ART OF LOVE.
TRANSLATED, SOME YEARS SINCE, BY MR. DRYDEN.
BOOK I.
IN Cupid's school, whoever would take degree,
Must learn his rudiments, by reading me*
Seamen with failing arts their vessels move;
Art guides the chariot; a art instructs to love*
Of ships and chariots, others know the rule;
But I am master in love's mighty school.
Cupid indeed is obstinate and wild.
A stubborn god b; but yet the god's a child:
Easy to govern in his tender age,
Like fierce Achilles in his pupilage.
That hero, born for conquest, c, trembling stood
Before the centaur, and received the rod. d
As Chiron e mollify'd his cruel mind
With art; and taught his warlike hands to wind
The silver strings of his melodious lyre:
So love's fair goddess does my soul inspire
To teach her softest arts; to sooth the mind,
And smooth the rugged breasts of human kind.
Yet Cupid and Achilles, each with scorn
And rage were filled; and both were goddess-born.
The bull, reclaimed and yoked, the burden draws:
The horse receives his bit within his jaws.
And stubborn love shall bend beneath my sway,
Though struggling often he strives to disobey.
He shakes his torch, he wounds me with his darts;
But vain his force, and vainer are his arts.
The more he burns my soul, or wounds my sight,
The more he teaches ^o revenge the spite.
I boast no aid the Delphian god affords,
Nor auspice from the ^light of chattering birds; h
Nor Clio nor her sisters have I seen,
As Hesiod saw them on the shady green:
Experience makes any work a truth so tried.
You may believe^* and Venus be my guide. i
Far hence (...) be, who bind your hair;
And wives, wh^ gowns below your ankles, wear.
I sing the brothels loose and unconfined,
The unpunishable pleasures of the kind;
Which all alike, for love, or money find.
You, who in Cupid's, rolls inscribe your name,
First seek an object worthy of your flame; k
Then strive with art, your lady's mind to (...)*
And last, provide your love may long remain.
On these three precepts all my work shall move*
These are the rules and principles of love.
Before your youth with marriage is oppressed.
Make choice of one (...) suits your humor best
And such a damsel drops not from the (...)*
(...)
The wary angler, in the winding brook,
Knows what the fist, and where to (...) his hook.
The ^owler and (...) by (...),
The certain haunts, (...)
So must the lover beat the (...);
The assemblies where his (...).
Nor shall my novice warder (...):
These rules shall put him in the ready ^ay:
Thou shall not sail around the (...)*
As far as Perseus, or as (...)
For Rome alone afford^ thee such a (...).
As all the world can hardly (...)
The face of heaven with (...)
Than beauties in the (...).
Whether thy love is (...)
On dawning sweetness, (...)
Or courts the juicy joys of riper (...)
Here may thou find thy full (...)*
Or if autumnal beauties please thy (...)*
(An age that knows to give, (...))
Millions of matrons of the (...),
In common prudence, will no^ (...) the sport.
In summer heat^ thou (...) but (...)
To Pompey's cool and (...);
Or Concord's fane (...) or that (...).
Whose turrets near the (...)
Or to that other (...)
The cruel father urging (...)
And fifty daughter (...)
To plunge their (...)
Or Venus' temple; (...)
They mourn Adonis with (...)
Nor shun the ^e^vish walk, (...).
On Sabbaths, rest (...) every (...)
Nor (...) temple; (...) for that (...)
Makes others, what to Jove she was before. r
And if the hall itself be not belied,
Even there the cause of love is often tried.
Near it at least, or in the palace yard;
From whence the noisy combatants are heard,
The crafty counselors, in formal gown,
There gain another's cause, but lose their own.
Their eloquence is non plus'd in the suit;
And lawyers, who had words at will, are mute.
Venus, from her adjoining temple, smiles,
To see them caught in their litigious wiles.
Grave senators lead home the youthful dame;
Returning clients, when they patrons came.
But above all, the playhouse is the place;
There Is choice of quarry in that narrow chase.
There take thy stand, and sharply looking out,
Soon may thou find a mistress in the rout;
For length of time, or for a single bout.
The theaters are berries for the fair;
Like ants on mole-hills, thither they repair:
Like bees to hives, so num'rously they throng,
It may be said, they to that place belong.
Thither they swarm, who have the public voice*
There choose, if plenty not distracts thy choice.
To see, and to be seen, in heaps they run;
Some to undo, and some to be undone.
From Romulus the rise of plays began,
To his new subjects a commodious man;
Who, his unmarried soldiers to supply,
Took care the commonwealth should multiply:
Providing Sabine women for his braves:
Like a true king, to get a race of slaves.
His playhouse, not of Parian marble made,
Nor was it spread with purple sails for shade.
The stage with rushes, or with leaves they strewn:
(...) scenes in prospect, no machining god.
(...) of homely, turf they sat to see,
Crowned with the wreaths of every common tree*
There, while they sit in rustic majesty,
Each lover had his mistress in his eye;
And whom he saw most suiting to his mind,
For joys of matrimonial rape designed.
Scarce could they wait the Plaudit in their haste;
But ere the dances and the songs were past,
The monarch gave the signal from his throne:
And rising, bade his merry men fall on.
The martial crew, like soldiers ready pressed,
Just at the word (the word too was the best)
With joyful cries each other animate;
Some choose, and some at hazard seize their mate.
As doves from eagles, or from wolves the lambs,
So from their lawless lovers fly the dames.
Their fear was one, but not one face of fear;
Some rend the lovely tresses of their hair:
Some shriek, and some are struck with dumb despair.
Her absent mother one invokes in vain;
One stands amazed, not daring to complain;
The ^^mble^ ^rust their feet, the slow remain.
But naught availing, all are captives led,
Trembling and blushing, to the genial bed.
She who too long resisted, or denied,
The lusty lover made by force a bride;
And with superior strength compelled her to his ^^le,
Then soothed her thus: -- My soul's far better part,
Cease weeping, nor afflict thy tender heart.
For what thy father to thy mother was,
That ^aith to thee, that solemn vow I pass.
Thus Romulus became so popular;
Th^^ was the way to thrive in peace or war.
To pay his army, and fresh whores to bring:
Who would not ^ight for such a gracious king*
Thus love in theaters did first improve;
And (...) still the scene of love.
Nor shun the chariot's and the courser's race;
The t Circus is no inconvenient place.
No need is there of talking on the hand:
Nor nods, nor signs, which lovers understand. u
But boldly next the fair your seat provide;
Close as you can to hers, and side by side.
Pleased or unpleas'd no matter, crowding sit,
For so the laws of public shows permit;
Then find occasion to begin discourse*
Enquire whose chariot this, and whose that horse;
To whatsoever side she is inclined,
Suit all your inclinations to her mind:
Like what she likes, from thence your court begin;
And whom she favors wish that he may win.
But when the statues of the deities,
In chariots rolled, appear before the prize;
When Venus comes, with deep devotion rise.
If dust be on her lap, or grains of sand,
Brush both away with your officious hand*
If none be there, yet brush that nothing thence;
And still to touch her lap make some pretense.
Touch any thing of hers; and if her train
Sweep on the ground, let it not sweep in vain;
But gently take it up, and wipe it clean*
And, while you wipe it, with observing eye,
Who knows what charming objects you may spy?
Observe who sits behind her, and beware,
Lest his encroaching knee should press the fair.
Light service takes light minds: for some can tell
Of favors won by laying cushions well.
By fanning faces some their fortunes meet;
And some by laying footstools for the feet.
These overtures of love the Circus gives:
Nor at the sword-play less the lover thrives:
For there the son of Venus fights his prize*
And deepest wounds are often received from eyes.
One, while the crowd their acclamations ma^^,
Or while he bets, and puts his ring to stake,
Is struck from far, and feels the flying dart;
And of the spectacle is made a part.
Caesar would represent a naval fight, y
For his own honor, and for Rome's delight.
From either sea the youths and maidens come;
And all the world was then contained in Rome.
In this vast concourse, in this choice of game,
What Roman heart but felt a foreign flame?
Once more our prince prepares to make us glad;
And the remaining east to Rome will add.
Rejoice ye Roman soldiers in your urn,
Your ensigns from the Parthians shall return,
And the slain Crassi shall no longer mourn.
A youth is sent those trophies to demand;
And bears his father's thunder in his hand:
Doubt not the imperial boy in wars unseen,
In childhood all of Caesar's race are men.
Celestial seeds shoot out before their day,
Prevent their years, and brook no dull delay.
Thus infant Hercules the snakes did press;
And in his cradle did his ^ire confess.
Bacchus, a boy, yet like a hero fought,
And early spoils from conquered India brought.
Thus you your father's troops shall lead to fight,
And thus shall vanquish in your father's right.
These rudiments you to your lineage owe;
Born to increase your title as you grow.
Brethren you had, revenge your brethren slain;
You have a father, and his rights maintain.
Armed by your country's parent and your own,
Redeem your country and restore his throne.
Your enemies assert an impious came;
You ^ight both for divine and human laws.
Already in their cause they are overcome;
Subject them too, by force of arms, to Rome.
Great father Mars with greater Caesar join;
To give a prosperous Omen to your line;
One of you is, and one shall, be divine.
I prophecy you shall, you shall overcome:
My verse shall bring you back in triumph home.
Speak in my verse, exhort to loud alarms;
O were my numbers equal to your arms,
Then would I sing the Parthians' overthrow*
Their shot a verse sent from a flying bow.
The Parthians, who already flying sight,
Already give an Omen of their flight,
O when will come the day, by heaven designed,
When thou, the best and fairest of mankind,
Drawn by white horses shall in triumph ride,
With conquered slaves attending on thy side,
Slaves, that no longer can be safe in flight?
O glorious object, O surprising sight,
O day of public joy; too good to end in night!
On such a day, if thou, and next to thee,
Some beauty sit, the spectacle to see;
If she enquire the names of conquered kings,
Of mountains, rivers, and their hidden springs,
Answer to all thou know; and, if need be,
Of things unknown seem to speak knowingly:
This is Euphrates, crowned with reeds; and there
Flows the swift Tigris with his seagreen hair. z
Invent new names of things unknown before;
Call this Amenia, that the C^spian shore:
Call this a Mede, and that a Parthian youth;
Talk probably no matter for the truth.
In feasts, as at our shows, new means abound:
More pleasure there than that of wine is found.
The Paphian goddess there her ambush lays;
And love betwixt the horns of Bacchus plays:
Desires increase at every swelling draught:
Brisk vapors add new vigor to the thought.
There Cupid's purple wings no flight afford;
But, wet with wine, he flutters on the board.
He shakes his pinions, but he cannot move;
Fixed he remains, and turns a maudlin love.
Wine warms the blood, and makes the spirits flow;
Care flies, and wrinkles from the forehead go:
Exalts the poor, invigorates the weak;
Gives mirth and laughter, and a rosy cheek.
Bold truths it speaks; and spoken, dares maintain;
And brings our old simplicity again.
Love sparkles in the cup, and ^ills it higher:
Wine feeds the flames, and fuel adds to fire.
But choose no mistress in thy drunken fit, ^a
Wine gilds too much their beauties and their wit.
Nor trust thy judgment when the tapers dance;
But sober, and by day, thy suit advance,
By daylight Paris judged the beauteous three;
And for the fairest did the prize decree.
Night is a cheat, and all deformities
Are bid, or lessened in her dark disguise.
The sun's fair light each error will confess,
In face, in shape, in jewels, and in dress.
Why name I every place where youth abound?
It Is lo^s of time; and a too fruitful ground.
The Bajan baths bb where ships at anchor ride,
And wholesome streams from sulphur fountains glide*
Where wounded youths are by experience taught,
The waters are less healthful than they thought.
Or (...) fane, which near the suburb lies;
Where priests for their promotion, ^ight a prize* (...)
That maiden goddess is love's mortal foe,
And much from her his subjects undergo.
Thus far the sportful muse, with myrtle bound,
Has sung where lovely lasses may be found.
Now let me sing, how she who wounds your mind,
With are may be to care your wounds in ^in'd.
Young nobles to my laws attention lend:
And all you vulgar of my school, attend.
First then, believe all women may be won;
Attempt with confidence, the work is done.
The grasshopper shall first forbear to sing
In summer season, or the birds in spring;
Than women can resist your flattering skill:
Even she will yield, who swears she never will.
To secret pleasure both the sexes move;
But women most, who most dissemble love.
'Twere best for us, if they would first declare,
Avow their passion, and submit to prayer.
The cow, by lowing, tells the bull her flame:
The neighing mare invites the stallion to the game.
Man is more temperate in his lust than they;
And more that women can his passion sway.
Biblis, we know did first her love declare; dd
And had recourse to death in her despair.
Her brother she; her father Myrrha sought;
And loved; but loved not as a daughter ought.
Now from a tree she 'stills her odorous tears;
Which yet the name of her who shed 'em bears.
In Ida's shady vale a bull appeared; ee
White as the snow, the fairest of the herd;
A beauty spot of black there only rose,
Betwixt his equal horns and ample brows:
The love and wish of all the Cretan cows.
The queen beheld him as his head he reared;
And envied every leap he gave the herd.
A secret fire she nourished in her breast,
And hated e'vry heifer he caressed.
A story kown, and known for true I tell;
Nor Crete, though lying, can the truth conceal. ff
She cut him grass; (so much can love command)
She strok'd, she fed him with her royal hand:
Was pleased in pastures with the herd to roam;
And Minos by the bull was overcome.
Cease queen, with gems, t'adorn thy beauteous brows;
The monarch of thy heart no jewel knows.
Nor in thy glass compose thy looks and eyes;
Secure from all thy charms thy lover lies:
Yet trust thy mirror, when it tells thee true;
Thou art no heifer to allure his view.
Soon would thou quit thy royal diadem
To thy fair rivals; to be horned like them.
If Minos please, no lover seeks to find;
If not, at least seek one of human kind.
The wretched queen the Cretan court forsakes;
In woods and wilds her habitation makes;
She curses every beauteous cow she sees;
Ah why do thou my lord and master please!
And think, ungrateful creature as thou art,
With frisking aukwardly to gain his heart,
She said; and straight commands with frowning look,
To put her, undeserving, to the yoke.
Or feigns some holy rites of sacrifice,
And sees her rival's death with joyful eyes.
Then, when the bloody priest has done his part;
Pleased, in her hand she holds the beating heart;
Nor from a scornful taunt can scarce refrain;
Go, fool, and strives to please my love again.
Now she would be Europa -- Io now, gg
(One bore a bull; and one was made a cow.)
Yet she at last her brutal bliss obtained:
And in a wooden cow the bull sustained:
Filled with his ^eed accomplished her desire;
Till, by his form, the son betrayed the fire.
If Atreus's wife to incest had not run, hh
(But ah, how hand it is to love but one!)
His courses Phoebus had not driven away,
To shun that sight, and interrupt the day.
Thy daughter Nisus, pulled thy purple hair* ii
And barking sea-dogs yet her bowels tear.
At tea and land Atrides saved his life;
Yet fell a prey to his adult'rous wife.
Who knows not what revenge M^d^^ sought, kk
When the slain offspring bore the father's fault;
Thus Phoenix did a woman's love bewail: ll
And thus Hippolytus by Ph^dra fell. mm
These crimes revengeful matrons did commit;
Hotter their lust and sharper is their (...).
Doubt not from them an easy victory,
Scarce of a thousand dames will one deny.
A^^ women are content that men should woo:
She who complains, and she who will not do.
Rest then secure, whatever thy luck may prove,
Not to be hated for declaring love.
And yet how can thou miss, since womankind
Is frail and vain; and still to change inclined?
Old (...), and stale gallants they despise;
And more another's than their own they prize.
A larger crop adorns our neighbor's field,
More milk his kin^ from swelling udders yield.
First gain the maid; nn By her thou shall be sure
A free access and easy to (...):
Who knows, what to her office does belong,
Is in the secret and can hold her tongue.
Bribe her with (...) with (...) prayers;
For her good word goes far in love affair^.
The time and (...) occasion leave to her,
When she most (...) can thy suit prefer.
The time for (...) fire their (...),
I^ when they find her in a merry mood.
When all things at her wish and (...);
Her heart is open then, and free to low.
Then mirth and wantonness to lust betray,
And smooth the passage to the lover's way.
Troy stood the siege when filled with anxious care:
One merry fit concluded all the war.
If some fair rival vex her jealous mind,
offer thy service to revenge in kind.
Instruct the damsel, while (...) her hair,
To raise the choler of that (...) fair;
And sighing, make her mistress understand,
She has the means of vengeance in her hand.
Then, naming thee, thy humble suit prefer;
And swear thou languishest and dy'st for her.
Then let her lose no time, but push at all;
For women soon are raised and soon they fall.
Give their first fury leisure to relent,
They melt like ice and suddenly repent.
TO enjoy the maid, will that thy suit advance?
It Is a hard question, and a doubtful chance;
One maid corrupted, bawds the better for it;
Another for herself would keep the sport.
Thy business may be furthered or delayed,
But by my counsel, let alone the maid.
Even though she should consent to do the feat;
The profit's little, and the danger's great.
I will not lead thee through a rugged road;
But where the way lies open, safe, and broad:
Yet if thou find'st her very much thy friend;
And her good face her diligence commend.
Let the fair mistress have thy first embrace.
And let the maid come after in her place.
But this I will advise, and mark my words,
For it is the best advice my skill affords.
If needs thou with the damsel wilt begin;
Before the attempt is made make sure to win.
For then the letter better will be kept;
And she can tell no tales when once she is dipped.
It Is for the fowler's interest to beware,
The bird entangled should not 'scape the snare.
The ^ish once pricked avoids the bearded hook;
And spoils the sport of all the neighboring brook*
But if the wench be thine, she makes thy way;
And for thy sake, her mistress will betray;
Tell all she knows, and all she hears her say
Keep all the counsel of thy faithful spy:
So shall thou learn whenever ^he treads awry.
All things the stations of their seasons keep: oo
And certain times there are to sow and reap.
Ploughmen and sailors for the season stay.
One to plough land, and one to plough the sea,
So should the lover wait the lucky day.
Then stop thy suit; it hurts not thy design;
But think another hour she may be thine.
And when she celebrates her birth at home.
Or when she views the public shows of Rome:
Know all thy visits then are troublesome.
Defer thy work and put not then to sea. pp
For that is a boding and a stormy day.
Else take thy time, and when thou can begin;
To break a Jewish Sabbath, think no sin:
Nor even on superstitious days abstain. qq
Not when the Romans were at Allia slain.
Ill omens in her frowns are understood:
When she is in humor, every day is good
But than her birthday seldom comes a worse;
When bribes and presents must be sent of course;
And that is a bloody day, that costs thy purse.
Be stanch; yet parsimony will be vain:
The craving sex will still the lover (...).
No skill can shift them of, no art remove;
They will be begging when they know we love.
(...) comes upon the (...),
Who (...)
To choose for her she craves thy kind advice:
Then begs again to bargain for the price:
But when she has her purchase in her eye,
She hugs thee close, and kisses thee to buy.
It Is what I want, and it is a penn'orth too:
In many years I will not trouble you.
If you complain you have no ready coin;
No matter, it is but writing of a line:
A little bill not to be paid at sight;
(Now curse the time when thou were taught to write.)
She keeps her brith-day; you must send the cheer;
And she will be born a hundred times a year.
With daily lies she dribs thee into cost;
That ear-ring dropped a stone, that ring is lost.
They often borrow what they never (...);
Whatever you lend her, think it thrown away.
Had I t^n mouths and tongues to tell each art,
All would be wearied ever I told a part.
By letters, not by words, thy love begin*;
And ford the dangerous passage with thy pen.
If to her heart thou aim'st to find the way,
Extremely flatter, and extremely pray.
Priam by prayers did Hector's body gain;
Nor is an angry god invoked in vain.
With promised (...) her easy mind b^ witch;
For even the poor in promise may be rich.
Vain hopes a while her appetite will stay.
It Is a deceitful, but commodious way*
Who gives is mad; but makes her still believe
(...) will come, and that is the cheapest way to give.
(...) barren lands, fair promises afford;
But the lean harvest cheats the (...) lord.
Buy not thy first enjoyment; le^^ it prove
Of bad example to thy future love:
But yet it gratis; and she will give thee more.
(...) of losing what she gave before.
The losing gamester shakes the box in vain,
And bleeds and loses on, in hopes to gain.
Write then, and in thy letter, as I said,
Let her with mighty promises be fed.
Cydippe by a letter was betrayed,
Writ on an apple to the unwary maid.
She read herself into a marriage vow;
(And every cheat in love the gods allow:)
Learn eloquence, ye noble youth of Rome,
It will not only at the bar overcome:
Sweet words, the people and the senate move;
But the chief end of eloquence is love.
But in thy letter hide thy moving arts
Affect not to be thought a man of parts.
None but vain fools to simple women preach:
A learned letter often has made a breach.
In a familiar style your thoughts convey;
And write such things as present you would say.
Such words as from the heart may seem to move:
It Is wit enough, to make her think you love.
If sealed she sends it back, and will not read;
Yet hope, in time, the business may succeed.
In time the steer will ^o the yoke submit;
In time the restive horse will bear the bit.
Even the hard plough-share, use will wear away.
And stubborn steel in length of time decay.
Water is soft and marble hard; and yet
We see, soft water through hard marble (...).
Though late, yet Troy at length in flames expired*
And ten years more, Penelope had tired.
Perhaps, thy lines unanswered she retained;
No matter, there is a point already gained*
For she who reads, in time will answer too;
Things must be l^^t, by just degr^^s to grow.
Perhaps, she writes, but answers with disdain^*
And sharply bids you not to write (...).
What she requires, she fears you should accord;
The jilt would not be taken at her word.
Mean-time, if she be carried in her chair,
Approach; but do not seem to know she is there.
Speak softly, to delude the standers-by;
Or, if aloud, then speak ambiguously.
If saunt'ring in the portico she walk,
Move slowly too; for that is a time for talk;
And sometimes follow, sometimes be her guide:
But when the crowd permits, go side by side.
Nor in the playhouse let her sit alone:
For she is the playhouse and the play in one.
There thou may ogle, or by signs advance
Thy suit, and seem to touch her hand by chance.
Admire the dancer who her liking gains,
And pity in the play ^he lover's pains.
For her sweet sake the loss of time despise;
Sit while she sits, and when she rises rise.
But dress not like a fop; nor curl your hair, rr
Nor with a punice make your body bare.
Leave these effeminate and useless toys
To Eunuchs, who can give no solid joys.
Neglect becomes a man: This Theseus ^ound;
Uncurl'd uncomb'd, the nymph his wishes crowned.
The rough Hyppolitus was Phaedra's care;
And Venus thought the rude Adonis fair
Be not too finical; but yet be clean;
And wear well-fashion'd clothes like other men.
Let not your teeth be yellow, or be soul;
Nor in wide shoes your feet too loosely roll.
Of a black muzzle, and long beard beware;
And let a skilful barber cut your hair.
Your nails be picked from (...), and even pared.
No^ let your nasty nostrils bud with beard.
Cure your unsav'ry breath; gargle your throat:
And free your arm pits from the rain and goat. ss
Dress not, in short, too little, or too much;
And be not wholly French nor wholly Dutch.
Now Bacchus calls me to his jolly rites. ss
Who would not follow, when a god invites?
He helps the poet, and his pen inspires;
Kind and indulgent to his former fires.
Fair Ariadne, wandered on the shore, tt
Forsaken now; and Theseus loves no more:
(...) was her gown, dishevelled was her hair;
(...) bosom naked, and her feet were bare:
Exclaiming, in the water's brink she stood;
Her briny tears augment the briny stood.
She shrieked, and wept, and both became her face:
No posture could that heavenly form disgrace.
She beat her breast: The traitor's gone, laid she,
What shall become of poor forsaken me?
What shall become -- she had not time for more,
The sounding cymbals rattled on the shore.
She swoons for fear, she falls upon the ground:
No vital heat was in her body found.
The Mimallonian dames about her stood;
And scudding Satyrs ran before their god.
S^^enus on his ass did next appear; uu
And next upon the name (the god was clear)
The drunken sire pursues; the dames retire;
Sometimes the drunken dames pursue the drunken sire.
At last ^e topples over on the plain;
(...) Satyrs laugh, and bid him rise again.
And now the god of wine came driving on,
(...) on his chariot by swift tigers drawn. xx
Her color, voice, and sense forsook the fair;
Thrice did her trembling feet for slight prepare,
And thrice affrighted did her flight forbear.
She shook, like heads of corn, when tempests blow:
(...) re^ds that in the marshes grow.
To whom the god -- compose thy fearful mind;
In me a truer husband thou shall find;
With heaven I will endow thee; and thy star
Shall with propitious light be seen afar:
And guide on seas the doubtful mariner.
He said; and from his chariot leaping light:
L^st the grim tigers should the nymph affright.
His brawny arms around her waist he threw;
(For gods whatever they will, with ease can do:)
And swiftly bore her thence; the attending throng
Shout at the sight, and sing the nuptial song. yy
Now in full bowls her sorrow she may steep:
The bridegroom's liquor lays the bride asleep.
But thou, when flying cups in triumph ride,
And the loved nymph is seated by thy side;
Invoke the god, and all the mighty powers,
That wine may not defraud thy genial hours.
Then in ambiguous words thy suit prefer;
Which she may know were all addressed to her.
In liquid purple letters write her name:
Which she may read and reading find thy flame.
Then may your eyes confess your mutual fires:
(For eyes have tongues, and glances tell desires)
Whenever she drinks, be first to take the cup;
And where she laid her lips, the blessing sup.
When be to carving does her hand advance;
Put out thy own, and touch it as by chance.
Thy service even her husband must attend. zz
(A husband is a most convenient friend.)
Seat the soul cuckold in the highest place;
And with thy garland his dull temples grace.
Whether below or equal in degree,
Let him be lord of all the company;
And what he says be seconded by thee.
It Is common (...) deceive through friendship's name:
But common (...) it (...), it is still to blame.
Thus factors frequently their trust betray;
And to themselves their master's gain convey.
Drink to a certain pitch, and then give over;
Thy tongue and feet may stumble drinking more.
Of drunken quarrels in her sight beware;
Pot valor only serves to fright the fair.
Eurition justly fell, by wine oppressed, aaa
For his rude riot at a wedding-feast.
Sing, if you have a voice; and show your parts
In dancing, if endu'd with dancing arts.
Do any thing within your power to please;
Nay, even affect a seeming drunkenness;
Clip every word; and if by chance you speak
Too home; or if too broad a jest you break;
In your excuse the company will join,
And lay the fault upon the force of wine.
True drunkenness is subject to offend;
But when it is feigned it is often a lover's friend.
Then safely you may praise her beauteous face;
And call him happy, who is in her grace.
Her husband thinks himself the man designed;
But curse the cuckold in your secret mind.
When all are risen, and prepare to go;
Mix with the crowd, and tread upon her toe.
This is the proper time to make thy court;
For now she is in the vein, and sit for sport.
Lay bashfulness, that rustic virtue, by; bbb
To manly confidence thy thoughts apply.
On fortune's foretop timely fix thy hold;
Now speak and speed, for Venus loves the bold.
No rules of rhetoric here I need afford: ccc
Only begin* and trust the following word;
It will be witty of its own accord.
Act well the lover, let thy speech abound
In dying words that represent thy wound.
Distrust not her belief; she will be moved:
All women think they merit to be loved.
Sometimes a man begins to love in jest;
And after, feels the torments he professed.
For your own sakes be pitiful, ye fair;
For a feigned passion may a true prepare.
By flatt'ries we prevail on womankind;
As hollow banks by streams are undermined.
Tell her, her face is fair, her eyes are sweet;
Her taper fingers praise, and little feet.
Such praises even the chaste are pleased to hear
Both maids and matrons hold their beauty dear.
Once naked Pallas with Jove's queen appeared;
And still they grieve that Venus was preferred.
Praise the proud peacock and he spreads his train;
Be silent, and he pulls it in again.
Pleased is the courser in his rapid race;
Applaud his running, and he mends his pace.
But largely promise and devoutly swear;
And, if need be, call every god to hear.
Jove sits above, forgiving with a smile,
The perjuries that easy maids beguile.
He swore to Juno by the Stygian lake:
Forsworn he dares not an example make;
Or punish falsehood for his own dear sake;
It Is for our interest that the gods should be;
Let us believe 'em: I believe they see;
And both reward, and punish equally.
Not that they live above like lazy drones,
Or kings below, supine upon their thrones:
Lead then your lives as present in their sight*
Be just in dealings, and defend the right,
By fraud betray not, nor oppress by might.
But it is a venial sin to cheat the fair;
All men have liberty of conscience there.
On cheating nymphs a cheat is well designed;
It Is a pro^a^^, and a deceitful kind.
It Is said, that Egypt for nine years was dry,
(...) N^^^ did floods, nor heaven did rain supply.
A foreigner at length informed the king, ddd
That slaughtered guests would kindly moisture bring.
The king replied, on thee the lot shall fall,
Be thou, my guest, the sacrifice for all.
Thus Phalaris, Perillus taught to low,
And made him season first the brazen cow.
A frightful doom, the laws of nature cry,
It Is the artificers of death should die.
Thus justly women suffer by deceit;
Their practice authorizes us to cheat.
Beg her, with tears, thy warm desires to grant;
For tears will pierce a heart of adamant.
If tears will not be squeezed, then rub your eye,
Or 'noint the lids, and seem at least to cry.
Kiss, if you can: Resistance if she make,
And will not give you kisses, let her take.
Fie, fie, you naughty man, are words of course;
She struggles, but to be subdued by force.
Kiss only soft, I charge you, and beware,
With your hard bristles not to brush the fair.
He who has gained a kiss, and gains no more,
Deserves to lose the bliss he got before.
If once she kiss, her meaning is expressed;
There wants but little pushing for the rest:
Which if thou do not gain, by strength or art,
The name of clown then suits with thy desert;
It Is downright dullness, and a shameful part.
Perhaps she calls it force; but if she 'scape,
She will not thank you for the omitted rape.
The sex is cunning to conceal their fires;
They would be forced even to their own desires,
They seem to accuse you, with a downcast sight,
But in their souls confess you did them right.
Who might be forced, and yet untouched depart,
Thank with their tongues, but curse you with their heart.
Fair Phoebe and her sister did prefer, eee
To their dull mates, the nobler ravisher.
What Deidamia did, in days of yore,
The tale is old, but worth the telling over.
When Venus had the golden apple gained,
And the just judge fair Helen had obtained:
When she with triumph was at Troy received,
The Trojans joyful, while the Grecians grieved:
They vowed revenge of violated laws,
And Greece was arming in the cuckold's cause;
Achilles, by his mother warned from war,
Disguised his sex, and lurked among the fair.
What means AEncides to spin and sew?
With spear and sword in field thy valor show!
And leaving this, the nobler Pallas know. fff
Why do thou in thy hand the distaff wield,
Which is more worthy to sustain the shield?
Or with that other draw the wooly twine,
The same the fates for Hector's thread assign?
Brandish thy falchion in thy powerful hand,
Which can alone the ponderous lance command.
In the same room by chance the royal maid
Was lodged, and, by her seeming sex betrayed,
Close to her side the youthful hero laid.
I know not how this courtship he began;
But to her cost, she found it was a man.
It Is thought she struggled, but withal it is thought
Her wish was to be conquered when she fought.
For when disclosed, and hastening to the field.
He laid his distaff down, and took the shield,
With tears her humble suit she did prefer,
And thought to stay the grateful ravisher.
She sighs, she sobs, she begs him not to depart;
And now it is nature, what before was art.
She strives by force her lover to detain,
And wishes to be ravished once again.
This is the sex: they will not first begin,
But when compelled, are pleased to suffer sin.
Is there, who thinks that women first would woo?
Lay by thy self-(...), thou foolish beau.
Begin, and save their modesty the shame;
It Is well for thee, if they receive thy flame.
It Is decent for a man to speak his mind;
They but expect the occasion to be kind.
Ask, that thou may enjoy; she waits for this:
And on thy first advance depends thy bliss.
Even Jove himself was forced to sue for love:
None of the nymphs did first solicit Jove.
But if you find your prayers increase her pride,
Strike sail awhile, and wait another tide.
They fly when we pursue; but make delay,
And when they see you slacken, they will stay.
Sometimes it profits to conceal your end;
Name not yourself her lover, but her friend.
How many skittish girls have thus been caught?
He proved a lover who a friend was thought.
Sailors by sun and wind are swarthy made;
A tanned complexion best becomes their trade.
It Is a disgrace to ploughmen to be fair;
Bluff cheeks they have and weather-beaten hair.
The ambitious youth, who seeks an olive crown,
Is sunburned with his daily toil, and brown;
But if the lover hopes to be in grace,
Wan be his looks, and meagre be his face.
That color, from the fair, compassion draws;
She thinks you sick, and thinks herself the cause.
Orion ggg wandered in the woods for love,
His paleness did the nymphs to pity move;
His ghastly visage argued hidden love.
Nor ^ail a night cap, (...) ^ull health to wear,
Neglect thy dress, and discompose thy hair.
All things are decent, that in love avail;
Read long by night, and study to be pale.
Forsake your food, refuse your needful rest,
Be miserable, that you may be blessed.
Shall I complain, or shall I warn you most?
Faith, truth, and friendship in the world are (...)
A little and an empty name they boast.
Trust not thy friend, much less thy mistress praise;
If he believe, thou may a rival raise.
It Is true Patroclus hhh by no lust misled,
Sought not to stain his dear companion's bed.
Nor Pylades, ggg Hermione embraced,
Even Phaedra to Pirithous still was chaste.
But hope not thou, in this vile age, to find
Those rare examples of a faithful mind.
The sea shall sooner with sweet honey flow;
Or, from the furzes, pears and apples grow.
We sin with gust, we love by fraud to gain;
And find a pleasure in our fellow's pain.
From rival foes you may the fair defend;
But would you ward the blow, beware your friend,
Beware your brother, and your next of kin;
But from your bosom-friend your care begin.
Here I had ended, but experience finds,
That sundry women are of sundry minds:
With various crotchets filled, and hard to please,
They therefore must be caught by various ways.
All things are not produced in any soil; iii
This ground for wine is proper, that for oil.
So it is in men, but more in womankind:
Different in face, in manners, and in mind.
But wise men shift their falls with every wind.
As changeful Proteus varied often his shape,
And did in sundry forms and figures 'scape,
A running stream, a standing tree became,
A roaring lion or a bleating lamb.
Some fish with harpoons, some with darts were struck, kkk
Some drawn with note, some hang upon the hook:
So turn thyself; and imitating them,
Try several tricks, and change thy stratagem.
One rule will no^ for different ages hold;
The jades grow cunning as they grow more old.
Then talk not bawdy to the bashful maid;
Bug words will make her innocence afraid.
Nor to an (...) girl of learning speak;
She thinks you conjure when you talk in Greek.
And hence it is often seen, the Simple shun
The learned, and into vile embraces run.
Part of my task is done, and part to do:
But here it is time to rest myself and you.
NOTES TO BOOK I.
a Art is certainly requisite, in every thing, to succeed well: and he who does
not understand the art of writing, especially of making verses, ought never to
meddle that way.

b Love is very seldom guided by reason. Ille ferus est, I confess he is cruel,
or wild.

c Chiron. Ovid calls Philly rides, that is the son of Phillyra; for Chiron was
the son of Phillyra, daughter of Oceanus and Saturn; who made love to her in
the shape of a horse, according to Aratus.

d This alludes to the killing Hector.

e Achilles submitted to the discipline of the centaur Chiron; and when he had
committed a fault, held out his hands to the Ferula, or rather rod for
correction.

f Cupid was the son of Venus, and Achilles of Thesis. Both were children
alike, and both hard to govern. For indeed the passions of love and glory, are
not easily overcome by reason, which ought always to be mistress.

g This is, (says he) to show us that love may always be tamed by habit.

h The poets, as is well known, always invoked this divinity; but Ovid's manner
is here particular; he addresses Venus to be propitious to him, the subject
relating to that goddess. From whence the ancients drew their auguries. To
which the poet here (...). As if he would have said, I am not Hesiod, who, as
he kept his flocks in the vale of Asera (that poet being a shepherd) saw the
nine muses, who inspired him to make verses. The vale of Asera was at the foot
of mount Helicon, where Dius and Lycemede, Hesiod's father and mother dwelt.

i It has been before observed, that he invokes the goddess of love to assist
his song.

k The poet here gives his advice as to three things; to seek after an amiable
object; to win it by respect and complacency; and not to lose it after once
gotten.

l Allusion to Paris, who sailed from Troy to Greece to look for a wife, where
he stole the famous Helen, so much talked of, and carried her off.

m Generally interpreted, and is supposed to mean the temple of concord, built
by Livia, Cermanicus's mother.

n The Danaides, so called from their father Danaus, king of Argos; and
sometimes Belides, from the name of their grandfather Belus, who had two sons,
Egyptus and Danaus.

o It was the custom among the Romans, to meet in the temple of Venus to mourn
Adonis; of which the Prophet Ezekiel speaks, Ezekiel. viii. 14. Ovid means the
temple of Venus, where that goddess was worshipped at Rome with Adonis,
according to the manner of the Assyrians.

p There were a great number of the Jews at Rome, in Augustus's reign, who were
allowed full liberty to exercise their ceremonies, according to the law of
Moses* And the Roman ladies went often to see them out of curiosity, which gave
occasion for assignations at their Synagogues.

q This relates to certain ceremonies in the temple of Isis, after the manner
of the Egyptians. He calls this ^^mple the Cow of Nile. The feast of Isis was
celebrated every year by the women ten days together, and not without allowing
themselves great liberty on those occasions.

r Many women were debauched by Isis's means, as she was by Jupiter under the
name of Io, whose ^able all the world have heard of.

s The idea of the Roman theaters in their infancy, may put us in mind of our
own, which we read of in old poets in Bluckfryers, the Bull and mouth, and
Barbican, not much better than the strollers at a country fair.

t These races were in the Cirque, or in the Hippodromes, or the field of Mars,
and were commonly run in the month of April, in the grand Cirque, between the
Aventine and Palantine hills. The word Circus, or Cirques, comes from the
horses running round the course o^ Metes.

u It Is plain by this the ancient Romans used to make love by signs on their
fingers, like the modern Spaniards and Portuguese.

x Amphitheatres, where the gladiators fought: Of which Juvenal speaks
especially in the 6th Satyr: He calls it Tristis Arena, on account of the
murders that were committed there; and the Romans, with all their politeness,
must have a great mixture of cruelty in their tempers* or they would not have
taken pleasure in seeing men cut one another's throats, and look on with so
much indifference, that they could make love in those very places.

y The naval combats were represented in a place dug on purpose on the banks of
the Tiber; 'twas called Naumachia and, when occasion required, the river water
was set into it. This alludes to the triumphs of the Roman conquerors; They
were wonderfully magnificent, accompanied with rich spoils, and pictures of
rivers, mountains, cities, and provinces conquered by them; not to speak of the
captive kings and great captains that followed the victor's car in chains.

z A river that runs through Armenia, and fails in^^ the Euphrates with a very
rapid current.

aa. The poets gave horns to this god, to show his malice and obstinacy, very
well represented by horns. This is Fe^^s's thought: and the ancients used to
say so of such as were drunk. The night is an ill time to choose a mistress
(...).

bb. Seneca, among others, observes, that 'twas not only a place of pleasure,
but of debauchery. The delicious bat^^s that were there, tempted debauchees to
frequent them.

cc. The sovereign priest of Diana, Aricina, called himself king, and often got
that dignity by gaining the better of hi^ oponent in single combat. The wife of
this-king-priest called herself Queen of Sacrifices. He proposes here ^he means
to obtain the good graces of those we think worthy to be courted: And we must
do the same to acquire fine learning, as lovers do to satisfy their passions;
there is no need of more care, and the pleasure is much greater. The celestial
(...) is more charming than the terrestrial, and divine love soon extinguishes
carnal, which ^urn^ with an obscure fire; whereas the divine enlighters those
that it warms with holy desires; it leaves no (...) behind it, and never has an
end.

dd. She fell in love with Ca^^^^s her brother; both of them the children of
Mea^^^r.

ee. Not the Ida in Phrygia^ but in the isle of (...) and the highest mountain
(...) th^^ island, according to the Strabo. Phasiph^, daughter of the sun and
wife to Minos, king of Crete, is (...) to be (...) of (...) bull; and Dedalus,
the famous mechanic, assisted her to enjoy her detestable desires, by ^aking a
machine (...) a cow: within which, Ovid tells (...), she was caressed by her
gallant. From thi^ intrigue (...) Minotaure was born, half man and half b^ll,
who (...) enclosed in a ^^byrinth, and by the assistance of (...) killed by
Theseus.

ff The Cretans were always reckoned liars; and St. Paul, in his epistle to
Titus, quotes a verse of Epime^^^es on the same subject.

gg This known fable is told us thus. Jupiter falling in love with Europa,
daughter of Agenor, king of (...), and taking the shape of a bull, ravished her
in the Di^tean cave, and begot Minos and Radamanthus.

hh Atreus's wife's name was Eropa; she suffered herself to be debauched by her
brother-in-law Thyestes.

ii Her name is Scylla, and she betrayed her father, in favor of her gallant
Minos. Clytemnestra and the adulterer Egis^he^s murdered Agamemnon.

kk For Jason's leaving her and marrying Creusa daughter of Creon.

ll Phoenix the son of Amyntor, enjoyed a woman whom his father loved. His
father was so enraged a^ him, that he imprecated all the miseries he could
think of to light upon his son.

mm Hippolytus, the son of Theseus, was pulled in pieces by horses.

nn This precept is one of the most important in this treatise: For if you
would at any time gain the favors of the master, you must get the love of his
men.

oo It Is not easy to find out this propitious hour, especially in the affairs
of love, and, to say truth, all depends on fortune, and certain conjectures
that cannot be foreseen. Yet it is requisite a man should do his utmost to (...)
out the lucky minute.

pp The original tells us what particular times and seasons the lo^^r should
avoid, as the calends of March, which she (...) women highly reverenced; at
which time gallants never (...) to send their mistresses presents.

qq The constellation of the goat, which another (...) on called Auriga, (...)
month of October.

* The ancients used to write on a sort of leaves or plants of several kinds,
plaster'd over with wax, before the invention of paper was found out, at least
of such paper as ours; for it is well known they had the leaves of a certain
plant called Papyrus, which were brought from Egypt. It Is true the ancients had
other ways of writing, as on skins called Chartae, and that comes nearer our
paper; but our paper is of another species.

That is, don't let your wit get the better of your passion; nor as a modern
poet did, court your mistress with metaphysics. Avoid affected learning, too
many figures, and in every thing that looks like art; for that is always
suspected in the affairs of love. Those who would write love letters, should
not seek after flourishes, nor use sounding words.

rr The Beaux were not so well received by the ladies in Ovid's time, as the
men of wit and worth.

ss The smell of a ram or goat is very rank, and from those animals the proverb
came.

ss Wine is favorable to lovers, inspiring them at once with boldness and
vigor.

tt The poet tells what happened to Ariadne after Theseus had forsaken her:
Bacchus came, comforted and married her.

uu The nursing father and pedagogue of Bacchus.

xx It Is said Tigers and Lynxes drew Bacchus's car* because those two sorts of
animals are wonderful lovers of wine, and eat grapes.

yy It was an ancient custom to sing hymns of joy at weddings; which hymns were
called (...) or Hymenians from a certain Athenian named (...), who, a^ Servius
reports, delivered maids from a terrible trouble, for which they used to
involve him when they married, as the god who (...) them of the burden of
their maidenheads.

zz This and the verses that f^llow, show that Ovid did not mean very honestly,
and the decree of the (...) against him for this crime, as it is pretended,
because 'twas strictly forbidden by the Roman laws to corrupt married women, to
prevent the abuses which might happen in succession, and the injuring another
man, in taking from him what only belongs to himself.

aaa Erythus, or Eurition, was one of the Centaurs at Pirithous's wedding, who
so got drunk that he attempted to ravish Hippodamia the bride; but Theseus
knocked him down with a bowl, and made him bring his wine up again with blood.

bbb Modesty is a vice when it hinders us from doing any thing that is
profitable to us.

ccc He talks of modesty, and says, if the lover banishes it, he has no
occasion for eloquence; for love and fortune favor the bold.

ddd Busiris, king of Egypt, son of Neptune and Lybia.

eee Phoebe and Ilara were two daughters of Leucippus, both famous for their
beauty. Their father promised them in marriage to Idas and Lynceus, but Castor
and Pollux stole them away from him. Idas and Lynceus pursuing the ravishers,
Castor fell by the hand of Lynceus, and Lynceus was himself slain by Pollux:
Idas running upon the latter, to revenge the death of his companion, was struck
to the ground by thunder at Pollux's ^eet.

fff Minerva or Pallas, was not only the goddess of arms, but of arts and
manufactures.

ggg Orion fell in love with Lymne; but who she was is not well known.

hhh Patroclus, son of Men^cius, and grandson of Actor, who having killed
Clytonymus, son of Amphidamas, was banished his country, and came to Phia,
where he remained with Peleus, Achilles's father, his kinsman. By this means he
contracted a strict friendship with Achilles, and accompanied him to the siege
of Troy, where he was killed. Hermione, daughter of Menelaus and Helen, who
married her cousin german Orestes. Pylades was her husband's friend, and
therefore he would not offer to corrupt his wife. This prince was the son of
Strophius, king of Phocis.

iii A lover must comport himself variously, according to the various humors
of women.

kkk This gives us a various idea, and lively expresses, that women are to be
caught several ways.

END OF THE FIRST BOOK.
OVID's ART OF LOVE.
BOOK II.
NOW Io Paean sing! new wreaths prepare!
And with repeated Ios fill the air:
The prey is fallen in my successful toils,
My artful nets enclose the lovely spoils.
My numbers now, ye smiling lovers, crown,
And make your poet deathless in renown.
With lasting same my verse shall be enrolled.
And I preferred to all the bards of old.
Thus Paris from the warlike Spartans bore
Their ravished bride, to Ida's distant shore.
Victorious Pelops thus in triumph drove
The vanquished maid, and thus enjoyed his love.
Stay, eager youth! your bark's but under sail;
The distant port requires a prosperous gale.
It Is not enough the yielding beauty's found,
And with my aid your artful passion crowned.
The conquests, our successful conduct gained,
With art must be secured, with art maintained.
The glory's more to guard than win the prize;
There all the ^oil and threatening danger lies.
If ever, Cupid, now indulgent prove;
O Venus! aid; thou charming queen of love!
Kind Erato, let thy auspicious name
Inspire the work, and raise my generous flame.
The labor's great; a method I design
For love; and will the fettered god confine:
The god that roves the spacious world around,
In every clime, and distant region found;
Active and light, his wings elude our guard,
And to confine a deity is hard.
His guest from flight Minos enclosed around,
Yet he with wings a daring passage found.
Thus Daedalus her offspring first confined,
Who, with a bull, in lewd embraces joined:
Her teeming womb the horrid crime confessed;
Big with a human bull, half man half beast.
Said he, just Minos, best of human kind,
The mercy let a prostrate exile find.
By fates compelled my native shores to fly,
Permit me, where I durst not live, to die.
Enlarge my son, if you neglect my tears.
And show compassion to his blooming years:
Let not the youth a long confinement mourn,
O free the son, or let his sire return!
Thus he implored, but still implored in vain,
Nor could the freedom that he sought obtain.
Convinced at length; now Daedalus, he cried,
Here Is subject for thy art that is yet untried*
Minos the earth commands, and guards the sea,
No pass the land affords, the deep no way;
Heaven's only free, we'll heaven's inspicious height
Attempt to pass, where kinder fates invite:
Favor, ye powers above, my daring flight*
Misfortunes often prove to invention kind,
Instruct our wit, and aid the laboring mind.
For who can credit men in wild despair.
Should force a passage through the yielding air?
Feathers for wings designed the artist those,
And bound with thread his forming pinions close:
With tempered wax the pointed ends he wrought,
And to perfection his new labors brought.
The finished wings his smiling offspring views,
Admires the work not conscious of their use:
To whom the father said, observe aright,
Observe, my son, these instruments of slight.
In vain the tyrant our escape retards,
The heavens he cannot, all but heaven he guards:
Though earth and seas elude thy father's care,
These wings shall waft us through the spacious air.
Nor shall my son celestial signs survey,
Far from the radiant virgin take your way;
Or where (...) the chilled north commands,
And with his falchion dread Orion stands:
I Will go before, me still retain in sight.
Wherever I lead, securely make your flight.
For should we upward soar too near the sun,
Dissolved with heat, the liquid wax will run:
O^ near the seas an humbler flight maintain,
Or (...) will suffer by the streaming main.
A medium keep, the winds observe aright;
The winds will aid your advantageous flight.
He cautioned thus, and thus informed him long,
As careful ^^^ds instruct their tender young:
The spreading wings then to his shoulder bound,
His body poised and raised him from the ground.
Prepared for slight, his aged arms embrace
The tender youth, whilst tears overflow his face
A hill there was, from whence the anxious pair
Essayed their wings, and forth they launched in air.
Now his expanded plumes the artist plies,
Regards (...) son, and leads along the skies:
Pleased with the novelty of slight, the boy
Bounds in the air, and upward springs with joy
The angler views them from the distant strand,
And quits ^he labors of his trembling hand.
(...) they past, and Na^^s in their slight,
And Delos, with Apollo's presence bright.
Now on their right L^bynthos shores they found,
For fruitful lakes and shady groves renowned.
When the aspiring boy forgot his fears,
Rash with hot youth and unexperienced years:
Upwards he soared, maintained a lusty stroke,
And his directing father's way forsook.
The wax, of heat impatient, melted run,
Nor could his wings sustain that blaze of sun.
From heaven he views the fatal depths below,
Whilst killing fears prevent the distant blow.
His struggling arms now no assistance find,
Nor poize the body, nor receive the wind.
Falling, his father he implores in vain,
To aid his flight, and sinking limbs sustain;
His name invokes, till the expiring sound
Far in the floods with Icarus was drowned.
The parent mourns, a parent now no more,
And seeks the absent youth on every shore:
Where Is my loved son, my Icarus! he cries;
Say in what distant region of the skies,
Or faithless clime the youthful wanderer flies!
Then viewed his pinions scattered over the stream,
The shore his bones received, the waves his name.
Minos with walls attempted to detain
His flying guests, but did attempt in vain:
Yet the winged god shall to our rules submit,
And Cupid yield to more prevailing wit.
Thessalian arts in vain rash lovers use,
In vain with drugs the scornful maid abuse:
The skilfull'st potions ineffectual prove,
Useless are magic remedies in love:
Could charms prevail, Circe had proved her art,
And fond Medea fixed her Jason's heart.
Nor tempt with philters the disdainful dame;
They rage inspire, create a frantic flame:
Abstain from guilt, all vicious arts remove,
And make your passion worthy of her love.
Distrust your empty form and boasted face,
The nymph engage a thousand nobler ways.
To fix her vanquished heart entirely thine,
Accomplished graces to your nature join.
Beauty's but frail, a charm that soon decays,
Its luster fades as rolling years increase,
And age still triumphs over the ruined face.
This truth the fair, but short-lived lily shows,
And prickles that survive the faded ^o^e.
Learn, lovely boy, be with instruction wise!
Beauty and youth misspent are past advice.
Then cultivate thy mind with wit and same,
Those lasting charms survive the funeral flame.
With arts and sciences your breast improve,
Of high import are languages in love:
The famed Uylsses was not fair nor young,
But eloquent and charming with his tongue:
And yet for him contending beauties strove,
And every sea-nymph sought the hero's love.
Calypso mourned when he forsook her shores,
And with fond waves detained his hasty oars.
Often she inquired o^ r^^^'d Illum's fate,
Making him often the wondrous ^ale relate;
Which with such grace his florid tongue could frame,
The story still (...), though still the ^ame.
Now standing on the shore; again declare,
Calypso cried, your (...) exploits in war.
He with a wand, (...) under wand be bore,
Delineates every (...) on the shore.
Here Is (...), says he, then draws the wall^ in sand,
There (...), my battalions stand.
(...) there was, (and then describes the field)
Where (...), with reward, deceived, was (...).
(...) th^^ entrenched imagine R^^sus lies,
And here (...) make his (...) prize.
Much he described, when a destructive wave
Washed off the slender Troy, and rolling gave
To Rhesus and his tents one common grave.
Long with delight his charming tongue she heard,
The well-rais'd passion in her looks appeared:
The goddess weeps to view his spreading sails,
So much a soldier with the sex prevails.
Distrust thy form, fond youth, and learn to know,
There Is more required in love than empty show.
With just disdain she treats the haughty mind,
It Is complaisance that makes a beauty kind.
The hawk we hate that always lives in arms,
The raging wolf that every flock alarms:
But the mild swallow none with toils infests*
And none the soft Cha^nian bird molests. a
Debate avoid, and rude contention shun;
A woman's with submissive language won.
Let the wi^e rail, and injured husband swear,
Such freedoms are allowed the married pair:
Discord and strise to nuptial beds belong,
The portion justifies a clamorous tongue.
With ^^nder vows the yielding maid endear,
And let her only sighs and wishes hear.
Contrive with words and actions to delight.
Still charm her ear, and still oblige her sight.
I no instructions to the rich impart,
He needs not, that presents, my useless art: b
The giving lover's handsome, valiant, wi^e,
His happy fortune is above advice*
I to the needy sing; though poor, I love,
And, wanting wealth, with melting language move,
His honor storms a stubborn dumsel's door;
I Am (...) to affront, because I Am poor:
With (...) art I court, with art possess;
Or (...) I Am (...), it is in promises.
(...) hair,
(...) was I banished by the injured ^air;
Long mournful nights for this consumed alone,
Nor could my tears the furious maid atone.
Weeping, she vowed a suit of point I tore;
Falsely she vowed, but I must purchase more.
Make not your guilty master's crime your own,
But by my punishment my error shun.
Indecent fury from her sight remove.
No passion let your mistress know, but love.
Yet if the haughty nymph's unkind, and coy,
Or shuns your sight; have patience, and enjoy.
By slow degrees we bend the stubborn bough;
What force resists, with art will pliant grow.
In vain we stem a torrent's rapid force,
But swim with ease, compaying with its course.
By gentler arts we savage beasts reclaim,
And lions, bulls, and furious tigers tame.
Fiercely Atlanta over the forest roved, c
Cruel and wild, and yet at last she loved.
Melanion long deplored his hopeless flame,
And weeping, in the woods pursued the scornful dame.
On his submissive neck her toils he wore,
And with his mistress chased the dreadful boar.
Armed to the woods I bid you not repair,
Nor follow over hills the savage fair.
My soft injunctions less severe you will find,
Easy to learn, and framed to every mind.
Her wishes never, nor her will withstand;
Submit, you conquer; serve, and you will command.
Her words approve, deny what she denies,
Like what she likes, and when she scorns, despise.
Laugh when she smiles; when sad, dissolve in tears;
Let every gesture sympathize with hers,
If she delights, as women will, in play,
Her stakes return, your ready losings pay.
When she is at cards, or rattling dice she throws, d
Connive at cheats, and generously lose.
A smiling winner let the nymph remain,
Let your pleased mistress every conquerst gain.
In heat, with an umbrella ready stand; e
When walking offer your officious hand:
Her trembling hands, though you sustain the cold,
Cherish, and to your warmer bosom hold.
Think no inferior office a disgrace,
No action, that a mistress gains, is base:
The hero that eluded Juno's spite,
And every monster overcame in sight;
That past so many bloody labors over,
And well deserved that heaven whose weight be bore; f
Amidst Ionian damsels carding stands,
And grasps the distaff with obedient hands; g
In all commands the haughty dame obeys:
And who disdains to act like Hercules?
If she is at law, be sure commend the laws,
Solicit with the judge, or plead the cause.
With patience at the assignation wait,
Early appear, attend her coming late.
Whenever she wants a messenger, away,
And her commands with flying feet obey.
When late from supper she is returning home,
And calls her servant, as a servant come.
She for the country air retires from town,
You want a coach, or horse, why foot it down:
Let not the sultry season of the year,
The falling snows, or constant rains deter.
Love is a warfare, and ignoble sloth
Seem^ equally contemptible in both;
(...) are watchings, duels, anxious cares,
The soldier thus, and thus the lover fares;
With rain he is drenched with piercing tempest shakes,
And on the cooler earth his lodging takes.
Fame says that Phoebus kept Admetus's herd; h
And (...) in an humble cottage fared:
Nor servi^e offices the god denied;
Learn this y^ lovers, and renounce your pride.
When all access is to your mistress hard,
When every door's secured, and window barred;
The roof untile, some des^^rate passage End:
You cannot be too bold to make her kind;
Oh how she will clasp you when the danger's over,
And value your deserving passion more.
Thus through the boisterous seas Leander moved,
Not to possess, but show how much he loved.
Nor blushing think how low you condescend,
To court her maids, and make each slave your friend!
Each by their names familiarly salute,
And beg them to promote your amorous suit.
Perhap's a bribe's required; your bounty show,
And from your slender fortune part bestow.
A double bribe the chambermaid secures,
And when the favourite's gained the fair is yours.
She Would add, to every thing you do, a grace,
And watch the wanton hours, and time her praise.
When servants merry make, and feast and play, i
Then give her something to keep holiday.
Retain 'em every on^^ the po^ter most,
And her who nightly guards the happy ^oast
I no profuse nor costly gifts commend,
But choose and time it well, whatever you send.
Provide the product of the early year,
And let your boy the rural present bear:
Till her (...), and from your manor brought,
Though (...), and in the suburb market bought.
The first ripe cluster let your mistress (...)*
With (...), melons, and fair (...):
Some (...), or choicer fowl (...). k
They (...) your passion, where they (...)
It Is with these (...) the childless (...)
(...) bought:
But (...) his name wi^h (...) be (...),
That (...) love, and (...) l.
In tender sonnets most your flame rehearse,
And who, alas! of late are moved by verse* m
Women a wealthy treating fool admire,
Applaud your wit, but costly gifts require.
This is the golden age, all worship gold,
Honors are purchased, love and beauty sold.
Should Homer come, with his harmonious train,
And not present, Homer's turned out gain.
Some of the sex have sense, their number's small,
Most ignorant, yet vain pretenders all:
Flatter alike, smooth empty stanzas send,
They seldom sense, but ^ound and rhyme commend.
Should you with art compose each polished line,
And make her, like your numbers, all divine,
Yet she will a treat, or worthless toy prefer
To all the immortal poets boasted care.
But he that covets to retain her heart,
Let him apply his flattery with art:
With lasting raptures on her beauty gaze,
And make her form the subject of her praise.
Purple commend, when she is in purple dressed;
In scarlet, sworn she looks in scarlet best:
Arrayed in gold, her graceful mien adore,
Vowing those eyes transcend the sparkling ore.
With prudence place each compliment aright,
Though clad in crape, let homely crape delight.
In sorted colors, praise a varied dress;
In night-clothes, or commode, let either please.
Or when she combs, or when she curls her hair, n
Commend her curious art and gallant air.
Singing, her ^oice, dancing, her step admire,
Applaud when she desists, and still desire.
Let all her words and actions wonder (...),
View her wi^h ^^ptures, and with (...) praise.
Fierce as (...) though your mistress prove,
These arts will teach the stubborn beauty love.
Be cautious, lest you over-act your part,
And temper your hypocrisy with art:
Let no false action give your words the lie,
For once deceived she is ever after shy.
In Autumn often, when the luxurious year
Purples the grape and shows the vintage near;
When sultry heats, when colder blasts arise,
And bodies languish with inconstant skies:
If vicious heaven infects her tender veins,
And in her tainted blood some fever reigns;
Then your kind vows, your pious care bestow,
The blessings you expect to reap, then sow.
Think nothing nauseous in her loathed disease,
But with your ready hand contrive to please:
Weep in her sight, then fonder kisses give,
And let her burning lips your tears receive,
Much for her safety vow* but louder speak,
Let the nymph hear the lavish vows you make.
As health returns so let your joys appear,
Often smile with hope, and often confess your fear.
This in her breast remains, these pleasing charms
Secure a passage to her grateful arms.
Reach nothing nauseous to her taste or sight,
Officious only when you most delight:
Nor bitter draughts, not hated medicines give:
Let her from rivals what she loathes receive.
Those prosperous winds that launched our bark from shore,
When out at sea, assists its course no more;
Time will your knowledge in our art improve,
Give strength and vigor to your forming love.
The dreadful bull was but a calf when young; o
The lofty oak but from an acorn sprung:
From narrow springs the noblest currents flow,
But swell their blood* and spread them as they go.
Be conversant with love, no toils refuse,
And conquer all fatigues with frequent use.
Still let her hear your sighs, your passion view,
And night and day the flying maid pursue.
Then pause awhile; by fallow fields we gain;
A thirsty soil receives the welcome rain.
Phyllis was calm while with Demophoon blessed,
His absence wounded most her raging breast:
Thus his chaste consort for Ulysses burned,
And Laodamia thus her absent husband mourned.
With speed return, you're ruined by delays,
Some happy youth may soon supply your place.
When Sparta's prince was from his Helen gone, p
Could Helen be content to he alone?
She in his bed received her amorous guest,
And nightly clasped him to her panting breast:
Unthinking cuckold, to a proverb blind!
What, trust a beau and a fair wife behind!
Let furious hawks thy trembling turtles keep,
And to the mountain wolves commit thy sheep:
Helen is guiltless, and her lover's crime
But what yourself would act another time.
The youth was pressing, the dull husband gone,
Let every woman make the case her own:
Who could a prince, by Venus sent, refuse?
The cuckold's negligence is her excuse.
But not the foaming boar whom spears surround,
Revenging on the do^^ his mortal wound.
Nor lioness, whose young receives the breast.
Nor viper by unwary footsteps pr^st;
Nor drunkard by the Aonian god possessed, q
Transcend the woman's rage, by fury led,
To find a rival in her injured bed.
With ^^re and sword she flies, the frantic dame
Disdains the thought of tenderness or shame.
Her offspring's blood enraged (...) spilt. r
A cruel mother, for the father's guilt.
And (...) unrelenting fury proves. s
That (...) revenge pursues neglected (...).
Where sacred ties of honor are destroyed,
Such errors cautious lovers must avoid.
Think not my precepts constancy enjoin,
Venus avert! far nobler's my design.
At large enjoy, conceal your passion well,
Nor use the modish vanity to tell:
Avoid presenting of suspected toys,
Nor to an hour confine your varied joys:
Desert the shades you did frequent before,
Nor make them conscious of a new amor.
The nymph, when she betrays, disdains your guilt,
And by such fal^hood taught, she learns to jilt.
While with a wife Artid^s lived content, t
Their loves were mutual, and she innocent:
But when enflamed with every charming face,
Her lewdness still maintained an equal pace.
Chryses, as same had told her, prayed in vain,
Nor could by gifts his captive girl obtain;
Mournful Briseis, thy complaints she heard,
And how his lust the tedious war deferred.
This tamely heard but with resentment viewed,
The victor by his beauteous slave subdued:
With rage she saw her own neglected charms,
And took AEgisthus to her injured arms. u
To lust and shame by his example led,
Who durst so openly profane her bed.
What you conceal, her more observing eye
Perhaps betrays; with oaths the fact deny,
And boldly give her jealousy the lie:
Not too submissive seem, nor over kind;
These are the symptoms of a guilty mind:
But no caresses, no endearments spare,
Enjoyment pacifies the angry fair.
There are, that strong provoking potions praise,
And nature with ^^^^tions medicine raise.
Nor drugs, nor herbs will what you fancy prove,
And I pronounce them poisonous all in love.
Some pepper bruised, with seeds of nettles join,
And clary steep in bowls of mellow wine: x
Venus is most averse to forced delights,
Extorted flames pollute her genial rites.
With fishes spawn thy feeble nerves recruit,
And with eringo's hot salacious root.
The goddess worshipped by the Erycian swains,
Megara's white shallot, so faint, disdains. y
New eggs they take, and honey's liquid juice, z
And leaves and apples of the pine infuse.
Prescribe no more, my muse, nor medicines give,
Beauty and youth need no provocative.
You that concealed your secret crimes before,
Proclaim them now, now publish each amor.
Nor tax me with inconstancy; we find
The driving bark requires a veering wind:
Now northern blasts we court, now southern gales;
And every point befriends our shifted sails.
Thus chariot-drivers, with a slowing rein
Direct their steeds, then curb them in again.
Indulgence often corrupts the faithless dame,
Secure from rivals she neglects your flame.
The mind without variety is cloyed,
And nauseates pleasures it has long enjoyed.
But as a sire, whose wasted strength declines,
Converts to ashes, and but faintly shines;
When sulphur's brought, the spreading flames return,
And growing embers with fresh fury burn:
A rival thus the ungrateful maid reclaims,
Revive desire, and feeds her dying flames.
Often make her jealous, give your fondness over,
And ^eaze her often with some new amor.
Happy, thrice happy youth, with pleasures blessed.
Too great, (...) to be expressed
That view (...) ^he anguish of her jealous breast.
Whenever thy guilt the slighted beauty knows,
She swoons; her voice, and then her color goes,
Often would my furious nymph, in burning rage,
Assault my locks, and with her nails engage;
Then how she would weep, what piercing glances cast!
And vow to hate the perjured wretch at last.
Let not your mistress long your falsehood mourn:
Neglected fondness will to fury turn,
But kindly clasp her in your arms again,
And on your breast her drooping head sustain;
Whilst weeping, kiss, amidst her tears enjoy,
And with excess of bliss her rage destroy.
Let her a while lament, a while complain,
Then die with pleasure as she died with pain.
Enjoyment cures her with its powerful charms,
She Will sigh a pardon in your active arms.
First nature lay an undigested mass,
Heaven, earth and ocean wore one common (...)
Then vaulted heaven was framed, waves (...)
And Chaos wa^ in beauteous forms disposed;
The beasts inhabit woods, the birds the air,
And to their floods the scaly fry repair.
Mankind alone enjoyed no certain place,
On rapin lived, a rude unpolished race:
Caves were their houses, herbs their food and bed,
Whilst each a savage from the other sled.
Love first disarmed the fierceness of their mind,
And in one bed the men and woman (...)
The youth was eager but (...) in joy,
Nor was the unexperienced (...):
They knew no courtship, no instructor (...)
Yet they enjoyed and blessed the pleasing wound.
The birds with consorts propagate their kind,
And sporting fish their finny beauties find;
In amorous ^olds the wanton (...)
And dogs with their (...) female* (...)
The lusty bull delights his frisking dames,
And more lascivious goat her male inflames.
Mares furious grow with love, their bound'ries force,
Plunging through waves to meet the neighing horse.
Go on, brave youth, thy generous vigor try,
To the resenting maid this charm apply:
Loves softening pleasures every grief remove,
There Is nothing that can make your peace like love.
From drugs and philters no redress you will find,
But nature with your mistress will be kind.
The love that is unconstrained will long endure,
Machaon's art was false, but mine is sure. aa
Whilst thus I sung, inflamed with nobler fire,
I heard the great Apollo's tuneful lyre:
His hand a branch of spreading laurel bore,
And on his head a laurel wreath he wore;
Around he cast diffusive rays of light,
Confessing all the god to human sight.
Thou master of lascivious arts, he said,
To my frequented ^ane thy pupils lead:
And there, inscribed in characters of gold,
This celebrated sentence you will behold,
First know yourself; who to himself is known, bb
Shall love with conduct, and his wishes crown.
Where nature has a handsome face bestowed,
Or graceful shape, let both be often showed:
Let men of wit and humor silence shun,
The artist sing, and soldier bluster on:
Of long harangues ye eloquent take heed,
Nor thy damned works thou teazing poet read.
Thus Phoebus spa^e: A just obedience give,
And these injunctions from a god receive.
I mysteries unfold; to my advice
Attend, ye vulgar lovers, and grow wise,
The thriving grain in harvest often sails,
Often prosperous winds turn adverse to our sails:
Few are the pleasures, though the toils are great;
With patience must submissive lovers wait.
What hares on Athos, bees on Hybla feed, cc
Or berries on the circling ivy breed;
As shells on sandy shores, as stars above,
So numerous are the sure fatigues of love,
The lady's gone abroad, you're told; though seen,
Distrust your eyes, believe her not within.
Her lodgings on the promised night are close,
Resent it not, but on the earth repose,
Her maid will cry with an insulting tone,
What makes you saunter here? you sot begone.
With moving words the cruel nymph entreat;
And place your garland on the bolted gate.
Why do I light and vulgar precepts use?
A nobler subject now inspires my muse?
Approaching joys I sing, ye youths draw near,
Listen ye happy lovers and give ear:
The labor's great, and daring is my song,
Labors and great attempts to love belong.
As from the sacred oracles of Jove.
Receive these grand mysterious truths in love.
Look down when she the ogling spark invites,
Nor touch the conscious tablets when she writes,
Appear not jealous, though she is much from home,
Let her at pleasure go, unquestioned come.
This crafty husbands to their wives permit,
And learn, when she is engaged to wink at it.
I (...) own (...) modestly confess;
And (...), give those precepts I transgress.
Shall I, with patience the known signal hear,
(...), and leave a happy rival there.
What (...) suffer the provoking wrong,
^
^
^
I, like a fury, for my nymph engage,
And like a madman, when I miss her, rage.
My passion still preva^^s, convinced I yield:
He that submits to this is better skilled.
Expose not, though you find her guilty flame,
Lest she abandon modesty and shame:
Conceal her faults, no secret crimes upbraid;
Nothing's so fond as a suspected maid.
Discovered love increases with despair.
^hen both alike the guilt and scandal share;
All sense of modesty they lose in time,
While each encourages the other's crime.
In heaven this story's famed above the rest,
Among the immortal drolis a standing jest:
How Vulcan two transgressing lovers caught,
And every god a pleased spectator brought.
Great Mars for Venus felt a guilty flame,
Neglected war, and owned a lover's name:
To his desires the queen of love inclined;
No nymph in heaven's so willing, none more kind.
Often the lascivious fair, with scornful pride,
Would Vulcan's foot and footy hands deride:
Yet both with decency their passion bore,
And modesty concealed the close amor.
But by the sun betrayed in their embrace,
(For what escapes the sun's observing rays?)
He told the affronted god of his disgrace.
Ah, foolish sun: and much unskilled in love:
Thou have an ill example for above.
Never a fair offending nymph betray*
She Will gratefully oblige you every way:
The crafty spouse around her bed prepares
Nets that deceive the eye, and secret ma^^s;
A (...) they (...), the impatient lovers met, dd
And naked were exposed to Vulcan's net.
The gods deride the criminals in chains,
And scarce from tears the queen of love refrains:
Nor could her hands conceal her guilty face,
She wants that cover for another place.
To surly Mars a gay spectator said,
Why so uneasy in that envied bed?
On me transfer your chains; I Will freely come
For your release, and suffer in your room.
At length, kind Neptune, freed by thy desires,
Mars goes to Crete, to Paphos she retires, ee
Their love augmented by revengeful fires,
Now conversant with infamy and shame,
They set no bounds to their licentious flame.
But honest Vulcan, what was thy pretense
To act so much unlike a god of sense?
They sin in public, you the shame repent,
Convinced that loves increase with punishment.
Though in your power, a rival never expose;
Never his intercepted joys disclose: ff
This I command, Venus commands the same,
Who hates the snares she once sustained with shame.
What impious wretch will Ceres' rites expose? gg
Or Juno's solemn mysteries disclose?
His witty torments Tantalus deserves, hh
That thirsts in waves, and viewing banquets starves.
But Venus most in secrecy delights;
Away, ye babblers, from her silent rites!
No pomp her mysteries attend, no noise,
No sounding brass proclaims their late^^ joys!
With folded arms the happy pair possess,
Nor should the fond betraying tongue confess
Those raptures, which no language can express.
When naked Venus casts her robes aside,
The parts obscure her hands extended hide:
No girl on propagating beasts will gaze,
But hangs her head and turns away her face.
We darkened beds and doors for love provide;
What nature cannot, decent habits hide:
Love darkness courts, at most a glimmering light,
To raise our joys, and just oblige the sight.
Ever happy men beneath the roof were laid,
When oaks provided them with food and shade;
Some gloomy cave received the wanton pair;
For light too modest, and unshaded air.
From public view they decently retired,
And secretly performed what love inspired.
Now scarce a modish fop about the town,
But boasts with whom, how often, and where done;
They taste no pleasure, relish no delight,
Till they recount what passed the happy night.
But men of honor always thought it base,
To prostitute each kinder nymph's embrace;
To blast her fame, and vainly hurt his own,
And furnish scandal for a lewd lampoon.
And here I must some guilty arts accuse,
And disingenuous shifts that lovers use,
To wrong the chaste, and innocence abuse.
When long repulsed they find their courtship vain,
Her character with infamy they stain:
Denied her person, they debauch her same,
And brand her innocence with public shame.
Go, jealous fool, the injured beauty guard,
Let every door be locked, and window barred!
The suffering nymph remains exposed to wrong.
Her name's a prostitute to every tongue;
For malice will with joy the lie receive,
Report, and what it wishes true, believe.
With care conceal whatever defects you find:
To all her faults seem like a lover blind.
Naked Andromeda when Perseus viewed,
He saw her faults, but yet pronounced them good.
Andromache was tall, yet some report,
Her Hector was so blind he thought her short.
At first what is nauseous lessens by degrees.
Young loves are nice, and difficult to please.
The infant plant that bears a tender rind,
Reels to and fro with every breath of wind:
But shooting upwards to a tree at last,
It stems the storm, and braves the strongest blast.
Time will defects and blemishes endear,
And make them lovely to your eyes appear:
Unusual scents at first may give offense;
Time reconciles them to the vanquished sense.
Her vices soften with some kinder phrase;
If she is swarthy as the negro's face, ii
Call it a graceful brown, and that complexion praise:
The ruddy lass must be like Venus fair,
Or like Minerva that has yellow hair.
If pale and meagre, praise her shape and youth,
Active when small, when gross she is plump and smooth.
Every excess by softening terms disguise,
And in some neighboring virtue hide each vice.
Nor ask her age, consult no register,
Under whose reign she is born, or what is the year*
If fading youth chequers her hair with white,
Experience makes her perfect in delight;
In her embrace sublimer joys are found,
A fruitful soil, and cultivated ground!
The hours enjoy whilst youth and pleasure last,
Age hurries on, and death pursues too fast:
Or plough the seas, or cultivate the land,
Or wield the sword in thy adventurous hand;
Or much in love thy nervous strength employ,
Embrace the fair, the grateful maid enjoy;
Pleasures and wealth reward thy pleasing pains,
The labor's great, but greater far thy gains.
Ad^ their experience in affairs of love,
For years and practice do alike improve;
Their a^ts repair the injuries of time,
And still preserve them in their charming prime;
In varied ways they act the pleasure over,
Not pictured postures can improve you more. kk
They want no courtship to provoke delight,
But meet your warmth with equal appetite:
Give me enjoyment when the willing dame ll
Glows with desires, and burns with equal flame.
I love to hear the soft transporting joys,
The frequent sighs, and tender murmuring voice:
To see her eyes with varied pleasure move,
And all the nymph confess the power of love.
Nature's not thus indulgent to the young,
These joys alone to riper years belong.
Who youth enjoys drinks crude unready wine,
Let age your girl, and sprightly juice refine,
Mellow their sweets, and make the taste divine.
To Helen who'd Hermione prefer?
Or Gorge think beyond her mother fair?
But he that covets the experienced dame
Shall crown his joys, and triumph in his flame.
One conscious bed receives the happy pair:
Retire, my muse; the door demands thy care. mm
What charming words, what tender things are said!
What language flows without thy useless aid!
There shall the roving hand employment find,
Inspire new flames, and make even virgins kind.
Thus Hector did Andromache delight,
Hector in love victorious as in sight.
When weary from the field Achilles came,
Thus with delays he raised Brise^s' flame.
Ah, could those arms, those fatal hands delight?
Inspire kind thoughts, and raise the appetite?
Could thou, fond maid, be charmed with his embrace,
Stained with the blood of half thy royal race?
Nor yet with speed the fleeting pleasure was^e,
Still moderate your love's impetuous haste:
The bashful virgin, though appearing coy,
Detains your hand, and hugs the proferr'd joy.
Then view her eyes with humid luster bright,
Sparkling with rage, and trembling with delight.
Her kind complaints, her melting accents hear,
The eye she charms, and wounds the listening ear.
Defer not then the clasping nymph's embrace,
But with her love maintain an equal pace:
Raise to her heights the transports of your soul,
And fly united to the happy goal,
Observe these precepts when with leisure blessed,
No threatening fears your private hours molest;
When danger's near, your active force employ,
And urge with eager speed the hasty joy.
Then ply your oars, then practice this advice.
And strain with whip and spur to gain the prize.
The work's complete, triumphant palms prepare,
With flowery wreaths adorn thy flowing hair.
As to the Greeks was Podalirius' art,
To heal with medicines the afflicted part:
Nestor's advice, Achilles arms in field,
Automedon for chariot-driving skilled;
As Calchas could explain the mystic bird, nn
And Telamon could wield the brandished sword:
Such to the town may ^am'd instructions prove,
So much I am renowned for arts of love.
Me every youth shall praise, extol my name,
And over the globe diffuse my lasting fame.
I arms provide against the scornful fair,
Thus Vulcan armed Achilles for the war.
Whatever youth shall with my aid overcome,
And lead his Amazon in triumph home; oo
Let him that conquers, and enjoy the dame,
In gratitude for his instructed flame,
Inscribe the spoils with my auspicious name.
The tender girls my precepts next demand,
Them I commit to a more skilful hand.
NOTES TO BOOK II.
a Ovid makes use of the particular for the general, Chaonia is part of Epirus,
so called from the fate of Chaon, a Trojan. There (...) a temple of Dodonian
Jupiter, where doves dispensed the sacred oracles with human voices.

b That is, riches will do all things, and interest easily gains a woman's
heart, because the sex is generally covetous.

c The poet makes use of the example of Atlanta, to show there is nothing so
wild but may be made gentle.

d There is nothing more difficult, than to explain the ancient gaming,
especially to make it any way agree with the modern.

e They were commonly in use at the theaters, or in walks, to keep off the heat
of the sun, the rain and the wind. Sometimes they were made of feathers; for,
according to most commentators, by (...) we must understand feathers sewed or
otherwise fastened together. Ovid advises the lover not only to hold an
umbrella over his mistress, but to descend to meaner offices, to pu^^ off or
put on her shoes or slippers.

f Speaking of Hercules, who having learned astrology of Atlas King of (...) as
(...) says, (...) poets feigned he had'd the (...) Atlas to ^ear up the sky.

g Speaking still of Hercules, w^^ for the love of O^^p^ale used the dista^^
and (...), according to the (...) of the lonian damsels.

h That was, after he was d^graded of his divinity for death of the Cyclops:
(...) which he ^led to (...), and submitted to keep Admetus the king's sheep.

i This has allusion to a festival celebrated at Rome by the servants, in
remembrance of a great piece of service their predecessors had done, the
Romans, soon after the invasion of the Gauls; the time of celebrating it was in
July.

k Ovid names the bird. The turdi were our thrushes, and Martial thought them
one of the finest dishes that could come to a table.

l Alluding to such as flatter the rich, in hopes of being put in their wills
for good legacies.

m Indeed what Ovid complains of in his time, may with much more reason be
complained against now; for the muses are not only neglected but despised. It Is
too true, that learning of all sorts is not in that esteem which it was in
Augustus's days; and if there are few men who write good books, there are fewer
still who read them.

n They curled their hair with a bodkin, and sometimes with a hot iron, as in
our days; but they showed more of it, than it is the fashion of our modern
ladies. The next care Ovid recommends to the lover, is the complaisance he is
to observe toward his mistress when she is sick. Alluding to a ceremony
practiced by the Romans of purifying the bed; an office which belonged to the
nurse. And this was done with sulphur and eggs; a sort of religious worship,
when vows were made of the health and rest of the patient.

o This and the following similies are taken from country affairs, which have
an agreeable effect on this occasion, when the poet speaks of the tendency of
every living thing to love.

p Meneloeus was then absent in Crete, whether he and his brother Agamemnon
went to divide the estate left them by their father Arteus.

q Aonia is taken here for (...), of which Thebes was the capital, where
Bacchus was born; and the fury that transports people when they are drunk, is
very well compar^d to that of wild beasts and vipers.

r Medea, to be revenged of Jason for his inconstancy, murdered her own
children after they had lived together ten years with Creon king of Corinth.

s Wife of Terens, king of Thrace, who killed her own daughters, and presented
them to her husband, because he had ravished her sister Philomena.

t Agamemnon, son of Arteus, whose wife Ovid thinks would not have been so
imprudent, if he himself had been constant, and had not ravished Briseis and
Cassandra.

u AEgisthus, the son of Thyestes and Pelopeia, his own daughter, killed his
uncle Atreus, and his son Agamemnon, whose wife Clytemnestra he had debauched,
and was himself killed by her son Orestes, to revenge the death of Agamemnon,
his father.

x The quality of this plant is very hot, according to the several observations
of Dioscoriodes, and his commentator Mathiolus. As for the pepper its nature is
hot and dry.

y Mount Eryx in Sicilly, was so called from Eryx, a son of Venus, who having
taken a certain king called Burras to her arms, had this child by him. He built
a temple here to his mother, when she arrived to man's estate, who from thence
had the name of Erycinian, or Erycian: We have made bold to use the word
Erycian or Erye for the sake of the measure.

z Here Ovid certainly speaks of a bulbous plant that grew in the territory of
M^gara, which was of a hot quality and provocative. Also hen and partridge
eggs. The kernel of the pine apple and pis^achos are mentioned by the author,
as provocative, and Pliny observes, they strengthen the reins.

aa An admirable physician, of whom Homer speaks in the 2d Iliad. And Diodora
writes, that Es^^mpius left two sons, who were both physicians, and as famous
as himself, Machaon and (...), who accompany'^ Agamemnon to the siege of Troy,
and cured wounds almost to a miracle.

bb This was a saying of Chilo the Lacedoemonian, who was one of the seven wise
men of Greece. Pliny mentions him; and this saying was so highly esteemed that
'twas written in letters of gold in the temple at Delphos

cc Athos is a mountain in Macedonia, or Thrace, according to Stephanus, which
Xerxes, as Pliny tells us, divided 1500 paces from the continent; it is so high,
that its top is above the region of the clouds.

dd Lemnos; as the poet says, an island in the AEgean sea, over against mount
Athos, according to Pliny. Phoestia and Myrine were two cities in it, in
ancient times, whither, during the solstice, the mountain used to send its
shade.

ee Paphos is a city in Cyprus, consecrated to Venus.

ff He means intercepting a rival's letter, and discovering the contents. To
intercept letters, and divulge a secret, was a crime punishable by the laws, by
banishment, or interdiction of fire and water, by which was understood exile.

gg This is a simile, and shows us, 'twas not lawful to reveal the mysteres of
Ceres.

hh He proves by the example of Tantalus, that no man should reveal secrets.
Tantalus, so Diadorus tells us, was the son of Jupiter and the nymph Plato,
equally rich and renowned. He dwelt in Paphlagonia, and was favored by the
gods for the dignity of his birth; but having been told some of their secrets,
and divulging them to mortals, he was thrown into hell for his crime, where his
punishment was what Ovid tells us.

ii The Greeks called the people who lived above Macedonia and Thrace, as far
as Chaonia and Thesprotus to the Damb^, Illyrians, according to Appian; which
name was given them from Illyrus the son of Pollyphemen and Galatea.

kk He speaks of obscene pictures representing nudities, and different
postures. There are too many of these infamous paintings in our own times, and
it is pity the use of snu^t has given occasion to introduce them into companies*
where such things should be held in detestation.

ll From this and the following verses we may perceive our poet abhorred the
gallantry too much practiced among the Romans then, and Italians now, as well
as in the eastern countries.

mm Ovid, who has advanced a little too far, checks his muse, and bids her give
back. He tells his muse here, so every man should tell himself, even in the
most excellent things; when we are arrived at a certain point, we should
abstain from saying any more, we should enjoy the charms of philosophy, retired
and by ourselves.

nn Calchos was the son of Thestor, as Homer writes in his first Iliad, famous
for his skill in the art of divination which he learnt of Apollo. He
accompanied the Greeks to the siege of Troy, though he was himself a Trojan, if
we may believe Dictys Cretensis; but says he, 'twas by Apollo's order. And
Servious informs us, that finding Mopsus excelled him in his own art, he died
of grief.

oo This he speaks by way of metaphor for some lady hard to be overcome.

END OF THE SECOND BOOK.
OVID'S ART OF LOVE.
BOOK III.
THE men are armed, and for the fight prepare;
And now we must instruct and arm the fair.
Both sexes, well appointed, take the field,
And mighty love determine which shall yield.
Men were ignoble, when thus armed, to show
Unequal force against a naked foe;
No glory from such conquest can be gained,
And odds are always by the brave disdained.
But, some exclaim, what frenzy rules your mind?
Would you increase the craft of womankind!
Teach them new wiles and arts! as well you may
Instruct a snake to bite, or wolf to prey.
But sure too hard a censure they pursue,
Who charge on all, the failings of a few.
Examine first, impartially each fair,
Then, as she merits, or condemn, or spare.
If Menelaus, and the King of men, a
With justice, of their sister-wives complain:
If false Eriphyle forsook her faith, b
And for reward proc^^'d her husband's death;
Penelope was loyal (...) and chaste, c
Though twenty years her lord in absence past
Reflect how Laodamia's truth was tried,
Who, though in bloom of youth, and beauty's pride,
To share her husband's rate unt^^ely dy^d. d
Think how Alcestis' piety was proved, e
Who lost her life to save the man she loved.
Receive me, Capaneus, Evadne cried* f
Nor death itself our nuptials shall divide:
To join thy all^es, pleased I shall expire*
She said, and reaped amidst the funeral ^ire.
Virtue herself a goddess we confess, g
Both female in her name and in her dress;
No wonder then, if to her sex inclined,
She cultivates with care a female mind.
But these exalted souls exceed the reach.
Of that soft art, which I pretend to teach.
My tender bark requires a gentler gale,
A little wind will sill a little sail.
Of sportful loves I sing, and show what ways
The willing nymph must use, her bliss to raise,
And how to captivate the man she would please.
Woman is soft, and of a tender heart,
Apt to receive, and to retain love's dart:
Man has a breast robust, and more secure,
It wounds him not so deep, nor hits so sure,
Men often are false, and, if you search with care,
You Will find less fraud imputed to the fair.
The faithless Jason from Medea fled,
And mad^ Creusa partner of his bed.
Bright Ariadne, on an unknown shore,
The absent, perjured Theseus, did deplore.
If then the wild inhabitants of air
Forbore her tender lovely limbs to tear,
It was not owing, Theseus, to thy care.
Enquire the cause, and let Demophoon tell,
Why Ph^llis by a fate untimely fell. h
Nine times, in vain, upon the promised day,
She sought the appointed shore, and viewed the sea;
Her fall the fading trees consent to mourn,
And shed their leaves round her lamented urn.
The prince so far for piety renowned,
To thee, Eliza was unfaithful found;
To thee forlorn, and languishing with grief,
His sword alone he left, thy last relief.
Ye ruined nymphs, shall I the cause impart
Of all your woes: 'Twas want of needful art,
Love, of itself, too quickly will expire;
But powerful art perpetuates desire.
Women had yet their ignorance bewailed,
Had not this art by Venus been revealed.
Before my fight the Cyprian goddess shone,
And thus she said; "what have poor women done?
" Why is that weak, defenseless sex exposed.
" On every side, by men well-arm'd, enclosed:
" Twice are the men instructed by the muse,
" Nor must she now to teach the sex refuse.
" The bard who injured Helen in his song, i
" Recanted after and redressed the wrong.
" And you, if on my favor you depend,
" The cause of women, while you live defend."
This said, a myrtle sprig, which berries bore,
She gave me (for a myrtle wreath she wore).
The gift received, my sense enlightened grew,
And from her presence inspiration drew.
Attend, ye nymphs, by wedlock unconfined,
And hear my precepts, while she prompts my mind. j
Even now in bloom of youth, and beauty's prime,
Beware of coming age, nor waste your time:
Now, while you may, and ripening years invite,
Enjoy the seasonable, sweet delight.
For rolling years, like stealing waters, glide:
Nor hope to stop their ever-ebbing tide.
Think not* hereafter will the loss repay;
For every morrow will the taste decay,
And leave less relish than the former day.
I Have seen the time, when, on that withered thorn,
The blooming rose vy'd with the blushing morn. l
With fragrant wreaths I then have decked my head,
And see how leas^^s now, and how decayed!
And you, who now the lovesick youth reject,
Will prove, in age, what pains attend neglect.
None, then, will press upon your midnight hours,
Nor wake, to strew your street with morning flowers,
Then nightly knockings at your doors will cease,
Whose noiseless hammer, then, may rust in peace.
Alas, how soon a clear complexion fades!
How soon a wrinkled skin plump flesh invades!
And what avails it, though the fair one swears
She from her infancy had some gray hairs;
She grows all hoary in a few more years,
And then the venerable truth appears.
The snake his skin, the deer his horns may cast,
And both renew their youth and vigor past:
But no receipt can human-kind relieve,
Doomed to decrepit age, without reprieve.
Then crop the flower which yet invites your eye,
And which, ungather'd, on its stalk must die.
Besides, the tender sex is formed to bear,
And frequent births too soon will youth impair:
Continual harvest wears the fruitful field,
And earth itself decays, too often tilled.
Thou did not, Cynthia, scorn the Latmian swai^; m
Nor thou, Aurora, Cephalus disdain;
The Paphian queen, who, for Adonis' fate
So deeply mourned and who laments him yet,
Has not been found inexorable since;
Witness Harmonia and the Dardan prince. n
Then take example, mortals, from above,
And like immortals live, and like ^em love.
Refuse not these delights which men require
Nor let your (...) languish with (...).
False though they prove, what loss can you sustain,
Thence let a thousand take, 'twill all remain,
Though constant use, even flint and steel impairs.
What you employ no diminution fears.
Who would, to light a torch, their torch deny?
Or who can dread drinking an ocean dry;
Still women lose, you cry, if men obtain:
What do they lose, that is worthy to retain?
Think not this said to prostitute the sex,
But undeceive whom needless fears perplex.
Thus far a gentle breeze supplies our sail,
Now launched to sea, we ask a brisker gale,
And first, we treat of dress. The well dressed vine,
Produces plumpest grapes, and richest wine;
And plenteous crops or golden grain are round,
Alone, to grace well-cultivated ground.
Beauty's the gift of gods, the sex's pride!
Yet to how many is that gift denied?
Art helps a face; a face, though heavenly fair,
May quickly fade for want of needful care.
In ancient days, if women slighted dress,
Then men were ruder too, and liked it less.
If Hector's spouse was clad in stubborn stuff, o
A soldier's wife became it well enough.
Ajax, to shield his ample breast, provides
Sev'n lusty bulls, and tanned their sturdy hides;
And might not he, do you think, be well caressed,
And yet his wife was elegantly dressed?
With rude simplicity Rome first was built,
Which now we see adorned and carved and gilt.
This capitol with that of old compare:
Some other Jove you would think was worshipped there.
That lofty pile where senates dictate law, p
When Tatius reigned was poorly thatched with straw;
And where Apollo's sane refulgent stands, q
Was heretofore a tract of pasture lands.
Let ancient manners other men delight;
But me the modern please, as more polite.
Not, that materials now in gold are wrought,
And distant shores for orient pearls are sought:
Nor for, that hills exhaust their marble veins,
And structures rise whose bulk the sea restrains:
But that the world is civilized of late,
And polished form the rust of former date.
Let not the nymph with pendants load her ear,
Nor in embroid'ry, or brocade appear;
Too rich a dress may sometimes check desire,
And cleanliness more animate love's fire.
The hair disposed, may gain or lose a grace,
And much become* or mis-become the face.
What suits your features, of your glass enquire,
For no one rule is fixed for head-attire.
A face too long should part and flat the hair,
Lest, upward combed, the length too much appear:
So Laodamia dressed. A face too round,
Should show the ears, and with a tower be crowned,
On either shoulder, one, her locks displays;
Adorned like Phoebus, when he sings his lays:
Another, all her tresses ties behind;
So dressed Diana hunts the fearful hind.
Di^hevell'd locks most graceful are to some;
Others, the binding fillets more become.
Some plait, like spiral shells, their braded hair,
Others, the loose and waving curl prefer.
But, to recount the several dresses worn, r
Which artfully each several face adorn,
Were endless, as to tell the leaves on trees,
The beasts on Alpine hills, or Hybla's bees.
Many there are, who seem to slight all care,
And with a pleasing negligence ensnare;
Whole mornings, often, in such a dress are spent,
And all is art that looks like accident.
With such disorder Iole was graced, s
When great Alcides (...) the nymph embraced.
So Ariadne came to Bacchus' bed,
When with the conqueror from Crete she fled.
Nature, indulgent to the sex, repays
The losses they sustain, by various ways.
Men ill supply those hairs they shed in age, t
Lost like autumnal leaves when north winds rage.
Women, with juice of herbs, gray locks disguise, v
And art gives color which with nature vies:
The well-wove towers they wear, their own are thought,
But only are their own as what they have bought.
Nor need they blush to buy heads ready dressed,
And choose, at public shops to suit 'em best.
Costly apparel let the fair one fly,
Enriched with gold, or with the Tyrian dye, w
What folly must in such expense appear,
When more becoming colors are less dear!
One, with a dye is tinged of lovely, blue,
Such as, through air serene the sky we view.
With yellow luster see another spread,
As if the golden fleece composed the thread, x
Some of the seagreen wave the cast display;
With this, the nymph^ their beauteous forms array;
And some, the saffron hue will well adorn;
Such is the mantle of the blushing morn.
Of myrtle-berries, one, the tincture shows;
In this, of amethysts, the purple glows,
And that, more imitates the paler rose.
Nor Thracian cranes forget, whose sil^'ry plumes
Give patterns, which employ the mimic looms.
Nor almond, or the chestnut d^e disclaim,
Nor others, which from wax derive their name.
As fields you find, with various flowers overspread,
When vineyards bud, and winter's frost is fled;
So various are the colors you may try,
Of which the thirsty woo^ imbibes the dye.
Try every one, what best becomes you, wear;
For no complexion all alike can bear.
If fair the skin, black may become it best,
In black the lovely fair Briseis dressed.
If brown the nymph, let her be clothed in white,
Andromeda so charmed the wondering sight.
I need not warn you of too powerful smells,
Which, sometimes health, or kindly beat expels,
Nor, from your tender legs to pluck with care
The casual growth of all unseemly hair.
Though not to nymphs of Caucasus I sing, y
Nor such who taste remote the Mysian spring;
Yet, let me warn you, that through no neglect,
You let your teeth disclose the least defect.
You know the use of white to make you fair,
And how, with red, lost color to repair:
Imperfect eyebrows you by art can mend.
And skin, when wanting, over a scar extend.
Nor need the fair one be ashamed, who tries,
By art to add new luster to her eyes.
A little book I Have made, but with great care,
How to preserve the face, and how repair;
In that, the nymphs, by time or chance annoyed,
May see, what pains to please 'em I Have ^^ploy'd
But, still beware, that from your lover's (...)
You keep concealed the medicines you apply;
Though art assists, yet must that art be hid,
Lest, whom we would invite, it should forbid
Who would not take offense, to see a face
All daubed, and dripping with the melted (...)
And though your (...) bear th^^ Athenian name
The wool (...) scent (...) still the same.
Marrow of (...) your Pomatums try,
Nor clean your (...) teeth, when men are by,
For many thin^^ when done afford delight,
Which yet, (...) may offered the (...)
Even Miro's statues, which for art surpass (...)
All others, once were ^ut a shapeless mass;
Rude was that gold which now in rings is worn,
As once the robe you wear was wool unshorn.
Think how that stone rough in the quarry grew,
Which, now, a perfect Venus shows to view.
While we suppose you sleep, repair your face,
Locked from observers, in some secret place:
Add the last hand, before yourselves you show;
Your need of art, why should your lover know?
For many things, when most concealed are best;
And few of strict enquiry bear the test.
Those figures which in theaters are seen
Gilded without, are common wood within.
But no spectators are allowed to pry,
'Till all is finished which allures the eye.
Yet, I must own, it often affords delight
To have the fair one comb^^er hair in sight;
To view the flowing honors of her head,
Fall on her neck, and over her shoulders spread.
But let her look, that she with care avoid
All fretful humors, while she is so employed.
Let her not soon undo, with peevish haste
All that her woman does; who does her best.
I hate a vixen, that her maid assails,
And scratches, with her bodkin, or her nails;
While the poor girl in blood and tears must mourn,
And her heart curses, what her hands adorn.
Let her who has no hair, or has but some,
Plant sentinels before her dressing room:
Or in the fane of the good goddess dress,
Where all the male-kind are debarred access.
It Is said that I (but it is a tale devised)
A lady at her to^let once surpised:
Who starting, snatched in haste the tower she wore,
And in her hurry placed the hinder part before.
But on our foes fall every such disgrace,
Or barbarous beauties of the Parthian race.
Ungrateful it is to see without a horn
The lofty heart, whom branches best adorn,
A leafless tree, or an unverdant mead;
And as ungrateful is a hairless head.
But think not, these instructions are designed
For first-rate beauties of the finished kind;
Not to a Semele, or Ledu bright,
Nor an Europa, these my rules I write: aa
Nor the fair Helen do I teach; whose charms
Stirred up Atrides, and all Greece, to arms:
Thee to regain, well was that war begun,
And Paris well defended what he won.
What lover or what husband, would not fight
In such a cause, where both are in the right?
The crowd I teach some homely and some fair,
But of the former sort the larger share,
The handsome least require the help of art,
Rich in themselves, and pleased with nature's part.
When calm the sea, at ease the pilot lies,
But all his skill exerts when storms arise.
Faults in your person, or your face correct:
And few are seen that have not some defect.
The nymph too short, her seat should seldom quit,
Left when he stands, she may be thought to fit;
And when extended on her couch she lies,
Let length of petticoats conceal her size.
The lean of thick-wrought stuff her cloths should choose,
And fuller made than' that the plumper use.
If pale, let her the crimson juice apply;
If swarthy, to the Pharion varnish fly, bb
A leg too lank tight garters still must wear;
Nor should an ill-shap'd foot be ever bare.
Round shoulders, bolster'd will appear the least, cc
And lacing strait confines too full a breast.
Whose fingers are too fat, and nails too coarse,
Should always shun much gesture in discourse.
And you, whose breath is touched, this caution take;
Nor fasting, nor too near another, speak.
Let not the nymph with laughter much abound,
Whose teeth are black, uneven, or unsound.
You Would hardly think how much on this depends,
And how a laugh, or spoils a face or mends.
Gape not too wide, lest you disclose your gums,
And lose the dimple which the cheek becomes.
Nor let your sides too strong concussions shake,
Lest you the softness of the sex forsake.
In some, distortions quite the face disguise;
Another laughs, that you would think she cries.
In one, too hoarse a voice we hear betrayed,
Another's is as harsh as if she brayed.
What cannot art attain! many, with ease,
Have learned to weep, both when and how they please,
Others, through affectation lisp; and find,
In imperfection, charms to catch mankind.
Neglect no means which may promote your ends;
Now learn what way of walking recommends.
Too masculine a motion shocks the sight;
But female grace allures with strange delight.
One has an artful swing and jut behind,
Which helps her coats to catch the swelling wind;
Swelled with the wanton wind, they loosely flow,
And every step and graceful motion show.
Another, like an Umbrium's sturdy spouse, dd
Strides all the space her petticoat allows.
Between extremes, in this, a mean adjust,
Nor show too nice a gait, nor too robust.
If snowy white your neck, you still should wear
That, and the shoulder of the left arm, bare;
Such sights never fail to fire my amorous heart,
And make me pant to kiss the naked part.
Sirens, though monsters of the stormy main, ee
Can ships, when under sail, with songs, detain:
Scarce could Ulysses by his friends be bound,
When first be listened to the charming sound.
Singing insinuates: Learn, all ye maids;
Often, when a face forbids, a voice persuades.
Whether on theaters loud strains we hear,
Or in Ruelles some soft Egyptian air.
Well shall she sing, of whom I make my choice,
And with her lute accompany her voice.
The rocks were stirred, the beasts to listen staid,
When on his lyre melodious Orpheus played;
Even Cerberus and hell that sound obeyed. ff
And stones officious were, thy walls to raise,
O Thebes, attracted by Amphion's lays. gg
The dolphin, dumb itself, thy voice admired,
And was, Arion, by thy songs inspired. hh
Of sweet Callimachus the works rehearse, ii
And read Philetas and Anacreon's verse, kk
Terentian plays may much the mind improve; ll
But softest Sapho best instructs to love. mm
Propertius, nn Gallus, oo and Tibullus pp read,
And let Varronian verse to these succeed. qq
Then mighty Maro's works with care peruse;
Of all the Latin bards the noblest muse.
Even I, it is possible, in after days,
May 'scape oblivion, and be named with these,
My labored lines, some readers may approve,
Since I Have instructed either sex to love.
Whatever book you read of this soft art,
Read with a lover's voice, and lover's heart.
Tender epistles too by me are flamed,
A work before unthought of, and unnam'd.
Such was your sacred will, O tuneful nine!
Such thine, Apollo and Loeyus thine!
Still unaccomplish'd may the maid be thought,
Who gracefully to dance was never taught;
That active dancing may to love engage,
Witness the well-kept dancers of the stage.
Of some odd trifles I Am ashamed to tell,
Though it becomes the sex to trifle well;
To raffle prettily, or slur a dye,
Implies both cunning and dexterity.
Nor is it amiss at chess to be expert, rr
For games most thoughtful, sometimes most divert.
Learn every game, you will find it proves of use;
Parties begun to play, may love produce.
But easier it is to learn how bets to lay,
Than how to keep your temper when you pay.
Unguarded then, each breast is open laid,
And while the head's intent, the heart's betrayed.
Then base desire of gain, then rage appears,
Quarrels and brawls arise, and anxious fears;
Then clamours and revilings reach the sky,
While losing gamesters all the gods defy.
Then horrid oaths are uttered every cast,
They grieve, and curse, and storm, nay weep at last;
Good Jove avert such shameful faults as these,
From every nymph whose heart's inclined to please.
Soft recreations fit the female kind;
Nature, for men, has rougher sports designed, ss
To wield the sword, and hurl the pointed spear;
To stop, or turn the steed in full career.
Though martial fields ill but your tender frames,
Nor may you sworn in Tiber's rapid streams;
Yet when Sol's burning wheels from Leo, drive, tt
And at the glowing virgin's sign arrive, vv
It Is both allowed and fit, you should repair
To pleasant walks, and breathe refreshing air,
To Pompey's gardens or the shady groves
Which Caesar honors, and which Phoebus loves:
Phoebus, who sunk the proud Egyptian fleet, ww
And made Augustus' victory complete.
Or seek those shades, where monuments of fame
Are raised to Livia's and Octavia's name;
Or, where Agrippa first adorned the ground,
When he with naval victory was crowned. xx
To Isis' fane, to theaters resort;
And in the Circus see the nobler sport.
In every public place by turns be shown;
In vain you're fair; while you remain unknown,
Should you, in singing Thamyras transcend; yy
Your voice unheard, who could your skill commend?
Had not Apelles drawn the sea-born queen, zz
Her beauties, still, beneath the waves had been.
Poets inspired write only for a name,
And think their labors well repaid with fame.
In former days, I own the poets were
Of gods and kings the most peculiar care:
Majestic awe was in the name allowed,
And, they, with rich possessions were endowed.
Ennius with honor was by Scipio graced,
And, next his own, the poet's statue placed.
But now their ivy crowns bear no esteem, aa
And all their learning's thought an idle dream.
Still there is a pleasure, that proceeds from praise:
What could the high renown of Homer raise, bb
But that h^^^ng his ^iliad's deathless says?
Who could have been of Dame's charms assured, cc
^ad the grown old, within her tower immured?
This, as a rule, let every nymph pursue,
That it is her interest often to come in view.
A hungry wolf at all the herd will run,
In hopes through many to make sure of one.
So, let the fair the gazing crowd assail,
That over one, at least, she may prevail.
In every place to please, be all her thought;
Where, sometimes, least we think, the fish is caught,
Sometimes, all day, we hunt the tedious soil,
Anon, the stag himself shall seek the toil.
How could Andromeda once doubt relief, dd
Whose charms were heightened and adorned by grief?
The widowed fair, who see her lord expire,
While yet she weeps, may kindle new desire,
And Hymen's torch delight with funeral fire.
Beware of men who are too sprucely dressed;
And look, you fly with speed a fop professed.
Such tools, to you, and to a thousand more,
Will tell the same dall story over and over.
This way and that, unsteadily they rove,
And never fixed, are fugitives in love.
Such flattering things all women sure should hate,
Light, as themselves, and more effeminate.
Believe me; all I say is for your good;
Had Priam been believed, Troy still had stood. ee
Many, with base designs, will passion feign,
Who know no love, but fordid love of gain.
But let not powdered beads nor c^^^nc'd hair, ff
Your well believing, easy hearts ensnare.
Rich clothes are often by common sharpers worn,
And diamond rings felonious hands adorn.
So, may your lover burn with fierce desire
Your jewels to enjoy, and (...).
Poor Chloe robbed, runs crying through the streets;
And as she runs, Give me my own repeats.
How often, Venus, have thou heard such cries,
And laughed amidst thy Appian votaries? gg
Some so notorious are, the very name,
Of every nymph whom they frequent, defame.
Be warned by ills which others have destroyed,
And faithless men with constant care avoid.
Trust not a Theseus, fair Athenian maid, hh
Who has so often the attesting gods betrayed.
And thou, Demophoon, heir to Theseus' crimes,
Have lost thy credit to all future times.
Promise for promise equally afford;
But once a contract made, keep well your word.
For, she for any act of hell is sit,
And undismayed may sacrilege commit;
With impious hands could quench the vestal fire;
Poison her husband in her arms for hire,
Who first to take a lover's gift complies,
And then defrauds him, and his claim denies.
But hold, my muse, check thy unruly horse,
And more in sight pursue the intended course.
If love-epistles tender lines impart,
And ^illet-doux are sent, to found thy heart,
Let all such letters by a faithful maid
Or confident be secretly conveyed.
Soon from the words you will judge, if read with care,
When seign'd a passion is, and when sincere.
Ere in return you write, some time require;
Delays, if not too long, increase desire:
Nor let the pressing youth with ease obtain,
Nor yet refuse him with too rude disdain.
Now let his hopes, now let his fears increase,
And, by degrees, let (...) to hope give place.
Be sure avoid set phrases when you write,
The usual way of speech is more polite.
How have I seen the puzzled over vexed,
To read a letter with hard words perplexed!
A style too coarse takes from a handsome face, ii
And makes us wish an uglier in its place.
But since (though chastity be not your care)
You from your husband still should hide the affair.
Write to no stranger till his truth be tried;
Nor in a foolish messenger confide.
What agonies that woman undergoes,
Whose hand the traitor threatens to expose;
Who* rashly trusting, dreads to be deceived,
And lives forever to that dread enslaved!
Such treacheries can never be surpassed,
For those discov'ries, sure as lightning, blast.
Might I advise, fraud should with fraud be pa^^;
Let arms repel all who with arms invade.
But since your letters may be brought to light,
What if in several hands you learn to write;
My curse on him who first the sex betrayed,
And this advice s;o necessary made.
Let not your pocketbook two hands contain;
First rub your lover's out, then write again.
Still one contrivance more remains behind,
Which you may use as a convenient blind;
As if to women writ, your letters frame,
And let your friend to you subscribe a female name.
Now, greater things to tell, my muse, prepare,
And ^lap on all h^^ fall the bark can bear.
Let no (...) in your looks find place;
For fury will (...) the finest face:
It swells the lips, and blackens all the veins,
While in the eye a G^rg^n horror reigns.
While on her flute divine Minerva played, kk
And in a fountain saw the change it m^de,
Swelling her cheeks; she flung it quick aside,
Nor is thy music worth so much, she cried,
Look in your glass when you with anger glow,
And you will confess, you scarce yourselves can know;
Nor with excessive pride insult the sight,
For gentle looks alone do love invite.
Believe it as a truth that is daily tried,
There Is nothing more detestable than pride.
How have I seen some airs disgust create,
Like things which by antipathy we hate!
Let looks with looks, and smiles with smiles be paid,
And when your lover bows incline your head.
So, love precluding, plays at first with hearts,
And after wounds with deeper-piercing darts.
Nor me a melancholy mistress charms;
Let sad Tecmessa weep in Ajax' arms. ll
Let mournful beauties sullen heroes move;
We cheerful men like gaiety in love.
Let Hector in Andromache delight,
Who in bewailing Troy wastes all the night.
Had they not both borne children (to be plain)
I never could think they would with their husbands lain.
I no idea in my mind can frame,
That either one or the other doleful dame
Could toy, could fondle, or could call their lords
My life, my soul; or speak endearing words.
Why from comparisons should I refrain,
(...) small things by greater to explain?
(...) what conduct prudent generals use,
And how their several officers they choose,
To (...) a charge of infantry commit,
And (...) for the horse is thought more fit.
So yo^^ ^our several lovers should select,
And, a^ you find them qualified, direct.
The wealthy lover store of gold should send;
The lawyer should in courts your cause defend.
We who write verse with verse alone should bribe;
Most apt to love is all the tuneful tribe.
By us your fame shall through the world be blazed;
So Nemesis, so Cynthia's name was raised. mm
From east to west Lycori^' praises ring;
Nor are Corinna;'s silent, whom we sing.
No fraud the poet's sacred breast can bear,
Mild are his manners, and his heart sincere:
Nor wealth he seeks, nor feels ambition's fires,
But shuns the bar, and books and shades requires.
Too faithfully, alas! we know to love;
With ease we fix, but we with pain remove;
Our softer studies with our souls combine,
And both to tenderness our hearts incline.
Be gentle, virgins, to the poet's prayer,
The god that fills him, and the muse revere; nn
Something divine is in us, and from heaven
The inspiring spirit can alone be given.
It Is sin a price from poets to exact;
But it is a sin no woman fears to act.
Yet hide, however, your avarice from sight,
Lest you too soon your new admirer fright.
As skilful riders rein, with different force,
A new-bac^'d courser, and a well trained horse;
^o you by different management engage
The man in years, and youth of greener age.
This, while the wiles of love are yet unknown,
Will gladly cleave to you and you alone;
With kind caresses often indulge the boy,
And all the harvest of his heart enjoy.
Alone, thus blessed, of rivals most beware:
Nor love nor empire can a partner bear,
Men more discreetly love when they are mature
And many things, which youth disdains, end^^^;
No windows break, no houses set on fire,
Nor tear their own or mistresses attire.
In youth, the boiling blood gives fury vent,
But men in years more calmly wrongs resent.
As wood when green, or as a torch when wet,
They slowly burn, but long retain their heat:
More bright is youthful flame, but sooner dies;
Then swiftly seize the joy that swiftly dies.
Thus, all betraying to the beauteous foe,
How surely to enslave ourselves, we show.
To trust a traitor, you will no scruple make,
Who is a traitor only for your sake.
Who yields too soon, will soon her lover lose;
Would you retain him long? then long refuse.
Often at your door make him for entrance wait,
There let him lie, and threaten and entreat.
When cloyed with sweets, bitters the taste restore;
Ships by fair winds are sometimes run ashore.
Hence springs the coldness of a married life,
The husband, when he pleases, has his wife.
Bar but your gate, and let your porter cry,
"Here Is no admittance, Sir; I must deny:" oo
The very husband, so repulsed, will find
A growing inclination to be kind.
Thus far with foils you have fought; those laid aside,
I now sharp weapons for the sex provide;
Nor doubt, against myself, to see them tried.
When first a lover you design to charm,
Beware lest jealousies his soul alarm;
Make him believe, with all the skill you can,
That he, and only he is the happy man;
Anon, by due degrees, small doubt create,
And let him fear some rival's better fate.
Such little arts make love its vigor hold,
Which else would languish, and too soon grow cold.
Then strains the courser to outstrip the wind,
When one before him runs, and one he hears behind.
Love, when extinct, suspicions may revive;
I own, when mine is secure it is scarce alive.
Yet, one precaution to this rule belongs;
Let us at most suspect, not prove our wrongs.
Sometimes, your lover to excite the more.
Pretends your husband's spies beset the door;
Though free as Thais, still affect a fright; pp
For, seeming danger heightens the delight.
Often let the youth in through your windows steal;
Though he might enter at the door as well.
And, sometimes, let your maid surprise pretend,
And beg you, in some hole to hide your friend.
Yet, ever and anon, dispel his fear,
And let him taste of happiness sincere;
Lest, quite disheartened with too much fatigue,
He should grow weary of the dull intrigue.
But I forgot to tell, how may you try
Both to evade the husband, and the spy.
That wives should of their husbands stand in awe,
Agree with justice, modesty, and law,
But, that a mistress may be lawful prize,
None but her keeper, I am sure, denies.
For such fair nymphs, these precepts are designed,
Which never can fail, joined with a willing mind.
Though stuck with Argus' eyes your keeper were, qq
Advised by me, you will elude his care.
When you, to wash or bathe retire from sight,
Can he observe what letters then you write?
Or can his caution against such provide,
Which, in her breast your confident may hide?
Can he the knot beneath her garter view,
Or that, which, more concealed, is in her shoe?
Yet, these perceived, you may her back undress,
And, writing on her skin, your mind express.
New milk, or pointed spires of flax, when green, rr
Will ink supply, and letters mark unseen.
Fair will the paper show, nor can he read,
Till all the writing's with warm ashes spread.
Acrisius was, with all his care betrayed;
And in his towers of brass a grandfire made.
Can spies avail, when you to plays resort,
Or in the Circus view the noble sport?
Or, can you be to Isis' fane pursued,
Or Cybelle's, whose rites all men exclude?
Tho watchful servants to the bagnio come,
They Are never admitted to the bathing-room.
(...), when with sudden sickness you pretend,
May you not take to your sickbed a friend?
False keys a private passage may procure,
If not, there are more ways besides the door.
Sometimes with wine your watchful follow'r treat;
When drunk you may with ease his care defeat;
Or, to prevent too sudden a surprise,
Prepare a sleeping draught to seal his eyes:
Or, (...) maid, still longer time to gain,
An inclination to his person feign:
With faint resistance let her droll him on,
And, after competent delays, be won.
But what needs all these various doubtful wiles,
Since gold the greatest vigilance beguiles
Believe (...), men and dogs with (...) are pleased;
Even angry (...) with offerings is appeased.
With (...) foods and wi^e alike are caught.
(...) the husband may be bought.
But let me warn you when you bribe a spy,
That you for ever his connivance buy;
Pay him his price at once, for with such men
You Will know no end of giving now and then.
Once, I remember, I with cause complained
Of jealousy occasioned by a friend.
Believe me, apprehensions of that kind,
Are not alone to our sex confined.
Trust not, too far, your she-companions truth,
Lest she sometimes should intercept the youth:
The very confident that lends the bed,
May entertain your lover in your stead.
Nor keep a servant with too fair a face,
For such I Have known supply your lady's place.
But, whither do I run with heedless rage,
Teaching the foe unequal war to wage?
Did ever bird the fowler's net prepare?
Was ever hound instructed by the hare?
But all self ends and interest set apart,
I Will faithfully proceed to teach my art.
Defenseless and unarmed expose my life,
And for the Lemman ladies whet the knife. ss
Perpetual fondness of your lover feign,
Nor will you find it hard belief to gain;
Full of himself, he your design will aid!
To what we wish, it is easy to persuade,
With dying eyes, his face and form survey,
Then sigh, and wonder he so long could stay:
Now drop a tear your sorrow to assuage,
Anon, reproach him, and pretend to rage.
Such proofs as these, will all distrust remove,
And make him pity your excessive love.
Scarce so himself will be forbear to cry,
'How can I let this poor fond creature die?'
But chiefly one such fond behavior ^ires,
Who courts his glass, and his own charm a knifes.
Proud of the homage to his merit done.
He Will chink a goddess might with ease be won.
Light wrongs, be sure, you still with mildness bear,
Nor straight ^ly out, when you a rival fear.
Let not your passions over your sense prevail,
Nor credit lightly every idle tale.
Let Fr^^ris's sa^e a sad example be tt
Of what effects attends credulity.
Near, where his purple head, Ilymettus shows
And flow'ring hills, a sacred fountain flows,
With soft and verdant turf the soil is spread,
And sweetly-smelling shrubs the ground o'er-shade.
There rosemary and bay their odours join,
And with the fragrant myrtle's scent combine, vv
There, tamarisks with thick-leav'd box are found,
And cyti^^^is, and garden-pines abound, ww
While through the boughs, sort wind of zephyr pass,
Tremble the leaves, and tender tops of grass.
Hither would Cephalus retreat to rest,
When tired with hunting, or with heat oppressed:
And thus, to Air, the panting youth would pray,
'Come gentle Aura, come this heat allay,'
But some tale-bearing too officious friend,
By chance, o'er-heard him as he thus complained;
Who with the news to Procris quick repaired.
Repeating word for word what he had heard.
Soon as the name of Aura reached her ears,
With jealousy surpised, and fainting fears,
Her rosy color ^^ed her lovely face,
And agonies of death, supplied the place;
Pale the appeared as are the falling leaves,
When first (...) ^he writer's (...) receives.
Of (...) the yellow hue,
Of, when (...) we (...) view.
(...) her robes she tore,
Nor her (...) would (...)
Now, all dishevelled, to the wood she flies,
With Bacchanalian fury in her eyes. xx.
Thither arrived; she leaves below her friends;
And, all alone, the shady hill ascends.
What folly, Procris, over thy mind prevailed?
What rage, thus, fatally, to lie concealed?
Whoever this Aura be (such was thy thought)
She, now, shall in the very fact be caught.
Anon, thy heart repents its rash designs
And now to go, and now to stay inclines:
Thus, love, with doubts perplexes still thy mind.
And makes thee seek, what thou must dread to find.
But, still the rival's name rings in thy ears,
And more suspicious still the place appears:
But more than all, excessive love deceives,
Which, all its fears too easily believes.
And now, a chillness runs through every vein,
Soon as she saw where Cephalus had lain.
'Twas noon, when he again retired to shun
The scorching ardour of the mid-day's sun:
With water, first, he sprinkled over his face,
Which glowed with heat: then sought his usual place,
Procris, with anxious but with silent care,
Viewed him extended with his bosom bare;
And heard him, soon the accustomed words repeat,
Come Zephyr, Aura come, allay this heat.'
Soon as she found her error, from the word,
Her color and her temper were restored.
With joy she rose, to clasp him in her arms:
But Cephalus, the rustling noise alarms:
Some beast he thinks he in the bushes hears,
And straight, his arrows and his bow prepare^,
Hold! hold! unhappy youth! -- I call in vain,
With thy own hand thou have thy Procri^ ^^^in.
' Me, me (she cries) thou'st wounded with thy dart;
' But Cephalus was wont to wound this heart.
' Let, lighter on my ashes (...) will (...)
' Since, though untimely I unrivaled (...).
' Come, close with thy dear hand my eyes, in death.
' Jealous of air, to air I yield my breath.'
Close to his heavy heart, her check he laid,
And was^'d, with streaming tears the wound he made:
At length, the springs of life their current leave,
And her last gasp, her husband's lips receive.
Now to pursue our voyage we must provide,
'Till safe to port our weary bark we guide.
You may expect, perhaps, I now should teach
What rules, to treats and entertainments reach.
Come not the first invited to a feast;
Rather, come last, as a more grateful guest:
For that, of which we fear to be deprived,
Meets with the surest welcome, when arrived.
Besides, complexions of a coarser kind,
From candlelight, no small advantage find.
During the time you eat, observe some grace,
Not let your unwip'd hands besmear your faoe;
Nor, yet, too squeamishly your meat avoid,
Lest we suspect you were in private cloyed.
Of all extremes of either kind beware.
And still, before your belly's full, forbear.
No glutton nymph, however fair, can wound,
Though more than Helen she in charms abound.
I own, I think, of wine the moderate use
More suits the sex, and sooner finds excuse;
I^ warms the blood, adds luster to the eyes,
And wine and love have always been allies.
But carefully from all intemp'rance keep,
Nor drink till you see double, lisp, or sleep;
For in such sleeps, brutalities are done,
Which, though you loath, you have no power to shun.
And now the instructed youth from table led,
Should next be taught how to behave in bed.
But modesty forbids: Nor more, my muse,
With wearied wings the labored flight pursues;
Her purple swans unyok'd the chariot leave, yy
And needful rest (their journey done) receive.
Thus, with impartial care, my art I snow, zz.
And equal arms, on either sex bestow:
While men and maids, who by my rules improve, aaa
Ovid, must own, their master is in love.
NOTES TO BOOK III.
a Agamemnon and Menelaus, two brothers, married two sisters, Clytemnestra and
Helena, daughters of Tyu^arus, king of Lacedemon.

b Eriphyle, daughter of Talaon, queen of Argos and wife of Amphiarus, being
covetous of a gold chain, which Venus had given Hermione, and which Polynice's
wife had received as a present from that unfortunate prince, he gave it her on
condition she obliged her husband to go to the Theban war, in which he knew he
would perish; and she prevailed with him to go. This princess being thus the
occasion of her husband's death, is often represented as an instance of the
falsehood and vanity of the sex.

c Penelope, daughter of Icarus and Polycasta. Her chastity in often mentioned
to the reputation of the fair.

d (...) husband, was the first Greek that was killed in the Trojan war, to
which he went with 40 ships, as Homer tells us in his 2d (...).. When his wife
Laodamia Augustus daughter, heard the news she passionately desired to see his
(...) being granted her by the (...). she embraced it (...) closely, that the
(...) in (...).

e Alcestis, Admetus's wife, who offered to die to lengthen her husband's life.

f There were three famous ladies of this name. The first was daughter of
Neptune and Pilanes, who was bred upon the banks of the Eurotas. The second was
daughter of king Pelias, whom Jason gave to O^nens. son of Cephalus, king of
the phoceans; and the third daughter of Iphias. She married Capaneus, who
signalized himself in the Theban war, of which the poet speaks here.

g She was represented at Rome in a woman's habit, and a temple and altars were
dedicated to her. The poet vindicates the sex by this saying in a very high
degree, as if virtue, by being a goddess, was more the ladies than the mer^^s.

h Phyllis, daughter of Lycurgus king of Thrace, despairing for the return of
Demophoon son of Thescus to whom she had granted her last favors, was about to
hang herself; when, as the fable says, the gods in compassion to her, turned
her to an almond-tree without leaves: Demophoon, sometime after this, returning
w^nt and embraced his metamorphosed mistress, and the (...) afterward put
forth leaves, nine times, to show that she as often went to the seaside,
expecting to meet him. The poet Stesichorus, on whose lips a nightingale sung
when he was a child, a sure prognostic of his being a famous poet.

i Pliny writes this of him. He wrote a (...) against (...), for which her
brothers (...) and Poll^^^ plucked out his eyes; but sometimes (...) he was
restored to his sight, having recanted in his (...) a poem quite contrary to
the former.

k It Is certain that none can make too much haste to acquire the good graces of
philosophy (...) learning; for which youth, (...) and the (...) are necessary.

i When a fair lady has out lived (...) will be at the (...) out of rage or
despair? The second verse alludes to a piece of gallantry in use among the
Roman lovers, to strew flowers before the doors of their mistresses.

m Endymion, with whom, according to that sable, the moon fell in love, and
descended to converse with him on mount Lamos in Caria; because, as Pliny says,
he was the first who observed the motion of that planet.

n Harmonia or Hermione, daughter of Mars and Venus, was married to Cadmus.
Diodorus, who calls her Harmonia, makes her the daughter of Jupiter and
Electra, but agrees that she was Cadmus's wife.

o. Andromache is always represented as a plain sort of a woman.

P The capitol was a hill in Rome, so called from a man's head which was found
there as the Romans were digging the foundation of the temple of Jupiter. Varro
writes, there were two sorts of courts in the capitol; one for the deliberating
sacred matters, and the other for affairs of state.

q Meaning the temple Augustus built near his palace, and joining to the famous
library of Greek and Latin books which Progerius well describes.

r By this we perceive the Roman ladies were as fond of fashions as the French
(...) English, too much their imitators.

s Iole, daughter of Eurytus, king of occhalla, and Hercules's wife. He took
her from her father by force, because the king would not consent to it. When he
returned from AEtolia, where he had married Dejanira

t Pliny observes, that women rarely shed their hair, eunuchs not at all; and
no body, if we may believe him, neither on the hind part of the heads, nor
about their temples and ears; for there is no animal that turns bald, except
man.

v They died their hair with the juice of herbs, according to the fashions of
the Germans, who make use of certain herbs to black their hair, or dye them of
any color, to disguise their age, and appear young.

w The Tyrian scarlet was the finest dye in the world. The color like that of
Phryxus's ram.

x He was the son of Athamas, king of Thebes; and to avoid the anger of Ino,
his mother-in-law, fled with his sister Hele upon a ram with a golden fleece.
His sister tumbling into the sea, gave it the name of Hellespont; but he
arriving at Chalcos, sacrificed the ram to Mars, who placed it in the zodiac,
and hung up his golden fleece in the temple consecrating it to Mars under the
keeping of the dragon.

y Caucasus, is a mountain which stretches itself from the East Indies to mount
Taurus, and goes by several names, according as it is inhabited by several
nations; but being always covered with snow in some places, it is called
Caucasus, which in the oriental signifies white, as Ptolemy witnesses.

z. Pliny writes there were two famous statuaries of this name; one a Lycian,
Polycletes's, disciple, who flourished in the 87th Olympiad; the other a native
of Elcuthera, Ageladis's disciple, who made that admirable brazen cow, of which
so much is said, and several other pieces of sculpture which are mightily
praised by antiquity

aa The Sidonian Europa, daughter of Agenor, king of Phoenicia, whom Jupiter
fell in love with, and ravished her in the shape of a bull: He carried her to
Crete, and she there brought him three sons, Minos, Radamanthus, and Sarpedon.
After that Asterius having no children, married her, adopted Jupiter's sons,
and left his kingdom to them, as Diodorus informs us. Europa is called the
Sidonian, from the city of Sidon, built by the Phoenicians.

bb Pharos was a little island at the mouth of the Nile. near the port of
Alexandria, where anciently stood a stately high tower, reckoned one of the
seven wonders of the world. Ptolemy Philadelphus spent 800 talents in building
it. We read of it in Caesar's commentaries. In this island were abundance of
crocodiles, the (...) of which were excellent to take off freckles or spots of
the face, and whiten the skin.

cc The same invention is used in our days both for this defect in women, and
in calv'd stockings for the men. And it is satisfactory to the curious to know
the fashion is 880 years old.

dd Umbrians inhabited a country joining to the Appenine hills, which runs from
Savona, on the coast of Genoa, to the Sicilian streights. This nation was
reckoned rustic in their manners, strong in bodies and stout of heart.

ee Sirens, though monsters, etc. Ovid here advises the ladies to learn to sing,
and takes his comparison from the Sirens, who charmed voyagers by their singing.

ff Orpheus of mount Rhodophe, that is, of Thrace; from whence he is so often
called Threicius: For he was a Thacian, son of Oeagrus and Calliope, as
Diodorus writes: He was so skilled in playing upon the lyre, that it is said he
drew after him trees and wild beasts.

gg He means the walls of Thebes, built by the found of Amphion's lyre, He was
the son of Jupiter and Antiope, and brother of Zethus. Eusebius writes that
Amphion reigned at Thebes, and made rocks move with the ^ound of his lyre; for
that he was at last hearkened to by his subjects, who were a stubborn sort of
people.

hh Some say he was a poet and musician of Lesbos, and invented Dithyrambics
for praise of wine and Bacchus. Having got a great deal of money, and returning
from his travels home by sea, the sailors robbed him, and throw him overboard:
when a Dolphin charmed with his music, conveyed him safe to Pel^ponesus: where
he (...) Periander to put the sailors to death.

ii Callimachu^^ (...) considerable poet, and according (...) that wrote
elegres in Greek. He was the son (...) who built Cyrene. For which (...) he is
called Battiades.

kk. (...) was a native of the island of co^s in the (...); a celebrated poet,
and writer of elegies Ovid calls Anacreon the old man of Teios, who loved
drinking so well. He was a lyric poet; and Pliny tells us he choked himself
with a grapestone as he was drinking.

ll He means Terence, and his Pharmio in particular. The ancients used to call
their servants by the names of the countries from whence they came, as Lydus,
Syrus, etc.

mm Sapho is made famous by almost all the poets of antiquity, as well as by
her own writings. She was contemporary with Alceous.

nn Propertius was a native of Umbria, that rude part of taly; so that we find
genius and politeness are not confined to places.

oo He translated the Euphorian of the Greeks into Latin, and wrote four books
for a freed woman of Voluminous, with whom he was in love. He was the first who
commanded in Egypt under Augustus. He was pro-consul, according to Eusebius.

pp Every body who is the least acquainted with antiquity, knows he was one of
the finest wits of the Augustine age, and a man of gallantry and profusion,
wasting his estate, even while he was in his youth, on his extravagancies and
pleasures.

qq Who, when he was thirty five years old, learned Greek, and translated
Apollonius Rhodius's four books of the conquest of the Arg^^^uts.

rr Supposed to be billiard balls.

ss As tennis, to sting the dart, quoits, sencing, and ride the great horse, or
manage horses.

tt The sun is the master planet, and Leo the fifth sign in the Zodiac, by
astronomers called the house of the sun, who therein causes the greatest heats.

vv Virgo is the sixth northern sign in the Zodiac, next to the autumnal (...).
The poet means the summer season, when the (...) through Cancer, Leo, and Virgo.

ww It Is said (...) at the battle of Attium and was present on the Romans' side
when Augustus beat Mark Anthony.

(...) Agrippa married Julia, Augustus's daughter of Scribonia, and his father
in-law honored him with a naval crown after he beat Pompey in Sicily. One of
the Porticos in Rome, was built or named by Agrippa.

yy Thamyras, son of Philamon, of whom it is said, that as he returned from the
city of AEtolia he met with the Muses by the way, and was so proud of his
singing, he fancied he could outdo them in that art; at which the daughters of
Jupiter were so enraged, that in revenge they deprived him of the use of his
reason.

zz Every one has heard of Apelles, the famous painter. He was a native of Cos,
or as others write Ephesus: for his great skill in his art he was called the
prince of painters.

aaa Perhaps there never was, and never will be an age, where some poets, and
those not the worst, will not have cause to complain with Ovid; who lived in a
time when poetry was favored with the protection, and honored with the
example of Augustus M^cenas, and the Roman court.

bbb Homer's name, and the contention of seven cities for him, are so well
known that there is no need of saying much about it; he was so called from his
blindness. He was the most famous of all the Greek poets, but poor to the
extremity of begging.

ccc Danoe, daughter of Acrisius king* of Argos; who having consulted the
oracle, and being told that he should be killed by her son, shut her up in a
brazer, tower to prevent it. But Jupiter, transforming himself into a golden
shower, blinded her keepers, and got her with child; which, being born, was the
renowned (...): her father commanded both the babe and his mother to be thrown
into the sea; but being fortunately cast ashore on one of the islands called
Cyclades, the king of the island married the mother: and (...) when he was
grown up, unwittingly killed his grandfather.

ddd She was the daughter of Cepheus; king of Arcadia, and for her mother's
pride, in comparing her beauty to that of Ne^ides, was exposed to a horrible
sea monster, from whom she was delivered by the above named Perseus.

eee Priam, king of Troy, and father of Paris, who stole Helen, was for
restoring her to the Greeks when they demanded her by their ambassadors; but
other councils prevailing, the war ensued, which ended in the destruction of
Troy, and the death of Priam, who was killed by Py^^^us, son of Achilles, after
40 years reign.

fff The Nardus or Nard, was a plant brought from (...), or Spira, from which a
precious ointment was extracted, and put to the same uses as the modern Beaux
and Belles do their essences.

ggg The temple of Venus stood in the Appian way, and the gallant women used to
frequent it to meet their spark.

hhh Theseus's inconstancy to Ariadne has rendered him famous among the
inconstants in story.

iii This is very delicate, and shows of what importance it is for beauty to be
well-bred, if it would be victorious.

kkk Minerva playing on her flute by a river side, and seeing in the water what
grimaces ^^obliged her to make, she slung away the instrument in a passion, and
cursed it so much, that he who made use of it afterward had cause to repent of
it.

lll She was Ajax's captive and his mistress, by whom he had Eurysaces, from
whom descended the Eury^cide one of the most noted families of Athens.

mmm Nemesis was the goddess of justice. The Romans involved her before they
went to battle, and returned her thanks after victory, for revenging them on
their enemies.

nnn Meaning that poetic fury with which Apollo (...). Perhaps its (...) this
reason that (...) calls poets divine, as Cicero writes in his oration for
Archias.

ooo We understand by it, that the ladies must keep out both lovers and
husbands to raise their passion, apt to be cloyed when admittance is too easy.

ppp Thais was a name given to all sorts of women of a lewd character, who
however affect discretion.

qqq The sable of Argus has been spoken of before: he had a hundred eyes, and
kept Io from Jupiter by Juno's orders; for which Mercury killed him by command
of his father Jove. To make him amends, Juno turned him into a peacock, and
plac'd-his eyes in the tail.

rrr Ovid shows several ways to write letters, so that the writing may not be
perceived.

sss Alluding to those wicked women, who rose against the men, and did not
spare their own husbands.

ttt She was the daughter of Eri^^theus king of Athens.

vvv Black myrtle. 'Twas dedicated to Venus. (...) makes mention of three
sorts, white, black, and a third which he calls conjugal, because it is
dedicated for the ceremonies of marriage.

www It Is a shrub which fattens sheep, and horses prefer it to grain.

xxx The priestesses and priests of Bacchus, who celebrated the festival of
that god, did it with the noise of shouts, drums, timbrels and cymbals, were
crowned with ivy, vine, etc. and carried a Thrysus or staff weaved with it in
their hands: they were frantic and outrageous in their actions during this
ceremony.

yyy To show that he treats of love affairs, represented by the swans that are
said to draw Venus's ^ar some^^^^^; (...)' doves are oftenest harnessed on this
occasion. So that Ovid, as both a poet and lover, might have the privilege to
put swans to his ^ar, as emblems of his being conducted by Venus and Apollo.

zzz The reader has now gone through the Art of Love, and it is hoped he has found
nothing to shock him. He (...) look upon this book as a history of the manners
and customs of the ancients, not to imitate them, but see Ovid's fine
sentiments, his eloquence, and fruitful invention, which makes him speak
agreeably of every thing.

aaaa We see Ovid made no scruple of calling him Naso, though it was a name of
distinction given him from his great nose, but perhaps not a name of contempt,
great noses being more a beauty among the Romans than in our times.

END OF THE THIRD BOOK.
OVID's REMEDY OF LOVE.
TRANSLATED BY MR. TATE.
THE title of this book when Cupid spied.
Treason! a plot against our state! he cried. b
Why should you thus your loyal poet wrong,
Who in your war has served so well and long!
So savage and ill-bred I never can prove,
Like Diomedes, to wound the queen of love, c
Others by (...) have felt your amorous flame,
I still have been, and still your martyr am;
Rules for your vot'ries I did late impart,
Refining passion, and made love an art.
Nor do I now, of that of thee take leave,
Nor does the muse her former with unweave.
Let him, who loves where love success may find,
Spread all his sails before the prosperous wind;
But let poor youths, who female scorn endure,
And hopeless burn, repair to me for cure:
For why should any worthy youth destroy
Himself, because some worthless nymph (...)*
Love should be nature's friend; let hemp and steel
Hangmen and heroes use, whose trades to (...).
Where fatal it would prove, let passion cease:
Nor love destroy, which should our (...)
A child you are, and like a child you play;
And gentle as your ears should be your sway.
Keen arrows, and to wound the hardest hearts,
You are permitted -- but no mortal darts.
Let your step father Mars, on sword and spear d
The crimson stains of cruel conquest wear;
You should your mother's milder laws observe,
Who never did childless parent's curse deserve.
Or if you must employ your wanton power,
Teach youths by night to force their mistress'd door:
How lovers safe and secretly may meet,
And subtle wives the cautious husband cheat:
Let now the excluded youth the gate caress,
A thousand wheedling soothing plaints express;
Then on the ill-natured timber vent her spite,
And to some doleful tune weep out the night.
For tears, not blood, love's altar should require:
Love's torch, designed to kindle kind desire,
Must seem profane, to light a funeral fire.
Thus I. -- The god his purple wings displayed,
And, forward, finish your design, he said.
To me, ye injured youths, for help repair,
Who hopeless languish for some cruel fair:
I Will now unteach the art I taught before,
The hand that wounded shall your health restore.
One soil can herbs and poisonous weeds disclose,
The nettle often is neighbor to the rose.
Such was the cure the Arcadian, hero found, e
The Pelian spear, that wounded, made him sound.
But know, the rules that I to men prescribe,
In like distress may serve the female tribe:
And when beyond your sphere my methods go*
You may, at least, infer what you should do.
When flames beyond their useful bounds aspire,
It Is charity to quench the threatening fire.
Nine (...) to the shore poor (...) made:
Had (...), ^he tenth she would have paid.
Nor had Demophoon when returned from sea,
For his expected bride, embraced a tree.
Nor Dido, from her flaming pile, by night.
Discovered her ungrateful Trojan's flight.
Nor had that mother dire revenge pursued,
Who in her off-spring's blood her hands embru'd,
Fair Philomel, preserved from Terous' rape;
Her honor she had kept, and he his shape.
(...) never had felt such wild desire:
Nor Phoedra suffered by incestuous fire.
Let me the wanton Paris take in hand,
Helen shall be restored, and Troy shall stand.
My wholesome precepts had lewd Scylla read,
The purple lock had grown on Nisus' head.
Learn, youths, from me to curb the desperate force
Of love; and steer, by my advice your course.
By reading me, you first received your bane;
Now, for an antidote, read me again;
From scornful beauty's chains I Will set you free.
Consent but you to your own liberty.
(...), thou god of physic and of verse, f
Assist the healing numbers I rehearse;
Direct at once my medicines and my song,
For to thy care both provinces belong.
While the soft passion plays about your heart,
I fare the tickling venom turns to smart,
Break then (for then you may) the treacherous dart:
(...) up the seeds of the unrooted ill,
(...) they are weak, and you have power to kill.
(...) delay; the tender bladed grain,
(...) up to stalk, can stand the wind and rain.
The tree, whose branches now are grown too big
(...) ^a^d, to bend, was set a slender twig:
When planted, to your slightest touch 'twould yield,
But now has fixed possession of the field,
confiding, ere to love you give the reins.
(...) mistress worth your future pain^
While yet in breath, ere yet your nerves are broke,
Cast from your generous neck the shameful yoke:
Check love's first symptoms, the weak foe surprise,
Who, once entrenched will all your arts despise.
Think, wretch, what you hereafter must endure,
What certain toil, for an uncertain cure.
Slip not one minute; who prefers today,
Tomorrow will be hardened in delay.
It Is love's old practice, still to sooth you on,
It Is your disease gets strength, and till your strength is gone.
Rivers small fountains have, and yet we find
Vast sets of those small fountain'd rivers joined,
Locked up in bark poor Myrr^a never had been,
Had she the progress, of her crime foreseen;
But pleased with the soft kindling of love's fire,
We, day by day, indulge the fond desire;
'Till like a serpent it has eat its way,
And uncontrolled does on her entrails prey.
Yet if the proper season you have passed,
Though hard the task, I Will use my skill at last;
Nor see my patient perish by his grief,
Because no sooner called to his relief.
When Philoctetus first received his wound, g
The venomed part cut off, had saved the sound:
Yet he, even after tedious years of grief,
Was cured, and brought the fainting Greeks relief
Thus I, who charged you speedy means to use,
Will none, in last extremities, refuse.
Or try to quench the kindling flames, or stay
'Till their spent fury on itself does prey.
While in its full career, give scope to rage.
And circumvent the force you cannot engage.
What pilot would against the current strive,
When with a side-course he may safely drive
Distempered minds, distracted with their grief,
Take all for foes, who offer them relief.
But when the first fermenting smart is over,
They suffer you to probe the ripened sore.
It Is madness a fond mother to dissuade
From tears, while on his hearse her son is laid:
But when grief's deluge can no higher swell,
Declining sorrow you will with ease repel.
Cures have their times; the best that can be tried
Inflame the wound, unseas'nably applied.
If therefore you expect to find redress,
In the first place, take leave of idleness. h
It Is this that kindled first your fond desire,
It Is this brings fuel to the amorous fire.
Bar idleness, you ruin Cupid's game,
You blunt his arrows, and you quench his flame.
What wine to plane-trees, streams to poplars prove,
Marshes to reeds, is idleness to love.
Mind business, if your passion you would destroy;
Secure is he, who can himself employ.
Sleep, drinking, gaming, for the foe make way,
And to love's ambuscade the roving heart betray.
The slothful he seeks out, and makes his prize,
Surely as he the man of business flies.
Make business (no matter what) your care;
Some dear friend's cause may want you at the bar:
Or if your courage tempts you to the field,
Love's wanton arms to rough campaigns will yield.
Parthia fresh work for triumph does afford,
Half-conquer'd to your hand, by Caesar's sword.
Cupid's and Parthian darts at once overcome,
And to your country's gods* bring double trophies home.
Your sword as dreadful will to love appear,
As to his mother the AEtolian spear.
The adult'rous ^ust that did AEgisthus seize, i
And brought on murder, sprang from wanton ease:
For he the only lo^te^er remained
At home, when Troy's long war the rest had drained.
He revell'd then at his luxurious board,
And never embarked and never unsheathed his sword:
But while the Grecians did for glory rove,
He wasted all his idle hours in love.
Or country-work and tillage can disarm
Your amorous cares, for every grief a charm.
Yoke oxen, plough the painful field, you will find
The wounded earth will cure your lovesick mind;
Then trust your grain to the new-furrow'd soil,
That with large interest will requite your toil.
Behold what kind returns your fruit trees send,
Down to your hand the burdened branches bend.
Behold a murmuring brook through pastures glide,
Behold the grazing sheep on either side;
While in the shade, his pipe the shepherd tries,
The watchful dog his master's care supplies.
With loud complaints another grove is filled
Of heifers lowing for their firstlings killed.
What pleasure it is with smoke of yew to drive
The murmuring swarm, and seize the loaded hive.
All seasons friendly to the swain are found;
Autumn with fruit, with harvest summer's crowned;
The spring's adorned with flowers to charm the eye,
And winter fires the absent sun supply.
At certain times you will see the vintage full,
And for your wine press may choice clusters cull.
At certain times you ponderous sheaves may bind,
Yet for the rake leave work enough behind.
In mellow ground your plants no wat^ring need;
The thirsty you from neighboring springs may seed.
Then, grafting, make old stocks sprout fresh and green,
And various fruits on one proud branch be seen
When once these pleasures have your mind possessed
Love soon departs, like a neglected guest.
Hunt, if the dull distemper you would remove:
(...) will too hard for Venus prove.
Through all her doubling shifts the hare pursue,
O^ spread your toils upon the mountain's brow.
Even when the stag's at bay provoke his rage;
Or with the spear the foaming boar engage.
Thus tired, your rest at night will prove so deep,
Dreams of your mistress never will haunt your sleep.
It Is easier work, yet 't will require more care,
The feathered game with bird-lime to ensnare;
Or else to fish your bearded hook to bait.
And for your art's success with patience wait
Through sports like these you will steal into relief,
And while your time you cozen, cheat your grief.
Or travel; (though you find your fetters strong)
Set out betimes; your journey must be long.
You Would weep at thought of her you left behind,
And halting, to return be often inclined.
But how much more unwilling to proceed,
Compel your feet to so much greater speed.
Advance, let nothing interrupt your way,
No wind nor weather, nor unlucky day.
Nor count the miles you have past, but what remain;
For (...) nigh no fond pretenses feign.
Nor reckon time, nor once look back to Rome,
But fly; and Parthian like, by flight overcome.
You Will call my precepts hard; I grant they are:
(...) for dear health who would not hardships bear.
When sick, the bitter portion I have taken;
And for the fond I fancied begged in vain.
Both steel and fire you will patiently endure,
And thirst more scorching, for the body's cure.
(...) you, who thus your earthly part redeem,
For your immortal mind have less esteem?
Yet, for my patient's comfort. I must own,
When (...) first stage he manfully has run,
(...) half, the worst half of his task is done.
Galled with the yoke, at first the heifer draws:
The curb's first trial frets the courser's jaws.
Perhaps to leave your father's house you will mourn;
Yet go; and think, when tempted to return,
Your kindred but the false pretense is made;
It Is absence from your mistress does persuade.
When once set out, diversions you will meet,
Fair country prospects, and companions sweet.
Nor only travel far, but tarry long;
Nor once look homeward while your passion's strong.
Rebellious love, if he perceive your halt,
With greater fury will renew the assault.
Half-famish'd passion will more fiercely prey,
And all your labor past be thrown away.
You Will think, when through Hoemonian fields you rove, k
The magic arts may yield a cure for love.
Old tales of witchcraft strange effects rehearse:
The only charm I bring is sacred verse.
By my advice, no jargon shall be read,
Nor midnight hag, blaspheming, raise the dead;
Nor standing crop to other fields shall range;
No sick eclipse the sun's complexion change.
Old Tyber shall his sacred course retain,
And Cynthia, unmolested, guide her wain.
No suffering heart to spells shall be obliged.
No love resign, by sulphur streams besieged.
Think on Medea of all hopes bereft.
When fled from home, and by her lover left.
And what did (...) powerful drugs avail, l
When she beheld Ulysses under sail?
She tried her magic, charm on charm renewed;
He with a merry gale his course pursued:
No force or skill the fatal dart removes;
She raves to find she loves -- but still she loves.
To thousand shapes she could transform mankind,
No means to change her hated self could find.
In these soft terms, to her departing guest,
Her passion (to detain him) was expressed.
" I now no more (as when I first received
" Those hopes and you, by both alike deceived)
" Expect that you with me would pass your life,
" No more ambitious to be made your wife.
" Though sure my pedigree you cannot scorn;
" (The daughter of the sun, a goddess born)
" I but entreat you for a time to stay,
" And urge, for your own sake, the short delay.
" The (...) are rough, which you have cause to fear;
" Wait but a friendlier season of the year.
" What haste? this isle does no new Troy afford,
" No second Rhesus to employ your sword. m
" Love revels here, with peaceful myrtle crowned,
" And mine the only heart that feels a painful wound."
She (...). His crew the swelling sails display,
That ^ear him and her fruitless prayers away.
In vain to her enchantments she returns,
(...) all, yet still in hopeless flames she burns.
For (...) sake, all lovers I advise,
That spells, as useless things, they would despise.
The benefits of travel I have told,
Which, for sick minds, the best relief I hold.
But if, through business, you may still remain
In have, and near the author of your pain;
Though it is a dangerous neighborhood, I Will show
What methods there the lover must pursue.
He takes the wisest course, who from his heart
Does by (...) force, wrest out the offensive dart;
Resolved severely once for all to smart.
A master of such courage I Will admire;
Such patients will no more advice require.
Who wants this resolution to be freed
At once, by ^lower methods must proceed;
(...) remedies I Will him direct,
Which (...), in time, will have the wished effect.
Think, till the thought your indignation move,
What damage you have received by her you love:
How she has drained your purse; nor yet content
Till your estate's in costly presents spent,
And you have mortgaged your last tenement,
How she did swear, and how she was forsworn;
Not only false, but treated you with scorn:
And, since her avarice has made you poor,
Forced you to take your lodgings at the door:
Reserved to you, but others she will caress:
The foreman of a shop shall have access.
Let these reflections on your reason win;
From seeds of anger, hatred will begin.
Your (...) on these topics should be spent,
Oh that your wrongs could make you eloquent!
But grieve, and grief will teach you to enlarge,
And, like an orator, draw up the charge.
A certain nymph did once my heart incline,
Whose humor wholly disagreed with mine.
(I, your physician, my disease confess)
I from my own prescriptions found redress.
Her still I represented to my mind,
With what defects I could suppose or find.
Oh how ill-shap'd her legs, how thick and short!
(Though neater limbs did never nymph support)
Her arms, said I, how tawny brown they are!
(Though never ivory statue had so fair)
How low of statute! (yet the nymph was tall.)
Oh for what costly presents will she call!
What change of lovers! And, of all the rest,
I found the thought strike deepest in my breast.
Such (...) good and ill divide,
That (...) other may be misapplied.
Even truth, and your own judgment, you must strain,
Those blemishes you cannot find, to feign:
(...) if she is but lovely brown;
(...) slender, skeleton.
Censure her free discourse as confidence:
Her silence, want of breeding and good sense.
Discover her blind side, and put her still
Upon the talk which she performs but ill.
Court her to sing, if she wants voice and ear;
To dance, if she has neither shape nor air;
If talking misbecomes her, make her talk:
If walking, then in malice make her walk;
Commend her skill when on the lute she plays,
Till vanity her want of skill betrays.
Take care, if her large breasts offend your eyes,
No dress do that deformity disguise.
Ply her with merry tales of what you will,
To keep her laughing, if her teeth are ill.
Or if blear-eyed, some tragic story find,
'Till she has read and wept herself quite blind.
But one effectual method you may take,
Enter her chamber, ever she is well awake:
Her beauty's art; gems, gold, and rich attire,
Make up the pageant you so much admire;
In all that spacious figure which you see,
The least, least part of her own self is she.
In vain for her you love, amidst such cost,
You search; the mistress in the dress is lost.
Take her disrobed, her real self surprise,
I Will trust you then, for cure, to your own eyes,
(Yet have I known this very rule to fail,
And beauty most, when stripped of art, prevail.)
Steal to her closet, her close 'tiring place,
While she makes up her artificial face.
All colors of the rainbow you will discern,
Washes and paints, and what you're sick to learn.
I now should treat of what may pall desire,
And quench, in love's own element the fire.
(For all advantages you ought to make,
And arms from love's own magazine to take:)
But modesty forbids at full extent
To prosecute this luscious argument:
Which, to prevent your blushes, I shall leave
For your own (...) better to conceive.
For some of late censoriously accuse,
My amorous liberty, and wanton muse.
But envy did the wit of Homer blame,
Malice gave obscure Zoilus a name. n
Thus sacrilegious censure would destroy
The pious muse, who did her art employ,
To settle here the banished gods of Troy. o
But you, who at my freedom take offense,
Distinguish right, before you speak your sense.
Moeonian strains alone can war resound,
No place is there for love and dalliance found.
The tragic style requires a tale distressed,
And comedy consists of mirth and jest.
The tender elegy is love's delight,
Which to themselves pleased mistresses recite,
Callimachus would do Achilles wrong;
Cydippe were no theme for Homer's song.
What mortal patience could endure to see
Thais presenting chaste Andromache?
Kind Thais, (none of Vestas's nuns) supplies p
My song; with Thais all my business lies:
The actress, if my muse performs with art,
You must commend, though you dislike the part,
Burst envy; I Have already got a name;
And, writing more, shall more advance my fame
Despair not then, for as I longer live,
Each day fresh fuel for your spleen shall give.
Thus fame's increasing gale bears me on high,
While tired and grovelling on the ground you lie,
(...) elegy in such esteem I Have placed
(...) more the Epic strain has graced.
Censure did us to this digression force;
Now, muse, pursue thy intercepted course.
When first (...) nymph admits your visit, stay,
And take some other beauty in your way;
More safely thus your passion you may trust,
When you approach her charms with fainter gust:
You Will otherwise misconstrue, for delight,
The eagerness of your own appetite.
Desire does all; the Grotto's cool retreat,
And shady grove, relieve in summer's heat;
Warm fires in winter: Thirst makes water sweet.
Now is the time, your artifice to try,
Act not so much the lover as the spy:
For vanity makes all the fair presume
There Is nothing which their charms can misbecome.
Take this occasion her defects to find,
When you can fix them deeper in your mind:
In the dull minute of your discontents,
(The pensive mood when sated love repents)
To your sick thoughts her blemishes display,
And, for aversion, by those means make way.
These helps you will say are trivial; I confess,
Singly they are, but joined will have success.
By one small viper's bite an ox is killed; q
The forest boar by a less dog is held.
Unite my precepts, if apart they fail,
And by resistless number you will prevail.
But different minds for different methods call,
Nor what cures most, will have effect on all.
Even that which makes another's flame expire,
Perhaps may prove but fuel to your fire.
For one, disgusted with the nymph's undress,
Grows cold, and weary of her warm caress.
Another from his wanton mistress flies*
When he his rival's recent raptures spies.
Like warm desire! And he but little loves,
Whom every trifle shocks, and nothing moves
To those I write, (for my advice they need)
Whose hardy passion can unbaulk'd (...)
What think you of that lover, who could lie
Concealed, to see what custom must (...)
I to no such undecent means direct,
Not to be practiced though of sure effect.
If to excess you find your passion rise,
I would, at once, two mistresses advise. r
Divided care will give your mind relief;
What nourished one, may starve the twins of grief,
Large rivers, drained in many streams, grow dry:
Withdraw its fuel, and the flame will die.
What ship can safely with one anchor ride?
With several cables she can brave the tide.
Who can at once two passions entertain,
May free himself at will from either chain.
If treated ill by her whom you adore,
A kinder nymph your freedom must restore.
No sooner Minos did fair Procris view, s
But scandal on Pasiphoe's fame he threw.
From his first charmer soon Alcmoeon fled: t
Ca^li^h^ once admitted to his bed.
Oenone still had Paris' mistress been, v
Had Paris fairer Helen never seen.
So Progne's beauty, though a wife endeared
Her (...), till Philomel appeared.
But I too long on dry examples dwell:
Some new desire your former must expel.
A fruitful mother with one child can part,
(The rest surviving to support her heart)
But she is impatiently of one bereft,
Who has, alas! no second comfort left.
But lest you think that I new laws decree,
(Though proud of the invention I could be)
The same long since wise Agamemnon saw,
(What saw be not, who kept all Greece in awe!)
The beauteous captive to himself he kept: w
Her father lo^dly for his daughter wept,
Why do thou grieve, old sot? thy daughter's blessed.
A royal whose But (to assuage the pest)
When with his mistress he was forced to part.
The prudent prince never laid the loss to heart.
Achilles keeps as fair a lass as she,
Their form, their very names almost agree.
Let him, said he, resign her by consent,
Or he shall feel my kingly pow'r's extent.
If to my subjects this shall give offense,
The name of monarch is a vain pretense.
Rather than reign, and have my love confined,
My throne shall to Thersites be resigned. x
He said; and, for a charming mistress lost,
Repaired his sufferings at another's cost.
Do you this royal precedent pursue,
And quench your former passion by a new.
If you're a stranger to the sex, enquire,
Where you may find a mistress to admire.
To learn their haunts my books of love peruse,
Where from a swarm of beauties you may choose.
But if my precepts have the least pretense
To truth, and if I speak Apollo's sense,
Though Etna's fires within your bosom glow,
Dissemble, and appear more cold than snow.
In spite of torture, still from tears refrain;
Laugh when you have most reason to complain.
Nor do I such severe commands impart,
At once to bid you tear her from your heart;
But counter^^^t* You Will prove, in the event,
That careless lover whom you represent.
Often when the merry round I would not keep.
I Have seemed to nod, and seeming, fallen asleep.
I Have laughed at him, who fooled away his heart,
Dissembling passion, 'till he felt the smart*
Love comes by use; disguise will love (...):
Learn to reign health, and you will soon be (...)
If she has bid you come, and fixed (...) night.
Though sure that she to mock you did invite,
Yet go; and if you find the door fast locked,
Endure the disappointment; be not shocked.
Nor curse the gate, nor fond entreaties make,
Nor on the threshold a hard lodging take:
And when you see her next, complaints forbear.
Nor in your looks the least resentment wear.
Her pride will stoop, and give your feigned neglect,
What she denied to your sincere respect.
Nor is it enough your mistress thus to cheat,
You on yourself must put the same deceit;
Acquaint not your own thoughts with the design,
'Till the work's done, and you have sprung the mine.
For else, it is odds, but nature in your heart
Will faction raise, and take your mistress' part.
What you propose will soon effected be,
Your progress, sure, if made with secresy.
Conceal your nets; if they are spread in sight,
The bird you mean to take, you will only fright.
Nor suffer her you love, so much to prize
Her charming self, that she may you despise.
Take courage, conscious of your merit seem,
And worthy you will appear of her esteem.
Even then, when you her door wide open spy,
Nay, though called in, yet pass regardless by.
She Will offer you her bed; refuse to take
The favor, or a doubtful answer make
Let wisdom once but teach you to abstain
From what you wish, you may your wish obtain
Perhaps at my severe advice you will start,
But know I act a reconciler's part.
(...) in a thousand forms are ranged;
As tempers very medicines must be changed.
Some bodies must a long sharp course (...)
A single drug on others work a cu^^
If your (...) ^^ture yield to Cupid's stroke.
And strength is wanting to reject his yoke
Forbear against the wind and tide to strive,
Slacken your sail and with the current drive.
For first the raging thirst in which you fry
Must be assuag'd, ere other means you try;
Drink freely then; nor can you safely trust y
To satisfaction, drink even to disgust,
Visit your mistress, keep her in your sight,
Locked up all day, and in your arms all night,
Still sit at board, though appetite decay,
And, though you find you could be absent, stay;
Indulge desire, till your desires are cloyed;
And love, by too much plenty, is destroyed,
Even fear with passion will some minds inspire,
Remove distrust, and passion will retire.
Who fears some rival should his mistress gain.
Machaon's skill can scarce relieve his pain. z
Since no fond mother for her darling son
Feels greater pangs when to the war he is gone.
Near the Salarian gate a temple's placed,
With Erycinian Venus' worship graced.
It Is there Lethaean love cures love's desire. aa
Bedews his lamps, and water blends with fire;
There sweet forgetfulness grieved lovers find,
And injured nymphs, whose husbands prove unkind.
There in a vision, (if a vision 'twere)
I heard the Cupid speak, or seemed to hear,
O thou who do sometimes teach youth to love,
Then rules prescribe their passions to remove,
One powerful precept more let me impart,
Unknown to you, a master in the art.
Bid him who loves, and would love's yoke reject,
On his own life's misfortune often reflect:
For all have crosses, it is the common lot.
Let him, who deeply into debt has got,
Think on a jail, and how he shall sustain bb
Confinement, more severe than Cupid's chain.
Let him who serves a rigid father's will,
And sees his filial duty treated ill,
(whatever success in other things he find)
Keep still his father's angry looks in mind.
Let him who has that double curse of life,
At once a shrew and beggar to his wife,
Instead of gallantry abroad, contrive
Domestic famine from her door to drive.
You that are masters of a generous soil,
Look to your vines, employ your careful toil,
Lest sudden frosts the hopeful vintage spoil.
One has a trading vessel homeward bound;
Let him imagine storms, his ship unsound,
Bulg'd foundered wrecked, and more, some barbarous coast
Enriched with the dear cargo he has lost.
Fear for your son, who serves in the campaign,
And for your daughter be in greater pain.
For mortifying cares you need not roam,
By thousands they will throng to you at home.
If, Paris, Helen's charms you would abhor,
Behold your brothers welt'ring in their gore.
Thus spoke the god, till from my fancy's view
His youthful form, sleep from my eyes, withdrew.
What shall I do, my Palinurus gone, cc
And left to steer through untried seas alone?
But solitude must never be allowed;
A lover's never so safe as in a crowd.
For private places private grief increase;
What haunts you there, in company will cease.
If to the gloomy desert you repair,
Your mistress' angry form will meet you there.
What makes the night less cheerful than the day^
Your griefs are present, and your friends away.
Nor shun discourse, nor make your house a cell;
Despair and darkness still together dwell.
To comfort you, some Plyades admit,
Which is of friendship the chief benefit.
To death's cold arms what made poor Phillis fly
'Twas less her grief, than want to company.
Wild as a Bacchanal, her way she took,
With hair dishevelled, and distracted look;
Far out to sea she cast her prying eyes;
Now stretched upon the sandy beach she lies:
Faithless Demophoon! to deaf waves she cried,
While sighs her interrupted words divide.
Hard by a lonesome tree its shadow cast,
As if for solitary mischief placed:
It Was now her ninth sad visit to the shore;
No sail appears and she will expect no more:
Her nuptial girdle round her waist was tied,
Just over her head a stretching bough she spied;
She offers, and flies back, dreads what she dares;
And, thus confused, the fatal net prepares.
Now, wretched Phillis, while this deed was done,
I could have wished thou had not been alone.
Let disappointed lovers warning take
By thee, and never company forsake.
But while society I do prescribe,
I mean not those of your own sighing tribe:
^or nothing sure can more injurious be
To one in love, as lovers company, dd
A patient, who my orders did obey,
And to his cure was in a hopeful way.
By keeping lovers company one night,
Relapsed, beyond my skill to set him right.
Such dangerous neighborhood you must avoid:
A flock's by one contagious sheep destroyed.
If health you would keep, shun those that are unsound:
By looking on sore eyes our own we wound;
Dry lands are often by neighboring rivers drowned.
Love's pest allows no safety but in f^ight;
And the infected, to infect, delight.
Another, who quite through his ^^^use had gone,
By living ne^t his mistress was undone.
Rashly his strength, ever well confirmed he tries,
Too weak to stand the encounter of her eyes,
She meets, and conquers with one single view,
And all his fresh-skinn'd wounds gush forth anew.
To save your house from neighboring fire is hard.
Distance from danger is the surest guard.
Avoid your mistress' walks, and even forbear
The civil offices you paid to her.
Change all your measures, new affairs pursue;
Find out (if possible) a world that is new.
A table spread to view gives appetite;
To see a gushing rill does thirst excite.
To leap their females in a neighboring plain,
Your bull will break his fence, the steed his rein.
Nor is it enough to quit the nymph, but you
Must to her friends and kindred bid adieu;
Nor to your sight admit the page or maid,
By whom the tender Billet-Deau's conveyed.
And, though impatient, stifle your desire;
Nor of her health, nor what she does, enquire.
Even you who powerful reasons can assign,
That 'twas ill treatment made your love decline:
Forbear complaints, and no invective make;
By scornful silence, best revenge you will take.
Bury your passion in a speechless grave,
Desist from love, but do not say you have.
If overmuch you boast, the symptom's ill;
Who always cries, I Have done with love, loves still.
To make sure work, quench leisurely the fire;
He Is ^a^e, who can by just degrees retire.
A torrent's swift, a stream does gently glide,
But that is a short, and this a lasting tide;
That love must irrecoverably decay,
Which does by atoms waste itself away.
Yet, even humanity must needs abhor.
That you should hate the nymph you did adore.
For he discovers a mere brutal mind,
Whose love to enmity the way can find.
A gentle cure is what I recommend;
For he whose passion can in hatred end,
As soon may to his first desire return;
His fire does still beneath the embers burn.
To see two lovers at outrageous odds,
Is scandal and offense to men and gods.
Many have railed, and yet been reconciled,
That minute they their mistresses reviled.
Others I Have known, who parting without strife,
Have fairly taken leave -- but taken for life.
A nymph but lately passing in her chair,
Met with her lover; (I by chance was there)
He stormed, and with reproaches filled the air.
At last, Come forth, thou harlot, come, he cried:
She came; at sight of her his tongue was tied.
The writings in his hand he flings away,
Runs to her arms, and has but power to say,
You Have conquered, and no more I Will disobey.
Let her the presents you have sent retain,
And to a less prefer the greater gain.
Weigh the advantage by that loss you reap,
And think the purchase of your freedom cheap.
If to her presence you by chance are driven,
Straight recollect the precepts I have given,
Since with your Amazon you must engage,
To whet your courage, muster all your rage.
Think on your rival in her chamber kept;
While you, excluded, on her threshold slept.
How falsely she has treated you; and then
More falsely sworn, to draw you in again.
Study to dress when she is to be seen,
(...) your garments careless as your mein.
Or, if the sparkish mode your fancy seize,
Take care it be some other nymph to please.
What most retards your cure, I Will now reveal;
And to your own experience dare appeal.
Hoping to be at last beloved (though vain
Those hopes) we linger, and indulge our pain,
TO our own defects, through self-opinion, blind,
We wonder how the fair can be unkind.
Never think that what she says or swears is true;
She fears the gods no more than she fears you.
Nor trust her tears, though plenteous tears distill;
Their eyes are disciplined to weep at will.
With various art they storm a lover's mind,
Like some bleak rock, exposed to waves and wind.
Nourish the just resentment in your heart,
Nor ever declare the reason why you part.
For taxed with crimes, she will plead her innocence;
And you will too much incline to her defense.
Contract the indictment; spinning out the charge,
But show you would have her clear herself at large.
Nor yet abruptly should you leave the fa^^.
And like Ulysses drive them to despair:
To no such violent methods I Will advise,
Nor aid a lover, when his mistress dies,
I mean not Cupid's purple wings to clip,
Nor break his bow, or feathered arrows (...)
The counsels that I give are just and true,
Do you as faithfully my rules pursue.
Phoebus, to thee once more for aid I r^^;
Assist me, as thou have already done.
He comes, he comes, he will instantly appear,
His quiver and his founding harp I hear, ee
Both fight most certain that the god is near.
Compare your bastard scarlet with the right,
The difference will appear, though both are bright.
Your charmer so by first-rate beauties place,
And her defects, by brighter luster trace.
Pallas was tall and graceful, sternly fair,
And Juno carrry'd a majestic air;
Singly they pleased, and by each other charmed,
But both by Venus' presence were disarmed.
Nor manhood yet must you so far disgrace
As to become the vassal of the face,
Nor to mere beauty your devotion pay;
Her breeding, humors, and her manners weigh;
But in the scale of an impartial mind;
Or inclination will your judgment blind.
What more I have to say, will lie comprised
In little room, but must not be despised.
Those short receipts have cures on many done,
And, of that number, I myself am one.
The letters sent you, when your nymph was kind,
Revise not, for they will shake your constant mind;
But say, when you commit them to the fire,
" Be this the funeral pile of my desire;
" perish my love, in this just flame expire."
Althea burnt the fatal brand, and knew, ff
The brand consuming, her own son she flew.
Can you, whose kindness had a worse return.
Repine, a few deceitful words to burn?
No; make a total sacrifice, nor spare
The very seal that does her image bear.
From all such places, too you must remove.
As ever have been conscious to your love.
You Will say, (and grieve to think those joys are fled)
This way the apartment, this the happy bed!
The dear remembrance will renew desire,
And no fresh blaze blow up the sleeping fire.
The Creeks could wisht' have shunned the Eubian coast, gg
And ve^geful fire, by which their fleet was lost.
Wise sailors tack, while S^illa's rock they spy; hh
So you should from your mistress' dwelling fly.
There stands the rock on which you split before,
Imagine there you hear Charyhdis roar. ii
But chance itself may sometimes stand your friend,
And give your griess an unexpected end.
Had Phaedra's wealth to poverty declined,
She never for Hippolitus had pined.
O were Medea born a rural maid,
No faithless Jason had implored her aid.
But love in pampered palaces is bred,
By pleasure, and luxurious riches fed.
Not Hecale or Irus could arrive kk
At Hymen's joy, though long they did survive;
For both were poor; and Cupid still shoots high.
His shafts above the humble cottage fly.
Yet so severe a cure I cannot approve,
Or bid you starve yourself, to starve your love.
But never frequent the wanton theater,
Where vain desires in all their pomp appear;
From music, dancing, and an amorous part, ll
Performed to the life, how can you guard your heart?
Against myself, I frank consession make;
Into your hands no amorous poet take, mm
Whose Sy^en muses draw the listening throng,
And charm them into ruin, by their, song.
Callimachus first from your sight remove.
Banish Phil^tas next, they are friends to love.
How ost have Sapho's odes set me on fire!
Who can contain, that hears Anacreon's (...)
Who reads Tibullus, must his passion feel;
Properties can dissolve a heart of steel;
Nor Gallus fails the coldest breast to warm;
And even my muse has found the art to charm.
But if Apollo, who conducts my song.
Secures me in, this point from guessing wrong;
The pain with which most sensibly you're grieved,
Is on the account of jealousy conceived.
No fear of rivals must your heart torment;
For, true or false, yet for your own content,
At least persuade yourself that you have none;
And that the harmless creature sleeps alone.
Orestes never could find his nymph had charms,
'Till he behold her in another's arms.
Why Menelaus, do thou now take or?
In Crete you long could saunt'ring stay alone;
Your Helen's absence never disturbed your rest;
No sooner fled she, with her Trojan guest,
The royal cuckold raves, and he must make
A ten years war to fetch the harlot back.
'Twas on this score the fierce Achilles wept;
With Agamemnon his Briseis slept.
Good cause to weep, the maiden toy was got,
Or great Alcides was a fov'reign sot;
His game of love were Ovid to have played
The poet had the better hero made.
At last with gifts he did the lass restore,
And that she was untouched profoundly swore.
Swore by his scepter; nor can that seem odd;
He knew his scepter but a wooden god.
O could you once arrive but to the power,
As unconcerned to pass your mistress' door:
Strongly resolve, though never so loath to stir,
For now is the time to stretch with whip and spur,
Think there is the Syren's den, the deadly bay. nn
Make all the sail you can and scud away.
Your fond resentment quit, and condescend
To ^ake your very rival for your friend.
Salute him kindly, though with deep regret;
Embrace him, I Will pronounce your cure complete.
Now to perform a true physician's part,
And show I Am perfect master of my art;
I will prescribe what diet you shall use.
What food you ought to take, and what refuse.
Mushrooms of every fort provoke desire,
Salacious rocket sets your veins on fire:
The plant I Would recommend is wholesome rue,
It clears the sight, and does the blood subdue:
But in a word, of all the herbs that grow,
Take only such as keep the body low.
If my opinion you would have of wine,
It quenches love, and does to love incline.
A little breath of wind but fans the fire,
Whose flame will in a happier blast expire.
In wine you must no moderation keep:
You must not drink at all; or drink so deep,
So large a dose, as put your cares to sleep.
Now to our port we are arrived: bring down
The josly wreath, our leaky bark to crown, oo
Your grief redrest, and now a happy throng,
Ye nymphs and youths applaud my healing song.
NOTES TO THE REMEDY OF LOVE.
b The author endeavors, in this treatise, to make ^mends for the hurt he did
by the former; and proposes several remedies in the case of love, some of which
are good and useful, as there are others very trivial, and not fit to be p^t in
practice.

c ^^omedes, the son of Tydeus, whom Minerva had so had strengthened, that he
was a match for the immortal gods, and having given this wound to Venus, forced
her ^o retire back to heaven as fast as she could in Mars chariot.

d He is called Love's father-in-law, from his familiarity with his mother
Venus.

e Telephus, King of Mysia, son of Hercules and Auge, daughter of the the king
of Arcadia. He was called T^le^hus, from his having been nursed by a do in a
wild place, where he was found by shepherds, who carried him to Craytus, king
of Thessaly, by whom he was adopted for his son. When he was grown up to man's
estate, he went to Delphos, to enquire out his parents of the oracle, which bid
him go to The^tras, king of Mys^a, where he should be informed of what he
desired. He (...) found his mother Auge; and when his birth was made known
great was the joy of the My^^^n court (...) who had no male issue, gave him his
daughter (...) in marriage, and left him his successor in the (...) when (...)
died.

f P^^ny says, we owe the origin of heroic verse to an oracle of this divinity:
though some authors inform us that Phemon^^, daughter of Apollo, was the
inventress of it; and others, that 'twas Cormenta, Evander's mother.

g He was the son of Paean, and Hercules's faithful companion, who made him
swear he never would discover where he lay buried, and gave him his arrows
dipt^^ Hydra's blo^d. The Greeks being told by the ora^^ that they should never
take Troy 'til^ they found the (...) arrows, import^ned Philo^tetus to tell
them where (...) were hid, which was in Hercu^^s's tomb; and he discovered it
by stamping on it with his foot, to keep himself from perjury; But he was
wounded in the ^oot for his pr^var^^^tion, by one of those arrows when he went
to the Trojan w^^.

h An excellent remedy, and the most in^ullible in the (...) and (...)

i The son of Theystes, whose adulterous love to Clytemnestra proved so fatal
to her husband Agamemnon, to himself and her; for having killed his
cousin-german, king Agamemnon, and seized his kingdom and wife, at his return
home from Troy; Orestes, that king's son, in revenge slew him, and even his own
mother, for which he was haunted by the furies.

k There were two mount Hamus's, one in Macedonia reaching from the E^^ine to
the Adriatic; the other in that part of Greece called Th^ssaly, which was
famous for poisonous herbs used in conjurations.

l Circe poisoned her husband, the king of the S^rmat^, and was therefore
banished by her subjects.

m He was king of Thrace, and assisted the Trojans with cavalry, but was
defeated and slain by Diomedes and Ulysses.

n Vitr^vius relates of this Zoilus, that having compiled, books against Homer,
and read them to Ptolemy king of Egypt, the king made him no reply, being
displeased that he should presume to censure so great a poet. Zoilus afterward
being reduced to want, came to beg relief of the same Ptolemy, who thus
answered What! have the works of Homer, after his having been (...) thousand
years in his grave, been able to maintain millions of men: And cannot you, who
pretend yourself a greater wit than he, by your writings, maintain one^ Zoilus,
some time after was accused of parricide, and crucified according to the
execution then used by the ancients in the east. A h^nost all ma^^^rs in any of
the sciences have had their Zoilases; (...) and (...) Virgil himself could not
escape them.

o He means Virgil, this divine (...) was not spared by the malice of some
false crities; which ought to be a comfort to such as do well in the arts, when
(...) deavours to wound them.

p The name of a famous court (...) whom (...) endeavored to (...) all the
(...) and qualifications (...).

q This is a little malicious on the sex, and shows that the least vice of a
mistress is fatal to lover.

r For love when divided is always least violent. Th^^ remedy is not so secure
as it is dishonorable.

s Procris to plotis, and not prognis, as it is in some editions; this procris
was a very beautiful woman with whom Minos fell in love. After which he turn^^
off Pasiph^, who out of revenge, or want prostituted herself scandalously.

t Al^m^on was the son of Amphiraus, and brother of Amphilochus; who
endeavoring to purify himself for the crime he had committed in murdering his
mother Eriphile, came to Phegeus, father of Alphesib^a, to whom he gave his
mother's fatal chain, and married her. Afterward going to visit Achelous, he
was enamoured of his daughter Callirhoe; who demanding of him that precious
chain, he returned to Alphesib^a, to fetch it, but was killed by her brothers
Timeno and Anonas, and buried in the Acropolis of Zacynthus, where grew cypress
trees, which they call virgins. In the mean time Alphesi^^a, to revenge her
husband's death, killed her two brothers, as Pausanias reports.

v She was the daughter of the river Troas, according to Apolladorus, and of
Zanthus, according to others. When Hecuba, Priam's wife, and Paris' mother, was
with child of him, she dreamed she had a firebrand in her womb, which should
consume Troy to ashes. To prevent Priam's making him away, Hecuba sent him to
mount Ida, to be bred up in the mean condition of a shepherd, and when he grew
up, he married Oenone. There he had a vision of the three naked goddesses, and
being made arbiter of their beauties, gave the golden apple upon which was
written, let it be given to the fairest, to Venus, who ^^d promised him the
fairest woman in the world if he decided the dispute in her favor; Pallas
tempted him with wisdom, and Juno with power, both which he (...) and preferred
pleasure. His father afterward (...) the knowledge of him, and admitting him to
court, he from thence went to Sparta, stole Helen, and Hecuba's dream proved
too true.

w Her name was Astynome, and her father's Chryses. He was Apollo's priest; and
the god, to revenge the affront offered him in the person of his priest, sent a
plague among the Greeks for Agamemnon's ravishing her, which was not taken off
'till that king of kings restored the young lady to her father by Cal^as's
advice.

x Thersites was the ugliest among the Greeks, a great talker, he was one-eyed,
hump-backed and lame.

y This is not the only advice which Ovid gives, that has a little too much of
Libertinism in it; but he proposes a less evil to avoid a greater.

z Machaon, son of Esculapius, and brother to Podilirius, who both inherited
the gift of medicine of their father.

aa Lethe, the river of forgetfulness. There was one in Lydia of that name,
another in Macedon, another in Spain, and another in Crete.

bb The poet by the swift calends understands the month of January, when
creditors sued their debtors; and this court was near the temple of Janus. They
are called swist calends, for these being days of payment, debtors thought they
came round very fast. This thought reflects on the extravagance of lovers, who
squander a way their estates, run in debt, and ruin themselves by their amors.
The first days; of the other months were pay-days, as well as those of January,
but not ^erms for suing; And from these calends, Augustus used to say of any
one that was insolvent, or would not pay his debts, he will pay at the Greek
calends, that is never; the Creeks having no calends, as the Romans had.

cc. Palinurus was one of AEneas's companions, and his pilot: who falling
asleep at the helm, tumbled with it in his hand into the sea, and after three
days swimming, arrived at port Velino in Italy where he was robbed and killed
by the inhabitants. For thus they were severely plagued, and having consulted
Apollo's oracle to appease his ghost, consecrated a grove to him, and built him
a tomb on the next promontory, called by the Italians the cape of Palinurus.

dd There Is a fort of dangerous infection in it. And indeed nothing is more
certain, than that what is bad is more easily communicated to another, than
what is good; which the poet justifies by similies, as he is wont to do.

ee The same Mercury gave him, with which he vanquished Marsyas, who challenged
him to a trial of skill in music, for which he was a little too severely
punished.

ff Althea, wise of Oeneas, king of Calydonia, and mother of Meleagar, who
hearing all her other sons were killed in a sedition, in a fury slung the brand
into the ^ire, upon which the fate of Meleagar depended, and then ^^abbed, or
hanged herself.

gg Nauplius, king of Euboea and Scriphus, the father of pulamedes, to revenge,
the death of his son ^et up a watch^^ght upon a promontory, which the Greeks
being overtaken in a storm, took for a signal of the safe landing place, and so
fell in among the rocks, as Nauplius intended it: But he ^inding Ulysses had
escaped, in a rage threw himself into the sea.

hh It Is said that Scylla, daughter of Nisus, falling in love with Minos, who
had besieged M^gara, of which her father was king, she cut off that lock of
hair on which his strength and fortune depended, and the city being taken, he
was turned into an osprey. Minos afterward slighted Scylla; she died of
despair, and was metamorphosed into a lark.

ii This ^ock lies over against Z^n^la in Sicilly, at the entrance of the
streights of Messina.

kk Hecale was a poor old woman, who entertained Theseus at her cottage in one
of his enterprises; and I^^^, one of Penelope's suitors, who being extremely
poor, was almost starved, and so weak that Ulysses knocked him on the head with
his fist. Irus's poverty occasioned the proverb Iro pauperior.

ll Meaning that of Mimes, where the postures were very debauched, and the
fight of them dangerous to manners.

mm Soft poems, elegies of love, and pleasant songs, revive amorous fancies,
and should be avoided.

nn In the original Lotophages, that is, eaters of the fruit of a certain tree
called Lotos. The Lotophages were a people of Africa, who, as Strabo writes,
inhabited an island called Menynge: Ulysses's company having tasted of this
country fruit, thought no more of their return, so delicious, did they think
it. The tree was as big as a pear tree, and the fruit about the bigness of a
bean of a saffron color, and extremely sweet, but it changed its nature if
transplanted into Italy. The Sirens are reported to sing off this shore.

oo The poet having finished his work, demands a time of rest, to enjoy the
glory he had deserved by his labor, as the seamen when they enter their port
after a long voyage: It being the custom to adorn the ship with garlands on
such occasions.

END OF THE REMEDY OF LOVE.
THE COURT OF LOVE:

A VISION, AND THE HISTORY OF LOVE.

Imitated from OVID's WORKS.

BY Several EMINENT HANDS.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A PASTORAL ELEGY.

PART SECOND.

THE COURT OF LOVE.
A VISION.
BY CHAUCER.
PART I.
ONCE as I lay by heavy sleep oppressed,
With this strange whim my fancy was possessed,
I dreamt that Cupid called me to his court
On mount Cithera, where his slaves resort:
Where Venus, queen and Goddess, fills the throne,
Her kingdom sharing with her darling son;
There was I straight commanded to appear, (...)
By Mercury, the winged messenger:
Away I went, through strange and distant lands,
The coast enquiring where Love's palace stands;
At last a crowd of travelers I found,
And asked them whither they so fast were bound;
One, looking like a maid, cried, gentle friend,
To Cupid's court our willing steps we bend;
Oh! where is his court? said I^ The nymph replied,
High on Cithera stands, with towering pride,
A stately castle, his imperial seat,
In which he lives magnificently great.
Her steps I followed till my eager sight,
Reaching the hill, found her description right*
Amazed I saw the building large and strong,
Vast were the domes, the marble turrets long,
But gold and jewels hid the massy stone,
And stretching to the skies with luster shone;
Saphires and rubies mingled various lights
More sparkling than the stars in winter nights;
And phoebus darted on this happy place
His luster, to regain the Queen's good grace;
For chancing once unluckily to find
Mars in her arms, he had enraged her mind;
But now to please the offended Queen he strove,
Which showed his longing for the sweets of love.
For all the Gods that on Olympus dwell,
Even Jove and pluto, kings of heaven and hell,
All things that live on earth, or breathe above,
The mighty joys of this best realm approve.
Arrived at court, I found the palace-rooms
Adorned with hangings made in costly looms;
Fair maids I met, that moved with heavenly grace,
And young men walking with a lusty pace;
Old men I saw too, but I could not dream
What service Venus could receive from them.
Pensive I stood, and scarful to be seen.
'Till one I spied belonging to the queen,
Called Philomel; I knew her once a maid,
But all her life she loved: My friend, she said,
Welcome to Cupia's Court; but you, I fear,
Received from Mercury a summons here.
I answered, Yes; She said your negligence
will then be thought a wilful dire offense;
For all that live in luxury and ease,
By nature (...) the charming sex to please,
To this famed palace early should repair,
And hasten to the service of the fair;
But you that absent durst so long remain.
Without a boat had better cross the main,
Than bear the curse that disobedience draws
On bold contemners of love's sacred laws.
For no unhappy man such torments bear,
As wretches doomed to feel affliction here.
Soon they perceive their appetite decayed.
Love makes their health decrease, their color fade,
Long since I tempted you to Cupia's court:
Now he will receive you with a sullen port.
Perhaps repentance may the god assuage;
But why should you so long provoke his rage?
I answered thus: -- With sorrow I repent,
Wretch that I am, a life so vainly spent;
And, having spoke, by her I straight was led
To a vast hill, with various carpets spread,
And cloth of gold; on which I wondering found
A throne of state, erected from the ground.
Where Venus sat, with her imperial son;
Each had a scepter, and a radiant crown,
To see their pomp I could 'till now have stood,
Thoughtless of drink, and destitute of food:
The pleasures of the famed Elysian field,
Can no such rapture to a stranger yield.
No wonder Venus, blessed with such a mein,
And such a person, reigns, of beauty queen,
Her golden hair, dishevelled, crisp and long,
In easy curls, around her shoulder hung;
And every beam that is darted from her eyes,
Piercing and sharp, like pointed arrows flies,
The king of Love, had danger by his side,
The Queen despair: And looking further wide,
Attendance, fear, and flattery, I viewed,
And hope, with strength, above the rest endu'd;
And wrinkled jealousy, with young delight,
Open and free, and cheerful to the fight;
And envy lurking in a secret place,
Lean was her body, leering was her face;
Repining at the fortunate she sat,
And at that distance one might see her fret.
Below the throne, an humble sighing crowd
With pressing suits, and warm petitions bowed.
Then Philomel I asked whence came the tide
Of all those througing suppliants? She replied,
From diverse realms they come: Those dressed in blue,
Show by that color, they have still been true.
The men in black lament, that those they love
Are sick, or dead, or that they cruel prove.
What makes those priests, said I, in court appear?
Have they the privilege of serving here?
The dame replied, full many maids can tell
None are more welcome, and none serve so well.
While thus I viewed, with Philomel, the crowd,
A herald from the king cried out aloud,
Come all ye strangers, to the throne, draw near,
And instantly before the king appear.
In haste I ran, and kneeled before the throne,
All pale and trembling; as a wretch undone:
The king looked sternly, and demanded, why
I came so late, and what I could reply?
Weeping, I answered, Oh, my sovereign lord,
One act of mercy to your slave afford;
If yet, a rebel both in word and thought,
I never loved so truly as I ought;
I will henceforth endeavor to fulfill
The just decrees of your almighty will.
Well, all is pardoned, he replied, If now
To me allegiance and true faith you will bow:
Then straight (...) called an officer of state,
His name is Rigor, solemn was his gait,
And grim his look, unmoved with gold or prayer;
(...) statute-book, he brought, and said, 'You swear
True to remain, in deed, in thought, and word,
To Venus, and her (...) your sovereign lord
' To love one fall unchangeably 'till death,
' And own your passion with your latest breath,
' To bear the various temper of her mind,
' And let her will your just obedience find:
' To give the honor to her virtue due,
' And think all tales that blast her fame, untrue:
' To swear her conduct is exactly right,
' And in defense of that opinion fight:
' To find what present and device she loves,
' And often to send her what she most approves:
' To write, to dress, to practice every art
' Yourself to recommend, and gain her heart:
' To take no pleasure absent from her sight,
' But by reflecting on your past delight;
' Nor absence long endure, but justly choose,
' Rather than live from her, your life to lose.'
All this I swore; and as I turned the book,
On other statutes of the realm to look,
Rigor cried out, hold, traitor to the queen,
Those sacred statutes are not to be seen:
Those are the laws for womankind ordained,
That with men's eyes were never yet profaned;
Nor even with mine, though I on Venus wait,
Long trusted with her deep affairs of state.
Believe me, friend, mankind must still despair
To know the rules and maxims of the fair.
And when you see them change with every wind,
Themselves indulging, to their slaves unkind,
Conclude their duty to these laws they pay;
Which, ^ho' unwillingly, they must obey.
Now seek the temple of the Queen of Love,
And may her son your just d^^^ies approve;
All you whose choice is made, her grace implore,
To serve and please the ladies you adore;
And each that (...), pray to ^ind
By her propitious, (...)
We all obeyed the (...) that Rigor spoke,
(...)
Entering the temple, which famed artists built,
Soft was the front, the lovely roof was gilt:
The cheerful choir with well-carv'd works was lined,
And amorous paintings on the pillars shined.
There Dido, that unhappy dying queen,
With false AEneas, in one piece was seen.
And other pictures round the walls were spread,
Of men and maids, for love untimely dead.
Raised in the middle i will, fond souls to awe,
A golden image of the queen we saw;
This all adored: Some looking fresh and fair,
Some worn with grief, or blasted by despair:
Some in new mantles dressed; and some in old,
Like half-starv'd beggars, ugly to behold.
Some pale as death appeared; some glowed like fire.
Confessing so their inward fierce desire:
These with their lo^d complaints the queen besought
To cure those ills, that cruel love had wrought;
And punish all such authors of their woes,
As mocked their sufferings, or had broke their vows.
But all the happy there, whose envied lives,
Were blessed with joys which bounteous Venus gives,
Cried, goddess, had! propitious to redress
The cares of mortals, and their hearts to bless;
May no divisions in your realm be found,
Since the whole world in love's soft chains is bound;
This is the life of joy your vot'ries know.
Who feel their bliss of paradise below;
Love cures our vices, and refines our hearts;
The source of manners, industry, and parts:
Honor to you, celestial queen, we pay,
Whose minds are lighted with your beauty's ray.
Taught by the prayers those happy lovers made
I tried my wit, and thus devoutly said;
Fairest o^ a^^ that ever in nature shined,
Light of the (...), and (...) of mankind,
To you, O goddess, I my (...)
Freely (...) death.
Yours be the choice, I only wish to find
A faithful mistress, beautiful, and kind;
No woman yet my settled passion moves;
One I have seen, whom most my soul approves;
Of stature low, cast in a lovely mould,
Healthful and young, with hair more bright than gold;
Her looks are fresh, her countenance demure,
Her eyes though killing, look like crystal pure:
Her could I serve; but if your high decree
That fair denies, some other find for me,
With whom in pleasure I may spend my life;
MY mistress, empress, any thing but wife.
So will I always sacrifice to you,
And with Diana constant war pursue;
A fig for her and all her chastity,
Let monks and friars her disciples be.
Thus in the temple having said my prayer,
Another image I discovered there;
A tender maid, said Philomel, does claim
That sacred shrine, and Pity is her name:
In all the court, none knows so well the art
To help a lover, or to save a heart:
Her all-commanding interest cannot fail;
Gain but her friendship, and you must prevail.
Now you shall see the fairest thing alive,
Come on with me, and by your carriage strive
To please a Lady of the nicest taste.
Whose air is prudent, as her life is chaste:
Called Rosalinda; could you gain her grace,
Well might you bless the goddess of this place:
Take care your sense and modesty to show,
She hates a p^rt, insipid, prating beau,
Then straight she led me to a spacious room,
Where Rosalinda sat in beauty's bloom:
At the first fight a shivering pain I found;
In all my veins, my heart received a wound;
I dreaded much to speak, my voice was broke,
Yet when my sighs permitted, thus I spoke;
Accept my service, thou celestial fair,
And oh! receive a dying lover's care;
To your commands my painful heart I bind,
And have for ever liberty resigned.
She made no answer, and I soon retired,
To press not daring, though by love inspired;
But still her image dwelt within my breast,
Too excellent to be in verse expressed.
Her head is round, and flaxen is her hair,
Her eyebrows darker, but her forehead fair,
Straight is her nose; her eyes like em'ralds bright:
Her well-made cheeks are lovely red and white;
Short is her mouth, her lips are made to kiss,
Rosy and full, and prodigal of bliss;
Her teeth like ivory are, well-siz'd and even:
And to her breath etherial sweets are given:
Her hands are snowy white, and small her waist,
And what is yet untold is sure the best.
Had Jove himself beheld this heavenly fair,
Calisto never had been made a star;
He never had borne Europa on his back,
Nor turned a mortal for Alcmena's sake;
Nor tried the virtue of a golden shower,
To enter Danae's Well-defended tower:
For all their beauties had too mean appeared.
With Rosalinda's matchless charms compared.
Soon I returned her heavenly form to view,
And still my wound's impression deeper grew;
And thus I spoke: O nature's boasted pride.
For torments caused by you some cure provide:
Praised be my fate, and ever blessed the hour,
That made me subject to your lawful power:
Not Antony could greater passion boast,
Though for one woman the whole world be lost.
The answered, Friend, your service I disclaim,
Who are you, pray? Whence come you? What Is your name?
Men call me Celadon, in verse I write,
And songs at home, with some applause, ind^^e
Oh, why is every flower and pleasing root,
That in the muses happy garden shoot,
Denied me now? And why must I despair,
With sweets of verse, to charm the brightest fair?
Thus, gentle muse, my humble breast inspire
With sacred numbers and celestial fire;
And, Pallas, thy propitious light convey,
To chase the mist of ignorance away --.
Peace, rhyming fool, and learn henceforth to make
A ^itter choice; your woman you mistake.
O mercy, Venus! mercy from above!
Why should you curse me with such helpless love?
Behold the most abandoned soul on earth;
I^^ was I got, and woeful was my birth.
Unless some pity on my pain you shed,
The frosty grave will quickly be my bed.
Thus having spoke, my voice began to fail,
My color sunk, and turned like ashes pale;
I swoon'd, and down I fell. Thou slave, arise,
Cried Rosalinda; now thy love I prize.
I only tried thy heart; and since I find
It Is soft and tender, know that mine is kind.
Swear but to keep the oath you lately took,
And I Will not be so cruel as I look.
Her eyes then languish'd and her face grew red.
And squeezing fast my hand, she laughing said.
I know a way thy passion to appease,
And soon will set thy simple heart at ease.
But ^^er ^he brought me to her promised bed,
The (...) waked me, and the vision fled.
END OF THE FIRST PART.
THE HISTORY OF LOVE.
BY CHARLES HOPKINS.
PART II.
YE woods, and wilds, serene and blessed retreats,
At once the lovers, and the muses feats;
To you I fly, to you, ye sacred groves,
To tell my wondrous tale of wondrous loves.
Thee, Delia, thee shall every shepherd sing,
With thy dear name the neighboring woods shall ring,
No name but thine shall on their banks be found,
With none but thine shall echoing hills re^ound.
My verse, thy matchless beauties shall proclaim,
'Till thine out-rivals Sacharissa's fame.
My verse shall make thee live, While woods shall grow
Whi^^ stars shall shine, and while the seas shall flow;
While there remains alive a tender maid,
Or amorous youth, or lovesick swain to read.
Others may artfully the passions move,
In me alone it is natural to love.
While the world sees me write (...) such a strain,
As shows, I only feel, what others feign,
Thou darling of my youth, my life's delight,
By day my vision, and my dreams by night;
Thou who alone do all my thoughts infuse,
And art at once, my mistress and my muse:
Inspired from thee, flows every sacred line,
Thine is the poetry, the poet thine.
Thy service shall my only business be,
And all my life employed in pleasing thee,
Crowned with my songs of thee, each day shall move,
And every listening ^un hear naught but love.
With flowing numbers, every page shall roll,
Where, as you read my verse, receive my soul,
Should sense, and wit, and art, refuse to join,
In all I write, and fall my great design:
Yet with such passion shall my lines be crowned,
And so much softness in my poem found,
Such moving tenderness; the world shall see,
Love could have been described by none but me.
Let Dryden from his works, with justice, claim
Immortal praise; I from my sacred flame
Draw all my glory, challenge all my fame.
Believe me, Delia, lovers have their wars,
And Cupid has his camp, as well as Mars,
That age which suit, a soldier best, will prove
The fittest for the sharp fatigues of love.
None but young men the toils of war can bear.
None but young men can serve and please the fair.
Youth, with the for maintains the vigorous sight,
Youth, gives the longing maid the full delight,
On either hand, like hardship it sustains,
Great are the soldier's great the lover's pains.
The event of war no (...) can foreknow,
And that alas! of love is doubtful too.
In various fields, wherever change shall ^all,
The soldier must resolve to bear it all.
With the like constancy must lovers w^it,
(...) bad, and hoping, better (...),
Th^^' doubts, and fear, ^^sire, and wish^^, (...)
Undaunted, they must strain to rea^^ the (...).
All will a while lo^k (...) to their eye,
The threat (...)
(...) sight of land, (...),
Yet through all this, the (...),
To (...) the golden (...)
So the bold mariners the seas explore,
Though winds blow hard, and waves like thunder roar,
Rather than live in poverty on shore,
Emboldened thus, let every youth ^et (...),
And trust to fortune for a prosperous ga^e:
Let then launch boldly from the lazy shore,
Nor fear a storm that will at last blow over.
Set all the reins to all their passions free,
Give wings to their desires; and love like me.
Happy that youth, who when his stars incline
His soul to love, can make a choice like mine.
ADMIRATION.
Thee, Delia, all that see thee must admire,
And mankind in its own despite desire.
As a blind man, restored to sudden sight;
Starts (...) amaze at the first flash of light;
So was I struck, such sudden (...) know.
When my eyes dazzled with the sight of you
I saw whatever could inflame desire.
Parch up the veins, and set the blood on (...)
From every charm the painted lightning came;
And fast, as they disper^'d, I caught the flame.
Like stars, your glittering eyes were seen to (...)
And ro^^ with motions that were all divine.
Where majesty, and softness, (...)
And show the (...), at once, (...) and (...)
I gazed, and (...) ^az'd, from every (...)
New wonders I (...)
Not were the (...) less (...)
My (...) soul on every (...),
(...)
These (...) move,
But (...)
That (...)
Each (...)
Each of itself might singly win a soul,
And never need the assistance of the whole.
On this one part a poet's praise might dwell,
Did not this other part deserve as well.
Beauty is surely near allied to wit,
Of which none can the just description hit.
By their own selves they can be shown the best,
And only are in being seen, expressed.
Beauty's new charms no poem can present,
Which but imperfectly are done in paint.
That too comes short of life, and only takes,
Faint images of these which nature makes,
LEANDER's EPISTLE TO HERO.
Leander accustomed nightly to swim over the Hellespont to visit Hero,
(priestess of Venus's temple) being at last hindered by storms from his wonted
course, sent her the following epistle.

READ this; yet be not troubled when you read,
Your lover comes not, in his letter's stead,
On you all health, all happiness attend,
Which I would much, much rather bring than send.
But now these envious storms obstruct my way,
And only this bold bark durst put to sea.
I too had come, had not my parents' spies,
Stood by to watch me with suspicious eyes,
How many tedious days and nights are past,
Since, I was suffered to behold you last!
Ye spiteful gods and goddesses, who keep
Your watery courts within the spacious deep,
Why at this time, are all the winds, broke forth?
Why swell the seas beneath the furious north?
It Is summer now when all should be serene:
The skies unclouded, undisturbed the ma^^;
Winter is yet unwilling to appear,
But you invert the seasons of the year.
Yet let me once attain the wished for beach,
Out of the now malicious Neptune's reach:
Then blow, ye winds; ye troubled billows roar;
Roll on, you angry waves, and lash the shore.
Ruffle the seas, drive the tempestuous air;
Be one continued storm, and keep me there.
Ah! Hero, when to you my course is bent,
I seem to slide along a smooth descent.
But in returning thence, I clamber up.
And scale, methinks, some lofty mountain's top.
Why, when our souls by mutual love are joined,
Why are we sunder'd by the sea and wind?
Either make my Abydos your retreat,
Or let your Se^^os be my much loved seat.
This plague of absence I can bear no more,
Come what can come, I Will shortly venture over.
Not all the rage of seas, nor force of storms.
Nothing but death shall keep me from thy arms:
Yet may that death at last to friendly prove,
To float me to the coast of her I love.
Let not the thought occasion any fear:
Doubt not, I will be soon and safely there:
But 'till that time, let this employ your hours,
And show you, that I can be none but yours.
Meanwhile the vessel from the la^d withdr^w,
When heaven took pity on a (...):
The winds to blow, the waves to (...).
In leaps the ravished youth, and ventures over.
With a smooth passage to the farther shore.
Now to the p^rt the prosperous lover drives.
And safely after all his toils arrives.
Dissolved in bliss, he lies the live-long night,
Melts, languishes, and dies in vast delight;
But that delight my muse forbears to sing.
She knows the weakness of her infant wing.
AS when the painter strove to draw the chief
Of all the Grecians, in his height of grief:
In every limb the well-shap'd piece excelled,
But coming to the face, his pencil failed.
There modestly he staid, and held, for fear
He should not reach the woe he fancied there;
But round the mournful head a veil he threw.
That men might guess at what he could not show.
So when our pleasure rises to excess,
No tongue can tell it, and no pen express.
Love will not have his mysteries revealed,
And beauty keeps the joys it gives concealed.
And 'till these joys my Delia lets me know,
To me they shall continue ever so.
Ah! Delia, would indulgent love decree,
Thy faithful slave that heaven of bliss with thee;
What then should be my verse? What darling flights
Should my muse take? reach what celestial heights?
Now in despair, with drooping notes she sings,
No dawn of hope to raise her on her wings,
In the warm spring the warbling birds rejoice,
And in the smiling sunshine tune their voice.
Bask'd in the beams, they strain their tender throats,
Where cheerful light inspires the charming notes.
Such, and so charming should my numbers be,
If you, my only light, should smile on me.
Your influence would inspire as moving airs.
And make my song as soft and sweet as theirs.
Would you but once auspiciously incline
To raise his fame, who only writes for thine;
I Would sing such notes, as none but you can teach,
And none but one who loves like me can reach.
Secure of you, what raptures could I boast!
(...) shall I (...) when you are lost!
Ah! think what pangs despairing lovers prove,
And what a blessed estate were mutual love.
How might my soul be with your favor raised!
And how in pleasing you, myself be pleased!
With what delight, what transport could I burn
Did but my flames receive the least return.
How would one tender look, one pitying smile,
Or one kind word from you, reward my toil!
It must, and would your tenderest pity move,
Were you but once convinced how well I love,
By every power that rules and reigns on high,
By love, the mighty'st power of all the sky;
By your dear self, the last great oath, I swear,
That neither life, nor soul are half so dear.
What need I these superfluous vows repeat?
Already sighed so often at your feet.
You know my passion is sincere and true,
I love you to excess; you know I do.
No tongue, no pen, can what I feel express,
Even poetry itself must make it less.
You haunt me still, wherever I remove
There Is no retreat secure from fate or love.
My soul from yours, no distance can divide,
No rocks, no caves, can from your presence hide.
By day, your lovely form fills all my sight,
Nor do I lose you, when I lose the light,
You are the charming phantom of the night.
Still your dear image dances in my view,
And all my restless thoughts run still on you.
You only are the sleeping poet's dream.
And when awake, you only are his theme.
Were I, by some yet harder fortune, hurled
To the remotest part of all the world;
The coldest northern clime, the torrid zone,
should hear me sing of you, and you alone.
That pleasing task should all my hours employ,
(...) charming melancholy joy.
The chorus of the birds, the whispering boughs,
And murmuring stream, should join to sooth my woes*
My thoughts of you should yield a sad delight,
While joy and grief contend like day and night.
With smiles, and tears, resembling sun and rain,
To keep the pleasure, I Would endure the pain.
If such content my troubled soul could know,
Such satisfaction mixed with so much woe;
If but my thoughts could keep my wishes warm,
Ah! how would your transporting presence charm!
How pleasant would those pathless wilds appear,
Were you alone my kind companion here!
What should I then have left me to deplore?
Oh! what society to wish for more?
No country thou art in can desert be,
And towns are desolate deprived of thee.
Banished with thee, I could an exile bear;
Banished from thee, the banishment lies there.
I to some lonely isle with thee could fly,
Where not a creature dwells but thou and I;
Where a wide spreading main around us roars,
Besprinkling, with its foam, our desert shores;
Where winds and waves in endless wars engage,
And high-wrought tides roll with eternal rage;
Where ships far off their fearful courses steer,
And no bold vessel ever ventures near.
Should rising seas swell over every coast.
Were mankind in a second deluge lost,
Did only two of all the world survive,
Only one man, one woman left alive;
And should the gods that lot to us allow,
Were I Deucalion, and my Pyrrha thou;
Contentedly I should my fate embrace,
And would not beg them to renew our race;
And my most ardent wishes should implore,
All I should ask from each indulgent power,
Would be to keep the^ safe, and have no more.
Your cruelty occasions all my smart,
Your kindness could restore my bleeding heart.
You work me to a storm, you make me calm;
You give the wound, and can infuse the balm.
Of you I boast, of you alone complain,
My greatest pleasure and my greatest pain.
Whenever you grieve I can no comfort know,
And when you first are pleased, I must be so.
While you are well, there is no disease I feel,
And I enjoy no health, when you are ill.
Whatever you do, my actions to direct,
Your smile can raise me, and your frown deject,
Whome'er you love, I, by the self same fate,
Love too; and hate whatever wretch you hate.
With yours, my wishes and my passions join.
Your humor, and your interest, all is mine.
I s^are in all; nor can my fortune be
Unhappy, let but fortune smile on thee.
You can preserve, you only can destroy.
Increase my sorrow, or create my joy.
From you, and you alone my doom I wait,
You are the star, whose influence rules my fate.
On yours my being, and my life depend,
And mine shall last no more, when yours must end.
No toil would be too great, no task too hard,
Were you at last to be my rich reward.
In serving you I Would spend my latest breath,
Brave any danger, run on any death.
I live but for your sake, and when I die,
All I shall pray for, is, may you be by.
No life, like living with thee, can delight:
No death can please, like dying in thy sight.
Oh! When I must by heaven's severe de^^^e,
Be snatched from all that is dear, be snatched from thee,
May thou be present, to dispel my fear.
And soften with thy charms the pangs I bear.
While on thy lips I pour my parting breath.
Look thee all over and clasp thee close in death:
Sigh out my soul upon thy panting breast,
And with a passion not to be expressed
Sink at thy feet into eternal rest.
HERO's ANSWER.
By Mr. TATE.
WITH such delight I read your letter over
Your presence only could have given me more.
Excuse my passion, if it soar above
Your thought; no man can judge of woman's love.
With business you, or pleasures may sustain
The pangs of absence, and divert the pain
The hills, the vales, the woods, and streams are stored
With game, and profit with delight afford.
Whilst gins for beasts, and snares for fowls you set,
You smile, and your own amorous chains forget.
Ten thousand helps besides effect your cure,
Whilst woman's sole relief is to endure.
Or, with one confident I hold discourse,
Debating what should interrupt your course;
Or viewing from aloft the troubled tide,
Mix in the fray, and with the tempest chide,
Or in the storm's least interval suspect
Your stay, and almost charge you with neglect
I seek your footsteps on the sand in vain.
The sands no more confess thee than the main.
I watch the arriving barks, and never fail.
TO enquire of you, and write by every sail.
Still as the setting sun restores the night
(The night to me more welcome than the ^ight)
I fix my flaming torch to guide my love,
Nor shines there any friendlier star above.
Then with my work or book the time I cheat,
And 'midst the task Leander's name repeat.
My wedded thoughts no other theme pursue,
I talk a hundred things -- but all of you.
What think thou, nurse, does my Leander come?
Or waits he till his parents sleep at home?
For he is forced to steal his passage there,
As nightly we by stealth admit him here.
Think thou that now he strips him in the bay,
Or is already plunged, and on his way?
Whilst she, poor soul, with tedious watchings spent,
Makes half replies, and nodding, gives assent.
Yet cannot I the smallest pause allow,
But cry, he is launched forth for certain now,
Then every moment through the window peep;
With greedy eyes examine in all deep;
And whisper to the floods a tender prayer
In your behalf, as if I spied you there.
Or to beguile my griefs my ^ar incline,
And take each gentle breeze's voice for thine:
At last surpised with sleep, in dreams I gain
That bliss, for which I waked so long in vain.
To shroud you then my shoulders I divest,
And clasp you shivering to my warmer breast.
A lover need not be informed the rest.
These pleasures often my slumbering thoughts employ,
But still they are dreams, and yield no solid joy.
Though never so lively the fruition be,
To fill my bliss, I must have very thee.
At present, I confess the seas are rough,
But were last night composed and ca^m enough,
Why did you then my longing hopes delay?
Why disappoint me with a total stay?
Is it your fear that makes my wishes vain?
When rougher, you have often engaged the main;
If it be fear* that friendly fear retain.
Nor visit me till you securely may:
Your danger would afflict me more than stay.
Dread every gust that blows, but oh! my mind
Misgives, if you prove various as that wind.
If ever you change, your error secret keep,
And in blessed ignorance, oh! let me sleep,
Not that I am informed you're changed at all,
But absent lovers fear whatever may fall.
Detained by floods, your stay I will not blame:
But less I dread the floods than some new flame.
Be hushed ye winds, ye raging billows sleep,
And yield my love safe passage through the deep.
Blessed sign, the taper sparkles while I pray,
I guess in the flame! Leander's on his way!
Our household altar yields propitious signs,
From which my nurse your swift approach divines.
The crickets too of your arrival warn.
And say our number shall increase ever morn.
Come, gentle youth, and with thy presence make
The glad conjecture true: the day will break.
And mar our bliss, prevent the hastening morn;
To me and love's forsaken joys return.
My bed without thee will afford no rest;
There is no pillow like Leander's breast.
Do thou suspect the time will be too short?
Or want th^^ strength the adventure to support?
if this detain thee, oh! no longer stay.
I Will plunge and meet thee in the flood half way.
Thus in th^^ (...) waves our flames shall meet,
And danger make the soft (...) more sweet.
Our love's our own, which yet we take by (...),
Like midnight (...) from their hidden wealth.
'Twist (...) and love unhappy made,
Whilst same forbids what our desires persuade
How art thou ^ight^y snatched from (...)
To dare the floods when sailors keep the bay
Yet be advised (...) of the (...)
Nor in thy youthful strength (...)
Think not thine arms can more than oars prevail;
Nor dare to swim, where pilots fear to sail.
With much regret I cautiously persuade.
And almost wished my counsel disobeyed.
Yet when to the rough main my eyes I turn,
Methinks I never can enough forewarn:
Nor does my last night's visions less affright,
(Though expiated with many a sacred rite)
A sporting Dolphin whilst the flood retired,
Lay hid in the Ooze, and on the Beach expired.
Whatever the dream portend, as yet reside.
In the safe port, nor trust the inconstant tide.
The storm (too fierce to last) will soon decay,
Then with redoubled speed redeem your stay,
Till then these sheets some pleasure may impart,
They bring what most you prize, your Hero's heart.
The Parting of ACHILLES AND DEIDAMIA.
Achilles had a long time lain disguised like a woman, in the court of
Necomedes, king of Bithynia, making use of that habit, the better to carry on
his amors with Deidamia, Necomedes's daughter, but he was at last discovered
by the subtilty of Ulysses; who putting a sword into his hands, which ^e
wielded too dexterously for a woman, so betrayed, and w^rn^d him to the Trojan
war, the Greeks having been warned by the Oracle, that Troy should ^^ver be
taken, unless Achilles assisted at the siege.

THUS young Achilles, in Bithynia's court,
Had made a private, and a long resort:
Dressed like a maid, the better to improve,
With his fair princess, undiscovered love.
Where hours and days, he might secure receive
The mighty bliss that mutual love could give.
Where in full joy the youthful pair remained
And naught a while but laughing pleasures reigned.
'Till at the last, the gods were envious grown,
To see the bliss of man surpass their own.
All Greece was now with Helen's, rape alarmed,
And all its princes to revenge her armed.
When spiteful powers foretold them their desent
Would be in vain, unless Achilles went.
In vain they might the Phrygian coast invade.
Scale Troy in vain, no onset could be made,
That should succeed without that hero's aid.
And now Ulysses by a crafty slight.
Had found him out in his disguise's spite,
Who, though betrayed by his unhappy sat,
Had too much (...) honor to retreat.
Which when his charming Deidamia kn^w.
She to her late discovered lover flew,
On his dear neck her snowy arms she hung.
And streaming tears awhile restrained her tongue,
But she at last, her dismal silence broke,
These mournful words the weeping princess spoke.
Whither, ah! whither would Achilles (...)?
From all he is dearest to, from love and me?
Are not my charms the same? the same that power?
Have I lost mine? or has Bellona more?
Oh! let me not so poorly be forsook,
But view me, view me, with your usual look.
Would you unkind from these embraces break?
^^glory grown so strong? or I so weak?
Glory is not your only call, I ^ear,
You go to meet some other mistress there.
Go then, ungrateful, though from me you fly,
You Will never meet with one so fend as I.
But some camp mistress, lavish of her charms,
Devoted to a thousand rival arms,
Then will you think, when she is common grown,
(...) Deidamia, who was all our own.
Then will I clasp thee to my panting breast,
And thus detain thee to my bosom pr^st.
And while I sold thee thus, and thus dispense
These kisses to restore my wandering sense,
What dismal found of war shall snatch thee hence?
What though the gods have ordered you should go
Or (...) return inglorious from her foe?
Have not ^he felt same cruel gods (...).
That if you w^nt, you should as surely bleed?
Then since your fate is destined to be (...)
Ah! Think, can any Troy be worth so (...)?
(...) whatever she please, for (...)
(...) at (...) shall my Achilles live
(...), built by heavenly hands may stard, (...)
You never shall obey the (...)
Your Deidamia swears you shall not go,
Life would be dear to you, if she were so.
If not your own, at least my safety prize,
For with Achilles, Deidamia dies.
All this, and more, the lovely mournful maid,
Told the sad youth, who sighed at all she said.
Yet would he not this resolution break,
Where all his fame and honor lay at stake.
Now would he think on arms; but when he gave
A side-long glance on her he was to leave,
Then his tumultuous thoughts began to jar,
And love and glory held a doubtful war.
'Till with a deep-drawn sigh, and mighty course
Of tears, which nothing else but love could force,
To the dear maid he turns his watery eyes,
And to her sad discourse, as sad replies.
Thou late great blessing of my joyful heart,
Now grown my grief, since I must now depart,
Behold the pangs I bear; look up and see
How much I grieve to go; and comfort me.
Curse on that cunning traitor's smooth deceit,
Whose craft has made me, to my ruin great.
Curse on that artifice by which I fell,
Curse on those hands for wielding swords so well.
Though I should never so fit for battle prove,
All my ambition's to be fit for love.
In his soft wars I would my life beguile,
With thee contend in the transporting (...),
Ravished to read my triumph in thy smile.
Boldly I Would strive, yet even when conquering yield
To thee the glory of the bloodless field.
With liquid fires, melt the rich beauties down:
Rifle thy wealth, yet give thee all my own.
So should our wars be rapture and delight;
But now I Am summoned to another ^ight.
It Is not my fault, that I am forced away;
But when my honor calls I must obey.
(...) I not death and every danger brave,
I were not worthy of the bliss I have.
More hazards than another would I (...),
Only to lay more laurels at your feet.
Oh! do not fear that I should faithless prove,
For you, my only life, have all my love.
The thought of you shall help me to subdue,
I Will conquer faster to return to you.
But if my honors should be laid in dust,
And I must fall, as heaven has said I must;
Even in my death, my only hopes will be,
That I for ever shall be matched from thee
That, that alone occasions all my fears,
Shakes my resolves, and melts me into tears.
My beating heart pan^s to thee as I speak,
And wishes rather than depart, to brea^.
Feel how it trembles with a pa^^^ fright:
Sure it will never fail me thus in fight.
I cannot longer hold this fond discourse,
For now the trumpet founds the (...) divorce.
Sound every trumpet there, beat every drum;
Use all your charms to make Achilles come.
Farewel^ -- Alas! I have not time to tell
How wondrous loath I part, -- once more farewell.
Remember me, as I remember you,
Like me be constant, and like me be t^^e;
Gods, I shall never be gone; adieu, adieu, adieu.
ABSENCE
Happy that an^'rous youth, whose mistress hears
His swelling sighs, and (...) his falling tears,
(...) and her pity (...) deny
(...) and a (...)
(...) them all (...)
While (...) of his (...)
Yet wretched as he is, he might be blessed,
would he himself contribute to his rest:
would he resolve to struggle through the net.
And, but a while, endeavor to forget.
But his mad thoughts run every passage over.
And anxious memory, makes his passion more.
Perplexing memory, that renews the scene
Of all past cares, and keeps him still in pain.
Keeps a poor wretch perpetually oppressed,
And never lets unhappy lovers rest.
Lets them no pangs, no cruel sufferings lose.
But heaps their past upon their present woes.
Such was Leander's memory when removed,
And sunder'd by the seas, from all he loved.
The gathered winds had wrought the tempest high,
Tossed up the ocean, and obscured the sky;
And at this time, with an impetuous sway,
Poured forth his forces, and possessed the sea.
When the bold youth stood raging on the beach.
To view the much loved coast he could not reach.
His restless eyes ran all the distance over.
And from afar discerned his Hero's tower.
Thrice naked, in the waves his skill he ^ry'd,
And strove, as he was used to stem the tide.
But tumbling billows, threatened present wreck,
And rising up against him dashed him back,
Then, like a gallant soldier, forced to go,
Full of brave wrath, from a prevailing foe;
Again, to town he makes his sad resort,
To see what ships would loosen from the port.
Finding but one durst launch into the seas.
He writes a letter, filled with words like these See page 152,

THE HISTORY OF PYGMALION:
Imitated from the Tenth Book of OVID's METAMORPHOSES.
HOW art thou envied? let Pygmalion prove;
Who by a miracle obtained his love:
Who living in an age, when women led
The lewdest lives, all shame and honor fled:
For a long time declined the ^uptial bed.
He saw them all debauched with monstrous crimes,
No virtuous maid, no Delia blessed the times.
Had she lived then, his skill had never been shown,
Nor the strange miracle that crowned it known.
There had he fixed, nor formed his fancied maid;
Not fondly been by his own art betrayed.
The nymph in polished ivory glittered bright.
So smooth, she seemed too slippery for his sight.
^o curious was her shape, so just her frame.
^o quick here eyes appeared so full of flame,
They would have rolled, if not restrained by shame.
From his strong art, the statue had received
Such lively strokes, one would have thought it lived
Even he himself could hardly, hardly know,
But doubting long, whether it lived, or no.
Yet from her, as she was, he gathered fires:
And fierce and boundless were his mad desires
He felt her flesh (his fancy thought it such)
And feared to (...) with too rude a touch.
(...) kissed her, with belief so strong and vain.
That he imagined (...) she kissed again.
(...) makes his (...), his mad addresses (...)
(...) have (...)
Presents her now, with all he thought might please,
With precious gums distilled from weeping trees.
Small singing birds, who strain their tuneful throats,
And hovering round, repeat their pretty notes.
With sweetest flowers he crowns her lovely head,
And lays her on the softest downy bed.
In richest robes his charming idol dressed,
Bright sparkling gems adorn her neck and breast,
And she -- looked well in all, but looked when naked best.
Now Venus kept her feast; a goodly train
Of lovesick youths frequent, and fill her fane.
The snow-white heifers fall by sacred strokes,
While with rich gums the loaded altar smokes.
Among the rest, the hopeless lover stands,
Tears in his eyes, his off rings in his hands;
More furious than before he feels his fires,
Even his despair redoubles his desires.
A long, long time, his orisons deferred,
He durst not pray, left he should not be heard.
'Till urged by love, his timorous silence broke,
Thus (but still tim'rously) at last he spoke.
If you, ye sacred powers that rule above,
And you, great goddess of propitious love;
If all we want is placed within your power,
And you can give whatever we unplore:
Exert you godhead now, now lend your aid,
Give me the wife! I wish, one like, ^e said,
But durst not say, give me my ivory maid.
This finished; thrice auspicious flashes rise
And wreaths of curling smoke ascended (...)
Half hoping now, and yet still half afraid,
With doubtful joy he seeks his ivory maid,
Do^ts more than ever on her fancied charms,
And closely clasps her in his longing arms.
When all at once, with joy and wonder filled,
He feels her stubborn sides begin to yield.
Soft was her bosom grown, her throbbing breast,
Heaved with her breath, swelled gently to be pressed.
Surpised, and glad, he feels her often, and often:
And more, and more, perceives her warm and soft.
Warm were her lips, and every pointed kiss.
With melted touches, met and moistened his.
Her blood now circled and her pulses beat,
And life at last enjoyed a settled seat.
Slowly she lifts her new and fearful sight,
And sees at once, her lover and the light.
An unborn maid, both life and lover found;
And he too, had his desperate wishes crowned.
Desperate indeed; what prospect could he see,
Or how at first, hope any more than me?
SAPHO TO PHAON:
BY THE HONORABLE SIR CARR SCROPE, BART.
The Poetess Sapho, forsaken by her Lover Phaon* (who was gene from Lesbos to
Sicily) in (...) writes this Letter to him.
WHILE Ph^^^ to the (...) flies,
Consumed, with no (...) poor Sapho di^^.
I burn, I burn, like kindled holds of corn,
When by the driving wind^ the flames are borne.
My muse and lute can now no longer please.
They are the employments of a mind at ^ase.
Wandering from thought to thought I sit alone
All day, and my once dear companions shun.
In vain the L^shian maid claim each a part,
Where thou alone has taken up all the heart.
Ah lovely youth! how can thou cruel prove,
When blooming years and beauty bid thee love?
If none but equal charms thy heart can bind,
Then to thyself alone thou must be kind.
Yet worthless as I am, there was a time
When Phaon thought me worthy his esteem.
A thousand tender things to mind I call,
For they who truly love, remember all.
Delighted with the music of my tongue,
Upon my words with silent joy he hung,
And snatching kisses, stopped me as I sung.
Kisses, whose melting touch, his soul did move.
The earnest and the coming joys of love.
Then tender words, short sighs, and thousand charms
Of wanton arts endeared me to his arms;
'Till both expiring with tumultuous joys,
A gentle faintness did our limbs surprise.
Beware, Sicilian ladies! ah beware
How you receive my faithless wanderer.
You too will be abused, if you believe
The flattering words that he so well can give.
Loose to the winds, I let my flowing hair,
No more with fragrant scents perfume the air,
But all my dress discovers wild despair.
To whom, alas! should now my art be shown,
The only man I cared to please is gone.
Oh let me once more see those eyes of thine,
Thy love I ask not, do but suffer mine.
Thou might at least have taken thy last farewell.
And seign'd a sorrow which thou did not feel.
No kind rememb'ring pledge was asked by thee.
And nothing lest but injuries with me.
Witness ye gods, with what a death-like cold
My heart was seized, when first thy flight was told
Speechless and stupid for a while I lay,
And neither words nor tears could find their way.
But when my swelling passion forced a vent,
With hair dishevelled, clothes in pieces rent;
Like some sad mother through the streets I run,
Who to his grave attends her only son.
Exposed to all the world myself I see,
Forgetting virtue, same, and all but thee:
So ill, alas! do love and shame agree!
It Is thou alone that art my constant care,
(...) pleasing dreams thou comfort'st my despair;
And make the might that does thy form convey,
Welcome to me above the fairest day.
Then 'spight of absence, I thy love enjoy:
In close embraces locked, methinks we lie.
Thy tender words I hear, thy kisses feel,
With all the joys that shame forbids to tell.
But when I waking miss thee from my bed,
And all my pleasing images are fled;
The dear deluding vision to retain,
Hay me down, and try to sleep again.
^oon as I rise, I haunt the caves and groves,
Those conscious scenes of our once happy loves)
There like some frantic Bacchanal I walk,
And to myself with sad distraction talk,
Then big with grief I throw me on the ground,
And view the melancholy grotto round;
Whose hanging roofs of moss and craggy stone
^^^ights my eyes above the brightest throne
But when I spy the banks, whose grassy bed
Retains the print our weary bodies made;
On thy forsaken side I lay me down,
And with a shower of tears the place I drown.
The trees are withered all since thou art gone,
As if for thee they put thy mourning on.
No warbling Bird does now with music fill
The woods, except the mournful Philomel.
With hers my dismal notes all night agree,
Of Tercu^ she complains, and I of thee.
Ungentle youth: did thou but see me mourn.
(...) art, thou would, thou would return
Let him alone, his victory pursue;
For dreadful war has nothing here to do.
This short account will lovesick swains suffice;
He flew his foe, and straight received his prize.
Thrice happy youth, too fortunately blessed;
Who only came, and conquered, and possessed.
None of the pangs of love your bliss annoyed;
But you beheld, admired, and so enjoyed.
The STORY of HIPPOMANES AND ATALANTA:
In Imitation of Part of that in the Tenth Book of OVID's Metamorphoses.
HIPPOMANES alone with hope inspired,
Might well rejoice to find his wishes fired,
Since well assured of all his wish desired.
His passion was all life, all soul, and flame,
He dauntless to the fatal barriers came,
With joy his vanquished rivals he beheld,
Assured to win, where all besides had failed.
He saw the lovely nymph out-fly the wind,
And leave her breathless suitors far behind;
Sew Atalanta swift as lightning pass,
Yet soft as Zephyrs, sweep along the grass.
He knew the law, whose cruelty decreed,
That every youth who lost the race should bleed.
Yet if, like them, he could not run so fast,
(...) saw her worth the dying for, at last.
Her every charm his praise and wonder moved,
And still the more he praised, the more he loved.
Now, ^^ll at once, he feels the raging fires,
Sees all the maid, and all he ^ees, admires.
With awe and wonder, mixed with love and fear,
He stands as motionless as shame made her.
Urged on at last, but still by slow degrees,
Loath to offend, he draws to what he sees,
Oh! why, he cries, most matchless fair one, why
Are you thus used? Can you be doomed to die?
Have you done any guilt, that guilt relate,
How can such beauty merit such a fate?
I am thy champion, and espouse thy cause;
In thy defense, the thund'rer's offspring draws,
Say, if you are rescued by the son of Jove,
Say, for thy life, will thou return thy love?
The bashful virgin no return affords,
But sends ten thousand sighs, instead of words;
With grief, redoubled with her shame, she mourns;
She weeps, he joys, she blushes, and he burns.
In chains extended at her length she lay,
While he with transport took a full survey.
Fain would her hands her conscious blushes hide.
But that the ^etters, which they were denied.
What could she do? all that she could, she did:
For drowned in floods of tears, her eyes she hid.
Much urged to speak, she turned her bashful look.
Far as she could aside, and trembling spoke:
My mother, conscious of her beauty, strove
(Alas! too conscious) with the wife of Jove;
Who by a cruel and unjust decree,
To punish her, takes her revenge on me.
Here I am doomed a dreadful monster's prey,
Who now, now, now is issuing from the sea.
Haste; generous youth, our common foe subdue;
And if you save my life, I live for you.
Thus spoke the maid, half dying with her fears.
When lo! the monster from the sea appears.
The dauntless hero mounts his flying horse.
And over the waves directs his airy course.
Let him alone, his victory pursue;
For dreadful war has nothing here to do.
This short account will lovesick swains suffice;
He slew his foe, and straight received his prize.
Thrice happy youth, too fortunately blessed;
Who only came, and conquered, and possessed.
None of the pangs of love your bliss annoyed;
But you beheld, admired, and so enjoyed.
The STORY of HIPPOMANES AND ATALANTA:
In Imitation of Part of that in the Tenth Book of OVID's Metamorphoses.
HIPPOMANES alone with hope inspired,
Might well rejoice to find his wishes fired.
Since well assured of all his wish desired.
His passion was all life, all soul, and flame,
He dauntless to the fatal barriers came,
Wish joy his vanquished rivals he beheld.
Assured to win, where all besides had failed
He saw the lovely nymph out-fly the wind,
And leave her breathless suitors far behind;
(...) Atalanta swift as lightning pass,
Yet soft as Zephyrs, sweep along the grass.
He knew the law, whose cruelty decreed.
That every youth who lost the race should bleed.
Yet if, like them, he could not run so fast,
(...) her worth the dying for, at last.
Her every charm his praise and wonder moved,
(...) the more he praised, the more he loved
Now had he viewed the last unhappy strife,
And seen the vanquished youth resign his life;
When with his love transported, from his place,
Lest any other first should claim the race,
Rising he runs regardless of their fate,
And presses where the panting virgin sat.
With eyes all sparkling with his hope and love,
And such a look as could not fail to move;
Tell me, he cries, why barbarous beauty, why
Are you pleased to see these wretches die?
Why have you with my feeble rivals strove,
Betrayed to death by their too daring love?
With me a less unequal race begin,
With me exert your utmost speed to win;
By my defeat you may your conquests crown,
And in my fall establish your renown:
Then undisturbed you may your conquests boast;
(...) none will dare to strive when I have lost.
Thus while the prince his bold defiance spoke,
^he eyes him with a soft relenting look.
Already does his distant fate deplore,
Concerned for him, though never concerned before.
^oubtful she stands, and knows not what to choose,
and cannot wish to win, nor yet to lose.
(...) murmurs to herself: Ye powers divine,
(...) hard, alas! a destiny is mine!
(...) must I longer such a law obey,
(...) daily throw so many lives away?
^hy must I by their deaths my nuptials shun?
(...) else by marrying be myself undone?
^hy must I still my cruelty pursue?
^hy must a prince, so charming perish too?
(...) is his youth, his beauty, valor such,
(...) to myself I seem not worth so much.
^y lovely stranger, ere it is yet too late.
(...) from thy too, ah! too too certain fate,
^ould not send thee hence, I would not give
(...) a command; could thou but stay, and live.
Thou with some fairer maid wilt happier be:
The fairest maid might be in love with thee.
So many suitors have already bled,
Who rashly ventured for my nuptial bed,
I fear lest thou should run like them in vain,
Should lose like them, and ah* like them be slain.
Yet why should he alone my pity move?
It is but pity sure; it is not love.
I wish, bold youth, thou would the race decline,
Or rather wish, thy speed could equal mine.
Would thou had never seen this fatal place,
Nor I, alas! thy too, too charming face.
Were I by rig'rous fate allowed to wed,
Thou should alone enjoy, and bless my bed.
Were it but left to my own partial choice,
Of all mankind, thou should obtain my voice.
'Twas here she paused, when urged with long delay,
The trumpet ^ounds to hasten them away.
Straight at the summons is the race begun,
And side by side, for some short time they run.
While the spectators from the barriers cry.
Fly prosperous youth, with all thy vigor fly;
Make haste, make haste, thy utmost speed enforce.
Love gives the wings to win the noble course:
See how unwillingly the virgin flies,
Pursue, and save thy life, and seize the prize.
It Is doubtful yet, whether the general voice.
Made the glad youth, or virgin most rejoice.
Often, in the swiftest fury of the race
The nymph would slacken her impetuous pace^punc;
And halt, and gaze, and almost fasten on his fa^^.
Then fleet away again as swift as wind,
Not without sighs to leave him so behind.
By this, he saw his strength would never prevail.
But still he had a charm that could not fail.
From his loose robe a golden apple drawn,
With force ^e hurled along the flowery lawn,
Straight at the sight the virgin could not hold;
But starts aside to catch the rolling gold.
He takes the wished occasion, passes by,
While all the field resounded shouts of joy.
This she recovers with redoubled haste,
'Till he far off the second apple cast.
Again the nymph diverts her near pursuit.
And running back, secures the tempting fruit;
But her strange speed recovers her again;
Again the foremost in the flowery plain.
Now near the goal, he summons all his might,
And prays to Venus to direct him right,
With his last apple to retard her flight.
Though sure to lose, if she the race declined,
For such a bribe the victory she resigned.
Pleased that she lost, to the glad victor's arms
She gives the prize, and yields her dear-bought charms;
He by resistless gold the conquest gained,
In vain he ran, till that the race obtained.
Possessed of that, he could not but subdue,
For gold alas! would conquer Delia too.
Yet oh! thou best beloved, thou loveliest maid,
Be not by too much avarice betrayed.
Prize thyself high, no easy purchase prove,
Nor let a fool with fortune buy thy love.
Like Atalanta's conqu'ror let him be,
Brave, generous, young, from every ^ailing free,
And to complete him, let him love like me.
What pains against thy wretched life I take?
Even I myself my jealousies awake.
Such men there are, blessed with such gifts divine,
Who if they knew thee, would be surely thine.
JEALOUSY.
How wretched then, alas! should Daphnis grow?
Gods! know the very thought distracts him now?
Even now perhaps some youth with happier charms,
Lies folded in the faithless Delia's arms.
Even now, the favors you denied me, seem
To be too prodigally heaped on him.
Close by your side, all languishing he stands.
And on your panting bosom warms his hands.
Straight in your lap he lays his envied head,
And makes the shrine of love his sacred bed.
Then glows his ravished soul with pointed flames,
And thoughts of heavenly joys fill all his dreams.
Let not your passion be to me revealed,
But if you love, keep him your love concealed.
The STORY of CEPHALUS AND PROCRIS:
Imitated from the Tenth Book of OVID' s METAMORPHOSES.
FROM Cephalus's tragic story, ^ead
What fatal mischiefs jealousy may breed.
Hear that unhappy wretched huntsman tell,
How by his hands, his much-loved Procris fell.
Hear him, lamenting his mischance, complain
In the soft Ovid's sadly charming strain.
Happy a while, thrice happy was my life,
Blessed in a beautiful and virtuous wife.
Love joined us first, and love made life so sweet,
We praised the gods, that 'twas our lot to meet
Our breasts glowed gently with a mutual flame,
The same were our desires, our fears the same.
Whatever one did, the other would approve,
For one our liking was, as one our love.
Then happy days were crowned with happier nights,
And some few months rolled on in full delights.
Joys crowded to appear, and pleasures ran
A while in circles, ever our woes began.
'Till I one fatal morn the chase pursued
Of a wild boar, through an adjacent wood:
Where, as I hunted eager on my prey,
Aurora stopped me in my hasty way.
You may believe I do not dare to feign,
(For misery never made a man so vain)
She, though a goddess, straight began to move
A fruitless suit, and vainly talked of love.
Though she looked bright as when she shines on high,
In all the glories of a morning sky;
Though earlier than the ^un's, her beams display,
And show the first approaches of the day:
I told her Procris all my soul possessed,
That she alone reigned sovereign of my breast,
Which never would admit another guest.
Enjoy thy Procris then, the goddess cried;
Whom thou shall one day wish thou would never enjoyed.
Stung with her words, with doubts and fears oppressed,
A sudden jealousy destroys my rest,
Mads all my brain, and poisons all my breast.
I thought the sex all false, even Procris too.
Again I thought, she could not but be true.
Her youth and beauty kindled anxious ca^.
But her known chastity condemned my (...)
But th^n my absence does again revive,
And keep the tor^ring fancy still alive.
I thought her faith too firmly fixed to fall.
Yet a true lover is afraid of all.
I knew not what to think, but straight I go,
Resolved to cure, or to complete my woe.
A^ habit different from my own I took.
Which with (...) aid Aurora changed my look
To Athens straight, unknown to all, I came,
Even to myself I scarce could seem the same.
Hardly I got admission to my house,
But far, far harder to my weeping spouse.
The house itself from ought of blame was free.
And every place expressed its grief for me.
A dismal silence reigned through every room.
To mourn my loss, already safe at home.
Even that sad pomp of woe, some charms could beast,
But when my Procris came, she charmed me most.
Black were her robes, her solemn pace was ^low,
Her dress was careless, yet becoming too.
A virtuous grief dwelt deeply in her face.
But matchless beauty gave that grief a grace.
Whole showers of tears her streaming eyes let fall,
Yet something wondrous lovely shone through all.
Scarce could I at the charming sight forbear
From running to embrace my mournful fair,
Scarce hold from telling whom she law (though altered there)
But yet at length, my first design pursued,
With words I flattered, and with gifts I wooed?
All the most moving arguments I used,
Often prayed, and pressed, but was as often refused.
She said another had before engrossed
All her affections, and my suit was lost.
would any but a madman further try?
But ah! that mad, that desperate fool was I.
I grew the more industrious to destroy
Her matchless truth, and ruin all my joy.
Redoubled presents, and redoubled vows.
I made, and offered to betray my spouse.
At last, her stagg'ring faith be^^ to yield,
And I Would just won the long (...).
Thy falsehood straight I cried too ^ate (...);
False to thy Cephalus for I am (...).
Since you are perjured, since my Procris gr^w
Forsworn and (...) what (...)
She, at these words, almost of sense bereaved,
With sad confusion found herself deceived.
Fixed on the ground, she kept her downcast eye,
And silence with her shame made no reply.
But to the mountains like a huntress hies,
And for my sake from all mankind she flies,
Which when I found, abandoned and alone,
My dearer half through my own folly gone;
Love fiercer than before began to burn,
'Till I was raging for my wife's return.
My prayers dispatched with eagerness and haste
That she would pardon all offenses past;
Found her as kind as she was truly chaste.
She came and crowned my joys a second time;
Forgot my jealousy, forgave my crime.
'Twas then I thought my greatest mis'ries over,
But fate it seems had worse, far worse in store.
Soon as each early sun began to rise,
To glad the enlightened earth, and gild the skies,
I with his first appearance rise, and trace
The woods, and hills, that yielded game to chase.
Alone I hunt, a long and tedious way,
And seldom fail to kill sufficient prey.
Then spent with toil, to cooler shades retreat,
And seek a refuge from the scorching heat.
Where pleasant valleys breathe a freer air,
For my refreshment I address this prayer,
Come, air, I cry, joy of o'er-labour'd swains.
Come, and diffuse thyself through all my veins;
Breathe on my burning lips, and fev'rish breast.
And reign at large an ever-grateful guest.
Glide to my soul, and every vital part,
Distill thyself upon my panting heart.
By chance I other blandishments bestow,
Or destiny decreed it should be so;
As, O thou greatest pleasure of the plains,
Thou who assuagest all my ^aging pains;
Thou, who do nature's richest sweets excite,
And make me in the desert woods delight:
Breathless, and dead without thee should I be,
For all the life I have, I draw from thee.
While thus I sung, some one who chanced to hear.
Thought her a nymph, to whom I made my prayer,
And told my Procris of her rival air.
She, kind, good soul, half dying at the news,
Would now condemn me, now again excuse.
Now hopes it is all a falsehood, now she fears;
Suspects my faith as I suspected hers.
Resolved, at last to trust no busy tongue,
But be herself the witness of her wrong;
When the next day with fatal haste came on,
And I was to my loved diversion gone,
She rose and sought the solitary shade,
Where, after hunting, I was daily laid.
Close in a thicket undiscerned she stood,
When I took shelter in the shady wood.
Then stretching on the grass my fainting weight,
Come much-loved air, I cried oh! come abate
With thy sweet breath, this most immod'rate heat.
On this a sudden noise invades my ear,
And rustling boughs showed something living there.
I rashly thinking it some savage beast,
Threw my unerring dart with heedless haste,
Which pierced, O gods! my Procris through the breast.
She at the wound, with fearful shrieking fell,
And I alas! knew the dear voice too well.
Thither distracted with my grief I flew,
To give my dying love a sad adieu.
All bloody was her lately snowy breast,
Her soul was hastening to eternal rest.
With rage I tore my robe, which close I bound,
To stop the blood, about the gaping wound.
What pardons did I beg? what curses frame,
For my damned fate that was alone to blame?
When weakly raising up her dying head,
With a faint voice, these few sad words she said,
" Draw nearer yet, dear author of my death,
" Hear my last sighs, and snatch my parting breath.
" But ere I die, by all that is sacred swear.
" That you will never let my rival air,
" Profane my ^ed, or find reception there.
" This I conjure you by your nuptial vow;
" The faith you gave me then, renew me now
" By all your love, if any love remain,
" And by that love which dying I retain.
" Assure me but of this before I go.
" And I shall bless thee for the fatal blow."
To her sad speech abruptly I replied,
In haste to show her error ere she died.
Quickly I ran the tragic story over.
Which made her pleased, amidst the pangs she bore.
That done, she rolls, in death her dizzy eyes,
And with a sigh, which I received, she dies.
Here did the youth his doleful tale conclude,
A tale too doleful to be long pursued.
But this ill-chosen instance will not do,
Unless my Delia could be jealous too.
But she, whenever I woo some other fair,
Shows no resentment, and betrays no care.
She sees me court another, as unmoved,
As she has always seen herself beloved,
That dreadful thought redoubles all my fear,
That drowns my hopes, and drives me to despair,
DESPAIR
No foreign instance need of this he sh^wn,
To draw it best, I must describe my own.
Though of this kind all ages can produce
Examples proper for the mourning muse;
Yet all to m^ must the first place resign,
None ^ver was so just, so deep as mine.
All day and night I sing, and all day long,
I love, and I despair, makes all my song.
Revolving days the same sad music hear,
Unchanged these notes, love, and I despair.
To me, as to the echo, fate affords,
No power of speech but for those doleful words.
Some glimpse of sun, some cheerful beams appear,
Even through the gloomiest season of the year.
My clouded life admits ^o dawn of light,
No ray can pierce through my eternal night.
All there is dismal as the shades beneath,
And all is dark as hell, as sad as death.
My anxious hours roll heavily away,
Deprived of sleep by night, and peace by day.
My soul no respite form her sufferings knows,
And sees no end of her eternal woes.
In a long line they run for ever on,
And still increase, and lengthen as they run.
By flight to lose my ills in vain I try,
From my despairing self (...) cannot fly.
Where ever I go, I bear about my flame,
In cities, countries, seas, it is all the same.
Scorched with my burning pains, I shun my house,
And strive in open air to seek repose.
My flames, like torches, shook in open air,
Grow with dilated heat, more furious there.
Now to the more retired, remotest place,
Even to obscurity I fly for ease.
Retirement still soments the raging fire,
And trees, and fields, and floods, and verse conspire
To spread the flame and heighten the desire.
Wildly I range the woods, and trace the groves,
To every oak I tell my hopeless loves.
Torn by my passion, to the earth I fall,
I kneel to all the gods, I pray to all.
Nothing but echo answers to my prayer.
And she speaks nothing, but despair, despair.
From woods and wilds I no relief receive,
But wander on to try what seas can give.
Deep through the tide, not knowing where, I walk;
To the deaf winds, not knowing what, I talk.
Mad as the foaming main, aloud I rave,
While every tear keeps time with every wave.
The PASSION of SCYLLA FOR MINOS.
FROM THE Eighth Book of OVID's Metamorphoses
A TOWER with sounding walls erected stands,
The sacred fabric of Apollo's hands.
His harp laid by, the strings their airs dispense,
And vocal stones received their virtue thence.
This Scylla, in the time of peace, ascends,
And thence her look over all the lawn extends:
Now with delight she views the spacious town,
Now, pleased with dropping little pebbles down,
Strikes a sweet music from the warbling stone.
In times of wars the self-same prospect yields,
The pleasing horror of the bloody fields;
Long had they now in equal balance hung,
And doubtful victory depended long.
This gave her leisure to discern and know
The several leaders of the neighboring foe.
Minos, their general, most of all she knew,
More than a virtuous virgin ought to do,
Whether his helmet glittered form afar,
And with its waving feathers threat'ned war;
Whether his hands, the shining sword would wield,
Or hi strong arm raise his refulgent shield;
Whatever she saw him do, she praised and loved,
And kept him still in view, where ever he moved.
When ever he shook a spear, or cast a dart,
She knew not which excelled, his strength or art.
When ever he drew a shaft, she would swear, that so
Even Phoebus would himself discharge his bow.
But when his naked visage he disclosed.
His charming face to public view exposed;
When on his foaming horse he rode the plains,
Ruling with skilful hands, the stubborn reins;
Then like tempestuous seas her passions roll,
Mad her sick brain, and rack her troubled soul.
Happy, she calls the courser which he pressed;
Happy, the lance he couched within his vest
Happy, the vamplate that secured his breast.
Now would she think of flying to the foe,
And would have gone, had she a way to go.
Now, headlong form the tower herself have sent,
And ventured life, to reach her lover's tent.
Open the brazen gates, when love inspired,
Or act what ever the foe she loved desired,
Silent she sat with a distracted look,
Till passion gave her leave, and then she spoke.
In this unhappy war, and fatal strife,
I know not which to yield to, joy or grief.
Though it is my fate to love my country's foe,
I had not seen him, had he not been so.
Yet might they let their fierce contention fall,
And making peace, make me the pledge for all.
Minos and I once joined, our wars might cease,
And that alliance fix a lasting peace.
Well might our mother's charms a god subdue,
If ever she could charm dear nymph like you.
Happy! thrice happy had I wings to fly
To yonder tents, where the loved foe does lie.
I Would tell the dear disturber of my rest,
All that I feel, could it be all expressed,
And pour my soul into the charmer's breast.
Give all I can to make him once my own,
All he would ask, all, -- but my father's crown.
This love shall cease, these fierce desires shall die,
Ever I by treachery my wish enjoy.
Yet when a (...) foe disputes the field,
It is not safest to resist, but yield.
The tragic dest^oy of his darling son,
Has brought at last these fatal mischiefs on.
In a just cause his vengeful sword he draws,
Strong is his army to maintain his cause.
Needs must my charming hero prosperous prove,
Then let him owe (...) conquests to my love.
Thus thousands must be saved who else must bleed,
And daily perish, if the wars proceed.
Minos, will thou be safe, and I be blessed;
Else he may chance to perish with the rest.
Some rash u^^owing hand his spear may dart
Against my too, too venurous hero's heart.
For who, without concern, his wounds could see?
Or who would wound him, if he knew 'twas he?
It Is then resolved; lest such a chance should fall
On him, I love so well, I Will ha^^ard all.
My country, and myself, one gi^^ I Will join,
And make the merit of his conquest mine.
To will is nothing, when we cannot fulfill,
For wretch^^ want of power, the things we will.
The gates are kept with a sufficient guard,
And every night my father sees them barred.
It Is he destroys my bliss; it is him I fear;
Would he were with the dead, or I were there.
Might I (not inj'ring him) my bliss pursue?
Indulgent gods! but why invoked I you?
We our own gods, have power ourselves to bless,
And form ourselves, derive our own success.
The only way to prosper is to dare.
For fortune listens not to lazy prayer.
Others enflamed with such a fierce desire,
Have forced through all, to quench their raging fire.
Shall any other then more res'lute prove?
Through fire and sword I Will force my way to love.
Yet to assist me here, I need not call
For fire, or sword: my father's heir is all.
That, that must crown my joys and make me blessed,
Beyond whatever else can be possessed,
Beyond what can be by my words expressed.
A PASTORAL ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF DELIA.
Quan referent Musoe, vivet, dum robora tellu^,
Dum coelum stellas, dum vebit amnis aquas.
TIBULUS.
DAPHNIS and THYRSIS. Thy. STAY, wretched swain, lie here, and here lament;
Press not too far our strength, already spent.
Long has distracting sorrow made me rove
Through every desert plain and dismal grove,
Still silent with excess of grief, and love.
Feebly your trembling legs beneath you go,
And bend, o'er-burden'd with the load of woe,
Stay, and this melancholy grotto choose,
A proper mansion for a mourning muse.
Lay your tired limbs extended on the moss,
And tell the listening words of Delia's loss;
Here, the sad muse need no disturbance fea^,
For not a living thing inhabits here.
Music may give your sorrows some relief,
And I, by listening to you, share your grief.

Daph, What music now ca^my sad numbers boast?
What muse invoke? alas! my muse is lost
Long since my useless pipe was thrown aside,
My reeds were broke that hour that Delia died.
From her alone their inspiration came,
She gave the verse, and was the verse's theme.
For ever should my sorrows keep me dumb,
Silent as death, and hushed as Delia's tomb;
Did not the force of love unlock my tongue,
Left her dear beauties did remain unsung.
Her charms let every muse conspire to tell,
And that once done, let every muse farewell.
" This the last tribute of my verse I bring,
" To sing her death, and then more to sing."
Be still, ye winds, or in soft whispers blow,
Ye purling streams, with gentle murmurs flow;
Let lambs forbear to bleat, and herds to low,
Let all in easy mournful numbers move,
Let all be soft and artless as my love.
Oh! she was every way divinely fair.
Charming in person, and in soul sincere.
She was, alas! more than the muse can tell,
Well worthy love, and was beloved as well.
She was, alas! these tears that saying draws,
Oh! it is a cruel, killing word: she was.
Now she no more must tread the flowery plains.
No more be gazed at by admiring swains;
No more, the choicest flowers and daisies choose,
Or pluck, the pasture for her tender e^^es.
Say, ye poor flocks, how often have ye stood:
And form her lovely hands received your food;
Now ye no more from those fair hands must feast,
Those hands, which gave the flowers a sweeter taste.
Mourn her, by whom ye were so often fed.
And cry with me, the shepherdess is dead,
" This the last tribute of my verse I bring,
" To sing her death, and then no more to sing."
Weep for her loss, relenting heaven, and keep
Time with our tears; heaven seems apace to weep,
In murmuring drops the mournful rain distills,
And sable clouds warp round the sides of hills.
The goat forbears to browze, the tender ewe
Will drink no longer of the falling dew:
No morning larks their mounting wings display,
Or cheer with warbling airs the dusky day,
On dropping boughs sad nightingales complain,
Join in my songs, but sing like me, in vain.
In doleful notes the murmuring turtles ^oo.
Each of them seems to have lost a Delia too.
The melting air in mists its sorrow shows,
And cold damp sweat the face of earth bedews,
With tears the river-gods enlarge their spring.
Swans in sad strains on swelling waters sing.
In sighs the god of winds his passion vents,
And all, all nature, for her loss laments.
" This the last tribute of my verse I bring,
" To sing her death, and then no more to sing."
How often on the banks of silver Thames,
My eyes on hers, and hers upon the streams,
Has she stood listening, when I told my flames?
How often has a sudden, sidelong look,
Seemed to confess her pity when I spoke?
Pity she had, though I could never move,
In her cold breast, the least return of love.
Pity from her, more welcome did receive,
Than all the love another fair could give.
And it was some, some small relief, to see,
She loved not others, though she loved not me
Say, gentle Thames, how often have I stood
Viewing her dear reflection in your flood?
When on her face I durst not gaze for fear,
How often have I looked, and found in there?
How often have I wished my verse might prove
Smooth as your stream, whenever I write of love?
Say, how your courteous waves would never flow
Over any path where the was used to go,
Now let your river, like my eyes, run over,
Insult with fuller tides the desert shore.
And drown those banks, where Delia walks no more.
" This the last tribute of my verse I bring,
" To sing her death, and then no more to sing,"
But violets, and blushing roses fade,
Fold your silk leaves, and hang your drooping head.
Shut up your sweets, and seem, like Delia dead,
Let spring run backwards, and the vintage blast,
Let constant showers lay all the country waste,
Let flames unto the center downwards tend,
And let the floods, untoss'd by wings, ascend.
Let all things change, and wear another face,
Let nature not appear the same she was.
Let fowl to dwell beneath the water try,
And let the water h^rd attempt to fly:
Let wolves protect the flocks upon the plains,
Let bashful virgins woo disdainful swains;
Let savage death its cruelty pursue;
And, since my Delia's dead, let me die too.
" This the last tribute of my verse I bring,
" I sing her death, and then no more I sing."
See where the god of love all sad appears,
His smoking torch extinguished with his tears;
Well may he weep for his declining power,
His charms are done since Delia is no more.
Through her he conquered, and through her he reigned,
Her beauties his decaying sway sustained,
And she now gone, his empire is disdained,
See where (...), with a stately train
Of goodly nymphs descends upon the plain:
Each of them weeps, and leans upon her bow,
And mourns her fellow Delia wanting now.
The goddess grieves to see her train decreased,
And swelling sighs shakes every virgin breast,
Unhurt, they let the stags beside them pass,
Nor follow boars that tempt them to the chase.
In several forms of woe their grief they vent,
And all with me for Delia's loss lament,
" This the last tribute of my verse I bring,
" To sing her death, and then no more to sing."
Look yonder where the lovely nymph is laid,
I Will go, and on her earth recline my head,
Choke with my sighs, and hasten to the dead.
Come hither all ye swains, with garlands come,
Pour out your richest perfumes on her tomb.
Let myrtles on her grave unplanted grow,
In ready wreaths for every lovers's brow.
Let flowers, unknown before, be daily seen
To raise their heads above the spacious green.
Millions of blooming sweets her earth surround.
And balmy gums distill upon the ground.
Here let the tuneful muse for ever cease,
To give unutterable sorrow place.
Let sighs and streaming tears resume their course,
And my sad eyes be their eternal source.
I Will go and choose some melancholy cave,
As undisturbed and secret as the grave.
I Will feast my eyes with nothing fair on earth,
Nor shall my ears hear any sound of mirth.
Farewell, ye charming choristers that dwell
In sacred groves; ye warbling birds farewell.
Adieu ye nymphs, adieu ye fellow swains,
Ye silver streams, sweet swans, and flowery plain^:
Farewell all happy days and smiling hours,
Refreshing valleys and delightful bowers.
Adieu to every grotto, every grove,
Adieu to poetry, adieu to love.

END OF THE HISTORY OF LOVE
THE ECONOMY OF LOVE:

A POETICAL ESSAY.

BY DR. ARMSTRONG.

(...) docet certa ratione modoque,

THIS little juvenile Performance, was chiefly intended as a Parody upon some
of the Didactic Poets; and that it might be still the more ludicrous, the
Author in some places affected the stately language of Milton.

THE ECONOMY OF LOVE.
THY bounties, LOVE, in thy soft raptures when
Timeliest the melting pairs indulge, and how,
Best to improve the g^mal joy, how shun
The snakes that under flowery pleasure lurk,
I sing: if thou, fair Cytherea, deign
Gracious to smile on my attempt Though thou
None of the muses nine, yet often on thee
The muses wait, often gambol in thy train,
Though virgins. Come, nor leave the Boy behind,
Blind but unerring archer, Hymen, raise
Aloft thy sacred torch. Your gifts I sing.
Ye youths and virgins, when your generous blood
Has drunk the warmth of fifteen summers, now
The loves invite; now to new rapture wakes,
The finished sense: while stung with been desire,
The madd'ning boy his bashful fetters bursts;
And, urged with secret flames, the riper maid,
Conscious and shy, betrays her smarting breast.
Yet nature not in all her sons maintains
An equal progress. This with kindly warmth
concocts to manly vigor straight; while that
Pines, crude and chill, and scarce at last attains
Imperfect life. Some slight their varnished steed.
And (wondrous instinct!) bent on manlier sport.
Cope with the maids. Alcides thus, they say,
Rose brawny from his cradle, while the snakes,
Hung hissing round him, horrible and fell,
Sent by enraged Saturnia to destroy
Her rival's hope: the mighty infant grasped
His speckled foes, and smiling dashed them down
To hell, their native clime; the spumy gore
Blotted the frighted pavement. Early thus
Was future chivalry presaged. -- Meantime
Others slow ripen: men there are who scarce
Feel the soft thrillings of untaught desire,
While pallid maids scarce ruminate on man.
Till twenty; well if then. It boots thee much
To study the complexion, much the clime,
And habitudes of life. Meanwhile with me
Credit these signs. The boy may wrestle, when
Night-working fancy steals him to the arms
Of nymph often wished awake, and, mid the rage
Of the soft tumult, every turgid cell
Spontaneous disembogues its lucid store,
Bland and of azure ^inct* Nor envy thou
Waking fruition while such happy dreams,
Visit thy slumbers; liveliest then the touch
Thrills to the brain, with all sensations (...)
Unshaken, unseduc'd. The maid demands,
The du^s of Venus, when the parting breasts
Wanton exuberant and tempt the touch,
^lum^'d with rich moisture from the finished growth
Redundant now, for late the shooting, ^ubes
(...) all the blood the toiling heart could pour,
(...); now full grown, they crave no more
Then wh^t repairs their daily waste. but still
There must be loss, nor does the superpl^s
Turn all to th^^t. For from love's grotto now
(...) the sanguine stream through many a rill,
(...) the simple l^ss, that anxious glows
Inward, till bold necessity o'erco^es
Her fond reluctant blushes to consult
Her nurse, well versed in mystic cases deep,
At christ'nings often discussed, when warmed with wine
The mellow matrons by the midnight fire
Lewd Orgies hold; while naked roams around,
His torch high-flaming from the spicy bowl,
Lust full of glee, and through each laboring breast
His sacred fury pours. The Sibyl solves
Sagely the alarming case. -- The rising down
Then too begins to skirt the hallowed bounds
Of Venus' blessed domain. In either sex
This sign obtains. For nature provident
Now when both sides stand equal for the fray,
This graceful armor spreads; and, but for this,
Excoriate often the tender parts would rue
The (...) encounter; now they fight secure
Thus harnessed, and sustain the mutual shock
Of war, unhurt, for many a well-fought day.
But if to progeny thy views extend
Paternal, and the name of fire invites;
Would thou behold a thriving race surround
The spacious table; shun the soft embrace
Emasculent, till twice ten years and more
Have steeled thy nerves, and let the holy rite
License the bliss. Nor would I urge, precise,
A total abstinence; this might unman
The ge^^al organs, unemploy'd so long,
And (...) extinguish the prolific flame,
(...). But riot often unblam'd
On (...), sweet repast, ambrosial joy!
Now press with gentle hand the gentle hand,
And, ^ighing, now the breasts, that to the touch
Heave (...) fair maid, refuse,
Indulgence, (...) thy paramour discreet
(...) no farther: th^s thou may expect
(...) hereafter, when the bridegroom, warm,
Trembling with keen desire, profusely pours
The rich collection of enamored years,
Exhaustless, blessing all thy nuptial nights. 100
But, O my son, whether the generous care
Of propagation, and domestic charge,
Or soft encounter more attract, renounce
The vice of monks recluse, the early bane
Of rising manhood. Banish from thy shades
The ungen'rous, selfish, solitary joy.
Hold, Saticide, thy hand! for thee alone
Did nature form thee? for thy narrow self
Grant thee the means of pleasure? dream'st thou so?
That very self mistakes thy wiser aim;
Its finer sense ungratify'd, unpleas'd,
But when from active soul to soul rebounds
The swelling mingling tumult of delight.
Hold yet again, ere idle callus wrap
In sullen indolence the astonished nerves;
When thou may fret and tease thy sense in vain,
And curse too late the unwisely wanton hours.
Impious, forbear! thus the first general hail
To disappoint, "increase and multiply!"
To shed thy blossoms through the desert air,
And sow thy perished offspring in the winds.
Unhallowed pastime! -- though the factious chief
Often brew hot insurrection, rather hie
To bagnio lewd, or tavern, nightly where
Venereal rites are done, from Draco's ken
Remote, and light of heaven (as erst retired
The heaving Gallic saints to the kind gloom
Of clift, or cave, or trusted barn, to hold
Forbidden sabbaths): rather visit thou
Those haunts of public lewdness; often though there
Sore ills dismay. Purse, or the golden pride
That decks thy finger, gorgeous with the spoils
Of Mexico, Peru, or farthest Ind,
Or watch, time meas'ring, often subtracted sly
Sink in the dark profound. And often, to crush
Thy slackened manhood, in the mid career
Of puissant deed, untimely rushes in
A forward boisterous wight, and from thy arms
The passive spouse of all the town demands.
Him, hung'ring after gold, nor words can charm,
Nor more persuasive wine: thy gold must pay
The violation of the public bed;
Or braver steel must prove thy manly arm,
In dubious fight. Yet well if here could end
The misery: worse perhaps ensues; a train
Of ills of tedious count and horrid name.
Such as of old distressed the man else squared
To God's own hear, but that his wiles debauched
Jerusalem's fair daughters to his flames;
Nor did he form the holy marriage bed
Refrain his loose embraces, when the wife
Of wronged Urias he seduced; nor stopped
Till murder crowned his lust, Hence him the wrath
Of righteous Heaven awaking, long pursued
With sore disease, and fill^d his loins with pain,
All day he roared, and all the tedious night
Bedewed his couch with tears; and still his groans
Breathe musical in sacred song. What woes!
What pains he tried! but now this plague attacks
With double rancour. and severely marks
Modern offenders: ^^^ly undermines
The fame and nose, that by unseemly lapse
Awkward deforms the human face divine
With ghastly ruins. Though this breach, they say,
Nice Ta^iacotius' art, with substitute
From porters borrowed, or the callous breech
Of sedentary weaver, often repaired:
Precarious, for no sooner fate demands
The parent stock, than (pious sympathy!)
Revolts the adopted nose. -- Such ills attend
Obscene and bought embraces. Wiser thou,
Find (...) nymph, whom tender sympathy
Attracts to thee; while all her captives else,
Awed by majestic beauty, mourn aloof
Her charms, to them reserved, alone to thee
Discreetly lavished. Sacrifice to her
The precious hours, nor grudge with such a mate
The summer's day to toy or winter's night.
Now clasp with dying fondness in your arms
Her yielding waist; now on her swelling breast
Recline your cheek, with eager kisses press
Her balmy lips, and drinking from her eyes
Resistless love, the tender flame confess,
Ineffable but by the murmuring voice
Of genuine joy; then hug, and kiss again,
Stretched on the genial couch, while joyful glows
Thy manly pride, and throbbing with desire
Pants furious, felt through all the obstacles
That intervene: but (...) fervid course
Mountains nor seas oppose, ca^ soon remove
Barriers so slight. Then, when her lovely limbs,
Often lovely deemed, far lovelier now beheld,
Through all your trembling joints increase the flame;
Forth with discover to her dazzled sight
The stately novelty, and to her hand
Usher the new acquaintance. She perhaps,
A verse, will coldly chide, and half afraid,
(...), half pleased, the tumid wonder view
With neck retorted and oblique regard;
Nor quite her curious eye indulging, nor
Reframing quite. Perhaps when you attempt
The sweet (...) toyful she resists
With thy reluctance; nathless you pursue;
The soft attack, and warmly push the war,
Till quite o'erpow'r'd with love, the melting mai^
Faintly opposes. On the brink at last
Arrived of ^iddy rapture, plunge not in
Precipitant, but spare a virgin's pain;
Ah! spare a gentle virgin! spare yourself!
Lest sanguine war love^ tender rites profane
With fierce dilaceration, and dire pangs,
Reciprocal. Nor droop because the door
Of bliss seems shut and barricadoed strong;
But triumph rather in this faithful pledge
Of innocence and fair virginity
Inviolate. And hence the subtle wench,
Her ^^iden honors torn, in evil hour
Unsee^^ ^orn, and shrunk her virgin rose;
Studious ^ow best the guilty wound to heal,
Her shan^ best palliate with fair outward show,
Inward le^^ (...), with painful hand collects
The sylvan (...). The lover Myrtle yields
Her styptic (...), and the horrid Thorn
Its prune auste^^, in vain the Caper hides
It Is wandering ^ots; the mighty Oak himself,
Sole tyrant of the shade, that long had 'scap'd
The tanner's rage, spoiled of his callous rhind,
Stands bleak and bare. These, and a thousand more
Of humbler growth and far inferior name,
Bistort, and Dock, and that wayfaring herb
Plantain, her various forage, boiled (...)
Yield their astringent force; a lotion (...)
Thrice powerful to c^^ract the shame (...).
Beware of those, for is our dangerous days
Such counterfeits about^^ whom next to know
Concerns, And here expect no dye of wound:
No wound is made; the ^^rrugated parts,
With ill-dissembled virtue (though severe,
Not wrinkled into frowns when genuine most)
Relapse apace, and quit their borrowed tone,
Yet judge with charity the varied work
Of nature's hand, Perhaps the purple stream,
Emollient bath, leaves flexible, and lax
The part i^ lately washed But hapless he,
In nuptial night, on whom a horrid chasm
Yawns dreadful, waste and wild; like that through which
The wandering Greek, and Cytherea's Son,
Diving, explored hell's, adamantine gates:
An unessential void; where neither love
Nor pleasure dwells, where warm creation dies
Starved in the abortive gulf; the dire effects
Of use too frequent, or for love or gold.
Now hear me, lovers! ye whose roving hearts
No sacred nuptial chains have yet confined;
Attentive hear, and daily, nightly weigh
The counsels sage, which through my raptured breast,
To you the auspicious heavenly muse conveys:
The muse, no soothing minister of vice;
Though now in sportive vein to youthful ears
She tunes her song, to give instruction grace.
Attend, ye wise! no frantic Bacchanal,
No shameless bard of the licentious rout
Of flushed Silenus, sings. -- What nature bids
Is good, is wise; and faultless we obey.
We must obey, however hard stoic dreams
Of apathy, much vaunted, seldom proved:
For often beneath the philosophic gloom
Sly Lewdness lurks, and oft'ner mazy Guile,
That with well-mimick'd love the unwary heart
Lures to its fate, and hails while it betrays!
There bloated Pride too dwells, and baneful Hate,
And dark Revenge, than which a deadlier fiend
Never poured its venom through a human breast;
Far hence be these; we know great Nature's power.
Mother of things, whose vast unbounded sway
From the deep center all around extends
Wide to the flaming barriers of the world.
We feel her power: we strive not to repress
(Vainly repressed, or to deformity)
Her lawful growth: ours be the task alone
To check her rude excrescences; to prune
Her wanton overgrowth, and where the sports
In shapes too wild, to lead her gently back,
With prudent hand, to better form and use
For wisest ends this universal power
Gave appetites; from whose quick impulse life
Subsists; by which we only live; all life
Insipid else, unactive, unenjoy'd.
Hence too this peopled earth; which, that extinct,
That flame for propagation, soon would roll
A lifeless mass, and vainly cumber heaven.
Then love of pleasure sways each heart, and we
From that no more than from ourselves can fly.
Blameless when governed well. But where it errs,
Extravagant, and wildly leads to ill,
Public or private; there its curbing power
Cool reason must exert. -- This lesson weigh,
Ye tender pairs, Indulge your gentle flames,
Each fondest wish, and bathe your souls in love.
But let discretion guard the life of bliss,
Virtuous in pleasure. So you shall enjoy
Pleasure unmixed, and without thorn the rose.
This caution scorned beware the event perverse:
Expect, for pleasure, pain and sharp remorse;
For love, aversion and each broken vow,
The j^st of fools, the pity of the wise.
Be secret lovers, Let no dangerous spy
Catch your soft glances; as oblique they deal
Mutual contagion, darting all the soul
In missive love; nor hear your laboring sighs.
But chiefly when the high-wrought rapture calls,
Impatient, to soft deeds, then, then retire
From every mortal ^^n. The Sapient King
(Whose loves who could defame?) in the mild gloom,
Deep in the center of his gardens, hid,
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian spouse,
Find then some soft obscure retreat, untrod
By mortals else. where thick-embow'ring shades
Condense to darkness and embrown the day;
There, safe from all profane access pursue
Love's bashful rites. For often the curious eye
Of prying childhood, and the aspect malign,
Wanting and wan, of virgin stale in years,
Shed baneful influence on the rites of love.
And thou, my son, when floods of mellowing wine
And social joys have loosened all thy breast
When every secret gushes; this at least,
This one reserve, of love and bounteous charms
Of trusting beauty; vent'ring all for thee,
For thy delight her fortune and her fame;
For her thou nothing. Hold! ungrateful, hold
Thy wanton tongue! Leave to the last of fools,
Of villains! that ungen'rous vanity,
Cruel and base, to vaunt of secret joys;
Of joys on thee, so vaunting, ill bestowed,
O dare not thus with mortal sting to wound
The tender hapless sex! Does thy vile breath
So blast my sister's or my daughter's fame, --
By Heaven thou die! thy treacherous blood alone
Can wash my honor clean. Prudent, meantime,
Ye generous maids, revenge your sex's wrong;
Let not the mean destroyer ever approach
Your sacred charms. Now muster all your pride,
Contempt, and scorn, that, shot from beauty's eye,
Confounds the mighty impudent, and smites
The front unknown to shame, Trust not his vows,
His labored sighs, and well-dissembled tears,
Nor swell the triumph of known perjury.
Meanwhile, my son, if angry fate, or love
Grown indiscreet, or loud Lucina, tell
The important secret: is thy mate well formed,
Virtuous, and equal for thy lawful bed,
Save her, I charge thee, from foul infamy,
And lonely shame; let wedlock's holy tie
Legitimate the indissoluble flames.
If abject birth, dishonorable, and mind
Incultivate or vicious, to that height
Forbid her hopes to climb; at least secure
From penury her humble state, by thee,
Else humbled more, and to necessity,
Stern foe to Virtue, Fame, and Life betrayed,
A helpless prey. O! let no parent's woe,
No plaints of trusting innocence, nor tears
Of pining beauty, blast thy guilty joys.
Shall she, so late the soft'ner of thy life,
Thy chief delight, whose melting essence often
Lay with thy melting essence kindly mixed
(As far as bodies and embodied souls
Can mingle); she who deemed thy vows sincere,
Thy passion more than selfish, and thy love
To her devoted, as was here is to thee;
Shall she (O! cruel perfidy!) at last,
When with her tainted name the winds grow sick,
When envious prudery chides, affecting scorn
Of natural joys, and they of public fame.
Insulting, hail her sister; while each friend
Disgusted flies: shall she not find in thee
Unshaken amity? when to thy arms,
Well-known, with wonted confidence she flies,
To pour her sorrows forth, and forth her cares,
Shall she then find thy faithless heart from home,
From her estranged? at that disast'rous hour
Will thou ungently spurn her from thy love?
To waste in sickly grief her once-priz'd charms,
Forlorn to languish out her life, to lead
Despised, unwedded, her dishonored days?
Or, if her barren fortune, hard like thee,
Scowls meagre Want (whose iron empire Pride,
Reluctant, and her offspring Modesty,
Blushing at last obey) unskilled in arts
Of mercenary Venus, to increase
The rompish band, that, without pleasure lewd,
With deep-felt sorrow gay, through Trivia's reign
Nightly solicit lovers; often repulsed,
Often* when invited to the barren toil
Thankless deserted by their slippery loves!
Or to the salt of years, where tedious lust
Uncouth and monstrous creeps through freezing loins,
Patient submitted! to the boisterous will
Of midnight ruffians! to abhorred disease,
Hourly exposed, and Draco's fiercer rage!
Spare, mighty Draco! spare a hapless race,
By their own sex to wretchedness betrayed.
A woman bore thee; by each tender name
Of woman spare! have thou or daughter fair,
Or sister? they, but for a happier birth,
The gift of fate, and honor's guardian, Pride
Early inspired, had swelled the common stream.
While she whom now thy awful name dismays,
Portentous heard from far, with fortune's smiles
And fair example, might have graced thy bed,
A virtuous mate, in every charm complete.
A pious duty next, neglected often,
Demands my song, If from thy secret b^d
Of luxury unbidden offspring rise
Let them be kindly welcomed to the day.
It Is nature bids, To nature's sacred voice
Attend; and from the monster-breeding deep,
The ravaged air, and howling wilderness,
Learn parent virtues, Shall the growling bear
Be more a fire than thou? an infant once,
Helpless and weak, but for paternal care,
Thou had not lived to propagate a race
To misery, to resign to step-dame fate
Perhaps a worthier offspring than thy ^i^e
Tenderly reared. For from the stolen embrace,
Untir'd with worn acquaintance, keenly urged,
Elate with generous rapture, likeliest springs
The noblest breed, most animated, best.
What he^^es hence have issued! what famed chiefs!
And demigods, of old! the stealth of love
Gave Greece her Hercules, and mighty Rome
First rose beneath (...) ^^^dom son of Mars.
Thy vigor too, the blossom of thy strength,
Reckless and wild profus'd, in dangerous days,
Or in the senate wise, and nobly warm
To public good, may save the rushing state;
Or, bold in arms, may roll her thunders forth
To shatter distant skies, and, roused to blood,
Usher the British Lion to the field.
Thy country claims thy care; nurse well her hopes,
And thine; nor thou her church's hungry wolves,
Hight Overseers, with thy own children's gore
Satiate, if rapine know satiety.
For bred to death, and of sagacious nose,
A prowling herd, lured with the recent smell
Of secret birth, their carnage sweet, or led
By infant wailings, querulous and shrill,
Beset thy frighted gates. These timely thou
Prevent, or mourn too late thy ravished gold
And captive son; to the street-dunning tribe
Of mendicants let out, fictitious badge
Of low distress: there to what life of pain
Led up who knows? to what disgraceful fate,
What gibbet, bred? or from his parent's arms,
With nurse unpitying, unbenign, exiled
To squalid lodge, to find in Famine's cave
A lingering death; or by a deadlier hag,
Than her that rides the laboring night oppressed,
Untimely sink beneath a heavier fate.
While they, the sons of licensed rapine, screen'd
Under the altar of the God of life
With murder stained, on what should raise thy son
Nightly regale, carnivorous; for them
The heifer bleeds, or for her slaughtered young
Roams wild the woodland bounds; and what should now
To thy young hopes run soft in balmy rills
Lacteous, to them in deep Oporto flows,
Or hot Madeira. Thus the sanguine feast
They crown, nor dread the cry of infant blood.
These precepts wisely keep, by these direct
Thy steps through pleasure's labyrinth. Unhurt
And unoffending, thus thy tutored feet
May tread the wilds of else delusive joy.
So shall no sorrows wound; no ruder cares
Disturb thy pleasures, no remorseful tears
Attend thy gay delight; nor sighs make way,
But such as heave the pleasure-burden'd breast,
As utter love, with speechless eloquence
Well understood; and breathe from soul to soul
The soft infection, fondly still received.
Almighty Love! O unexhausted source
Of universal joy! first principle
Of nature all-creating! harmony,
By which her mighty movements all are ruled!
Soft tyrant of each element, whose sway
Resistless, through the wilds of air is felt,
Through earth, and the deep empire of the main!
Thy willing slaves, we own thy gentle power,
In us supreme, with kind endearments raised
Above the merely sensual touch of brutes.
By thy soft charm the savage breast is tamed,
The genius raised. The heavenly warmth inspires
Whatever is noble, generous, or humane,
Or elegant; whatever adorns the mind,
Graces or sweetens life; and without thee,
Nothing or gay or amiable appears.
Yet not to Love (thus polishing the soul,
Thus charming; though of every finer breast
The sovereign joy), yet not to Love alone
Yield languid all your hours. The self-same cates
Still offered, soon the appetite offend;
The most delicious soonest. Other joys,
Other pursuit, their equal share demand
Of cultivation, These with kindly change
Will cheer your sweetly-varied days; from these
With quicker sense you shall and firmer nerves
Return to Love, when Love again invites.
Be those the least neglected which inform
With virtue, sense, and elegance, the mind:
Those what before was amiable improve,
And lend to Love new grace and dignity.
Life too has serious cares, which madly scorned,
The means of pleasure melt. -- And age will come,
When Love, alas! the flower of human joys,
Must shrink, in horrid frost. O hapless he!
Thrice hapless then! whose only joy was that;
Whose young desires tumultuous still engage
To wield a load of unobedient limbs,
With vain attempt. Him the inclement power
Of craving impotence, to fonder toys
Than other dotage knows, or easy-dup'd
Credulity can well believe, incites,
Him all the Nymphs despise, and the young Loves
With leering scorn behold; while vigorous beat
Has ^led his shaken limbs, surviving still
In his green fancy. Thence what desperate toil
By flagellation, and the rage of blows,
To rouse the Venus loitering in his veins!
Fruitless, for Venus unsolicited
The kindest smiles, abhorring painful rites.
Cease, reverend fathers! from those youthful sports
Retire, before unfinished feats betray
Your slackened nerves, The hoary years, designed
For wisdom, for sedate philosophy,
And contemplation, ill agree with love.
Cheerful retire: nor grudge in peevish saws,
Like envious monitors, the sprightly joys
Of lusty youth. You had your genial time
Of pleasure; -- ours is on the rapid wing!
And you whose youthful blood impetuous rolls,
With generous spirits fraught and kindly balm,
Husband your vigor well; if aught or health,
Or offspring numerous, beautiful, and strong,
Or pleasure weigh. For from the trite embrace
Follow faint relaxation, strength impaired.
Disgust, and mutual apathy, Love's bane.
Some boast, I know, their vigor to renew,
And keen desire, by food restorative,
Or pharmacy more noxious. Orchis hence,
Lascivious bulb, Satyrion better named;
And that maritime, which the sea-born Queen
Feeds with her native spume, Eryngo, mild;
Boletus, sam'd among the fungous tribe;
And fell Cantharides; in various forms
Are used. But what ensues? Diseases more
Then ever burdened Auster's drooping wings,
Cold Tremors, Spasms, and Cephal^as dire
Eternal flux of nature's balmy dew,
Tabes, and gaunt Marasmus, hideous loss
Of godlike reason, and the imprisoned rage
Of fierce Lipyria, whose collected fires
The vitals only seize. Or if the sons
Of jaded luxury those plagues escape,
They waste their melting youth, and bring gray hairs
Before their time, gray hairs and idle years.
Leave Nature to herself, not covet more
Than Nature gives, that but to real wants
Each well-conducted appetite provokes.
But chiefly thee, fair nymph. behooves to know
That love and joy, when in their prime, must fear
Decay, (...) of all created things,
Be frugal then; the coyly-yielded kiss
Charms most, and gives the most sincere delight.
Cheapness offends; hence on the harlot's lip
No rapture hangs, however fair she seem,
However formed for love and amorous play.
Hail Modesty! fair female honor hail!
Beauty's chief ornament, without whose charm
Beauty disgusts; or gives but vulgar joys.
Thou giv'st the smile its grace; ^he heightened kiss
Its balmy essence sweet! and, but for thee,
The very raptures of the lawful bed
Were outrage and foul riot, rites obscene!
Celestial maid! be it lawful that with lips
Profane I name thee, and in wanton song.
But in these vicious days great Nature's laws
Are spurned; eternal Virtue, which nor time
Nor place can change, nor custom changing all.
Is mocked to scorn; and lewd Abuse instead,
Daughter of night, her shameless revels holds
Over half the globe, while the chaste face of day
Eclipses at her rites. For man with man,
And man with woman (monstrous to relate!)
Leaving the natural road themselves debase
With deeds unseemly, and dishonor foul.
Britons, for shame! be male and female still,
Banish this foreign vice; it grows not here;
It dies neglected; and in clime so chaste
Cannot but by forced cultivation thrive:
So cultivated swells the more our shame,
The more our guilt. And shall not greater guilt
Meet greater punishment and heavier doom:
Not lighter for delay. Did Justice spare
The men of Sodom erst? like us they sinned,
Like us they sought the paths of monstrous joy;
Till, urged to wrath at last, all-patient Heaven
Descending wrapped them in sulphurous storm,
And where proud palaces appeared, the haunts
Of luxury, now sleeps a sullen pool;
Vengeful memorial of Almighty ire,
Against the sons of lewdness, exercised!
END OF THE ECONOMY OF LOVE.
A LOVE ELEGY.
BY W. PRESTON.
IF beauty's vaunt demands a wretch's pain,
And tortured victims sooth thy high disdain;
Come, while thou may, thy lover's pangs deride;
The suff'rer soon shall mock thy scorn and pride.
The darkling purpose labors in my breast;
Some spirit whispers, I shall be at rest. --
-- From these wild eye balls not a tear shall flow,
My frantic grief shall learn to laugh at woe,
When reason from her orb of rule is thrown;
And bold despair explores the realms unknown.
What phantoms rise! -- spare, spare, ye hideous band!
Heaven, heaven, restrain a wretch's impious hand! --
-- A thousand furies flap their murky wings,
They goad my madding soul with scorpion stings. --
Less dire the train, that rose at Juno's call,
While sable gore bedewed the regal hall.
Round 1 no's head, the Stygian brand they hurled.
In venomed folds, their hissing snakes they curled;
The Theban's soul received the infernal brood. --
-- He raged, he thirsted for his children's blood.
With cheerless gaze, I mark the dawning light;
The sun descends, I curse the gloom of night;
Friends, business, books I loath; -- my sullen fate,
My frantic love, but most myself, I hate.
What saving aim! my feeble prayers arise;
But feeble prayers must never reach the skies. --
What gifts of heaven! with bounteous heaven at strife,
My love embitters all the goods of life.
Oh fond remembrance! wakeful cruel guest,
The toil, the torments of the enamored breast. --
-- Alas, I loved thee, ere I viewed thy charms, --
Be cursed the dawnings, (...) my fierce alarms;
And cursed the youth, that Clara's beauty praised,
'Twas wonder first the gay description raised,
The heavenly theme had touched his lips with fire.
He spoke, and wonder softened to desire.
Possessed, inspired, on every charm he dwelt,
From pore to pore the subtle flames I felt;
I ran -- I flew -- I viewed. in evil hour,
The boast the darling of creative power.
Better, disease had chained me to my bed.
Or vollied lightning ranked me with the dead. --
From every smile, the glad allurements strayed.
In every glance, the softest wishes played
Who there could read, the deep capricious art,
The sportive hardness of thy cruel heart?
Who then the pangs? -- alas, alas, 'tw^re vain, --
Though death (...) all his forms of pain;
Though hell had (...), athwart my desperate way.
And starting fiends recoiled from sudden day.
Soon, with my peace the insulting wanton prayed;
With fatal skill, the uncertain reins she swayed.
Now floating loose, they wave their easy folds,
And now severe, the steely curb she holds.
Skilled to torment, and studious to destroy.
With floods of woe she blends a drop of joy.
Now (like the dove) familiar, soft, and bland,
Uncalled she comes, and courts the fondling hand.
Now (like the imperial eagle) seeks the skies,
Sublimely towers, and mocks my dazzled eyes.
Now gently kind the various maid appears,
In soothing smiles arrayed and balmy (...)
Mild as the s^lphids of the gliding (...)
Mild as the phantoms of the maiden's dream.
And now she takes the avenging spirits form;
Arrayed in flames, and bursting in the storm:
Midst the wild havoc good and blameless still,
For ruin bright, and beautiful to kill.
Well knows my tyrant, that unvaried pain,
Might loose her captive from the weary chain.
She scorns the (...), yet loves the applauding rhyme^
Her (...), (...), pride would (...) in other time^
Thousands; she sees are noble, wise and brave,
The enamored poet is no vulgar slave;
And mine the applause that pride herself might choose;
The muse of Edwin is no common muse.
Severely chaste. she walks erect and bold,
Unstained by ^latt'ry, undebauch'd by gold;
Not poorly bartered, nor at random given.
Her praise is hoarded for the elect of heaven.
O friend of man! O last and dread repose!
Dear sacred harbor from the storm of woes. --
O when shall death -- Alas! I vainly rave --
Sure I shall love thee even beyond the grave.
From pangs to pangs the weary spirit cast,
Midst changeful woes may find its passion last.
Deluded wretch, no more pursue the flame
That draws thee wide from every noble aim,
Blasts thy fair hopes, and vain existence fills
With dreams of good, and certainty of ills. --
Where now the generous toils that warmed thy youth?
The path of science, and the light of truth? --
O shame of manhood! -- Reason wakes my soul. --
I tear thy chains, I spurn thy base control.
That heavenly smile! -- my fondly changeful mind!
What hope would whisper -- Clara may be kind.
Deluded novice! -- poor believing child! --
The fondest wretch that woman ever beguiled! --
Behold the creature of thy high command,
The pliant wax beneath thy forming hand;
No more, my Clara, shall thy slave rebel,
No more complaints, my vain despair farewell;
The star of Venus in the ascendant towers.
There Clara sits, and guides the smiling hours;
With peace and love she fills the gladsome sphere,
And rising good and beaming hopes are there.
Strange power of woman! with what high control
A smile or glance can take the imprisoned soul,
And hurl it far from reason and from rest;
Or toss it like a loaf within the breast!
DESPAIR.
Translated from the French of Tristan. BY THE SAME.
1.
MY fruitless love, with many a lavished song.
And altars, graced thee midst the immortal throng;
Ungrateful maid! neglected and forlorn,
I stand the mark for all thy shafts of scorn;
Ungrateful maid, thy fierce contempt deplore,
With sighs of living flame, and tears of streaming gore.
2.
When my fond numbers would conceal her hate,
And snatch her beauties from oblivious fate,
From pole to pole when Clara's praises sound,
Ungrateful maid! she mocks the amorous wound.
Her single word a healing balm might shower,
Yet she that word withholds, and vaunts her cruel power.
3.
Dear galling yoke, which I must never rend!
Dear cruel maid, whom prayers must never bend!
By one last blow, my hand, fulfill her doom,
And rest, my sorrows, in eternal gloom!
Thou wretch, at once thy chains and life resign;
With courage worthy love, and worthy charms divine.
4.
Tremendous power, thou demon pale deform,
Who never art called, but when the gathered storm
Over life is spread, nor hope remains below,
Despair, I call thee to relieve my woe!
O come, thy kindly cruel aid impart:
Teach me to heal the pangs that gnaw my bursting heart.
5.
Come, ghastly phantom, with thy direful band.
Come, guide the stroke with unrelenting hand.
O bring me peace, and close my weary days,
(...) pomp of death my settled woe dismays.
Since Clara's eyes withdraw their cheering light,
The genial beams of heaven but pain my aching sight.
5.
I see thee come* with horror in thy train,
Affliction, phrenzy, rage, despair, and pain;
Devouring flames and swords around are seen,
The baneful aconire, and poniard keen.
That set sad Pyramus from anguish free,
And gave to Caro's soul its darling liberty.
7.
A bloody torrent (...) thy path along,
^ell fell despite is there, and giant wrong,
That angry heaven defy, and fortune's hate; --
I see the pangs for me reserved by fate,
And shame the wrath the lingering purpose chide,
"O fly, thou wretch, from life, nor future woes abide."
8.
Yes, I will die, to g^^d thy savage heart. --
Receive the (...) of thy cruel art. --
Yes, thou (...) see, -- no longer mock my pain, --
I burst the prison of thy (...) disdain.
When pity (...) to balm the lover's wound,
The rest of death remains, and poison may be found. --
9.
Thersander spoke -- and fixed on heaven his eyes,
While bird^ ill-omen'd passed before his eyes;
As screaming round they clapped their murky wings,
He grasps the steel, to drain the vital springs;
While silent night displays her sable weed,
And waits with dewy tears to mourn the frantic d^^d.
FINIS.

