SERMONS TO CHILDREN: TO WHICH ARE ADDED SHORT HYMNS, SUITED TO THE SUBJECTS.

BY A LADY

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. YOUNG, No. 52, (...) Second the Corner of
Chesnut-street. M,DCC,XCV.

SERMONS, etc.
SERMON I.
ISAIAH, Chap. xl. Verse 11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall
gather the lambs with his arms, and carry them in his bosom.
MANY of you, (...) little friends, have spent your pleasantest hours amidst
the (...) of the garden, and the flowers of the field: and have you not, in
your little rambles, seen the skipping lambs looking innocently gay, and
sporting by the side of their dams? It delighted you to see them thus happy,
and enjoying themselves in the cheerful sunshine; but perhaps at other times,
you have seen the tender creatures exposed to stormy winds, or pinching frost;
your little hearts have pitied them, and been ready to fear that the severity
of the winter would destroy them. In this distressed situation, how delightful
to see the kind shepherd come to their relief, gather them together, and lead
them to a place of shelter and safety!

Delightful indeed! to see him take up the tender and feeble in his arms, and
carry them in his bosom, till the little creatures are revived and cherished;
but, children, I can tell you a more pleasing and wonderful thing than this.
You have heard of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who came down from heaven to
save sinners. You have heard how great and glorious a person he was before he
came into our world. And will it not surprise you to hear, that this Jesus
calls himself (...) shepherd? his people, those who love and serve him, he
call^ his sheep, and the young and ^^^der, such as you are, he calls his lambs.

He calls you lambs, because, like them you are young, innocent, and helpless;
and like them you fly to others for safety and protection.

You are but of yesterday, and know but little: little indeed of the God that
made you, of the Savior who came to redeem you. You know little of the world
in which you live, or of that world in which you are to live for ever. You
stand in need of daily instruction, both in the concerns of your soul and body;
but your compassionate shepherd has promised, that he will feed his flock; he
will feed you with the sincere milk of his word, that you may grow thereby.

He has said, Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find.

Are you at a loss what to ask? Ask, above all things, his favor, which is
life: and his loving kindness, which is better than life. Ask him to teach you
more of himself, of his greatness, and goodness, that you may love him more,
and serve him better.

You are not only ignorant, but like the ^eeble lamb, you are helpless, and can
do but little for your own safety and protection. You are exposed to many
dangers that you know nothing of: there are many disorders to which your infant
years are liable, and a thousand accidents to which your tender frames are
exposed.

How happy, amidst all this weakness and dangers, to reflect, that your kind
shepherd has promised to gather you in his arms, and carry you in his bosom.

Your parents do much for you, and you have reason to thank God for them. But
Jesus, your kind shepherd, can do much more, he can supply all your need; in
sickness he can save you, and in death deliver you; he can make you happy in
this world, and happy for ever.

Often think, children, how much love and compassion are contained in those
delightful words: He shall gather them in his arms, and carry them in his
bosom. You know what it is to be folded in the fond arms of a compassionate
father, and to hang on the breasts of a tender mother.

How often have they wiped away your tears, and eased the little sorrows of
your hearts? and while you are enjoying their love and affection, think, thus
has my kind shepherd promised to fold me in his arms. How condescending in him
to notice such an ignorant and helpless creature as I am! What an honor to be
called one of his lambs! How safe I am under his protection! He is Almighty,
and none can pluck me out of his hands. The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not
want any thing that is good for me.

Blessed Jesus, I desire to be one of the lambs that thou will gather in thy
arms, and carry in thy bosom. I am ignorant, but I come to thee that I may be
taught. -- I am weak and helpless, but I fly to thy arms for safety and
protection. Make me one of thy lambs, in love, in meekness, and humility; let
me never wander from thee* or provoke thee to cast me ou^ of thy fold. Keep me
from every danger in this world, and fit me to dwell with thee for ever, in thy
heavenly kingdom, Amen.

A HYMN.
SEE the kind shepherd Jesus, stands,
And calls his sheep by name;
Gathers the ^eeble in his arms.
And ^eeds the tender lamb.
He Will lead us to the heavenly streams,
Where living waters fl^w^*
And guide us to the fruitful fields,
Where trees of knowledge grow.
When wandering from the ^old, we leave
The strait and narrow way,
Our faithful shepherd still is near,
To guide us when we stray.
The feeblest lamb amidst the stock,
(...) be its shepherd's care;
While solded in our Savior's arms,
We Are safe from every snare.
SERMON II.
MARK, Chap. x. Verse. 14. And Jesus said, Suffer the little children to come
unto me, and forbid them not; for of such the kingdom of heaven.
HOW great is your honor and happiness, children, to be thus noticed by the
Son of God, the Savior of the world* though he was so great, you see he was
humble; though he was wise, he was condescending.

But I must tell you the whole of this pleasing story.

While Jesus was employed, as usual, in teaching the multitude who came to him,
some pious parents brought their children to Jesus that he might bless them.
His disciples, instead of encouraging, rebuked those who brought them; but when
Jesus saw it he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of
heaven; and he took them up in his arms and blessed them.

Good children are humble, modest, and teachable, and so must all good people
be. In heaven there are none who are proud, conceited, or ill-natured. In that
world the saints are all lovely and amiable, such as you children ought to be,
and such as you must be, if you would live with Christ in his heavenly kingdom.

Heaven is full of love; God himself is love; his saints dwell in love: and can
you, children, expect to go to that world of love, if you do not love God, and
Christ, and one another? If you are proud, malicious, or ill-natured, do you
think that Jesus would say, of such as you is the kingdom of heaven? No, these
are the dispositions that would ^it you only for the devil's kingdom. And would
you wish to live for ever with those who are full of malice, pride, and anger?
who hate God and Christ, and one another? no; we hope better things of you. You
wish to be holy; for God is holy: to be modest and humble; for Jesus was meek
and lowly; to be loving and kind, that Jesus may be able to say, of such as you
is the kingdom of heaven.

How delightful must it be to those who brought the children to Jesus, to see
them in the arms of their compassionate Savior? And there is nothing, my
little friends, that your pious parents so much wish for, as to see you coming
to Jesus Christ for life and salvation. Though he is now in heaven, the arms of
his love and compassion are still open to receive you. He can bestow upon you
every blessing you stand in need of, both for soul and body; he can bless you
in this world, and bless you for ever.

Your pious parents have already put you into the arms of this compassionate
Savior, and devoted you to his service; and will you not choose him for your
Savior and your Lord? Your parents' prayers will not save you; you must pray
for yourselves. Go, children, to this compassionate Savior; you have every
encouragement; your ministers encourage you, your parents encourage you, Jesus
himself says, come unto me; and can you refuse his kind ^nvitation? Say to him,
Lord! to whom should we go but unto thee? thou have the words of eternal life.

A HYMN.
COME, Children, it is Jesus that calls,
The voice of your Savior obey?
When Jesus invites you to come,
No disciple shall turn you away.
The children he folds in his arms,
Must surely be blessed indeed;
For Jesus alone can bestow,
The spiritual blessings they need.
Let parents with thankfulness own,
The encouragement Jesus has given:
Delighted to hear him declare,
Of such is the kingdom of heaven.
SERMON III.
JOHN, Chap. xxi. Verse 15. Feed my lambs.
YOU have heard children, that Jesus your kind shepherd, while he was here upon
earth, folded the lambs in his arms, and carried them in his bosom; and as he
was now about to leave this world, and go to his Father, it was natural he
should be concerned about his flock -- what would become of his sheep and his
lambs: he was going to leave them in a world full of difficulties and dangers;
he was afraid they might meet with strange shepherds who would not care for the
flock, nor lead them into good pastures; and that they would be like sheep
having no shepherd.

As Jesus was thus caring for his sheep, he looked round upon his disciples,
and fixing his eyes upon Peter, who had professed to love him better than the
rest, he said unto him, Simon, son of Jonas, love thou me? He said unto him,
Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee, He says unto him, Feed my lambs,
Jesus said unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, love thou me, Peter
was grieved, because he said unto him the third time, Love thou me? And he
said unto him, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee,
Jesus said unto him, Feed my sheep.

Why, my little friends, does Jesus so often question Peter about his love to
him? he knew that Peter did indeed love him; but he was willing to try Peter's
love, and to show how much he loved you, the lambs of his flock. Do thou
indeed love me, Peter? show thy love to me by feeding my sheep; feed my lambs;
feed them with the sincere milk of my word, that they may grow thereby; tell
them, though I leave this world, and go to the Father, that I still love them;
that I go to prepare a place for them, that where I am, there they may be also;
that I will come again, and receive them unto myself; that they shall never
perish; and that none shall pluck them out of my hands. Not only Peter, but all
the ministers of the gospel, are shepherds, sent by Jesus Christ, to take care
of his flock: and he says to them, as well as to Peter, Feed my sheep, feed my
lambs.

Though your ministers are wise and learned, they are ready to instruct the
young and ignorant; they are content to leave their studies and their learning,
that they may teach you the first principles of religion, and the love of God;
how you may be happy in this world, and happy for ever in heaven. And will you
not oblige them by seriously attending to their instruction, and endeavoring
to grow wise unto salvation? And, they not only instruct you, but they pray for
you; they often bear you upon their hearts before God: they pray that you may
grow in grace, as well as in stature, and in favor with God and man; they
pray, that the love of God may be shed abroad in your hearts, and that you may
know and love the God of your fathers.

And if they thus kindly pray for you, will you not pray for them, that while
they are teaching others, they may be themselves taught of God, and that they
may be blessed with every spiritual blessing in Christ Jesus?

How amiable to see the minister and his flock thus praying for each other!

But above all, children, pray for yourselves, that God would enlighten your
minds to understand the Scriptures, which are able to make you wise unto
salvation; that you may grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, by whom alone you can be saved; that when Jesus, the
great shepherd, shall come at the last day to gather his sheep together, you
may appear at his right hand with joy.

A HYMN.
YE faithful servants of the Lord,
Who bear my sacred name,
Be the kind shepherds of my sheep,
And feed the tender lamb.
Tell them, I am their shepherd still,
Though now I reign above;
Still I can fold them in my arms,
For all my heart is love.
When I Have prepared a place on high,
I Will surely cal^ them home;
There will I gather all my ^ambs,
And there my fold shall come.
SERMON IV.
ACTS, Chap. viii. Verse 32. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a
lamb dumb before his shearers, so he opened not his mouth.
UPON hearing this scripture, you are ready, perhaps, to say as the eunuch did
to Philip; of whom does it speak? who was the person who was thus cruelly
treated? Like Philip, we would take this text, and ^reach unto you -- Jesus.

Yes, children, it was Jesus, the friend of sinners, your compassionate
Savior, who was thus cruelly put to death. But you will ask, why, what evil
has he done? He did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; he was holy,
harmless, and separate from sinners: but he was wounded for our sins, he was
bruised for our iniquities; all we, like sheep, have gone astray, we have
turned every man to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities
of us all.

The blessed God, children, made us to be holy and happy but like the silly
sheep^ we have wandered into the way that leads to death and destruction. All
mankind have forsaken God, broken his commandments, and deserve death.

In this sad state, Jesus, our compassionate Savior, saw us ready to perish;
and, like the good shepherd, offered to lay down his life for the sheep; rather
than we should perish, he would bear our sins in his own body upon the cross,
and answer for all our guilt. He knew this would be a sacrifice well pleasing
to his Heavenly Father, who is not willing that any should perish.

And he said, Lo! I come to do thy will, O God! and now having loved his own,
he loved them unto the end; he loved them even unto death. Think, children,
what he endured for your sake, for your salvation.

He was led as a sheep to the slaughter. You cannot think of the innocent sheep
being led to the slaughter without pity and compassion: and can you read the
sad history of your Savior's sufferings and death without sorrow and love?

He was scourged, he was crowned with thorns, he was buffetted and spit upon,
he was mocked and reviled, and then crucified between two thieves; and all this
he bare like the patient lamb; dumb before his shearers, while they were
stripping the wool from his back. When he was reviled, he reviled not again;
but while his cruel murderers were taking away his life, he said, Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Now, my little friends, do not your hearts overflow with gratitude and love to
this compassionate Savior of sinners? Has he thus loved you, and will you not
love him? Greater love he could not show, than by laying down his life for you,
he had power to save his life; with a look he could have struck his enemies to
the ground; but how then could the Scriptures be fulfiled? How could God be
glorified, and sinners saved?

Will you not children, for ever hate sin; because that was the cause of his
sufferings and death? Surely the blessed God must hate sin, or he would not
have given up his dear, his we^^-beloved Son to die for it. It was sin that
brought sickness and death into our world, makes us like the devil, and ^it for
^ell. It was ^in that provoked the blessed God to destroy the world by water
after he had made it: it was sin that provoked God to destroy Sodom and
Gomorrah with fire from heaven: it was sin that provoked God with the children
of Israel in the wilderness: and it was sin that at last crucified the Lord of
life and glory. And do you not think, children, that sin must still be
displeasing to God? Has Jesus died to redeem you from all iniquity, and will
you indulge sin in your hearts? Remember Jesus died, not only to save you from
the punishment of sin in hell, but to save you from sin itself; to make you
holy, that you may be happy; for without holiness you cannot be like God here,
you cannot dwell with God in heaven.

A HYMN.
BEHOLD the patient lamb,
Before the shearer stands:
And yields his harmless life,
Into its murderers hands.
Thus was the Lamb of God,
By cruel hands betrayed;
Patient he bore the cross,
And for his murderers prayed.
Thus the good shepherd died,
That we his sheep might live; --
" To all who follow me,
" Eternal life I give."
" Thus I lay down my life,
" Because my sheep I love;
" And those who serve me here,
" Shall reign with me above."
SERMON V.
MATTHEW, Chap. vi. Verse 9. Our Father which art in heaven.
WILL the great God, who made all things, and who dwells in the highest
heavens, permit us to call him Father? Yes; these are the words that Jesus
Christ himself has taught us. When ye pray, say, Our Father who art in heaven.

You have all, my little friends, been taught to say, Our Father who art in
heaven: but have you been taught who this heavenly Father is? and what he has
done for you? and what you must do to become his children? When you say, Our
Father, do you feel such a disposition as a child ought to feel toward a
tender father? Do you feel a reverence of him, and a love to him; a sorrow for
having offended him, and a desire to be his dutiful and obedient children?

These are the dispositions you ought to feel toward your earthly parents; and
much more to your heavenly Father.

And let me tell you, children, if you have never prayed in this manner, you
have never prayed at all. To say the prayers only with your lips, is not
praying; you must pray with your heart, or it is no prayer.

It is affronting the blessed God to call him Father without loving him.

Though he is in heaven, he sees and knows all that you think, as well as that
you say or do; in the darkness as well as in the light he sees you.

You will not then, children, any more affront the blessed God, by drawing near
to him with your lips, while your hearts are far from him? From this time will
you not call upon him as your heavenly Father, with all the duty and love that
becomes obedient children? He is a kind and tender Father. Like as a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pities you.

It is he who gives you every good thing that you enjoy. It is his flax that
clothes you, and his corn that feeds you. It is he who preserves you from a
thousand accidents, heals your diseases, and crowns you with loving
kindness and tender mercies.

And above all, he has sent his dear, his well-beloved Son to redeem and save
you; that you might not perish, but have everlasting life. Has your heavenly
Father been thus kind to you, and will you not love him? Go, children, with al^
your wants to this compassion ate Father: he who hears the young ravens when
they cry, will surely hear when you cry unto him.

Do you want food to eat? he who gives food to the beasts of the field, will
seed you also. Do you want raiment to put on? he who clotheth the lilies of the
field, will much more clothe you. Your earthly parents may be taken from you by
death; but your heavenly Father has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee.

Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb? Yea, she may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

This is the kind language of your heavenly Father; and what should be your
language toward him? Should it not be all duty and love? Can you be a^ a loss
what to say to him? Can you ever forget to pray to him? Go, like his dear
children, and say to him, Our Father, who art in heaven, we thank thee, that
thou will permit us to call thee by that tender, that delightful name; we would
come to thee with all that duty, love and affection, that becomes thy children.
We are grieved that we should offend so kind a Father; forgive, we pray thee,
the sins and follies of thy children. May we be holy, for thou art holy; and
merciful, as thou, our heavenly Father, art merciful. We come to thee for all
that we want; for food and raiment; but above all, we pray for a heart to love
thee more, and serve thee better, that we may be fit to dwell with thee in thy
heavenly kingdom for ever.

A HYMN.
To God who reigns above the sky,
Our Father and our friend,
To him let all our vows be paid,
And all our prayers ascend.
It Is he who claims our youthful hearts,
He loves to hear us pray;
By night we'll think upon his love,
And praise him every day
When we offend against our God,
We'll ask his pardoning love;
'Twas for our sins the Savior died,
And pleads for us above.
With all the love a father feels,
He pities and forgives,
And though our earthly parents die,
Our heavenly Father lives.
SERMON VI.
MATTHEW, Chap xxii. Verses 37, 38. Jesus said unto him, thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
This is the first and great commandment.
-- AND surely, children, this ought to be the first lesson you should learn.
You can not begin too soon to love the Lord your God. His mercies to yo^ began
with your very being; could you count them, they are more in number than the
sands upon the seashore. They are new every morning, and fresh every evening.
You should love him, because he is the greatest and best of Beings, the Father
of mercies, and the God of all grace; he is good to all and his tender, mercies
are over all his works. You should love him, because he so loved he world as to
give his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life.

Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pities them that fear him.

The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry.

O taste and see that the Lord is good.

The rich and poor, the old and young, may all join in this delightful service.
Let the rich love him, because it is he who gives them all things richly to
enjoy. Let the poor love him, because the poor man cries, and the Lord hears
him and delivers him out of all his trouble. Let the old love him, because he
is the length of their days. Let the young love him, because he is the guide of
their youth. O love the Lord all his saints!

And is he thus good to you, good to all, and will you not love him with all
your soul, and with all your mind? Love him above all things; let him have the
first place in your affections; think often upon God; think of him when you
awake in the morning, and when you lay down at night; when you go out, and when
you come in; let every fresh mercy lead your heart to him in gratitude, make
you love him more, and serve him better.

And if you love God with all your heart, you will love to pray to him, and to
praise him. You will say with David, Whom have I in heaven, but thee? and there
is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

Lord! lift up thou the light of thy countenance upon me; and this shall put
more joy and gladness into my heart, than when corn and wine increases.

A day in thy courts is better than a thousand elsewhere.

I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
tents of sin and wickedness.

This is the language of the pious soul, that loves God above all things. And
if you thus love God with all your heart, will it not grieve you to offend him?

You would not willingly offend the kind parent or friend you love, much less
would you sin against that God who is always doing you good? If ye love me,
says Jesus Christ, keep my commandments.

Thus, children, you must show your love to God. And if you love him with all
your heart, you will delight to please him always: you will do your duty in all
things, because it is well-pleasing to your God.

To love God and praise him, will be the work of heaven; and if you would be
fit for heaven, you must begin this delightful work here on earth. You cannot
wish to go to heaven if you do not love God; for there saints and angels cease
not day nor night praising God, and saying Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty.

If you love to pray to God, and praise him here, you will think with pleasure
of that world, where you will love him more, and praise him better: where you
shall never be tempted to sin against him any more; but shall love and serve
him for ever, and where God shall be all in all.

SERMON VII.
MATTHEW, Chap. vi. ver. 6. When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when
thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father
which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.
DO you, children, love God above all things? is he your Father? your heavenly
Father? then, surely, it must be your highest pleasure to pray to him: you have
much to say to him; much to ask of him; and much o thank him for.

Go, children, if possible, where none can see you but God, your heavenly
Father, and there pour out your hearts before him, with all the duty and
affection of a child; tell him how much you love him for all his goodness to
you; that you had rather have his favor, the light of his countenance, than
all the good things that this world can give you.

You may tell him how grieved you are, that your giddy hearts are so apt to
forget him amidst the follies and vanities of childhood and youth; that you so
often pray to him without that reverence, love, and affection, which you ought
ever to feel for him; that you so often read his holy word with carelessness
and indifference, as if it were the word of man, and not the word of God, and
that you are not made holier and better by it.

You may lament over the pride, obstinacy, and perverseness, that you sometimes
feel in your hearts, and that you strive so little against these sins, that you
may conquer and overcome them.

Thus may you humble yourselves before God, for all your sins and follies, and
beg, that for Christ's sake, he would forgive them all; and grant you the
assistance of his good Spirit, to help you to love him more, and serve him
better.

It is good, children, to draw near to God, to show forth his loving kindness
in the morning, and his faithfulness every night. Begin every day with this
delightful service. You cannot surely awake in the morning to health, to
friends, to every blessing of life, without thanking the God of your mercies,
who gives you all things richly to enjoy.

Dare not venture into the dangers and temptations of the day, without praying
that God would be with you, to keep you from sin, and deliver you from evil.
Nor can you surely lie down in peace at night, without thanking the kind hand
that has kept you from evil, and crowned the day with his loving kindness and
tender mercies, without asking forgiveness of your heavenly Father for all that
you have done amiss. Thus may you commit yourselves to his care, through the
dangers of the night; for it is God only who can make you to dwell in safety.

Thus, children, you may converse in secret with your heavenly Father; and be
assured, he who hears the young ravens when they cry, will hear you when you
pray unto him; he sees in secret the feeblest wish of your heart to love and
serve him; he will remember the kindness of your youth, and will reward you
openly. Fear not, children, though you should have only a dark corner to pray
in, your heavenly Father sees you there: fear not, though your companions
should laugh at you for being so precise about your prayers; remember whom you
are to fear: fear him who can kill both soul and body in hell.

Your heavenly Father sees when you are ashamed or afraid to pray to him. Jesus
has said, He who is ashamed of me, of him will I be ashamed before my Father
and his holy angels; but he who confesses me before men, him will I confess
before my Father and his holy angels.

Believe it, children, you will never pray to him in vain; he will reward you
in this world with every thing that he sees best for you; and at the last day,
he will reward you openly before men and angels.

A HYMN.
COME, children, learn this kind command,
To love the Lord your God;
Love him with all your heart and mind,
And spread his praise abroad.
'Twas his kind hand your being gave,
And formed you of the ground,
And '(...) the same Almighty hand,
That fills creation round.
Soon as your infant years began,
Your life was crowned with love;
And every blessing you receive,
Is given you from above.
Let your first thoughts by morning light,
Ascend to God on high,
And in the evening raise your thoughts,
Above the starry sky.
He loves to hear your infant cries,
He bids you seek his face;
Go, like the children of his love,
And ask his promised grace.
To him let your first vows be paid,
He merit^ all your love;
Tell him their's none you love like God,
In earth or heaven above.
SERMON VIII.
LUKE, Chap. x. Verse 42. One thing is needful.
UPON hearing these words I doubt not, my little friends, you are all eager to
know what this one thing needful is? They are the words of Jesus Christ; and I
will tell you upon what occasion they were spoken.

It came to pass as Jesus went about doing good, he entered into a certain
village, and a woman, named Martha, kindly received him into her house; and she
had a sister, called Mary, who sat at Jesus' feet, and heard his words; but
Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said Lord, do
thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Bid her therefore
that she help me. And Jesus answered, and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou
art careful, and troubled about many things; but one thing is needful: and Mary
has chosen that good part which shall not be taken away from her.

And now, children, from this story you may learn what the one thing needful
is. It is to hear the words of eternal life, and inquire what you must do to be
saved. And though you cannot now sit at his feet as Mary did, while he was here
upon earth, yet you may go to him as an humble learner. Like Mary, hear his
words, and attend to the concerns of your souls; and like her choose that good
part which shall ^^^ver be taken away from (...).

Religion is the one (...) needful; because, without (...) you cannot be happy
in (...) world, and must before (...) miserable in the world to come.

It is needful for all; for the rich, and for the poor, for the old, and for
the young. It is needful for you, children, to know God, and serve him here on
earth, that you may dwell with him, and be happy for ever in heaven. It is more
needful for you than riches, or honors, or all that this world ^^an give you;
for what would (...) ^^ofit you, if you should gain (...) ^hole world, and lose
your (...) ^oul.

Jesus Christ not only calls (...) the one thing needful, (...) calls it the
good part.

Yes, children, it is a good thing to love God and Christ: the ways of religion
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. There is no peace, says
my God, to the wicked; but great peace have they who love thy law. To pray to
God, and to praise him is a delightful employment; to show forth his loving
kindness in the morning, and his faithfulness every night.

Religion is a good thing: for it teaches us to be good ourselves, and to do
good to all around us.

The religious child will be a good child; he will obey his parents, not only
because he loves them, but because God has said, Honor thy father and thy
mother. And Jesus Christ has said, Children, obey your parents in all things;
he will be merciful and kind, because his heavenly Father is merciful and kind
to all: he will be diligent and industrious, because his Bible tells him he
must not be slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. In
short, he will be a good child, that he may be the child of God, and have God
for his father, and his friend for ever. And now, my little friends, must not
that be a good thing that will make you thus good and happy?

Jesus has said, this good part shall never be taken away from you: your
parents and friends may be taken from you by death, but if you are good, God
will be your father, and friend for ever. Your riches may be taken away from
you; but if you are good, you have better treasures in heaven; death itself
cannot take away this good part from you; for you know that the righteous shall
dwell with God and Christ for ever in heaven.

And now, children, what shall I say more to persuade you to choose this good
part? Your parents tell you it is the good part; they have found it so
themselves, and they wish, above all things, to see you make the same choice.
Jesus says it is the good part; go to him, sit at his feet, and say to him,
Blessed Jesus, to whom should we go but unto thee? thou have the words of
eternal life, teach us what we must do to be saved; teach us the one thing
needful; teach us, like Mary, to choose that good part that shall never be taken
away from us.

A HYMN.
THOUGH children in knowledge and years,
Religion is needful for you;
For* young as you are, you may die,
And answer for all that you do.
It Is needful for you who are young,
To remember the God whom you love;
To serve him and worship him here,
And dwell in his presence above.
Go, sit at the (...) of your Lord,
And learn without further delay:
He Will teach you to choose the good part,
That shall never be taken away.
SERMON IX.
LUKE, Chap. ii. verse 8 to 14. And there were in the same country shepherds
abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flocks by night.

And lo, the angels of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone
round about them; and they were sore afraid.

And the angel said unto them, Fear not; for behold I bring you good tidings of
great joy, which shall be to all people.

For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord.

And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling
clothes, lying in a manger.

And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host,
praising God, and saying,

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.


TO you, children, as well as to the shepherds, were these glad tidings sent;
for you was born a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. His name was called
Jesus, because he should save his people from their sins.

And is not this joyful news indeed, that Jesus, the beloved Son of God, should
come down from heaven, be born into the world a feeble infant, like one of us,
that he might save us from our sins, that we might not perish, but have
everlasting li^e?

And you see there is not only joy on earth, but in heaven too; the holy
angels, those kind and friendly beings, rejoiced to bring this good news to man.

No sooner had the angel told the news to the shepherds, but suddenly there was
with him a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory to
God in the highest!

They sang glory to God, because he so loved the world, as to give his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should no^ perish, but have
everlasting life.

They sang peace on earth. Jesus, the Prince of Peace, was now come to bring
peace on earth; to reconcile guilty man to the blessed God, whom they had
offended; to teach them to love God, to love one another, that they might be
fit to dwell with God, and with his holy angels for ever in heaven.

These holy and blessed spirits rejoiced, to see, instead of sin and
wickedness, hatred and strife; righteousness and peace, and joy among men.

They sang good will to men. When man was first made the holy angels, these
morning stars, sang and rejoiced together; but when they saw man rebel against
his Maker, and condemned to die, their joy was turned into sorrow. But they
rejoiced again to see him restored to the favor and love of God, to holiness
and happiness: to see the works of Satan, the great enemy of God and man,
destroyed, and peace restored on earth.

They rejoiced to think, that good men should come from the east, and from the
west, from all parts of the world, and dwell with them for ever in heaven. The
friendly angels had often been sent down to do service to good men here below,
but they never came with so much joy as upon this occasion. This was good news
to the whole world; good tidings of great joy to all people; to the rich, and
to the poor, to the old, and to the young; for all stand in need of this
Savior.

Yes, children, to you is this salvation sent. And will you not receive it with
joy? With the children in the temple, will you not cry Hosanna! blessed is he,
who comes in the name of the Lord. Will you not join with the holy angels, in
saying, Glory to God in the highest, on earth, peace, and good will to men? Do
they glorify God for his love to you, and can you be silent? Do they rejoice in
the hope of your salvation, and will not you wish to be saved from sin, and
hell, and to dwell with the holy angels for ever in heaven?

It is pleasant to think of the holy angels being employed for our service here
on earth; but it is still more delightful to think of joining with them in the
praises of our God and Savior in heaven.

Then shall we sing glory to God in higher strains than we can praise him in
here on earth. There we shall join with those blessed spirits, who cease not
day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is,
and is to come! Then shall we join with thousands of angels, saying, Worthy is
the Lamb that was stain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing.

Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him who sits upon the throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Amen.

A HYMN
GLORY to God the holy angels cry,
Glory to God, let every heart reply;
The son of righteousness now shines on earth,
And peace returns at our Redeemer's birth.
Good will to men the holy angels cry,
Good Will to men let every heart reply.
Let hatred, strife, and wrath, be heard no more,
But peace and love be spread from shore to shore.
Glory to God, who sent his Son from heaven;
For us a child is born, a Savior given;
He comes with peace and pardon from above
And rules his people with the laws of love.
Jesus, the long expected Savior's come,
Let every heart prepare to make him room;
Let ^nfant tongues proclaim his love abroad,
And join to praise their Savior and their God.
SERMON X.
MATTHEW, Chap. xxi. Verses 15, 16. And when the chief priests and scribes saw
the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and
saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; they were sore displeased.

And said unto him, Hear thou what these say? And Jesus says unto them,
yea, have ye never read, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou have
perfected praise?


YOU have in this chapter the pleasing account of our Savior's entrance into
Jerusalem; not like an earthly monarch, surrounded with his men of war, and
adorned with trappings of gold and silver, but meek and lowly, sitting upon an
ass, and a colt, the foal of an ass. The richest carpets he rode upon were made
of the boughs of the trees, and the garments of the people: and they suited his
humble appearance better than the richest tapestry. He was indeed a king; king
of kings; but he appeared on earth only as king of (...) church; king of his
saints; king of Zion.

And the multitude who went before, and the multitude who followed after,
cried, Hosanna, to the son of David, blessed is he who comes in the name of
the Lord! Hosanna in the highest! These longs of praise were more pleasing to
the blessed Jesus than all the honors they could give him; he came not to
conquer his enemies, but to reign in the hearts of his people; not to save them
from their enemies, but to save them from their sins. This was the kind errand
upon which he came. Well might the people cry Hosanna! well might the children
join in the song of praise to this compassionate Savior! Surely, if these held
their peace, the very stones would cry out for shame against them.

It was to your honor, children, that you welcomed Jesus to his temple, while
the scribes and priests were too proud to acknowledge him for their Savior and
their king.

When they saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the
temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, they were sore displeased, and
said unto him, Hear thou what these say? Jesus answered, and said unto them,
Yea, have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have
perfected praise.

You see, Jesus was ready upon all occasions to show his love to you, the lambs
of his flock; he would not suffer the scribes and priests to stop the infant
mouths that were employed in his praise. It was foretold in Scripture, that you
should welcome him into his kingdom; and he was pleased to hear Hosannas from
the mouth of babes.

You cannot be too young, children, to sing the praises of your Savior: and
while you hear others welcome him as the Son of God, and Savior of men, do you
catch the sound, and cry, Hosanna! blessed is he who comes in the name of the
Lord, blessed is he who comes from heaven with good will to men! blessed is he
who comes to bring salvation to his people, and save them from their sins!

Go into his temple, children, with thanksgiving, and enter his courts with
praise. Praise is comely for the upright, is comely for the young; bow the
knee, and own Jesus for your king and your Lord. Let him reign in your hearts,
let him have the first place in your affections; for he is altogether lovely,
he is worthy of your highest love; for he has redeemed you to God by his
blood, and has made you unto his God, kings and priests.

Glory to God in the highest, because on earth there is peace and good will to
men.

A HYMN.
HOSANNA to Jesus our king,
Who comes in the name of the Lord
By children he is welcomed on earth,
By angels in heaven adored.
He comes with good news from on high,
With a message of pardon and love:
He comes to redeem us from sin,
And sits us for mansions above.
Let Zion rejoice in her king,
He comes in his temple to dwell;
There children shall sing of his love,
And saints all his victories ^ell.
SERMON XI.
LUKE, Chap. xii. Verses 6, 7. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings,
and not one of them is forgotten before God?

But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye
are of more value than many sparrows.


WHAT a beautiful description is this of the goodness and compassion of God! he
is good you see, even to the feeblest and smallest of his creatures; to the
beasts of the field, and the birds of the air; even the sparrow, the meanest of
the little feathered tribe, is not beneath his notice.

The God who made them does not forget to give them their daily bread; numerous
as they are, there is food provided for them all: the trees are loaded with
berries, that the birds may not want food in winter. Your heavenly Father is
good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. And does he thus
feed the fowls of the air? does he thus clothe the ^lowers of the field? and do
ye not think, children, that he will much more take care of you? Yes, he has
said, Fear not, ye are of more value than many sparrows; your heavenly Father
will much more feed you.

You are of more value than many sparrows; for you have souls immortal, souls
that must live for ever. When the birds and beasts die, there is an end of
them; but when you, children die, there is not an end of you; for your souls
will live after your bodies are dead.

You are of more value; for you are made for nobler ends than they: you are
made to know God, and serve him here on earth, that you may dwell with him, and
be happy hereafter in heaven.

The sparrows know not the God who made them, the hand that feeds them; but
you, children, can know and remember your Creator; you can love the God who
feeds and clothes you; you can pray to him daily for what mercies you want, and
give him thanks for what you receive; you can love him as your heavenly Father,
and you are sure that he will never forget you.

Thus you see God has made you a nobler creature than the fowls of the air, or
the beasts of the field; and if he provides for them, he will much more provide
for you: fear not, your heavenly Father will not let you want bread to eat, or
raiment to put on.

He who hears the young ravens when they cry, will much more hear you when
you cry unto him. Are you poor? fear not; for the poor man cries, and the Lord
hears him, and delivers him out of all his trouble. Are you fatherless? fear
not; for God is the Father of the fatherless. Or have your father and mother
forsaken you? fear not; for the Lord will take you up. He knows all your wants,
and all your fears; nothing can befall you without his permission. Are you sick?
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth; to show how much your heavenly Father cares
for you, he has said, The very hairs of your head are all numbered.

Does your heavenly Father thus care for you, then, children, what have you to
fear? You have nothing to fear but sin; nothing to fear but displeasing God: to
make God angry with you would be sad indeed; but if you love and serve him, you
need not fear that he will be angry with you, he is only angry with the wicked,
with those who do not love and serve him.

Remember, he expects more from you than from the fowls of the air: God has not
given them reason, and therefore he expects nothing from them; but he expects
that you should love him as your heavenly Father, and be his dutiful and
obedient children. Go, children, and thank your heavenly Father, that he has
given you more understanding than the beasts of the field, and made you wiser
than the fowls of heaven.

Say unto him, Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the feeble
infant, that thou should take care of him? thou art good to all, and thy
tender mercies are over all thy works; bless the Lord, O my soul!

A HYMN.
OUR God is the father of all,
The Father of mercies and love;
He pities the works of his hands,
Though he reigns in the heavens above.
Not a sparrow can fall to the ground,
Without his permission and care;
From such a kind Father and Friend,
Then what have his children to fear?
We Have nothing to fear but from sin;
It is sin that displeases our God;
When we disobey his commands,
Like a Father he uses the rod.
SERMON XII.
LUKE, Chap. vi. Verse 36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is
merciful.
GOD is good, and his tender mercies are over all his works.

This good God, children, is your Father, your heavenly Father; and we hope it
is your wish and desire to be like him. You cannot be like him in greatness;
but you may be like him in goodness; you may be holy, as he is holy; you may be
merciful, as he is merciful; you may be good, and do good to all around you; it
is your happiness, your pleasure to be merciful.

The man who is unkind and cruel must be unhappy; for he has no love, no
compassion in his breast; he knows not the joy of seeding the hungry, and of
clothing the naked: and Jesus shall say to him at the last day, Depart from me,
I know you not; for I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty and
ye gave me no drink; a stranger and ye took me not in; I was sick, and in
prison, and ye visited me nor; and these shall go away into everlasting
punishment.

But the merciful man is blessed: Jesus has said, Blessed are the merciful, for
they shall obtain mercy; blessed is he who considers the poor; the Lord will
deliver him in time of trouble; the Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive,
and he shall be blessed upon the earth: the Lord will strengthen him upon the
bed of languishing, he will make all his bed in (...) sickness; the merciful
man will be blessed by the poor; -- because I delivered the poor (...), and the
fatherless, (...) him who had none to help him; the blessing of him who was
ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.

Surely children, there cannot be a greater joy on earth, than to have the
blessing of him who was ready to perish.

You have read the story of the poor man who fell among thieves, who wounded
him, and left him half dead. Which do you think felt the greatest pleasure in
his own breast, the good Samaritan, who took care of him, and poured oil into
his wounds, or the cruel Priest and Levite, who passed by and left him to
perish? You will surely say, He who had mercy on him.

Then, children, go and do likewise; go, like your heavenly Father, and carry
bread to the hungry, to them who are ready to perish: go, comfort the sick and
afflicted. It is, perhaps, little you can do for them at present* but do what
you can; carry them something from your little store to relieve their
necessities: you can speak kindly to them, and even your compassionate looks
may revive and comfort them; tell them you will do what you can for them, that
you wish you could do more; but that your heavenly Father is merciful, he knows
what they stand in need of, and can supply all their wants, and that he hears
the poor when they cry.

How do you think, children, you will feel after such acts of kindness as
these? (...) you no^ feel happy; yes, y^^ will ^eel happier than all (...)
riches or pleasure^ of the (...) can make you? Your (...) will be ready to over
(...) gratitude to God, who ha^ given you all things richly to enjoy* and given
you a heart to share his (...) with the poor.

Surely you will never wish to lay out your little treasures upon vanities and
trifles, while you can lend it to the Lord, by giving to the poor? Remember
what Jesus will say to them on his right hand at the last day, Come, ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you! for I was an hungered and
you gave me meat; I was thirsty and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger and ye
took me in; naked and ye clothed me; sick and (...) prison, and ye came unto
me: these shall go away into life eternal.

A HYMN.
GO, like your heavenly Father, feed the poor,
And carry comfort to the sick man's door;
Pity the widow, be the orphan's friend,
And if you cannot give them, freely lend.
Think of your heavenly Father's love to you,
And imitate his love in all you do;
M^rcy shall then your early steps attend.
And from the snares of death your paths de^end.
I or you the poor man's prayers shall reach to heaven,
And blessings more than you can (...) be given;
And when the righteous judge (...) heaven descends,
Before the world (...) friends.
SERMON XIII.
1 SAMUEL, Chap, i. Verse 27, 28. For this child I prayed: and the Lord has
given me my petition which I asked of him.

Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord; as long as he lives he shall be
lent to the Lord.


THUS did the pious mother of Samuel devote the child that God had graciously
given her, to him (...) to his service; for this child she had prayed. She knew
that her children, as well as all her other mercies, came from God; therefore
she went up to the temple of God, the house of prayer, and there poured out her
soul before God.

And she vowed a vow, and said, O Lord of hosts! if thou will indeed look upon
the affliction of thy handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thy handmaid;
but will give unto thy hand said a man-child; then will I give him unto the
Lord all the days of his life.

She prayed for a man-child; not because she wished for an h^ir to ^n estate,
or that he might (...) or great in the world, but that he might have the honor
to serve God in his temple, and minister to the Lord in holy things. And when
God had given her the child she had asked of him, she remembered the vow she
had made; and as soon as he was weaned, she took him with her to the house of
God, and brought him to Eli, the high priest, and there, in the most ^ol^mn
manner, devoted her child, and gave him up unto ^he Lord, in the words of the
^ext: for this child I prayed; and the Lord has granted my ^etition; therefore
also I have ^ent him to the Lord; as long as he lives, he shall be lent to the
Lord.

From this pleasing history, we learn what is the duty of pious parents: It is
to acknowledge, that they receive their children at the hand of God, and to
devote them to his fear and service. And, perhaps, some of you, my little
friends, like Samuel, have had a pious mother, who has devoted you to the Lord:
They have said in some such language as this: For this child I prayed, and the
Lord has granted my request. It is God who has given it to me, and shall not
I devote it to him, and to his service?

He has said, All souls are mine; the soul of the father, and the soul of the
son; and when he puts this child into my hands, does he not, as it were, say,
Here is an immortal soul that may be happy or miserable for ever; bring it up
for me and my service.

And is it possible that this dear child, whom I so tenderly love, may be made,
through my neglect, for ever miserable? Dreadful thought! But how pleasing to
think, that, with the blessing of God upon my endeavors, it may be taught to
know the God who made it, to love and serve him here, and to dwell with him for
ever and ever. Delightful thought! Soon as its infant tongue can speak, it
shall be taught the praises of its God and Savior, its little hands be lifted
up to the God of its mercies, and its feet taught the way to the house of its
Creator. O, my God! I desire not that it may be rich or great in this world;
only give it a heart to love and serve thee: to thee who gave it to me, would I
solemnly devote it, and may it be thine for ever!

This has been the language of many a pious mother; and we would hope,
children, of some of yours. And surely you will not disappoint their pleasing
hopes and expectations? Consider the many prayers they have put up for you, the
many tears they have shed upon your account. How can they bear the thought,
that their children should be the children of the devil, instead of the
children of God! Do they love God above all things, and must they not desire
that you should love him too? Do they hope to dwell for ever in heaven, and
must they not earnestly desire, that you, their dear children, may be likewise
heirs of that heavenly kingdom?

Children, you never can be thankful enough to God for such parents as these;
let your behavior to them be all duty, love, and obedience, and let not their
prayers and instruction be lost upon you; go upon your knees, and thank God for
all the mercies of your infant years, that you have been so early taught to
know the God of your mercies, and to call him Father. Pray that your parents
may have the joy of heart to see you love God above all things, and serve him
with a cheerful heart and willing mind, and that you may never forsake their
God, and your God.

A HYMN.
THUS does the pious parent give
(...) children to the Lord;
Teacher (...) ^nfant tongues to pray,
And learn his holy word.
With early steps they learn to tread
The temple of their God;
And there their infant tongues are taught
To spread his praise abroad.
Happy the child whose future years,
Are thus for heaven designed!
Nor (...) other acts her part,
Forgets the heaven-born mind.
SERMON XIV.
2 TIMOTHY, Chap. i. Verses 1, to 5. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the
will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus.

To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the
Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord.

I thank God whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, that,
without ceasing, I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day.

Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled
with joy.

When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt
first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice: and I am persuaded that
in thee also.


IN what an affectionate man^er does the apostle Paul begin ^his letter to
Timothy: he calls ^im his own son, his dearly beloved son; he wishes him the
^est of blessings, not riches and ^onours, but grace, mercy, and peace; not the
good things that this world can give, but ^he better blessings that come from
God and Christ.

Your parents, my little friends, may wish you grace; ^ut it is only the grace
of God that can make you truly happy. It is his mercy in Christ Jesus, that
must pardon all your sins, and it is the peace of God that must keep your
hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

These are the blessings the apostle Paul wished to Timothy; and we earnestly
wish, children, that God would thus bless you. The (...) Paul not only blesses
Timothy, but he prays, for him; though he is at a distance from him he does not
forget him, but prays for him night and day.

This was the best way in which he could show his love to Timothy; he knew it
was God alone who could make him truly good and happy; and he knew that God
would hear and answer the prayers of his servants.

And will you not go to your parents, and ministers, and ask them to pray for
you? to bear you upon their hearts before God? The prayers of the upright are
his delight: he is a God, hearing and answering prayer, and you have reason to
hope, that their prayers will descend in blessings upon your head.

What was it, my little friends, that made Timothy so beloved by the apostle
Paul? It was because he feared the Lord from his youth. The apostle had been
Timothy's first instructor in the gospel of Christ; he had instructed him; he
had prayed for him; he had watched over him with all the affection of a tender
parent; and it filled him with joy to see his son Timothy walking in the truth.

He remembered, with joy, Timothy's pious grandmother (...), and mother Eunice;
and he rejoiced to see the same faith and piety in their son.

And there is nothing, my little friends, can give the ministers of the gospel
greater pleasure, than to see you children imitating the faith and piety of
your parents. It delights them when they can tell you, they remember with what
tenderness they instructed you, prayed for you, and wept over you; and it fills
them with joy, to see the very image of those pious parents in you; they
rejoice to think, that when they are gone to heaven, you will fill up their
places in the church, and in the world.

And they exhort you, as the apostle Paul did Timothy; that you continue to
remember, and to practice the things that you have learnt: for your parents'
sake, for your minister's sake, for your own sake, we pray you to continue to
grow wise unto salvation.

SERMON XV.
2 TIMOTHY, Chap. iii. v. 15. And that from a child thou (...) the holy
Scriptures, which (...) able to make thee wise unto salvation.
WE wish, my little friends, to see you like the blessed (...) growing in
wisdom, as well (...) in stature.

Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: She shall give to thine
head an ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.

You will soon find much entertainment from books that tell you what sort of a
world this is, and what was done before you were born into it. You will read
with pleasure the histories of the wise and good, that you may learn to be like
them; but, children, we wish above all things, to see you wise unto salvation.
You may know much of the world, and of the works of God, and yet know nothing
of the God who made the world, and all things that are in it.

You may be so wise as to get riches and honors in this world, and yet be so
ignorant, as not to know what will become of you for ever.

You may know much, and yet know nothing of Christ, and him crucified, which
the apostle Paul thought the highest wisdom of all: in short, you may know much
of this world, and yet know nothing of that world in which you are to live for
ever.

Now, children, would it not be sad, if after all your knowledge, you should
know nothing of God, of Christ, of heaven, of hell, or of your own souls?

Time here can be but short; and will it not be sad when death comes, if you
should not have God for your friend, and Jesus for your Savior? Sad indeed, to
hear the blessed God say at last, Depart from me, I know you not.

Thus, children, you see that religion is the true wisdom; and that he only is
wise, who is wise unto salvation.

Will you not then eagerly inquire where you can learn this true wisdom?

The text informs you, that it is the holy Scriptures that are able to make you
wise unto salvation: they are the words of God himself; for holy men of old
wrote as God taught them by his holy Spirit; they are words of eternal life;
words whereby you may be saved. Young as you are, there is much in them that
you can understand; for they are written for the young as well as for the old,
for the unlearned as well as for the learned.

You will there find many delightful histories to entertain and instruct you;
many amiable examples to make you wise and good.

The holy Scriptures will tell you much of God, how great, and how good he is;
so great, that the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, and yet so humble as
to dwell in every contrite heart. You will there find, that God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. That Jesus, your compassionate
Savior, came to seek, and to save that which was lost, to call you to
repentance, and to save you from your sins. You will there learn, that you must
be holy if you would be happy for ever; that you are to love God above all
things, and to love your neighbor as yourself; that you must be good, and do
good to all around you.

You will there find, that time is short, and that death may come at a time
when you think not of it; that therefore you must watch and pray, that you
enter not into temptation; and that your Lord, when he comes, may find you
watching, and ^it to dwell with him for ever in heaven.

This, my little friends, is the wisdom that the holy scriptures will teach
you; and you cannot begin to learn it too soon. You have souls, immortal souls;
and you cannot inq^i^e too soon what you must do to be ^aved; for what would it
profit you, if you should gain the whole world, and lose your own soul.

A HYMN.
THUS, children, we earnestly pray,
That you may be blessed from above;
That mercy and peace from our God,
May fill all your hearts with his love.
With joy we remember the faith
Of the friends who from earth are removed;
In their children we wish to behold,
The image of those whom we loved.
Remember the lessons they taught,
Their faith and their piety learn;
The wisdom your Bible can teach,
Is your first and your greatest concern.
SERMON XVI.
1 CHRONICLES. Chap. xxviii. Verse 9. And thou, Solomon, my Son, know thou the God
of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; for
the Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thoughts. If thou seek him, he will be ^ound of thee; but if thou forsake him,
he will cast thee off for ever.
THESE are the words of a dying father, to his beloved son; and where is the
child who will not listen to them with seriousness and attention? With what
solemnity and earnestness does David exhort his son Solomon to remember God,
the God of his fathers; that God who searches all hearts, that God who could
make him happy or miserable for ever; and is not this the language of every
pious parent? My child, know thou the God of thy fathers; he has been my God,
my father and my friend; he has never left, nor forsaken me; he has been always
doing me good; when in trouble I have cried unto him, and he has delivered me;
he has healed my diseases, he has pardoned my sins, he has been nigh unto me in
all that I called upon him for; this God will be my God for ever and ever, and
he will be my guide even unto death; love the Lord, O my child! for his mercy
endures for ever to such as keep his covenant, and to those who remember his
commandments to do them: he will be your God too if you seek him; he loves the
children of his servants, and he is ready to be sound of them. God has heard my
prayers for you, and he waits to be gracious; if you seek him, he will be found
of you; he will be nigh unto you as your father and your friend; seek him, my
child, seek him with all your heart; for the Lord searches all hearts. Dare not
seek him with your lips while your heart is far from him; say to him, My
father, be thou the guide of my youth; and he will be your guide even unto
death.

But, O my child! should you forsake him, he will cast you off for ever.
Dreadful thought! to be cast off from that God whose favor is life, and whose
loving kindness is better than life; to be cast off from the family of God's
children, and to be no more a seed to serve him: to be cast into the lake that
burns for ever and ever, and to be punished with everlasting destruction from
the presence of ^he Lord.

My child, how can I endure the dreadful thought! seek him while he may be
found, call upon him while he is near; if you seek him he will be found of you;
but remember, if you forsake him he will cast you off for ever. Do not your
hearts melt, children, at such language as this? can you bear the thought of
being separated from your parents, and their God for ever? Hear it and tremble!
The children of pious parents who forsake God, are generally the most abandoned
sinners, and will have the heaviest punishment in hell for ever. How will your
hearts endure the terrors of that day, when you shall be called to account for
all the sins you have committed, for all the mercies you have despised, for all
the prayers of your pious parents, for the lessons of piety they have given
you, for the instructions of God's holy word, and for the blood of that
compassionate savior, which you (...) trodden under foot and despised? These
are awful scenes children, as unpleasant for us to tell, as for you to hear:
but, if we alarm you, it is that you may flee from the wrath to come, and lay
hold on eternal life. Forsake God! For what should you forsake him? is the
blessed God ready to cast you off? O, no; he has said, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee; I would gather you as a h^n gath^reth her chickens under her
wings. Come unto me, I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Why then children, should you forsake him?
Can you live without him. No? You may live without parents or friends, but you
cannot live without your God; and surely you cannot die without him. You will
then have nothing left but your God; and can you be happy without him? No. His
favor is life, and his loving kindness is better than life. Seek him then
while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. If you seek him he is
ready to be found of you; but if you forsake him, he must cast you off for ever.

A HYMN.
MY son, know thou the Lord,
Thy father's God obey;
Seek his protecting care by night,
His guiding hand by day.
Call while he may be found,
And seek him while he is near;
Serve him with all thy heart and min
And worship him with fear.
If thou will seek his face,
His ^ar will hear thy cry;
Then shall thou find his mercy sure,
His grace for ever ^igh.
But if thou leave thy God,
Nor choose the path to heaven;
Then shall thou perish in thy sins,
And never be forgiven.
SERMON XVII.
LUKE, Chap. xiii. Verses 6 to 9. He sp^ke also this parable: A certain man had
a fig tree planted in his vineyard: and he came and sought fruit thereon, and
found none.

Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I
come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none; cut it down; why cumbereth
it the ground?

And he answering, said unto him, Lord let it alone this year also, till I
shall dig about it and dung it.

and if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that thou shall cut it
down.


My little friends, you are the fig trees in God's vineyard: God is the
husbandman: you are the plants which his right hand has planted. He has planted
you in the choicest ground, where streams of heavenly mercy slow, and words of
sweet salvation sound; amidst all the blessings of the gospel and the means of
grace. Your pious parents have nourished and cherished you; they have
instructed you, they have prayed for you, your ministers have taught you from
God's holy word, they have fed you with the sincere milk of his word, that you
may grow thereby. Above all, Jesus, the compassionate lover of souls, the great
vine-dresser in God's vineyard, has nourished you with his word and ordinances,
he has drawn you with the cords of love, and he has laid down his life for you,
that you might not perish, but have everlasting life.

And now, my little friends, suppose the great husbandman, after all that he
has done for his vineyard, should come and find no fruit upon his vines and his
fig trees? Sad indeed, if he should come, year after year, seeking fruit and
finding none, after he has done so much for you. Will he not expect that you
should bring forth the fruits of holiness to the praise and glory of God? You
who are trained up in piety and goodness, who have been taught from your
earliest infancy to know God, to love him, and to serve him, to pray to him,
and to praise him, what do you more than others?

Consider how many poor unhappy children there are, whose wicked parents have
never taught them to know the God who made them, the Savior who died to redeem
and save them. Will you not pity and pray for them? and remember God expects
much more from you. Young as you are, you may bring forth some fruit; he
expects that you be modest, humble, and teachable, obedient to your parents,
and loving and kind to all; but perhaps, he has come for one, two, or three
years, and found none of these fruits: no fear of God, no love to him, no
prayer to him, no care about your souls, no thoughts of heaven or of hell. Sad
indeed! He waits to be gracious, and yet you will not regard him. Have you not
reason to fear he will say to his vine-dresser, Cut it down, why cumbereth it
the ground? Remember every plant that bears not fruit he takes away; and how
soon you may be taken away you know not. Young plants are aften removed, often
in mercy taken away from the evil to come; take care that you are not removed
in anger, because you bear no fruit. It is sad, indeed, to be mere cumberers of
the ground; to live in the world without being good ourselves; or doing good to
those around us; we root such plants out of our garden, and cast them among the
weeds that are to be burnt.

So at the last day God shall say to his angels, Gather together the tares;
that is, the wicked and unprofitable, and bind them in bundles to be burnt.

The blessed God is not willing that any should perish; he waits to be
gracious; he comes, year after year, seeking fruit; and it is not till there is
no more hope, that he says, Cut it down: he was willing to hope year after
year, that it would blossom, and bring forth fruit; but, alas! he has been
disappointed, and he now pronounces the awful sentence, Cut it down; why
cumbereth it the ground? But see, Jesus, the kind vine-dresser, interceeds for
you: O! my Father! let it alone this year also: true, thou have done much for
it, have borne it with much patience year after year, and still it has been
barren and unfruitful, and there seem now but little hope that it will ever
bear fruit; but spare it one year more; I know not how to give it up; let it
alone this year also: let instruction, reproof, and correction, be tried a
little longer; perhaps the heart that is now hard may be softened and melt; the
temper that is now rough and obstinate, may become gentle and teachable; the
disobedient child may become dutiful and obedient; and the child who seemed
almost ripe for destruction, be made a child of God, and an heir of the kingdom
of heaven. Then it will be well indeed! then there will be joy in heaven; for
the plant that was dead is alive again, and will flourish for ever in the
Paradise of God.

A HYMN.
SEE in the vineyard of the Lord,
A barren fig tree stands!
It yields no fruit, no blossom bears,
Though planted by his hands.
From year to year he seeks for fruit,
And still no fruit is found;
It stands amidst the living trees,
A cumberer of the ground.
But why should mercy longer spare,
The soul who will not live?
The sinner who will not repent,
Can heaven itself forgive?
But see the kind Redeemer pleads,
The barren tree to spare;
Let mercy still withhold his hand,
And grant another year.
Perhaps some means of grace untried,
May reach the stony heart,
Or the (...) heavenly grace,
May a new life impart.
But if these means should prove in vain,
And still no fruit be found;
Then mercy shall no longer plead,
But Justice cut it down.
THE END.
REMARKS, Extracted from "an estimate of the RELIGION Of the FASHIONABLE WORLD.
IT is seriously to be regretted, in an age like the present, remarkable for
indifference in religion and levity in manners, and which stands so much in
need of lively patterns of firm and resolute piety, that many who really are
christians on the soberest conviction, should not appear more openly and
decidedly on the side they have espoused; that they assimilate so very much
with the manners of those about them (which manners they yet scruple not to
disapprove); and, instead of an avowed but prudent steadfastness, which might
draw over the others, appear evidently fearful of being thought precise and
over-scrupulous; and actually seem to disavow their right principles, by
concessions and accommodations not strictly consistent with them. They often
seem cautiously afraid of doing too much, and going too far; and the dangerous
plea, the necessity of living like other people, of being like the rest of the
world, and the propriety of not being particular, is brought as a reasonable
apology for a too yielding and indiscriminate comformity.

But, at a time when almost all are sinking into the prevailing corruption, how
beautiful a rare, a single integrity is, let the instances of Lot and Noah
declare. And to those with whom a poem is an higher authority than the Bible,
let me recommend the most animated picture of a right^^u singularity that ever
was delineated, in -- The Seraph Abdiel, faithful found
Among the faithless, faithful only he:
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
Unshaken, unseduc'd, unterrified,
His loyalty he kept, his love and zeal:
Nor NUMBERS, nor EXAMPLE with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind,
Though SINGLE.
PAR. LOST, b. iv.

Few indeed of the more orderly and decent have any objection to that degree of
religion which is compatible with their general acceptance with others, or the
full enjoyment of their own pleasures. For a formal and ceremonious exercise of
the outward duties of christianity may not only be kept up without exciting
censure, but will even procure a certain respect and confidence; and is not
quite irreconcilable with a voluptuous and dissipated life. So far many go; and
fo far "as godliness is profitable to the life that is," it passes without
reproach.

But as soon as men begin to consider religious exercises not as a decency, but
a duty; not as a commutation for a self-denying life, but as a means to promote
a holy temper, and a virtuous conduct: as soon as they feel disposed to carry
the effect of their devotion into their daily life: as soon as their principles
discover themselves, by leading them to withdraw from those scenes, and abstain
from those actions, in which the gay place their supreme happiness as soon as
something is to be done, and something is to be parted with; then the world
begins to take offense, and to stigmatize the activity of that piety, which had
been commended as long as it remained inoperative, and had only evaporated in
words.

But when religion, like the vital principles, takes its seat in the heart, and
sends out supplies of life and heat to every part; diffuses motion, soul, and
vigor, through the whole circulation; and informs and animates the whole man:
when it operates on the practice, influences the conversation, breaks out into
a lively zeal for the honor of God, and the best interests of mankind: then
the sincerity, or the understanding, of that person will become questionable:
and it must be owing to a very fortunate combination of circumstances indeed,
if he can at once preserve the character of parts and piety.

But it is a folly to talk of being too holy, too strict, or too good. Where
there happens to appear some ^oundation for the charge of enthusiasm (as there
are indeed too often in good people eccentricities which justify the censure),
we may depend upon it, that it proceeds from some defect in the judgment, and
not from any excess in the piety; for in goodness there is no excess: and it is
as preposterous to say that any one is too good, or too pious, as that he is
too wise, too strong, or too healthy; since the highest point in all these is
only the perfection of that quality which we admired in a lower degree. There
may be an imprudent, but there cannot be a superabundant goodness. An ardent
imagination may mislead a rightly turned heart; and a weak intellect may
incline the best intentioned to ascribe too much value to things of
comparatively small importance. Such an one not having discernment enough to
perceive where the force and stress of duty lie, may innocently discredit
religion by a too scrupulous exactness in points of small intrinsic value.

And even well-meaning men, as well as hypocrites, may think too much is done
when their "mint" and "anise" are rigorously tithed.

BOOKS for the Instruction and Amusement of Children. Printed and sold by
William Young, the Conner of Chestnut and Second streets.
THE New England Primer. Adorned with cuts. Price (...) cents. The Moving
Market; or Philadelphia Cries. Embellished with thirty-one elegant Engravings.
4 cents. The New year's Gift Containing diverting and Instructive Histories
Adorned with cuts. 6 cents. The History of Little King Pippin showing how he
became a great man. With beautiful engravings. 6 cents. The History of the
Bible abridged. (...) with cuts. 18 3-4 cents. The House that Jack built; with
other tales. 4 cents. The new History of Polly Cherry and her Golden Apple. To
which are added the adventures of Prince George. 4 cents. Easy Lessons. 12
cents.

