

INSTRUCTIVE AND ENTERTAINING EMBLEMS On various Subjects.

BY MISS THOUGHTFUL.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY J. BABCOCK.

1796.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z and ct sb sk st ssi ffi
^^l sl fl ff ss si fi,;:. -!? '

OF EDUCATION. Emblem I.
SEE in what evil plight yon vine appears,
nor spreading leaves, nor purple cluster bears: --
But if around the elm her arm she throws,
or by some friendly prop supported grows,
soon shall the stem be clad with foliage green,
and clustered grapes beneath the leaves be seen. --
Thus prudent care must rear the youthful mind,
by love supported, and with sense refined:
It Is thus alone the human plant can rise,
Unprop'd it droops, and unsupported dies.
There cannot be a truer emblem of the state of infancy, than in this of the
vine, which, when it is reared with care, rewards us with its luscious fruit;
but, if neglected, presents us with nothing but leaves and stalks.

Industry. Emblem II.
OBSERVE, thou sluggard, but the little ant,
midst summer's plenty think of winter's want;
by constant journies careful to prepare her stores,
and bringing home the corny (...)
lest it elude her care and (...) again,
she bites the end of every little grain.
Behold each insect, how their deeds appear,
what marks of thought, contrivance, hope and fear.
When we behold but the little, seemingly insignificant ant, what a moral and
instructive lesson may be drawn from it, in that excellent proverb, "Employ
well the hour present." Idleness is the cause of many evils; it brings both
misery and want; it destroys the health of body, and the peace of mind. But
industry, besides giving us plenty, gives us health, without which there can be
no solid enjoyment.

Improvement. Emblem III.
SEE how the little be employs her hours,
in sipping fragrance from the various flowers:
no plant, no herb, that nature's hand prepares,
but yields her honey to reward her cares.
Learn from the be, from each event to find,
some hint of use or profit to your mind.
Nothing so small but you may draw from thence
improvement for your virtue or your sense.
Honey like this life's evils will assuage,
and give you sweets in your declining age.
The be, like unto the ant, is one of those little insects that teaches us to
provide in due time, what we may have occasion for at a future period. -- The
be is ever busy in the summer season, and there is no flower but yields
something for their winter's support. Follow her example.

Time.
TIME'S an hand's breadth, it is a tale;
it is a vessel under sail;
it is a short lived fading flower,
it is a rainbow on a shower;
it is a torrent, rapid stream,
it is a shadow, it is a dream;
it is a bubble, it is a sigh; --
Be prepared in youth to die.
Inordinate Desire. Emblem V.
THE busy insect hovering round the light,
pleased with the taper's beams which gild the night,
still round and round in giddy circles flies,
till caught within the scorching blaze it dies.
Ah! silly thing, the source of all thy joy,
a beauteous mischief, shines but to destroy. --
Even so the youth who burns with wild desires,
often falls the victim of un^allowed fires.
Avoid the glittering evil, shun the (...),
which sin and guilt for artless youth prepare;
lest with the moth one common fate you prove,
and perish by the excesses which you love.
Shun all temptations, if you are wise, and be not deceived by appearances.
Vice, folly and danger, lurk often under the most inviting charms. --

Sweetest leaves the rose adorn,
Yet beneath they hide a thorn.
Vain Pursuits. Emblem VI.
FROM sultry noon till night's dull shades descend,
behold the boy his fruitless chase attend;
To gain the insect's painted wings he flies,
and pleased at last obtains the gaudy prize;
but whilst its beauties he surveys with joy,
those hands which seize them fatally destroy. --
Even so those pleasures which we sigh to gain,
and sacrifice our quiet to obtain,
with gaudy flutterings tempt us to pursue,
but while we grasp them, vanish from our view;
or gained, but ill reward our labor past,
crushed as we seize them by our eager haste.
This is an apt emblem of the impetuosity of youth, who with a blind
precipitancy pursues vain pleasures, that can afford no solid enjoyment. Be
moderate in the pursuit of pleasures, and you will then truly enjoy them.

Vain Glory. Emblem VII.
BEHOLD the silly bird, how proudly vain
of the bright colors of his gaudy train!
Even to a proverb grown his idle pride,
by outward show alone is worth supplied;
for no harmonious sound, no cheerful note,
must ever issue from that hideous throat;
nor of the hundred eyes that grace his tail,
can one for sight, or real use avail. --
O son of vanity, be wise in time!
apply the moral of this homely rhyme:
To real worth alone should praise be given,
for real worth inherits it from heaven.
Like the proud peacock is the son of vanity; and surely it is more ridiculous
in a rational creature to indulge this pride than in an unreasonable animal.
How worthless is man, however finely clad, without mental qualifications! A
fine house unfurnished is but an uncomfortable dwelling.

Evil and its Punishment. Emblem VIII.
WHILE the sweet nightingale chaunts forth her lays,
her warbling throat the hidden nest betrays,
eager to seize it hastes the thoughtless boy,
and all the mother's comfort to destroy;
when lo! the faithless branch in pieces broke,
his limbs are shattered with a dreadful stroke. --
So when we seek some dear prized joy to gain,
and buy our pleasure with another's pain,
our slippery steps to evil are betrayed,
we fall unpitied in the snare we made.
This is a just emblem of those who seek their own good at the expense of that
of others, and often meet with a bitter disappointment, and lament too late the
evils which themselves have occasioned. Hence learn the danger of fraud, lest,
like the boy in the emblem, you prove the author of your own destruction.

Tyranny and Oppression. Emblem IX.
LO! the fierce lion, how he lordly stalks,
grimly majestic in his lonely walks;
when round he looks, all living creatures fly,
and clears the desert with his rolling eye.
By the pale moon he takes his destined round,
and lashed his side, and furious tears the ground,
while shrieks and dying groans the desert fill,
and rage and rend; their ravenous jaws distill
with crimson foam, and when the banquet's over,
he strides away, and paints his steps with gore.
In flight alone the shepherd puts his trust,
and shudders at the talons in the dust.
The lion is a fit emblem of tyranny; his royalty consists in cruelty,
strength, and power; in raising terror, instead of confidence and love; in
being a destroyer, and not a safeguard; hence he is called the sovereign of the
forest.

Temptation. Emblem X.
THE silly fish, while playing in the brook,
has gorged and swallowed the destructive hook --
In vain he flounces on the quivering hair,
drawn panting forth to breathe the upper air.
Caught by his folly -- in the glittering bait
he meets his ruin, and submits to fate. --
Avoid base bribes -- The tempting lure displayed,
if once you taste you perish self-betray'd.
Be slow to take, when strangers haste to give,
lest of your ruin you the price receive.
What a fit emblem is this of those heedless persons who suffer themselves to
be deluded by glittering temptations, or drawn into snares by the artifices of
the vicious and designing! The offers of some men are dangerous; let the
character of the giver, and the conditions he is likely to exact be well
considered before you receive the gift.

Brotherly Love. Emblem XI.
LO! here the valiant twins whose glorious name
the poets consecrate to endless fame! --
Two bodies swayed by one agreeing mind,
loving in life, and not in death disjoined. --
For feats of arms through all the world renowned,
for friendship more, the brother chiefs were found:
Through life's whole race one common fate they share,
alike united, or in peace or war. --
Learn hence true friendship and fraternal love,
an offering grateful to the throne above.
By this emblem we are informed that man was by nature framed for society, and
that there can be no happiness without the benefit of friendship. By this we
mutually supply the wants of each other, and enjoy those blessings of life,
which, without it, we could seldom purchase.

Fidelity. Emblem XII.
BEHOLD the faithful beast resolved to die
near where his much loved master's ashes lie;
emblem of constancy he yields his breath
for ancient love, and seals his ^aith by death. --
Hence learn fidelity; with grateful mind
repay the courteous, to your friends be kind.
Whatever fortune on your life attend,
the best of treasures is a faithful friend.
The dog is of all animals the most faithful and sagacious. -- There are few
things which a good dog may not be trained up to do to serve his master; and,
if he be well used, there are fewer still that he will not do to defend him.

Gratitude and fidelity to our friends, are the best qualities that can adorn
our natue. In this respect, the emblem of the dog is a very just one, and a
good example for man.

Heavenly Love. Emblem XIII.
THE tender pelican with ceaseless cares,
protects her young ones, and their food prepares;
from her own breast the nourishment proceeds;
as with her blood, with which her brood she feeds:
Emblem of heaven's supernal graces known
and parent's love to dearest children shown.
To God above, and to your friends below,
still let your breast with zeal and duty glow;
much to your parents, more to heaven you owe.
The pelican is the only bird that feeds her young with her own blood. In this
emblem is expressed the state of dependence we are in, on the one hand, and the
great goodness of God on the other, who equally supplies our temporal and our
spiritual wants, and who sent his only Son to be a propitiation for our sins,
who for us shed his own blood, and by whose stripes we are healed -- The
pelican, indeed, grants this supply but to her own brood; but the great Author
of our salvation did this for wicked offenders, he died even for his greatest
enemies, and bore our sins, that we might be made righteous, and that we might
proceed from grace to grace, till at last we are made heirs of his glorious
inheritance.

BOOKS for CHILDREN.
A handsome assortment of Books for Children, constantly for sale by J.
Babcock, near the bridge, Hartford, ten per cent lower, by the quantity, than
the imported editions.


