A DISH OF ALL SORTS, OR THE NOVELIST's COMPANION. BEING A COLLECTION of PIECES
that are witty, funny, curious, useful and droll.

Compiled from the works of CURIOUS MEN, by the Hon. SECRETARY of the Company
of Flying Booksellers.

Printed in the year 1797, for the perusal of the good, bad, small, and great.

THE AFFECTING HISTORY, of the Dreadful Distresses of Frederic Manheim's
family, who was taken prisoners by the Indians, in 1779.
FREDERIC Manheim, an industrious German, with his family, consisting of his
wife, Catharine, a daughter of eighteen years of age, and Maria and Christina,
his youngest children (twins,) about sixteen, resided near the river Mohawk,
eight miles writ of Johnston. On the 19th of October, 1779, the father being at
work at some distance from his habitation, and the mother and eldest daughter
on a visit at a neighbor's, two hostile Canasadaga Indians rushed in, and
captured the twin sisters.

The party to which those savages belonged, consisted of fifty warriors, who
after securing twenty-three of the inhabitants of that neighborhood, (among
whom was the unfortunate Frederic Manheim) and firing their houses, retired for
four days with the utmost precipitancy, till they were quite sa^e from pursuit.
The place where they halted on the evening of the day of rest, was a ^hick pine
swamp, which rendered the darkness of an uncommonly ^^^omy night, still more
dreadful, The Indians kind (...) fire, which they had not done before, and
ordered their prisoners, whom they keep together, to refresh themselves with
such provisions as they had. The Indians ate by themselves. Instead of retiring
to rest after supping* the appalled captives observed their enemies busi^d in
operations which b^ded nothing good. Two saplings were pruned clear of branches
up to the very top, and all the brush cleare^ away for several rods around
them. While this was doing, others were splitting pitch pine billers into small
splinters about five in^hes in length, and as small as one's little finger,
sharpening one end, and dipping the other in melted ^urp^n^^^.

At length, with countenances distorted by infernal fury, and with hideous
yells, the two savages who had captured the hapless Maria and Christina, leaped
into the midst of their circle, and dragged those ill-fated maidens, shrieking,
from the embraces of their companions. These warriors had disagreed about whose
property the girls should be, as they had jointly seized them; and, to
terminate the dispute, agreeably to the abominable usage of the savages, it was
determined by the chiefs of the party, that the prisoners, who gave ^ise to the
contention, should be destroyed; and that their captors should be the principle
agents in the exe^rable business. These ^uries ass^^^d by their comrades,
stripped the forlera girls, already con^ulsed with apprehensions, and tied each
to a sapling, with their hands as high extended above their hands as possible;
and then pitched them from their knees to their shoulders, with upwards of six
hundred of the sharpened splinters above described, which, at every puncture,
were attended with screams of distress, that echoed and re^echoed through the
wilderness. And then to complete the infernal tragedy, the splinters, all
standing erect on the bleeding victims, were every one set on fire, and
exhibited a scene of monstrous misery, beyond the power of speech to describe,
or even the imagination to conceive. It was not until near three hours had
elapsed from the commencement of their torments, and that they had lost almost
every resemblance of the human form, that these helpless virgins sunk down in
the arms of their deliverer, Death.

REMARKABLE encounter of a white man with two Indians. In a letter to a
gentleman of Philadelphia.
Westmoreland, April 26, 1779. DEAR SIR,
I WROTE you a note a few days ago, in which I promised you the particulars of
an affair between a white man of this county, and two Indians: now I mean to
relate the whole story, and it is as follows:

The white man is upwards (...) sixty years of age; his name is David Morgan;
he had, through fear of the Indians, fled to a tort about twenty miles above
the province line, and near the east side of Mon^nga^ela river. From thence he
sent some of his younger children to his plantation, which was about a mile
distant, there to do some business in the field He afterward thought fit to
follow, and see how they ^ared. Getting to his field* and seating himself upon
the sense, within view of his children, where they were at work, he esp^ed two
Indians making toward them; on which he called to his children to make their
escape. The Indians immediately bent their course toward him. He made the best
haste to escape away, that his age and consequent infirmity would permit; but
soon found he would be overtaken, which made him think of defense. Being-armed
with a good rifle, he faced about, and found himself under the necessity of
running four or five perches toward the Indians, in order to obtain shelter
behind a tree of sufficient size.

This unexpected in manceuvre obliged the Indians, who were close by, to st^p
where they had but small timber to shelter behind, which gave Mr. Morgan an
opportunity of shooting one of them dead upon the spot. The other, taking the
advantage of Morgan's empty gun, advanced upon him, and ^ut him to flight a
second time, and being lighter of foot than the old man, soon came up within a
few paces, when he fired at him, but fortunately missed him. On this Mr. Morgan
^aced about again, to try his fortune, and clubbed his firelock. The Indian, by
this time, had got his tomahawk in order for a throw, at which they are very
dextrous. Morgan made the blow, and the Indian the throw, almost at the same
instant, by which the little finger was cut off Morgan's left hand, and the one
next to it almost off, and his gun broke off by the lock. Now they came to
close grips. Morgan put the Indian down; but soon found himself overturned, and
the Indian upon him, feeling for his knife, and yelling most hideously, as
their manner is, when they look upon victory to be certain. However, a woman's
apron, which the Indian had plundered out of a house in the neighborhood, and
tied on him, above his knife, was now in his way, and so hindered him getting
at it quickly, that Morgan got one of his fingers fast in his mouth, and
deprived him of the use of that hand, by holding it; and disconcerted him
considerably by chewing it; all the while observing how he would come on with
his knife* length the Indian had got hold of his knife, but so far toward the
blade, that Morgan got a small hold of the hinder end; and as the Indian pulled
it out of the scabbard, Morgan giving his finger a severe screw with his teeth,
twitched it out through his hand, cutting it most grievously. By this time they
were both got partly on their feet, and the Indian was endeavoring to
disengage himself; but Morgan held fast by the finger, and quickly applied the
point of the knife to the side of its savage owner; a bone happening in the way
prevented its penetrating any great depth, but a second blow directed more
toward the belly, found free passage into his bowels. The old man turned the
point upward^, made a large wound, burying the knife therein, and so took his
departure instantly to the fort, with the news of his adventure.

On the report of Mr. Morgan, a party went out from the fort, and found the
first Indian where he had fallen; the second they found not yet dead* at one
hundred yards distance from the scene of action, hid in the top of a fallen
tree, where he had picked the knife out of his body, after which had come out
parched corn, etc. and had bound up his wound with the apron aforementioned;
and on first sight he saluted them with, How do do, brother, how do do, brother?
but alas! poor savage, their brotherhood to him extended only to tomahawking,
scalping, and, to gratify some peculiar feelings of their own, they skinned
them both.

TABLE of the Remarkable Occurrences in America, from the year 1492, to 1794.
1492. AMERICA discovered by Columbus, October 11, so named by Americus
Vespucius, 1497; not known to the French till 1504; had negro slaves first
carried to it, 1508. 1606. The first permanent settlement in Virginia. 1620.
New England planted by a colony of English Puritans. 1625. Connecticut began to
be settled by emigrants from Massachusetts. 1635. Rhode Island began to be
settled. 1667. The New Netherlands, now New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania,
confirmed to Britain by the Dutch and Swedes. 1725. Vermont first began to be
settled. 1740. Paper Money first used in America; revived in '88. 1762.
American Philosophical Society established. 1764. American Stamp Act passed in
the Parliament of England; repealed, March, 1766. 1768. Troops ordered to
Boston. 1770. Soldiers at Boston f^^e on the inhabitants. 1773. Tea destroyed
at Boston by the inhabitants. 1774. The Massachusetts people prepare to defend
their rights by arms. The first Congress met at Philadelphia Sept. 10, 1775.
Skirmishes at C^ncord and Lexington. The first settlement in Kentucky. Crown
Point taken by the Americans, May, 4. The 2d Congress met at Philadelphia May
10. Ticonderoga taken by the Americans, May 13. Genesis Washington elected
commander in chief of the American forces, June 15. Action at Bunkers Hill,
June 17. Charleston (Mass) bu^ (...) by the British, June 17. Montreal taken by
the Americans, Nov. 12, and retaken by the British, June 15, 1776. Genesis Gage
seized the powder at Charleston (Mass) September 1. ^a^mouth (N.C.) destroyed
by the British, Oct. 18. Col. Warner defeats Sir Guy Carleton at Lon^^eil,
October 31. Quebec besieged by the Americans, Dec. 6. An assault, which
miscarried, made on Quebec by the Americans, Dec. 31. 1776. Nor^o^lk (Virginia)
burnt by the British, Jan. 1^ Genesis Schuyler disarms the inhabitants of Tryon
county, New York, Jan. Po^^smouth (Virg) destroyed by the Eng. Jan. 1. Boston
evacuated by the British* March 17th. The British ship Hope, with 1500 barrels
of powder, and a variety of other military implements taken, in Boston B^y, May
17. Battle at Three Rivers, June. 1776. Genesis Thomson, defeated and taken
prisoner at the Three Rivers, June 10. America declared an Independent State by
Congress, July 4. The British made an unsuccessful attempt against Charleston (
S.C.) June 21. Battle of Long Island, Aug. 27. Newyork surrendered to the
British, Sept. 15. Sea fight on Lake Champlain, Oct. 11, where Arnold was
defeated. Battle of White Plains October 28. Fort Washington taken by the
British, Nov. 16. Rhode Island taken by the British Dec. 6. Genesis Lee taken
prisoner by the British, Dec. 13. The Hessia^s surprised and taken at Trenton
by Genesis Washington, Dec. 26. 1777. Can^onade at Trenton, Jan. 2. Action at
Princeton, Jan. 3. Ticoederoga evacuated by the Americans, July 6. The American
armed vessels taken and destroyed by the British near Skenesborough Falls, July
8. Genesis Presect taken prisoner by Col. Borton, July, action re^t Bermington
(Ver.) August 16. Battle of B^andywine, Sept. 11. Action above Stillwater, on
the borders of Hudson river, Sept. 1^. Philadelphia taken by the British, Sept.
26. Battle of Germantown, Oct. 4. Action tear Saratoga, Oct. 7. E^^p^^ bornt by
the British, Oct. 16. Burgayne and his whole army taken prisoners near
Saratoga, Oct. 17. 1778. Treaty with France, Jan. 6. Concilitary terms offered
by G. Britain to America, and rejected, April 13. Philadelphia evacuated by the
British, June 18. Battle of Monmouth, June 28. Bedford burnt and great property
destroyed by the British, Sep. 5. Col. Bayla^'s regiment of light dragoons,
after they had begged for quarters, massacred by the British, near Tapan, (N.
J.) Sept. 27. 1779. Action at Bria^ Creck (Georgia) May 3d. 1779 Action at
Stone Ferry (S.C.) June 20. Stoney Poi^t taken by the Americans July 15. The
British ga^^is a surprised and taken prisoners at Powles Hook, by Major Lee,
July 19. Sea sight off Penobscot (N.C.) July 30. Assault on Savannah, by the
Americans and French, October. 1780. Charleston (S. C.) surrendered to the
British, May 13. Battle of Camden, Aug. 16. Arnold deserts to the English,
Sept. 24. Major Andre taken by three Newyork militia, Sept. 27, and executed as
a Spy, October 2. Defeat of the British at King's Mountain, near the confi^es
of N. and S. Carolina, Oct. 7. Col. T^rleton attacked a p^rry of 300 Americans
at the Wechaws (N.C.) and notwithstanding their entreaties for quarters, killed
most of them. 1781. British invaded Virginia, Jan. 3. Richmond plundered and
great proper^y destroyed by the British, Jan. 7. Battle of the Cowpens (S.C.)
where the British were defeated, Jan. 17. Battle near Guilford, (N.C.) March
15. Fort Watson (S.C.) surrendered to the Americans, April 23. Second battle of
Camden, April 25. M^nchester plundered, and great property destroyed by the
British, April 30. British evacuate Camden, May 9. The British port of
Orangeburgh, surrendered to the Americans, May 11. Fort Granby (S.C.)
surrendered to the Americans, May 15. George Town evacuated by the British
troops May 16. Fort Cornwallis at Augusta, surrendered to the Americans, June
15. Ninety Six abandoned by the British, July. De Gras^'s fleet arrived Aug.
26. Engagement off the cap^s of Virginia between the English and French fleets,
Sept. 6. Battle of Eutaw springs (S. C.) Sept. 8. 1781. New London ^rn^ by
Arnold, Sep. 13. Lord Cornwallis surrendered his whole army and the ports of
York and Gloucester, to the Americans, Oct. 19. 1782. Holland acknowledged the
American Independence in April. Battle near Sava^n^^. Charleston (S C.)
evacuated by the British Dec. 14. 1783. The Independence of America
acknowledged by Sweden. Denmark, in February. Spain, in March. Russia, in July.
Great Britain, in the definitive treaty, Sep 3. 1783. Newyork evacuated by the
British, Nov. 25. American army discharged, Dec. 17^6. Two settlements made in
the Western territory. 1789. The government of the United States organized
according to the New Constitution. 1790. Genesis Harmer was defeated by the Miami
Indians, Sept. 30 1791. Genesis St. Clair defeated by the Indians, Nov. 4. 1794
Genesis Wayne defeated the Indians, August 20.

A CURIOUS LAW CASE.
AN indictment was lately preferred at Colchester (England) against a person
for assault. It appeared in evidence, that the plaintiff attempted to hang
h^mself, and that the defendant finding him in that situation, cut him down,
twe^ked him by the nose, and str^ck him several hard blows on his back, for the
purpose of reviving suspended animation. The jury very properly c^nsi^e^ing
that there was no MALICE in the case, found a verdict for the defendant.

MAXIMS.
THE friend of order has made half his way to virtue.

Modest is the temperament to pride, as humility is the corrective to self love.

Wealth is ^o^ so much the cause as the effect of exertion.

Difference of High Water at several places from New London.
AT New York, Tarpauli^-Cove and Say-Bro^k Bo^, the same as New London; at
Rhode Island and Ambe^, 40 minutes sooner; at Providence, 25 minutes sooner; at
Sandy-Hook 2 hours and 40 minutes sooner; at Albany, 3 hours and 10 minutes
sooner; at Boston, 2 hours and 20 minutes later; at Guilford and New Have^, ^
hours and 50 minutes later; at Philadelphia 5 hours and ^0 minutes later; at
Norwich Landing, 45 minutes later; at Southold harbor and Sagg harbor 2 hours
and 10 minues later.

USEFUL and GENUINE RECEIPTS.
A certain Cure for the MEASLES in SWINE.
IT frequently happens that swine are killed when disordered by the measles,
which is easily discovered, by the mea^ or flesh containing small globu^a^ red
or white pus^^le^, of different sizes, varying according to the different
degrees of the disease; which originate from their being fed with musty damaged
corn, or some unwholesome food; or from its being b^iled in lead or copper
vessels in which it has lain too long; or from their being kept in a wet or
dirty pen; either of which causes tends to obstruct the f^^e circulation of the
fluids; hence arise those globular postules, which are the juices rendered
viscid and co^gulated. -- About once a week, mix two spoonfuls of madder in
their food, which p^events obstructions, acting as a d^cretie, and is at the
same time an astringent. And, on some other day in the week, give a spoonful or
two of an equal quantity of flour-of-sulphur and saltpeter* well p^^n^e^ and
mixed, which purifies and cools the blood. Al these different article^, added
to each pail of food in the morning on separate days, prevent the measles, keep
the swine healthy, and fatten them more expeditiously.

For different diseases in HORSES.
HIDE BOUND.
To cure this, it will be necessary to put your horse on a pretty liberal diet;
also every day a ma^h of bran or bo^^ed rye should be given him; and twice a
week give him half an ounce of brimstone in his br^n.

SCRATCHES.
Cut the hair off close, and with the legs with strong soap suds or urine; put
on a ^ur^ip po^l^ice a few da^^, mixed with hog's fat and li^seed ^i^; it will
soon effect the cure.

HOOF BOUND.
Take a phlegm lancet, and open the house at the edg^ of the hair, to give it
liberty of spreading. Then gre^se it daily with woodchuck, sku^k or dog's
grease, that it may grow.

SCOURING.
Give your horse two quarts of the liquor, wherein garden rhubard, fl^x i^ed
and mallows, have been boiled; or boil white o^k bark, and white pine together;
give him one quart of this morning and evening til. well.

Of diseases in CATTLE.
For the SCAS or SCURF.
Take soft soap and ^ar an^int the place, and it will soon cure it.

To kill WORMS.
Take savine, cut it fi^e and make it into balls, with fresh butter, to be put
down the creature's throat. Or give half an ounce of powdered aloas in a quart
of savine tea.

For loss of the CUD.
The quickest and best method is to ^ake half the cud from another creature,
and put in warm into the mouth of that which has lost it; this remedy is
infallible.

METHOD to destroy WEAZLES.
Take Crude Mercury, Sal Armonick, and Wheat flour; make them up in a paste
with honey, and strew it in little piles where their haunts are, and by
greedily devouring they will die.

To kill RATS and MICE.
Mix u^slak'd Lime and Oatmeal together, or Wheat flour, and lay on bits of
chips where they come.

A sure Method to destroy the CANKER WORMS, [proved by long experience.]
Take a strip of paper about 6 inches wide and tie or pa^te round each apple
tree, about a foot below the lowed branches, then get some of the thinest Tar
you can, and with a brush cover the paper well with it. Examine the trees every
evening, and as often as you find the Tar growing dr^, pay it on again. If your
Tar is too thick, you may warm it by the fire. By using the paper, less Tar
will answer, and very probable that the hot nature of the Tar on the bark may
injure the tree.

Curious and Entertaining ANECDOTES.
A CERTAIN Paddy, newly transported into this country, passed by where a farmer
was gathering pumpkins. By my ^^oul and what do you call them, say Paddy --
Mares eggs, says the farmer. And by St. Patrick, and w^n't you sell me one of
them? for I wish to get in a way of raising my own horses, for my poor old
father straightened the hemp for nothing but for taking one without liberty --
Yes, yes, for a quarter of a dollar you may take one. So Paddy takes it and on
he goes -- and in descending a kill he by chance let the pumpkin fall, and it
took a direction down the hill toward a bunch of bushes, and Mr. Paddy in full
speed after it The Pumpkin struck a stump and split open -- a rabit which lay
under the bushes asleep, started, almost frightened to death, and Paddy after
it, yelling -- stop that Cault! stop that Cault! stop that Cault!

2. A FARMER who had married a rich wife, after promising another of meaner
circumstances, endeavored to palliate his conduct, to a clergyman, who told
him, it was so wrong that he did not know any thing like it. -- If you do not,
I do, says Modge, it is similar to your leaving a poor parish for a rich one.

3. SIR John Barber had a son, who demanded permission to travel. Go, said the
old knight, and see the world, provided it does not see you

4. AS a minister and a lawyer were riding together, says the minister to the
lawyer, sir, do you ever make any mistakes in pleading? I do, said the lawyer.
And what do you do with mistakes? said the minister. Why, si^, i^ large ones, I
me^d them: If small ones, I let them go, said the lawyer. And pray, sir,
continued he, do you ever make any mistakes in preaching ^ Yes, sir, said the
minister, I do. And what do you do with mistakes? said the lawyer. Why, sir, I
dispens^ with them much in the same way you just observed: ^ rectify large
ones, and neglect small ones. Not long since, continued he, as I was preaching,
I went to observe that the devil was the father of liars, but mistook and said
lawyers, and the mistake was so small I let it go.

5. JEMMY Johnson being asked what wine he chiefly chose for his own drinking,
answered, that of other people's.

6. A FRENCH Constitutional Priest, who had usually a very small audience, was
one day preaching a^ the Church in his village, when the doors being open a
gander and several geese came stalking up the middle aisle The preacher
availing himself of the circumstance, observed, "He could no longer find fault
with his district for non attendance, because, though they did not come
themselves, they had sent their representatives!"

7. KNAVERY is almost always its own punishment as virtue is its own reward. A
woman who had brough^ some light pounds of butter to market, had the goo^ luck
to sell them all but one before the clerk of the market came about: when she
perceived the officer of justice, she began to dread the fa^e of her last roll;
however, iniquity is fertile in expedients she thought it di^ not want more
than two ounces to make it a pound, an^ therefore, as the clerk approached, she
squeezed tw^ dollars into the roll, to make it the right weight: the clerk
come, weighed the butter it was still to light; h^ threw it into his basket,
dollars and all, and st^ppe^ away to inspect the butter of another woman, who,
t^ avoid the possibility of censure or loss, had put it u^ half an ounce above
the standard weight.

8. Old Frederick king of Prussia, had a great opinion of the utility of
experience. A very young office presented a petition, requesting his majesty
would appoint him a supreme general. The king wrote under his petition -- 'Turn
to your bible, and in the tent^ chapter, the fifth verse, of the second book of
Samuel you will find it thus written. -- Tarry in Jericho, unti^ thy ^eard is
grown, and then come again.'

9. A WIT being once very low in pocket, and meeting with a lord who was
walking in the court, thought to weedle him out of a broad piece, and coming up
to him, said, my lord, I had a strange dream last night, and now half of it is
out; for I dreamed that I met you here, and that you gave me a broad piece.
Well, says his lordship, then I will make out the other part, and so gave it
him. But stay, now I think on it, give me that again, it is a piece my mistress
gave me to keep for herself. Scroggin readily returned it, in hopes of a better
gratuity. Now, said my lord, I Will tell you my dream, that it may be out
likewise. I dreamt that I gave a fool money, and he had not the wit to keep it;
and so passed on, leaving Scroggin to scratch his ears, and fretting to be so
outwitted.

10. TWO Negroes having spent an evening at a tavern, where the Mug went
briskly round on returning home, one of them happened to strike his foot
against the remains of an old post that once stood in the way, but was now
almost worn to the ground, which brought him flat on his face in the mud, on
his rising and rubbing himself* he said to his comrade in a pet, "I wonder why
de Debble de Sun cannot shine disse dark night, and not keep shining all day
time, when no need on him"

11. ONE day the famous Mr. Whiston dined with sir Joseph Tekyll, master of the
rolls. Lacy Tekyll who was one of the sisters of Lord Summers, thought that she
must know more than any other woman, and was often puzzling herself and others
with curious questions After dinner she said, -- Mr Whiston, -- a difficulty
occurs to me* in the Mosaic account of the creation, which perhaps you can
resolve me in, and it is this. -- Since it pleased God to create the woman out
of the man, why did he form her out of the rib, rather than any other part?"
Whiston scratched his head and answered, -- "Indeed, madam, I do not know:
unless it be that the rib is the most cr^cked part of the body." There said the
husband, you have got it now, I hope you are satisfied.

12. A YOUNG woman being to take her oath, before a justice of the peace, as a
witness in some cause, the examiner asked her by what title he should set her
down, whether maid, wife, or widow? "O certainly a maid!" said she, for I never
was married," He seeing her a handsome, agreeable girl, asked her how old she
was -- she answered 24. "How," said he, "24! have a care, my girl, what you
say; remember you are now on your oath -- may I safely set you down a maid at
these years? the girl, struck with the question, and considering a while with
herself, said "I pray you, sir, to avoid all mistakes, write me down Young
Woman."

13. A CLERGY MAN seeing his son about to drink a glass of Brandy, says, "Son,
don't drink that filthy stuff, ardent spirits is the worst enemy you have." I
know that, father, replied the son, but you know we are commanded to love our
enemies -- so, here it goes."

14. A POOR man and his wife were traveling; they sa^ down by the road
exceedingly fatigued. The wife signed, "I wish I was in Heaven" -- the husband
replied, "I wish I was at the tavern." "On, you old rogue, says the wife you
always want to get the best place."

15. A SLOVENLY fellow enquired of a friend, how he could go to a billiard
table in disguise -- "Put on a clean shirt Sir."

16. ON the banks of a rivulet in the North of Ireland is a stone with this
inscription, "Take notice, that when this stone is out of sight, it is not safe
to ford the river."

SELECT POETRY.
THE TWO TAILORS.
THROUGH Pancaras church yard, as two Tailor^ were walking,
Of princes and p^^ities earnestly talking;
Says Robert to Richard (by way of digression)
"'It Is a monstrous fi^e morning beyond all expression:
If this weather goes on, added he, looking round,
'T will bring everything charmingly out of the ground."
"God forbid, replied Richard ^ler^ly, for here
I buried two wives without dropping a tear."
EPITAPH, wrote on a grave stone, dated 1016.
HERE lies a man that was not born,
His father lived not before him,
He did not live, and did not die,
Yet underneath this stone does lie, Aged 64.
The SEAMAN's Home.
OH you, whose lives on land are passed,
And keep from dangerous seas a osf;
Who careless listen to the bl^st,
Or beating rains upon the roof;
You^l tr^e need how seamen fare,
Condemned the angry storm to bear.
Sometimes* while breakers vex the tide,
He takes his station on the deck;
And now lashed over the vessel's side,
He clears away the cumbering wreck:
Yet while the b^^^ows a'er him soam,
The Ocean is his only home.
Still fresher bl^ws the midnight gale!
"All hands reef top sails" are the cries;
And while the clouds the Heavens veil,
Aloft to reef the sail he flie^!
In storms so rending, doomed to roam,
The Ocean is the Seaman's home.
EPIGRAMS.
By a gentleman who lived upon ill terms with his wife.
YE Gods, ye gave to me a Wife,
Out of your wanted favor,
To be the comfort of my life;
And I was glad to have her.
But if your Providence divine,
For greater bliss design her,
TO obey your will at any time,
I Am ready to resign her.
On a false MISTRESS.
MY heart still hovering round about you,
I thought I could not live without you:
Now we have been two months asunder,
How I lived with you -- is the wonder.
ON WOMAN.
WOMAN, charming, lovely creature,
Gentle, modest, glittering thing;
Most ref^^ed work of nature,
Fairer than the flowery spring.
Queen of every gentle passion,
Tender sympathy and love;
Perfect work of heavenly fashion,
Miniature of charms above.
Love and grace in rich profusion,
Softening man's ferocious soul;
All creation's fair conclusion.
Formed to beautify the whole.
THE LADIES NEW CATECHISM.
Q. FOR what end did you come into the world?

A. To get a husband.

Q. Which is the way to get a husband.

A. To dress, dance, chat, play and go to all manner of public places, except
church, for fear of being called a fanatic.

Q What is the duty of a husband.

A. To please his wife.

Q. What is the duty of a wife.

A. To please herself.

Q Are there no more duties incumbent on you as a fine Lady.

A. Yes, I must be deaf, dumb and blind, as occasion requires; deaf to the
voices of d^ns, and all such poor re^^^ions as most easily beset me; dumb when
my husband remonstrates; and blind to the whole race of city a^quaintance and
to country cousins.

The most acceptable homage which can be paid to the Deity is being virtu^^^.

A SURE METHOD To know whether it will be a long Winter, and what weather it
will be.
THERE are some things proper to be known by the husbandman, that will be of
great use to him, and s^^ve for a good precau^ion against the rig^^^s of the
winter; and he may take this for a certain presage of a very severe winter,
when there is a great plenty of a^^^ns.

A shepherd should take care to observe whether the ewes, after they have taken
ram, seek after them again; and by that they may guess that the next winter
will be a hard one.

Take notice of the 24th of Nov. and as that day is, so the winter is like to
prove; and as you find the ^5th of the same month, so will the month of January
be.

Y^^ may easily know what sort of a winter it will be, by observing the last
days of the moon between November and December; for as they prove, so will the
winter.

And to know what sort of a summer you will have, th^se who are nice observers
of the seasons say, that the three last days of the moon between April and May,
are infallible presages how it is like to prove.

A REMARKABLE INSTANCE OF THE EFFECTS OF SURPRISE.
AN attorney being grievously afflicted with the gout, which had confined him
several weeks to his h^mber, launched out into all those extravagances of
^^ssion which generally attend that exc^u^iat^^^g e^s^r^er. His pain was so
excessive that, though a^ other times he was not addicted t^ pro^an^ness of
speech, he upon this occasion exercised his tongue in the m^^t bit^er
invectives, cursing his leg, and wishing the d -- l ^ight rid him of it, rather
that suffer him to undergo ^uch torture and pain. A chimn^y sweeper had been
^irected to come that day to sweep the kitchen c^^m^ey* he sent his boy before
him with a message that he would immediately follow: the boy, in order to
prepare for his m^ster's coming, g^t up the chimney to observe the state of it,
but in coming down he misto^k his c^u^^e, and came down the chimney of the
chamber where the attorney was sitting cursing his gouty leg. To account for
the boy's mistake, it m^st observed, that both the kitchen and chamber chimneys
had the same funnel to convey out the smoke. The boy, seeing the attorney, made
his ob^^sance in his way, and said, "Your servant, Sir; my master is coming
immediately." The attorney, forg^tting, or probably being unacq^^inted with the
circumstance of the chimney being to be swept* thought that the imprecations he
had uttered had really called forth the d -- l: he was therefore so agitated
with the idea, that, forgetful of the disorder he labored under, he jumped out
his chair, and, to the astonishment of all the family, went down into the
kitchen as though the gout had never v^si^^d him: but, what was more
extraordinary, he has never since been in the least troubled with it.

Instance of the Sagacity of the AMERICAN INDIANS.
THE American Indians are not so stupid as the proud European fancies them to
be. A Spaniard, on a journey had ^et with an Indian in the mi^st of a desert.
They were both an horseback; the Spaniard's horse being very bad, he asked the
Indian, whose h^^se was (...) and vigorous, to make an exchange with him.
(...), as he should do. The Spaniard sought a cause of quarrel with him. They
came to blows; but the Spaniard, w^ll armed, seized easily the horse he wanted,
and continued his journey. The American p^^sues him into the next town, and
makes his complaint to the judge. The Spaniard is obliged to appear, and take
along with him the horse, he treats the Indian as a cheat, affi^ms the horse
belongs to him, and that he had reared it from a fo^^. There were no proofs of
the contrary, and the Judge, perplexed, was going to send the pleaders out of
the Court, and to dismiss the process; when the Indian cried out -- "The horse
is mine, and I Will prove it." He immediately strips off his clock, and co^ers
with it the animal's head. "That man being so confident that he had reared this
horse, command him," said he addressing himself to the Judge, "to tell which of
the two eyes is blind." The Spaniard, in order not to seem to (...) in the
least, answered immediately. "The right eye." The Indian uncovers the ho^se's
head: (...) is neither blind," said he, "of the right, nor of the left eye,"
The Judge, so convinced by so ingenious and strong a proof, adjudged him the
horse; and the affair was decided.

A way to tell good spirits from bad,
TO ^y spirits, put half a point into a tumbler, take s^l^t^e clean cotton* ^ay
it as ^ight^y as possible on the l^g^o^. ^f the spirits are of good proof, the
cotton will s^^k immediately to the bottom; add a little water to it, and the
cotton will rise.

A speci^^^ of Russian Barbarity, or, Cruelty unexe^plafied.
MADAM Lapouchin, the great ornament of (...) c^ur^ of Petersburgh, during the
reign of that ^mpress E^^z^beth, having contracted an intimacy with a foreign
ambassador, was brought under suspecion ^f plotting with him against the
government, and was accordingly c^n (...) to undergo the punishment of the
kn^^^. And replace of (...) in ^ she appeared in a g^^^e (...), which
heightened her beauty. -- Of whatever i^ (...) ^ight have been guilty, and
(...) ^e^^^ce, and her composure, but (...) in the sp^^tators the s^^ghte^^
suspicion of (...), l^^r youth also, her beauty, her life and spirit pleaded
(...). But all in (...): ^he was deserted by all an^ a^^nd^ned ^o su^ly
executioners, whom she be^eld with (...) doubt wh^^ (...) such preparati^^^
were intended for her. The cloak that (...). One of the (...) to the waist,
seized her by both hands, and threw her on his back, raising her some inches
from the ground. The other executioner laying hold of her delicate limbs with
his rough fists, put her in a posture for receiving the punishment. Then laying
hold of the ^nout, a sort of a whip made of a leather strap, he retreated a few
steps, and with a single stroke tore off a slip of skin from the neck downward,
repeating his strokes till all the skin of her back was cut off in small slips.
The executioner finished his talk by cutting out her tongue; after which she
was banished to Siberia.

MAXIMS.
Great affairs may be entrusted, and still greater actions expected, of him
who, by a single ready medium, knows how to unite and to attain many harmonious
ends.

Modesty is the temperament to pride, as humility is the corrective to self
love.

Be certain that he who has betrayed you once, will betray you again.

Who has no confidence in himself has no faith in others, and none in God.

JOHN TRUMBULL, (...) at his PRINTING (...) A (...) BOO^^ and STATION^^^; A
particular attention will be paid to have a supply of the most valuable
SCHOOL-BOOKS, which will be sold as CHEAP as can be purchased in Connecticut.

Also, for sale ^s above, Most all kinds of BLANKS that are used in this State.

CASH will be paid for Clean Cotton or Linen RAGS, at said Office.


