DIALOGUE, BETWEEN A Fond FATHER and his little SON.

Designed to amuse and instruct Children.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL, 1798.

PREFACE.
WHEREAS a Dialogue between a Father and Son, printed some time ago, met with a
speedy sale, and was thought of some advantage, it is now thought that a
continuation of said Dialogue, may be still more advantageous, and it is
committed to the press for that purpose.

A DIALOGUE, etc.
Father. DEAR Son, you remember that some considerable time ago, we took a
rambling walk through the orchards, fields and meadows, and close by the side
of the river, where we took a view of the bridges, mills and falls, and
proceeded down the stream until it emptied itself into the ocean, where the
great ships traverse the main, and go round the world, which is above twenty
thousand miles, or as the ships must sail, to go round the different capes of
land, it will be above forty thousand miles, before they can get back to the
place from whence they sat out.


Son. I very well remember that agreeable walk, and should be glad to take
another such, if you would go with me. -- But I never could understand how the
ships could go round the world, when there is so much land as well as water.


Father. Dear son, it is not strange that you should not fully understand it,
for there are many men that cannot fully comprehend it. But when you are older
and have read some books on geography, and had an opportunity also to see a
terrestial globe, where the globe is divided into land and water, and where the
tract of Lord Arson and Capt. Cook, is marked out on the globe, you may easily
conceive how they may go round the world, and return again to the place from
which they sat out.


Son. Truly sir, I think it would be a very pleasing study, and I hope that I
shall soon be ready to begin it, for I should be greatly pleased to see how the
globe is divided into land and water, and to see where the different nations of
the world live, and whether they be black or white, heathen or christian, and
what is the produce and manufacture of the different parts of the world.


Father. It Is truly a very agreeble study, and at a proper time I shall be glad
to instruct you therein, but at present we will defer it, and talk of something
else.


Son. Well sir I am willing to be directed by you, as you know what will be
most useful and beneficial to me.


Father. Since the time that we took that agreeable walk, you are become older
and bigger, and I hope have read and learned a good deal.


Son. Sir I have read some little story books wrote for the instruction of
children, such as the Mother's gift, the Father's legacy to his children, the
Child's Instructor, and Children's Friend, etc. I have also read some little
histories of the Bible.


Father. Have you not also read the bible.


Son. Yes Sir, I have read it through and through again, and some parts of it I
have read many times.


Father. Then I hope you remember a good deal that you have read.


Son. I hope that I remember some, but truly my memory is so poor, that I do
not remember half so much as I wish I did.


Father. What do you remember to have read in the Bible.


Son. I remember that in the beginning God created the world, the heavens and
the earth, the sun, moon and stars, and the sea, and all in the space of six
days, and rested from his labor on the seventh, which was the sabbath.


Father. Do you not also remember that God made man.


Son. Yes, I remember that it is said, that God made man out of the dust of the
earth, and breathed into him the breath of life, and he became a living soul.


Father. After God had made man where did he live.


Son. We read that he was placed in the garden of Eden, which is also called
the garden of Paradise.


Father. Was he to live there alone.


Son. No, we read that God said it was not good that man should be alone, and
he caused a deep sleep to fall on Adam, and he took out one of his ribs, of
which he made a woman, and brought her to Adam to see what he would call her,
and he called her Eve, for she was bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh,
and she became his wife.


Father. What were they to be employed about in the garden.


Son. We read that they were to cultivate and till the ground, and take care of
the fruit trees, herbs, etc.


Father. Had they liberty to eat of all the fruit trees in the garden.


Son. We read that they had liberty to eat of all except one, which was the
tree of knowledge and of good and evil, which they were not to eat of, upon the
(...) of death.


Father. And was they (...) as to eat of that tree, which God had commanded
them that they should not eat.


Son. Yes sir, we read that the serpent (or the devil) said unto the woman,
that she should not surely die if she eat of that true, but that they should be
as Gods, to know good and evil, and to she (...) to the temptation, and (...)
of the fruit and did eat, and (...) unto her husband and he did eat.


Father. And what was the consequence.


Son. Why we read that their eyes were opened, and they knew that they were
naked, and had sined, and they endeavored to hide themselves from the presence
of God, among the trees of the garden.


Father. Did God after this suffer them to continue in the garden.


Son. No, we read that God turned them out of the garden, and placed a flaming
sword to prevent their return, and God cursed the earth in consequence of their
sining, and said, that it should bring forth briars and thorns, and that men
should earn their bread with the sweat of their brows, until they should again
return to the earth.


Father. Had Adam and Eve any children.


Son. Yes, they had Cain and Abel, of whom we read that Cain was a wicked boy,
and Abel a good boy, and when they were grown up Cain was angry with his
brother Abel, and when they were in the field, he rose up against him and slew
him.


Father. And was not God angry with Cain for killing his brother.


Son. It is said, that God was very angry with him, and told him that he should
be a vagabond upon the earth, and that every one who sound him should slay him;
and Cain said, that his punishment was greater than he could bear, and God set
a mark upon him, least any finding him should slay him.


Father. Did mankind multiply upon the earth after this.


Son. Yes, they multiplied and (...) very numerous.


Father. (...) as the people generally good and virtuous, or very sinful.


Son. We read in the bible that mankind became very sinful, and by their sins
and wickedness, provoked God to anger.


Father. And what was the consequence of the world becoming (...) wicked.


Son. We read that the great God was very angry with them, and threatened to
crown the world, and destroy mankind, unless they repeated and became good.


Father. And did not mankind in general grow better and repent after God and so
threatened them.


Son. No, we read that they still continued wicked, except Noah and his family,
and God bid Noah build an Ark, by which he and his family and some of all sorts
of creatures, might be preserved and saved alive, when the rest of the world
should be drowned.


Father. How long was Noah in building the Ark.


Son. We read that he was many years in building it, for it was a very great
building, with many apartments; it was three stories high, and made to
accommodate all that was to be taken into it.


Father. Was not Noah called a preacher of righteousness to the people.


Son. Yes, he is so called in the Bible, and I suppose he preached to the
people, and warned them to repent and become good, or they would all be
destroyed.


Father. And did (...) the people regard (...), and attend to his (...).


Son. No, they went on in their old way until the fatal day in which the rain
began to fall, and Noah and his family, and two and two of all creatures went
into the Ark, and the doors and windows were closed, and no man suffered to go
in, and so they were all drowned.


Father. How long did the flood prevail on the earth.


Son. We read that it rained forty days and forty nights, and the fountain of
the great deep was broken up.


Father. And how did Noah know when the waters were abated on the earth.


Son. We read that the waters prevailed on the earth 150 days, but after 40
days Noah opened a window and let out a dove, who after flying about and
finding no place to rest her feet upon, she returned to Noah and he took her
again into the Art; and then he waited seven days more, and let her go out
again, and after a while she returned with an olive leaf in her mouth plucked
off, by which Noah supposed the waters were abated, and after seven days more
be let out the dove again and she never returned, and after a while the Ark
rested on a great mountain called Ararat.


Father. How long was this flood upon the face of the earth.


Son. We read that in the sixth hundred and first year of Noah, the first month
and first day of the month, the waters were dried from off the face of the
earth, and Noah and his family, and all the creatures in the Ark went out upon
the dry land.


Father. What now become of Noah and his family.


Son. We read that God made a covenant with him, and it was confirmed by a
rainbow, that the earth should not again be drowned.


Father. After the flood, was the posterity of Noah all good, or did the people
again be wicked.


Son. We read that they again become very wicked, and thought in their pride to
build a great tower, that should reach up to heaven, and God was angry, and
came down and destroyed their language, so that they could not understand each
other, and so they were scattered upon the face of the earth.


Father. But was there no good people in all this time, did not God make some
discovery of Christ the Savior, who was to come into the world.


Son. Yes, we read that soon after the fall of man, God said, that the seed of
the woman should bruise the serpents head; but I never knew the true meaning of
that sentence.


Father. Why the meaning of that text is generally supposed to be, that a
Savior, the Messiah, should come into this world, and make satisfaction for
the sins of man, and so destroy the works of Satan, and thereby prepare the way
for man to be finally saved.


Son. Was there any further prophecy of the Messiah, who was to come into the
world.


Father. Yes, there were many prophecies and intimations thereof, to Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to David, Isaiah, and other Prophets of old, and all
the sacrifices of beasts and birds, etc. that we read of in the old testament,
are supposed to look forward to that great and atoneing sacrifice that should
be made for sin, by Jesus Christ the Messiah, and Savior of the world; and
especially by the type of the brazen Serpent, that was erected in the
wilderness, which the children of Israel were directed to look to, when they
had been bitten by the flying fiery serpents.


Son. And did the Messiah truly come into the world, agreeable to the prophecy
and expectation of the people, who were looking and waiting for the
accomplishment of these prophecies.


Father. Yes, in the fullness of time, namely, at about the four thousandth year
of the world, the Messiah made his appearance to the Jews and the world.


Son. And did not the Jews, (God's ancient people,) expect him as a temporal
king, and that he would be ushered into the world in great pomp and splendour,
and that he would deliver them from their bondage to the Romans.


Father. Yes, truly this was their expectations, and they were greatly
disappointed when they found that he rather took on him the form of a servant,
and was poor and despised in the world.


Son. Where was Christ's first appearance in the world.


Father. He was born at Bethlehem, and was found with his mother Mary in a
stable, there being no room for them in the inn.


Son. Was there any intimation to any body, of the Messiah being born into the
world.


Father. As the shepherds were seeding their flocks, an angel appeared unto
them and told them that the Messiah who had been long expected, was born into
the world; and the shepherds were disposed to go and see him, and pay their
worship and adoration unto him, and also the wise men of the East, enquired
where Christ should be born, and they were directed by the appearance of a star
in the Heavens, that went before them, and stood over the place where the child
Jesus was.


Son. And did they find as the Angel had told them.


Father. Yes, they found the child Jesus and his mother Mary at Bethlehem,
laying in a manger, and they rejoiced and praised God that there was a Savior
born into the world.


Son. Did not King Herod desire the wise men when they returned, to tell him
where they found him, that he might also go and worship him.


Father. Yes he did, but his design was to (...) was afraid that he would
become a king and take away his kingdom.


Son. And did the wise men of the East, return and inform the King Herod.


Father. No, they returned another way and to disappointed him, and he was so
angry that he ordered all the children from two years old and under to be
(...); but Mary with her child Jesus, went into Egypt, and so escaped his hand.


Son. Was there any thing extraordinary that appeared in Christ Jesus whilst he
was young.


Father. We read in the Bible, that he kept with his parents, and was subject
to them; -- but when he was twelve years old he was found in the temple, asking
questions of the doctors, and giving answers beyond what could be expected from
one of his age; and he asked his parents if they did not know that he must be
about his father's business.


Son. What is said of him when he became a man.


Father. He became a preacher, and speak as never man spoke before; and he went
about doing good, healing the sick, restoring the lame, giving sight to the
blind; he fed many thousands with a few loaves and fishes, and raised some to
life again who had been dead, and did many miracles, so that thousands flocked
after him to be healed of their diseases of soul and body, and they brought
little children to him, and his disciples forbad them, but he told them to
come, for of such he said was the kingdom of God, and he took them up in his
arms and blessed them.


Son. What doctrine did he preach, or what advice did he give to the people
that came to him.


Father. He told them that they were sinners, and that they must repent of
their sins, and believe on Jesus Christ if they would be saved.


Son. What is meant by repentance.


Father. You have learned your Catechism, which tells you what repentance is.


Son. I remember it is said, Repentance unto life is a saving grace, whereby a
sinner out of a true sense of his sin, and apprehension of the mercy of God, in
Jesus Christ, does with grief and hatred thereof, turn from it unto God, with
full purpose and endeavors after new obedience.


Father. Don't you also remember the answer to the question, "What is faith in
Jesus Christ?"


Son. Yes, the answer says, That says in Jesus Christ is a saving grace,
whereby we receive and rest upon him alone for salvation, as he is offered in
the gospel.


Son. But is this all that we are to do, in order to be saved and go to Heaven.


Father. Truly, I believe that those who repent and believe on Christ, will not
fail of being saved and going to Heaven; but they who have true faith and
repentance will be disposed to good works, and to hate every wicked and false
way, to do as they would be done by, and attend unto all the rules and precepts
of the gospel, to fear God and keep his command, and live soberly, rationally,
and Godly, in this world.


Son. Is it not of free grace that any are saved.


Father. Surely it is, and whosoever is saved will be ready to acknowledge,
that it is all grace from the foundation to the top stone.


Son. Truly I am obliged to you, for the good instruction given me, and I can
say as King Agrippa said to Paul, thou almost persuadest me to be a Christian.


Father. And I can as truly say as St. Paul, I wish that you was not only
almost but altogether persuaded to be a Christian, that so after serving God,
and your generation according to his will, you might go to Heaven and be
eternally blessed and happy.


Son. But is it worth while for children and young solks to be religious, and
to put on the Christian name.


Father. Surely it is well worth while, and it highly becomes all, both young
and old, to profess and practice the Christian. -- Hear what the great poet,
and good man, Dr. Young, says; -- "A Christian is the highest style of man,
"And is there who the blessed cross wipes off
"As a foul blot from his dishonored brow?
"If angels tremble, it is at such a sight:
"The wretch they quit, desponding of their charge,
"More struck with grief, or wonder, who can tell?"



Son. I thank you for your instruction and kind advice, and hope I may have
wisdom and grace to follow it.


Father. Dear Son, if you do truly so hope, you will be willing from your heart
to join in the following PRAYER.

Oh Lord God, have mercy on me in Jesus Christ thy dear Son; and for his sake
pardon all my sins, and accept of me (a poor sinful child,) as righteous in thy
sight. Make me a Christian indeed, and help me to live a sober and religious
life, that my latter end may be that of the righteous, and my eternity happy.
-- AMEN.


End of the Dialogue.
Entertaining Extracts, From various Authors. Worthy the perusal of every good
Child.

Learning advances men of mean degree,
To high seize, wealth, and dignity.
PRINTED February, 1798.

EXTRACTS, etc.
THE bitterest things in religion are sweet; there is a sweetness even in
reproofs; when God meets with our corruptions, and whispers unto us, such and
such things are dangerous; and that if we cherish them, they will bring us to
hell, the word of God is sweet to a christian, that has his heart under his
innocence; is not pardon sweet to a condemand man, and riches sweet to a poor
man, and favor sweet to a man in disgrace, and liberty sweet to a man in
captivity? so all that (...) from God is sweet to a christian, that has his
heart touched with the sense of sin.

ORIGIN OF SHIPPING.
And God said to Noah, make thee an ark of Gopher wood; rooms shall thou make
in the ark, and shall pitch it within, and without, with pitch. THE most
ingenious and useful arts are of celestial origin; and from this chapter it is
evident, that the first ship that ever floated on the world of waters, was
built according to the plan, and under the regulating eye, of a divine
artificer. With what amazing contrivance and economy were the directions given
by the Deity to Noah? How exact the architecture, and what judicious hints were
hence furnished to human creatures in regard to maritime affairs! Man has
always been characterised by his powers of imitation. From this very ark arose
the first ideas of a possibility to pass beyond the limits of land: the scheme
once projected, and the secret of its construction once imparted, it was not
likely to be forgotten; so far otherwise, that we stand indebted to it, for
many valuable blessings -- for the advantages of commerce, the pleasure of
travel, and the glory of victory. The merchant and the sailor owe to this
undertaking all their benefits; and whatever desirable circumstances arise from
connections with remote climates, certainly originate from an imitation of that
sacred repository, which preserved from the deluge the family of Noah.

OF COMPANY.
BE very circumspect in the choice of your company; in the society of your
equals you may enjoy pleasure; in the society of your superiors, you may find
profit; but to be the best in company, is to be in the way of growing worse;
the best means to improve, is, to be the least there. But above all, be the
companion of those who fear the Lord, and keep his precepts.

OF POVERTY.
IN seeking virtue, if you find poverty, be not ashamed, the fault is not
yours. Your honor or dishonor is purchased by your own actions; though virtue
gives a ragged livery, she gives a golden cognizance. If her service make you
poor, blush not; your poverty may prove disadvantageous to you, but cannot
dishonor you.

OF READING.
OF all the diversions of life, there is none so proper to fill up its empty
spaces, as the reading of useful and entertaining authors; and with that the
conversation of a well chosen friend. By reading we enjoy the dead, by
conversation the living, and by contemplation ourselves. Reading enriches the
memory, conversation polishes the wit, and contemplation improves the judgment.
Of these reading is the most important, which furnishes both the others.

FINIS.

