BUCK's POCKET COMPANION; OR, MERRY FELLOW: A CHOICE COLLECTION OF SONGS.
SELECTED WITH CARE FROM THE LATEST EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN PUBLICATIONS:
INCLUDING THE MODERN TOASTS AND SENTIMENTS.

"Hence, loathed melancholy,
"Mirth admit me of thy crew."
NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY GEORGE BUNCE. M. DCC, XCVIII.

Shall hateful tyrants, mischief breeding,
With hireling hosts a russian band,
Affright and desclate the land,
While Peace and Liberty lie bleeding?
To arms, to arms, ye brave,
The avenging sword unsheathed;
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death.
Now, now the dangerous storm is rolling,
Which treacherous kings, confed'rate raise;
The dogs of war, let loose, are howling,
And lo! our fields and cities blaze.
And shall we basely view the ruin,
While lawless force, with guilty stride,
Spreads desolation far and wide,
With crimes and blood his hands embring?
To arms, ye brave, etc.

With luxury and pride surrounded,
The vile, insatiate despots dare,
Their thirst of power and gold unbounded
To mete and vend the light and air.
Like beasts of burden would they load us,
Like gods, would bid their staves (...)
But man is man, and who is more?
Then shall they longer lash and goad us?
To arms, ye brave, etc.

O LIBERTY! can man resign thee,
Once having felt thy generous (...)
Can dungeons, bolts, and bars confine thee,
Or whips thy noble spirit tame?
Too long the world has wept, bewailing,
That Falsehood's dagger Tyrants weild:
But FREEDOM is our sword and shield,
And all their arts unavailing.
To arms, ye brave, etc.

SONG III. TO LIBERTY.
From Helvetic Liberty.

MOUNTAIN goddess! unconsin'd,
Lang our fathers roved with thee,
And left their sons this charge behind,
Die, or live with Liberty.
CHORUS.
Barb the arrow, fletch it new,
From the eagle's soaring wing,
Aim aright and send it true,
From the strong bow's fatal string.
Be our points the tyrants fear,
He who robs us of our right,
All our fathers held so dear,
All in which their sons delight.
CHORUS, etc.

Sing this theme to cheer the brave,
He who aids not Freedom's cause.
Let him live despised a slave,
Unprotected by her laws.
CHORUS, etc.

SONG. IV. The Lass of Lucern Lake.
From the Same.

SAY will you leave your lowland haunts,
And range the hills with me;
This arm shall render light your wants,
And guard your Liberty.
The mountain do that slits so fleet,
At earliest morn I Will take;
And make the rich repast for thee,
Dear Lass of Lucern Lake.
The choicest fruits that grace the groves,
The muscadine and pear,
Just when the be for honey roves,
Will I at morn be there.
I Will pluck impearl'd with evening dew
The berry from the brake,
And spread the bower with sweets for you,
Dear Lass of Lucern Lake.
From nipping blasts, from frost and hall
Thy beauty I Will defend,
And still amidst the winter's gale
I Will live thy love and friend.
Turn then fair maid and fly with me,
Thy lowland haunts forsake,
And all my cares shall be for thee,
Dear Lass of Lucern Lake.
SONG V.
WHILE plots work revolutions,
And revolutions plots;
New model constitutions,
Be mine the best of lots.
A lass that is plump and rosy,
Good-natured ever free,
It Is all I ask,
My girl, my flask
The rest is trash to me.
And what more needs the soldier blade,
Who when in battle joined,
May yield to death his fighting trade,
What Is wealth then left behind.
Then give the girl that is rosy,
Good-natured ever free,
It Is all I ask,
My girl, my flask,
The rest is trash to me.
Let tyrants live in endless fear,
Despised and cur'sd by all;
For ever dream of dangers near,
Of poison, fire, and ball.
We heed not such who love the lass,
Good-natured ever free,
It Is such I ask,
My girl, my flask,
The rest is trash to me.
SONG VI.
EDWALD. MY fair Serena often has seen,
When spring bedecks with flowers the green,
How soars the lark his mate to cheer,
Warbling sweetly love sincere.
As loves the bird that sings above,
My dear Serena, so I love.

SERENA. My gentle Edwald often has seen
When cuckoo-buds first paint the scene,
How in pairs the ring-doves meet,
Still cooing kind and billing sweet.
As loves the lark, or constant dove,
My gentle Edwald so I love.

BOTH. Come then caressing let us live,
For what has life like love to give,
We'll love, and when our youth is past,
By friendship teach the flame to last.

SONG VII.
A SOLDIER I am for a lady,
What beau was ever armed completer,
When face to face
Her chamber's the place,
I Am able and willing to meet her.
Gads curse, my dear lasses I Am ready.
To give ye all satisfaction,
I Am the man,
For the crack of your fan,
Though I die at your feet in the action.
Your bobbins may beat up a row dow dow,
Your lap dog may out with his bow wow wow
The challenge is love,
I take up the glove,
Though I die at your feet in the action
SONG VIII.
IN choice of a husband us widows are nice;
I Would not have a man woul'd grow old in a trice;
Not a bear or a monkey, a clown or a fop,
But one that could bustle and stir in my shop.
A log I Will avoid when I Am choosing my lad,
And a stork that might gobble up all that I had;
Such suitors I Have had sir, but off they might hop,
I want one that can bustle and stir in my shop.
The lad in my eye, is the man to my mind,
So handsome, so young, so polite, and so kind;
With such a good soul to the alter I Would hop,
He Is the man that can bustle and stir in my shop.
SONG IX. The Cheerful Hibernian.
ALL you that are wise, and think life worth enjoying,
Or soldier or sailor, by land or by sea;
In loving and laughing your time be employing,
Your glass to your lip, and your lass on your knee.
Come sing away honics, and cast off all sorrow,
Though we all die today, let us be merry to morrow,
A hundred years hence 'twill be too late to borrow
A moment of time to be joyous and free
Come sing away honies, etc.

My lord and the bishop, in spite of their splendour,
When death gives the call from their glories must part;
Your beautiful dame when the summons is sent her
Will feel the blood ebb from the cheek to the heart.
Then sing away honies, etc.

For riches and honors then, why all this riot,
Your rangling and jangling and all your alarms;
Arrah! burn you my honies, you would better be quiet,
And take while you can, a kind girl to your arms.
You Would better be singing and casting off sorrow,
Though you all die today, sure be merry tomorrow;
A hundred years hence 'twill be too late to borrow
One moment to toy and enjoy her sweet charms.
You Would better be singing, etc.

SONG X. St. Patrick's Day in the Morning.
YE lads and ye lasses so buxom and clever,
Who come from Hibernia of famous renown,
Put on your best bibs and be coming together,
So neatly yourselves all adorning.
The music shall be sweetly playing,
Each shall be dancing skipping around,
Green shamrock shall shine, sir,
To make us all fine, sir,
Salt fish and potatoes
Shall smoke my dear creatures,
And nothing be wanting which there can be found,
Full bumpers of whisky
Will make as all frisky,
On St. Patrick's day in the morning.
St. Patrick he was of vast estimation,
And lived a great while, sir, before he was dead,
He frightened the bug-a-bos out of the nation,
So none of your sneering and scorning.
For many things he did most truly,
All as clever as clever could be,
He banished the bugs, sir,
From blanket and rug, sir,
Oh! hub a boo, sir,
What more could he do, sir,
Whatever he said, sir, the blind could not see;
With heart like shillaly,
Then let us be gaily,
On St. Patrick's day in the morning.
There Is Phelem O'Fagan and ruddy faced paddy,
With many tall fellows to make up the wake;
Miss Blarney will sing with her mammy and daddy,
And play till the ev'ning's returning.
With mirth and music dance and caper,
We will jovial, jovial be.
While each pretty miss, sir,
We'll smuggle and kiss, sir,
And pull'em and haul'em,
And tenderly maul'em,
Arrah! uke in the world are so merry as we.
All this to begin, sir,
We think it no sin, sir,
On St. Patrick's day in the morning.
SONG XI. O what a Charming Thing's a Battle.
WHAT a charming thing's a battle,
Trumpets sounding, drums a beating,
Crack, crick, crack the cannons rattle,
Every heart with joy elating.
With what pleasure are we spying,
From the front and from the rear,
Round us in the smoky sky,
Head and limbs and bullets flying,
Then the groans of soldiers dying,
Just like sparrows as it were.
At each pop,
Hundreds drop,
While the muskets prittle pratile,
Killed and wounded,
Lie consounded,
What a charming thing's a battle.
But the pleasant joke of all,
Is when to close attack we fall,
Like mad bulls each other beating,
Shooting, stabbing, maiming, cutting.
Horse and foot,
All go to it,
Kill's the word, both men and cattle,
Then to plunder,
Blood and thunder,
What a charming thing's a battle.
SONG XII. YO YEA.
I SAILED in the good ship the Kitty,
With a stiff blowing gale and rough sea,
Left Polly the lads call so pretty,
Safe here at an anchor, yo yea.
Yo yea, yo yea.

She blubbered salt tears when we parted,
And ery'd now be constent to me,
I said, my dear, do'nt be down hearted,
So up with the anchor, yo yea.
Yo yea, yo yea

When the wind whistled larboard and starboard,
And the storm came on weather and lee,
The hope I with her should be harbored,
Was my cable and anchor, yo yea.
Yo yea, yo yea

And yet my boys, would you believe me,
I returned with no rhino from sea;
My Polly would never receive me,
So again I heaved anchor, yo yea.
Yo yea, yo yea.

SONG XIII. Paddy's Expedition.
WHEN I took my departure from Dublin's sweet town.
And for England's own self through the seas I did plow,
For four long days I was tossed up and down,
Like a quid of chewed hay in the throat of a cow.
While afraid off the deck in the ocean to slip, sir,
I clung like a cat, a fast hold for to keep, sir,
Round about the big post that grows out of the ship, sir,
O, I never thought more to sing Langolee.
Then standing stock still all the while I was moving,
Till Ireland's coast I saw clear out of sight;
Myself the next day a true Irishman proving,
When leaving the ship on the shore for to light.
As the board they put out was too narrow by quarter;
The first step I took I was in such a totter,
That I jumped upon land, to my neck up in water.
O, that was no time to sing Laugolee.
But as sharp cold and hunger, I never yet knew more,
And my stomach and bowels did grumble and growl;
I thought the best way to get each in good humor,
Was to take out the wrinkles of both by my soul.
So I went to a house where roast meat they provide, sir,
With a whirligig which up the chimney I spyed, sir,
And which grinds all their smoke into powder besides, sir,
It Is true as I Am now singing Langolee.
Then I went to the landlord of all the stage coaches,
That set sail for London each night of the week,
To whom I obnoxiously made my reproaches,
As a birth aboard one I was come for to seek.
But as for the inside I Would no cash in my casket,
Says I with your leave, I make bold sir to ask it,
When the coach is gone off, pray what time goes the basket,
For there I can ride and sing Langolee.
When making his mouth up, the basket, says he, sir,
Goes after the coach a full hour or two:
Very well, sir, says I, that is the thing then for me, sir,
But the devil a word that he told me was true.
For tho one went before and the other behind, sir,
They set off chick by jole at the very same time, sir,
So the same day at night I set out by moon shine, sir,
All alone by myself, singing Langolee.
O long life to the moon for a brave noble creature,
That serves us with lamp light each night in the dark,
While the sun only shines in the day which by nature,
Wants no light at all, as you all may remark,
But as for the moon by my soul I Will be bound, sir,
(...) would save the whole nation a great many pounds, sir,
To subscribe for to light her up all the year round, sir,
Or I Will never sing more about Langolee.
SONG XIV. JACKY BULL.
IN Jacky Bull, when bound for France,
The gosling you discover,
But taught to ride, to fence and dance,
A finished goose comes over.
With his tirce and carte -- sa -- sa.
And his cotillion so smart -- ha -- ha,
He charms each female heart, oh, la!
As Jacky returns from Dover.
For cocks and dogs, see squire at home,
The prince of country tonies,
Returned from Paris, Spain or Rome
Our squires a nice Adonis.
With his tierce and carte -- sa -- sa,
And his cotillion so smart -- ha -- ha,
He charms the female heart, oh, la!
The pink of macaronies.
SONG XV. Strephan and Flora.
STREPHON with his Flora lying,
On a flowery bank one day,
She was bashful, he was spying --
Tol lol de roll roll de roll.
She was bashful he was spying
All her beauties, as she lay.
While the amorous youth lay stealing
Kisses from the willing fair,
Still his wanton hand was feeling --
Tol lol, etc.
Still his wanton hand was feeling
The ringlets of her flowing hair.
Long they talked of love and honor,
Till her virtue wore away;
Then he clapped his hand upon her --
Tol lol, etc.
Then he clapped his hand upon her
Heaving breasts, and thus did say.
Tell me, Flora, where is the sin to
Rightly use those graceful charms;
Where Is the harm of entering into --
Tol lol, etc.
Where Is the harm of entering into
Such a lovely virgin's arms.
Long, too long, have I been hoping,
Long to gain thy heart I strove;
Then be kind and freely open --
Tol lol, etc.
Then be kind and freely open
Those sweet lips with words of love.
Thus addressed by a lover,
Gay and graceful as the sun;
Flora quickly flirted up her --
Tol lol, etc.
Flora gently lifted up her
Down cast eyes, and said you have won.
Then, as quick as pointed steel is,
Flew the brisk and amorous swain,
And with vigor made her feel his --
Tol lol, etc.
And with vigor made her feel his
Kisses over and over again.
SONG XVI. THE CHARMING FELLOW. FROM THE AGREEABLE SURPRISE.
Sung by Mrs. Hodgkinson at the Theater, N. York
LORD! what care I for mam or dad,
Why let' em scold and bellow,
For while I live I Will love my lad,
He Is such a charming fellow.
The last fair day, on Gander Green,
The youth he danced so well, O?
(...) spruce a lad was never seen
As my sweet charming fellow.
The fair was over, night was come,
The lad was somewhat mellow.
Says he, my dear, I Will see you home,
I thank d my charming fellow.
We trudged along, the moon shone bright,
Says he if you will not tell, O!
I Will kiss you here by this good light:
Lord, what a charming fellow.
You rogue, says I, you will stop my breath,
Ye bells ring out my knell, O!
Again I Would die so sweet a death,
With my sweet charming fellow.
SONG XVII. BRIGHT PHOEBUS.
BRIGHT Phoebus has mounted the chariot of day,
And the horns and the hound, call each sportsman away.
Through woods and through meadows with speed now they bound,
While health, rosy health, is in exercise found.
CHORUS.
Hark away! hark away! hark away is the word, to the sound of the horn,
And echo, and echo, and echo, blithe echo makes jovial the morn.
Each hill and each valley is lovely to view,
While puss flies the covert and dogs quick pursue
Behold where she flies over the wide spreading plain
While the loud opening pack pursue her amain.
Hark away, etc.

At length puss is caught and lies panting for breath
And the shout of the huntsman's the signal of death
No joys can delight like the sports of the field,
To hunting all pleasures and pastimes must yield.
Hark away, etc.

SONG XVIII. How stands the Glass around.
HOW stands the glass around,
For shame, ye take no care my boys:
How stands the glass around,
Let mirth and wine abound.
The trumpets sound,
The colors they are flying boys,
To fight kill or wound,
May we still be found,
Content with our hard fate my boys,
On the cold ground.
Why soldiers why
Should we be melancholy boys;
Why soldiers why,
Whose business it is to die,
What, sighing, fie.
Drown fear, drink on, be jolly boys,
It Is he, you, or I,
Cold, hot, wet, or dry,
We Are always bound to follow boys,
And scorn to fly.
It Is but in vain,
I mean not to upbraid you boys;
It Is but in vain,
For soldiers to complain;
Should next campaign,
Send us to him who made us boys,
We Are free from pain,
But if we remain,
A bottle and kind landlady,
Cures all again.
SONG XIX. POOR JACK.
GO patter to lubbers and swabs do you see,
'Bout dangers and fears and the like;
A tight water boat and good sea room give me,
And it a'n't to a little I Will strike;
Tho the tempest top-gallant mast smack smooth should smite,
And shiver each splinter of wood,
Clear the wreck, stow the yards and bowse every thing tight,
And under reef'd fore-sail we'll scud.
Avast! nor don't think me a milk sop so soft,
To be taken for trifles a-back;
For they say there is a Providence sits up aloft,
To keep watch for the life of poor Jack.
Why, I heard the good chaplain palaver one day,
About souls -- heaven -- mercy -- and such;
And, my timbers! what lingo he would coil and belay!
Why, it was just all as one as High Dutch,
But he said, how a sparrow cannot founder, do you see,
Without orders that come down below;
And many fine things, that proved clearly to me,
That Providence takes us in tow.
For, says he, do ye mind me, let storms ever so often
Take the top-lifts of sailors a-back,
There Is a sweet little Cherub sits perched up aloft,
To keep watch for the life of Poor Jack.
I said to our Poll (for you see she would cry)
When last we weighed anchor for sea,
What argufies sniv'ling and piping your eye:
Why, what a damned fool you must be!
Cannot you see the world's wide and there is room for us all,
Both for seamen and lubbers ashore;
And if to old Davy I go, my dear Poll,
Why, you will never hear of me more;
What then! all is a hazard -- come don't be so soft,
Perhaps I may laughing come back;
For do you see, there is a Cherub sits smiling aloft,
To keep watch for the life of Poor Jack.
Do You mind me a sailor should be, every inch,
All as one as a piece of the ship,
And with her brave the world without offering to flinch,
From the moment the anchor's a trip.
As to me, in all weathers, all times, tides and ends
Nought's a trouble on duty that waits;
My heart is my Poll's -- and my rhino my friend's,
And as for my life -- it is the States!
Even when my time comes never believe me so soft
As with grief to be taken a-back; --
That same little Cherub, that sits up aloft
Will look out a good birth for Poor Jack.
SONG XX. Davy Jones's Locker; Or, a sequel to the favorite song of Poor Jack.
WHEN last honest Jack, of whose fate I now write,
Weighed anchor, and cast out for sea;
For he never refused for his country to sight,
When called on no lubber was he.
To hand, reef, and steer, and house every thing tight,
Full well did he know every inch;
Though the top-lifts of sailors the tempest should smite,
Jack never was known for to flinch.
Though the top-lifts, etc.

Aloft from the mast-head one day he espied,
Seven sail, which appeared to his view;
Clear the decks, sponge the guns, was instantly cried,
And each to his station then flew;
And fought until many a noble was slain,
And silenced was every gun:
It Was then all the honest tar's valor was vain,
For by numbers, alas! they are undone.
Yet think not hold Jack, though by conquest dismayed,
Could tamely submit to his fate;
When his country he found he no longer could serve,
Looking round, he addressed thus each mate;
What Is life, do you see, when our liberty's gone,
Much nobler it were for to die --
So now for old Davy -- then plunged in the main --
Even the Cherub above, heaved a sigh,
SONG XXI. The Can of Grog.
WHEN up the shrouds the sailor goes,
And ventures on the yard,
The landsman, he no better knows,
Believes his lot is hard.
CHORUS.
Bold Jack with smile each danger meets,
Weighs anchor, heaves the log:
Trims all the sails, belays the sheets,
And drinks his can of grog.
If to engage they give the word,
To quarters he will repair,
Now sinking in the dismal flood,
Now quivering in the air.
Bold Jack, etc.

When waves against rocks and quicksands roar,
You never hear him repine,
Though he is on Greenland's icy shore,
Or scorched beneath the line.
Bold Jack, etc.

SONG XXII. When I was a Younker.
WHEN I was a younker, and lived with my dad,
The neighbors all thought me a smart little lad;
My mammy she called me a white headed boy,
Because with the girls I liked to toy.
There was Ciss, Priss, Letty, and Betty, and Doll,
With Meg, Peg, Jenny, and Winney, and Moll.
CHORUS.
I flatter their chatter so sprightly and gay;
I rumble'em, tumble'em; that is my way.
One fine frosty morning a going to school,
Young Moggy I met, and she called me a fool;
Her mouth was my primer, a lesson I took;
I swore it was pretty, and kissed the book.
But school, fool, primer, and trimmer, and birch,
And boys, for the girls I Have left in the lurch.
I flatter, etc.

It Is very well known I can dance a good jig,
And at cudgels from Robin I won a fat pig;
I wrestle a fall, and a bar I can fling,
And when over a flaggon, can sweetly sing.
But pig, jig wicket, and cricket, and ball,
I Would give up to wrestle with Moggy of all.
I flatter, etc.

SONG XXIII. Piquet.
AFTER breakfast, says Nancy, well what shall we do?
Will you try me again and our party renew?
The girl was inviting, the morning was wet,
So I stayed at her challenge, the game of piquet.
All matters adjusted, the conquest we try,
I went out strong in hand and my courage was high,
Come on my dear girl, it is well we are met,
I Will give you enough of your game at piquet.
I defy you says she; it is not boasting will win,
So give me, my dear, what I am to take in;
Then she laid down her point, mine against it I set,
She allowed it was good at this game of piquer.
But quint and quartorze too she reckoned away,
I could hold no such thing, so desired her to play;
And the hussy so played I was soon in her debt,
Both laughed at and lurch'd at this game of piquet.
Well my lad never mind when your courage will rise
You shall have your revenge she jeeringly cries:
And as long as I found I had something to bet,
I attacked her again at this game of piquet.
But each effort I made still the case was the same,
Till no stakes I could raise, I then left off the game,
For the player, believe me, no credit will get,
Who offers unfurnished to play at piquet.
Yet, so sweet is the game my fond sancy pursues
I Will never decline it tho certain to loose;
But morn, noon or night, take the challenge up yet
And sport with my Nancy at charming piquet.
SONG XXIV. The Stay Maker.
GAD a mercy, devil's in me,
All the damsels wish to win me,
All the damsels, all the damsels, wish to win me;
Like a maypole round me cluster,
Hanging garlands, fuss and fluster,
Lilting, cap'ring, grining, smirking,
Pouting, bobbing, winking, jerking,
Cocking bills up, chins up perking,
Kates and Betties,
Polls and Letties,
All were doting gentle creatures,
On these features.
To their aprons all would pin me;
Gad a mercy, devil's in me,;
All the ladies wish to win me.
Pretty damsels -- ugly damsels -- black hair'd damsels -- red hair'd damsels
-- six foot damsels -- three foot damsels -- pale faced damsels -- plump faced
damsels -- small legged damsels -- thick legged damsels -- dainty damsels --
dowdy damsels -- pretty, ugly, black hair'd, six foot, three foot, pale faced,
plump faced, small legged, thick legged dowdy, dainty, all run, all run after me
sir, for when pretty fellows, we pretty maids are frank and free.

Gad a mercy, devil's in me,
All the ladies with to win me;
For their stays, taking measures,
Taking measure, Oh! the pleasure,
Taking measure, taking measure,
Oh! the pleasure.
Oh! such tempting looks they gave me,
Wishing in my heart to nim me,
Pat and cry you devil Jemmy.
Pretty ladies -- ugly ladies, etc.

SONG XXV. The Tar for all Weathers.
I SAILED from the Downs in the Nancy,
My jib how it smack'd through the breeze,
She Is a vessel as tight to my fancy,
As ever sailed through the salt seas;
Then adieu to the white cliffs of Britain,
Our girls and our dear native shore,
For if some hard rock we should split on,
We should never see them any more.
But sailors were born for all weathers,
The wind then blow high or blow low,
Our duty keeps us to our tethers,
And where the wind drives we must go.
When we entered the Gut of Gibraltar,
I verily thought she would have sunk;
For the wind it began so to alter,
She yaw'd just as tho'f she was drunk:
The squall tore the mainsail to shivers,
Helm a-weather, the hoarse boatswain cries,
Brace the foresail athwart -- see she quivers,
As through the rough tempest she flies.
But sailors, etc.

The storm came on thicker and faster,
As black just as pitch was the sky,
When truly a doleful disaster
Befell three poor failors and I;
Ben Bluntline, Sam Shroud, and Dick Handsail,
By a blast that came furious and hard,
Just while we were furling the mainsail,
Were every soul swept from the yard.
But sailors, etc.

Poor Ben, Sam and Dick cried peccavi,
As for I at the risk of my neck,
While they sunk down in peace to old Davy,
Caught a rope and so landed on deck;
Well, what would you have? we were stranded,
And out of a sine jolly crew,
Of three hundred that sailed, never landed
But I, and (I think) twenty-two.
But sailors, etc.

After thus we at sea had miscarried,
Another guess way sat the wind,
For to England I came and got married,
To a lass that was comely and kind;
But whether for joy or vexation,
We know nor for what we are born,
Perhaps I may find a kind station,
Perhaps I may touch at Cape-Horn.
But sailors, etc.

SONG XXVI. The Lasses of Dublin.
THE meadows look cheerful, the birds sweetly sing,
So gaily they carrol the praises of spring;
Though nature rejoices, poor Norah shall mourn,
Until her dear Patrick again shall return.
Ye lasses of Doublin, ah! hide your gay charms,
Nor lure her dear Patrick from Norah's fond arms;
Though sattins, and ribbons, and laces are fine,
They hide not a heart with such feelings as mine,
SONG XXVII. Poor Tom, or the Sailor's Epitaph.
HERE, a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling,
The darling of our crew;
No more he will hear the tempest howling,
For death had broached him to.
His form was of the manliest beauty,
His heart was kind and soft;
Faithful below he did his duty,
And now he is gone aloft,
And now he is gone alost.
Tom never from his word departed,
His virtues were so rare,
His friends were many, and true hearted,
His Poll was kind and fair:
And then he would sing so bly the and jolly,
Ah many's the time and often!
But mirth is turned to melancholy,
For Tom is gone aloft.
For Tom, etc.

Yet shall poor Tom sind pleasant weather,
When he who all commands,
Shall give, to call life's crew together,
The word to pipe all hands.
Thus death, who kings and tars dispatches,
In vain Tom's life has doff'd;
For though his body's under hatches,
His soul is gone aloft.
His soul, etc.

SONG XXVIII. Tug at the Oar.
O THINK on my fate -- once I freedom enjoyed
Was as happy as happy could be!
But pleasure is fled -- even hope is destroyed,
A captive, alas on the sea!
I was taken by the foe -- 'twas the fiat of fate
To tear me from her I adore!
When thought brings to mind my once happy state,
I sigh, while I tug at the oar.
Hard, hard is my fate -- oh how galling my chain,
My life's steered by misery's chart;
And though against my tyrants I scorn to complain,
Tears gush forth to ease my full heart;
I disdain even to shrink, though I feel the sharp lash,
Yet my breast bleeds for her I adore,
While around me the unfeeling billows will dash,
I sigh and still tug at the oar.
How fortune deceives! -- I had pleasure in tow,
The port where she dwelt we'd in view,
But the wished nuptial morn was over clouded with woe
And, dear Anna, I was hurried from you:
Our shallop was boarded and I borne away,
To behold my dear Anna, no more,
But despair wastes my spirits, my form feels decay,
He sighed and expired at the oar.
SONG XXIX. The Merry Sailor.
HOW pleasant a sailor's life passes,
Who roams over the watery main,
No treasure he ever amasses,
But cheerfully spends all his gain;
We Are strangers to party and faction,
To honor and honesty true,
And would not commit a base action,
For power and profit in view.
CHORUS.
Then why should we quarrel for riches,
Or any such glittering toys?
A light heart and thin pair of breeches,
Goes through the world my brave boys.
The world is a beautiful garden,
Enriched with the blessings of life,
The toiler with plenty rewarding,
But plenty too often breeds strife;
When terrible tempests assail us,
And mountainous billows affright,
No grandour or wealth can avail us,
But skilful industry steers right.
Then why should we quarrel, etc.
The courtier's more subject to dangers,
Who rules at the helm of the state,
Then we, who to politics strangers,
Escape the snares laid for the great:
The various blessings of nature,
In various nations we try,
No mortals on earth can be greater,
Who merrily live till we die.
Then why should we quarrel, etc.
SONG XXX.
WHEN whistling winds are heard to blow.
In tempests over the earth,
The seamens often dashed to and fro,
Yet cheerly takes his birth:
And as he fearless mounts the shrouds,
A while the vessel swings,
Though skies are mantled over with clouds
The gallant sailor sings:
It Is pretty Poll and honest Jack,
My girl and friend on shore,
Will hall me at returning back,
So let the billows roar.
When bending over the rocking yard.
While seas in mountains rise.
He takes a spell however hard,
And danger ever defies:
The storm once over, the gallant tar
Lets fancy freely roam,
And though from many a friend afar,
Thus sings of those at home.
It Is pretty Poll, etc.
On burning coast, or frozen seas,
Alike in each extreme,
The gallant sailor's ever at ease,
And floats with fortune's stream
To love and friendship ever true,
He sleers life's course along,
And wheresoever sailing to,
Fond hope elates his song.
It Is pretty Poll, etc.
SONG XXXI.
WHEN first I slipped my leading strings -- to please her little Poll.
My mother bought me at the fair a pretty waxen doll,
Such sloe black eyes and cherry cheeks the smiling dear possessed,
How could I kiss it often enough, or hug it to my breast.
No sooner I could prattle it as forward Misses do
Then how I longed and sighed to hear my doll prattle too;
I curled her hair in ringlets neat, and dressed her very gay,
And yet the sulky hussy, not a syllable would say,
Provoked that to my questions kind, no answer I could get,
I shook the little hussy well, and whipped her in a pet;
My mother cried, Oh fie upon it -- pray let your doll alone,
If ever you wish to have a pretty baby of your own
My head on this I bridled up, and threw the plaything by,
Although my sister snubb'd me for it -- I knew the reason why --
I fancy she would wish to keep the sweethearts all her own,
But that she shall not depend upon it -- when I Am a woman grown.
SONG XXXII. The All of Life is Love.
WHEN first this humble roof I knew,
With various cares I strove;
My grain was scarce, my sheep were few,
My all of life was love.
By mutual toil our board was dressed,
The spring our drink bestowed
But when her lip the brim had pressed,
The cup with nectar flowed.
Content and peace our dwelling shared,
No other guest came nigh:
In them was given (though gold was spared)
What gold can never buy.
No value has a splendid lot,
But has the means to prove,
That from the castle to the cot,
The all of life is love.
SONG XXXIII. The Girl of my Heart.
IN the world's crooked path, where I Have been,
There to share in life s gloom my poor heart,
The sunshine that softened the scene
Was -- a smile from the girl of my heart.
Not a swain when the lark quits her nest,
But to labor with glee will depart,
If at eve he expects to be blessed
With a smile from the girl of his heart.
Come then crosses and cares as they may,
Let my mind still this maxim impart,
The comfort of man's fleeting day
Is -- a smile from the girl of his heart.
SONG XXXIV. Row Dow.
OH, fear not my courage, proved over and over,
Your soldier will rout each impertinent lover;
With a row dow I Will guard you, the foe shall your presence fly,
Who to fall in love here, must have tumbled, faith, pretty high.
With wide spreading charms, like the lake of Killarney,
Dear creature, O listen to none of their blarney.
With a row dow, etc.
Your true hearted lad is come galloping to you,
Oh! the salmon's leap's naught to his flight to pursue you,
With a row dow, etc.
Your short date of beauty -- your glib tongue contrasting,
Like our own giant's causeway, will prove everlasting.
With a row dow, etc.
Hark Away. SONG XXXV.
THE sable-clad curtain's undrawn,
The lark sweetly carrols on high;
Quickly open's the eyes of the morn,
See the sunbeams are gilding the sky;
The huntsman he throws off the hounds,
The horn winds a tedious delay;
And the heart of each sportsman elated rebounds,
In expecting the summons for hark, hark away.
Hark! a bust gives the signal for chase,
Through woodlands we dashing pursue;
While the fox, fleet as wind, mends his pace,
'Till the huntsman proclaims him in view:
Now his strength and his cunning a mort,
See the dogs seize in triumph their prey,
While the death of the game gives fresh life to the sport,
The echo re-echo with hark, hark away.
Now for Liberty-Hall we repair,
To replenish the joys of the field;
Where good humor combines with the fare,
And the wise smiles obedience to yield:
While the bottle and bowl both unite,
To vie with the sports of the day,
Let bumpers go round to the sportsman's delight,
And all join in the chorus of hark, hark away.
SONG XXXVI. The Tar.
MY heart from my bosom would fly,
And wander, oh wander afar,
Reflection bedews my sad eye,
For Henry is gone to the war:
Oh ye winds, to my Henry bear
One drop, let it fall on his breast,
The tear as a pearl he will wear,
And I in remembrance be blessed.
In vain smiles the glittering scene,
In vain blooms the roseate flower;
The sunshine in April's not seen,
I have only to do with the shower.
Oh ye winds, etc.
Ye winds that have borne him away,
Restore the dear youth to my arms:
Restore me to sun shine and day,
It Is night, till my Henry returns.
Oh ye winds, etc.
SONG XXXVII. The Captured Crew.
NIGHT scarce her mantle had withdrew,
And slowly ushered in the morn,
When bearing down, we 'spied in view,
The savage foe not far astern;
The stoutest trembled -- small our crew,
The victims of superior power;
Yet courage bid the drooping few
Wait calmly for the fatal hour.
Bold they approached -- a council's held
Our men, with voice united, cry,
'Rather than basely deign to yield,
'They'd meet their fate and boldly die:'
The fight now rag d -- from side to side
The thund ring cannon's dreadful sound;
With purple stain the deck was died,
Which issued from each gaping wound.
Such havoc now stern death has made,
Vain our resistance -- naught could shield,
Wounds and fatigue on valor preyed,
And with reluctance did we yield:
But scarce our battered hull we quit,
Scarce from the sturdy wreck retire,
'Ere up she blew, shamed to be beat,
Shrouding (...) form in sheets of fire.
SONG XLI. One Bottle More.
ASSIST me ye lads who have he is void of guile,
To sing in the praise of Old Ireland's Isle;
Where true hospitality opens the door,
And friendship detains us for one bottle more.
One bottle more, arrah one bottle more.
And friendship detains us for one bottle more.
Old England your taunts on your country forbear;
With our bulls and our brogues we are true and sincere,
For if but one bottle remained in our store,
We have generous hearts to give that bottle more.
We have, etc.

In Canady's, in Church street I Will sing of a set,
Of six Irish blades who together had met;
Four bottles a piece made us call for our score,
And nothing remained but one bottle more.
And nothing, etc.

Our bill being paid, we were loath to depart,
For friendship had grappled each man by the heart;
Where the least touch you know makes an Irithman roar,
And the whack from shilella brought six bottles more.
And the whack, etc.

Slow Phoebus had shone through our window so bright,
Quite happy to view his blessed children of light;
So we parted with hearts neither sorry nor fore,
Resolving next night to think twelve bottles more.
Resolving (...)

SONG XLII. Corporal Casey.
WHEN I was at home, I was merry and frisky,
My dad kept a pig, and my mother sold whisky:
My uncle was rich, but would never be easy,
Till I was enlisted by corporal Casey,
Och! rub a dub, row de dow, corporal Casey,
Rub a dub, row de dow, corporal Casey,
My dear tittle Sheelah, I thought would run crazy,
Oh! when I trudged away with my tough corporal Casey.
I marched from Kilkenny, and as I was thinking
On Sheelah, my heart in my bosom was sinking;
But soon I was forced to look fresh as a daisy,
For fear of a drubbing from corporal Casey
Och! rub a dub, row de dow, corporal Casey;
The devii go with him, I never could be lazy,
He stuck in my skarts so, auld corporal Casey,
We went into battle, I took the blows fairly,
That fell on my pate, but they bother'd me rarely;
And who should the first be that dropped? -- why, a'nt please ye,
It was my good friend honest corporal Casey.
Och! ruba dub, row de dow, corporal Casey;
Thinks I you are quiet, and I shall be easy,
So eight years I fought without corporal Casey.
SONG XLIII. Hang me if I Marry.
DECLARE, my pretty maid,
Must my fond suit miscarry?
With you I Will toy, I Will kiss and play;
But hang me if I marry:
With you I Will toy, etc.

Then speak your mind at once,
Nor let me longer tarry;
With you I Will toy, I Will kiss and play;
But hang me if I marry.
With you I Will toy, etc.

Tho charms and wit assall,
The stroke I well can parry?
I love to kiss, to toy and play,
But do not choose to marry.
I love, etc.

Young Molly of the dale
Makes a mere slave of Harry;
Because, when they had toy'd and kissed,
The foolish swain would murray:
Because, etc.

These fixed resolves, my dear,
I to the grave will carry;
With you I Will toy, and kiss and play;
But hang me if I marry:
With you I Will toy, etc.

SONG XLIV. Fie for Shame.
AS through the groves I chanced to stray,
I met young Phillis on her way;
I slew like lightning to her arms,
And gazed in rapture on her charms;
Her looks revealed a modest flame,
Yet still she cried, O fie for shame.
With eager haste I stole a kiss,
Which blushing Phillis took amiss;
She pushed me from her with a frown,
And called me bold presuming clown;
While I confessed myself to blame,
But still she cried, O fie for shame.
In tender sighs I told my love,
And pledged my faith on things above;
But she, like all her sex, was coy.
And tho I swore, would not comply:
Yet I perceived she met my flame,
But still she cried, O fie for shame.
When this I saw, I quickly cried,
Will lovely Phillis be my bride?
For hark! I hear the tinkling bell;
To church let us go -- It pleased her well,
And soon a kind compliance came,
But still she cried, O fie for shame.
Now Hymen's bands have made us one,
The joys we taste to few are known;
No jealous fears our bosoms move
For constant each, we truly love;
She now declares I Am not to blame,
No longer cries, O fie for shame.
SONG XLV. The Topsails shiver in the Wind.
THE topsails shiver in the wind,
Our ship she is casts to sea,
But yet my soul, my heart, my mind,
Are, Mary, moored with thee;
For tho thy sailor's bound afar,
Still love shall be my leading star.
Should landsmen flatter when we are sailed,
O doubt their artful tales,
No gallant sailor ever failed
If love breathed constant gales;
Thou art the comfort of my soul,
Which steers my heart from pole to pole.
These are our cares; but if you're kind,
We'll scorn the dashing main,
The rocks, the billows, and the wind,
Till we return again.
Now England's glory rest with you,
Our sails are full, sweet girls adieu.
SONG XLVI. The Ploughman.
I THAT once was a ploughman, a sailor am now,
No lark that aloft in the sky,
Ever slutter'd his wings to give speed to the plough,
Was so gay and so careless as I;
But my friend was a Carfindo aboard a king's ship.
And he asked me to go just to sea for a trip,
And he talked of such things
As if sailors were kings,
And so teazing did keep,
And so teazing did keep,
Till I left my poor plow to go ploughing the deep,
No longer the horn,
Called me up in the morn,
No longer the horn,
Called me up in the morn;
I trusted the Carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
I did not much like for to be aboard a ship,
(...) no door to creep out
I (...) bumbo and slip,
But I did not like rocking about;
Bye and bye came a hurricane, I did not like that,
Next a battle that many a sailor laid flat;
Ah! cried I who would roam?
That like me had a home,
When I Would sow and I Would reap.
When I Would sow and I Would reap,
Ever I left my poor plow to go ploughing the deep,
Where so sweely the horn,
Called me up in the morn;
Where so sweetly the horn
Called me up in the morn;
Ever I trusted the Carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
At last safe I landed, and with a whole skin,
Nor did I make any long stay,
Ever I found my friend, who I ask for my kin;
Father dead, and my wife ran-away:
Ah! who but thyself, said I, have thou to blame,
Wives losing their husbands, often lose their good name.
Ah! why did I roam?
When so happy at home,
I could sow and could reap,
I could sow and could reap,
Ever I left my poor plow to go ploughing the deep,
When so sweetly the horn,
Called me up in the morn;
When so sweetly the horn,
Called me up in the morn;
Curse light upon the Carfindo and the inconstant wind,
That made me for to go and leave my dear behind.
Why if that be the case, said this very same friend,
And you ben't no more minded to roam,
Giv's a shake by the fist; all your care's at an end,
Dad's alive, and your wife's safe at home.
Stark staring with joy, I leapt out of my skin,
Buss'd my wife, mother, sister, and all of my kin;
Now cried I, let them roam,
Who want a good home,
I am well so I Will keep,
I am well so I Will keep;
Nor again leave the plough to go plough in the deep.
Once more shall the horn,
Call me up in the morn;
Once more shall the horn,
Call me up in the morn.
Nor shall any damned Carfindo, nor the inconstant wind,
Ever tempt me for to go and leave my dear behind.
SONG XLVII. Jack in his Element.
BOLD Jack, the sailor, here I come,
Pray how do you like my nib,
My trowsers wide trampler on,
My nab and flowing jib,
I sailed the seas from end to end.
And led a joyous life,
At every mess we find a friend,
At every port a wife.
I have heard them talk of constancy,
Of grief and such like fun,
I have constant been to ten cried I,
But never grieved for one.
The flowing sails we tars unbend,
To lead a roving life.
At every mess we find a friend,
At every port a wife.
I Have a spanking wife at Portsmouth gates,
A pigmy at Goree,
An orange tawny up the Straits,
A black at St. Lucie.
Thus whatsoever course we bend,
We lead a jovial life,
At every mess we find a friend,
At every port a wife.
Will Gaff by death wasta'en aback,
I came to bring the news,
Poll whimper'd sore but what object,
I stood in William's shoes,
She got high chest and at the end,
She loves me as her life,
And she has an honest friend,
And I a loving wife.
Come all ye sailors that do go,
The unfortunate seas to rub,
You must work, love, and fight your foes,
And drink your generous bub,
Storms that our masts in splinters tears
Can take our joyous life,
In every want we find a friend,
And every port a wife.
SONG XLVIII. Friendship and Love.
THOUGH Bacchus may boast of hi care killing bowl,
And folly in thot drowning revels delight.
Such worship, alas! has no charms for the soul,
When softer devotions the senses invite;
To the arrow of fate or the canker of care.
His potions oblivious, his balm may bestow;
But to fancy, that feeds on the charms of the fair,
The death of reflection's the birth of all woe.
What soul that is possessed of a dream so divine,
With riot would bid the sweet vision be gone?
For the tear that bedews sensibility's shrine,
Is a drop of more worth than Bacchus's tune.
The tender excess which enamours the heart,
To few is imparted, to millions denied,
It Is the brain of the victim that tempers the dart,
And fools jest at that for which sages have died.
Each change and excess has through life been my doom,
And well can I speak of its joy and its strife:
The bottle affords us a glimpse through the gloom,
But love's the true sunshine that gladdens our life.
Come then, rosy Venus, and spread over my fight.
The magic illusions that ravish the soul,
Awake in my breast the soft dream of delight,
And drop from thy myrtle one leaf in my bowl.
Then deep will I drink of the nectar divine,
Nor ever jolly God, from the banquet remove,
But each tube of my heart ever thirst for the wine,
That Is mellow'd by friendship and sweetened by love.
SONG XLIX. Tipple and Smoke.
WITH a pipe of Virginia, how happy am I,
And good liquor to moisten my clay standing by,
I puff up the smoke, and it curls round the room,
Like a Phoenix I seem in a nest of perfume.
Delighting,
Inviting,
Is a pipe, and a friend who is fond of a joke,
Then happy together we tipple and smoke.
How pleasant it is thus to puff time away,
And between every whi^^ that the news of the day;
Tobacco, great Raleigh, we owe to thy name,
And every true smoker will puff up thy fame.
Delighting, etc.

When business is over, we puss away care,
Let every man else say the same if he dare.
This plant so delightful, is a foe to the spleen,
As it glows in the pipe it enlivens the scene.
Delighting, etc.

While thus in the fumes we'er envelop'd around,
Our heads are like hills which with clouds still are crowned;
Yet soon we emerge, and go cheerful away,
For a pipe of the best makes us bright as the day.
Delighting, etc.

SONG L. The Maid of Martindale.
IN Martindale a village gay,
A damsel deigns to dwell;
Whose looks are like a summer's day,
Whose charms no tongue can tell:
When'er I meet her on my way,
I tell my am rous tale,
Then heave a sigh and softly say,
Sweet maid of Martindale.
This nymph has numbers in her train,
From Hodge up to the Squire;
A conquest makes of every swain,
All gaze and all admire.
Then where is the hope, alas! for me,
That I should ever prevail;
Yet, while I breathe I Will (...) of thee,
Sweet maid of Martindale.
Should fate propitious be my lot,
To call this charmer mine;
I Would live content in lowly cot
And pompous thoughts resign,
But if she scorns each heart felt sigh,
And leaves me to bewail;
For thee, my fair, for thee I Will die,
Sweet maid of Martindale.
SONG LI. The Disconsolate Sailor.
WHEN my money was all gone that I gained in the wars,
And the world 'gan to frown a my sat,
What mattered my zeal or my honored sears,
When indifference stood at each gate.
The face that would smile when my purse was well lined,
Showed a different aspect to me:
And when I could naught but ingratitude sind,
I hi'd once again to the sea.
I thought it unwise to repine at my lot,
Or to hear with cold looks on the shore:
So I packed up the trifling remnants I Would got,
And a trifle, alas! was my store.
A handkerchief held all the treasure I had,
Which over my shoulder I threw;
Away then I trudged, with a heart rather sad,
To join with some (...) ship's-crew.
The sea was less troubled by far than my mind,
For when the wide main I surveyed,
I could not help thinking the world is unkind,
And fortune a slippery jade.
And I vowed if once more I could take her in tow,
I Would let the ungrateful ones see,
That the turbulent winds and the billows could show,
More kindness than they did to me.
SONG LII. Ben Block.
I WAS pressed while a roving so happy --
No matter, it was childish to grieve;
So to drown care with grog I got happy,
Yet sighed my sweet Kitty to leave:
But what hurt me most were those ninnies,
On whom I had thought to depend,
For I wished to raise Kate a few guineas,
But found I had got never a friend.
When on board, why I troubled a ship-mate
A note to my sweet heart to write;
Which in doing he somehow a slip made,
His own tale of love did indite!
So when I at Battersea landed,
He Would pattered her so to his end)
I learnt he my frigate commanded,
And found I had got never a friend.
When again on the salt seas in motion,
The ill-humour'd winds loudly roar;
And friendship I found on the ocean,
As scant as I left it on shore;
We were wrecked -- but (...) little matters,
While messmates to Da(...) ^escend,
I escaped but was poor, all in tatters,
And found I had got never a friend.
Yet still to all sear I was stranger,
In battle, (where death tips the grin)
Was exposed to the heat of each danger,
Till a musket-ball splintered my shin:
Well, away to the cockpit I hobbled,
Where so many customers tend,
That the surgeon to save further trouble,
Lopped it off, damme, not like a friend.
But now every comfort's imparted,
I find, laid in Greenwich sung deck,
My messmates are true, honest-hearted,
And each wisher well to Ben Block:
The rear of my life glides on cheerly,
In a calm here my moments I Will end;
I have fought for my King late and early,
And, bless him, the King is my friend.
SONG LIII. The Female Gamester.
AT cards last year, I with my dear,
Played every night and day;
I do not fib, she bilk'd my crib,
So crafty she did play;
Games at all fours, she is beat me scores,
So well the knows the pack;
When'er she deals, she cribs or steals,
And can always (...) Jack.
With her fall lal lal, (...) ral, fall lal lal, lal de ral,
When'er she deals, she cribs or steals,
And can always lug out Jack.
When'er at putt, I with the slut
Sit down it is, just the same;
Tho fair to play, I show my tray,
Her deuce will get the game:
Putt if you will, I Will meet your fair,
And play you for a crown:
As I Am alive, she will so contrive,
That she always can lay down.
With her fall lal, etc.

At dear quadrille, I Have had my fill,
She Is beat me over and over;
Tho a good hand made me to stand,
She had always matadores;
When in the pool, I like a fool,
Put in my little fish,
She Would win them all, both great and small,
And have her warmest wish.
With her fall lal, etc.

I never could at piquet,
Play with her but she won;
From first to last, she played so fast,
She Would beat sure as a gun:
If I look fierce, and show my tierce,
A quart she always had;
If I had four, she showed me more,
Her quint did make me mad.
With her fall lal, etc.

I always mist, if ever at whist
We did together play;
She Would keep her seat, and always beat,
While I tried every way,
Tho face to face, she would win my ace,
And make me a mere pup;
My three times three, and honors, she
Takes from me and gets up.
With her fall lal, etc.

I am a Jew at hazard too,
And often times have a nick,
Tho I throw well, I blush to tell,
That she has made me sick;
When with the box, she at me knocks,
My spirit sometimes flags;
For, by the gods, she wins the odds
And empties all my bags.
With her fall lal, etc.

SONG LIVE. Prithe Fool be Quiet.
AS the other day young Damon strayed
Where Chloe say demure,
He doff'd his bat, and sighed, and gazed,
It Was love that struck him -- sure:
With reverence he approached the fair,
Which she looked very shy at:
And when he praised her shape and air,
It Was -- prithe fool be quiet.
My dear, he cried, now be not coy,
Nor think my meaning rude;
Let love, like mine, thy mind employ,
True love can never intrude;
Her hand he then assayed to kiss,
Which, srowning, she cry difie at,
And when he struggled for the bliss,
Said -- prithee fool be quiet.
Then kneeling at her feet he swore
Without her he should die;
That man never loved woman more,
And heaved a melting sigh:
Cupid unseen now touched her breast,
And there kicked up a riot;
Much softened, yet she still expressed
Nay -- prithe sir be quiet.
The youth perceived her altered tone,
And boldly asked her hand:
Soon (...) made them both as one,
United in his hand:
The case too soon is changed quite --
A scene you will all cry fie at;
She prates away from morn all night,
While he cries -- Zounds be quiet.
SONG LV. The Sea-Worn Tar.
THE sea-worn tar, who in the war,
No danger ever could move;
True to his gun, all hazards run,
Yet thought upon his love:
But, home again, forgets his pain,
And seeks his faithful lass;
Locked in her arms, enjoys her charms,
And fills the sparkling glass.
The ship safe moored, with gold well stored,
All dangers now are over;
His timbers tight, his rigging light.
He souds along the shore,
To seek the place where every grace
Adorns his charming lass;
Then, in her arms, enjoys her charms,
And fills the sparking glass.
In war renowned, with honor crowned,
He laughs and sings away;
Often fore and aft, aloft abaft,
He talks from night to day,
Of red hot balls, and battered walls,
To entertain his lass;
Locked in her arms, enjoys her charms,
And fills the sparkling glass.
The two followings Songs are sung in the Musical Entertainment of the
"HIGHLAND REEL."

SONG LVI. When I Have Money I am Merry.
WHEN I Have money I am merry,
When I Have none I Am very sad;
When I Am sober I am civil,
When I Am drunk I Am roaring mad,
CHORUS.
With my titol teedle tum,
Likewise fol lol feedle fum,
Not forgatting diderum hi,
And also teedle tweedle dum.
When disputing with a puppy,
I convince him with a rap;
When I Am romping with a girl,
By accident I tear her cap,
Gadzooks, I Will never marry,
I Am a lad that is bold and free,
Yet I love a pretty girl,
A pretty girl is fond of me.
With my, etc.

There Is a maiden in a corner,
Round and sound, and plump and fat,
She and I made love together
But no matter, Sir, for that.
If this maiden be wi' bairn,
As I do suppose she will be,
Like good pappy I must learn
To dandle Jacky on my knee.
With my, etc.

SONG LVII. Tho I Am a very little Lad.
THO I Am a very little lad,
If fighting men cannot be had,
For want of better I may do,
To follow the boy with a rat-tat-too;
I may seem tender, yet I Am tough,
And tho not much of me, right good stuff,
Of this I Will boast, say more who can,
I never was afraid to meet my man.
CHORUS.
I Am a chickabiddy, see take me now now now,
I Am a little merry he, for your row dow dow,
Brown Bess I Will knock about, oh, there is my joy,
At my back a knapsack like a roving boy.
In my tartan played a young soldier view,
My phillibeg and dirk, and my bonnet blue,
Give the word, and I Will march where you command,
Noble Sergeant with a shilling, strike my hand.
My Captain, as he takes his glass,
My wish to toy with a pretty lass,
For such a one I have a roguish eye,
He Will never want a lass when I am by.
I am a chickabiddy, etc.

Though a barber never yet has mowed my chin,
With my great broad sword I long to begin,
Cut slash, ram-damn -- oh glorious fun,
For a gun, pip, pop, change my little pop-gun.
My foes shall fly like geese in flocks,
E'on Turks I Will drive like turky-cocks,
And wherever quartered I shall be,
Oh, Zounds! how I Will kiss my landlady.
I Am a chickabiddy, etc,

SONG LVIII. The Heaving of the Lean.
FOR England, when with favoring gal,
Our gallant ship up channel steered,
And, scudding under easy sail,
The high blue western land appeared
To heave the lead the seamen sprung,
And to the Pilot cheerly sung,
By the deep nine!
By the deep nine!
To heave the lead the seaman sprung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
By the deep nine!
And beating up to gain the port,
Some well-known object kept in view;
And abbey-tow'r an harbour-fort,
Or beacon, to the vessel true,
While often the lead the seaman flung,
And to the pilot cheerly sung,
By the mark seven!
While often the lead, etc.

And, as the much loved shore we near,
With transport we beheld the roof;
Where dwelt a friend or partner dear,
Of faith and love a matchless proof.
The lead once more the seaman slung,
And to the watchful pilot sung,
Quarter less sive!
The lead once more, etc.

SONG LIX. The Sailor's Consolation.
SPANKING Jack was so comely, so pleasant, so jolly,
(...) winds blew great guns, still he would whistle and sing;
Jack loved his friend, and was true to his Molly,
And if honor gives greatness, was as great as a king,
One night as we drove with two reefs in our mainsail,
And the scud came on louting upon a lee shore,
Jack went up aloft for to hand the top-gallant sail,
A spray washed him off, and we never saw him more.
CHORUS.
We never saw him more, but grieving's a folly, come let us be jolly,
If we have troubles at sea, boys, we have pleasure on shore.
Whistling Tom, still of mischief or fun, in the middle,
Through life, in all weathers, at random we jog,
He Would dance and he would sing, and he would play on the fiddle,
And swig, with an air, his allowance of grog:
Long fide of a Don, in the Terrible frigate,
As yard arm and yard arm we lay off the shore,
In and out whistling Tom did so caper and jig it,
That his head was shot off, and we never saw him more.
Bonny Ben was to each jolly messmate a brother,
He was manly and honest, good natured and free;
If ever one tar was more free than another,
To his friend and his duty, that sailor was he,
One day with the david to heave the cadge anchor,
Ben went in a boat on a bold craggy shore,
He over board tipped when a shark and a Spanker
Soon nipt him in two, and we never saw more.
But what of it all, lads, shall we be down-hearted
Because that may hap we may take the last sup,
Life's cable must one day or other be parted,
And death in safe mooring will bring us all up,
But it is always the way on it one scarce finds a brother,
Found a pitch honest hearty, and true to the core,
But by battle or storm or some d -- thing or other,
He Is popp'd off the hooks, and we never see him more.
SONG LX. The Faithful Soldier.
SHE. COULD you to battle march away,
And leave me here complaining,
I Am sure it would break my heart to stay,
When you are gone campaigning:
Ah! non non non, pauvre Madelon
Never will quit her rover.
Ah! non, etc.


HE. Cheer, cheer my love, you shall not grieve,
A soldier true you will find me;
I could not have the heart to leave,
My little girl behind me;
(...)! non non non, pauvre Madelon,
Shall never quit her rover;
Ah non non non, pauvre Madelon,
Shall go with me all the world over.

SHE. And can you to the battle go
To women's fears a stranger,
No fears my breast shall ever know
But when my love's in danger.
Ah! non non non, pauvre Madelon
Will never quit her rover,
Ah! non non non, pauvre Madelon
Will go with you all the world over.

HE. Then let the world jog as it will,
Let hollow friends forsake us,
Then let the world jog as it will,
Let hollow friends forsake us,
We both shall be as happy still,
As love and war can make us,
Ah! non non non, pauvre Madelon
Shall never quit her rover.

SONG LXI. Homeward Bound.
COME loose every sail to the breeze,
The course of my vessel improve,
I Have done with the toils of the seas,
Ye sailors! I Am bound to my love,
Ye sailors! I Am bound to my love,
Ye sailors! I Am bound to my love.
I Have done with the toils of the sens,
Ye sailors! I Am bound to my love.
Since Emma is true as she is fair,
My griefs I fling all to the wind.
It Is a pleasing return for my care:
My mistress is constant and kind.
My sails are all sill'd to my dear:
What tropic-bird swifter can move;
Who cruel shall hold his career,
That returns to the nest of his love.
Hoist every sail to the breeze,
Come, ship-mates, and join in my song;
Let Us drink while the ship cuts the seas,
To the gale that may drive her along.
SONG LXII. Heaving the Anchor.
WHEN first we hear the boatswain's bray,
With a voice like thunder roaring,
All hands, my lads get under way;
Hark! the signal for unmooring,
To save the joyous breeze,
Our handspikes quick we seize,
In hopes to meet the foe --
Our capston here, the windless there,
We man to the tune of heo, hea heo, etc.
Cast loose your topsails next he cries,
Top-gallant sails and courses,
Clew lines and geer, let go my boys,
Haul home your sheets like horses,
The mizen too, be glib,
Fore stay-sail too, and jib,
Your downhauls, boys let go:
We straight comply and eager fly,
And obey to the tune of heo, hea, heo, etc.
The anchor's up oh! next we call,
Avast boys, vast your heaving,
Out cat and fish we overhaul,
Our handspikes nimbly leaving;
Then if a prosperous gale,
We crowd on every sail,
Our sheers they sweetly flow,
Along we swim, our braces trim,
And it is all to the tune of heo, hea, heo, etc.
Then lovely Moll and Sue, and Beck,
Their eyes with grief overflowing,
With heavy hearts come up on deck,
The rude winds on them blowing;
A short embrace we take,
Which makes our hearts to ache,
A while we are lost in woe:
Nor to our grief can find relief,
Till cheered by the tune of heo, hoa, heo, etc.
SONG LXIII. Freedom or the Grave.
FILL high the animating glass,
And let the electric ruby pass
From hand to hand, from soul to soul;
Who shall the energy control,
Exalted, pure, refined,
The Hearth of Human kind!
CHORUS.
Assert the hollowed Rights which Nature gave,
And let your last best Vow, be FREEDOM or the
GRAVE.
Not now a venal tribe shall raise
The song of prostituted praise,
To sov'reigns who have seized their power;
But at this gay, this liberal hour,
We bless what Heaven designed,
The Health of Human kind.
Assert the hallowed, etc.

We turn indignant from each cause
Of man's dismay; from partial laws,
From kings who vainly seek by flight,
To shun the blaze of Mortal light;
We bless what Heaven designed,
The Health of Human kind.
Assert the hallowed, etc.

SONG LXIV. From Night Till Morn, etc.
FROM night till more I take my glass,
In hopes to forget my Chloe,
From night, etc.
But as I take the pleasing draught,
She Is never the less before me,
Ah! no no no, wine cannot cure
The pain I endure for my Chloe.
To wine I slew to ease my pain,
Her beauteous charms created;
To wine, etc.
But wine more firmly bound the chain,
And love would not be cheated.
Ah! no no no, etc.
INDEX.
A
A SOLDIER I am for a Lady page 9 All you that are wise and think life worth
enjoying page 10 After breakfast, says Nancy, well what shall we do? page 26
Aslist me ye lads who have hearts void of guile page 42 As through the groves I
chanced to stray page 42 At cards last year, I with my dear page 54 As the other
day young Damon strayed page 55
B
Bright Phoebus has mounted the chariot of day page 19 Bold Jack, the sailor,
here I come page 47
C
Come, my fairest, learn of me page 39 Could you to the battle march away page
62 Come loose every sail to the breeze page 63
D
Declare, my pretty maid page 42
F
For England, when which favoring gale page 59 Fill high the animating glass
page 65 From night till morn I take my glass page 66
G
Go patter to lubbers and swabs do you see page 21 Gad a mercy, devil's in me
page 27
H
How blessed the life a sailor leads page 3 How stands the glass around page 20
Here, a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling page 30 How pleasant a sailor's life
passes page 31
I
In choice of a husband us widows are nice page 10 I sailed in the good ship
the Kitty page 13 In Jacky Bull, when bound for France page 16 I sailed from
the Downs in the Nancy page 28 In the world's crooked path, where I Have been
page 35 I that once was a ploughman, a sailor am now page 45 In Martindale, a
village gay page 50 I was pressed while a roving so happy page 52
L
Lord! what care I for mam or dad page 18
M
Mountain Goddess! unconfined page 6 My fair Serena often has seen page 8 My
heart from my bosom would fly page 37
N
Night scarce her mantle had withdrew page 38
O
O think-on my fate -- once I freedom enjoyed page 31 Oh, fear not my courage,
proved over and over page 35
S
Say, will you leave your lowland haunts page 7 Strephon with his Flora lying
page 17 Sons of Bacchus let us be gay page 39 Spanking Jack was so comely, so
pleasant, so jolly page 60
T
The meadows look cheerful, the birds sweetly sing page 29 The sable-clad
curtain's undrawn page 36 The topsails shiver in the wind page 44 Tho Bacchus
may boast of his care killing bowl page 48 The sea-worn tar, who in the war
page 56 Tho I Am a very little lad page 58
W
While plots work revolutions page 7 What a charming thing's a battle page 12
When I took my departure from Dublin's sweet town page 14 When last honest
Jack, of whose fate I now write page 23 When up the shrouds the sailor goes
page 24 When I was a younker, and lived with my dad page 24 When whistling
winds are heard to blow page 32 When first I slipped my leading strings -- to
please her little Poll page 33 When first this humble roof I knew page 34
Whilst on thy dear bosom lying page 40 When I was at home, I was merry and
frisky page 42 With a pipe of Virginia, how happy am I page 50 When my money
was all gone that I gained in the wars page 51 When I Have money I am merry page
57 When first we hear the boatswain's bray page 64
Y
Ye Sons of France! awake to glory page 4 Ye lads and ye lasses so buxom and
clever page 11

