

THE MISFORTUNES OF ANGER. A DRAMA, IN TWO PARTS.

"Our Pardons gone, and (...)
"We wonder at the Mischief we have done."
WALLER. BOSTON. PRINTED FOR WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD. 1798.

CHARACTERS.
Mrs. Selwyn, Governess to Juliet. Paulina, Her Cousin. Mary, Her Maid. Juliet,
Fanny A little Girl.
THE Misfortunes of Anger.
SCENE, a Parlour.
Mary enters, lifts up a tambour frame which appears to have been thrown down,
picks up the spangles, silks, etc, -- She speaks. SO Miss Juliet has been here,
I see! -- What put her into a rage with her tambour, I wonder? -- Oh! I see,
this rose-bud does not look well, so down it went, I Will warrant it, and here
lie the spangles and twist thrown all over the floor. For my part, I wonder the
frame was not all broke to smash, it would have been like her. -- Ah! here
comes Miss Paulina! There Is a young lady, marry, I wish our's was like her, but
no hope of that!

Enter Paulina (with a book.) Paulina. Mary have you seen my cousin?


Mary. No, Miss, not since breakfast.


Paulina. I left her here at her tambour frame -- She said she would work while
I read to her.


Mary. Aye, Miss, but something has gone wrong since that. -- Here I found the
frame, and there lay the silks -- Truly, I Am glad I was not here, they would have
been thrown at my head.


Paulina. Perhaps she is gone to her own room, I Will seek her; if she comes
there in the mean time, Mary tell her I am up stairs.


Mary. Yes, Miss, to be sure I will. -- ( Paulina goes out.) -- Ah! by my
truth, there is some pleasure in doing any thing for you, one does not get
pinched and called names! -- So here is the Governess, yawning as usual, but
just up.

Enter Mrs. Selwyn. ( She speaks in a slow, dull manner, and yawns often.)
Mrs. Selwyn. Well, Mary! -- Where Is Miss Juliet?


Mary. I don't know, Ma'am, not I, she is in one of her passions today; every
thing goes wrong with her; she was ready to fight with the looking-glass, while
I dressed her this morning, and I don't know how many pinches I got for not
being quick enough to please her.


Mrs. Selwyn. She Is a strange girl, I cannot help laughing at her sometimes.


Mary. (laughing.) It Is no laughing matter, ma'am, I can tell you that, and it
only makes her worse.


Mrs. Selwyn. She fatigues me so! I really cannot stay with her long at a time,


Mary, (aside.) No, truly, you take care not to have too much trouble!


Mrs. Selwyn draws a chair indolently, and takes out her work

Mrs. Selwyn. Well, Mary, go and tell her to come to me, I want her to read.


Mary. Lord, ma'am I Am quite afraid to go, she will not mind me.


Mrs. Selwyn, (yawning.) And she will fatigue me sadly too, well, never mind,
she will come byeand bye.


Enter Fanny, (crying) Mary. What Is the matter with you, Fanny, what are you
crying for?


Fanny. Miss Juliet! -- Miss Juliet! -- Oh dear.


Mrs. Selwyn. Child, don't make so much noise, what has Miss Juliet done to you?


Fanny. Why, ma'am, an please you she met me in the garden, about half an hour
agone, I was a coming up, ma'am, to beg a little milk for my little sister, for
mother is very bad, and so she said as how --


Mrs. Selwyn. Don't talk so fast, let us hear what Miss Juliet did.


Fanny. Yes, ma'am, and so ma'am, if you please, I met Miss Juliet; and so she
asked me what I wanted, and so I told, and so the


Mrs. Selwyn. Grant me patience! How many more so's?


Mary. Don't make such a long story, Fanny, tell us, at once, what made you cry.


Fanny. Yes, I Am a going, so miss asked me to play wi' she, for she said his
honor was gone out and Madam Selwyn wa'nt up, and Master Charles was gone to
school, and Miss Paulina was up stairs, and she did not know what to do wi'
herself.


Mrs. Selwyn. So, there is all the family disposed of. -- Well, child, what then?


Fanny. Then we went up stairs ma'am, and miss showed me her doll, and we
played, but at last, -- Oh dear, oh dear!


Mrs. Selwyn. I never heard such a girl in my life. -- What happened then?


Fanny. Why, miss beat me, yes, she did, ever so hard, and scratched me.


Mrs. Selwyn. What, all at once, without any cause?


Fanny. Yes, ma'am, cause I let the doll fall.


Mrs. Selwyn, (laughing.) What nonsense! -- Go away, child, take your milk, and
bid the cook give you some broth.


Fanny. Yes, ma'am, thank you ma'am (Aside.) -- But I will not come here any more
to be beat about so. (Mary and Fanny go out.)


Enter Juliet, (with her doll.) Juliet. Where Is Fanny Wood?


Mrs. Selwyn. Gone home, miss, do you think any body will stay where you are,
to be beat and scratched?


Juliet. I don't care What business had she to throw down my doll?


Mrs. Selwyn. Do you think she did it on purpose?


Juliet. I don't know. -- Let her take more care then.


Mrs. Selwyn. Has she spoiled it?


Juliet. No.


Mrs. Selwyn. Well then, what was there to be in such a rage about? -- Come and
read.


Juliet. Not till I have dressed my doll.


Mrs. Selwyn. Well, -- make haste then -- (A pause, Mrs. Selwyn works but
slowly and idly, Juliet dresses her doll, at last, she stamps her foot, and
says: --


You tiresome creature, will not you be dressed?


Mrs. Selwyn. My stars, Miss Juliet, how you make one start -- What is the
matter now?


Juliet. Why, my nasty doll is such a torment.


Mrs. Selwyn. Very pretty, to quarrel with a bit of painted wood! -- Oh! you
silly child! -- Come, leave your doll, and let me hear you read.


Juliet. I tell you I will not.


Mrs. Selwyn. Oh! you are a sweet little girl, so mild and so obliging; how
every body loves you.


Juliet, (Crying.) Let me alone then!


Mrs. Selwyn. Pretty creature! -- What a sweet face! -- Look how your doll
stares at you!


Juliet. (Rising in a passion, and throwing her doll across the room.)


I wish the doll was a thousand miles off, a little provoking creature! --
(Mrs. Selwyn laughs.) -- I will not be laughed at that I will not.


Mrs. Selwyn. How will you help it? -- Leave off crying directly, or I will
shut you up for two hours. -- (Another pause, Juliet still cries, but by
degrees becomes quiet, after some time she calls.) -- Mary! -- Mary


Mrs. Selwyn. What now, mise?


Juliet. I want Mary. -- (calls) -- Mary, I say!

Enter Mary.
Mary. Mercy, miss I came as soon as ever I heard you.


Juliet. You are always so slow. -- Take down my gold finch, and fetch me some
feed and water.


Mary. Yes miss. (She reaches the bird down, then goes out, and returns with
some water and seed.)


Juliet. Come my pretty, let your mistress feed you, I love you very much --
(She feeds it.)


Mrs. Selwyn. Yes, you love it vastly just now, but sometimes you are ready to
wring its neck, when it does not eat to please you.


Mary. (aside.) One would think Mrs. Selwyn liked to see her in a passion, she
delights so in teazing her!


Juliet.(feeding the bird) Oh, you little torment you will not eat out of my hand!


Mrs. Selwyn. There, I told you so, now, miss, you has better beat the bird, or
throw it across the room, as you did your doll.


Juliet. So I will, if I please.


Mrs. Selwyn. Do, I would advise you!


Mary. Dear ma'am, how can you?


Juliet. Come, eat then -- You will not! -- You nasty, little obstinate,
ungrateful creature, -- I Will teach you to teaze me, I will. -- (She snatches
the bird out of the cage in a passion, gives it a squeeze, then looks at it,
and bursts into tears.) -- Oh! Heaven, I have killed my bird! --


Mary. Oh, dear, miss, I hope not.


Juliet. Look at it, Mary, pray try if you can fetch it to life! -- Oh my poor
bird -- Is it dead, Mary? --


Mary. Yes, miss, you have killed it.


Juliet. It -- I have killed it! -- I that loved it so! -- Oh! how unhappy I am!


Mary. Don't cry so, miss, you was not so much to blame now.

Enter Paulina
Paulina. Dear Juliet, what is the matter?


Juliet. ( Throws herself into Paulina's arms.) Oh! cousin, why did you leave
me? -- I am never so naughty when you are with me.


Paulina. My dear, I have been seeking you, at last I heard you was playing
with Fanny Wood, so then I sat down to write to mama -- But what has happened?
--


Mrs. Selwyn. Oh Miss Juliet has been in one of her usual furies. -- I must
dress. -- I am tired out with her. -- Mary will tell you, Miss Paulina. (She
goes out.)


Mary, (muttering.) And it is as much your fault as here is this time, I must say,
teaze, teaze, for ever.


Paulina. Mary, what is the matter?


Mary. Shall I tell, miss?


Juliet. Oh! my cousin will hate me.


Paulina. I hate you, my dear, no I shall pity you.


Mary. Why, miss, my young lady was feeding her bird, and hurt it somehow, and
it is dead.


Juliet. No, Paulina, that is not all; I was angry with my poor bird, I gave it
a sudden squeeze, and killed it.


Paulina. My dear cousin, you almost redeem your faults by this openness of
heart. -- How I pity you, how much you must feel on this occasion!


Juliet. ( weeping, but with gentleness.) But you, who are so good, how much
you must detest me!


Mary. To tell you the truth, Miss Paulina, my young lady was not so much to
blame as she is sometimes, Mrs. Selwyn did teaze her sadly, that she did, to be
sure.


Juliet. But that was not my bird's fault! -- Ah, my poor bird, he will never
eat out of my hand again! -- How could I be so cruel as to hurt a little
creature who loved me so dearly.


Paulina. Leave us, Mary.


(Mary goes out.) Paulina, Juliet. Paulina. Do not distress yourself so much,
my dear Juliet.


Juliet. Do I not deserve to be distressed?


Paulina. You have certainly been wrong.


Juliet. Ah! You do not know half how naughty I have been: I pinched Mary, I
beat Fanny Wood! -- What is it makes me so wicked, Paulina? I always know when
I am so, and I am unhappy, then I fret, and do wrong again.


Paulina. I can easily conceive all that, you are greatly to be pitied.


Juliet. But you are the only person (except my father) who ever speaks to me
as if I had common sense! -- Mary shrugs up her shoulders and leaves me as soon
as she can. -- Mrs. Selwyn laughs at me and treats me like a baby. It was but
just now she bade me "look how my doll stared at me!" And that put me into such
a passion, that I threw my doll across the room.


Paulina. Certainly Mrs. Selwyn does not treat you properly, but that does not
justify you. You are now, my dear, more than twelve years old; at that age,
though children, we are no longer babies, but you do not seek to improve
yourself. You read, indeed, because you love reading, but not with a steady
view to your own improvement, and almost all the remainder of your time is
spent in dressing your doll and playing with Fanny Wood, who is too ignorant to
be a proper companion for you; thus you tempt others to treat you like a baby.
-- I do not offend you?


Juliet. No, no, -- I like to hear you because you speak to me gently, and I
feel what you say. Pray, dear Paulina, tell me what I must do to be like you.


Paulina. My dear Juliet, I wish you a better example; -- if you were with us,
mama would soon teach you to be all your friends could wish. -- But Juliet,
with the understanding nature has given you, you may do much for yourself. In
the words of a very great author I will tell you that -- "There is no soul
More able to direct you than yourself.
If with the sap of Reason you would quench
Or but allay the Fire of Passion!" --


Read more, and reflect -- Whenever you find yourself getting angry leave the
cause of your displeasure, take a book which amuses you, and read till you find
yourself calm and easy. Struggle with your violent passions, and think to what
dreadful consequences they will lead if you indulge them.


Juliet. Consequences!


Paulina. Yes, my dear cousin, I know not to what an excess they may transport
you in time, if they are not now opposed. -- My mother told me, the other day,
she had just read the history of a man, who, when a boy, squeezed his squirrel
to death as you did your bird, and when he grew up, after various crimes, being
angry with his wife, his child, who was in her arms, happened to cry while he
was speaking and, in a fit of passion, he laid his hand on it, and strangled it
in a moment!


Juliet. Oh! Heaven, how shocking; do you think it possible, Paulina, do you
think it possible I should ever do so?


Paulina. It is impossible to say to what extravagance passion may lead! -- But
yesterday you would have detested the idea of injuring your bird -- and are we
not told in the Bible, that when the Prophet foretold to Hazael Sec 8th Chapter
of the (...) Book of Kings.
the miseries he would bring on his country, and the cruelties of which he
would be guilty he exclaimed, "Is thy servant a dog that he should do this
great thing?" -- And yet when he gave way to his passions, he exactly ver^^^
the Prophet's words.


Juliet. Oh, Paulina! you terify me extremely -- I will indeed try to do good
-- I will not beat Fanny nor pinch Charles any more.


Paulina. I wish you may not -- It is time for us to dress, your father will be
at home presently, and I hear Charles is just come from school. (They go out.)


END OF THE FIRST PART.
THE Misfortunes of Anger. PART II.
Juliet enters from the garden, she draws a chair, sits down, and leads her
head on her hand. Juliet. I HAVE a sad headache, it always comes when I cry so
much. -- How true is what Paulina said just now, that I make myself wretched by
indulging my passions I -- Why did nobody ever tell me so before? -- (She takes
a picture from her bosom and kisses it. -- Oh, my dear mother! -- You died too
early to form by your example, the daughter you loved so tenderly! -- Wretched
girl! -- Why do I ever, for a moment, forget the character which my father drew
of my mother when he gave me this picture, -- "Be like your mother, my Juliet;
she was mild and gentle to all, she was beloved by every one who knew her! her
dying wish was, that you might be virtuous! -- My child, be worthy of your
mother! -- Yes, those were exactly his words. Ah! how little do I fulfill her
wishes! -- I, who ill-treat the servant to whose care she entrusted my infancy
-- Who abuse a poor child whose situation should make me pity her! -- I whom
every body hates! -- Torn by contrary feelings! -- Capable of knowing when I do
wrong, yet yielding to the next temptation. -- In spite of my faults, am I not
to be pitied?


Enter Mary. Mary. Miss, my master bade me tell you he is going to Mr.
Richley's, and shall be back in less than an hour.


Juliet. Very well.


Mary. What is the matter miss, you are crying?


Juliet. I have reason to cry.


Mary. I am sure, miss, I don't know any young lady who might be happier. --
You have the best of fathers.


Juliet. Ah! that is true.


Mary. And here you have a fine house, where you are, as one may say, mistress,
and a carriage, and every earthly thing you can wish. -- Only think of the poor
children down in the village: the little Wood's whose mother is so sick, and
who are half starved!


Juliet. Alas, yes! -- And I have ill-treated poor Fanny! -- My dear Mary, do
go down to the village and give her this shilling; I will beg papa, presently,
to send our apothecary to her mother,


Mary. Oh, miss, what a pity you are not always good, how every body would love
you.


Juliet. I hope they will in future.

Enter Paulina.
Paulina. Juliet, what are you going to do?


Juliet. I am going to read to Mrs. Selwyn, in her own room, and afterward
Charles and I are going to play.


Paulina. Very well, then I will finish my letter to mama.


Juliet. Do so. -- I shall not stay long with Mrs. Selwyn. -- Let me know,
Mary, when my father comes in.


Mary. Yes, miss. (Juliet goes out.)


Paulina, Mary. Mary. Miss Juliet seems very unhappy today.


Paulina. Yes, she has naturally a strong sense of what is right; she feels
that she is wrong, and of course is unhappy.


Mary. I cannot help loving her, though she is sometimes so much out of the
way. She was a sweet child before she grew so passionate, and she has a great
deal of good about her still. How my poor lady would have grieved had she lived
to see her so headstrong.


Paulina. Had it pleased Heaven to spare Mrs. Beecher, Juliet would probably
have been a very different character; she has an admirable understanding, but
she is ill educated.


Mary. That Is true, indeed, miss. I take the liberty of speaking to you because
you know how I love all this family, and that I have lived in it long enough to
know something about it.


Paulina. Yes, Mary, you may speak to me without fear; I know your attachment
to your late lady and all that belonged to her.


Mary. Ah, miss, I wish my young lady lived with you, you are so mild and so
sensible, and my lady your mother is so fine a character --


Paulina. I have reason to glory in my mother -- May I be one day like her.


Mary. You will, miss, nay, you are already; truly I hear of you from all
parts. -- But I know yo don't wish to be praised. -- What I was going to say,
is this: -- Nobody hears us! -- No -- Indeed, Miss Paulina, Mrs. Selwyn is not
fit to have the care of my young lady.


Paulina. It is true indeed.


Mary. She sets her no example but laziness, and she teazes her out of her
wits; -- if you had but heard her this morning --


Paulina. I see it with pain. She has no command over my cousin, because she
puts herself on a level with her by mean teazing and raillery; -- a passionate
temper was never mended by irritation. -- By the way, I don't much like this
scheme of playing with Charles; Juliet and he always quarrel, and I am afraid
he will overthrow all her good resolutions. I mean to speak to my uncle,
tonight, about Mrs. Selwyn, not to blame or censure her, but merely to say I
think she does not exactly follow the right method of managing my cousin's
temper.


Mary. Truly I think not.


Paulina. I intend to ask my uncle to let Juliet return with me, I know mama
wishes it.


Mary. I wish he may, miss, with all my heart.


Paulina. Well, I will go and write my letter.


(She is going, when Juliet rushes in apparently much terrified.) Juliet. Oh
Paulina! -- Mary -- Help, help!


Mary. Oh dear, miss what, is the matter?


Juliet. My brother! -- help -- help him -- go to him.

(Mary runs out, Juliet sinks down with her head against a chair, Paulina goes
to her.)
Paulina. Cousin! -- My dear Juliet, what is the matter? -- Oh, Heaven! she is
fainting! -- What shall I do, shall I run to Charles? -- No, I cannot leave
this dear girl. -- Juliet, revive, smell to my salts. --

(Juliet recovering, rises on her knees, and clings round Paulina.)
Juliet. Oh, Paulina! -- Send for some help. -- Run to my father. -- My father!
-- Good Heaven! he will hate me for ever. -- I shall be banished his sight;
plead for me Paulina! -- Wretched girl! -- What will become of me!


Paulina. For pity's sake tell me what you have done?


Juliet. What have I done? -- I know not! -- Perhaps I have killed my brother!


Paulina. ( shudders and shrinks back.) Unhappy girl!


Juliet. Oh! well may you shudder, well may you look at me with horror! -- You
who warned me; how dare I clasp my arms round you. -- Those hands, which, (how
can I five to tell it) perhaps have murdered my brother. (She faints)


Paulina. With what terror do I hear her, (She leans over her.) Wretched victim
of ungoverned passion! -- Revive, fear not my reproaches! -- Ah, thou art
already too miserable!

Enter Mary
Mary. Ah, miss, what shall we do? -- I have sent for a surgeon.


Paulina. How is he hurt?


Mary. Alas! I know not how much, the knife has struck him near the eye.


Paulina. The knife!


Mary. Yes, they were at play and quarrelled, Miss Juliet had a knife in her
hand, which she threw at him.


Paulina. How dreadful! -- let us run to him! -- Yet, Juliet! But why should I
seek to revive her! -- Unhappy creature, she wakes but to woe -- Perhaps he may
be blinded! -- I stiffen with horror! -- Ah I hear the surgeon; follow me, Mary!

(They run out.) (Juliet alone and recovering.)
Paulina, where am I! -- You will not speak! -- What have I done! -- Ah I
remember -- too, too well I remember! -- (She raises herself) -- They are gone!
-- They leave me! -- to die alone! -- Alas I deserve it! -- Am I worthy that
one creature should pity me! -- Yet the torments I endure! -- Can they alone
for my crimes? -- Never, never! -- Dreadful idea! -- must I suffer through life
the anguish I feel at this moment? -- Through life -- what terrible fears crowd
upon me! -- (She kneels,) Oh God of mercy! hear me, pity me! -- Ah He is a God
of justice! -- Can he forgive me who have murdered my Brother? -- What a wretch
am I!


Enter Mary. Mary. Miss Juliet, are you better?


Juliet. Yes, Mary. -- Have you seen --


Mary. Your brother? -- yes, Miss.


Juliet. Ah, you weep!


Mary. Truly yes, I am frightened to death.


Juliet. I am the unhappy cause. -- I dread to hear -- I dare not ask.


Mary. The surgeon is with him; I could not stay any longer to see him suffer
so.


Juliet. Suffer!


Mary. Yes, the surgeon is obliged to hurt him, to find if the wound is -- I
cannot speak it.


Juliet. Mortal you would say? How is it that I have courage to pronounce that
horrible word? -- Ah, I gather courage from the excess of my despair.


Mary. Oh my poor master, what will he say!


Juliet. Do not distract me! -- Pity for a moment the pangs I suffer! -- Leave
me, Mary, leave me, I implore you! -- Go, learn if there is any hope!

(Mary goes out.)
Juliet. I have lost everything! -- My father will drive me from him for ever
-- I shall quit every thing I love! -- My friends, my relations will blush when
my name is mentioned -- Never more shall I revisit these scenes, so dear to my
infancy! -- Let me not recall the years I have past -- years of innocence and
happiness! -- Go where I will, I shall be pointed at and hated. -- Even the
picture of my mother, which used in all my distresses to console me, I can
never fee again. -- I should fancy it reproached me. -- And all this misery I
have incurred by one moment of passion! -- Oh God, if thou should this once
deign to save me, never, never, will I be guilty again!


Enter Paulina, (running.) Paulina. Juliet! -- my dear cousin! -- be comforted.


Juliet. Ah! what then! -- What! -- may I, dare I hope!


Paulina. Yes -- the surgeon says he is in no danger.


Juliet (throwing herself into her arms.) Oh my best Paulina!


Paulina. (embracing her with tears.) I ran to you the instant I heard it.


Juliet. I have not deserved your goodness.


Paulina. Ah Juliet! -- if the knife had gone ever so little on one side,
Charles would have been killed, or on the other, and he would have been blinded
for ever.


Juliet. Oh merciful Almighty God! -- from what misery has thy providence
preserved me! -- even now I cannot behold myself without horror. -- Have I
deserved the mercy I have met with? -- No! -- though innocent in intention, my
action was guilty -- I could not wish to hurt my brother, yet took the means to
do so! -- Detested passion! -- Oh Paulina, I am cured for ever!


Paulina. I dare hope so! -- The lessons of this day have been striking. --
They show how one step in evil leads to another. -- Aweful and horrid might
have been the event, but as it has proved, we will hope this instruction has
been directed by Providence, to warn you of your danger!


Juliet. It has done it completely. -- But Paulina, where is my father?


Paulina. I hear him now in the hall.


Juliet. Oh Paulina, I dare not see him.


Paulina. I will go to him, and I hope, return with your pardon.


Juliet. My best friend -- let actions speak my gratitude, deign but to counsel
and direct me, henceforth I will be guided by you alone.

(Paulina goes out)
Enter Mrs. Selwyn and Mary. Mary. Well, Miss Juliet, make yourself easy, all
goes well.


Juliet. Thank God!


Mrs. Selwyn. You have had good fortune, Miss, I can tell you.


Juliet. Good fortune, Ma'am! I dare to consider it as the act of Divine
Providence, if not to save me, yet to preserve my father from misery.


Mrs. Selwyn. You improve, Miss, your language is really fine.


Juliet. Misfortunes correct the heart, and strong feelings excite strong
expression. -- I hope I shall improve.


Mrs. Selwyn. You astonish me -- you who but this morning were dressing your
doll, to be making wise remarks, is indeed surprising.


Juliet. I am not a fool, though I have acted like one.


Mary. No, no, they an't very wise that take you for a fool. I have often heard
you talk to my master as sensible as anybody in the world.


Mrs. Selwyn. Miss Juliet never indulged me with any of her sensible
conversation.


Mary. Truly no, because you treated her like a baby.


Mrs. Selwyn. You take great liberties.


Mary. I beg your pardon, Ma'am, but I have often told you you did not know my
young lady so well as I did.


Mrs. Selwyn. The more sense she has, the more shame for her to behave as she
has done.


Juliet. Too true indeed! -- my conscience tells me I have not the excuse of
folly. -- But I have suffered passion to overrun and darken many good
qualities. This one hour has driven it from my heart. I am no longer a foolish
child.

Enter Paulina.
Paulina. Come, my dearest Juliet -- Charles is with your father, he knows all,
he forgives you, he calls for you.


Juliet. I owe everything to you!


Paulina. I have more good news for you -- one word.

(Mrs. Selwyn and Mary retire to the back of the Scene.) You go home with me --
you are to stay with us as long as you please!


Juliet. Delightful! --


Paulina. Your father dismisses Mrs. Selwyn.


Juliet. Ah I am sorry! She is poor, and she has taught the many things.


Paulina. My good cousin, how I love that gratitude! -- your father will allow
her a pension, we have settled all that since I left you.


Juliet. Oh my best cousin! -- how much do I owe you.


Paulina. I am overpaid if you are happy.


Juliet. To be so I must be good. -- That will be the work of your hands! --
How will you be loved by your friends, by your mother, by Heaven itself! -- yes
that will repay you.


Paulina. Let us go, my uncle expects us.


Scene closes.

