PROSPECTUS OF A NEW WEEKLY PAPER, SUBMITTED TO MEN OF AFFLUENCE, MEN OF
LIBERALITY, AND MEN OF LETTERS.
A YOUNG MAN, once known among village-readers The Editor, not without emotion,
calls up in review the tranquil pleasures of a studious life, amid the
ever-green forests of Newhampshire. In Solitude, "with her best nurse,
Contemplation," he passed his "inoffensive day," "Often perched upon the green
hill top, and close
Environed with a ring of branching elms."
COWPER. The conclusion of the fourth Georgic of the Mantuan bard vividly
describes the pursuits of "a self sequestered man." The nice eared Prosodist
must forgive the substitution of harsh "Hantonia" for "Parthenope," the
classical and the liquid. Illo -- me tempore dulcis alebat
Hantonia, ETUDIIS FLORENTEM IGNOBILIS O^^,
Carmina, qui lu^i Pastorum; audaxque juventa
-- Cecini sub tegmine fagi.
VIRG.
, as the humble historian of the hour, the conductor of a Farmer's Museum, and
a Lay Preacher's Gazette, again offers himself to the public as a
volunteer-editor. Having, as he conceives, a right to vary, at pleasure, his
fictitious name, he now, for higher reasons than any fickle humor might
dictate, assumes the appellation of OLDSCHOOL. A name, which though harshly
combined, is abundantly expressive, and not unprotected by analogical
authority. BOLINGBROKE published his Remarks on the History of England, under
the name of Old Castle. To a diffident Editor, the machinery of a fictitious
title is convenient. Sir Richard STEEL, as a periodical Mentor, appeared to
many a delighted eye in the shape of an Isaac BICKERSTAFF, and a Nestor
IRONSIDE; and, if an English Knight deemed it decorous to avail himself of the
"immunities of invisibility," it is surely proper they should be claimed by an
unobtrusive American.
Fond of this title, indicative of his moral, political, and literary creed, he
proposes publishing, every Saturday, on a super-royal quarto sheet,

A NEW WEEKLY PAPER, TO BE CALLED, THE PORT FOLIO, Many periodical writers,
seriously or jocosely, have described the difficulty of inventing an
appropriate title. Though this to Cynical eyes may appear one of the frivolous
cares of authorship, yet it has kept many an Essayist awake, for at least one
night. Of the name for a popular vehicle it is required that it should be
concise, modest, and appropriate. The words Port Folio, from the French Port
Feuille, are not to be found in Johnson's Dictionary, but they are very
currently employed, in pure English, to signify a portable repository for
fugitive papers, which is the exact definition of this Miscellany. Editors,
ambitious of sonorous, or brilliant titles, frequently select a name, not
intimately connected with the nature of their work. We hear of "The Mirror,"
and the "Aurora," but what relation has a literary essay with a polished plane
of glass, or what have politics to do with The morning?
BY OLIVER OLDSCHOOL, ESQUIRE.

Warned by "the waywardness of the time This phrase alludes to our indifference
to elegant letters, to the acrimony (...) our party bickerings, and to the
universal eagerness for political texts, and their commentary. Hence, it is
generally, and not without reason, supposed that amid such "wild uproar," the
gentle voice of the Muse is scarcely audible. Prudence, therefore, has dictated
a concise paper, not quite a Gazette, nor wholly a Magazine, with something of
Politics to interest Quidnuncs, and something of literature to engage Students.
To those, who utterly despair of the success of such a plan, and to those who
would deride the temerity of the Editor for persevering to the end, it may be
said, that the first similar scheme in England commenced at a time, when the
nation was divided into whigs and tories, and coxcombs and impertinents, rather
than into Patrons and Readers. But, to use the Tatler's own words, "by forming
that paper, by way of Letter of Intelligence, consisting of such parts as might
gratify the curiosity of persons of all conditions, and each sex, the design,
however executed, met with so great success, that there is hardly a name now
eminent among us for power, wit, beauty, valor, or wisdom, which is not
subscribed." This was no empty vaunt of Steele's, for on consulting the
celebrated edition of the Tatler, published in 1786 by the indefatigable and
accurate John Nichols, we find a list of the subscribers, at an early stage of
the undertaking. The names are both very numerous, and very respectable.

The condition of a literary adventurer, meditating a new work, and solicited
to publish by some, and to suppress by others, is drolly described by honest
John BUNYAN. The conclusion drawn by his whimsical logic is what might be
expected from the natural wishes, and self complacency of every author.

Some said, John print it; others said, not so.
Some said, it might do good; others said, no.
Now I was in a strait, and did not see
Which was the best thing to be done by me:
At last I thought, since you are thus divided,
I print it will, and to the case decided!

," and the admonitions of every honest printer, the Editor begins his work on a
Lilliputian page, and, like a saving grocer, gives of his goods only a small
sample; but Subscribers, if peradventure The Editor employs this old fashioned
adverb to express his skepticism, with respect to the immediate encouragement
and success of this paper. But under every disadvantage of a narrow
subscription, he is resolved to persevere. He is sure of being fondly fostered
by the liberal Few, and will trust to Time for the slow reward of literary toil.

This it is presumed will prove ultimately successful, if men of virtue,
influence, genius, learning, and wealth assist his honest endeavors to promote
the dissemination of the true, and the beautiful. But this assistance must be
rendered with fervent zeal, and unabating kindness. A paper to be
advantageously edited, must be liberally supported. The compositor must be
requited for his mechanical toil, the publisher must be compensated for his
cares and risque, and the conductor, if competent to his highly responsible
duties, has a claim to what an ancient author, who well knew the value of
literary service, calls the "quiddam honorarium," the generous stipend for
mental efforts, not the paltry wages of a vulgar hireling. If an industrious
and high minded man thus situated, received only a servant's price of labor,
he will quickly sink to the level of the mercenary fugitive in the gospel. He
will flee from or neglect his duty, because he is an Hireling.

Literary industry, usefully employed has a sort of draught upon the bank of
opulence, and has the right of entry into the mansion of every Maecenas. When
to government or to individuals it renders actual service, gives harmless
pleasure to some, and new ideas to others, it confers at least a species of
obligation, which any code of ethical precept will teach men to repay. Let not
this be considered a mercenary doctrine, and let not writers be rashly censured
for vending the fruits of mind. Authors, far elevated above the mire of low
avarice, have thought it debasement to make Literature common and cheap. The
affluent lord LYTTLETON made his history of Henry II. a booksellers property
at the price of three thousand pounds; and Gibbon, and Robertson, and Blair,
and Sir William Jones sold their manuscripts for sums, which the generosity of
Britain did not scruple to pay, nor the pride of authorship blush to receive.


the Editor should have any, must not "despise the day of small things." It is
proposed always to give plenty of letter-press, in proportion to the public
demand, and, as the exigency of the season, or copiousness of materials may
require, to double, treble, and even quadruple the number of pages in the PORT
FOLIO. Hereafter, more may be done, if more be wanted, and if more be fostered.
At present, with the prudent policy of wary beginners, it is judged expedient
to risk but little. No sonorous promises are made, and no magnificence of style
attempted. The paper is to be neither wire-woven, nor hot-pressed, and it
certainly, in more senses than one, shall not be cream-coloured; but, in a
plain dress of Quaker simplicity, may, perhaps, offer something tolerable on
political, literary, and transient topics, and something, auxiliary to sound
principles, which, after church, "retired leisure MILTON. Il Penseroso.
" may read on Sunday The choice of Saturday is propitious to our plan. The
leisure, which is generally found, or made on that day, together with the
retirement and quiet of the Sabbath, seem to invite moral speculations, and
"the cherub Contemplation." The union of Literature, Piety, and Morals, is
fervently and elegantly wished by the admirable author of "The Pursuits of
Literature," a lofty and columnar work, whose grace and strength will endure,
when the delusions of fanatic democracy and Gallic philosophy shall have
vanished, like the filthy fogs of a morbid autumn. "Oh, never may Castalia's
streams divide
From Siloa's brook and Jordan's hallowed tide."

.

Empirical vaunting is always nauseous and arrogant; and the plausibility of
mighty promise has generally a pitiful conclusion. The Editor, with honest
diffidence, declines making specious engagements; timid, lest time or chance,
lest laziness, sickness, or stupidity, should step between stipulation and
fulfillment, he applies to himself one of the didactics of Solomon, and boasts
not himself of tomorrow, for he knows not what a day may bring forth.

But though the making of such promises is no less trite than fallacious, and
it is the part of Effrontery to exclaim, I possess adequate powers, and I will
perform mighty things, yet, on the other hand, it will be both novel and safe
for an Editor to declare, what he will avoid. More certain and confident
respecting that which he can shun, than that which he can accomplish, he
stipulates, with perfect sincerity, not to do certain things, and makes his
public contract as Theologians, at the beginning of the century, used to divide
their sermons, with a First, negatively.

He will not publish an impartial I would not take one of these, says a great
orator, speaking with all contempt of the impartial tribe, I would not take one
of these for my arbitrator in a dispute, for so much as a fish pond, for if he
reserved the mud to me, he would be sure to give the water, that fed the pool,
to my adversary

EDMUND BURKE. Dr. SMOLLET, in one of his merry novels, describing a quackish
prescription of a neutral draught, adds, "it was so neutral, as to declare
neither for the patient nor the disease." Such is the neutrality of many a
news-paper; and it may be added, of its readers too, men of convenient maxims,
who can cry amen to every creed, and venture on all sides, without being
trusted by any. Of such infamous principles the Editor has the deepest
abhorrence, and for the silly scheme of Impartiality, he cherishes the most
ineffable contempt. This is not a time for "creamy smoothness" in our
speculations, nor for lukewarmness in our conduct. When "bold bad men" are
assailing THE CITADEL, and violating the tombs of the ancients, and plucking up
the old landmarks, it is salutary to apply to each timid Bystander what was
once indignantly addressed to the supineness of Laodicea, "I know thy works
that thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot." When
Classical Learning is exploded as a senseless study of words; public quiet
disturbed by every boorish bawler; a church pronounced no better than a barn,
and the bible classed with an obsolete almanac: When Genius, Talents, and
Virtue are wrenched from their just elevation, and "trodden under the hoofs of
a swinish multitude," it is right and decorous, and useful to be partial,
bigoted, adhesive to old systems.


paper, in that style of cold, callous, supine, and criminal indifference,
which views, with equal eye, a chieftain, and a follower -- a man of sense, and
a fool -- the philosophy of the Greeks, and the philosophy of the French -- a
stable government, and the uproar of anarchy. He will not make his paper "a
carte-blanche on which every fool and knave may scribble what he pleases." To
gratify the malignancy of fanatics, he will not asperse the government or the
church, the laws or the literature of England. Remembering that WE ARE AT PEACE
with that power -- that the most wholesome portions of our polity are modelled
from hers -- that we kneel at Shrines, and speak a language common to both, he
will not flagitiously and foolishly advert to ancient animosities, nor, with
rash hand, attempt to hurl the brand of discord between the nations.

He will not strive to please the populace, To the lower classes of our motley
vulgar, too often composed of the scoundrels of all nations, and perpetually
restless and rebellious, may be applied a description from the most vigorous
poet in the language.

-- "A headstrong, moody, murmuring race,
As ever tried the extent and stretch of grace;
A pampered people, whom, debauched with ease,
No king can govern, nor no God can please;
These Adam wits, too fortunately free,
Begin to dream they want more liberty;
And when no rule, no precedent, is found
Of men by laws, less circumscribed and bound,
They lead their wild desires to woods and caves
And think that all but savages are slaves."
DRYDEN. One of the primary objects of this undertaking is to combat
revolutionary doctrine. The opinion of a profound English lawyer deserves
quoting in this place. He thought rightly, though he acted wrong. "Alteration
is dangerous, because we know not where it will stay; it is like a millstone,
that lies upon the top of a pair of stairs; if once it be thrust off the first
stair, it never stays till it comes to the bottom.

SELDOM. In an age, when inversion is the order of the day, the modern idea of
improvement does not consist in altering, but extirpating. We do not reform,
but subvert. We do not correct old systems, but demolish them; fancying that
when every thing shall be new it will be perfect. Not to have been wrong, but
to have been at all, is the crime. Excellence is no longer considered as an
experimental thing, which is to grow gradually out of observation and practice,
and to be improved by the accumulating additions brought by the wisdom of
successive ages. Our wisdom is not slowly perfected by age and gradual growth,
but a goddess, which starts at once, full grown, mature, armed cap a pee, from
the heads of our modern thunderers. Or rather, a perfect system is now expected
inevitably to spring at once, like the fabled bird of Arabia, from the ashes of
its parent; and, like that, can receive its birth no other way, but by the
destruction of its predecessor.

H. MORE.
at the expense of their quiet, by infusing into every ill-balanced and weak
mind, a jealousy of rulers, a love of innovation, an impatience of salutary
restraint, or the reveries of liberty, equality, and the rights of man.

He will not labor to confound the moral, social, and political system, nor,
desperately essay "to break up the fountains of the great deep" of government.
He will not calumniate Talents and Authority, and the "higher powers," whether
of Genius or Wealth, or Might and Dominion. He will not repeat to hewers of
wood and drawers of water, the Fairy-Tales of France, that all men See Dr.
JOHNSON's works, passim, for irrefragable arguments and bitter satire against
this execrable delusion of hair brained Philosophy. See PRATT's Gleanings for a
sensible train of reasoning on this subject. See SALLUST's admirable
description of the motives, which instigated to revolt the followers of
Cataline. See all the productions of Edmund BURKE, posterior to the French
revolution. See the very eloquent performance of Professor WILD.
are kings and emperors, and nobles, and judges, and statesmen. To plunder
property, and to suffocate genius, he will not invite either a Wat Tyler, or a
Jack Cade.

He will not, with political adversaries, maintain any other than well-manner'd
controversy, and will not, in the rage "The moral Satirist, if he cuts deep, it
is with the hand of a surgeon, not of an assassin." Cumberland.
of a zealot, forget the principles of a gentleman.

And, lastly, He will not print any other than a uniform, correct, and
independent paper; nor gratify the caprice of parties, sects, or individuals,
by departing, no, not for a moment, from that scheme of political and literary
composition, which has hitherto been pursued by the Editor, with sufficient
approbation from the good Happy my studies* when by these approved,
Happier their Author, when by these beloved.
Pope.
, the loyal, and the studious. He will not be an inconstant and lukewarm
supporter to principles and law; nor, like the parasite of the poet, "Supple to
every wayward mood, strike sail,
"And shift, with shifting humour's peevish gale:
"Nor be a glass, with flattering grimace,
"Still to reflect the temper of each face."


On the promissory part of this contract, the Editor engages that attempts will
be made,

To publish, in a condensed manner, momentous intelligence. That all our facts
will be authentic, or all our remarks just we dare not venture to promise: we
can relate but what we hear, we can point out but what we see. Of remote
transactions, the first accounts are always confused and commonly exaggerated;
and in domestic affairs if the power to conceal is less, the interest to
misrepresent is often greater and, what is sufficiently vexatious, truth seems
to fly from curiosity, and as many enquiries produce many narratives, whatever
engages the public attention is immediately disguised by the embellishments of
fiction. We pretend to no peculiar power of disentangling contradiction, or
denuding forgery, we have no settled correspondence with the antipodes, nor
maintain any spies in the cabinets of princes. Dr. Johnson's Preliminary
Dicourse to the London Chronicle
To reject the minuteness of foreign and domestic detail, and, by a sort of
synopsis of news, retain the valuable, and reject the refuse;

To communicate, with accuracy, the most interesting and important State papers;

To correct vulgar errors, and detect Jacobinical misrepresentations,
respecting the acts of government;

To obtain political essays, not merely from lookers-on, but from experienced
statesmen and from principals,

To relieve the dryness of news, and the severity of political argument, with
wholesome morals and gay miscellany -- to insert interesting articles of
biography, criticism, poetry, and merriment, and bind the rod of the moralist
with the roses of the Muse -- As the various fits
Of humor seize you, from Philosophy
To fable shift; from serious Antonine
To Rabelais' ravings, and from prose to song.
Dr. Armstrong. Those who aspire to a solid erudition, must undoubtedly take
other methods to acquire it. They have their labor and their merit. But there
are readers of another order, who must not be left wholly unprovided: For such
readers, it is our province to collect matters of a lighter nature; but
pleasing even by their levity; by their variety; and by their aptitude to enter
into common conversation. Things of this sort often gradually and imperceptibly
insinuate a taste for knowledge, and in some measure gratify that taste. They
steal some moments from the round of dissipation and pleasure. They relieve the
minds of men of business, who cannot pass from severe labor to severe study
with an elegant relaxation They preserve the strenuous idleness of many from a
worse employment.

Preface to Dodsley's Annual Register. The junior PLINY, the most elaborate, if
not the most agreeable letter writer of antiquity, has sanctioned by his
opinion the propriety of diversifying our lucubrations.

Ult in vita, sic in studiis pulcherrimum existimo,
SEVERITATEM COMITATEMQUE MISCERE.
Plinii Epist. In a paper, designed for general perusal it will be necessary to
dwell most upon things of general entertainment. The elegant trifles of
Literature, the wild strains of Fancy, the pleasing amusements of harmles wit,
shall therefore be considered as necessary to our collection.

Dr. Johnson. Preface to the Literary Magazine
.

Having succinctly stated what he will avoid, and what he will attempt, the
Editor now feels the propriety, the necessity, the utility of summoning to his
aid the Master-Spirits of the nation. It must be apparent to the most heedless
observer, that it is the object of this undertaking, to combine literature with
politics, and attempt something of a more honorable destiny, than a meagre
journal. To accomplish this purpose, the cooperation of many minds is
requisite; and, without the cheerful and constant contributions of erudition,
taste, and genius, an Editor, the most inventive and industrious, would have
frequent occasion to sigh over his pages, either "mournfully jejune," or
ignominiously vacant and incorrect. The causes of the inaccuracy, inequalities,
dullness, and, at length, the total failure of many of our American Gazettes may
be easily traced; and it may be useful to read a brief chronicle of the rise,
progress, and downfall of a newspaper, lamely conducted, and penuriously
supported.

An obscure and illiterate individual, of mere mechanical skill in the art of
printing, contracts debt for his press and paper, and issues proposals for a
Gazette. As education or habit, as chance or interest, may determine, he
professes himself a republican, or a federalist; or, what is more common, a man
of no party; willing to publish trash for all, and pretending to be unbiassed
by any. Fervet opus. The press groans, the work begins, and with the paltry aid
of two or three hundred subscribers, and without assistants, either literary or
political, he, of necessity, prints from week to week a thing -- "without a
name," without correctness, without consistency; in narration turbid, or false,
in comment clumsy, in its original departments crude and juvenile, in its
selections uncouth, vicious in the humblest combinations of grammar, and a
trespasser on all the limits of language. This fashionable mode of bad writing
is forcibly, though quaintly ridiculed by the vivacious HOWELL, an "old English
gentleman" of sound understanding, and of sparkling wit "A kind of simpering,
and lank hectic expressions, made up of a bombast of words and finical affected
compliments only. I cannot well away with such sleazy stuff, with such cobweb
composition, where there is no strength of matter, nothing for the reader to
carry away with him, that may enlarge the notions of his soul."
A puny bantling from the press "so faint, so spiritless, so dull, so dead in
look," quickly "goes to its long home," its inky "mourners go about the
streets," and its numerous sponsors and friends strangely wonder at its
dissolution.

Thus conducted, and thus unsupported, can it be expected that a paper should
flourish in vigor, or possess interest; that it should furnish documents to the
Historian, or even amusement to the Lounger? The journals of Europe are
respectable, are read eagerly, and preserved long, because they are under the
direction of active skill, assisted by the researches of statesmen, and the
liberal labors of literature and genius. -- Abroad, it is generally understood
that the director of a press is a scholar and a gentleman It is well known to
all, who are conversant in the history of the writers in the reign of Queen Ann
and of George II. that some of the finest wits of the age, both scholars and
statesmen, were actively engaged in writing for the public papers. Dean Swift,
Mr. Addison, Sir Richard Steel, Lord Bolingbroke, etc. At a subsequent period,
Henry Fielding. Mr. Kelly and the Bishop of Dromor^ wrote in the gazettes.
Richardson, the author of Clarissa, was the conductor of two papers, and
Bowyer, one of the most learned of English printers, published for many years a
weekly museum.
. In Germany and Holland, university professors, men erudite and dignified, are
frequently engaged in this honorable service. A Gazette of Leyden, and a
Spectator of the North have been conducted by men who associated the
statesman's research and the scholar's lore; men who visited the tombs of the
learned, and the camps of the valiant. In France, under the old government,
abbes, lawyers, and men of letters by profession, superintended the
flying-sheets of the time; and now, UNDER THE ANARCHY, it is notorious that all
the public prints, controuled by whatever faction, are composed, or compiled,
by men of invention and learning, many of whom were once among the clergy. In
Scotland, more than one paper has been illuminated by many a ray from the
constellations of genius and wisdom, shining in her three universities; and in
England, not to mention that political articles and arguments are frequently
furnished by the ministry themselves, the best and most popular papers exhibit
the abilities of numerous writers, ACTING IN CONFEDERACY. The memory of
WOODFALL has supplied with parliamentary debates the columns of a Chronicle,
and DUNNING has given it sparkling wit, and logical precision. By the side of
SMART's poetry, Dr. JOHNSON published his Idlers in a Saturday's paper, by
Newberry. The Whitehall Evening Post, and the St. James' Chronicle numbered
Soame JENYNS, Lord CHESTERFIELD, and Horace WALPOLE, on an ample catalogue of
accomplished auxiliaries; and both the literary virtuoso, and the laborious
annalist, still preserve and read the files of "The Public Advertiser," which
displayed, at one period, the political arguments of the Marquis of ROCKINGHAM,
the playful humor of Dr. GOLDSMITH, the polite literature of ARTHUR MURPHY,
and the gorgeous imagery of EDMUND BURKE Well conducted, authentic, and
accurate newspapers often afford useful, and sometimes the only materials to
the historian. Bolingbroke somewhere in his letters mentions the utility of
gazettes both to the studious and the compiler of History. BURKE and Dr.
Campbell, who for many years furnished the historical article in Dodsley's
Annual Register were largely indebted to the news writers of the time. A very
tolerable narrative of the American war (published in 1779 by Faulder in Bond
street) was compiled almost entirely from gazettes: and the Paris "Moniteur" at
the earlier (...) French revolution, was the ground work of more (...) the
events of a memorable epoch.
.

From the experience of some years, while he was conducting the FARMER's
MUSEUM, a paper pronounced, by the partiality of the public, not altogether
vacant of original composition, the Editor concludes, that of learning and wit,
an alliance defensive can be formed even here. Private assurances have been
already made of liberal contributions from learned minds; and the Editor will
omit nothing, which can add to the literary forces of this enterprise. To this
end, a correspondence with men of political information, and miscellaneous
writers will be commenced; and arrangements are already made, to obtain from
Europe every new and interesting publication, which, either for use or
ornament, may supply proper materials to be deposited in the PORT-FOLIO.

To men of letters, -- who from early youth
Have trod the FLOWERY TRACTS OF TIME
Together mused, in search of truth,
Over learned sage, or bard sublime.
SHENSTONE.
and to all, who are in the habit of writing correctly, usefully, or
pleasantly, we would give a very general invitation. Meritorious essays shall
always be cordially welcomed, and bad ones dismissed with urbanity. From the
very nature, and demands of the undertaking, the Editor will sometimes be
compelled to the ungrateful task of rejection; but he will always "glance an
eye of pity" on juvenile imperfections, and though the crude and incorrect must
be denied a place in the PORT-FOLIO, yet the denial shall not be conveyed in
terms contemptuous, or austere.

In this invocation to correspondents, it is proper and pleasant to name the
CLERGY. From their love of letters, from their literary leisure, and from their
order and regularity of life, so propitious to mental exertion, they are
peculiarly interested in the advancement of every vehicle of knowledge. The
members of that dignified and pious profession, who, in the words of PROSPERO,
are -- "All dedicated
To closeness, and the bettering of the mind."
are entreated to become auxiliaries. To such Mentors, as candid, consistent,
and enlightened Clergymen, we shall always lend a listening ear, and give the
confiding heart It is highly honorable to the character of the priesthood,
that both in monkish and modern time, they have been either faithful
depositaries, or laborious teachers, or diligent cultivators of science. The
monk in his cloister, darkened by the gloom of the tenth century, saw the
brightness of the classical page. The Jesuits, in the age of Lewis the
fourteenth, familiarized to Gallic nobles every Athenian and Roman expression;
and a Lowth and a Watson have adorned the schools as well as the pulpit. --
"Learning would rather choose
Her Bodley, or her Vatican to lose."
COWLEY.
.

The gentlemen of the bar, to whose liberality and genius the Editor is largely
indebted for much of the diffusion, and many of the materials, of the papers,
he formerly conducted, are solicited to supply pages for the Port-Folio, when
the Court Docket is cleared, and when the client has paid "the uttermost" of
his fee. Though duty and interest urge every Barrister to employ "his courage,
and his care," in climbing the rugged steep of jurisprudence, yet, lawyers are
splendidly distinguished for polite, as well as professional studies. The
critics of Rome desc^^^^d no less upon the elegant literature, than upon the
legal science of Trebatius, Sulpitius, and Cicero; and London will not soon
cease to extol the versatile genius of a Talbot, a York, and a Jones Mr.
GIBBON has elegantly painted the various features of Mes^ala, an accomplished
Roman, the " omnis homo" of the poet.

As an orator he disputed the palm of eloquence with Cicero himself. He
cultivated every muse, and was the patron of every man of genius. He spent his
evenings in philosophical conversation with Horace* assumed his place at table
between Delia and (...), and amused his leisure by encouraging the (...) of
young Ovid.

There have been lawyers that were orators, philosophers, historians: there
have been Bacons and Clarendons.

Lord BOLINGBROKE. The name of Sir WILLIAM JONES demands the amplest tribute of
praise. The Editor, captivated by the versatility of his powers, and benefited,
he hopes, by his industrious example, owes the sincerest compliments to the
varied excellence of a lawyer, in whose learned and luminous pages one may
discern the most exact proportions of logic, and the most beautiful forms of
diction. He is "a legitimate English classic." He has omitted nothing useful or
pleasant in literature. He has translated the oratory of the Greeks, and
compiled a grammar of the Persic; he has methodized the most chaotic of English
law titles, and described the jurisprudence and morals, the arts and amusements
of Asia. He has instructed and charmed the courts of Calcutta, and playfully
investigated the origin of chess. He has embodied the features of the landscape
of Hinzuan, and composed classical epithalamiums on wedded Beauty.


.

The liberal merchant, the inquisitive manufacturer, and the country gentleman,
if they find leisure, in the intervals of business, to inspect the contents of
the Port Folio, will discover that essays on topics of commerce, and the useful
arts, and rural economy, will not be omitted.

The tranquil sect of Quakers, a description of men, imbued with that "charity,
which suffers long, and is kind;" men honorably distinguished for their
aversion to pernicious novelties, and to the state charlatans, and audacious
deists of France, and to all the trumpery of her bungling innovation, and to
all the tampering of her political restlesness, are invited to countenance this
work.

In aid of a paper, principally devoted to moral instruction, and polite
literature, it would be equally indecorous and undeserved, to neglect
soliciting the good opinion, and assistance of the ladies. The influence of
female elegance on the manners, and female principles on the character of men,
is wide and powerful. They not only fix the standard of fashion, but regulate
most of the duties, and decencies of life. On every question of delicacy, and
sentiment, and taste, and decorum, they have the clearest right to be
respectfully heard. To the honor of the country, especially of its CAPITAL,
where their education is the most sedulously regarded, there are many, who,
possessing learning, which would be thought extensive in the other sex, set an
example of deep humility to their own; -- women who distinguished for wit and
genius, are eminent for domestic qualities; who, excelling in the fine arts,
have carefully enriched their understandings; and who have not refined elegance
into insipidity, nor frittered down delicacy into frivolousness H. MORE. With
strict propriety and with merited praise. MILTON makes our general ancestor
accost the first (...) as "Daughter of God and man, ACCOMPLISHED EVE."


. Such females can give grace, strength, and luster to Literrature, can weave
the brightest textures in the loom of Fancy, and teach the noblest morals of
the heart. To this respectable and polished class of female characters, the
Editor looks confidently for the exertion of their influence, and for the
display of their talents in support of his Miscellany. It has been his
privilege to know more than one highly instructed and accomplished woman,
indulging herself in a chaste display of literary as well as fashionable
excellence, benignant to the votaries of science, which she loved, and
patronizing the learning which she herself adorned. Flattery and fondness have
extolled the Aspasias and the Glyceras of Athens, and the Talliens of Paris.
But we can pay homage to beauties of purer luster. We have "of honorable women
not a few;" who associate study and invention, who unite the virtues to the
graces, and who are "capable of making the bad good, the inconstant stable, and
the giddy wise."

Nor is the Editor of that hermit humor, to be regardless of the innocent
wishes of the modish tribe. Though it cannot correctly be expected that he
should be a critic of Coquelicot, or learned in laces; yet, he will not omit to
notice sometimes the shop of the milliner, and "watch the wild vicissitudes of
taste." Fashionable dress, as well as manners, shall be occasionally described;
and to please the flaunting belle, he will, with no languid voice, and in the
words of Anstey, invoke her tutelary power.

"Come then, nymph of various mein,
Votary true of beauty's queen,
FASHION, come, -- on me a while
Deign, fantastic nymph, to smile.
Versed in science debonnair,
Bowing, dancing, dressing hair,
You gaily trip it over the globe,
Clad in party colored robe.
Bring, O bring thy essence pot,
Amber, musk, and bergamot,
Eau de chipre, eau de luce,
Sans pareil, and citron juice.
Nor the band-box leave behind,
Filled with stores of every kind;
All the enraptured bard supposes,
Who to FANCY odes composes;
All that fancy's self has feigned,
In a band-box is contained:
Violets, pinks, Italian posies,
Myrtles, jessamin, and roses,
Aprons, caps, and 'kerchiefs clean,
Straw-built hats, and bonnets green."
It remains for the Editor to indicate to his friends and correspondents,
various topics of composition, and to subjoin the conditions to which the
purchase of his paper is subjected. He enters copiously into the detail of the
first; and, he presumes, that to the terms of the second, no just and generous
man will hint an objection.

Brief reports of the most interesting debates in Congress, from the notes of
members, friendly to this undertaking.

Political information, and political disquisition from the pens of Principals.

Elegant, or interesting speeches, in either house of Congress.

An early and prompt communication of momentous state papers.

Monthly, quarterly, or semi-annual retrospects of foreign affairs.

Faithful translations from valuable French, Spanish, or German books,
pamphlets or papers. But, it must be understood, that the Editor totally
prohibits every thing Jacobinical.

Economical essays, on the model of count Rumford.

Statistical tables.

Abstracts of the specification of every new patent.

Summary of domestic politics.

Detections of Jacobinical forgery, falsehood, and misrepresentation.

Accurate reports of legal decisions, involving important national, commercial,
or private interests.

Essays on rural economy.

Scientific papers.

Notices of the useful and fine arts.

Notices of new books, pamphlets, and literary projects of every description.

Information, respecting every species of "lettered worth," in obscurity.

Sketches of tours and journies, either through our own, or foreign territory.

Journals of voyages.

Descriptions of local peculiarities, and characteristical manners.

Review of new, or fashionable musical publications.

Remarks on the manners of the times, and on public amusements.

Descriptions of the fashionable dresses of the season.

Hymeneal register.

Articles for an obituary of remarkable, or distinguished persons, accompanied
by anecdotes, after the model in " The Gentlemans' Magazine."

Meteorological diaries.

The various tribes of gay and useful miscellany; and in this pleasant and
flowery walk, the Editor will assume the freedom to particularize the ^^iects,
he wishes should be attended to.

Burlesque translations.

Parodies of the poets, particularly of Shakespeare.

Cross readings.

Ship news extraordinary

Advertisements extra.

Humorous and satiric ballads, in the style of John Gilpin.

Tender and pathetic ballads, in the manner of Dr. Percy's "O Nancy will thou
go with me," and Hamilton's "Braes of Yarrow."

Mock odes, imitations etc. in the manner of "The Rolliad."

Hudibrastic poetry.

Characteristical and humorous diaries.

Dialogues, sentimental, or sportive.

Correct songs, adapted to the taste of the Anacreontic group, or the amateur.

Translations from the classic poets of Spain and Italy.

Epigrams.

Anecdotes.

Articles of levity, wit, and humor.

Articles of American biography, and of memoir writing in general.

Historical documents, or narrative.

Elegant translations of brilliant or useful passages from THE ANCIENTS.

Concise moral lessons.

Criticisms on new books and pamphlets.

Periodical essays, in the manner of Addison, Johnson, or Goldsmith.

Moral Allegories, Tales, and Romances.

Dramatic Sketches of Character.

Extracts from scarce and curious publications.

Extracts from the most novel works of celebrity, published abroad.

Extracts from the most recent and valuable American publications.

Original poetry.

Scenes of original plays.

Original letters.

Notes, concerning Americans of genius, enterprise, or mechanic skill, resident
abroad, and

Literary selections from the London, or Cambridge, Bristol, Bath, Liverpool,
Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Dublin newspapers.

CONDITIONS.
I.
The Port-Folio will be published every Saturday morning, and will always
contain at least eight pages of letter press. The Prospectus is a specimen of
the size and quality of the paper, and of the typographical execution.

II.
It will be published, for the Editor, by ASBURY DICKINS, opposite
Christ-Church, Philadelphia.

III.
The price will be five dollars annually, and it is requested of subscribers
that the money be paid in advance. To many this may appear a rigorous and
unpleasant exaction, but, as the expenses of the publication will be great, and
as it is extremely difficult, not to say impracticable, to collect small sums,
at remote periods, or from remote situations, it is believed that the
considerate and the liberal, to whom this is addressed, will cheerfully comply
with the condition.

IV.
No single paper to be sold, nor any subscription for less than a year to be
received. No advertisements to be inserted in the body of the work; but as they
principally contribute both to the profit and the circulation of every City
paper, the Editor hopes that Merchants and Booksellers will not forget this
circumstance. Their advertisements shall be conspicuously printed on a separate
sheet, which will serve as an useful envelope to the Port-Folio.

V.
City subscribers shall be regularly supplied by the carriers; and, by the
mail, it shall be punctually transmitted to gentlemen, in different parts of
the United States, and British America, who are inclined to read and circulate
a paper, which, vacant of advertisements, must be peculiarly desirable to
remote residents, naturally studious of original composition, and political
documents, unmixed with mere local and commercial matter.

VI.
In proportion to the increase of pecuniary and literary assistance, afforded
to this paper, the quantity of its contents shall be gradually augmented.

VII.
All letters and communications for the Port-Folio must be Post-paid, and
addressed to Mr. Asbury Dickins, bookseller, Philadelphia. To facilitate City
correspondence, a letter box will be placed in the window.

VIII.
Gentlemen in the West Indies, or in any part of Great Britain, who wish to
encourage this paper, may be furnished with regular files, at no very distant
period from the time of publication; and those, who do not choose to receive
them in a desultory way, may have them transmitted semi-annually, or annually,
in the form of volumes, half bound. Orders, accompanied by the moneys for the
subscription, and incidental charges, shall be strictly attended to.

SUCH are the outlines, and terms of an adventurous paper, which, not without
anxiety, is now to be presented to the public. Between Criticism and the
conducter of the Port-Folio, there are but few hours: and, during a suspense,
so interesting in the annals of a writer, the proudest heart would beat, and
the firmest nerves tremble. In this walk of composition, this is not the
Editors first essay. To some little experience, he may, without arrogance,
pretend, who for many years has been laboriously employed in a Literary
Journal. At an early season of life, he voluntarily forsook the path of
ordinary business, for a lowly seat in the Muses' bower. Though his choice has
not enriched, or advanced him, yet of its propriety he has never doubted. "I
was," says Mr. HUME, "seized very early with a passion for literature, which
has been the ruling passion of my life, and the great source of my enjoyments."
The heart of every literary enthusiast is always responsive to such sentiments;
the Editor has a right to make a similar declaration. In common too with many
others, he has long been urged by a sober wish, or, if the sneering reader will
have it so, he has long been deluded by the visionary whim, of making
literature the handmaid of Fortune, or, at least, of securing something like
independency, by exertions, as a man of letters. Hitherto, his success has been
far from brilliant: But though the gains of Authorship have been trivial, yet
once they secured him a portion of rural comfort, and, perhaps, they will
enable him to flourish in a city. The anticipations of an adventurer, are like
the desires of a lover, "Gay hope is their's by Fancy fed." With a spirit
lofty, yet not insolent, with a voice timid, yet not servile, he calls on his
countrymen to inspect and appreciate his labors; and, with a moderate
estimate, he will persevere and be cheerful.

NAMES.

ABODE


