NEWS FROM GERMANY. Wherein is also related, how the Emperors Brother
Archduke Leopold-William Has proceeded according to Martial Law against
those Regiments that ran away in the late Battle fought betwixt him and the
Swedish General Torstensohn, Near Leipzigk the 23. of October last, 1642.

December the 10th. Printed in the year, 1642.

Ersurd the 13.23. of November, 1642.
WE can hear no certain news how it stands with the City of Leipzigk; only
this we understand, That the Besieged are now very quiet, and shoot but little
out of the Town, they expected the Duke of Saxonies resolution; Mean while,
the Swedish General Torstensohn has removed his head-quarter from Steteritz
into the Suburbs before St. Peter's Gate, and first of all, shot with his Canons
such breaches through the great steeple in the Castle, and spoiled the same so
much, that the besieged can make no more use of it: afterward, over against
the two waterworks, he caused a very deep ditch to be dug against the great
outworke near the Castle, and some demy-Canons to be planted very deep into the
earth level to the ground of the Castle Moat; if he brings it to pass, then
the chiefest place of the City is lost, there are likewise three Mines more
made ready, insomuch that the said City is in great danger. The Swedish
Cavallery lies enquartered all along in the way toward Bohemia; As Soon as
Leipzigk is surrendered, it is thought they will march that way. The Weymarish
Army is arrived about Halberstat, to expel out of the said City and
Bishopric the new levied Imperial Troops, and then to join with the Swedish
General Major Coningsmarck: The new levied Imperial Troops under Colonel
Pentzen, and Colonel Bothen, which were routed lately by the Swedes in
Luneburgland, having recollected themselves again, had order to march toward
Magdeburg, but not far by the custom Sconce there, they were surprised again
by a Swedish party, and totally ruinated.

From the Swedish Camp before Leipzigk the 16.26. of November.
THe Siege before the City and Castle of Leipzigk is yet seriously continued,
the 7.17. and the 8.18. of this instant, General Torstensohn made above 500.
Canon-shots against the great steeple in the Castle, so that the besieged made
but a volly shot out of the Steeple, and afterward let down their Canons from
the same, the 9.19. and 10.20. of this instant; they played again fiercely with
their Canons against the Castle, and into the City, and battered down the
stairs in the Castle steeple, they flang also diverse diverse Grenades into it;
especially one great one, which fell into the Storehouse near the Castle hard
by Peter's steeple, which took such effect, that the whole roof of the house
was taken off by it; Mean while the Swedes continued in approaching toward the
City, and came to the very Moats of the same: Whereupon, the 11.12. of this
instant, a new Battery was raised, Cannons planted upon it, and the Walls
battered, whereby a great part of the Wall fell into the Moatt, and filled up a
great part of it, the 12.22. dito, he besieged viewed the breach in the Wall,
and about 10. of the clock at Noon, sallied out unawares with a reasonable
strength, surprised and slew two Captains, and two Lievtenants together with
some few common soldiers, nailed six Pieces of Ordnance standing upon the said
Battery, fired the Gunpowder and Watch-houses, chased the Gunners from the
Battery, and afterward retired into the City again, the seventh Piece of
ordnance that stood on the same battery, they took not so much time to nayl it,
out of the two Pieces the nayls were presently taken again, out of which the
Swedes played into the Citiy, out of the other four Pieces the nayls were
likewise taken again, and the same likewise used again against the City; the
same day about four of the clock in the Evening, the besieged ventured again,
sallied out again through the same Breach where the wall was battered down,
fired the shelters and Cannon baskets near the battery, and the powder upon it,
but they were beaten back again with the loss of many men, that were both
slain and taken prisoners, and the same day the besieged undertook to shoot
with Muskets and double Muskets out of the breach of the Castle steeple, but
they were presently hindered in their design by the Swedish Cannons. The
13.23. dito the Swedes begun to shoot a breach not far from the Castle, hard by
the Water-worke, and continued the shooting all the next day long, and spared
no labor with approaching, undermining and battering, and cut off all the
Mills from the besieged, and the River of Pleisse flowing heretofore through the
city, they led another way; and being the Swedes understood by the prisoners,
That about 1200 Imperial soldiers fled in the last Battle into the city, and
that they have armed all young Tradesmen; and being the Swedes perceive also,
That the besieged intend to defend themselves to the last man, and to expect
the extremities, wherefore the Swedes make all manner of preparations for a
general assault, which the besieged are every day to expect: the Swedes have
planted yet 12 Cannons close to the wall, to force thereby the yielding of the
city; horses and cattle are sold very cheap in the Swedish Camp; all the
country thereabouts is wholly ruinated; the Weymarish Army is arrived within
two hours going from the Swedish Camp; as soon as they are arrived in the Camp,
a general Assault shall be given, if Leipzigk does not come to an Agreement.

Prague the 19.29 of Nov.
From Rockezan the 16.26 of this instant we are certified, That Archduke
Leopold William has summoned to appear before him there the Piccolominish,
Pompeijch, Bucheimish, and Maudloish Regiments: As Soon as they were come into
the Town, he caused the Gates to be guarded with a 1000 Musketeers; and 3
other Regiments arrested the 4 Lievtenant-colonells, and signified unto them
their faults: Unto the Serjeant-Majors, Captains of Horse, and all other
Officers, he read likewise their sentence, and thereupon caused them to be
beheaded; but the Corporalls, and other Officers, together with the tenth man
of the ordinary horsemen, to be hanged, the rest he declared for Rebels, made
them a free Price, caused the General Provost to tear off their Colors from
the Standards before their eyes, and to break the Standards in pieces.

From Alsatia, the 18.28 of Nov.
General Major Erluch, Governor of Bryssack, has fetched from Hohenwiel, 2
Demi-cannons, and 4 Quarter-cannons, wherewith he intends to march toward Zell
or Villingen: some write, That Lievtenant-colonell Rosa, with the Avantguard,
has begird already Dudlingen, wherein lie 100 Imperial Horse, and 50
Musketeers: At Stutgurt and Eslingen, fell the 15.25 of this instant, betwixt
twelve and one of the clock at Noon, an unusual rain; the water that was taken
up in Vessels, was like unto the color of flesh, notwithstanding any linen
cloth being put into the same, it did not color it in the least way; and in
the morning, strange sights of fire appeared in the Air: General Major Erlach
intends to put the whole country of Wirtenberg under contribution, like as he
has done unto the Marquisate of Baden.

An extract of a Letter from Franckford, the 21 of Nov. the 1 Dec.
The Archduke Leopold William is at Pilsen, appointing Quarters for his
Horsemen; and being at Rockezan in Behomia, caused one of those Regiments that
they say did run away in the last Battle, to be put in order upon the
Marketplace of the Town, and so environed them all about with other Horsemen
and Musketeers, then caused their Cornets to be taken from them, and all the
Officers light from their horses, and committed them as prisoners to the
General Provost; after this, caused likewise all the ordinary Horsemen
likewise to alight from off their horses, and lay down their Arms; all which
together with their horses, he has given to other Regiments, and pronounced
sentence, That all the Officers should be hanged, and the ordinary Horsemen
shall cast Dice, and the tenth man shall likewise be hanged, and the rest he
declared Knaves and Rogues, and that they shall be sent as slaves, perpetually
to work in the Fortifications of Hungaria; all which has been done the next
day, 14 Officers hanged, and two shot to death, which is a great example to all
soldiers; the Lievtenant-colonell, and Major of the Regiment, have been sent
for Prague, where their Colonel is, whose name is Maudlo, in prison, where
they will likewise be punished, and many others of the other 3 Regiments, but I
believe not so severely as this Regiment, for the like has not been done these
many years. At this instant we understand of the Agent of the Bishop of
Wurtsburg, That the city of Leipzigk has agreed with the Swedes, to give
200000 Rixdallers for the plundering, and take in one Regiment for Garrison:
The truth we shall know this afternoon by the Letters.

FINIS.

