A DECLARATION Of the Right Honorable the Earl of NEWCASTLE, etc.
IT is no new thing (though it was never so frequent as now) for Incendiaries
to accuse Innocents, as disturbers of the public tranquillity of the Country.
So ugly is the face of Rebellion when it comes unmasked, without some cloak or
vizard over it, that even seditious persons cannot fancy it in themselves. The
Charge which the Lord Fairfax gives against me in this Declaration, is like
that of a Roman against his fellow Citizen, That he did not receive his whole
weapon into his body: He was angry that his neighbor should defend himself;
and my Lord, that I should protect His Majesty's good Subjects from his
violence. And though a general accusation might justly be slighted as a
slander, to which by the Laws of this Land no man is bound to answer, to which
it is impossible for any man to make a direct Answer (since it is not invested
with the due circumstances of time and place and persons) neither is the Lord
Fairfax able to bring one particular instance to make good his general
calumniations; yet since it proceeds from a person of his eminency, I have
thought fit, as well for the vindication of mine own honor, as for the
confirmation of the minds of His Majesty's well affected subjects in their
loyalty, to repel his slanders in the Press, as I doubt not by Gods
assistance to do his Forces in the Field. Yet give me leave to wonder who they
are that have an such influence upon his Lordships understanding, as to draw
him in six lines to publish to the world six groundless aspersions, against a
person that has not deserved ill of him, without the least provocation.

The first is, That contrary to the Laws of the Land I have raised a great
Army. I might answer, That the Laws are indeed an excellent standard and
measure of Justice, so long as they are common to all parties: But when they
become like spiders webs, to entangle some, and let through others; when some
men must observe Law, and others will be free from all Law, it is the greatest
partiality, and the falsest measure in the world. And as our Savior said to
the Pharisees; If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your children
cast them out? they shall be your judges. So say I; If I be a Delinquent
against the Laws for raising defensive Arms by virtue of His Majesty's
Commission (with whom alone the power of the Militia is entrusted both by God
and man) what is the Lord Fairfax and his partners for raising offensive
rebellious Arms against their fellow subjects, without, nay, against His
Majesty's Authority. But he has appealed to the Laws: to the Laws let him go;
Let him show but any one particle of the known Law, Statute or Common, which I
have violated, and I shall lay down Arms as cheerfully as I took them up. But
if this be impossible (as without doubt it is) then cease at lenth to tell us
of Laws in the clouds, or of Laws written in the Sybylls Books, which no men
ever read or heard of but your selves. All true English men will disdain to
exchange their Inheritance, the ancient Laws of this Land (under which they and
their progenitors have already enjoyed such happy and Halcyonion days, and
hope still for better from His Majesty's greater experience and late Acts of
Grace) either for a company of far-fetched dear-bought principles, drawn
without Art or Judgment, by factious unskilful persons, out of the Law of
Nature or of Nations, as a Lesbian-Rule to serve their ambitious ends: Or for
Arbitrary Government, which knows no boudns or limits, but the will of
headstrong discontented persons. With what face can these men name the Laws of
the Land? when one of them has lately told the world in Print, That they are
but the Inventions of men; yea, moral Precepts, fitter for Heathens then
Christians. In a word; I raise Arms by the Law, and for the Law, to protect the
Laws and Religion established; you, to subvert them both: I raise Arms under
His Majesty, for His Majesty; you without Him, against Him, by virtue of your
own Warrants: If it be not so, show us but one text, one Statute, nay, but one
poor case or president for your justification. And that you may see I am in
earnest, I desire God to vouch safe his blessing and assistance to that party
which stands truly and cordially for the defense of the known Laws of this
Realm, and to deny it to all others.

The second Charge is, That mine Army consists of Papists and other Malignants.
That I have in mine Army some of the Romish Communion I do not deny; yet but an
handful in comparison of the whole Body of it, I believe not above one of
fifty: and I wish their consciences as well satisfied as mine own of the truth
of our Professions: These I admitted for their loyalty and abilities, not for
their Religion, as was most lawful for me to do; a course warranted by the
examples both of God and man, and chalked out to me by themselves: yea, it was
a note higher in them, in a War pretended against Papists, to make use of
Papists in places of great trust and command: nay, do they not still admit all
sorts of Sectaries, Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists, etc. I have demonstrated
the equity of this course to the world, which they know not how to answer: the
fidelity of the one, shall rise up in judgment against the Rebellion of the
other, and condemn it: Certainly in this particular service they show
themselves better friends to the Protestant Religion then the others. But they
are not satisfied to rob me of them, unless they may sweep away all the rest
under the stale and empty name of Malignants: I do not much blame them, their
intended work would be more easily achieved. But let us enquire who in their
Dialect are these Malignants; Are they who do not willingly part with their
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Lively-hoods, left them by their fathers, upon
Arbitrary Votes. So a thief may term a trueman a malignant, because he does
refuse to deliver his Purse upon demand: So the Wolves in their Treaty of
Accommodation with the Sheep, desired the Dogs to be delivered up to them as
malignants. Those have hitherto been esteemed malignant humors in the body
Natural, which being stubborn, rebellious, venomous, are with difficulty
reduced to their right temper, either by strength of Nature, or skill in
Physic; not those which are not easily infected, or distempered. This is new
Learning, and requires a new Dictionary to warrant it. Before they conclude
them malignant, they should do well to prove them to be peccant against any
authentic Rule: The Apostle says, Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression; To accuse boldly, is not sufficient to convince. If a common
adversary did not keep them in a kind of Herodian unity for a time, your
Brownists would soon condemn your ordinary disciplinarian^ for malignants, and
your Anabaptists again your Brownists, etc.

Thirdly, you charge me to have invaded this County of York. An insolent and
presumptuous Challenge. Can the Kings Forces be said to make an Invasion in His
own Dominions: The second blow may be said to make the fray, but it is the
first that makes the Invasion. Say in good earnest, Did not your Forces first
make Inrodes into the Bishopric of Durham* under my charge? where they had no
pretense of employment? Did they not rob and plunder sundry of His Majesty's
liege people at Darnton, in such cruel manner, that the prime Officer of the
Town died of grief within three or four days? Did they not give an assault
upon Piers-bridge to their loss? And when I come to chastise these Intruders,
can it be called an Invasion? Neither did I then set foot into this County, but
upon the earnest solicitation and intrerty of the prime Nobility and Gentry of
Yorkshire, to secure them from your violence and oppression. If Protection be
Invavasion, then this is Invasion. I could nourish little hopes that these
restless spirits, who could not be bounded within their own calling, would be
contained within the limits of a County: Or that they would spare me any
longer, then until they had fully subdued their Neighbors and fellow Subjects
at home. Neither could I have been ever able to have given an Account to His
sacred Majesty for such an unpardonable omission, if being Armed by His
goodness with sufficient power to repress such tumultuous disorders, I should
see before mine eyes His loving and loyal Subjects trampled upon by His and
their Enemies, in His Cause, and for His sake, and whilst they seek to me for
succor, I should be wanting in my Duty to my dread Sovereign, and my necessary
assistance to them. All this while the Lincolnshire Forces are quite
forgotten, they were Brethren, no Invaders.

The fourth Charge arises yet higher, For killing and destroying some numbers
of the Religious Protestant Subjects. Where did ever my Forces kill one man who
did not take up Arms against us, or was not ready to have killed us first if he
could? The weight of guiltless blood is more heavy then a mountain; The stain
thereof not to be washed out with all the water in the Ocean, but only by the
tears of Repentance, and the blood of Christ. This weight and guilt of blood
shall lie heavy upon the heads of those men, and of their seed after them, who
have been the authors and fomentors of these horrid distractions, when Peace
shall be upon the head of our Sovereign, and His Seed, and His Throne for ever.
They that take Sword (without lawful calling) shall perish by the Sword. And
he that sheddeth man's blood (without a Commission from the King of Heaven, who
only has original Power over the lives of his creatures, and no multitude of
men in the World, collective or representative, whatsoever) by man shall his
blood be shed. The supreme Magistrate is Gods Vicegerent, and bears not the
Sword in vain. But those who presume to use the Sword, and can derive no power
from Him, it were meet for them to make their Accounts betimes with God, lest
they die in the estate of Murderers both of themselves and others, both of
soul and body. It is an easy thing for an Orator to cast a mist before the
eyes of vulgar people, and make them a plausible Discourse of the Cause of God,
the true Religion, of suppressing Superstition and Idolatry, and setting up the
right Worship of the Lord. They had hard hearts, if they could not afford
themselves a good word. But admitting, not granting, all this to be true (which
is most false) will this Plea yet serve before the Judge of Heaven and Earth?
Nothing less. These very men, and their Predecessors, have taught the
contrary, have protested the contrary, have printed the contrary, Ant^mota
certamina, before these unhappy differences began, whilst men's eyes were not
fascinated with faction and prejudice: Then themselves condemned this very
Doctrine which now they practice, as Antichristian and Anabaptisticall; and
their present practice which they now defend, as seditious and sinful: this
would be truly laid to heart. And withal, That if the Lord Fairfax and his
friends had been men of their words, or performed that Agreement to which
Honor and Justice did oblige them, all the blood which has been spilled, or
shall be shed hereafter in this Cause, had been saved; and upon their score it
will be cast in the end, both by God and man. It would be known who they are
whom emphatically (if not exclusively) he calls Protestants: Are they the
successors in Doctrine of those first Reformers in Germany, whom from a
Protestation made, they named Protestants? No, what these old Protestants
allowed and practiced as lawful and necessary, these new Protestants condemn
as superstitious and Antichristian. This is beyond the power of Omnipotency, to
make both parts of a contradiction to be true, Protestants whilst they
continue the same to be no Protestants; and no Protestants to be Protestants.
If they do cordially love the thing, as they do hug the name, why do we not
all shake hands, and become friends.

And so from murdering their bodies, he proceeds to starving their souls; that
is, By banishing and imprisoning the Zealous Ministers: This is my fifth
Charge. I envy no man's zeal, but wish them Discretion proportionable to their
Devotion. To satisfy their Charge home, first, de jure, what may be done. It
has ever been accounted lawful to bind a phrenetick man's hands: Shall it be
lawful for these seditious Orators to bring railing Accusations to the Pulpits
daily against the Lords Anointed; such as Michael the Archangel durst not
bring against the Devil, and yet be free from question? May they prostitute
the Ordinance of God to the rebellious designs of ambitious men, yet be free
from question? Could these Ambassadors of Peace keep themselves to that Theme,
which was bequeathed to them by the Prince of Peace, they might long enjoy
their Benefices and Liberties; yea, with some connivence to a truly tender
conscience. But when a man may frequent their Sermons a whole year, and hear
nothing but incentives to War, shedding the blood of the ungodly, and joining
with others to make a great. Sacrifice to the Lord, may not a man justly say to
them, as Queen Elizabeth sometimes to an Ambassador, Hei mihi vocem Pacem
expectavi, cur Belli clamorem audio? Are not these the same men who teach in
their own Case, That he deserves more rigorous punishment who shall infect the
Souls of men with poisoned Doctrine, then he that shall destroy their bodies
with poison. Are not these the men who upon the same grounds have silenced or
imprisoned, or to use their own phrase, banished from their Churches so many of
our Reverend, Learned, and Worthy Divines thorowout the whole Kingdom, to
sub-introduce Heteredox and contentious persons in their Rooms? and may no man
say to their Minions, not worthy to sit at the feet of the other, Domine cur
ita faeis? Sir, why do you so: Or shall we once again bring in an exemption of
Churchmen privately at the backdoor, which we have publicly thrust out at
the fore-door. Thus you see it might be done, even upon your own Grounds, in
point of Right.

Now for the matter of fact, it is as much mistaken as the right, I have
recollected my self, I have inquired of my Secretary, yet can I not find one
Minister by me either banished or imprisoned. If any Minister either before my
coming or since, being apprehensive of his own demerits, or out of a guilty
Conscience, without other compulsion did forsake his Church, and leave it as
the Oestridge does her eggs in the sand, without care or provision, you cannot
call this Banishment. Or if any of your Ministers have assumed a plurality of
Professions and added the Sword to the Word, if my Officers should meet with
him in such a garb, might they not inquire an haec tunica Filii tui sit, and
take him in his second capacity. Or Lastly, if the Justices of this County, who
live upon the place, and do best know seditious persons, and the just fears
and dangers of the County, have thought fit to restrain any man from doing
hurt, was I bound to give a protection or a supersedeas? when you instance in
particular persons you shall receive particular satisfaction.

And so from the Body and Soul he descends to the Estate, the last step of his
accusation, in these words, And has besides done infinite spoil and waste
upon the good Subjects, plundering, and taking away their goods and cattle, in
so much as in many places, there are neither men nor cattle left to till the
ground. Lord how these men are touched to the quick, when any man but
themselves dare offer to plunder, as if they desired not only the free Trade,
but even the Monopoly of Plundering to themselves. I know no such places in
this County as he mentions; if there be any such, without doubt they must needs
know the desolation which themselves have made. But do they think with such
clamours and outcries to deaf the ears of men, and drown the ejulations of
poor people, whom they have harrowed. They have spared no Age, neither the
venerable Old Man, nor the innocent Child; No orders of Men, The long Robe as
well as the short has felt their fury. No Sex, not Women, no not Women in
Childbed, whom common humanity should protect: No condition, neither Fathers
nor Friends. They have spared no places, The Churches of Christians which the
Heathens durst not violate, are by them profaned. Their Ornaments have been
made either the supply of their necessities, or the subject of their
scurrillities, their Chalices, or Communion Cupps (let them call them what they
will, so they would hold their fingers from them have become the objects of
their Sacrilege, the Badges and Monuments of ancient Gentry in Windows, and
Pedigrees have been by them defaced; Old Evidences, the Records of private
Families, the Pledges of Possessions, the boundaries of Men's Properties have
been by them burned, torn in pieces, and the Seals trampled under their feet.
Seelings and Wainscot have been broken in pieces, Walls demolished, (a thing
which a brave Roman Spirit would scorn to tyrannise over Walls and Houses.)
And all this by a Company of Men crept now at last out of the bottom of
Pandora's Box. The poor Indians found out by experience that Gold was the
Spaniards God, And the Country finds to their loss what is the Reformation
which these men seek. At this very time I am informed they are executing the
illegal Order for the Twentieth part of every Man's Estate in Craven, This
would be a sufficient answer for them, but not a sufficient plea for me.

Therefore in the second place, I add that my case is clear different from
theirs, There may be Treason against the King, there can be none against them.
There may be Forfeitures of Estates to the King, none to them. The King may
raise Arms and leavy a just War, whatsoever they do in that kind is void by
the Law of Nations; whatsoever they shall acquire in such a Course is not by
Right, but a mere Nullity. No tract of time can wear away the unlawfulness of
the first acquisition, but after an hundred years possession, they are still
malae fidei possessores, possess it with a bad Conscience, and are bound to
make restitution.

Lastly, for matter of fact, when I came first into this County, I made a
public Declaration against Plundering, (in-Print) which I have since
endeavored to observe. Yet that some men of their party have suffered in their
Estates I do readily grant, that is, either such as have absented themselves,
or have refused to pay those proportions of money which were imposed upon them
by the County. But whatsoever has been done in that kind has been done by
the Gentry or the Committees by them named, with as much moderation as the
present exigence of affairs would permit, wherein I have rather acted the part
of their Minister, to execute what they resolved, then looked upon that great
trust which His Majesty has imposed upon me. So I have done with the charge.

The Lord Fairfax requires all Parties to appear, and I Command them all upon
their Allegiance to stay at home. They may perhaps come thither without danger,
but the difficulty will be to get safe back again, sed revocare gradum, hic
Labor hoc Opus est, and afterward to avoid certain punishment for these
tumultuous and Rebellious meetings. It were a more conscionable and discreet
part of them, to repair all as one unanimous body to their Sovereign's
Standard, and drive out these Incendiaries from among them, who have been the
true authors of all the pressing grievances and miseries of this County.

Withal, his Lordship talks of driving me and mine Army out of the County; he
knows this cannot be done without a meeting. If it be not a flourish, but a
true spark of undissembling Gallantry, he may do well to express himself
more particularly for time and place: This is more conformable to the Examples
of our Heroicke Ancestors, who used not to spend their time in scratching one
another out of holes, but in pitched Fields determined their doubts; This would
quickly set a Period to the sufferings of the People, unless he desire rather
to prolong those miserable distractions, which were begun with breach of
Promise. It were pity if his desires lead him this way, but he should be
satisfied: And let the God of Battles determine the right of our English Laws
and Liberties.

Ferdinando Lord Fairefax, General of all the Northern Forces raised, and to
be raised for the KING and PARLIAMENT. To all and singular, the Majors,
Bayliffes, Aldermen, and other Magistrates, and to the Ministers of the
Churches within the West Riding of the County of York, and to every of them.
FOr as much as the Earl of Newcastle, contrary to the Laws of the Land has
raised a great Army of Papists and other Malignants, and with them Invaded this
County of York, killing and destroying some numbers of religious Protestant
Subjects, banishing and imprisoning the zealous Ministers, and has besides
done infinite spoil and waste upon the good Subjects, Plundering and taking
away their Goods and Cattle, insomuch as in many places there are neither Men
nor Cattle left to till the ground. These are therefore to desire and Command
you respectively to cause to be Published and Proclaimed in all the Churches
and Markets of this County, That all Men of able Bodies and well-affected to
the Protestant Religion, are required with the best Weapons and Furniture for
the War that they have; to Assemble, come in, and assist me and the Army
under my Command, in expelling and driving away out of this County the said
Army of Papists, and common Enemies of the Peace, each Man bringing with him
necessary Victual for four Days, only the said Forces thus to be raised, to
draw down to the several places of Rendezvous hereafter named, that is, The
West Riding Men to Sherbourne and Abberford; The North Riding Men to Tollerton
and Own; And the East Riding Men to Stamford-bridge, all of them to be there
on Monday Night next, and so to March forward as they shall be ordered by
Command that shall meet them at the places aforesaid. And for so doing, this
shall be your Warrant.

Given under my hand and Seal Feb. 2. 1642. F. FAIRFAK.
To John Tailor, one of the High Constables of Skiracke, to procure this to be
Published within your Division. IT is my Will and Pleasure, That this my
Declaration, together with the Lord Fairfax his Warrant, be Published in all
the Churches and Chappells within this City and County of York.

W. NEWCASTLE.



FINIS.

