A Full RELATION Of the great defeat given to the Cornish Cavalliers, By
Sergeant Major General Chudley.

Confirmed by diverse Letters from those parts to several Merchants in London.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Edward Blackmore. May. 3. 1643.

A full Relation of the great defeat given to the Cornish Cavalliers.
OUr Army consisting of 1500. Musketeers, 200. Pikes, 5. Troops of Horse,
under command of Sergeant Major General Chudleigh, advanced out of Devon. into
Cornwall, over Poulson bridge, near Lancestone, Sunday moring last, and there
fought with the whole force of Cornwall all that day, till near midnight, and
was in danger to have been cut off, the enemy being so many, and having hemmed
them round to stop their retreat into Devon. which they had done, had not Col:
Merricks Regiment of Land. Gray coats, under command of Lieutenant Col.
Calmady, which went out of Plymouth the Saturday after noone, and rescued our
Army, when the enemy had wel-nigh encompassed them round, the gray coats
falling on them bravely, so that our Army themselves killed and hurt them many
men, some say 150. so as they made the enemy retreat, and so our men came
freely off, making an honorable retreat, not losing any thing, only having
some eight or ten men killed at most.

By Monday morning all our Forces were safely arrived into Devonshire again,
and whatever the matter was, I cannot learn, some difference there was, so as
part of our Army dispersed themselves, the rest being not above 600. Foot and 3.
Troops of Horse, the Tuesday night quartered at Ockhampton, and about nine of
the clock at night unthought on, one of the Quartermasters riding out to get
quarter to some village near the town for their Troopers, met three scouts of
the enemies, who fired their Carbines at him, whereon he set spurs to his
horse, discovered the enemies Army, which we hear consisted of 4000. Foot and
400. horse and Dragoons marching toward Ockhampton to cut off our Forces
there, who little expected them, the enemy as it seems intending to fall upon
them in the dead of the night. But now mark and observe the providence of God,
most wonderfully and miraculously, in delivering our Forces from these cruel
enemies.

The Sergeant major General understanding of the enemies near approach by the
Quartermasters relation, calling a sudden counsel, presently commanded the
Horse being but 108. in all, (who were going to their quarters before this news
came) to divide themselves in squadrons, having speedly marched first to the
brow of a hill where the enemy was to pass, and in that order to remain till
the enemy came home upon them, and upon pain of death no man to show himself,
till the enemy should march full upon them, and when they came, on whose
quarter soever they should first light, those squadrons first to charge, and to
charge them through and through, and to shout, crying, Fall on, fall on, They
run, they run. This being thus bravely and speedily designed, was as resolvedly
and valiantly put in execution, for it so fell out, that the enemy first
approached to Captain Drakes quarter, who having divided those of his Troop,
consisting but of 36. into tow squadrons of 18. each commanded them to follow
him, and not to give fire till they see him give fire, and so put spurs to
horse, and charged the enemies horse and Dragoons, giving the shout, Fall on,
fall on, pistolled the first man he met, knocked out the brains of the next with
his poll-axe, and so made way through for the rest of his squadron, who as
bravely followed him, and after him his Lieutenant with the other 18. crying,
Fall on, fall on, They run, they run, and on the other parts, Captain Gold,
Captain Pym, Sergeant Major Chudleigh himself as bravely fell on the body of
the foot, charging them through, making them throw down their Arms, and cry for
quarter. This being done, all with 108. Troopers, the Foot remaining in the
Town being but about 600. in all, who had command to make good the town for
retreat, where also their Ordnance and Ammunition was, after the first rout,
again about midnight our enemy faced about again, when our Foot also came out
upon 400. of them, and together with about 60. or 70. of the Horse so bravely
charged them, that they dispersed them in a shameful manner, make them turn
back, and again to retreat for Cornwall. Our Horse had so far pursued them,
that they had almost got their two brass Ordnance, which they had in
possession, but the Foot were not come up to bring them away: So not being of
number sufficient, thought it not good to go too far, but returned back to
Ockhampton with honor, being so well employed in the rout, took only some 20.
prisoners, killed some 20. more, and not a man of ours lost. They have taken
upon 1000. men's Arms, and 100. in 150. of their horses.

We are now gathering a considerable army together, and intend by Gods help to
march into Cornwall. Our men are now all courageous and hearty, seeing the
wonderful mercy of God, who gives the victory to few as well as to many, and
fights the battles of his servants, to whom be the glory and honor of his
mercy and goodness ascribed forever.

Barum the 28 of April, 1643. My constant friend,
YOur health wished, etc. I received your Letter by the Post, and do thank
you for your intelligence, our forces being not above 1500. lay on Friday last
10. miles from Lancestone, but on saturday they advanced to Liston within 3.
miles of Lancestone, and yet in Devon where they thought to have met with 3. or
4. regiments of trayners those being all Seamen and Volunteeres, but there was
no aid came thither as was promised by the Lieutenants: Sergeant Major
Chudleigh commanding in chief. Of these 1500. on Sunday morning at 10. of the
clock marched over Poulson-bridge into Cornwall, upon this ground hearing that
there was not above 1000. men and that of Sir Bevel Greenvils Regiment, so that
he thought to have set upon Lancestone, but before they came near the Town the
Cavaliers came out and lay half a mile off the Town in hedges, and shot upon
our men from 10 til 3. or 4. of the clock but our men beat them from hedge to
hedge till they were come near home to the Town; and then about 5. or 6. of
the clock there was 2. or 3. Regiments came in to the help of the Cavaliers,
but we held two or three small brass pieces which did great execution among
them, but their number being so much increased they were like to have begirt
our men round, and had sent a great number to the bridge, but by the providence
of God 500. of the E. of Stampfords men came in from Plymoth and cleared the
bridge, and our men made a fair retreat about 9. of the clock at night on
Sunday and marched to Southhampton, but I must tell you that our men killed
above 20. for one, we lost but 8. men, and they lost above 200. and some say
for certain 240. whereof M. Basset their high Sheriff was one shot in two by
our brass pieces, blessed be God for this mercy. Well, our men on Monday came
to Southhampton 15. miles from Lanson in the way to Exeter: The Cavaliers on
Tuesday advanced from Lanson into Devon, Sir Ralph came hut with 4000. almost
starved poor Cornish and 500. horse, our men by their Scouts sent out, brought
news to Major Chudleigh that the Cornish Army was within 4. miles of the
Town, they sent out 3. Troops of Horse, Major Chudleigh, Captain Gould and
Cap. Drake which in all made but 108. horse, who lay close under a hill where
the enemy was to come, who just in the edge of the evening came to the place,
our horse possessed, our men presently charged the Van very furiously, got
their word, and fell in among them pel mel: Cap: Drake slew 12. or 13. with his
battle axe and sword, and one of his Corporals the like number, he charged
through and through the midst of the Army, and had the foot come up had
gotten their guns, being 3. they had possession of them but wanted foot to
carry them away: It is thought the Cavaliers killed one another, seeing they saw
them kill their fellows that had the word, there was no difference but our men
in the moonelight knew every one by his skarfe and colors, our men killed
above 120. of them, took 6. or 700. Arms, buffe coats and scarlet coats
store, 12. drums, 3. Ensines. 11. prisoners, swans feathers and much other
pillage, and beat them back to Lancestone where they shamefully arived
wednesday the fast day, but we must not ascribe it to man but to God, that they
had this great success, being above 45. to one man. One thing is remarkable,
that as soon our horse charged them being on a great down; it grew dark and
it thundered and lightened in a very terrible manner, and the thunderclap brake
just over their heads and then rain extraordinary, and it was a very great
wind and hard weather all that day and night, and they were amazed at our
sudden charge, that they ran amain to save their lives, so let all our enemies
perish.

There was a Letter intercepted which came from the King, going to Sir Ralph
Hopton 3. or 4. days since near Exon wherein he wrote that he should come
away to his help speedily, and it is thought that if he could have cut off
that little force we had in Southhampton then he would have plundered the
Country where he had gone, and so gone away to the King, but he is gone to his
corner with weeping cross: Lord Major lost his, scarlet coat and Sir Straning
his skarfe and many beaver hats found cut and hewed, it is thought is 5000.
hurt of them, he lost in the last fight 5. or 6. horses but not one man, and
3. or 4. hurt, Gods name be glorisied. Pray let us hear what news, you I hope
this week will produce great news, God send it to be good, under God this war
dothly much on the E. of Essex his Army if well or ill, therefore it concerns
London to afford him all the help you possible can, your true friend for
Jerusalems peace, I rest,

W. N.
I hear the Letter from the King was written upon white satin and found in a
clokebag, wherein was many papers, and will discover all our Malignants of
Devon.



FINIS.

