NEVVES FROM BOW, AND The Earl of Norwich his Speech at a Randevous on
Pickenden Heath, who is designed General of the Enemies Forces.

WITH The Copy of a new Oath taken concerning what shall be concluded and
resolved upon at their Counsels, and for effecting their Results.

ALSO The particular Relation of the whole business in Kent, and a List of the
Names of prisoners taken at Maidstone viz.

Sir Gamaliel Dudley. Sir William Brockman. Esquire Scott. Major Price. And
many other of quality.
Those which are escaped and were very active, are
The Earl of Norwich. Esquire Hales. Sir William Compton. Sir Thomas Peyton.
Sir Bernard Gascoine. Sir John Many. And diverse others.

June 6th

LONDON, Printed by B. A. MDCXL VIII.

A particular RELATION From KENT
SIR,
THere have been taken since thursday night last, as many prisoners as make up
those then taken at Maidstone 1400, diverse of them being the Officers of a
Regiment of foot, four Troops of horse: their qualities are not yet known in
regard they conceal themselves: there are taken which we know Sir Gamaliel
Dudley who was appointed Governor of Maidstone, Sir Will. Brockman Col: of a
Regiment of foot, Squire Scot, Major Price, and diverse others, the peefect List
of which I shall send you by the next.

Some of the prisoners taken say, that there were present at the Randezvouz on
Pickenden Heath, on Thursday the Earl or Notwich, who was designed to be their
General, who made a speech of encouragement to them, that he would desire them
to go no further then he went himself, and that if they faild now they should
be for ever slaves.

The foot were ill armed and some whole files rode on Horse back in a rude and
uncouth manner.

Squire Hales was to be Lievtnant General to this Mock Army, and Sir william
Compton their Major General, Sir BernardGascoin a French Monsieur offered to
bring 50 Lieut. to be employed in this 'army Sir Thomas Many, and others were
very active.

Their Lieutenant General is to have a Regiment of horse, and another of foot.

Yesterday we had intelligence that the Enemy went about three in the
afternoon out of Rochester toward Gravesend, they broke up the bridge that no
horse might pass: the Town were very glad they were gone Major Brown Governor
of Upnecast as they upon their going away over turned their carriages of their
ordinance, and the women of the Town helped to throw down the works, they were
not full 3000 that marched out of that Town.

One of the Prisoners being a Lawyers Clark, hanged himself in a Belrope in the
Church where they were kept.

Yesterpay morning one of the Lord Generals footmen going to view the dead
bodies met with Major Price one of the enemies party and took him prisoner with
his sword by his side though the other had no sword of other Arms.

There was taken in the pockets of the one Lamb the copy of an oath of secrecy
which is as follows:

Rocbestor 3 May 1648.
We oblige our selves by the faith of Christians and the honor of Gentlemen
not to disroven or betrag any debate, or conclustons concluded or resolved upon
by the subscribers hereof further faithful and resolute ly to deliver our
judgments a indevours in effectuating of these Results,

This day his Excellency with Army advanced from Maidstone and had Rendezvous
upon Packenton Heath between Maidstone and Rochester, where the Army was drawn
up and a Council of War being called, diverse were proceeded against for
several misdemeanors one James Pluet of Col. Barksteads Regiment was
condemned to dye for taking 35. from a Country woman.

We are now come to Rochester, and have sent forth parties to Graves-end
Dartford and Craford to attend the Enemies motion who when hear were this day at
Wolwich and blackheath I pray send word how things are with you in London what
you hear from black heath and from Effex, my tender respects all our friend,
not forgetting my sweet. Frien,

In have I rest. Rochesher. 3 of Iunij. 1648. A List of the names before
mentioned.
The Earl of Norwich, designed General. Esquire Hales, appointed Lieutenant
General. Sir William Compton their Major General. Sir Bernard Gascoyne. Sir
John Many. Sir Gamaliel Dudley Governor of Maidstone. Sir John Brockman.
Fsquire Scott. Major Price, and many others.


Upon his Excellencies coming last night to Rochester, where he quartered with
the foot and train, astrong partvos Horse was sent forth under command of Col
Wha. to pursue the Kentish bumkins, for that is the common term our soldiers
give them and Cavies commanded by the Lord Goring, and this morning we fell
upon them, and have taken some prisoners which are brought thither, some of the
enemy fled into the I hames, and others boated over into Essex, and left their
horles behind them, many o en drowned for have to get over, a party of horse
and foot is gone to clear al about Dover castle and I hope regain Deal castle
and perhaps change the disposition of the Seamen, believe it if the earl of
Warwick was here now they would he glad of such a mediator for mercy to be
showed to them: the business of Maidstone was far greater then I first
presented, wet took above 1400 prisoners, 500 horse 16 barrels of powder, 12
run of march,, and 2000 Arms; A great fear is one the hearts of the whole
county, the Lord give the parliament and City hearts to discern and be thankful
for so great adeliverance as this of Kest, in which so many so many desperate
designs are linkt together: I suppose you have the business of the Isle of
Wight at large, but the design faild there, and the snare is broken here.

Rochester the 4 of Junij 1648.
On Sunday night last being the fourth of this instant June there was asmall
skirmish between some of the Lord Gorings Forces which were joined with the
Essexmen at Bow, and some of the Lord Generals horse which were cone back to
mile end, and are commanded by Col: Whaley, there was about 3 men killed on
both sides, those of the Essex party were forced to retreat again to Bow bridge
and further action ceased for the the present there are more horses mounting in
the City of London to assist those on that side the river of bow and the L.
Genesis is coming back, and will be on the other side this night or to morrow
Sunnons are givento the contrary party for a fuller appearance of the Essex men
who are much disoartned at thenew, they hear of success of the Kentishmen,
which were drawn into such a condition by the Cavaliers which were in the head
of them, that if his Excellencies forces had bad no more mecy on the poor
Country men and their wives, and children, then those by whom they were
deluded, with whom they were engaged they might all have been cut in peaces for
when the Generals Army had engaged the whole body of the Kentishmen to fight,
or lay down their Arms, then those which were most active and most of them
gotten into places of command fled away with the L. Goring into Essex and how
deeply that Country may also suffer, by entertaining such guests time will make
manifest many of the moderate party in Essex are much startled at the Lord,
Gorings coming thither, some say he is a papist, etc. And did great disservice
in Kent, the women also cry out for their husbands and many of them by
persuasion do prevail with their husbands which have been forward in appearing.

Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbott.

FINIS.

