OBSERVATIONS UPON THE INSTRVCTIONS For the taking the VOVV AND COVENANT
Throughout ENGLAND.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1643.

Observations upon the Instructions for the taking the Vow and Covenant
throughout the Kingdom.
Instruct. 1. and 2.

THat all Knights and Burgesses now in Parliament, do (...) special care
speedily to send down into their several Counties, a competent number of the
copies of the Vow and Covenant, unto the Deputy Lievetenants and Committees of
Parliament, in their several Counties and require a Certificate from them of
the day when they were received, etc. And that the said Deputy Lievtenants and
Committees do within six days at the utmost, disperse the said copies unto
every Parish Church or Chapel in their several Counties, etc.

Obser. 1. That these Instructions are not acknowledged to be made or enjoined
by either or both Houses of Parliament, only in the frontispice of the paper,
wherein they and the Oath are Printed, we find an Order mentioned as made by
the Lords and Commons, for the Printing and publishing these Instructions to
the whole Kingdom. Which to my apprehension imports, that some private men, or
some Parliament men in a private way framed them, and so presented them to the
Lords and Commons for their approbation to the printing and publishing of them:
and that is all the true power and authority they as yet carry in them. But I
assure you, whosoever they were that contrived them, they flew very high in
their presumption, to make all the Knights and Burgesses now in Parliament, to
be the first Officers in that disparch. I should think that where such as
they are required to do ought, there should be at least a Be it enacted by our
Sovereigne Lord the King, with the consent of the Lords and Commons, etc.
prefixed before it, and had the King and the Lords with the consent of some of
the Knights and Burgesses imposed such an office upon all Knights and Burgesses
in Parliament, it would have gone near to have been voted an high breach of
their privileges. It were therefore well worth the knowing, who it is that
has gotten this new Sovereignty over all the Knights and Burgesses now in
Parliament.

Obser. 2. That the Knights and Burgesses chosen by the several Counties to
keep off all pressures and burdens from them, are hereby made the prime
instruments of laying the forest and heaviest burden on them that ever was laid
on them since the burdon of the six Articles. Thus does God, when any trust in
the shadow of brambles, not only suffer those brambles to pluck off their
fleeces and tear their skins, but oftentimes causes fire to come out of
those brambles to devour them, and the tallest Cedars of Lebanon that are
near them. Did the Knights and Burgesses of the several Counties seriously
consider, how many souls will be hazarded by taking this oath thus conveied
unto them (as some by taking it doubtingly, others by taking it ignorantly,
some by taking it presumptuously, others by taking it desperately, and all by
taking in sinfully and irreligiously,) they would beware how they had any
further hand in this business, knowing that they have enough to answer, for
what they themselves have sworn, without bringing upon them the guilt of others
fwearing and forswearing in this dreadful manner.

Obser. 3. That if any of the Deputy Lievtenants and Committees of Parliament
in their several Counties (such ministers of Justice as were never heard of in
any County till this present Parliament) should have so much bowels and
compassion toward the souls of poor people, as to desire to give them some
relief against this oath, or some respite to bethink themselves better of it,
ere it be tendered to them, they cannot afford any ease or time to any soul
without danger to themselves. Should a man compare the liberty granted in
former times unto others, through whose hands oaths were to pass, ere they
were taken, with the liberty allotted to all those through whose hands this oath
is to pass, he would hardly believe, that the liberty of the Subject is so
maintained in any respect, as is pretended, no not in respect of men's
consciences, their most precious liberty: nay the liberty and respite granted
for the tendering and taking of the late Canonical oath so much and so justly
spoken against, was most gracious and conscientious to what this is.

Instruct. 3. The Ministers of the several Churches or Chapels are to give
public notice upon the first Lords day after the receipt of such copies etc.
What day the said Vow and Covenant shall be taken, the time not to exceed the
seventh day after such notice.

Obser. If the copies come to the Ministers hands on the Saturday night, he
shall have but very small time, till the next day, to consult with God, the
oath, and himself, whether it be lawful for him to invite his people to make
such a covenant or not: much less has he any convenient time to fit and
prepare his people for so solemn a business. Then if the Minister chance to
be a forward man in the promoting it, (as there are not a few forward promoters
of Parliament Orders, be they what they will be) he may appoint the next day
after for the taking it; and cannot, if he would, defer it above seven
days, (the people must not be suffered to chew too long upon it, lest in stead
of swallowing it, they nauseat or distaste it;) and alas, what resolution or
satisfaction in point of conscience, can poor souls, that shall scruple ought
in this Covenant, get within so-short a space? You know the fashion of most
Country people; they will hardly spare a day to consult the Physician in a
dangerous disease, till the market day come, that they may do that and their
other business together: and it is to be feared too many of them will as hardly
spare a day to consult the Divine, in this desperate case, till the Lords day
come, that they may go to their Church, and to their Minister both at once.
Besides, it may be those Ministers whose judgment they desire to hear, are
imprisoned, or flying up and down for fear of imprisonment, many miles from
them; and ere they can go or send to them, their allotted time will be expired:
or it may happen that those Ministers, or other knowing friends, to whom they
address themselves near hand, may be so far from satisfying their doubts,
that they may cause more to arise in them: yet take it they must within so few
days. Their Ministers themselves, that have the charge of their souls, and
must be answerable soul for soul, cannot grant them longer time though it
were to save their souls from perishing.

Instruct. 4. and 5. For fear lest at the day appointed some should slip from
taking this Oath, or shuffle it over in the taking: it is Ordered, That the
Constables in every Parish, shall bring to the Ministers of the Parish, the
names fairly written of all men above the age of fifteen, residing within
their several Parishes: and a Register Boo^e is to be provided by the
Churchwardens, wherein the Covenant is to be fair written, and every man's
name or mark, that takes it, subscribed, after he has taken it with an
audible voice, in the presence of the Ministers, Churchwardens, Sidemen, and
Constables of each Parish, or two of them, at the least, jointly with the
Minister.

Obser. Poor wretches! must the first Sacrament that many of them take after
their Baptism, be a Sacrament to swear themselves up to do that, which in
their Baptism they promised and vowed not to do? Alas for them! le^ one of
fifteen or sixteen years be examined through the several particulars of this
Vow and Covenant, what he knows of them, has done in them, or intends to do
concerning them; and who would not take his word, so far as he is able to give
an account, without putting him to his oath? When the Oath of Allegiance was by
the King and Parliament to be taken by the Subjects, upon the discovery of as
great a plot certainly, as this now so much talked of, viz. the Powder Treason,
as they did not in all that oath require any to swear that they had no hand in
it, so, in requiring them to swear what they did by way of promise for the
future, they thought it fit to require none to take that oath under the age of
eighteen years, though he were convict or indicted of or for any recusancy;
supposing (as by the Statute in that case appears) that by that age they ought
to know what belonged to so solemn an oath, and being then of a convenient age
to have received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they concluded they ought
to have received it if they had not: but for our younglings in these times (to
such maturity of knowledge and judgment are we grown above our fathers) they
must be put to take a solemn oath, and enter into a vow and covenant at the
age of fifteen, and that such a one as their fathers though of fifty and
upwards, do not understand, nor ever heard of the like, for so much as they do
understand. And unhappy Ministers, they to whom Christ has given such special
charge, as they love hi^ (...) his Sheep and his Lambs, they of all others
(...) according to those instructions, call to (or stand by as invit^^^ whilst
others call) those Sheep and Lambs to swallow do^^^ that, which will not only
(like that bitter water, (...) the curse in the case of jealousy, too much
resembling (...) ^^esent case Number. 5.) cause their bodies to rot, but also
(...) some waters that David so sorely complained of (...)) enter in unto their
souls, and endang^^ their perishing Chrysostom, as I remember, declames
exceedingly aga^^^^ ^he tendering oaths to the people by Ministers, for that
there is so great peril in taking them; but now Ministers must either tender a
most perilous oath (to say the least of it) to their people, or run the
peril of the high displeasure of the two Houses of Parliament, whatsoever else
betide them. God of his goodness stand by his Ministers and encourage them to
stand for his Sheep and his Lambs, that they be not caught in this snare, and
not to stand by them, looking on, and helping forward their insnaring.

It is well worthy all Ministers consideration at this time, that the tendering
and countenancing this oath is recommended particularly and principally to
them, who until this Parliament were never wont to be called to any such
employment, at least not so generally, as now they are. It may be God suffers
this to set before Ministers eyes their late over forwardness in imposing a
new oath upon their fellow Ministers, and others; and if so, I pray God open
their eyes that they may see it; or, which I rather think, God is resolved to
have Ministers now brought to the test or trial, whether they of all others
love his truth or people entrusted with them, so well, as to dare to be
valliant for either: and therefore to prevent all excuse, he will have every
Minister, that has any people committed to hi^ then to be present when this
truth-opposing, soul-^azar^ing covenant is to be tendered to the people, that so
he may prove their courage, whether like magnanimous David keeping his fathers
she^p, they will adventure to encounter with a Lion and a Bear, 1 Samuel 17.
rather then suffer one Lamb to be devoured; or like the slothful coward in
the Proverbs, will not think it a fair excuse, to say, There is a Lion
without, I shall be slain, etc. and so fit still or run away*, and leave
their whole flocks to the prey and spoil of cruel beasts ready to devour. A
good shepherd (says our great Shepherd) will give his life for his sheep,
much much more his living, much more his liberty. And never had good shepherd
in this Kingdom such an opportunity to show his goodness in adventuring for
the safety of his sheep, as at this present; when his very resusing to
countenance and assist the destroying of them, may save both them, and himself
from destruction; for if the Minister refuse to join with two of his Parish in
the tendering of this new oath, all the Parishioners may be excused from the
taking it, till some new order be made by the two Houses to supply that
defect, and by that time God may please to provide some other relief. And here
I am ^^ld to be a monitor in particular to those Ministers, who were so (...)
cour^gious in refusing and petitioning against the late Canonical oath; let
them of all others take heed that they do not destroy those consciences now,
which they pretended so zealously to preserve then, and with them many
thousands more committed to their charge. And for the provision of a Register
book to record every man's name that shall take this oath, me thinks that
strictness should rather ^^ar many from taking it, then seduce any to it,
considering what a dreadful and horrible record that may prove against the
takers when ever the King shall be reestablished in His Throne, which is to be
hoped, through Gods mercy to this Nation, will not be long.

Instruct. 6. In case my residing in the Parish should fail of taking this
oath at the first day appointed, the Minister is required to appoint another
day speedily* after, and the Churchwardens or some other for them are to go to
their houses and give them personal notice, and if they be not at home to
leave the notice with some of the house, and if they come not to take it at
that time, they may be returned for refusers of it.

Obser. The starting aside then, or obscuring themselves for a time will
advantage but little, only there is one clause in this Instruction which is
somewhat favorable to such, and that is the last: That if they come not and
take it on the second day appointed, they may be returned for refusers, if the
returners please. But I beseech you, what if any man have a just occasion to
absent himself from his place of residence a complete month together, just,
and at that time when the oath is to be taken, so that notice cannot possibly
be given him within the time limited by the instructions; whether shall he be
taken for a refuser or not, and this may chance to be many an honest man's case,
and should be mine, were I not confident of courage enough, through Gods
strengthening me, not only to deny the taking this oath, but to profess my
detestation of it, and to suffer whatsoever shall be inflicted for making such
a profession. In the intrim, I cannot but observe what care and pains is taken
to gain proselites, when it is to make them twofold more the children of hell
then they were: who can show when there has been such care taken to bring men
into the Church, who have separated from it, or to bring any that are yet
within the Church, to renew their covenant with God in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and to communicate with the congregation in other sacred, though
now despised Ordinances of God. But with such care and circumspection does God
suffer the tendering this horrid oath to be managed, that he that fears an
oath may be the better known from him that swears.

Instruct. 7. It is Ordered, that the Ministers and Churchwardens, shall within
twenty days after their receipt of the copies of the Vow and Covenant, make a
true certificate of the names of all such within their Parishes as do not take
it, unto such persons as shall be appointed for that purpose.

Obser. It Is presumed you see that all Ministers and Churchwardens will
certainly take this Oath themselves, and as certainly betray all their poor
Parishioners and neighbors, by a Certificat: for otherwise they would have
provided, that some others in every Parish should make this Certificate, in
case these should refuse or neglect to do it: or perhaps they thought that
there are false brethren enough in every Parish to do that, and to inform
against those that shall be faulty or slack in prosecuting this or any other
of these Instructions. Indeed in one clause of this 7. Instruction, they seem
to doubt somewhat of some Ministers forwardness in the business, whether they
would so speed it, as to send in the Certificate within the 20. days
prescribed, and have made a kind of proviso in that case, but for the taking
the oath, and making a Certificate of those that do not take it, and observing
other instructions recommended unto them by their order, they would have us
believe them to be such for piety and justice, at least that they themselves
think them such, as no Minister, now they have purged the Church of so many
scandalous and malignant Ministers, will once sc^uple them. Here then again,
the Ministers if they dare be so honest and stoo^, have another advantage to
preserve their people for a while, and if the Churchwardens should send in no
certificate at all there is no order as yet, for any to return their names.

Instruct. 8. That all that do not take this oath be forthwith disa^med, etc.
but perhaps that is done already, and what then? why if it can be proved by any
one, unless that they had in their custody any arms whatsoever, at the time
of the making of this covenant, or at any time since, which they shall not then
deliver to th^se appointed to seize the same, then they shall be forthwith
committed to prison without bail or manuprise.

Obser. Here is an instruction with a witness, any one man's testimony, though
a Knight of the Post, or a Gentlem^n from the whipping post, that shall but
say, that I had any thing in my house, that he or I know not who else, shall
please to call Arms (suppose a birding piece, a stonebow, a pikestate, a
pitchforke, a bodking, or a ring, especially with a coat of arms on it) and did
not deliver it up to the appointed seisers, shall be of power sufficient to
authorize those seisers or any man else, for ought I can see in the
instructions to the contrary, to seize upon my person, and clap me into prison
without bail or manuprise. Oh the miraculous liberty of the Subject, when not
only the Laws of men are cast off, and laid aside, but the express Law of God
himself is made of none effect through (...); that requi^ing, Deuteronomy. 19. 15.
That one wit^^^^^ (...) up against a man for any iniquity or for any (...) [but
that] at the mouth of two or three wit^^^^^^ the (...) shall be established.
Whereas here it is ord^^^^d, that any one witness rising up against a man, and
that ne^^her for any sin, nor for any iniquity, shall be of validity to
deprive any man of that liberty which many a foul crime cannot legally debar
him of. Here is also an admirable device to plunder all Cutlers and Armorers of
all their livelihood at once, and had it been thought on in time, it might
have stopped some of their clamouring for want of their monyes promised them for
swords, pistols, and other Arms. And I hope now, Popish Recusants will not
take it ill to be disarmed of all their Arms by act of Parliament, when an
instruction shall disarme all pious recusants of an impious Covenant* Look to
thy self O Israel, the Philistimes had once like to have ruined thee with this
very trick, when in the day of battle there was neither sword nor spear
found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan, 1 Samuel
15. and it is no very hard matter to cut a man's throat when he has nothing
wherewith to desend himself.

Instruct. 9. That no soldier entertained shall receive ann pay from the
State, until they have in the presence of their Commander, and some Minister
taken the Vow and Covenant.

Obser. A most rare antidote against the infectious complaining of the
Parliament soldiers for want of pay; they must now pawn their souls, as they
have a long time ventured their bodies, and swear a little deeper then any
Cavaliers dare swear ere they get a penny of all their arreere: and when they
have sworn, the same Minister that encouraged them to take this oath, or
tendered it to them, can, and it is likely will upon better grounds assure them
that after they have taken it, they are obliged thereby to go on in that
service, though they never receive any pay at all. There is not here as you
see, any hope left for any to evade either the taking this oath or the being
thoroughly tried and known, whether he will take it or not. And if it he not
taken you may descry a likelihood of mischief enough intended to the refusers,
and if it be taken, what woes, what miseries, what judgments, what torments of
souls and consciences, either here, or hereafter, or both the takers thereof
will plunge themselves in, or make themselves liable unto, no tongue can
express, though there is enough expressed in a few words by two of the
Prophets, Malacie and Zachary, to make any takers of this new oath to tremble
at the very reading of it, consult the words, I beseech you, Mal. 3. 5. and
Zac. 5. 2, 3, 4.

Into what a sad condition then, will the imposing this new Covenant cast
thousands, and ten thousands of poor souls throughout rhis miserable
Kingdom? Fear and the pit, and the snare (as once the Prophet Esaias spoke) are
upon thee, O inhabitant [of this Nation.] He that flies from the noise of the
fear, shall fall into pit, and he that comes up out of the midst of the
pit shall be taken in the snare. If men do not take this oath the fear of
being plundered, imprisoned, and utterly ruined in their estates, will seize
upon them, there is the fear; if they do take this oath, the guilt of Gods
displeasure against rebellion, treason, and perjury, that swallows them up,
there is the pit: and whether they take it or take it not, they themselves are
taken, there is the snare. Now he that flies from the noise of that fear, so
as to rush into the new covenant (as multitudes are likely to do) he cannot
but fall into the pit of Gods displeasure, and if then through Gods mercy, one
deep calling upon another, he chance to recover out of that pit by confessing
his sin, and humbling his soul for it, and so return to his former duty
toward God, and his Vicegerent, then he is sure to be maligned and persecuted
(perhaps more then if he had never taken this oath) by them that persist in
their iniquity, and whatsoever he does, he is sure to be undone. Oh the
matchless cruelty of this merciless Oath. In all former Orders and Ordinances
they did but angle for us, as the Prophet complained of some Hab. 1. 15. my
meaning is, they caught but here and there one of us; but by this order they
intend to catch us all as in a net, and to gather us together as in a drag. All
the heavy impositions, taxes, plunderings, rapines, and other grievous
oppressions, whereby men's estates have been exhausted, all the lies, slanders,
and false accusations, whereby men's good names have been blasted, and all the
restraints, imprisonments, and other illegal and unchristian pursutes,
wherewith men's bodies have been vexed, are not to be named the same age with
this one act of cruelty to men's souls; so much the more cruel because the
cruelty is the less discernable being maskt with the pretense of Religion,
like those poisons that look fairest, and kill soonest and surest. How fitly
may that pious wish of Hilary against Constantius be now taken up by every
sufferer in this cause, O that thou, who art the Omnipotent God, Creator of all
things, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, would have been pleased to have
ordered my age and time* that I might have fulfilled this office of making this
my confession of thee and thine only Son (for this truth, which I suffer for,
is thine and thy Sons as well as any truth whats^ever) in the times of Nero or
Decius; for then my happy fight or combat had been against such absolute
enemies, that no doubt would have been made, but that they were persecutors,
which would with tortures, sword and fire compel me to deny thee; neither
needed we then to do more to approve our selves to thee, then to suffer death
for thee. We Christians were wont to fight openly and boldly against those that
openly deny thee, and torment and slay those that are thine: and if our case
were such now, thy people would accompany us as their Captains and leaders, in
making the like religious confession with us: but we fight against a close
deceitful persecuter, against a fawning enemy, against an enemy that does not
openly threaten fire and fagget, but privately kindle hell fire against us,
that does not intend to overcome but to domineere, that confesses thy Christ
that he may deny him, that pretends to procure unity or association that there
may be peace, that suppresseth Heresies that there may be no Christians, that
honors Priests that there may be no Bishops, etc. And how well may others be
admonished in this case, as the wise man counsels his son, Proverb. 1. My
son if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. If they say, Come with us, let us
lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause: let us
swallow them alive as the grave, and whole as those that go down into the
pit. We shall find all precious substance we shall fill our houses with
spoil etc. And high time it is for all honest men to take up that prayer of
David, Psalm. 17. Here the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry, etc. And till God
shall hear this prayer, let all wait with patience, and suffer with courage;
let us neither be over careful for the things fo this life, nor over fearful
to part with them, and life, and all for truth and righteousness sake: Let us
remember, that when men revile us, and persecute us, and speak all manner of
evil against us falsely for Christ, then we are blessed, and therefore have
cause to rejoice, and be exceeding glad, knowing that great is our reward which
is in heaven. Let us in a word, not fear them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul; but let us fear him which is able to destroy both soul
and body in hell. From whence, and from all things leading thereunto,
especially from this new Oath, Vow and Covenant, Good Lord deliver us.

Finis.

