TRVTH IN TWO LETTERS BY A MAN OF WORTH from the Regiment of Colonel Brown,
upon the designs of MARBLOROVV, AND WINCHESTER.
With the manner of all the proceedings since they went out upon that service.

Not Written by any pot Poet. But by an honest true hearted Citizen, who serves
more in Conscience then Covetousness.

December. 22 LONDON, Printed by One, who regards rather truth then Money, 1642.

To the Reader.
REader
if you find not my things I print to be true, real, and from Men of worth,
you shall have your Money back, if you return the Books; for I deal not with
pot Poets nor with such as write any thing to get Money.

So I rest yours, M. S.

Loving friend,
IT much troubles to hear of that lamenesse that is upon you, which has
brought so much pain with it, the Lord in his due time I hope will deliver you
from both, and in the mean time give you patience to submit; I received the
sad news of it, in your Letter on wednesday as we were upon our march from
Okingham to Newberry; Where we quartered wednesday night, from whence we
intended to relieve Marleborough which had valiantly stood out against the
enemy three or four days, and slew diverse of them with little loss on their
side, never yielding until their Town was fired in four or five places,
which when it was taken, they plundered all the Town, and took some six score
of the honest people prisoners, and much like unto the Irish Rebels most
Barbarously dealt with them all, which might have been prevented if Mr. White.
Mr Pitts friend his solicitation for three or four days together of my Lord
General, and the Council of War could have prevailed to have sent us in time,
but when it was too late we were sent; Thursday we heard it was taken and that
3000 were got into Wantage in Barkeshire: Thursday about 11 or 12 of the clock
we marched toward that Town and drew up in the Field before it in to the ancles
in Clay, about nine or ten of the clock at night, but staying somewhat too long
before we fell in upon them not knowing their strength, and fortifications:
that better part of their persons, and horse fled and escaped amongst whom my
Lord Digby was the chief, the night was so exceeding dark, wet, and
Tempestuous that we could not possibly get intelligence of their strength,
until some 20 of our horse were sent in amongst them, who slew their
Sentinel, harged a whole Troop of their horse, and safely retreated to us
with the loss of only one of their horses: then were six or seven companies of
Dragoones sent in, who every step stepped up near to the very tops of their
Boots, and yet went on with such courage and cheerfulness (though exceeding
wet, weary, and dirty) as though they had been in the most delightful
Garden-walkes; after them some Troops of horse, but before this could be done
most of them escaped, which otherwise had been all slain or taken Prisoners,
only we slew five or six of them, one a Captain, and took about 30 prisoners
which we released at our coming away to free our selves of being troubled with
them, that night we returned back again to Nuberry, all the night being
exceeding wet and blustering, so that we had 24 hours march and service such as
these that have been 20 years inservices abroad never had the like, yet we are
all well blessed be God, only many of our horses fail us and by reason of it
some of our men are taken prisoners, the Enemy lying in most parts round about
us, and with their scouts take some of our men whose horses tired, we are like
to have a very hard service of it, If it continue out the winter as I doubt it
will: we have watched three or four nights together, but for victuals blessed
be God we have hitherto had enough and never yet wanted any. I received a
Letter from Master D for which I give him thanks, I would now return him
answer but I cannot being so extreme weary and sleepy, only remember me kindly
to him and tell him that our Commission was expressly to fall upon Henly, and at
that present those Forces that my Lord General sent from Windsor were to fall
upon Marlborough, so that our Commission was not so large as he was informed;
we had this afternoon an alarm that great Forces of the Kings were coming,
two or three ways against this Town, which we find is not altogether true
yet: certainly there is of some which will make us watch this night also: I
had almost forgot, we took my Lord Digbies Coach and Horses and their
Carriages and Arms, and Powder, but were constrained to throw away the Powder
and took their Muskets, and one of them that was slain died with a fearful
Oath in his mouth swearing he would see the Parliament hanged before he would
yield to them, with that one of our Dragoneers shot him, so that his last words
were Oaths. Good store of pillage our men got from them that they had gotten at
Marlborough, when they plundered it: remember me to Master D. and their wives,
Master A. and his wife, Master T. Master B. my Cozen Joseph, and the rest that
love me, not forgetting the new married couple, so with my love to your self I
commit you and yours to the Lords protection, and ever remain your truly
loving Friend.

From our Quarter at Newbury, December, 9. 1642. W, N.

Havant December, 17. 1642. LOving friend,
I now write this letter as I have done others formerly, not knowing when or
how to send it, the Lord has in goodness wonderfully preserved me hitherto,
especially in our taking of Winchester, where the most part of the Regiment
assaulted the City at one side of it where the wall was broken down, which yet
notwithstanding (with no small dificulty we entered) and in regard of the
exceeding high and steep passage to it, so steep that we had no other way to
get up, but to creep upon our knees and hands, from the bottom to the top as
high as most houses, the Enemy all the while playing with their Musketeers
upon us, but slew but three men in our getting up, and one of our Captains
that followed me as he was entering the breach, after I had led in some twenty
men; the bullets all this while flew thick about us, yet I bless God I had
not the least hurt; the most part of our Enemies at our coming got into the
Castle, so that the greatest part of the opposition we had in taking the Town
was from the Townse-men, who have since sufficiently paid for it, for they have
bin (the greatest opposers of us) plundered by our unruly soldiers: we stood
in arms all that night, and beset the Castle round with Musketeers and Horse,
and laid Perdues under the wall that not a man of them could stir, then they
sounded a parley about ten or eleven of the clock at night, but we refused to
accept it, against the morning we had prepared a great number of Fagots and
picht barrells, to fire the gate in regard we wanted Ordinance and Petards: as
soon as it began to be light they sounded another Parley wherein my Lord
Grandison himself with some five or six more desired to be, which was
accepted, after much debate they yielded and Articles were drawn up that they
were all to be taken Prisoners and resign up the Castle, and their Arms, and
Horses, and Money, all to be taken possession of by our Officers, but our
Common Soldiers who will be under no command, broke into the Castle by force,
seized upon the horses and all their goods, and most perfidiously contrary to
our Articles fell to stripping of them not leaving so much as Cloths upon some,
which together with many other disorderly passages makes us weary of the
service, which I had quit ere this but that the cause ties me to pass through
all difficulties whatsoever; since our taking the Castle, some of our men have
forsaken us (upon these grounds) one for want of money, the other because my
Lord Grandison and his Lieutenant Colonel, have escaped after they were a day
and night Prisoners, which does much dishearten all of us; I doubt not but you
heard of all and much more before this, the report is of great treasure that
was taken from them, which is more then I know, yet doubtless many have had
good booties of money and cloths, besides many brave horses, but for my part I
have neither: For I account my Obedience to Orders more then all that was here
to be gotten: our enemies are much troubled at their loss, for they account it
a great overthrow, two Regiments being utterly desolated, their Commanders
taken, together with their Arms, and five or six hundred horse: Colonel
Brownes Regiment had the honor to take the City, and enter the breach. Give
praise to God, for my preserva^^^^ we are now at Havant in Hamp. whither Sr.
William W^ and Col. Ramsy are come with two thousand men, from whence we are to
go against Chichester in Sussex, which I believe will be a good service, if
they do not run away before we come: they are well fortified with Ordinance
and one thousand men; we want no hardship neither by night nor day, for we
meet with nothing else, yet I bless God I never was better in health; I have
not so much as a Cough, the Lord give me a thankful believing heart; remember
me to all that love and ask for me: so with my love to you I commend you and
all about you to the Lords protection and rest, Yours.

We are this monday morning commanded by my Lord General to return to him
just now when we were going against Chichester.

FJNJS.

