The Kings Majesty's Receiving of the PROPOSITJONS FOR PEACE AT NEWCASTLE, On
Friday last, July 24. 1646. With some passages between his Majesty and the
Commissioners. ALSO A MANIFESTO, Sent to the Commissioners about the treaty
with the States at MUNSTER, By Order from his Majesty the King of SPAIN.

These are Printed by the original Papers, and published according to Order of
Parliament, By JANE COE. 1646.

The Plenipotency of the King of SPAIN. Given to his Ambassadors at MUNSTER,
Concerning the United Provinces. (With the manifestation by declaring them to
be free States) to treat for Peace, to the ending of the long during War.
DON Phillip by the grace of God King of Castille of Leon, of Arragon, of both
the Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarre, Granado, Toledo, Valencia,
Galizia, Mayorca, Minorca, Sevill, Cerdena, Cordona, Corsega, Murcia, Portugal
of the Algarves Algezina, Gibraltar, of the Isles, of the Canaries, of both the
East and West Indies, of the Jslands and Firme-Land, of the Ocean Sea,
Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgondie, Brabant, and Milan, Earl of Habspurg,
Flanders, Tiroland, Barcelona, Lord of Biscay, Molina, etc.
WHereas that for the earnest desire I have to set forward the rest and
Tranquillity of the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Provinces of the
Low Countries, that so they may be eased of so long and cruel a War for the
better attaining to a General Peace in Europe, for the Good of Christendom,
And having by common and mutual consent chosen and designed the Town of
Munster in Westfalia, for the assembling and negotiating the said peace. I have
thought it convenient to name persons who in my name may assist in the said
assembly, having full power and Plenipotency, and in a special manner with the
States of the free United Provinces of the Low Countries, or with their
Ambassadors Plenepotenciaries in particular authorized and deputed; And taking
into our consideration the sufficiency, integrity, Providence, Experience
understanding Intelligence and zeal for my service, and of the welfare and
universal peace of Christendom, which do concur in the persons of Don
Jasper de Bracamonte and Gusman Earl of Pennaranda Gentleman of my Chamber,
and one of my Privy Counsel, and my extraordinary Ambassador in Germany: Fray
Joseph Bargagne Archbishop of Cambray, and Antonio Brun being of my supreme
Counsel in Flanders, and for the great satisfaction I have always received
from them in several great affairs wherewith they have been entrusted, and
by them respectively managed therefore totally, reposing my trust on them all
together met, or severally in the absence of either of them caused by any other
impediment tending to the further good of Christendom and my particular
interests, have named and ordained them for my Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries, and by virtue of these presents do give unto them jointly
and to every one of them in particular in the absence or other impediment of
any one of them, a full and absolute power to make an overture unto the said
States of the said free and united Provinces of the Low Countries, or their
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, especially they being appointed and fully
authorized by the said States, and then to hear such things that will be
tending to end this long and cruel War raised in the Provinces of the
Low Countries, and others which have sprung from this in other Countries,
Lands, and Seas, far remote from them and in prosecution of this with the
said Estates General of the said free and united Provinces, or with their said
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries enter into a Treaty, propound, agree,
capitulate, conclude, a good firm and inviolable Treaty, be it of Peace or
Truce, promising for my self, my successors, to hold for ever firm and valid
precisely, and punctually not failing in any thing of all that by my said
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries jointly, or each of them in particular (in
the absence or other impediment of any of them) shall be agreed and capitulated
in the said Treaty with the said Estates General or the said Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries of the above said free united Provinces, as likewise to
approve the same, and ratify it within such time as by them shall be mutually
agreed, confirming the same by oath and other solemnities in such cases
necessary and accustomed, in witness whereof I have caused this present to be
dispatched.

Signed of mine own hand, and sealed with my Signet, and underwritten by my
Secretary of State.
Given at Sarogossa the 7. of June, 1646. I the KING. PEDRO COLOMO Secretary.
This is a Copy of the original Plenipotency of his Majesty word for word,
which remains in our power at Munster, this 3. of July, 1646.

Signed by us. El Conde de P^^^^nda. Fray Joseph (...) co^ispo de Cambray. A
Brun.



This Copy is conferred with the original of the King of Spaines
Plenipotency. Signed and authorized as abovesaid, and agrees with it word for
word.

I. Vander Burgh.



DON Philippe par la gracia de Dios Rey de Castilla, de Laeon, d'Arragon, de
las dos Sicilias, de Jerusalem, de Portugal, de Navarra, de Grandde, de
Toledo, de Valencia de Galicia, de Mallorca, de Minorca, de Sivilla, De
Sardana, de Cordua, de Corsega, de Murcia, de Portugal, de los Algarves, de
Algezira, de Gibralter, de las Islas de Canaria, de las Indias Orientales y
Occidentales, Islas y tierra firma del Mar Oceano. Archiduque d'Austrio, Duque
de Burgonna, y Bravante, y Milan, Conde, de Habsborg, de Flandres, de Tirol, y
Barcelona, Signior de Viscaya, y de Molina, etc.
POR quanto por lo mucho que desseo encaminar el reposo, y tranquilidad de los
subditos, y habitantes de las Provincias, de los Daises, baxos, para que
descansen, de tan larga, y cruel guerra parar llegar tanto meior a una paz
general en Europa, en bien de la Christianidad, y havien do se de commun y
mutuel concerto escogido y senalado la villa de munster en Westfalia para el
congres^o y negotiation de la dicha par, he hallado por conveniente nombrar
personas que en my nombre ayan d'assister con toda auctoridad y plenipotentia
del dicho congresso, y special mente con los Estados de las provincias libres
de los paeses baios unidos o sus Embaxadores, Plenipotentiarios en particular
autorisados y de putados, teniendo consideration a la sufficiencia integridad,
Providentia, Experientia, Intelligentia, y zelo de mi servicio, y del bien, y
reposo universal de la Christiandad, que concurren en la person de. Don Gaspar
de Braccamonte, y Gusman Conde de Penaranda, gentilhombre de Camara de mis
Conseios de Camara y Justicia, y mi Ambassador extraordinario en Alemanna, Fray
Joseph Bargagne Arcobispo de Cambray* y Antonio Brun, de mi conseio supremo de
Flandres, y por la satisfaction que siempre me han da do en differentos, y
grandes Negocios, que les han sido en cargados, y parellos respectivamente
maneiados: Por tanto confiando enteramente que todos juntos y y cada uno en
particular en ausencia y incommodidad del uno o del otro tendran attencion al
mayor bien de la Christiandad, y de mis interesses particulares, los he
nombrado por mis Embajadores y Plenipotentiarios, y en virtud 'de la present
les doyatodos juntos y a cada uno en particular en ausencia o incommodidad de
qualquier* dei^^ entreo y ^^^t^^to (...) para hazer abertura a los Estados de
diehas Provincias (...) de los paeses baios unidos o sus Embssadares y
Plenipotentiarios que especial mente fueron autorisados y constituy: dos
paraellos como tambien, oir lo que mirare a apazar la sobre dicha larga y cruel
guarra suscitada en las Provincias de los Laeses baios, y las de ella se han,
originado contra los dichos Estados generales en o tros leis paeses y mares, y
en consequentia desto con los dichos Estados generales de dicha Provincias
unidas libres o con los dichos sus Embaxadores y Plenipotentiarios entrar en
negotiation conferit, proponer, convenir capitular y conclur uno bueno firmo y
invioloble Tratado de reposo sea de paz o de Tregua, prometiendo por mi por mis
successores de tenir para siempre por firmo y valido precisia y puntual mente
sin falta alguna todo lo que por mis dichos Embaxadors y Plenipotentiarios
juntos o cada uno^es particular en ads encia o Incommodidad de Alguno dellos
fuero combenido y capitulado en el dicho tratado con los dichos Estados
generales o los dichos Ambassadors y Plenipotentiarios de las sobre dichas
Provincias unidas libres, y aussi mismo d approbar los y ratificarlo dentro dei
termino que reciproqua mente se sennalare con confirmacion de juramento y todas
solennidades en tal caso necessarias y accostumbrados en fedelo qual mando
despachar la present firmado de mano, fellado con mi sello segreto y
refrendado del infrascrito mi Sogretario de Stado. Dada en Saragoca a siece de
Junio, de mil y sciscientos y quaranta y seys Annos.

Yo el Rey, Pedro Coloma.
En bas estoit Escript.

Es Copia de la Pienipotentia original de su Majestad de verbo adverbum que
queda en nuestra poder en Munster 23 die Julio 1646. Estoit sign.

El Conde de Penneranda. Fray Joseph Archibispo de Cambray. A. Brun.



Cette Copy a este collationnee avec la Copy du pouvoir originel du Roy
d'Espaigne, signee and auctorisee comme dessus, and accord de mot en mot avecq
icelle

I. Vander Burgh.



A Letter from Newcastle, concerning delivering of the Propositions to his
Majesty, by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms of England and Scotland, for a
safe and well grounded PEACE.
NOBLE SIR,
OO Wednesday night we had Intelligence here at Newcastle, that the
Commissioners would be in this Town the next day with the PROPOSITIONS from
both Kingdoms of England and Scotland, (which we received in private by other
Messengers before, who brought down some Books from London hither;) Yesterday
being Thursday in the morning the said Commissioners came to this Town, and
the same day acquainted his Majesty, that they were come with Propositions
from both Kingdoms to be presented his Majesty for a safe and well grounded
peace; the particulars whereof being come hither in print before his Majesty was
the reader, to give them a more speedy answer, and therefore by order from his
Majesty, they were appointed to come to his Majesty with the said Propositions
this day, who accordingly came this afternoon, to deliver them as aforesaid,
and his Majesty (it is said) will give them a speedy answer, but whether
postitive or not, or what it will be, I must leave that to acquaint you with
hereafter, which (by the next opportunity) assure your self, shall not be
wanting from him who is

your humble servant D. N.
Newcastle the 24. of July, 1646.
FINIS.

