York
Pack up and away from Oxford.

woodcut frontispiece

A NEW PETITION: Earnestly entreating Subscription of Hands to back the late
City Remonstrance.

Unto which is annexed a useful Dialogue, betwixt a Churchwarden and a
Parishioner, Declaring the danger of the said NEW PETITION.

Serving as a Christian Caveat to the wise-hearted, to take heed of having
their feet taken in the snare thereof.

By a cordial Wel-willer to the peace of this famous City.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by MATTHEW. SYMMONS. 1646.

A New Petition, earnestly entreating Subscription of Hands.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the Aldermen and Commons of the City
of London in Common Council Assembled.
The humble Petition of diverse well-affected Citizens and Freemen of London
under the jurisdiction of the Lord Major.
Shows,
THat the great care and uncessant pains of this Honorable Court for the
promoting of the cause of God, is so eminently known, that your Petitioners
cunceive that they shall be too much wanting to their own duties and safety if
they should be backward in the thankful acknowledgement thereof. Wherefore as
they give you many humble and hearty thanks for what you have already done in
reference to the public good, so being desirous in what in them lies yet
further to strengthen your hands to so glorious a work they cannot but let you
know their resolutions to adhere unto you in all your just and legal
proceedings, not doubting but the same good hand of God that has hitherto been
with you will still be upon you for good, whilst you endeavor in your places
the establishment of truth and peace, and the removing those pressing
grievances, that lie upon us as you have lately done in that free and
necessary, yet humble and dutiful Remonstrance and Petition unto the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, and however there wants not those for the
present, who out of self-respects calumniate your good intention therein, yet
being persuaded that in very faithfulness to the public you have done it,
your Petitioners not only approve of it but rejoice in it, the rather since
they know no other ordinary way for obtaining remedy for their common
grievances then by your addresses to the Parliament in their behalf.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly Pray, that this Honorable Court would be
pleased still to persevere and courageously go on, and by all pious and
prudent means endeavoring the speedy settlement of Religion, the Peace of the
Kingdom, the union of both Nations, the safety and welfare of this City, and
in a word the performance of the Covenant,, wherein we are Solemnly engaged
unto God the righteous Judge of all the world: In reference unto all which good
ends your Petitioners pray, that you would still continue your humble addresses
unto the Parliament, not only for a gracious Answer of your said late
Remonstrance, but for all such other things as shall necessary conduce to the
putting a happy period to our present miserable distractions; and that the
mean time you would put in execution amongst your selves so many branches
thereof as the power wherewith (by the Laws of this Kingdom, you are already
invested) will extend unto.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
Observations upon the fore going Petition by way of Dialogue between a
Churchwarden and a Parishioner.
Churchwarden. COme Neighbor, here is a very sober, moderate, and pious
Petition, tending much for the glory of God, the peace of the kingdom, and
the common good; will you subscribe it?


Parishioner. Sir, I desire to be excused: for my part I do not like it.


Chapter Not like it man? what honest man can dislike it?


Par. Sir, It is a very dangerous Petition, and there is more mischief coucht
in it then you are aware of.


Chapter I think in my conscience some men will find fault with any thing; why
man it is as harmless a Petition as ever was subscribed unto; and many honest,
and understanding men have subscribed it.


Par. I will not make other men's examples, but mine own Reason, the Rule of my
actions: honest men may sometimes do knaves work, and the most cunning
strains of destperate Malignancy; and dangerous consequence are always
carried on by abused simplicity, but I look upon it as a very dangerous Petition


Chur. I know you are none of these Shimaticall Sectaries, which have ever
been the unhappie disturbers of the public peace of Church and state; whose
total suppression would be a happy thing to this land and nation, I pray you
tell me the reason why you will not subscibe it, I Will assure you we are to
return the names of those that deny subscription.


Par. Return the names, to whom? have you any authority that put you on work?
for my part I was never known to contemn thority; tell me to whom must you
return the names of the non-subscribers.


Chur. Excuse me there, I speak as your friend, and in my love to you, but I
pray you take no notice of that, but tell me the reason why you will not
subscribe it.


Par. Why I Will tell you, first I like not the thing in the general. 2. I like
not some things more particular?


Ch: What do you dis-like in it in the general.


Par: Why truly in the general I look upon it as mere seditition, and that
which has a very dangerous tendency in it, and may likely prove an utter
breach between City and Pariiament, and confident I am (however you are
abused) close malignancy lies at the root, and if my council be worthy to be
taken, have no further hand in it.


Ch: Sedition man? how can that be, I am sure as honest men, and as good
friends to the Parliament as any are in this City (none excepted) have their
hands in it.


Par: It Is no matter for that, honest men are not in all things the most
politiek, I Will give you an account of my thoughts of it.


Ch: Truly I have always taken you for an understanding man, not rash, but
rational, tell me why do you think it sedition?


Par. Why I Will tell you, the City has petitioned and Remonstrated to the
House, the House show no testimony of their acceptance (but rather their
dislike) of it, if in such a Case a party shall join together, and subscribe a
resolutution to stick unto those, and promise to back them in any thing
whereto the Parliament shows their dislike, it is absolute in my judgment
sedition, and a direct faction, and that which tends to make a very heavy
breach between the City and Parliament: for it is no less then to raise up a
party against the Parliament.


Ch: I confess there may be more in it then I see before: but confident I am,
that there are many honest men that would cut off their hands before they would
subscribe it, if they thought so?


Par: I do believe so too; but I verily think the design is deeper then you
are aware of, and I partly perceive whence it comes about, that there are such
daily tamperings with Citizens in matters of this nature?


Chapter I pray you tell me your thoughts freely.


Par. Why, I Will tell you, many Malignants are come into the City, and have made
their peace with the Parliament by their Compositions; though they are as
directly Royallists as ever they were: moreover, many Malignant Episcopal
Priests are likewise by Compositions admitted into the City, both the one and
the other, having cunning heads, choice wits, deep reaches, and malignant
hearts, having some hopes that the Scots and the King will join together
against the Parliament: (though for my part I have strong confidence (what ever
the Kings design may be) the Scots will appear honest) these men well knowing
that if they could but divide London from the Parliament, and get those men
suppressed that have done them as much mischief as any in the Kingdom under
the notion of Schismatics, Annabaptists, Independants and Sectaries, these men
(I say may foment divisions between the well-affected, and the City and
Parliament, not doubting but (if that was once irreconcileably done, what with
the Scots, the Kings Party in the Kingdom and City) the game would go on
their sides, and so they have their desires; Again we have a great many
Ministers here, in and about the City, some whereof doubtless in conscience
to the glory of God, being much affected with the divisions and errors of the
Times, others biased with base ends of honor, and profit, these by their
invective preachings, stirring up the Magistrates in their more popular Sermons
at Westminster, Paul's, every morning exercise in the City: as also by their
bitter writings against those that agree not with them in Church government?
and their dispersions of their unchristian like books abroad, such as Master
Edwards books are (enough to set a whole Kingdom on fire) as also by the
methods that are contrived by some, sending abroad, and spreading their
instructions, directions, and advice for the preaching on such subjects
throughout the City and Kingdom as people are not able to bear; whereby
divisions, wrath, discord, and general discontents are fomented throughout the
Kingdom, setting Menister against people, and people against Minister,
stirring up and provoking the City to be troublesome to the Parliament, to
petition again and again, under a pretense of zeal for the house of God, the
glory of God, the reformation of the Kingdom, the setting up (and that with a
rigorous exaction of uniformity therein) of that government wherein indeed
themselves do not agree, some holding it Jure Divino, others Jure Humano, and
so they make a great busling in the City and Kingdom about they know not
what: hereupon it is very probable, for I speak my thoughts, they stir up
the people to join with the Common Council, and to stick unto them,
insinuating that the Parliament can do nothing without the City, and therefore
petition: and if that will not do, petition, and if that will not do, petition
again and again until they do answer you, and that to your content: for
doubtless if they see you are many in number, and resolved in the thing, they
must not deny you, etc. This is another cause of these kind of procceedings, I
blunder out my own opinion, you know I am plain, these I profess are my very
thoughts? and for my part I look upon this very Petition as widening the
distance, and increasing the fire, and enlarging divisions, and therefore
believe it I shall have no hand in it; it grieves me to see how simply men are
hurried on to their own damage, let the Parliament alone and God bless them,
and let the City act within its sphere, and every of us study more peace and
love and Christian sweetness in our carriages one toward another then we do.
This for the general:


Ch: What are your particular exceptions against it?


Par: Truly I cannot stand now to examine all things in it, but I shall only
for present upon a sudden let you know my exceptions against one thing you
spoke of in the prayer, you petition the Lord Major and Common Council, as
they make conscience of their solemn Leagus and Covenant, that they endeavor
the settlement of Religion, I concceive you mean Presbiteriall Government, do
you not?


Ch: Yes doubtless we mean nothing else, for that we suppose to be according
to the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches?


Par: Why then by this kind of interpretation every man is bound to strive to
compel others to conformity unto that Government, which he supposes to be
according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches: so
the Anabaptist he is bound to compel others to his judgment: Independants to
do the like, seekers to do the like, and so this kind of exposition of the
Covenant, puts a sword into the hands of all sorts of Sectaries, and people of
different judgments to rend and tear and devour one another, and what a
dividing and dangerous interpretation of the Covenant is this? to press men as
they tender a good conscience to ruin one another. Sir, I am a little in have,
I have told you my present thoughts in short: I cannot subscribe the Petition.


Ch: I thank you for your freeness of discourse, I promise you I Will be better
advised before I proced any further therein.


Farewell Sir.
FINIS.

