News from Braband: Or, An Account of diverse Passages at the Siege of Mons.
Brussels, April 1. N. S. 1691.
YEsterday the whole Leagure of the Confederates did stand in a full Batallion
at Hall, expecting that by His Majesty of Great Britain they might be
Rendezvouzed. It Is said His Majesty is expected to be here to Morrow in the
Leagure, and with the same to break up the next day following. There is great
Courage, and more than ordinar^ Audacity to be seen, as well in all the
Officers, as common Soldiers, every one of them being very Willing and
Resolute to meet and stair the French in the face.

At Mons there is a very sharp Handling, for the Besieged within, have with
their Canons made an unspeakable damnage on the Enemies Batteries, of the which
one is altogether rendered useless; and likewise, by their Outfall within two
days did make a great ruin in the Enemies Works, and did kill a great number
of the French, of the which, as it is said, there are many great and principal
Courtiers, and with small or little loss returned again to the City.

The French King is very busy to block up and strengthen all the Passages
whereby any Succor might be brought to the Town, and has strongly compassed
them with Bulwarks and Pallisadoes. Yesterday the French with 18000 Men did
Storm upon the great Horn-work, but they within did Defend themselves so
Manfully, and Resisted the French so wisely, that the place did look rather
like a Murdering than a Fencing place; and after the French had lost about 8 or
9000, were forced over Head over Tail to Run and Fly, leaving the Victory and
Blessing to the Besieged. And after the Besieged had Obtained this blessed
Victory, then several Hundreds of the Garrison, with very many of the Burgesses
and free young Men made a Sally out, and with great Courage, did fall on the
Enemy at St. Peter's Mill, Beat out the Enemy, and recovered the Post, which
they now possess.

Without doubt His Majesty of Great Britain will be this day in this Town, for
several of his Followers and Domestics are already arrived here. The Governor
of Mons, by a Missive to His Majesty of Great Britain has signified Him, that
the City is very well provided with all things necessary, and that the Courage
of the Inhabitants is rather Augmented than Diminished, and that His Majesty
needed not to be too hasty, for till 14 Days he stood in need of nothing.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1691.


