NEWS FROM NEW ENGLAND: OF A most strange and prodigious Birth, brought to
Boston in New England, October the 17. being a true and exact Relation, brought
over April 19. 1642. by a Gentleman of good worth, now resident in London. Also
other Relations of six strange and prodigious Births in these Countries
following.

The 1. from New England. The 2 from Quieres. The 3d. in Ravena. The 4. in
Parts. The 5. in St. Andwes Church in Paris. The 6. in the Forest Biera.

TB



A Monstrous Birth brought to Boston in New England, October the 17. 1637.
ONe Mary wife of William Dier, sometimes a Citisen and Milliner in the
New-Exchange, near the city of London, and being both young, very comely and
proper born, was delivered of a woman child stillborn having life a few hour;
before, two months before the due time, yet as large as ordinary children are;
the face of it stood so far into the breast, as the ears which were like an
Apes ears, grew upon the shoulders; the eyes and mouth stood more out then
other childrens; the nose grew hooking upwards, the face had no part of the
head behind, but a hollow place, yet whole, it had no forehead, but in the
place thereof four perfect horns; whereof two were above an inch long, hard and
pointed, the other two were short, the breast and shoulders were full of
scales, sharp and pricking, like your Thornback, the navell and the belly with
a distinction of all the Sex, were behind and the hips were before where the
face stood, the arms and legs were as other children but instead of toes, it
had on each foot claws with sharp Talents like a fowl, in the upper part of the
back, it had two great mouths, and in each a piece of red flesh, sticking in it.

The second.
AT Quiers a small Village some 10. miles from Turine in Savoy, in the year
1578. upon the 17. day of Ian. about 8 a clock at night, an honest Matron
brought forth a child, having 5. horns, like to Rams horns, set opposite to one
another upon his head; he had also a long piece of flesh like in some sort to a
French hood which women used to wear, hanging down from his Forehead by the
Nap of his neck, almost the length of his back; two other Pieces of flesh like
the collar of a shirt, were wrapped about his neck: the fingers ends of both
his hands somewhat resembled a Hawks Talons, and his knees seemed to be in his
hammes: the right Leg and the right Foot were of a very red color the rest of
his body was of a tawny color: It is said, he gave such a terrible scritch
when he was brought forth, that the Midwives, and the rest of the women that
were at her Labor, were so frighted; that they presently left the House, and
ran away: when the Duke of Savoy heard of this Monster, he commanded it should
be brought to him, which performed, one would hardly think what various
censures the Courtiers gave of it.

The third.
ABout the time that Pope Julius the 2. raised up all Italy, and the greatest
part of Christendom, against Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, in the year of
our Lord, 1512. In which year upon Easter day near Ravena, was fought that
mortal Battle; in which the Popes were overthrown; a Monster was born in
Ravena, having a horn upon the crown of his head: besides two wings, one Foot
alone, most like to the Feet of Birds of prey, and in the knee thereof an eye,
the Privities of Male and Female, the rest of the body like a man.

The Fourth.
IN the year 1546. a woman in Paris, in her sixth Month of her account, brought
forth a child, having two heads, two arms, and four legs and dissecting the
body of it, found but one heart: by which, one may know it was but one Infant.
For you may know this from Aristotle, whether the monstrous Birth be one, or
more joined together, by the principal part. For if that the body has but one
heart, it is but one: if two, it is double by joining together in the
conception.

The Fifth.
IN Anno 1573. there was seen in St. Andrews church in Paris, a Boy 9. years
old, born in the Village Parpavilla, six miles from Guise, his Fathers name was
Peter Renard, and his Mother Marquote: he had but two fingers on his right
hand, his Arm was well proportioned from the top of his shoulder, almost to his
wrist; but from thence to his two fingers ends: it was very deformed, he wanted
his legs and thighs; although from the right buttock a certain unperfect
figure, having only four toes, seemed to put it self forth: from the midst of
the left buttock, two toes sprung out, the one of which was not much unlike a
man's yard.

The Sixth.
In Anno. 1517. in the parish of Knigswood in the Forest Biera in the way of
Fountain-Bleau there was a monster borne with the face of a frogg, being seen
by John Bellinger, Surgeon to the Kings Engineers, before the Justices of
the Town of Harmoy, principally John Bribon the Kings Procurator in that
place. The fathers name was Amadeus the little, his mothers, Magdalina
Sarbucata who troubled with a fever, by a woman's persuasion, held a quick
frogg in her hand till it died, she came thus to bed with her husband and
conceived. Bellanger a man of an acute wit, thought this was the cause of the
monstrous deformity of the Child.

Woman, is a creature bringing usually but one at a birth, but there have been
some who have brought forth two, some three, some four some five, some six, or
more at one birth. Empedoches thought that tho abundance of seed was the cause
of such numerous birthes: the Stoiks affirm the diverse cells or partitions to
be the cause: for the seed being variously parted into these partitions, and
the conception divided, there are more children brought no otherwise then in
rivers, the water beating against diverse rocks, is turned into into diverse
circles or rounds. But Aristotle says there is no reason to think so, for in
women that parting of the womb into cells, as in dogs and sowes takes no
place:

For women's Wombs have but one cavity, parted into two recesses, the right and
left, nothing coming between; except by chance distinguished by a certain
line, for often Twins lie in the same side of the Womb.

Aristotle's opinion is, that a woman cannot bring forth more than five children
at one birth.

The Maid of Augustus Caesar brought forth nine at a Birth, she and her
children dyed.

In the Year 1554 at Bearn in Switzerland, the Wife of Doctor John Gelinger,
brought forth five children at one Birth, three Boys and two Girls.

Albuccasis affirms a Woman to have bin the Mother of seven children at one
Birth; and another, who by some external injury did abort, brought forth five
perfectly, shaped in all their parts.

Pliny reports, that it was extant in the Writings of Physicians, that 12.
children were born at one birth, and that there was another in Peloponesus,
which 4. several times was delivered of five children at one birth; and that
the greater part of those children lived.

It is reported by Dalechampius that Bonaventura the slave of one Savill, a
Gentleman of Sena, at one time brought forth 7. children: of which 4. were
baptized in our time, between Sarte and Main in the Parish of Seaux, not far
from Chambella: there is a Family and noble House called Maldemeure, the wife
of the Lord Maldemeure: the first year she was married, brought forth twins:
the second year she had three children: the third year 4. the fourth year five:
the fifth year six, and of that Birth she dyed.

Of these six one is yet alive, and is Lord of Maldemeur. In the valley of
Beaufors, in the County of Anion: a young woman the daughter of Mace Channier,
when at one perfect birth she had brought form one child, the tenth day
following she fell in labor of of another, but could not be delivered until
it was plucked from her by force, and was the death of the mother. Martin
Cromerus that author of the Polish history, writes that one Margaret a woman
sprung from a noble and ancient family near Cracovia and wife to Count
Virboslaus, brought forth at one Birth 35 living children upon the 20th. day of
January. In the year. 1296, Fransiscus Picus Mirandula writes, that one
Dorothy an Italian had twenty children at two births, at the first 9 at the
secony 11, and that she was so big that she was forced to bear up her belly
which lay upon her knees, with a broad and large scarf tied about her neck,
as you may see by diverse authors.

FINIS.
woman in bed, two-headed human standing nearby

LONDON: Printed for JOHN G. SMITH, 1642.


