A NEW YEARS GIFT FOR THE WHIGS: Or, A True Relation of Threescore Presbyters
(Foot and Horse) that surprised Two of the Kin^^ Guards in their beds, at an
Inn seven Miles from Edenborough, Cutting all the Flesh off their bon^^ till
they were Dead, and carried the pieces to their Respective Friends, and there
burned them (...) Contempt of God and their King.
Tune of, Then then to the Duke let us fill up the Glass.
^

^

GReat Souls that are free from Faction, rejoice,
and stand on y'r guard for y'r Country and King
Observe the success of Papillion, Duboice,
of Bethel and Cornish, and Tony's black Sting:
Walcot and College, and Young Horned Dotage,
see how some are hanged, and the rest run away;
Let this be a warning, to Whigs rigid scorning,
who choose to be Damned rather than to Obey.
II.
Yet still with the Scotch they dare to Conspire,
the Dutch are not idle the French to send over;
The Scum of the Country from France do retire,
to support the Old- Cause, come to breed on our Shore;
To join with the Dutch or the whigs of our Nation,
must be the Design of those Presbyter Saints;
To the ruin of our trade they have made an invasion
pretense of Religion protects their false Cants.
III.
Whigs constant to nothing, but treason and change,
o're-charging their Noddles with notions of State;
With Trimming reflections on loyal L' Estrange,
more profligate Villains never peept thru' a Grate;
Let Oats be remembered, ten thousand times perjured,
and keep the Beast chained, until the next Term;
And then through a Casement, toth' whigs great amazement,
and next Sessions after he will Tyburn adorn.
IV.
The Scotch-Covenanters to rouse up our Knaves,
has given us a Signet, as they did before;
When the Bishops brains against the Coach-Nav^^
they dashed out, to show what a God they ador^
By the light of the Spirit, some sixty in number,
surpised in their beds two of the Kings Guards
Alive leg and limb they cut 'um asunder,
by Yea and Nay, Brother, they merit reward:
V.
with the flesh on the points of their swords they reti^^
in Triumph, cried, This is the work of the Lea^^^
For this holy murder by the Saints we were Hired,
Gend faith the next time let 'um stand on their gua^^
Had they been the King and the Duke, we had glory'^
and a Thanksgiving-day had been hum'd in our Kin^^
For their blood we do thirst, but their name we abhor^
for we worship no King, but the De'el and the Tur^^
VI.
And thus they disperc'd with the blood of their pre^
in hopes of a better next time they do meet;
This is the Religion our Saints hopes to sway,
in murder and plunder thinks nothing more sweet.
But God bless the King, the Duke and the Dutches^
for the Royal line let us Fight to maintain
Against all that upon the Prerogative touches,
conclude with this Health, let Charles ever Reign*
FINIS.
Printed for J. Deane Bookseller, in Cranborn-street, near Newport-house, in
Leicester-fields.


