A NEW REMONSTRANCE OF THE FREEBORN PEOPLE OF ENGLAND: CONCERNING This present
Parliament, and a new Representative: With their earnest Desires and
Propositions touching the same.

TOGETHER, With a Prophecy of the Right Honorable, Sir Francis Bacon, late
Lord Chancellor of England, concerning the Wars and Government of this
Commonwealth: with Advice and Instructions to be observed by all Persons
whatsoever.

AS ALSO, Observations touching the King, Parliament, Army, Presbytery, and
Independency; in relation to New-Lights, and New-Devises.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed for George Horton, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1651.

A new Declaration concerning the Parliament. And the Prophecy of that famous
and learned Lawyer, Sir FRANCIS BACON, late Lord Chancellor of England.
WHereas future Posterities may admire the magnitude of those Actions,
performed by the Parliament of England, since their first convening; even so
may this present Age conclude them to be men of brave and undaunted spirits,
that durst attempt so high, so great mutations in a Kingdom, whereinto less
then 25 Kings and Queens had succesfully reigned: insomuch, that it is an
Argument sufficient to convince the people of this Nation, that they were men
of admirable resolutions, and guided by divine Councels, that through so many
Meanders of good and adverse fortune, so many treasons even of their own
Members, and contrary judgments within and without the Walls of their own
House, yet at length foyling all their Enemies, have brought themselves and the
people of this Nation to a secure Harbor.

And behold, even now, when they might happily have expected rest for
themselves, and thanks from this people, for whose sakes they have so
dangerously adventured many of their persons, most of them their Estates;
Providence it seems will have another Generation to enter upon this work, and
if possible, finish that great Building, whose foundation themselves have with
so great industry laid. But indeed, Prophets have seldom any honor in their
own Country: Christ spoke it, and it is true; as also, that some of their
Members have acted, as men being derived from the Progeny of Adam; their
misactings cannot blemish the whole House; for the Countries from whence they
came, elected men to act for them, not Gods, Saints, or Angels, for these are
not commanded by men, or are their Habitations upon earth: Were not our
judgments prevaricated, we might know, this Parliament it self is no more
harmed by some men's failings, then the sound body of a strong Oak by rotten
branches falling from it: Now may the good Angels of God preserve them, and let
Posterity never mention any of their Names, without Encomiums of Honor due
unto their merits.

This is the sense and Remonstrance of diverse of the freeborn people of
England.

But old things must now be laid aside, the whole Nation are in expectancy of a
new Parliament; very greedy of Novelties and changes we are, (for so the
Heavens at present incline us) so were the Jews of old in craving a King; so we
in 1639. and 1640. were stark mad to have a Parliament: God was angry with the
Jews for their rashness, and thousands of our Nation repent their forwardness
in promoting the convention of this Parliament: We cry Hosanna to day, crucify
to morrow; nor full or empty bellies content us; when Gold was more plenty then
now Silver is, we repined; when we abounded, we muttered; now we are poor we do
but grumble.

Nor King, or Parliament, or Army, or Presbytery, or Independency will please
us long; New Lights, New Devices. What shall the God of Eternity do to satisfy
every one of us? What shall this present Authority do? or that which shall
succeed hereafter to give every curious fancy content? Oh people of England, be
wise unto sobriety; seek the glory of God, and not your selves; supplicate
Almighty God, that he permit his ministering Angels (not Priests) to direct you,
when you do elect new Members for a succeeding Parliament.

I beseech you, let us in all humbleness represent our thankfulness to these
present Members, who now sit at the Helm of Judicature, for that liberty and
good (which if not unthankful) we must attribute to have received from their
labor.

Let us now send into the House of Parliament as many Representations of our
loves and kind acceptances of their pains and carefulness for us, as formerly
we did of vain and very unnecessary Petitions: Such acknowledgements from us,
will encourage those whom providence shall elect to succeed, to endeavor with
their uttermost abilities to serve the Commonalty.

Let us wink at the small faults of some, and the personal failings of others
amongst them; but let us spare the tyranny of none.

Let us do what we do conscientiously, and nothing rashly, or in a giddy
humor. Oh England, what ever we do, let us unanimously reverence the great
Authority it self, let us maintain and support its greatness and Majesty with a
venerable Reverence. Let us above all things keep up the Parliaments Supremacy
above the Soldier or Divine; Omnia subject a sunto autoritati Parlamenti
Anglorum.

A Prophecy, Written by Sir Francis Bacon, late Lord Chancellor of England.
ENglands worst is well-neer run,
The loud Pipe stopped, the Fife and Drum.
The Earl of Derby a prime Ringleader in Lancashire is now dead, and his Pipe
stopped, so also the loud bagpiping Presbyterian Priests of that Country: We are
possessed of Fife in Scotland, the Drums begin to be silent. This Prophecy wrote
one hundred years since, is even now fulfilled.

There shall be seen upon a day
Betwixt the Bass and the May, d. alias Baugh.

The black Fleet of Norway;
When that that is come and gone,
England build houses of lime and stone,
For after Wars shall you have none.
The Bass and the Baugh are two Islands in the mouth of the River that goes up
to Edinborough, where our Fleet lay 1650.

So that now we may now safely buy houses, purchase Lands, either Crown,
Bishops, Deans, or Delinquents, with full confidence of possessing our
Purchases, until Doomes-day. There Is no scruple in the Parliaments Title,
Kings did the same to Traitors, as now our State does to Delinquents. Henry the
8. sold Abbeys and Munkeries; We Bishops and Deaneries; the Possessors were
most part Lubbers and Droans, did God no service; Ergo, There Is no Sacrilege
committed in the sale of these Lands. And many there are that do aver, That
this Nation shall be ever from this time quite free from War: For assuredly no
Forraigner hereafter shall ever plant or fix his Seat here; nor shall we have
any more Kings to reign over us. Yet shall Charles Stuart endeavor to disturb
our peace; and from Denmark, Sweden, and other parts, get an Armado to Sea; but
about the 7. day of July, 1652. there will happen a great fight; between the
English Fleet, and his Armado; and after a bloody Contest, his whole Navy will
be sunk, taken, and dispersed; and himself in perilous danger of suffering by
shipwreck. The Dutch will likewise be troublesome this Year at Sea; but we
shall make them tame enough quickly.

There has been within this 116. years five Conjunctions in the sign Leo. The
influence of this conjunction intimates oppression unto the poor, divided
opinions amongst our Governors; disturbances and emnities amongst the
Souldierie; the displacing of worthy men, preferment of vulgar sneaking
fellows; loss and damage in Scotland by treachery, by neglect of such as are
trusted in Authority, the downfall or questioning of many Ministers; several
Heresies or very uncouth opinions in Religion do take their original.

The minds of men incited through Choler and discontent to Rebellion, and
contempt of Authority: much scorning of superiors; both the temporal Laws and
Ecclesiastical questioned, strange and fearful sicknesses, private murders,
poisons, casually many fires to the great impoverishing of the people; very
desperate Sea Fights all over Europe.

Uproars, blood, Wars, tumults, rebellion in France; either sickness, death, or
strange misfortunes unto the French King. James Duke of York is threatened by
this conjunction, with either hurt by fire, or a desperate Fever, etc.

Women subject to abortions, or hard labor in the birth of their Children; many
tertian and quartain Agues, a general Mortality threatened both on Men and
Cattle: the temperature of men's bodies so poisoned by infectious airs, that a
plague most probably will afflict us ere the influence of this conjunction
depart from us, which will not be till 1654. is almost ended.

I only say, the greatest vigor of this Conjunction shall express it self in
Councels and Action near about February, March, and April next

FINIS.

