JERVSALEMS VVATCH-MEN, THE LORDS REMEMBRANCERS:

A SERMON PREACHED at the Abbie at WESTMINSTER, before both Houses of
Parliament, AND The Assembly of DIVINES, upon their Solemn Fast, July 7. 1643.
BY MATTHEW: NEW COMEN M. A. and Minister of the Gospel at Dedham in Essex.

As for me, I have not hastened from being a Pastor to follow thee, neither
have I desired the woeful day, thou know: that which came out of my lips was
right before thee.

Be not a Terror to me, thou art my hope in the day of evil,

Jer. 17.16, 17. Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and
to turn away thy wrath from them,

Jerem. 18.20. Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not still.
Remember the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your minds,

Jer. 51.50. Published by Order of both Houses of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for CHRISTOPHER MEREDITH at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORDS, The worthy Members of the HONORABLE House of
COMMONS, AND The Learned and Religious DIVINES, now assembled to consult about
matters of RELIGION.
THis Sermon might have been entertained from the Pulpit, and now from the
Press, as Pharez was from the womb, Genesis 38.29.
with a, Quam erupisti, how have thou broken forth? were it not known to this
Assembly, that the Parliament had designed another, both in years and all
Intellectual and spiritual abilities, far more fit for the solemn work of so
solemn a day, in so solemn and Reverend an Consisting of both Houses of
Parliament and the Divines all joining in humiliation and prayer.
Assembly. But bodily infirmities compelling him with Zarah to draw back his
hand, the work was (I know not by what providence) devolved on me, (...). I was
to that quire of Mourners and Intercessours, but as the grasshopper was to Hujus
meminit and Strabol. 6. and Clem. Al. in Protreptico al gentes, and Phot. in
Ep. ad Joen. Patricium.
Eunomius his harp; quae Citharae jugo insidens ruptae chordae sonum expleret.

The same Authority (which I am resolved to obey, usque ad Aras) that commanded
me to preach then, commands me now to make public to the eyes of all, what
then was committed to the ears of not many; when the same Authority shall
command other things that have since been spoken and transacted in your
Assembly to see the Light, I doubt not but all sober-minded men, that have not
been made drunk with the cup of Romes fornication, will acknowledge you have
with a single eye sought Truth with peace, and union with Reformation.

It is ( Men, Brethren and Fathers) a great work that God has called you to
set your heads, and hearts, and hands unto, to rescue truth from the jaws of
those monstrous errors, that had almost devoured it; to disburthen the worship
of God of those corruptions, that have so long clogged and defiled it; to
advise of, and propound such a Government in the Church, as may be most
agreeable to Gods word, most conformed to the pattern in the Mount, and to the
practices of the best Reformed Churches; (...); Had our God cast you upon this
work in the most pacate times, and among a People the most prepared for
Reformation that ever any were, yet (in it self considered) such is the
infinite weight of your employment as might even swallow up all your thoughts.
But then to consider how unprepared the hearts of people are for that which is
the work of this age, and this Assembly, Reformation, which has been
represented to Prince and People under the odious notion of Brownisme,
Anabaptisme, Church Anarchy, Confusion; in so much that with many, endeavors
and assays of Reformation will find no better entertainment, then Hezekiahs
messengers of Reformation did, 2 Chronicles. 30.10. when the people laughed them to
scorn, and mocked them; Nay, with some worse, for so enragedly do some burn
after their Idolatrous ways, and so mad are they upon their own inventions,
Jer. 50.38.
that deny them these, and it is to be feared you shall find them in the
temper the Abezrites were, scarce any thing will pacify them, but the blood of
those that have cast down the altar of Baal, and cut down the grove that was by
it; Judge. 6.30. Do not Multitudes cry already upon the disuse of some
Ceremonies, and the displacing of some Superstitious Priests? do they not cry
with Micah, Judge. 18.24. Ye have taken away our Gods and our Priests, and what
have we more? This makes the times so calamitous, as we may say of them with
the Learned Rivet. In multis certe infoelicissima sunt nostra Tempora, in
quibus in pessum omnia ruunt, and quasi transversum ire videntur. Concutiuntur
Regna, and Respublicae; tumultibus omnia perstrepunt, and seditionibus;
caedibus terra polluitur; and quod malum omnium malorum fons est, clamant
peccata, et coelum provocant; profligatis fere moribus honestis, and vitiis
late quasi aperta porta erumpentibus. Pruriunt ingenia multorum, and in rebus
Divinis ita se gerunt and adeo licenter, ut quod olim in populo Ebraeo (quibus
temporibus non erat Rex in Israele) quisque quod rectum videbatur in oculis
suis faciebant, Iud. 17.6. Sic multi sunt qui nullis repagulis continentur, and
fidem in dies mutans, quam dum multiplicant, amittunt. Alios vetusta socordia
detentos dum nullam mutationem admittunt in bonum, ita dementat superstitio, ut
in monitores insurgant, ne dum ut eos patienter audiant. All this proclaims the
work of Reformation the more necessary, but withal the more difficult.

Against these difficulties what have you to encourage you? (...): were ye
encompassed as sometimes Elisha was, with an host of armed men, yet might ye
say as he did there, They that be with us are more then they that be against us.

For first, Revel. 19 14.
with you are all the Armies in heaven: All the Saints and Churches of Christ
are with you, striving with you by their prayers, (not only in reference to
your persons, but to your employments) for protection, guidance, blessing. The
appearing of Christ in the beauty of Reformation among us, may be said to be
the desire of all (Christian) Nations.

Secondly, not only so, but ye have the prayers of those that have been before
us. For verily many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see the things
which ye see, Favor me the use of this expression by way of allusion.
and have not seen them; viz. a Parliament resolved upon a more thorough
Reformation; an Assembly called to debate and advise about the establishing of
Doctrine and worship, and the Government of the Church in a more pure and
regular manner; with how many tears and prayers did our Forefathers seek this
at the hands of God? The first fruits of which prayers we (who are entered upon
their labors) have already tasted, and shall reap in full answers, in due time
if we faint not.

Thirdly, you have the promise of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 18.20. Where two
or three are met together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. To be
met together in the Name of Christ, implies 3. things, 1o. Convenire ex
vocatione. Camero in Myrothe^.
2o. Convenire animo sequendi praescriptum Dei. 3o. Ita ut unusquisque diffidat
sibi, and soli Deo fidat. And if ever any in all these particulars were met
together in the Name of Christ, then are you, and therefore may with a holy
humble confidence challenge this promise of our Lord Jesus, to be in the midst
among you: Christ being in the midst of you, implies not only his adesse, but
his praeesse too: as Psalm 82.1. And if God be thus with us, who can be against
us? Romans 8.

Fourthly, some sweet, encouraging, engaging experiences, we have had of the
accomplishment of this promise. He must have a heart more ignorant and
unbeleeving then the Apostles Idiot, that should come in and be an
eare-witnesse of your proceedings and not worship God and report (...), That
God is in you of a truth. Verily I have often from my heart wished that your
greatest Adversaries and Traducers might be witnesses of your Learned, grave,
pious debates, which were able to silence, if not convert Malignity it self.

Go on in this your might; Judges 6.14.
has not the Lord sent you? is not the Lord with you? go on in this your
might. Pergite quo coepistis pede. In that Spirit of wisdom, and Love, and
zeal for Truth, wherein you have proceeded hitherto, go on still, to Love the
Truth and Peace. Peace is precious, and so is every grain and selvage of Gods
truth. It was a saying of Basil. Mag. and it well resembles him, (...), etc.
qui sacris literis innutriti sunt, ne unicam quidem syllabam Divinorum Dogmatum
prodere sustinent, sed pro his omnia, si opus sit, genera mortis libenter
subeunt.

The Lord strengthen your hands and hearts unto the great work that lies before
you, raise you above all discouragements and oppositions, fill you more and
more with a Spirit of Wisdom, discerning, Resolution, Courage, Zeal,
faithfulness; make you in this work of Reforming his Church as Zachariah and
Haggai were inre-building the Temple, ut Ecclesiam hanc, quam invenistis minus
quam Lateritiam, reddatis plusquam Marmoream: Suet. in vita Aug.
which is the sincere desire and prayer of him,

who is Less then the least of all Gods mercies and Employments, MATTHEW.
NEVVCOMEN.

A SERMON PREACHED BEfore the Assembly of Lords, Commons, and Divines, upon
their Fast July 7. 1643.
Isaiah 62. the latter part of the 6. and 7. ver. Ye that make mention of the
Lord keep not silence; And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he
make Jerusalem a Praise in the earth.


BEholding the face of the Church in this Chapter, The Chapt. analyzed into 4.
parts.
it appears to me as the Garden of God, made glad with four precious gracious
promises, like the four Rivers that watered the Eden of the Lord. Genesis 2.


promises to raise his Church out of a low afflicted estate, into an
illustrious glorious condition, v. 1. For Zions sake I will not hold my peace,
and for Ierusalems sake I will not rest, (for so with a Learned Expositor, I
take the words to be the words of God promising, Soultetus ad loc:
and not of the Prophet praying) For Zions sake I will not hold my peace, etc.
until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation of
it as a Lamp that burns; which righteousness shall be so glorious that all
the Kings and Nations of the earth shall behold and admire it, v. 2. It shall
be as a crown of glory and a Royal Diadem in the hand of God, v. 3. And a new
Name breathing nothing but delight and pleasure will God put upon his Church,
because the Lord God delights in her, v. 4, 5.

promises to raise up unto his Church Instruments fit for himself to use in
this great work of Restoring his Church and making it glorious, v. 6, 7. I have
set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem, which shall not hold their peace night
nor day, ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, etc.

promises to continue this his Churches felicity, and confirms this promise
with an Oath. The Lord has sworn by his Right hand and by the arm of his
strength, Surely, etc. v. 8, 9.

promises an increase and dilatation of his Church, by means of this
prosperity and glory; Go thorough, go thorough the gates, prepare ye the way
of the people, etc. Lift up a Standard for the people, etc. v. 10, 11, 12.

Our Text lies in the second part of this Chapter, wherein the Lord having 1
promised unto his Church Instruments and means fit for himself to use in the
effecting of the great things before promised; I have set (for I will set, an
usual Hebraisme, thereby to show the certainty of the thing promised) I have
set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem: And having 2 undertaken for the
Fidelity, and sedulity of these watchmen, which shall never hold their peace
night nor day: Presently by an Apostrophe turns to these watchmen, and gives
them a charge to see they make good what he had undertaken: Ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence; give him no rest, till he establish, and
till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

In the words you may please to consider these three things.

The text divided.
First, the Persons called upon, disciphered thus, ye that make mention of the
Lord. Secondly, the service or employment they are called unto, described
Negatively; keep no silence, and give him no rest. Thirdly, the Duration or
extent of this employment; till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth.
For the first of these, the persons called upon, Explained.
they are thus characterised, ye that make mention of the Lord; the margent
reads it, ye that are the Lords Remembrancers; the Greek (...) The Vulgar, qui
Reminiscimini Domini: Pagninus, qui Reminiscimini Iehovae: Arias Montanus,
Rememorantes Dominum: Jun. and Trem. qui Commemoratis Iehovam. All which
unless it be our marginall reading imply no other then what is the common duty
and disposition of all the people of God, to remember the Lord, and make
mention of the Lord; only that; The Lords Remembrancers seems to have something
in it peculiar to some rank and order of men; ye that are the Lords
Remembrancers; ye to whom it does ex officio belong to put the Lord in mind of
his people and of his promises. In the Original it is (...). C. a Lapide upon
the place says that the Kings of Judah and Persia had suos So 2 Samuel 8.16.
Jehosaphat the son of Ahilud (...) and 2 Samuel 20.24. (...) Recorder, in the
margent it is Remembrancer; qui negotia gerenda commemorat, and supplices
por^^git libellos.
Maskirim admonitores, qui singula gesta and gerenda Regi in mentem revocarent;
such as we are wont to say are Regi a Commentariis. It seems this was some
standing office in the Court to be the Kings Remembrancer: to this the prophet
here alludes, Ye that are the Lords Remembrancers; ye to whose office it
belongs to put the Lord in mind of his Churches necessities, and his promises,
which can be no other then the watchmen spoken of in the foregoing words, I
have set watchmen upon thy walls O Jerusalem; therefore the Greek Translation
joins these watchmen and this remembering the Lord in construction together.
(...). And upon thy walls o Jerusalem I have set watchmen all the day, and all
the night, which shall not hold their peace for ever remembering the Lord; so
that the Lords Remembrancers here are the same with Ierusalems watchmen before,
and they no other but the Priests and Prophets and Ministers of the Lord.

The second thing considerable in the text is, the employment they are called
to, and that is described Negatively; keep no silence, give him no rest; which
implies that their employment here is vocal, and that can be but either in
preaching or in praying: Some think the Ministers of the Lord are here called
upon for diligence in both these; but in this place I conceive, the Lord calls
them to attendance upon prayer, because of the following words, give him no
rest. The pronoun there having reference to God, and not to Jerusalem; keep no
silence, give him, that is the Lord, no rest, pray, cry importunately,
uncessantly. God here by his Prophet calls his Ministers to pray, as elsewhere
he does, by his Apostle, to preach, (...), in season and out of season; Night
and day. I have set watchmen upon thy walls o Jerusalem, which shall not hold
their peace night nor day; ye that are the Lords remembrancers, keep no
silence, give him no rest.

The third and last thing considerable in the words is, the Duration or Extent
of this employment; how far their prayer must extend it self, or how long
they must continue praying, even till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem
a praise, till God have not only laid the foundations, but set up the Pinacles
of a glorious Church. Not only brought forth the Corner stone, but the Top
stone of Jerusalem, and all the earth with shouting, cry, Grace, Zach. 4.7.
grace to it.

I might out of the words, present unto you several Doctrines; Several
Doctrines out of the text.
as many in number as the parts of the text: as,

God will certainly establish Jerusalem, and make it a praise in the earth.
This is clear, for certainly God would never call his servants to pray for that
which he never intended to do; were there never a text but this in all the book
of God, that told us of this beauty and glory, wherewith God in the latter
days will clothe his Church, even upon earth; were there nothing said of it
elsewhere in this Evangelicall Prophet Isaiah; nor any mention of it in that
Prophetical Evangelist St. John, if in his whole book of Revelation, he had
not uttered one word of this the Churches glory, yet in this one text, there is
enough to support the faith of Gods people, in the patient and comfortable
expectation of it; God has commanded prayer for it; therefore God will do it:
for, He never says to the sons of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain, Isaiah 45.19.

we might observe that, though the Lord will certainly make his Church
glorious, a praise upon earth, yet he will not do this till it be obtained of
him by earnest and uncessant prayer: Therefore in order to his own holy and
blessed ends, he here commands his servants prayers.

we may observe this, that it is in special manner the duty of Gods Ministers
to pray earnestly and uncessantly to God, that he would establish and make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

The Doctrine to be insisted upon,
This third I will embrace as adequately answering this Auditory and Day. To an
Assembly of Gods Ministers met together in a solemn Day of Prayer, to seek
God for the good of Jerusalem, what can be more apposite then such a Doctrine
as this that tells them, It is in a special manner their Duty to pray,
opportune, importune, uncessantly, importunately, that God would establish and
make Jerusalem a praise in the earth? The God of wisdom and grace who directed
the thoughts of his Servant unto this word, enlarge his own gracious hand, and
the heart and mouth of his poor and most unworthy instrument, that helped by
his Spirit, and your Prayers, I may utter right things, and such as may advance
Gods glory, and further all our hearts, not only in the work of this day, but
in that great employment whereunto we desire this day to sanctify our selves.

It is in a special manner the duty of Gods Ministers to pray that God would
establish Jerusalem and make it a praise in the earth.

I will not say, it is needful (in such an Auditory, it cannot be;) but it may
be convenient, and I must, pro more, a little open the terms of this
proposition. Not to speak of the persons, upon whom this duty is imposed, Gods
Ministers; nor of the duty imposed upon them, Prayer; I shall only speak of
the subject of the duty here propounded to us, which is twofold:

Subjectum cui, or cujus; and Subjectum quod. opened in two things.


The first showing whom we must pray for; the second, what we must pray for.

First for who^ we must pray.
For the first of these, the subjectum cui or cujus, whom we must pray for, the
Text and Doctrine tells us, Jerusalem.
Jerusalem. Jerusalem may be taken two ways, either literally, or mystically.

Literally, 1 For the place and City so denominated, or 2 For the people
sometime inhabiting that place. For the place or city, that was sometime so
famous among the Nations, the City where God dwelt, the habitation of his
holiness, the place near unto which Christ was borne, in which he conversed,
manifested the truth of his godhead in his Actions, the truth of his manhood in
his passions, was betrayed, scourged, reviled, condemned in it, John 19.41.
crucified, buried near unto it, this is literal Jerusalem: but this is not
that Jerusalem we must pray for, our devotions must not with the Papists dote
upon the ruins and rubbish of that bloody city, the City of Gods curse.

Secondly, Jerusalem literally signifies the people of Jerusalem, the Nation of
the Jews, whom God has in his righteous indignation scattered over the face of
the earth, as chafe before the wind: these we may pray for, I mean the
remnant according to the election of Grace, that God would gather them again
according to his promise: And so all Israel shall be saved, Romans 11.26.

But yet this is not that Jerusalem here meant neither. The Jerusalem meant in
this place is the Mystical Jerusalem, that Jerusalem, whereof this was but a
type, the new Revel. 21.2. which text seems to refer to this of Isaiah, and
speak the same language; for as here ver. 4.5. God says, The Lan I shall be
married; And, God will rejoice over Jerusalem, as a bridegroom rejoices over
his bride: so here John sees this Jerusalem prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband
Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven: And so it implies two things.

First, the Church of God in the utmost latitude of it: the whole Catholic
Church dispersed over the world, the general assembly and Church of the first
borne is unto us Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22, 23. for which we are to pray, that God would establish
and make it a praise in the earth. And secondly, by Jerusalem Mystical we are
to understand that particular Church, in which we live, of which we are, to
which we stand in the same relation that the Jews did to Jerusalem; for this we
are to pray, that God would establish, and make it a praise in the earth. And
so I come to the second thing to be explained, Secondly, for what we must pray.
the subjectum quod, or, what it is we are to pray for.

Two things we find mentioned in the text: first, that God would establish:
secondly, that God would make his Church a praise in the earth.

First, that God would establish his Church.
First, that God would establish his Church; for though the Church has a strong
foundation, and walls, and bulwarks strong, yet it is in it self but a weak
building, Mat. 16.18.
earthly tabernacles planted on a rock. Isaiah 26 1. 2 Cor. 5.
That which God speaks of the earth, may be applied to the Church, Psalm. 75.3.
The earth, and all the inhabitants of it are dissolved, I bear up the Pillars
of it. All the commissures and contignations of this great fabric of the
Universe would be loosned and disjoynted, if God did not put under his
everlasting arms, and bear up, and establish the Pillars of it: So would it
be in the Church of God; therefore we must pray, that God would establish his
Church, In two things.
and that in two things: first in Truth; secondly, in Peace: First, in truth
against all errors; Secondly, in Peace against enemies.

Fi^^, in Truth.
First, we must pray that God would establish* his Church in truth. The Church
is said, 1 Timothy 3.15. to be the pillar and ground of truth; not as the Papists
affirm, as if truth were grounded upon the judgment and determination of the
Church: the Church is indeed the Pillar of truth, not because it holds up the
truth, but because it holds forth the truth; the metaphor is taken, not from
Pillars that are supporters of houses, but from such Pillars as anciently were
wont to be fixed in market places, and other places of public meeting, upon
which they hung their laws, (as the leges 12. Tabularum at Rome) that they
might be public to the view and notice of all men; as amongst us
Proclamations, for the same end are pasted upon posts: such a Pillar of truth
we grant the Church is, and ought to be a Pillar to hold forth the truth, to
the view of all men; a Pillar to which all men resorting may read, and know the
truth; it is (...), but not (...), the Pillar and ground of truth; the word in
the Original is (...), which in the first and native signification is a seat;
the Pillar and seat of truth, the place of truths abode and residence, its
proper ubi, where truth is always to be found; this the Church of God is or
ought to be.

Now, though the Church of God should be thus, yet we know there is no Church,
but it is subject unto error: The Apostle tells us there must be Heresies, 1
Cor. 11.19. and that (...) and our Savior tells us, that there shall arise
some such subtle masters of heresy, that they shall seduce (if it were
possible) the very elect of God, Mark 13.22. Therefore we must pray, that God
would establish his Church in truth against all errors. Ephesians 6.14.
Truth it is the Churches girdle; A Church quae hanc Zo na^ perdidit aut soluta
est, as the Latin proverb is, a Church that has lost this girdle of truth, or
has this girdle loosed, is an Adulterous beggarly Church; therefore, ye that
are the Lords Remembrancers keep no silence, give him no rest till he establish
his Church in truth.

Secondly, in Peace.
And as in truth, so secondly, in Peace; Peace is one of the richest blessings
of heaven, a comprehensive blessing, a circle of blessings; I will not
rhetoricate in the praises of it: the want of peace has made us know what
peace is worth; in the enjoyment of this rich, desirable blessing, we must
entreat the Lord to establish Jerusalem, his Church; ye that are the Lords
Remembrancers, keep no silence, give him no rest, till he establish Jerusalem
in peace.

And this peace is threefold; Civil, with the Nations; Ecclesiastical, with
its own members; and spiritual or celestial, with its head and God.

First, 1. Civil.
we must pray that God would establish his Church in peace among the Nations;
the Church of God is among the Nations, Cant. 2.2.
as the lilly among the Thorns: the lot of Israel was among the uncircumcised
Heathens; so is the Churches; yet has her God promised peace in the midst of
enemies, Mic. 4.3. He shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong Nations
afar off, and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears
into pruning hooks, Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn war any more, but they shall sit every man under his vine, and
under his figtree, and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord
of Hoasts has spoken it; You that are the Lords Remembrancers, keep no
silence, give him no rest, till he establish his Church in this peace.

Secondly, there is peace Ecclesiastical, peace of the Church with its own
members, Secondly, Ecclesiastical.
peace in the bowels and bosom of the Church; we must pray, that God would
establish his Church in that; that the Church may not languish, and die of
Antiochus his disease, a torment in her bowels, that there may be no
incomposable divisions, no irreconciliable rents, no in urable ruptures in the
Church, which is one of the greatest and saddest mischiefs, and miseries can
fall upon the Church, or the Church fall under: That God who makes men to be of
one mind in a house, as the greek reads that of the 68. Psalm, (...), that
God I say can make men of one mind, in a Church, in a Nation, in Jerusalem, and
has promised that he will do it, Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give them one heart, and
Zeph. 3.6. I will turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call
upon the name of the Lord to serve him with one consent. O happy, happy we, if
God would fulfill these promises in us! happy we, if we could obtain this at
the hands of God by our prayers! ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, keep no
silence, give him no rest, till he establish his Church in this peace.

Thirdly, Spiritual or Celestial.
Thirdly, there is spiritual or celestial peace, peace between God and his
Church; we must pray that God would establish his Church in that also, that
God would so watch over, and work in his Church, that no sin may take hold and
spread upon it, which might cause a quarrel between his Church and him, or
cause the Lord to say, Mine heritage is to me as a speckled bird, Ier. 12.9.
That God would so order all the ways of his Church before him, and toward
him, that he may never know her by any other then those precious and lovefull
names of Ammi and Ruhamah, Hephzibah and Beulah: Ye that are the Lords
Remembrancers, keep no silence, give him no rest till he establish Jerusalem
his Church in this peace also. Thus you see the first thing we are to pray for,
that God would establish his Church upon the two pillars of truth and peace, as
Solomon did the proch of the Temple upon those two brazen pillars Iachin and
Boaz.

The second thing we must pray for, That God would make his Church a praise.
Yet there is one thing more, that this Text commands us to pray for, that is,
that God would make Jerusalem a praise; Ye that are the Lords Remembrancers,
keep no silence, give him no rest, til he establish, and till he make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth. In the former we pray that God would fortify
his Church, in this, that God would beautify his Church; make it clear as the
morning, fair as the moon, glorious as the sun, terrible as an army with
banners, lovely as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, the praise of all the earth.

This God does by five things.
Now God makes his Church a praise in the earth, specially by these five things;


First, by furnishing it with ordinances.
First, God makes his Church a praise in the earth, by furnishing it with
fullness of ordinances: this was that which was the (...), as the Apostle calls
it, Romans 3. the preheminency of the Church of the Jews above all other
Nations, (...), first of all and chiefly, it was this, that to them were
committed the oracles of God; this is that which God himself tells his people,
should make them glorious and praiseworthy in the eyes of all the Nations of
the world, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8. This is your wisdom and your understanding, in the
sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this
Nation is a wise and understanding people: for what Nation is there so great,
who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we
call upon him for? And what Nation is there so great, that has statutes and
judgments so righteous, as all this law, that I set before you this day? Now
when God bestows his oracles and ordinances upon a people, first his word, and
then appending ordinances, seals, Sabbaths, censures, administered in purity,
and in power, then he makes them a praise: Ye that are the Lords
Remembrancers, keep no silence, give him no rest, til he thus make his Church a
praise.

Secondly, 2. By ruling it according to his own orders.
God makes his Church a praise by ruling it according to his own order: (...),
are the two great destroyers of the Church of God; it is equally prejudicial
to the Church, not to be ordered at all, as to be ordered after the lusts and
wills of men; God (who is the God of order, and not the author of confusion, but
of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33.) would have all
things in all Churches, be done decently and in order, v. 40. now when all
ordinances and offices are administered in the Church according as God has
ordered, then is that Church a praise in heaven and earth, with God and Saints.
1 Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you brethren that you remember me in all things, and
keep the ordinances as I delivered them unto you. And on the other side
disorder or deflection from the rule of Christ, though but in one
administration, is a blemish and does detract from the Churches praise, as
appears in the same chepter, v. 17. Now in this that I declare unto you, I
praise you not, that you come together not for the better, but for the worse;
and v. 22. What, have you not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise you the
Church of God, and shame them that have not? what shall I say to you? shall I
praise you in this? I praise you not; one aberration from the rule of Christ in
the administration of this one ordinance of the supper of the Lord, casts a
cloud upon this Churches glory, and causes a great diminution of their praise,
therefore we must pray that God would help his Church in all things to keep the
ordinances as they are delivered unto us: Ye that are the Lords Remembrancers,
keep no silence, give him no rest, til he make his Church thus a praise.

Thirdly, 3. By filling it with abundance of light and knowledge.
God makes his Church a praise when he fills it with abundance of light and
knowledge; when after a night of ignorance or error that had swallowed up, and
buried the Church of God, the Church has a resurrection, and looks forth as
the morning, Cant. 6.10.
clear as the sun, fair as the moon, it ravisheth all eyes, and fixes them
upon it self in admiration, that men say, Who is this that locketh forth as
the morning? Cant. 6.10. Ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, keep no silence,
give him no rest, til he make Jerusalem thus a praise; remember him of that
which he has promised, Isaiah 11.9. All the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

Fourthly, 4. By improving this light to the working of holiness.
God makes his Church a praise, by improving and sanctifying this knowledge, to
the working of holiness in the hearts and lives of his people; this was the
praise of Jerusalem, it was a holy City, this is the praise of the Church, they
are a holy people, Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. The Lord has avouched thee this day, to be
his peculiar people, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all
his Commandments: and to make thee high above all Nations which he has made,
and that thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy God as he has spoken.
Abundance of light unsanctifyed would make the Church, if it were possible,
rather hell then heaven, and make men but like the devils, who know much, but
are the more desperately wicked, therefore we must pray that God would sanctify
that knowledge, wherewith he fills his Church, that so the beauty thereof may
be perfect: Ye that are the Lords Remembrancers, keep no silence, give him
norest, till he make Jerusalem thus a praise.

Fifthly, God makes his Church a praise, 5. By increasing his Church.
by increasing his Church, by enlarging the tents, and extending the cords of
it; this is a blessing God calls his Church to rejoice in, Esaias 51.1, 2, 3.
Sing O barren, etc. break forth into singing, etc. enlarge the place of thy
tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations, spare not,
lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes, for thou shall break forth on
the right hand, and on the left: and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and
make the desolate Cities to be inhabited. We are to pray that God would make
his Church a praise thus also.

Thus you have, (Right Honorable, Honorable, Reverent, and beloved in our
Lord Jesus) the sense of this doctrine as fully as my weak thoughts in the
little time I had to bestow upon this work were able to comprehend it; ye see
for whom we are to pray, Jerusalem, the Church of God in general, and our own
in particular; ye see what it is we are to desire for the one and for the
other, truth, peace, and praise; such a trinity of blessings, as the blessed
Trinity has none better to bestow upon the dearly beloved of his soul, while
she sojourns upon earth. I know I speak to an Auditory so rational as I shall
not need confirm this truth by reasons; and to so cordial to the Church of
God, as I shall as little need to stir you up to the practice of this truth by
application; The point confirmed by examples.
else I might fill up a large portion of the time remaining in telling you how
all the Lords remembranters in all the ages of the Church, under the Law, under
the Gospel, have exemplified this truth: under the Law, before the Captivity,
Moses, Samuel, David, Isaiah, Jeremy, which of the Lords Prophets have not made
the establishing and beautifying of Jerusalem the burden of their prayers? In
the captivity though they had lost their Vrim and Thummim, and the fire of the
Sanctuary that came from heaven, yet they had not lost this holy heavenly
disposition, of praying for Jerusalem; see abundant evidence of it, in Ezekiel,
Daniel, Mordecai; and after the captivity, in Ezra, Nehemiah, and others; And
now in the times of the Gospel, the same spirit still animates Gods children,
and enclines their hearts still to seek the good of Jerusalem; how do the
Apostles in several Epistles testify this disposition in them? Romans 1.9. God
is my witness whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that
without ceasing I make mention of you (says that Apostle to the Church of
Rome) always in my prayers; so Ephesians. 1.16, 17. making mention of you in my
prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give
unto you, etc.

Yea, so much religion have the Saints of God before us placed in this duty of
praying for Jerusalem, that they have deprecated the neglect of this as a most
abominable sin: 1 Samuel 12.23. As for me, God forbid that I should sin
against you, in ceasing to pray for you; nay, have imprecated a curse upon
themselves, if ever they should be so wretched, Psalm. 137.5, 6. If I forget
thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning: if I do not remember
thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem
above my chief joy; it is one of the greatest judgments that can befall a
Prophet, to be silenced: witness Zachary whose unbeleef God punished with
this, as an only judgment; witness those amongst our selves, that have had
their mouths stopped by the violent hand of man, who know what it is to have
the word of God as a fire in their bones and no vent for it; yet even to this,
does the Prophet here curse himself, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, if I do
not remember to mourn for thee, to pray for thee, let me never pray more, let
me never speak more if I forget to speak for thee, let my tongue cleave to the
roof of my mouth; The good Lord be merciful to every one of us, and pardon all
our forgetfulness of Jerusalem, whom we have as much cause and reason to
remember as ever any had. Proved by Reasons.


For 1 is not Jerusalem Heb. 12.22.
the city of God, the 1 Timothy 3.15*
house of God, the Psalm. 135.4. Titus 2.14.
peculiar of God, the Isaiah 62.4.
delight of God, Isay 62.2.
the crown of glory, the royal diadem in the hand of God? is not Cant. 5.2.
the Love, the dove, the Spouse, the sister, Ephesians 1.23.
the body, Ephesians 1.23.
the fullness, 2 Cor. 8.23.
the glory of Jesus Christ? and in all these respects does it not deserve our
prayers?

Psalm 83.3, 4. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and
consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said, Come, and let us cut them
off from being a Nation: that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
Geball, and Ammon, and Amalek, etc. And does not Jerusalem in this respect now
need our prayers?

truth and peace, Ierem. 33.6. I will cure them, and reveal abundance of truth
and peace unto them: as also of praise, v. 9. It shall be to me a name of joy,
a praise and an honor before all the Nations of the earth; and Zeph. 3.20. I
will make you a name and a praise among all the people of the earth. And is not
the Lord able to accomplish these promises notwithstanding al their
counter-machinations of his enemies? Isay 46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I
will do all my pleasure.

Ierem. 33.3. Call unto me and I will answer thee, and show thee great and
mighty things which thou know not; Ezekiel. 36.37. I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them.

Doctrine applied,
Sed quo feror? some use I would gladly make of this point, if I knew what; I
might afford variety of profitable instructions, but it is not for me to
presume to instruct so Honorable, Learned and Religious an Assembly; give me
leave to apologize for my self with Elihu, Job. 32.6. I said I am of few days,
and ye are old, wherefore I was afraid and durst not show you mine opinion; I
said days should speak, and multitudes of years should teach wisdom. The
Lord knows, glad would I have been to sit at any of your feet to learn, rather
then to stand hereto teach, and to receive rather then to give instruction,
therefore I decline that work.

For Reproof.
In the next place, this truth might serve for reproof, and if such an
application would not lead me besides my Auditory, o with what vehemence might
a man from hence, in the name and by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ
thunder indignation and wrath upon the heads of those, who though they have
usurped, and possessed the place of such as should be the Lords Remembrancers,
yet in stead of performing the duty of this text have practiced the clean
contrary, in stead of praying that God would establish his Church in truth,
have endeavored nothing but to undermine the truth, to subvert, adulterate the
truth; their folly (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.9.) is manifest unto all
men, God has unmasked them, and all that will see may see their design was to
let in such an inundation of popery and Socinianisme as should have drowned the
truth of God for ever; in stead of praying that God would establish his Church
in peace, they have acted the part of those unclean spirits, the frogs spoken
of, Rev. 16.14. stirring up the kings of the earth to battle against the Church
of God; first in Scotland, who were the Incendiaries, what the fuel of the war
there? And since that in England, have not the wars of both kingdoms had the
same fuel and fomenters? and who are they but the Iesuitizing clergy of
England, who like the unclean spirit we read of Mark 9. fearing they shall
now be cast out of their long possession, rent and tear the kingdom, and lay it
wallowing (not as he did the child there, in its foam, but) in its blood? What
shall I speak of such a clergy? who in stead of praying that God would make
his Church a praise, have endeavored nothing more then to rob the Church of
all that might make it praiseworthy, in stead of desiring that the Church
might enjoy fullness of ordinances, endeavoring to strip the Church of them
all; to abolish Sabbaths, to bring the delight of days, the Queen of days
under the curse of Jobs birth day, Let it not be joined to the days of the
year, let it not come into the number of the months; to excommunicate preaching
and praying, and cast them quite out of the Church; to turn the sacrament of
the Lords supper into a sacrifice of the altar; In stead of praying that all
ordinances and offices might be administered according to Christ's rule and
order, would have all things in Gods house and worship done according to their
own fancy, will, lust, humor. What shall we say to such a Clergy? (they dote
upon the name still, Arist. de Hist. Anim. l. 8. c. 27.
let them enjoy it) Aristotle speaks of a little worm called (...), that is
pestilently noxious and destructive to Bee-hives; no less noxious and
destructive has our (...) the greatest part of them been to the true Church of
God amongst us; against whom, the Church of God may power out as sad complaints
to her Lord Jesus Christ, as sometimes she did, Cant. 5. The watchmen, the
keepers of the wall, found me, they smote me, they took away my veil: let such
read their doom, 2 Pet. 2 their judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and
their damnation sleeps not.

I had not turned aside to this reproof, (for I look for none of this
generation here this day) had it not been to provoke my self and you to a more
serious and deep humiliation for those abominations of the late times, which
though many of us have seen and observed even then, and some of us have felt
and smarted under the violences thereof, yet few I fear amongst us have had our
hearts so humbled for the iniquity of the^, as they should have been: the Lord
help us so to take to heart this day, our own and other men's sins, that he may
forgive our iniquities, and heal our Land.

But I return to my Auditory, and the only boldness I shall assume, brethren
and fathers, is but to do as much as Naamans servant did unto his Lord, exhort
you to do that which you know God would have you do, pray for Jerusalem: and
I am confident I might spare even this; it is your work daily; but God having
called me this day to speak unto you, for Zions sake I cannot hold my peace;
Qui monet ut facias quod facis, dum monet laudat.

The Doctrine applied for exhortation,
Is it the duty of Ministers in a special manner to pray uncessantly that God
would establish Jerusalem and make it a praise in the earth? then let every one
of us by solemn engagements to God and to his Church bind our selves to the
performance of this duty: and surely brethren if ever there were times that
called for this duty, if ever there were men called to this duty, this is the
time, we are the Men.

First, 1. Enforced from the time present.
for the time; if ever there were time that did command the most importune and
uncessant prayers of all Gods ministers and people, (for here I will take in
all) that they should cry mightily to the Lord night and day in the behalf of
Jerusalem, keep no silence, give him no rest, til he establish and make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth, if ever there were a time that did exact this,
Now is the time. Had I art or grace enough to present before you the lively (or
rather) ghastly deadly face of Jerusalem, the Churches of Christ Jesus at this
time, I know it would command tears and prayers from the most flinty heart in
this congregation: could I let you see Jerusalem like that man in the parable,
Luke 10.30. that went down from Jerusalem, fallen among thieves, and by them
stripped and wounded and left half dead, while many, too many with the Priest
and Levite pass by on the other side of the way, and will not see (though they
cannot but see) the Churches bleeding miseries; amongst all her lovers there is
none to comfort her, Lam. 1.2. Zion spreads forth her hands, and there is
none to comfort her, Lament. 1.17. Zion spreads forth her hands from sea to
sea, from one Nation to another people, and there is none to comfort her, there
is none to guide her amongst all the sons whom she has brought forth, neither
is there any that takes her by the hand of all the sons that she has brought
up, Esaias 51.18. O were I able to express this to the life unto you, you would
say, if ever there were a time for you to show your selves as the good
Samaritane to bestow, as he did, your wine, your oil, your money, nay your
tears, your prayers, your bloods upon the healing of the Churches wounds, Now
is the time.

Or could I let you see the Church Jerusalem, as John saw her in that
Revelation which was given unto him by Christ Jesus, chap. 12. in the same
condition, though not in the same clothing; a woman clothed, not (as there)
with the sun, but with a cloud, not having the moon under her feet, but a globe
of flames, a field of blood under her feet, not as there with a crown of twelve
stars upon her head, but rather in Tamars dress and posture, 2 Samuel 13.19.
who with ashes on her head, and her garment of diverse colors (the ensign of
her Virginity and Royalty) rent and torn, and with her hands upon her head
going forth crying, such may we conceive the dress and posture of the Church
of Christ to be, she now, as there, Revel. 12. cries traveling and pained to
be delivered; in this pained condition the Church has been now almost these
three years, ever since the beginning of this Parliament, the Church of God
amongst us has been in travel, crying and pained to be delivered; and all
this while, as there, the great red dragon stands before the woman to devour
the child as soon as it is born. O! the sight of the Church in such a sad
condition might force a tear from a stone, a prayer from a speechless,
heartlesse man; but from Ministers, from those that are the Lords
Remembrancers, me thinks it might draw tears enough to rince the earth from
blood, and prayers enough to offer violence to heaven.

But not to speak parabolically, but plainly, I say again, if ever there were a
time that did command the most importune and uncessant prayers of all Gods
ministers and people, now is the time; was there ever time, wherein the Church
of God was more shaken, more in danger to have both her pillars of truth and
peace broken, reduced to dust, to nothing, then at this time? The enemies of
the Church have a long time sought to undermine the truth, but now, they raise
Arms against the truth, they plant open battery against the truth. And for our
peace, where is it? Terras reliquit, it has taken to it self the wings of a
dove, and forsaking earth is fled to heaven, frighted hence with the sound of
the trumpet, the alarm of war, and the cries of blood. We may chronicle of
our age, that which the Prophet Azariah spoke of some ages of Israel, 2 Chronicles.
15.5, 6. In those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him
that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the
countries. And Nation was destroyed of Nation, and city of city: for God did
vex them with all adversity. Never was this poor Church and people in a more
broken distressed condition in regard of peace civil, nor scarce ever worse in
regard of peace ecclesiastical: now when there are so many swords in England
and in Ireland drawn against the Protestants; o that we should be even at
daggers drawing one against another! O the bitter divisions and digladiations
of Protestants amongst themselves in these bleeding times! For the divisions of
Reuben there are great searchings of heart; for the divisions of Reuben there
are great searchings of heart. Holy Ridley and Hooper, though in the times of
the peace and liberty of the gospel, they could never agree about black and
white, but had many wrathful bickerings, yet in time of persecution for the
gospel, they could, as their own expression is, agree in red; when God came to
put them together in tears, and sufferings, and blood, they could forget all
differences of judgment then, and love and live and die together as brethren.
Do those know what spirit they are of, that at such a time as this, when all
the true hearted Protestants in England are put in one calamitous, suffering,
bleeding, condition, are yet quarrelling about their own opinions, weakening the
Protestant party by sub-divisions, which if united is scarce enough to
withstand the common adversary; should this be if we had not lost our peace
with God? As the Holy Ghost speaks of the calamities of the Church in Judah, 2
Kings 24.3. so may we say of the calamities upon the Church of England, Surely
at the commandment of the Lord came this upon England; and the Lord grant, the
Lord grant that the following words be not verified in their time, the Lord
grant this be not come upon us, to remove England out of his sight: but however
we may take up the Churches lamentation, Lam. 3.17. Thou have removed me far
from peace; Ey, and as far from praise The crown is fallen from our head, Lam.
5.16. we are become a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn, a derision, a
byword, a shaking of the head; those few of us that adhere to the Protestant
Religion and cause, are represented to the world at home and abroad, as
Sectaries, Anabaptists, Rebels, that if ever there were a time for us to cry to
God to scatter those clouds of blood, confusion, contempt, that cover the face
of the Church, to bring forth our judgment as the light, and our
righteousness as the morning, now is the time, Ye that are the Lords
Remembrancers, keep no silence, give him no rest, till he establish, and till
he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

A second enforcement of this duty from the persons present.
And if ever Men were called to this work, we are called to it; 1 as Ministers:
2 as Ministers selected from the rest of our brethren, to this present service,
whereunto we desire to sanctify our selves this day. As Ministers it does ex
officio belong unto us, to be the Lords Remembrancers: to put the Lord in mind
of Jerusalem; you know what order the Lord took, that the Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord, under the Law, might continually remember Israel the
Church of God unto the Lord, the high Priest was to bear the names of the
twelve tribes upon his shoulders, engraven in two stones; and upon his breast,
engraven upon twelve stones: Ex. 28.12.29. that he might bear them upon his
heart for a memorial before the Lord continually; they were to be the Priests
Remembrancers, that he should be the Lords Remembrancer, to put the Priest in
mind of putting God in mind of Israel, by praying for them: this type is
properly applyable to Christ, who is the only high Priest of his Church, yet so
far as the Ministers of the Gospel are Christ's substitutes upon earth, so
far this may (at least by way of allusion) be applied unto them, for so far
there ought to be in them the same disposition toward Jerusalem that was in
Christ Jesus, that as Christ wept over Jerusalem, so should they; as he
remembered Jerusalem, so should they; as he prayed for Jerusalem, so should
they; he by way of meritorious intercession, they by way of Ministerial
intercession, 1 Timothy 2.1.
to bear Jerusalem upon their shoulders and upon their hearts continually, when
ever they address themselves into Gods presence. Jerusalem is engraven upon
the hand of God, and therefore should be ingrav^n upon the hearts of his
Ministers, and is, if God has laid his hand upon their hearts. Ye know the
story of that heathen Priest that being to offer sacrifice before a battle writ
Victoria (or some such like word) in the palm of his hand, and in unbowelling
the sacrifice laid his hand upon the heart of the beast, and left the
characters of the same word there, that what had been written upon the hand of
the Priest was read upon the heart of the sacrifice. Behold I have graven thee,
says God to Jerusalem, upon the palms of my hands, Isaiah 49.16. and look how
many hearts there are of Nobles, or Gentry, or Ministers, or others, upon whom
God has laid his hand, I doubt not but there is the same configuration upon
them that is engraven upon the hand of God: that as God himself cannot forget
Jerusalem, (as he shows there) because it is engraven upon the palms of his
hands; so they cannot but remember Jerusalem, because it is engraven upon their
hearts; that as Queen Mary said of Callice, when I am dead rip me and you shall
find Callice at my heart: so there is a many a godly man, and many a godly
Minister especially who might say, when I am dead rip me and you shall find
Jerusalem at my heart. That sacred name is deeply graven there; If I forget
thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. All you that are the
Lords Remembrancers, you that have Jerusalem written in your hearts, keep no
silence, give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth. If ever Men were called to this work, Ministers are.

And if ever Ministers were called to this work, the^ more especially are you
whom it has pleased God by the Authority of the honorable Houses of
Parliament to call together to debate and advise of such things as may be
necessary, or conducing, to the establishment of Truth, and Peace, and Beauty
in the Churches of Christ Jesus; and does it not then especial lie upon you to
keep no silence, give the Lord no rest, till he establish, etc. I say till he
establish, for, except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build
it; except the Lord reform the Church, it is to no purpose to go about to
reform it; except the Lord set up the Pillars of Peace and Truth in his Church,
and put the crown of Glory upon his Church, it is labor lost to endeavor it;
You that are called to this great work, you of all men ought to keep no
silence, give the Lord no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth.

I need not tell you how many eyes and expectations there are upon this
Assembly, I speak it not as a matter of boasting, but as a matter of trembling
and lying low before the Lord this day, from all the parts of the Kingdom,
from all the parts of the Christian world, the eyes of all the people of God
are upon you; foreign Churches have their eyes toward you, waiting what you
will advise for the more utter ^^tinction of Papery, and effecting of a more
near and f^^^^^ion between us and the rest of the Reformed Churches; all the
parts of the kingdom have their faces and voices toward you, me thinks I hear
a voice from all the corners of the Land coming up to this Assembly, to be by
you reported to the honorable Houses of Parliament; a voice like that of the
poor woman to the King upon the wall, help, help, for the Lords sake help:
help us to better Ministers, help us to better Ordinances, help us to purer
worship, help us to better Discipline, help us to remove those things that
deter us from the Lords table, help our tender Consciences to more liberty,
etc. I know it Brethren, Gods people most of them look for help by this
Assembly, through your faithful advice given to the Honorable Houses of
Parliament. And may not you answer as he did there, except the Lord help thee,
whence should I help thee? there is such an Augeae Stabulum of corruption, and
confusion in Doctrine, Discipline, worship, in all; that (verily) unless that
God who is able to remove the iniquity of the land in one day, Zach. 3.9. and
to cause the Prophet and unclean spirit to pass out of the land, Zach. 13.2.
unless that great God set his hand to this great work, it will never prosper;
and yet if it should not prosper, the sin would be laid at your door, and you
would bear the reproach of it to all memory; therefore great need to importune
God to come down and own his work; o that thou would rent the heavens and
come down, that the Mountains might flow at thy presence! Ye among all the
rest of the Lords Remembrancers, keep no silence, give him no rest, till he
establish, and (...) make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

And ohe thing more, what I know you have all taught others your selves, now
put in practice, pursue your prayers, with your endeavors; what ye pray for,
contend for: as ye pray that God would establish his Church in truth, so with
united endeavors labor to raise up and establish the decayed truth among us,
vindicating the truths of the Protestant Religion from all Popish, Arminian,
Socinian, Anabaptisticall, Antinomian, and all other errors whatsoever. And as
ye pray that God would establish his Church in peace, so labor to work out
the Churches peace; 1 With God, by endeavoring a removal of what ever
pollutions, or prophanenesses, have turned God into an enemy to us. And then 2
labor the Churches peace with its own members; which certainly ye shall
establish, if denying your selves and laying by all pre-ingagements to your own
opinions, desires, ways, ye shall willingly, and unanimously, consent to that
which upon just and pious debate shall be found to be the way and truth of God;
which I doubt not but through his grace ye shall all do. Believe it Brethren,
in your Union will be laid a happy foundation of Union through the whole
Kingdom; if ye agree in this Assembly, I durst me thinks promise my self, and
you, a happy agreement amongst all that fear God in the Nation: And then we
need take no thought for the third thing, peace with our enemies: God will
either subdue them under us, or make them be at peace with us: only let neither
the desire of peace with them, nor of peace amongst our selves, bribe us to
tolerate any thing in the Church of God that might make him to be at war with
us.

And lastly, as ye pray that God would make the Church a praise, so endeavor
that also; endeavoring that the Church of Christ may enjoy all those Liberties
and Ordinances that are purchased for her by the blood, and bequeathed to her
in the testament of her Lord Jesus: that all her ways may be ordered according
to the rule of Gods word: that the Gospel may run and be glorified: that
those two great illuminating ordinances of Preaching and Catechizing, which are
as the greater and lesser lights of heaven, may have such liberty,
encouragement, maintenance, that all the earth may be filled with the knowledge
of the Lord. Romans 15.5.6.
This do, and prosper: and that you may thus do, the God of Patience and
consolation grant you to be like minded one toward another, according to
Christ Jesus, that you may with one mind and one mouth glorify God even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

