A NEW WIND-MIL, A NEW.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1643.

To my dearly beloved Brother Mr. Jonadas Trash, at his house in Soper-lane,
at the sign of the Shuttle.
For as much as I see every well-minded man has a fling at an happy alteration;
why should we only sit still when there is so much work to do. For my part I
love changes as well as another, and have, as I suppose, found out a prosect
very considerable, which I have thought fit to impart unto you.
TRuly Brother, I am very much offended with a foul Superstition, which I
wonder is so easily passed over by others: Our Wind-mills, you know, are framed
in so perfect a cross, as if they were erected in defiance of Reformation. To
what purpose do we banish the Cross out of our Churches and Markets, if we
allow it upon our City-wals, or in our fields: It is no marvel if our corn
that is ground with so Idolatrous an engine, turn to no better nourishment,
and serve only to feed wicked humors; I warrant you our Brethren in New England
admit of no such abomination: Indeed what need we any Wind-mils at all, have we
not water enough in every corner of our Land to drive our wheels about? Or if
our lot have fallen upon sandy soyles, or dry heathes, have we not Horse-mils,
and hand-mils, that may sufficiently prepare our grist? How do they in those
religious armies that are raised against the Malignant, and in those godly
towns and cities that have zealously shut out their King, and made themselves
their own prisoners? How did our Forefathers before ever these vain
whirligigs were devised? certainly they are scandalous instruments, where of
every sail is thwarted over with twenty crosse-bars, no cross of Jerusalem
has so many; and if you mark it, they are commonly seated upon high hills, that
their offense may be the more notorious: My advise therefore is, up with all
Wind-mils, up with them both root and branch, let them be all presently
escheated to the State. But if any of our Brethren be otherwise minded, and
shall think it fit to latch the moving air for such an advantage, and that
there ought to be a correspondence betwixt the holy Wind-mils in our brains,
and these outward motions; I could earnestly wish that at the next meeting it
might be propounded to our Brethren, that they would be pleased to agree among
themselves, upon a Vote for the reforming of this evil fashion of Wind-mils;
whereto I shall not be unwilling to contribute my best thoughts.

Why may there not be a device of a round Wind mill free from offense, and more
effectual? the form whereof I here present unto you: Let there be a large
round wheel of good heart of Oak: In the inner part whereof, above the
axelwheele shall be prominently set out, and fast mortised in the
circumferentiall wheel a large square of timber, with a fair roundell in the
midst of it, borne out by four studs arising from the axel-wheele, and in each
corner of that square, betwixt it and the outer circumference, let there be so
many lesser roundels severally placed (for I hate to think of any cross bars
in this fabric) all these roundels shall be so covered with strong canvase,
that there may be scope left for the bunt of the sail to swell in, wherewith
the wind may be caught to purpose: In the circumference of that large wheel
shall be fixed certain stiff and long spoakes, winged with several flags of
canvase, two whereof may uphold a several sail, fastend with strong cords to
the wheel, so as they may be spread or wrapped up according as the gale serves.
This is the model of the reformed Windmill; I suppose you have it in your
head already. The Idea of it is so familiar, that every brother may run away
with it at the first hearing. Here are no such emergent difficulties, and
unreconcileable impossibilities, as should need the concurrence of many wise
heads to salve them up; but plain round and square, without any cross
intricacies or deep subtilties.

Now the commodities of this form, and just elogies thereof, which shall
recommend it to present practice, and to posterity are not a few. First of all,
it is new, and that I suppose is no small praise: Away with the rotten fashions
of our doting Ancestors, give us all profitable novelties; I wonder at the
folly of those men which think any thing the better for age: We cast away
clothes because they are old; Liquors that are too stale we dislike; Timber
that is worm-eaten is rejected; and who cares for moldy and musty provision?
Yet Rites and Ceremonies are by foolish men entertained and magnified because
they are ancient: Should a man come forth clothed in the habit of his great
Grand-sire, how should he be followed by all the boys in the street, not
without hooting and derision; whereas he that walks in the common garb of the
last fashion, is not noted: And why should not we go beyond our Forefathers
for wit, since we have both the help of theirs, and more pregnant of our own?
What do they talk therefore of the old forms of Liturgy, or of the
Discipline and government both of Church and State: It was the credulous
stupidity of our progenitors to take all upon trust, that was derived unto them
from former hands, without enquiring into the better reasons of alterations;
For us we have learned to be wiser, and know how to be weary of the old
decrepit inventions of silly antiquity, and rejoice to furnish the world with
better projects.

Secondly, this is a fashion that has never been taken up by Papists or
Heathens, (whose very use and practice is enough to make any thing sinful and
abominable;) yea, therefore is it most fit to be set up, because it is quite
contrary to their forms: For since our Religion is justly opposite to theirs;
why should we agree with them in any thing? Why should we not affect an utter
contrariety unto them upon all occasions? If they use set forms of public
Prayer, why should not we avoid them? If they uncover or kneel in their
Churches, why should not we abhor that superstition? If they fast on
Good Friday, what day is fitter for our feasting? If Christmas day be their
Festival, why is it not fittest for our working-day? If they preach in gowns,
and walk in side-robes, what is so proper for us as short cloakes and Jumps:
Their Lent should be our Carnevall: And if we could have a Summer and Winter, a
day and night, varying from theirs, or another Sun from that which gives
light to them, we would not partake with them in these: And if they go on their
feet, I wish we could walk on our heads: I am much afraid lest when they see
the better fashion of our grinding engine, they will go near to conform unto
this Fabric, which if they should do, they should soon drive us to seek some
other devise, for we are resolved to hold aloosse from them in all our
concernments.

Thirdly, there can be no danger of any ill use to be made of this frame,
whereas the other being so exquisite a cross, does (as it were) invite every
passenger to superstition. In this regard surely I should marvel to see any
Papist pass by so fair representation with his hat on: And if the Jesuit
CAMPIAN uncovered his head when he passed by Tiburne (as his story tells us) the
structure whereof is only composed of three cross beams without any formal
arrectary; how would he much more have veiled to so perfect a resemblance of
that which is entertained with all idolatrous adoration? And if we break down
sorry halfe-headed crosselets in our Churchyards and highways, for fear of
the worst: With what courage should we (with the valiant and zealous DON
QUIXOTE) set upon these Giantly champions of superstition? Since we may boldly
say that no old Primer, or Horn-book, no book of Popish Massing, or conjuring,
has in it a more exact form of that great Idol than the common Windmill
has. Well fare a good sister of ours, Mistress W. a school-mistris, which would
not suffer her little ones to name that Idol in their first lesson, but taught
them to say black-spot in stead of Christs-crosse; And our brother H. L. the
Baker, that in detestation of this figure, would not so much as prick his
loaves with an headless cross, but contented himself still with one single
motion of his knife.

Fourthly, it cannot be denied that the fashion of this our Windmill is far
more excellent than the other, for the round figure is by all confession most
perfect; the heaven is round, the earth is round, and if these very square
sails did not move round they could do nothing; and if they be therefore
esteemed because they go round, why should they not be so much more approved
because they are round.

Fifthly, it is no slight argument to induce us to this form, that herein we
shall conform our selves to all other kinds of Mills, the Hand-mill, the
Horse-mill, the Water-mill, are all contrived into this figure; howsoever
therefore all the Windmils of the whole world be square and crosse-like; yet
since it is fit we should frame our selves to the fashion of our neighbors;
surely it is meet that these windy Engines should imitate their fellows, that
so there may be a correspondence between them, all of an happy and comely
rotundity.

Many other inducements might be enforced, but these are enough to incline al
reasonable men to a liking of this form, which I persuade my self will take so
well upon the first motion, that all our well-affected Corporations will be
ready to run into this praiseworthy fashion. Which because it may be of so
singular use, I could wish that in your next assembly, when you shall find a
general approbation of this plot, you would move that we two (who are the
first movers of this project) might have the just favor to be joint Patentees
in the work: (why not as well as some others have been in the round weights) so
as whosoever will reap benefit by our invention, may give some real
acknowledgement to the Authors of it: for howsoever I hate Monopolies (as the
very bane of the Commonwealth) yet I see no reason why those that have beaten
their brains for the contrivance of any rare device for the common good,
should not receive due encouragement from those hands which partake the benefit
of their labor; but this I leave to your discretion, and to the deeper
judgment of the Assembly, in the midst whereof I do often wish my self.

Boston, Januar. 2. 1642. Your alike-minded Brother, ABEDNECO CAN.


