General LESSLEY'S DIRECTION AND ORDER For the exercising of HORSE AND FOOT.

BEING A most Exact, Compendeous, and Necessary Direction for all such as are
studiously devoted to the due Exercise of ARMS, and principally intended for
the young sort of the MILITIA.

LONDON. Printed by Richard Badger, for L. Blaikelock. 1642.

To the Reader.
Dear Countrie-man.
MY zeal for the public good has invited me to expose this short, but
excellent Treatise to the public view, being without controversy, the best of
all modern Tracts upon this Subject. I need not amplyfie my self by way of
Apology in commendation of the work, where Lesleyes name shall command in
chief, nothing doubting, but every noble spirit will willingly follow such a
Leader, to whose conduct and direction I leave you.

Farewell.
General LESSLEY'S DIRECTION AND ORDER For the exercising of a FOOT COMPANY,
The Files being eight deep.
And that they frame their Companies, two parts Musketeers, and the third part
Pikes.
STand right in your Files.

Stand right in your Ranks.

Silence.

To the Right hand.

As you were.

Note, when you are commanded to be as you were, you are ever to turn to the
contrary hand from whence you came.

To the left hand.

As you were.

To the right hand about.

As you were

To the left hand about.

As you were.

Ranks to the right hand double.

As you were.

Ranks to the left hand double.

As you were.

Files to the right hand double.

As you were.

Files to the left hand double.

As you were.

Half Files to your right hand, double your front.

As you were.

Half Files to the left hand, double your front.

As you were.

Ranks to the Right hand countermarch.

When you will countermarch to the right hand, the first rank of Leaders only
must advance one step ^orwards with the right leg, and then turn, and all the
other ranks must march first up to the place from whence the first rank did
countermarch before they turned.

Ranks to the left hand countermarch.

Observe, that if you will now countermarch to the left hand, the first rank
must step forward, one step with the left leg, and then turn, and all the
other ranks behind must come up to that place before they turn where the
Serjants stands.

Observations before you wheel.
IF you will wheel to the right hand you must double your ranks to the left,
and if you wheel to the left, you must double to the right.

Ranks to the right hand double.

Files close to the right hand, to the close order.

Ranks close up to the swords point.

Note, that when you will wheel to the right hand, that the Leader of the right
hand file must keep his Musket-rest fixed to the ground, and must only turn his
body without loosing of any ground, and also the left hand leader if you wheel
to the left.

To the right hand wheel, or, To the left hand wheel.

Having wheeled to bring them to their former order, you must use these words
of command.

First to the Ranks that were closed to the swords.

Ranks, backwards to your double distance of twelve foot.

Open your Files to the left hand of three foot.

And then speaking to the Ranks that were first doubled,

Ranks, as you were.

Having performed the former motions; you may afterward exercise your company
of Pikes and Musketeers together, or each a part.

To begin with the Pikes, you may command them to do these motions standing,
viz.

Advance your Pikes,

Order your Pikes.

Shoulder your Pikes.

Charge your Pikes.

Order your Pikes.

Trayle your Pikes.

Cheek your pikes.

But these motions are to be performed both standing and marching.

Charge your Pikes.

Shoulder your pikes.

To the right hand charge.

Shoulder your Pikes.

To the left hand charge.

Shoulder your Pikes.

To the Reere charge.

Shoulder your Pikes.

Port your pikes.

Comport your pikes.

Charge your Pikes.

Shoulder your Pikes.

Stand.

Charge under hand.

Charge your pikes at the foot.

Shoulder your Pikes.

Order your Pikes.

1. First note that in Charging, half the Ranks only must charge their Pikes,
the other hindmost half of their ranks do but port their Pikes, that is,
they carry them so couched over the heads of the foremost, as may give them no
offense in charging, or retering: besides, this way the Pikes are not so
subject to be broken by the shot of the enemy, as when they are advanced.

2. They must likewise observe, when they charge standing to fall back with
the right Leg, and marching to step forward with the left.

3. The exercising of your Musketerees is likewise performed either standing or
marching, that is, either by Ranks or by Files after three manner of ways,
always blowing your match, moving your right leg foremost, when you are ready
to present.

1. Having an enemy in your front. 2. In your Reere. 3. Upon the right or left
hand Flank.
Note also that the first Rank falling back with their right legs, lies on,
gives fire, and the first rank falling away, the second in rank presenting
having their pans guarded, blows their matches, o^ens their pans, and steps
forward with their right legs, into the place of the first rank, lies on,
gives fire, and fall away, whiles the rest of the body of Musketeeres move up
to their places, and so two ranks at a time making ready, you may give fire so
often as you lif^.

Observe that in charging of an Enemy, that the right hand Wing fall off to the
right hand, and the left hand Wing to the left, and the Officers are to give
the same word of Command.

The Musketeers are to have a singular care to carry the mouths of their
Muskets aloft, as well when they are shouldred as in priming, as also when they
keep their pans guarded, and come up to give fire.

Moreover if an enemy shall appear on either your right or left Flank, and
that you resolve to maintain your ground, and would gall him from either
Flank, it is performed by giving first the words of command, To the right hand
or left hand which you please, and then making an intervall of six foot
distance between the middlemost leader of the half Files, for the half Rank
on the left hand do fall away between the Files, to the Reere before the
Pikes, and the half Rank on the right hand, on the right Flank, likewise you
may give fire, from either or both Flanks as ^ften as you list.

Again, if an enemy should show himself in your Reere, the like is done by
this term of direction:

To the right hand about.

And having given fire upon them, fall away to the place where the Front stood,
even in the same Manner as you did before.

In advancing toward an enemy, two Ranks must always make ready together,
and advance ten paces forward before the body, at which distance a Serjant, or
when the body is great, some other Officer must stand, to whom the Musketteers
must come before they present and give fire, first, the first Rank, and while
the first rank gives fire, the second keep their Muske^s close to their
rests, and their pans guarded, and as soon as the first are fallen away, the
second presently presents, gives fire, and fall after them. Now as soon as the
two first ranks do moove from their places in the front, the two Ranks next
it must unshoulder their Muskets and make ready, so as they may advance forward
ten paces as before, as soon as ever the two first Ranks are fallen away, and
are to do in all points as the former, so all the other ranks through the
whole company or division must do the some by two so^e after another.

A way how to give fire retreating from an enemy:
AS the Troop marches, the hindmost rank of all keeping still with the
Troop, makes ready, and being ready, the soldiers in tha^ rank turn
altogether to the right hand and give fire, marching presently away a good
round pace to the front, and there place themselves in ranks together just
before the front, as soon as the first rank turn to give fire, the rank
next it make ready and does as the former, and so all the Rest.

Last of all the Troop or wing of the Musketeers make ready altogether
standing, and the first without advancing gives fire, in the place it stands
in, and speedily as may be, yet orderly falls away, all the Ranks doing the
same successively one after another.

A manner how to give fire, either from the right or left hand Flank.
The Company or division marching, the utmost file next the enemy, are
commanded to make ready, keeping still along with the body, till such time as
they be ready, and then they turn all to the right or left hand, according to
the sight of their enemy, either upon the right or left flank and give fire
altogether, when they have discharged they stir not, but keep their ground,
and charge their pieces again in the same place they stand, now as soon as
the aforesaid file does turn to give fire, the utmost next it makes ready
always keeping along with the troop, till the bringers up be past, a little
beyond the leaders of the file, that gave fire last, And then the whole file
must turn, and give fire, and do in all points as the first did, and so all
the rest one after another.

A Serjant (or if the troop be great) some better qualified Officer must stand
at the head of the first File, and as soon as the second file has given fire
and has charged, he is to lead forwards the first file up to the second file,
and so to the rest one after another, till he has gathered up again the whole
wing, and then he is to join them again in equal front with the Pikes.

The manner of Ordering a Regiment.
IF there be ten Companies in a Regiment, consisting of a 1000. or 1200. men,
they must be drawn into two divisions, five Companies in one division, and
because it is not fit that the eldest Captains should be all in one Division,
They are thus divided, viz.

Collonell. I. V. III.
Serjant Major. Lievt. Collonell. IV. VII. VI. II.

1. The first Captains Company next to the Collonells Company.

2. The second Company the left hand of the second division.

3. The third next to the Serjant Major in the first Division.

4. The fourth next the Lieutenant Collonell in the second Division.

5. The fifth in the middle of the first Division.

6. The sixth next the second Captain in the second Division.

7. The seventh next the fourth in the second Division.

The Seriants are to march upon the Hankes of the Divisions as near as they
can to their own men to keep them in their ranks, and from straggling.

The Drummers betwixt the third, and fourth Ranks. But if the Regiment march
in Battle, then in the flanks of the Regiment as equal with the third rank
in the Front, and so likewise in the flanks of the Pikes.

The Demonstration of Places in a Regiment.
THe first Captain leads the Van of Pikes.

The second the Reere of the Pikes.

The third, the first division of Musketeers.

The Collonells Captain shall lead the Vanguard of the Musketeeres in the
right wing upon the left hand of the third Captain.

The fi st Leader to lead the second division of Musketeers.

The second to bring up the Reere of all.

The third to lead up the second division of Pikes.

The fourth to bring up the right wing of the Musketeers

But because the absence of Captains may be such, as the Regiment may want the
principal places of leading, it is in the Collonells will to dispose of the
places of leading, as he shall find fitting.

The Serjant major of every Regiment to have a special care, before the
Regiment moves out of the Quarter, to call upon the Captains for their odd men
of every Company, to make Files of them. And for the over plus, which cannot be
above in number, shall march in the Reere of the Regiment, before the Officer
that brings up the Regiment, not disbanding themselves.

Upon the very motion that the Drums begin to beat a march, the hindermost
Ranks shall march forwards together as well as the first Ranks, that the
hinder most Ranks need not come or march away faster then the foremost.

The distance between the Ranks in marching, shall be six foot one from the
other, so that the butt-ends of the pikes shall almost touch the heels of them
that March before them.

The files shall be no more than three foot distance one from the other.

When a Regiment marches in division, then the half of the Musketeeres shall
march before the Pikes, and the Pikes in the midst, and the other half of the
Musketeeres to be in the Reere of the Pikes.

Observing well, that they must March ten in front at the least, if the way be
fit thereunto, keeping always the distances both in Rank, and file, as
aforesaid.

The Officer that shall lead any part of the Regiment, shall take up no more
^lace than the space of a Rank, which is six foot, to the end they may follow
one another the better, and so neither loose time nor place in marching. As for
the Officer that shall march after any part of the Regiment or Division, he
shall follow the last Rank of them, that march before him, observing the
distance of six foot, to the end that betwixt him, and the Officer that shall
lead any part or devision of the Regiment following, there may be likewise six
foot, and so between the first and second division there must be eighteen
foot distance.

If the Regiment be divided and lead in two troops, the second division of the
Regiment shall follow the first, about the distance of ten or twelve paces, and
no larger.

The distance between the Regiments that march one after another, shall be
eighteen or twenty paces, to wit, six foot for the Officer that marches in
the Reere of the Regiment, and six foot for the Officer that leads in the
front of the next Regiment, and the rest of the place between both the
Officers aforesaid, and where there is room enough the Regiment shall march
close, and in a body, observing evermore the distance of Ranks and Files as
aforesaid.

Between every five files at the most, and between every three Files at the
least of Musketeeres, they shall leave a space of six foot bread, keeping as
much as possible may be the Musketeeres of one company together, not marching
but in fight.

When the Regiment stands in Battle, and that the regiment consists of two
divisions, each division shall be fifty foot distant one from another.

And the Musketeers of a Regiment being more in number than the Pikes, and
consequently falling out broader than the front or division of Pikes, they
shall close inwards, toward both the troops of the pikes which stand before
them.

But if so be the number of Musketeers be two great, and that by reason of the
intervals, or the spaces of six foot, that are to be made between them for
their number having no place to fall or close inward without touching one
another, then the two troops of Musketeers on both sides of the pikes after
whom they stand shall fall outward.

The Ensigns of every regiment are to march with their Colors in the Front,
six foot before the pikes when they march in a body, and in this Barracado to
be always ready to veil their Colors when the General passes by, But when
they march in Battle as command shall be given, all the Ensigns of each
division are to go down before the fourth and fifth rank, but the Colonels
own Colors to fly in the second rank, The same to be done in the second
division, if you come to charge with an enemy, then for good reasons let the
Colonels Colors fall back to the rest. If the Lord General passes by, make
the Body move their faces, either in Flank or reere, which way he passes.

That no Wagons shall be suffered to march between the regiments or Division,
only each Collonell one, which is to march in the Front of his Regiment, and
the Commander of every Tertia to have two in the head of the Tertia, besides
one of their own Wagons in the head of their own Regiment, and if their own
regiment have the Vanguard of the Tertia, Then they are to have three Wagons.

And for the Wagons of the Captains to march in the Reere of the Army in
their senioritie, according as their Collonells marches that day, and are to
be so ordered by the Carriage Master.

And when the whole is thus Marshalled and at any time shall come to make a
stand, either at noone-tide to eat, and repose, or at eventide to rest, till
the quarter be made, then the Tertia shall be lead up to the places, all three
in front, each Regiment in division one after another at fifty foot, each
regiment at an hundred foot, and each Tertia distant in flank from other about
150. foot, sometimes if the ground will give it, then the two divisions of each
Regiment shall stand in front, and so the regiments following in that order,
and also in this order conformable, all the three Tertians, side by side, and
so shall all the Cannons and Wagons front up in this wise in breadth, That the
train may be shortened, into a near compass; which is done to keep the Army
close, and in far distance in the Reere.

This order is to be observed especially as the General shall find fitting, to
give command for it, or otherwise not.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
WHen the Title Page of this book first came to the press, the like direction
was intended for the Horse, as thou here find for the Foot: but some defects
appearing in the Copy, in the Publishers obsence, I held it not fair to abuse
thy credulity.


