A NEW POEM ON THE DREADFUL DEATH OF THE EARL of ESSEX, WHO Cut his own Throat
in the TOWER.
By the Embroyan-Fancy of Anti- Jack Presbyter.
COme, with a nimble thrust of Rapier'd wit,
(My Muse) now Stab all Traitors, point at, hit
The Throat of a Self-murtherer, whose fall
Does manifest his Crimson Guilt to all.
Led by the Halter to the Stygian Lake.
Many there be, he to prevent the Stake,
Or Hemp or Hatchet, took a shorter Cut,
(As if to die were but to crack a nut,)
To let his Soul fly from its Prison, Body,
To stepped to -- ask his Chronies, How do you?
O pity it is that such a Branch as he,
Should thus deserve so sad an Elegy.
Whose Loyal Father pawned his life to those,
Who we the grand Promoters of the Cause.
So excellent his Father, that t'express
His Excellencies, seems to make them less.
"Should I presume to tell his worth, I fear
"(My Muse) I should subscribe a Murderer.
"To do it by halves were fair, but 'twould be sed,
"'Twere only then but Drawn and Quartered.
My Lord (like Tully's Son) Degenerates.
A Worm, within his breast most sadly prates,
Consc'ence (The Kings Attorney) stings his heart
So mortally, that now he dares depart.
"A wounded soul close coupled with the sense
"of Sin, pays home its proper Recompense.
"Could not your active hands had fairly staid
"The leisure of a Psalm? Judas has prayed,
"But later Crimes cannot admit the Pause,
"They run upon effects more than the Cause.
Hangman will curse your Feats, it is most severe
To be ones proper Executioner.
Some do affirm, that 'twixt such Acts and Death,
One may repent, even at his last breath.
I fear, there is, (after so foul a Sin,)
Too narow a gap to let Repentance in.
His Death to the Saints this Doctrine will afford,
Impatient of being with the Lord
He was good man: Dearly-Beloved, praise
His Policy, in shortening his Days.
"But if the Saints thus give's the slip, it is need
"We look about us, to preserve the Breed.
"Hence sweep the Almanac: Lilly make room,
"And Blanks enough, for the New Saints to come
"All in Red Letters: As their Faults have been
" Scarlet; so limb, their Anniverse of sin.
Jack Presbyter, I tell the Whoreson, Liar,
Encomiums that do amount much higher.
It Is height of Valor, Fortitude, to kill
(Not our strong foes, but) a man's self at will.
Brave active Roman Spirit! Purgatory
Shall be to thee, for a new Inventory.
Scylla, Cbaribdis, Python, Acheron,
Medea's Bull, the Tails of the Dragon,
Sea Monsters, Serpents, Gorgons, Centaurs all
Medusa's, Bugbear-Harpies these I call
Mormos and Bugs, (as our stout Earl did see,)
To fright poor Idiots to Morality.
Cowards do dread the grim pale face of Death,
Who foiled b'it, are but squeezed out of Breath.
Give me an Hector greedy of's own blood
Makes Death to tremble, bids Damnation, slud,
Fears not the Gods, it is sin, if they be good,
If bad, why 'ere in aw of them men stood?
Death, Hell, Damnation and if thou not fear,
Jack Presbyter, die thou thus if thou dare.
Or else learn hence not to aspire too nigh
The high Perogatives of Majesty.
Vive le Roy, let Rebels meet the end,
If their Repentance may not it prevent.
FINIS.
London, Printed for E. Cart, 1683.


