NEW PROPOSITIONS FOR PEACE.

Presented to the Kings most excellent Majesty, by the Commissioners of the
Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, And His Majesty's Royal Assent,
and gracious Answer thereunto on Monday last. With His Speech in the Treaty
Chamber, concerning the Army. And the joyful and happy proceedings, of the
King, Lords, and Commons, in the Treaty.

Also, the Propositions of the Prince of Wales, to the Earl of Warwick, for a
conjunction between the two Navies at Sea: With his Lordships Answer thereunto.

woodcut of a king and man

L(...) printed for R. Wells, 1648.

JOYFUL NEWS FROM THE KING, Concerning his coming to London; And a
Declaration of His proceedings with the Commissioners for an Agreement for
Peace.
Right Honorable,
UPon Satterday last, several papers were presented to our Commissioners by
his Majesty, purporting his earnest Desires to come to London, and sit with his
two Houses at Westminster, there to treat upon the great and important affairs
of the Kingdom; ^ut this will not be assented to, until further satisfaction
be given to the four first Bills, contained in the Propositions.

The great business insisted on is, the proposition for settling Religion,
which is like to take up some time, his Majesty gave in a paper to the
Commissioners of the Reasons wherefore he could not condescend to the taking
away Bishops, and the Government by Bishops, the treaty hereupon has held all
the last week, and nothing yet concluded on, yet most are of opinion His Maj.
will assent, and this proposition being over, there is less doubt the other in
course will be agreed on.

His Maj. has promised to deliver in his positive answer this present Monday;
which if it be but satisfactory, no doubt but there will be a good conclusion
of all to an happy peace.

Newport 9. October. 1648. New propositions presented, to his Majesty.
1 That your Maj. according to the laudable example of your Royal Father of
happy memory, may be pleased to swear and sign the late Solemn League and
Covenant; and that an act of Parl. be passed, for the injoyning the taking
thereof by all the subjects of the Kingdom, etc.

2 That a Bill be passed for the utter abolishing and taking away of all
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans and
Sub-Deans, and all other Officers whatsoever, out of the Church of England and
Dominion of Wales; and out of the Church of Ireland.

3 That the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines, be confirmed by Act of parliament.

4 That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be settled by act of
parliament, in such manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon
after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines.

5 That for the more effectual disabling Jesuits, priests, papists, and popish
Recusants from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws; and for the better
discovering, and speedy conviction of popish Recusants, an Oath be established
by act of parliament to be administered to them, wherein they abjure and
renounce the popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, purgatory,
worshipping of the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes and Images, and all popish
Superstitions and Errors; and refusing the said Oath, being tendered in such
manner as shall be appointed by the said Act, to be a sufficient Conviction of
popish Recusants.

6 An Act or Acts of parliament for education of the children of papists by
protestants, in the protestant Religion.

7 An Act for the true Leavy of the penalties against them, which penalties to
be levied and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree on, wherein to
be provided that his Majesty shall have no loss.

8 That an act be passed in parliament, whereby the practices of papists may be
prevented, and a stricter course taken to prevent tht saying or hearing of Mass
in the Court, or any other part of this Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Ireland.

To the four first, its said his Maj. makes some scruple at: to the latter, we
hear, that He gave his Royal assent on Monday last.

The Propositions of Prince Charles to the Earl of Warwick, their Engagement at
Sea, and a dangerous Fight thereupon.
SIR,
Upon the near approach of our Fleet to the revolted ships, the Princes
Mariners began to mutiny; His Highness caused a Council to be called, and
advised with his Officers of a speedy and facile way to unite the said ships;
and it was agreed, that every chief Officer in the ships should declare, that
His Highness had procured 6000. li. in Gold, which they should have amongst
them, with many other promises and persuasions, that the treaty would end all
differences, both by Sea and Land, and then they should come off with more
honor, then accepting of an Act of Indemnity now; and finding that the
Sailors were somewhat pacified for the present, the Prince sent a Message to the
Lord Admiral, declaring his great dislike that his Lordship should endeavor
any way to draw His servants from Him, requiring him to desist for the future
to do the like, and come and join with Him; which doing, He would procure a
pardon for him from the King His Royal Father.

The L. Admiral answered, that he takes it in dishonor that either in himself,
or any others, there should be the least thought of his breaking the trust
reposed in him; acquainting his Highness, that if he were exposed to the
greatest extremity that is incident to man, he would neever dissert the
Parliaments service; and being in a good condition at Sea, his advice to the
Prince was, to come and join with the Parl. but its thought nothing will be
effected till its known how the treaty goes, and we hear that Sir T. Lunsford
has bin lately dispatched privately from the Brill for the Isle of VVight upon
some Message to the King, or for some instructions or advice from those that
attend his May. this treaty.

By other intelligence we likewise hear, that M. Murrey is gone for England,
but upon what Design as yet. we cannot hear.

Some of our ships ride within two leagues of the revolted ships, with whom we
would fain engage, but as yet cannot; for the Hollander instead of securing
those revolted ships of the parl. of England (a service which in some measure
might well be expected at their hands) by holding a neutrality, say they will
prevent acts of hostility near unto their parts, though it were never so many
for promoting the affairs of the Parliament. Some assistance of Volunteers is
said to be expected from Denmark which has been long spoken of and is still
likely, to be as slowly performed for we hear of none that come to the revolted
ships, but some few which fled out of England, who are like to have as good a
match by coming over to join with them, that are like to mutiny among
themselves as the Hollanders had by coveting and engrossing the new Gold that
of late they got out of England, or as those which adventured 7000 li. Arms to
recrute Duke Hambletons forces, which were taken the last week going for
Scotland. Some action has happened between the two Fleets, upon the Princes
endeavor to sail from Gory, and two of his ships in danger of sinking.

From aboard the George 7 October. 1648.
Newport October. 10.
Letters from the Isle of Wight say, that the King has lately received a
message from France, which represent things there in a very sad condition, as
to himself and friends, and that the Queen cannot b ing about her Design for
England, the English quarrel beginning to be a la mode de France.

His Majesty is possessed with the sad condition of the Scots, yet says, that
their Conquerors in the North are worthy of unparalled honor, whose further
transactions and Declaration therein, he much expects and accordingly will make
his Concessions in the main, which is not to be looked for till the 40 days
are almost expired.

It is said that his Maj. has given his positive answer to the second Bill,
and has also given his royal word to pass the same; and that He is very well
satisfied in judgment, with the Aswer from the Divines, to his paper for
Episcopacy, which was

Subscribed, CHARLES R.

FINIS

