I Have taken a Survey of this Tractate, and find it very Spiritual, and
Practical, and doubt not but it will be very acceptable, and profitable, to all
those who have their senses exercised to discern between things that differ.
And therefore I cheerfully concur with these three Reverend, Learned, and Godly
Ministers who have written their Epistles in commendation of it; And think it
worthy to be Printed.

Imprimatur, Edm. Calamy. Place this before the Title.


THE Sinners Hope: AS HIS PRIVILEGE, and DUTY, In his worst Condition, Stated,
Cleared, and Improved.

TENDING As well to the Startling and Inviting of the Wicked from his Sinful
and Wretched Course, upon the Conditional Hopes that are laid out for him; As
the Confirming and Directing of the truly humble and weak Christian in his Duty
and Comfort, in the several Cases of Darkness, Sin, and Affliction.

Being the Substance of several SERMONS, PREACHED BY Henry Newcome, M. A. and
one of the Ministers of the Gospel, at Manchester, in the County Palatine of
LANCASTER.

Lam. 3.29. He puts his Mouth in the Dust, if so be there may be Hope.

Jer. 2.25. But thou said there is no Hope, no, for I have loved strangers,
and after them will I go.

Heb. 6.18. That -- we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for
refuge to lay hold on the Hope set before us.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for George Eversden, at the Sign of the Maidenhead
in Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

To my Reverend Friend, Henry Newcome,
Sir,
I Have been earnestly entreated, to importune you to the printing of those
Sermons, which in your preaching of them, were so greatly approved of, and so
signally successful. The Text was, Ezra. 10.2. You have since your coming
amongst us, preached upon several necessary and seasonable Subjects amongst
them, though many of the others might have cost you as much pains, and have
been very profitable and useful, yet these by some of your best and most
judicious Auditors, are desired to be the first fruits to a future harvest: I
should not engage you to this work (knowing the burdens that lie upon you, not
only in your public ministry, which is very great, but the multitude of
private concernments, wherein you are pressed above strength, and if not wisely
moderated will shorten your days) but that my own judgment concurs with others
for the publishing of them; Prove 13.1^.
Hope deferred makes the heart sick. Alexander the great he had all; when he
had nothing, because he had Hope. The Poets feign that in Pandora's box, which
was stuffed with all the woes and miseries that might be, the Gods placed Hope
in the bottom, the Prophet calls the people of God Prisoners of Hope. zach.
9.12
It was this that made the Rebel come in, when a thousand pound was proclaimed
to be given to whomesoever could bring his Head: the Hue and cry will make the
Traitor run, when Hopes of pardon will bring him back. I shall add no more but
that my Hopes are, you will answer our Hopes, and my prayers shall be for Gods
blessing on them.

Your fellow Labourer in the work of the Ministry, and your real Friend and
Brother. Richard Heyrick

To the Reverend his much esteemed Friend Mr. Henry Newcome Minister of the
Gospel, at Manchester.
Worthy Sir,
I Have by a providence (God so ordering it) seen and perused your painful,
profitable, powerful work; Enough (through Gods grace) to startle and awaken
the wicked, and to encourage Saints: well it is for the former that they have
any remote hopes of heaven: but sure it is in respect of a possible change, for
otherwise, they are at present, Ephesians. 2.12.
without Christ, without Hope, and without God in the World. The hope they
usually harbor in themselves is indeed no hope, at least no true hope, for
such an hope, as an handmaid, Job 8.13.14. Job. 11.20.
follows faith. The Hypocrites hope shall perish, it shall be cut off and his
trust shall be as a spiders web, or as a puff of breath, or as the giving up
of the ghost; The hope therefore you give them is not in respect of their
present state: Christ's rule is infallible; verily, verily I say unto thee, Jo.
3.3.
except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
Know ye not (says the Apostle) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. The Souls of men, as such,
do wave up and down without any anchor at all, only if they will come in, lay
hold on the covenant, embrace the offers and tenders of grace, there is then
Hope in Israel concerning this Thing. And as for the Saints, that are often
beset with darkness, sin, affliction, you have opened such a door of Hope to
them, that if they will but enter, they may take a view of that building, Isa.
54.11.12.
whose stones are laid with fair colors, and the foundation with Saphires,
whose Windows are of Agats, and the Gates of Carbuncles, and all the borders of
pleasant desirable stones. Pro 10.28.
The Hope of the righteous shall be gladness, Says Solomon; it may be for a
time the Lord may rear out of Zion, Joel. 3.16.
and utter his voice to Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the Earth may shake, yet
for all this, the Lord will be the Hope of his people, and the strength of the
Children of Israel: there is no reason that Gods people at the lowest should
let go their hold; are not the promises of victory and defense to the Prisoners
of hope? yea surely. The Lord their God shall save them in that day, Zach. 9.12
16.
as the flocks of his people; for they shall be as the stones of a Crown lifted
up. Now that the unregenerate may be won, and that the Saints may know their
privileges whilst they are yet in the valley of Achor, my advice and desire is
that these things may be published, not only to a great congregation, but to
the Church throughout these Nations. I hope much good will be in the publishing
of these Hopes, that although we have all trespassed against our God, even from
Dan to Bersheba, Yet now there is Hope in Israel concerning this thing. If a
Blush of modesty should stand as a temptation to keep back the publication of
this piece, I cannot but say to you as Schecaniah to Ezra, Arise, Ezra. 10.4.
for this matter belongs unto thee, we also be with thee, be of good courage
and do it. The Lord bless these papers, and the labors of all the learned to
the good of his church and the Glory of his grace. So prays

Garstang Jan: 2. 1658. Your unworthy Brother and fellow Labourer in the Lords
Vineyard Isaac Ambrose.

To the Reader who is spiritually alive, and reads for spiritual nourishment.
Good Reader:
THat the bountiful God might make his afflicted and suffering people great
amends, he has not only broken the iron yoke of Episcopacy, and superstitious
ceremonies so pinching and pressing; but has blessed us with a Covenant, and
beginnings of desired reformation (at first the wonder, and still the support
of the faithful in the Covenant) since which time the press has been
fruitful in practical treatiess, wherein as a Token of Covenant friendship,
The Lord has made a Feast of fat things, a feast of Wines on the lees, of fat
things full of marrow, Is. 25.6.
of wines on the lees well refined; That the spirit of Truth and Holiness,
might secretly and powerfully increase the power and practice of Godliness in
the truly Godly (the only ready way to perfect reformation) by sound and
spiritual food, choisly provided and severally dished, not only publicly and
weekly in Gods own house (where he is liberal and openhanded) but privately
and daily in their own Houses, in their families and closets, where this
Heavenly Manna is ever ready for them to take, and feed upon, whilst others
have been fast turning their sometimes forward profession of the power of
Godliness into a liveless and lawless form, and the unclean Spirit has been
every way active in practical errors, as separation, first from Churches of
Gods making, and after of man's; casting down authorities and trampling upon
them, as mire in the street, forging commissions for public preaching;
cashiering the Christian Sabbath, and listing the Jewish; puddle dipping the
rightly baptized in infancy; cole-blacking the stars in Christ's right hand,
as worthy to loose their light and place; and openly contradicting and
blaspheming that clear and dazzling light of truth, streaming from them all, and
especially the last, tending to Gospel banishment. This is one of the rare if
not unobserved providence of these late reling and rolling times, Acts.
3.45.46.
the lively workings of gods spirit, to bring the hidden and deep mysteries of
the Word written (and copied out into the hearts of gods Ministers) into
Sermons, and Sermons into printed volumes and printed volumes into the Houses
of the godly, that after they have read the exceeding great and precious
promises of God in his own Book, they may read the reality of them in the books
of them in the books of his Messengers, who have believed and proved, and
spoken and written what themselves have read and heard, and seen and learned,
that the faith of true believers might be strong, and their joy full. This
providence minds us of the seven years of so great plenty in Egypt, when god
fitted and raised up Joseph to gather together that plenty, and to lay it up in
storehouses, for a supply in the succeeding answerable years of famine. These
late years have been years of plenty for heavenly Manna, Gods steps have
dropped fatness, there have been showers of blessing, Jo. 12.23.24.
the Ministers of God (as the chief sheapherds dying as the corn sown) have
born much fruit; God has fitted and raised up many Joseph's to gather this
plenty into storehouses, I pray God, that years of famine be not to follow,
when there will be no food, or but little food but in such storehouses, when
the witnesses shall have finished their testimony and be slain: Certainly books
are dishes, wherein Christ serves in food to his Church in the wilderness, to
his scattered Church, to single Saints, However providence may order matters,
This storehouse and such like are worthy the Christian man's entertainment and
welcome, having this privilege, there can be no wast of this spiritual store
by the use of it, here is fullness in time of plenty, and will be fullness in
time of famine, this plenty though on the incresing hand, breeds no surfeit in
healthful and hungry souls. I doubt not the providence and pains of this our
Joseph, gathering together and storing up the hopes of all sorts, that are not
past hopes, will be acceptable to the Church of God, and especially to my good
and loving neighbors in, and about, Manchester, who have already savourily fed
upon this store, and for whose sake, in a peculiar sort, this provision is thus
treasured up. Their blessings, both in Ordinances and providence, have
prevailed above the blessings of their neighbors, God has turned away the
Sword from their gates, limited the pestilence and other fore diseases amongst
them, translated their lights, and again filled their candlesticks, cured the
pride and power of the spirit of error, increased and twisted the cords of
their union, and heightened their hopes of the spreading and increasing of the
power of godliness, which God establish. The God of their Mercy grant, Phil. 2
22.
that aged Paul and young Timothy (who hitherto has served with him in the
Gospel, as a Son with the Father) may long, and long live and love and labor
together, and be blessed in their labors, and remain a blessing to that great
congregation, both sowing precious seed, and reaping the labors of those men
of God, who have labored with them, and before them to the defeating of Satan's
policies, the disappointing of the deluded hopes of the busy spirit of
division, the raising and establishing of the grounded hopes of the righteous,
and the united joy and glory of Ministers and people at that great day of
gathering together unto Jesus Christ, which for the churches sake is the hearty
desire and prayer of

Thy souls friend, who does rejoice and bless God with thee, for the love and
labors of his Servants, John Angier:

To the Reverend Mr. RICHARD HEYRICK: Warden of the late College at
Manchester, his much honored Brother, and faithful fellow labourer in the
Congregation there.
Dear and much honored Sir,
IF my appearing thus in print be no wonder, it need be none to your self, or
any that knows us, That I prefix your name to these papers: you well know with
what fear and sense of unfitness for it I undertook any part of the charge of
this great congregation (wherein God has so long a time to mutual comfort
continued you) upon the Death of that eminent servant of his, and Dear Brother
of Yours Mr. Hollinworth, as judging the place too public for one of my mean
Abilities, though encouraged thereunto by your affectionate invitation and the
unanimous call of the congregation; And that I should yet make this adventure
to be more public, You are not unacquainted with, (being a principal
accessory to) the Occasion of it. The importunity of fundry of this people,
whom the Lord has made dear to your self, as to me, Headed and set on by your
respective Letter, having much against my own inclination and former intention
pressed this from me. Their request was to you in the first place, who have
been their ancient Pastor, to have revised and published some of your many
Elaborate discourses, whereof they have been made pertakers in your constant
ministry amongst them, that they might have had the profit of your former
pains by this means revived unto them. You have declined, at least at present
waved, the motion, upon the too just grounds of your age and some bodily
weaknesses, which might make the work somewhat tedious and more burdensome to
you: I cannot say much of my bodily strength, at least that it exceeds, or is
proportionable to the constant burden of this great Congregation, (wherein I
should bear a part with you) the Work now lying upon three of us, which
heretofore has had Seven to undertake it) and to which you are so ready to
express a tender Testimony upon all occasions (which I thankfully acknowledge)
that I should for that be less excuseable. And on the contrary, my want of
Age, and that gravity, which should have put authority upon such a Work, might
have pleaded much for me. But since it is come to this, and that I am not like
to be excused (as you are, as yet) from Printing, you will pardon me, If I
excuse not your name in this Dedication. It may be of no small advantage (and so
of no little weight with me in this Application of my self and these papers to
you) that being conscious to my self of my own meanness every way, and the
little that my own name can add to the acceptance of this Discourse, be the
matter never so of the greatest and highest Importance, that yet I appear to
the World, under the notion of any special relation to you, sufficiently known
for your eminency in birth, place, parts, service and printed labors, which
yet had been sufficiently manifest without this by our affectionate lines,
which I have made bold to publish herewith: But being really sensible of your
many kindnesses to me, and much refreshed in my poor endeavors in this
Congregation, in your comfortable and entirely affectionate condescension to,
and conjunction with me, I could do no less, then in this public appearance,
make this known to the World of you by this Dedication, as a thankful
acknowledgment of my heartiest respects unto you. May the Lord have mercy on us
in continuing your health still unto you, and preserving you long amongst us,
as an Ornament and rich blessing to this place, an helpful and useful
instrument to this part of his Church, and a singular part of the comfort of
his life, Who is

Your unworthy (yet truly Affectionate) Brother, and fellow laborer in the
Lords work, Henry Newcome:

To The Christian Reader, Especially to those of the Congregation of
Manchester, in the County of Lancaster, To whose Service The Lord has at
present appointed him in the Ministry of The Gospel.
Dear Friends:
IT is the Judicious Observation of one, that it is no marvel if many things
in nature, which are unknown in their causes be very wonderful, when many
natural things, that are known, are no less wonderful, if the commonnesse
did not prevent our consideration of them, and they would be no less admired
and questioned for preternaturall, if not so commonly known as they are. And
amongst some others this of Letters, whereby men speak with one another by
their hands, and a man may discourse with him that has been dead some hundreds
of years by taking up his book and reading, as if he were raised from the dead
to spoke with him. It was the great goodness of God that directed some
instruments at first to this most necessary help, upon many accounts to mankind
in all the Affairs and concernments of life, and as an high improvement of
this, no less admirable and gracious was that providence of God that set this
way of printing on foot, which as it is such in the thing it self; so in that
(as it is observed) it was in such a time when much use was made to a bad end
of the writings of men, wherein the vulgar were much abused and misled by the
false quotations and glosses upon the more rare and hard to be gotten written
copies, that were then extant; as also, that when the light of the gospel
begun to break out again after a dismal night of ignorance and superstition,
there should be such a ready means prepared for the transmitting and
dispersing of this light all over the Christian Churches; the benefits of which
blessed providence we and our forefathers have abundantly tasted: And though I
can not but bewail the manifold mischiefs and inconveniences of a licentious
unlicensed press, the horrible abuse and adulterating of this excellent
benefit; yet the profit of printing, whereby we are made partakers of the
labors of the Godly and and learned in former times and the labors of others
may be transferred to posterity, must needs be acknowledged as a glorious
Mercy. I must needs confess it was far from my thoughts ever to have said thus
much on this matter upon so feeling an occasion as this is, but my desire is to
be serious in this undertaking, and to have an eye at God, and the special end
wherein I might be useful in this matter, how poor and mean soever the
attempt be, or whatever it shall please God the success shall be.

The manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal. 1
Cor. 12 7. v. 4.
And there are differences of gifts, but the same spirit: To one is given by
the same Spirit, A word of Wisdom to another a word of knowledge by the same
Spirit. A word of Wisdom to speak Parables, A word of knowledge, to open and
explain parables as a learned Annotator and Paraphrast upon that Scripture.
Sit ergo scientia mediocris cognitio; sapientia vero revelationes magis arcanas
et subl^mes contineat. Calvin in Loc.
Calvin makes this knowledge to be, more mean seize in the more
mysterious things of God, and that of Wisdom to be more penetrating into more
high and hidden things. As therefore men's gifts do differ, so must needs the
Books that are written by men of by differing gifts; I must needs confess, my
share in this rich bounty in the things that are freely given us of God has
been, in what measure soever it is, of this second kind; having attained (and
desirous to be heartily thankful for it too) but to that of some Word of
knowledge, at the utmost, that Mediocris cognitio, that meaner knowledge in
these glorious mysteries; a word to explain, open, and endeavor to set on,
what is plainly set forth in Scripture for man's salvation. And whatever I am of
this (more I am not suspected of, I am sure) it is a special gift of the
Spirit to be a plain preacher, and upon this consideration being conscious to
my self of my own weakness, I should have resolvedly kept my self retired, if I
had known that none but the fruits of the gifts of Wisdom, in the more
accurate and judicious labors of men of higher parts and abilities, could be
of use to the Church of God.

I am (I bless God) content with that part the Lord has called me to act in
his Church, and for which he has in any measure furnished me, though much
burdened and unsatisfied, that I do not what I might do to the utmost therein:
and yet I often think of what a judicious Divine once said of one very famous for
a practical preacher, that we were in a sad condition, if we had no able.
Ministers in England to deal with gainsayers, then such as he. And I do bless
God that he has furnished out many excellently qualified, and enabled to
manage the controversies of the times with much strength and and clearness, and
to defend the truth against all Opposers. And though the multitude of Polemick
discourses has bred some inconvenience, and many of these worthy Champions
well skilled at their weapons have been too apt to fall from the public
service, to engage in unhandsome and some unwarrantable duells, making many
controversies and engagements wholly personal, and so the fruit of this has
no way answered the time, parts and pains that have been used in it upon many
occassions: yet to nauseate or under value parts and labors this way, were for
a peaceable people to throw away their defense and bulwarks in a trained
military power for their preservation. If we would have no Soldiers to defend
us, our Enemies will find Soldiers to oppose us, and without resistance by
some well experienced Champions, to destroy us: And if we decry all polemick
learning, we may soon be overthrown by it in our adversaries, who cherish it to
the utmost; and cannot be oppugned, nor the truth defended against them, unless
by some eminently skilled in it on our side: Men could not have peace, if it
were not for war; few would soon be to live in rest, if none to maintain
war upon occasion: Besides, these precious men of God thus specially qualified
keep the Bulwarks, whilst others less fit for such service should set on foot
and improve the trade of religion, by which we must subsist and live eternally.
Every minister should have his competency in both, the word of Wisdom, and the
word of Knowledge, though some men's potior parts, may lie more in the one, and
less in the other. But controversy maintains the truth, and practical piety
improves it, that, without tending on this, defends a shadow, fights for
religion while the heart and life is gone from it; this without that, lies open
to uncertainty, continual disturbances from opposers, and danger of building
without a foundation, these can not well and truly be the one without the
other, so likewise these do one, remotely yet often very effectually, the work
of the other: Controversies well stated and cleared in many points lay the
foundation solid for the power of Godliness to build on; and the power of
Godliness heartily admitted does notably prepare for the right judging of
controversies and tends much to the quieting of them. I have taken leave to
commend in these lines that part which here I present not to you: But yet I am
confident of it, that I may get leave for the, whoever thou art that art more
in controversies, then the study of thine own heart, to lay aside those things,
til this be first done. It is very sad when men when read controversies to
satisfy the lust and curiosity of their own carnal minds, rather then to
enquire into the truth under them, for Gods glory and the affecting their
hearts therewith which it is possible for thee to have done, read practical
books another while, and amongst the rest this, if thou please: I would thou
mighst return to those things another man, and less of those matters would
serve the turn, Five may be put out by taking away the fuel, as well as by
throwing on water; this study may heal division by diversions and by giving men
a truer notion of differences, and of the seed and fuel of them from within
us, which while the matter of prastical religion's neglected men have notwith
them. The clensing the stomach may prevent fumes into the head and cure the
disease in that part this way. I I have purposesly waved such a notion of this
very subject, as might have looked toward a controversy, as also the like
consideration of it, referring to us as a nation gotten like the people of
Israel in Ezra's time into a great transgression, and under sore judgments for
the same, and what hopes might be in this thing I have but touched on the by;
and all because I see this other particular course to drive at the root of all
diseases amongst us; if men's hopes were founded, secured, and improved about
their own souls, it would soon give us a true ground of hope of things
succeeding yet well in Church and state. What God may be about to do with us of
this Nation I am sometimes desirous to be enquiring after; the tokens of Gods
displeasure toward us are many as formerly, so of late more especially in the
sicknesses, strange, epedemicall and of long continuance; sudden death;
untimely and sad accidents; the removal of the righteous, the Chariots of
Israel and the horsemen thereof, some hopeful young men prepared for the
ministry prevented with the crown, before the Church had any taste of their
labors (a mercy no doubt unto them, but sharpest displeasure unto us)
Reformation sadly at a stand; many, senseless of any great evils upon us; many
have been crying out of glorious times, till the very shadows of the evening
are upon us, and we almost spent, the Nation secretly wasting and consuming
under our late brags of prosperity: the sudden and strange revolutions; the
turnings upside down; the backward and forward proceedings in the affairs of
the state. And what shall we think will become of us? well may we thus
conclude, that if God intend to keep us for his people he will reform us, and
before we be reformed, the heart of the people of the land must be prepared to
the Lord God of their fathers (for the want of that kept up the high places in
good and reforming governors times, 2. Chro. 20.23. ^. Chr. 34.3.
and after when Josiah did bring that to pass, the heart of the people was yet
unfit for such a state, and so reformation secured them not, as a people may
drive off reformation so long, that when it comes it may not cure them) but now
what way so like to prepare the heart of the people, as by setting them to this
study of their own hearts? my expectation of our reviving in the Nation is, if
God restore and revive his work on his peoples hearts, if wicked men be turned,
and men seriously study these matters about the soul, these close and inward
things wherein we are gotten so far wide, as we are, the man that can save a
soul is likest to be isntrumental to save the Land: The general desired
reformation must begin, and be carried on in the particular care of every man
about his own soul. If these hopes here laid down were improved, as here
endeavored to be pressed, we might of the general threating state of the
whole say, that, There might yet now be hopes in Israel concerning this thing.

That I should adventure these papers into the world, it cannot be out of any
conceit I can have of any thing extraordinary in them, the profit of practical
books I have had the comfortable experience of in my self and others; the
matter of this is not novell, neither every way common: The things may be found
in other treatises of the like kind, the method and particular digestion of
them may be new, however all good books of the like subject fall not into the
same hands, and this may light where some of these things may be news, at
least, 2. Pet: 1.12.
where the Children of God may well bear their being put in remembrance of
these things, though they may already know them, especially you of my charge,
dear to me in the Lord, because several of your conditions I have perticularly
digested in this discourse, and I judged, upon the importunity of many of you
to this publication, that it might be of use unto you to peruse, that so you
might be more familiar with these things, which I find many still needing, as
if nothing almost of this kind had been delivered.

It is much in my heart to persuade Christians to read practical books, and to
study to look after a spiritual provision from the Sabbath days and these
helps, for their Souls to live more handsomely upon, then many of us do; to lay
in on the market day to live on that week after, and when fresh provision is
scarce or spent; or if thou would feast or have variety, it were good to have
a store, though of cel^ provission, to furnish the Table with: we should not
keep such starved houses for Religion, as is too common amongst us, if this
course and forecast were on foot. Time were well redeemed in families, to read
some one of these books every day, and if this small tract may be helpful to
any this way, I shall have much cause to rejoice.

For my credit in this undertaking the Lord helped me over any thoughts at
that, before I could hearken in the least to the motion of appearing thus to
the World. It is for thy good (dear Reader) that I have ventured my self in
point of credit no little: I shall challenge thy improvement of what is here
tendered to thee with no other apology; then thy serious thoughts of accounting
for it at the bar of God. It is a weak Minister indeed, that shall either
preach or print, if it be but truth, that may not lay enough before thee to
heighten thy reckoning at that day.

I cannot (to invert that of Christ's friends to him) do this thing openly and
seek to keep my self in secret; Jo. 7.4.
some hands this book may fall into, that I had not chiefly in mine eye in the
publishing of it, and I shall not persuade them to lay it down, I print not
upon your motives, yet I may do it in part for your sakes; I would wish you to
suspend your scorn and censure, till you have well secured your concernment in
this very matter; look to the state of your immortal souls, which you may
soon come to the trial of, and for this book or me do as you please. As it
carries the message of thegne at God and our Lord Jesus Christ to men that must
live for ever, persuading them to come in, I know it is of that validity and
athority that my name can no way diminish it; and I will not derogate so much
from the majesty of the embassage, as to ask your leave or pardon, that it is
tendered to you. Reject it on your peril; It is the word, not which is, or can
be by man, exposed so to you to judge of, but that one day it shall recover its
place, and be that by which you shall be judged For my self I am willing to be
in your esteem as you see fit, provided you neither wrong the truth nor your
selves for me. If you receive any spiritual good here from, if you never see
me, return thanks to God, who is always with you, and stands by you, and
observes your very hearts in the motion, the very title of the Book makes upon
you, and to whom, I entreat you, speak a word for your friend (though unknown
to you) when it shall be well with you. If you refuse to read or reading refuse
to hearken, you will give me leave to own my name, as one amongst other
witnesses, against you, when we meet at the great day; and till then to be
known to you, as one desiring to be (as to others) dear to me in the Lord,

Your souls faithful friend and Servant in the Gospel. Henry Newcome.

The Sinners Hope.
EZRA X. 2. -- Yet now there is Hope in Israel concerning this thing.


CAP. I.
The Introduction, from the Text, and Coherence, to the Observation.

THIS book, written by that pious learned Priest Ezra, (as it bears his name)
does contain in it an account of the chief passages of History from the return
of the people of Babylon, for 164 years: And so you have an account of the
steps, by which in that time that work went or, Zerobbabel brings the people
up. ch: 1. and 2. They rear up an Altar. ch: 3. They begin to lay the
foundation of the Temple, In the latter end of chapter 3. This receives
interruption: at last at 2 bouts it gets up, as appears in the following
chapters. Ezra is sent, ch: 7. to restore Sacrifices. This was in the seventh
of Artaxerxes, 13 years before Nehemiah came to build the walls of the City.
But Ezra coming, and breaking up his commission from the King, and being about
to set upon the work with cheerfulness, that he came about, he was suddenly
saluted, with the sad account of the peoples miscarriage, in their marriage of
strange Wives, which struck him into a great terror and consternation. And
having sitten silent about this matter, with his cloths rent, after the manner
of a bitter mourner, who had his heart broken with this grievous miscarriage of
theirs, at the time of the evening Sacrifice, he makes patheticall lamentation,
and confession of the Sin to God, in the Prayer or rather complaint, which you
find: chapter 9 wherein you do not find any petition he could frame to put up for
them, the matter he judged so heinous, but all he could say about it, was to
aggravate it, and to leave the matter with the Lord, saying, he was not able to
stand before the Lord because of this. The people, upon this Lamentation of
his, flock together, and Schecaniah speaks to Ezra about the business: and he
joins with him in acknowledging the miscarriage of the people, but he would not
have it thus left as a matter desperate, but declares his opinion of the case,
that it is yet hopeful, and he proposed the way he conceived for cure, which
was, by making a covenant for reformation, in that particular, wherein they had
so grossly offended.

Who this Schecaniah was, that made this speech: we find no mention of him
before, nor after, save only in this place he is said to be the Son of Jehiel;
one of that name is mentioned to be one of the Priests, that had sinned in this
matter, enumerated among the offenders. v. 21 whether he was his Son or no, is
not determinable. If he was he might the better take himself concernd in the
business, and take the sin the more to himself, for his Fathers sake; however
it is probable he was a man of good place and authority amongst the people, in
that he offers to assist Ezra in driving on the covenant for reformation of the
sin, and, as a good man, grieves under Gods dishonor, as Ezra did, confesses
the thing was heinous and sad, yet he tells Ezra, he thinks it must not be so
left. But sees that yet there is Hope (yet now) for all this (which is too true
of us) that we have sinned thus hainously (now) Now I see the people thus meet
together, I have a better heart of the thing.

(There is Hope) the matter is not desperate, there is some Hope in it.

(In Israel) or concerning Israel, or because it is in Israel, as anon we may
show Isreal's covenant of being the Lords people, gives them hope upon their
repentance yet of Mercy. It is a greater sin for being Isreal's, yet in Israel
there is more Hope about it, then if it had been in another place, if they
repent of it.

(Concerning this thing) this whole matter, the sin that is committed, and the
judgment that is feared; this whole matof the strange Wives, the matter of the
present consternation. There is yet Hope about it.

The better to bottom the observation, I intend to raise from the words; I
shall preface the larger upon the explication, in making inquiry into 3 things,
which yet are all obvious to us in and about the text.

(1) What was the scope of Schecaniah his words here? what is the drift of them?

(1) To comfort Ezra in the business; he saw him dejected about it: he bids
him be of good cheer though it it was bad, yet it might do well, there was a
way yet out; there was Hope in the thing.

(2) To encourage him to set about the duty; Hope puts life into repentance and
reformation. Because I see Hope in the thing, let us fall upon the use of
means for the peoples recovery.

(3) In respect of all in general he asserts his apprehensions of the present
state, and that Ezra had left it too short; to conclude, as if there could be
nothing to be further done. Hereby implying it was not their duty to despair
in the thing, but rather to set upon the means yet left for remedy.

But Secondly wherein was the matter so difficult? Ezra leaves it as almost
remediless, and Schecania says, there is but Hopes in the thing. Hope implies
a difficulty. The matter was very dangerous. For

(1) It was a matter of sin, that was upon them; if it had been a judgment
only, it had not been so amazing, but it was a sin that they discovered; a sin
without a judgment as yet inflicted, is more amazing, to Godly men, then
judgment without a visible sin. It was not a matter of famine, or oppression
and sickness, but it was a matter of Sin, and therefore troublesome:

2. It was a very dangerous sin, in the very nature and proper influence and
effects of it, where it takes place. Deuteronomy 7 34
They had married strange Wives, a thing expressly forbidden; the reason given,
Because these women would go nigh to draw them to strange Gods, Neb. 13.26.
exemplified sadly to their constant experience, and in Salomons case, even
him, that wise King, did outlandish women cause to sin. Ezra saw al Religion
hazarded hereby; he might think all his laborfrustrated by this sin of theirs,
and that it was to small purpose for him to set up sacrifices; for these strange
Wives would soon draw their hearts from them and God too.

3. He saw so many ensnared in this sin. Many of the great men, the Priests and
all, as you see chapter 9. 1. and chapter 10. 18. etc. and therefore more heinous
before God, amounting near to an universal guilt upon them, more exemplary and
scandalous, and harder to be reformed.

4. He considered this sin they were gotten into to be sadly aggravated, in
that so soon after their return from captivity a grievous judgment, wherein
they had so heavily suffered for such like doings. To be sinning again upon a
new score, when building upon the ruins, which their former sins had
immediately made, Alas? might he think, Josh. 21.17.
when will this people mend? when will they be warned to leave sin? Is the
iniquity of Poor too little for us? Is the Iniquity of our former Idolatry too
little for us? from which the land is not yet purged to this day. But must we
so soon begin again? It is very sad; this you see laid the thing sadder on his
heart. ch: 9. 7.

5. He considered the sin the greater, in that it was committed by them, that
escaped the judgment so narrowly. It was not long since, when it might have
been questioned, whether ever this people: should have been a people any more,
and now to find them such a rebellious people! They might have perished in
Babylon, as many thousands did, and therefore it is very sad to find them thus
grossly sinning here. Chap. 9. v. 13, 14. having had such a deliverance as this,
should we again break thy commandments? If they would have strange Wives, Ier.
7.10.
If they would have strange Wives, they should have tarried still in Babylon.
Are they delivered to do all these abominations? must the Lord have them for
such work as this is? Oh! it is very intolerable.

6. Their danger is great, there is no judgment yet on them, the soarer one
may be expected; God knows what is coming. Deuteronomy. 7.4
The anger of the Lord is kindled against the people upon such a sin as this
is, and sure all good will be at a stand about it, and some speedy ruin shall
overtake us. Alas! alas! who can tell, what may, nay what may not befall such a
rebellious daring people? Ezra from this consideration was thus amazed,
concludes his confession, he could not for shame tell how to move one word for
this people in this case, they had so basely miscarried, and therefore he
leaves the Business in his confession before God, not moving one word on the
peoples behalf, as it were not knowing what to say for them, nor what to think
miserable enough, that might be toward them.

3. What were the grounds Schecaniah had of hopes in this difficult case. There
is yet hope in Israel concerning this thing. Whence had he this hope, that
things might yet frame well?

1. In respect of God. 2. In respect of the people.
1. In respect of God, he confesses to all the causes of fear forementioned in
the thing, the matter was dangerous, the people had committed a great sin, and
that very unseasonably, and all might be hazarded thereby, yet there was Hopes
because they had to do with a gracious God, one that is slow to anger, of great
kindness, that is ready to forgive. J^el. 2.13 ^o^ah 4 2
If we were in any ones hands but Gods we were gone, there were no hopes for
us. But we have infinite compassions to hope in. There are terms of pardon on
Gods part tendered to sinners, that have got themselves into plagues for such
like miscarriages. If they had sinned, and gotten into captivity for it, and
yet should bethink themselves, and turn to the Lord, the Lord would yet show
favor to them, why then much more, 1. K 8.46 10.51.
if we repent and reform, we may prevent the judgment, his infinite bowels
and goodness makes me hope. He is a God that can overlook transgressions, Mic.
7.18.
that can put up great injuries, pass by great offenses. And therefore there
is Hope, he has been used to forgive ever since he had a people, he knew what
ado he should have with the sons of men, when he took any of them to be in
covenant with him. He is armed with infinite mercy and patience, when he goes
about to deal with us, he is not deceived in us, when he finds much
untowardnesse and frowardness in us. He will forgive us, for he has been used
to forgive in many the like cases, and is a God that can do it.

2. There is Hope in respect of our selves. I look upon the matter as much
more hopeful now, then lately or before, there are some signs of good amongst
us.

1. In that the people are generally sensible of the sin. Women and Children
are here flockt about thee, it should seem they are sensible of the
miscarriage and willing to mourn with thee.

2. Psalm. 78.34.
In that they are gotten thus forward without a judgment: people that have
sinned themselves into the judgment, have yet by repentance gotten off, though
they have not sought him till he show them, yet upon their repentance he has
tried them, and showed mercy to them, but we have the advantage to seek mercy
on this side of the judgment. We may better discern the truth of the
repentance, in that no judgment is on us to force it from us; we were not quite
shut up, though the execution had been served, but there is more hope if we
make our peace before the Writ be broken up, and we attached, it cannot but
save us much charge. There is very much in it in turning betime, some they seek
God, when they have no soar, no sickness, no judgment on them, and yet they
tremble before the Lord, assuredly it is a very good sign. If you were
afflicted in sorrow, yet your condition might be hopeful, but when only
convinced into sorrow, when you have ways enough besides to take, if your
hearts would let you, it is much better.

3. Lam. 3.33.
There is hopes, in that I believe the people are willing to amend. The Lord
that does not willingly afflict the Sons of Men if he see us so willing to
reform without judgment, is very ready to spare the Rod.

I do judge from these grounds that our hopes are yet alive, that there is yet
Hopes in Israel concerning this Thing.

CAP. II.
The Observation and the several cases wherein Sinners may Hope.

THe Observation, from the example of this good man in the text which I shall
raise hence is this.

That men in the greatest straights about sin should yet take notice of, and
cherish, the hopes which God has left them about their State.

Matters that are dangerous should not be counted desperate.

It was a commendable practice in Schecaniah, that he yet took notice of the
Hopes God had left in Israel about this thing.

I shall insist on this doctrine, in these three heads. Showing

1. In what case sinners should yet count of their Hopes.

2. How far or in what sense this is to be understood.

3. The reasons why they should thus take notice of their Hopes in the straits
they are in about their State.

1. In what cases sinners should yet count of their Hopes.

We shall briefly hint at some heads in the general, to clear the scope of
the discourse till we come to the application, where we shall resume the most
material of them, and endeavor to lay more particular weight on them. These
cases therefore may be considered.

1. In respect of their outward estate. 2. In respect of their inward estate.
Outwardly, and that. 1. Nationally. 2. Personally.

1. Nationally. Things may be dangerous in respect of the Church. Matters may
be out of order, be hindered, gone back, yet if the work be the Lords, there
should be hopes in such cases. The work here went poorly on. First they set up
an altar, then begin the Temple, that with much ado is gotten up at two bouts.
When that was up, many years after Ezra would restore the sacrifices, this is
heavily clogged with the great sin of the strange Wives, after all this
Nehemiah comes, and gets but up the walls, so difficultly goes the work on, and
yet it is all this while going on, God has it on foot, and is secretly
bringing it on, for all this. And so in David's case. He as soon as he was made
King, though Saul in all his reign would never think of bringing up the Arc,
he makes it his first design. 2. Sa. 6.
But now behold in the way God makes a breach upon Vzzah, upon which David is
displeased, he thinks it is too sacred a business for him ever to meddle with,
so as to have hopes to effect it, he can not be able to bring it up, it turns
aside to the house of Obed-Edom, yet God blesses that house where it was, makes
David see the Arc lovely, and they enquire into the matter of the right order:
and after all these breaches and discouragements, 1 Chr. 13.15.13.
they bring up this Arc with shouting to its place. And so the work of
reformation, though by the means of enemies, and false brethren it seem to
receive obstruction, that God seems to refuse the service, that his poor
Ministers would do him therein, has made breaches upon us, on some eminent
reformers in the very work, yet there is Hope in this thing: Reformation has
a blessing with it where it is, 2 Chr. 20.33.
and when God has prepared the heart of his people to seek him in the right
way, the Ark of God may yet rest in his own place in the midst of us. This
matter has yet life in it, and there is hopes in Israel, it will revive.

2. Personally. If in great outward afflictions, what ever thy straight is, 1
Cor. 10.
there is yet a way out. God will with the temptation whatever it is, find out
a way to escape, he can still find a way for thee to get out of it. David was
in a great straight, yet he encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Sa. 30.6.
and the Lord brought him off. Alas! If thou be in a straight, and say, thou
shall never get past this, it is no more then what thou have said many another
time, If thou had perished and been undone as often as thou have said thou
should, thou had not been alive to have said so now. It seems thou have
been deceived before, and so may be now, there is yet Hope in this thing.

2. Inwardly. In respect of some straights sinners may be in about their
spiritual estate. They may look on their cases as dangerous, and yet should
not count them desperate.

1. In the case of gross sin, upon the instant of the first conviction. The
soul is attached by the Lords Writ, convinced of the sad course he has lived
in, has his sin laid before him, set in order before his eyes, Psalm. 15.
he sees himself in an evil case, and is apt, now he is beaten off presuming,
to run upon the coast of despair. It is ordinary for sinners, either to count
their sins too little to repent of, or too great to be forgiven. So Cain, Genesis
14.13
my sin is greater then can be forgiven; Not my sin is greater then I can bear:
but my sin is greater then God can bear, now a soul in this case: though it be
hard set (as the securest sinner will be, if God do but open his eyes,) there
being no thing but a little ignorance between him and the brinke of the very
gulf of despair; yet it should take notice of the Hopes which God has left to
such a one: even vile sinners are invited to repent. Let the wicked
indefinitely, be he what sort of wicked man he can be, Is: 55.7.
let him forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, Let him
resolve upon a through change, and turn to the Lord and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Mat: 12.31.
All blasphemy wherewith soever men shall blaspheme shall be forgiven. There is
Hopes for the pardon of all sin, that men can repent of, and therefore a sinner
in this straight should take notice of the way God has prescribed in which
such a one may come off.

2. In the case of Apostasy. 1. Great and more general apostasy. Such a soul
thinks its case dangerous, and so indeed it is, one that has backsliden very
sore, forsaken his first love, fallen back into his wicked course again,
returned with the dog to the vomit again. Or 2. a child of God, that for one
particular act has done untowardly, as David; yet even in these cases, these
poor creatures are not shut up. Jer. 3. v. 1.
There is a way out for such sinners. A woman that has done wrong to her
husband, can not come back again; the land would be greatly polluted to have
such a one pardoned; the Adulteress is to dye; ver. 22.
but you have committed fornication with many lovers, yet return again to me,
says the Lord: I can receive when none in the like case, would or can receive;
I can do that which none else can do, Return ye backsliding Children, I will
heal your backslidings. Ye backsliding Children, I will not plague you for
your backslidings but will heal them; 1 Sa. 12. v. 20.21.22.
the people had sadly sinned, in rejecting God to be their King, God thunders
upon them, frights them with reign in harvest, the people were convinced of
their sin, saw the justice of God directly against them, what is now to be
done? is there any remedy left for such sinners? is there any way for such
sinners to come off? is there any way but going on in rebellion? and standing
out in the way as long as they could? or sitting down in despair, waiting for
inevitable destruction? yea, there is another way. For all you had done this
wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, for then you shall
follow after vain things, which can not profit, for the Lord will not forsake
his people. The Father will own his Child yet, if he would come in, only fear
the Lord and serve him, etc. and all this evil may be done away; you may yet
come off: though the matter be very bad, yet there is hope still for such as
you. David is convinced plainly and particularly of a very great and foul
Miscarriage: he confesses, I have sinned, I have done very foolishly. Ay, 2 Samuel 12.13.
but says Nathan, There is hopes still to come off, The Lord has done away
thy sin; Thou shall not die. In this difficult case of greater, or lesser
falling back, there is a way left to come off in.

3. In the case of Darkness, a Soul is in trouble, the Lord with-draws his
favor; nay, may make positive expressions of Indignation against the Soul, and
when the Lord makes trouble, who can give quietness? Job 34.29.
only yet there is hope, that he himself will make peace again; and a Soul in
this dark condition is not to be without hopes: David puts it to the question,
whether, and says, God will be gracious no more, yet after he says, Psalm 77
9.10.
This is my infirmity, there is hope in the thing. Let him that walks in
darkness and has no light, Isa. 50.10.
yet trust in the Lord, and stay himself upon his God. There is hopes of such a
Creatures reviving again, the Case is hard, but not desperate.

CAP. III.
The Nature of the Sinners Hope, as his Privilege and Duty, truly stated.

2. HOw far, or in what sense is this to be understood, that sinners in such
cases as these, should yet take notice of, and cherish their hopes? In this we
shall, by the way, endeavor to set out, how far we should give way to trouble
in case of sin, in our daily course, and how far we must avoid it. How near we
may come to consternation in such cases, and how far, or wherein we must fly
from it.

1. How it is not to be understood? We must in these cases hope, yet,

1. Not so, as not to see, and confess our sin, we are not so to clap on the
Plaster, as to hide, instead of healing the Sore, the Sore must be opened and
searched, before the Plaster be laid on. This else were a way to cover, rather
then cure the sin: He that covers his sin cannot prosper; Prove. 28.23.
but he that confesses and forsakes shall find mercy. David while he kept
silence, would have hidden his sin, he was in sad distress of Soul, but when he
resolved to acknowledge his transgression, then he found ease. It is a weary
restless condition of Soul, that any man can look for, notwithstanding all the
hopes, if he yet hide his sin.

2. Not so, as not to be under a sense of Gods displeasure, for what we have
done; this hope is not to be so fomented, as to make a man think, that God is
not displeased with what we have done; though there may be hope, he may be
again pacified: we are to look at God under conviction of sin, as placable, yet
as provoked at it. It is not to hope that God is not angry, but that his anger
may be turned away again. David had contrived and carried on his wickedness;
but thus it concludes, The thing that David had done displeased the Lord: 2 Samuel 11. ult.
the Lord was really offended at it. Jehosophat, the Lord would pardon him, yet
there was wrath out against him for what he had done. 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
We are to hope, yet not so, as to force kindness from God upon our selves, to
fancy that God looks over our miscarriages, without any distaste of them, to
fancy, that such things as these shall never be looked after, as the profane
Athiest that says, Psalm. 10.
Tush, the Almighty regards not, he will not require it. Who ever do thus, it
is not such a hope that God has left them; not such an Antinomian fancy, to
think, that God loves us so fondly, as to love us in the very act of sin, in
our very wickedness. This is not Faith, we ought not to hope thus, which is
besides all reason and Scripture grounds: there may be hope, yet displeasure
too.

3. Not so to hope, As not to be ashamed truly before God, for what we have
done: it is Impudence in us to look upon God as confidently, as if we had done
nothing amiss; this setting a Face upon our sins, as if we had not offended at
all. Ezra was ashamed and confounded, and could not stand before the Lord; Ezra
9. ult
Could not look God in the face, because of that they had done. Shecaniah does
not propose these hopes to take off the shame that was due to them for sin. We
are not to hope so as not to be ashamed: Jer. 6 15.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush. This was a great Complaint, and God
threatens them for it; Therefore they shall fall among them that fall. Jer.
2.26.
As a Thief is ashamed, so is the House of Israel ashamed: As a man reputed to
be honest, and is caught stealing, is ill abasht; or one that has used
stealing, and is caught so doing, is made to carry his stolen Goods back again
in his hand, is fearfully ashamed of it. So is a Sinner that is apprehended by
the Spirit of God, with his sin upon him, and so sadly and miserably is to
carry in Gods presence because of it, and yet hope too.

4. Not so to hope, As not to be very much humbled and vile in his own Eyes. He
is not so to run to his hopes, as to save his due humiliation for what he has
done, to think basely and vilely of himself for his miscarriage: we are apt
either to despair in our selves and God too, or else to hope in God and our
selves too; whereas we must divide in this case, and hope in God, yet utterly
despair in our selves. Oh! upon such a straight, we ought to see the vileness
and weakness of our selves herefrom. Oh! this is my base and perverse Spirit?
this is my folly and wretchedness, this is that which is the best my heart will
bring forth, etc. and yet hope in God.

5. Not so to hope, 1 Timothy 1.1.
As not to see our absolute need to Christ: to hope so in such cases is sinful
hope. The Apostle speaks of Christ Jesus who is our hope. Though sin should not
drive us to despair, yet it should drive us to Christ alone to hope in: We are
so far to be troubled, as to make suit to our Blastus, to speak a good word for
us: Hope, to skip besides, or without Christ to Souls ease, is sad,
preposterous, and unchristian hope.

6. Not so to hope, As not to combat and strive to the utmost against the sin:
We are not to hope that the sin shall be pardoned, if we still allow it. It is
not an hope to let the sin alone: we are not to despair, so neither to hope
with the sin still upon us; not to hope, to save us any further labor about
the business, but to engage to the utmost against our sin, upon the ground of
this hope which the Lord has left us in our difficult case.

But secondly, How is it to be understood? We are not in cases of sin to give
way to consternation of mind so far; As (1.) in general.

1. To undo any of the conclusions concerning Gods goodness, that are made from
Scripture grounds. Sin concerns us, but Forgiveness belongs to God; what we
have done, we ought to be humbled for, but what he will do hereupon does not
concern us to determine against. What ever we are, we must leave God as we find
him in Scripture; while we bring down our selves, we must not go about to bring
down him too: while we truly discover our own badness, we must be careful we
disparage not his Goodness; what ever case we are in, Psalm. 86.5 and 103.8.
Exodus 34.7 Neh. 9.17.
we must still conclude, that God is where he was, A God ready to forgive, a
God slow to anger, a God pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin. Thou art
to say, what thou have done, that thy sin is great, etc. but to say, it cannot
be forgiven, this is not left to thee to determine on: what God will do to thee
is altogether with him, he is a gracious and a merciful God still.

2. Nor to make any peremptory conclusion about the event and issue of the
thing. To say, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. To say, 1. Sa. 27.1.
I am cut off, my hope is perished from the Lord. To say, I cannot be saved;
this will bring me to Hell: I am sure I must perish: this is to prevent God. It
is not for thee to make Decrees; thou know not, what ever thou art at
present, what yet God may make thee, Mat. 19.26.
and what thou may come to before thou die: With God all things are
possible, Sinners ought therefore to be sparing in their final determinations
concerning themselves, for secret things belong to God, And many such things
are with him. It is a mercy thou art not in Hell already, and it may be hoped,
thou shall not in the end ever come there.

2. More particularly, We are not to let down our hopes.

1. For a Sinner, upon his Conviction he is to hope, that upon his repentance
he may yet find mercy. God has given forth his Son, That whoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life. 1 Jo 3.16.
The vilest Sinner that comes in upon the Proclamation of pardon, is bound to
believe he shall find acceptance.

2. For the Godly, upon any failing, or sin, they are fallen into, or discover in
themselves.

1. They are to hope, so as not to cast down all their evidences of grace in
their Souls, raised and duly gathered before, for this one sin; one sin does
not evidence the want of Grace: He that is born of God sins not, 1 Jo. 3.9.
The Seed of God abides in him. This Seed of God, that brings him off, makes
him humble and turn to God, abides in him. Thy sin may argue a defect of strong
Grace, but not of true Grace.

2. They are Not to conclude against persuasions of Gods love to them, if ever
they had any upon Scripture grounds. I am God, I change not. God does not cast
off for every Offense: Mar. 3.6. 1 Samuel 12.21.
God will not forsake his People, for his great Names sake; because it has
pleased the Lord to make them his People.

3. They are Not to conclude this sin less pardonable then another. God can
forgive this, as well as he has forgiven others, and will do it upon their
repentance for it. Psa. 151.1.
Forgive my sin for it is great: A great Sin, infinite Mercy can forgive: If we
sin, he is not only Merciful, but just and faithful, in respect of his
Justice so fully satisfied by Christ, and his Truth, of promise whereby he is
engaged to forgive us our sins.

CAP. IV.
The Grounds of the Sinners Hopes as before stated.

3. THe Reasons why a Sinner should take notice of, and cherish his hopes in
his worst condition.

1. Because of the large footing God has given for a Sinners hoping in any
state almost, R. 1.
he can be in by his sin.

1. The first ground is, the Lords disposition and nature of mercy and
placableness toward a poor Sinner; Which gives him footing for his hope
abundantly in any particular case. As,

(1.) From his Name, and Attributes, whereby he has made himself known to his
people. God proclaims his Name to Moses, to be the Lord, the Lord God, the
powerful, the mighty Jehovah, Exodus 34.
which ministers comfort, when annexed to his manifestation of himself in this
way of mercy. Merciful, inclined to pity, the sin and misery of his people,
ready to relieve them in their distress, and not only just to require the due
Service, and punish the defaults; Gracious, of an affable condescending
descending nature, not standing upon the distance that he is in, as a great
King above all his Creatures; he may be petitioned, sought unto, and prevailed
with by his poor Suitors. Long-suffering, that is, not hasty to use severity
with the worst of Sinners, usually taking all other ways first with them, 1 Timothy 2.4
Willing that all men should repent and come to the knowledge of the truth:
Trying many that repent not with much goodness to draw them to it. Romans 9.22
Enduring with much patience the very Vessels of wrath, before he brings
Destruction on them. And one that with his own Children bears abundantly, takes
them not at the worst in every thing they do: Suffers their manners in the
Wilderness. Can take great Indignities at their hands, and pass them by upon
their repentance, Micah. 7.18.
and put them up. That passes by the transgression of his people. If his
people want good things, though they deserve them not at his hands, yet he has
Goodness out of which he is ready to supply them: he can satisfy them out of
his goodness, he has made them promises of mercy upon all occasions of their
sin and repentance. And he is a God of truth: He holds himself, though no
Debtor to us, yet a Debtor to his own good Word to his Servants, and both these
in no stinted manner, but he is abundant in them: We cannot need him so far,
but his goodness and truth abounds to us: he will multiply his goodness and
truth to us upon occasion: many have had experience of his mercy, but this
exhalts it not to those that come after; He keeps mercy for thousands, not only
shows mercy, but reserves mercy for thousands, and not only in some cases, but
in all cases he forgives Iniquity, transgression, and sin.

Now observe, he proclaims himself by this Name, when the people had finned a
great and fearful sin, in making a Calf in Horeb, when he was highly provoked,
Would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stood in the breach, etc.
Yet for all this, Ps. 106.23
this great provocation could not make him change his Name; but though he
declares his resolution to visit for obstinate sin, yet he will, for all that,
be known by no name but this, in respect of the truly penitent.

2. He is described to be slow of anger, Ps. 103.8.
not easily provoked: men are soon provoked, great men usually expect more
punctual observance then others, and are easily incensed, if they be not
observed in every circumstance. But God is slow to anger. It were sad for us,
if we had such an one of him, so hard to please, so very critical, so easily
moved, as some Children and Servants, have Parents and Masters of us. But God
is not so, he would have us slow to wrath, Ja. 1.19.
for so should we be Children of Our Father which is in Heaven, for such a one
indeed is he.

3. Not apt to stir up all his anger, upon any enforcing occasion, or
provocation. Moses was frighted over the people, Deuteronomy. 9.19
when he saw the Lords wrath waxed hot, for he saw nothing but a consuming fire
in it for them. But many times he turns his anger away, and puts up some
peevish untowardness in us: Psa. 78.38.
And when he is angry, he does not stir up all his wrath; it would be sad if he
did.

4. Not apt to be long angry, he will not retain his wrath, Ps. 30.5, 6. and
86.5. Isa 57.16.
he will not contend with his Creatures, for then the Spirit would fail before
him, and the Soul that he has made. Many of us for no cause can be angry, and
heartily angry, and long angry, but if we have just cause of provocation, we
rather study how to express our anger, then how to bear the Offense, and few
think at all how to proportion our anger so, as to know how they can bear it
against whom it is stirred. Ps. 103.14
But he, though provoked, is considering our frame, and remembering not only
what he can do against us, and what we have done against him, to provoke him to
it, but what we are, and what we can undergo, of what he might lay upon us.

Now who ever they are, that make it their first work to despait in every
difficult case, they must needs have other thoughts of God then what these
expressions manifest of him. If he be such a one, what case is there, but one
may have some hopes about it?

2. The second ground is, That full and complete way of mercy, that he has
found out and set forth for us in Jesus Christ. He is one, not only with whom,
Mat. 3. ult.
but in whom he is well pleased: well pleased with all that have interest in
him. He is every way such an high Priest as became us. Heb. 7.26. Col. 1.19.
Jo. 6.37. Heb. 2.17.18.
In him all fullness dwells; he is one, that the Father will in no wise cast
out: Those that come to him in his Name. He is not one that cannot be touched
with a feeling of our Infirmities. He has been in the flesh, and so knows what
it is to be a man; though he knows not what it is to sin, yet he knows what it
is to be tempted to it, and what it is to bear the weight and burden of it. He
knows the company we live with in the world, in the mids of Men and Devils, as
Luther phrased it. And so being a man for us, we may look upon the Deity as
blessedly accessible hereby, and know that he has pity and tender respect for
our nature and kind.

The third ground, Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. Jo. 7 37.
The universal tender of mercy, who ever will, let him come. The great day of
the Feast, when most people was there, he makes the Proclamation, That who ever
is a thirst, may come to him and drink. Hence (as one says) He was born in an
Inn, not in a private House, and crucified out of the City, and not within
Jerusalem, because the business and benefit of his Birth and Death was not of
private concernment, not to be confined to one place, or one people: the Gospel
is to be preached to every Creature. Mat. 16.16. Isa. 55.1.


The fourth ground, The freeness of this tender, Come and buy, and he that has
no money come: I can but have nothing; the worst Chapman that can come to the
Market, can be but he that has neither money, nor price; and yet such as these
may speed well, and go home best provided. They that come hither must have
nothing: thou art but in the poor condition beforehand, that every man must be
reduced to, that closes with Christ; None ever had him that deserved him, and
thou art but undeserving.

The fifth ground, That nothing is required at our hands, but the same is
promised unto us. I may come to Christ for the Condition, and upon that
Condition for Pardon: the nature of the Covenant is wonderful; he has
promised to perform both parts, Jer. 31.31.32. and 24.7. and 32.39.40.
there is nothing I can find at any time, that may incapacitate me, or hinder
me for comfort; but before I cast off my hopes, I may see that very thing
promised that is required: and sure this well considered, does wonderfully fit
a poor Christians turn upon many pinches, that otherwise he should be at a loss
in about his comfort. We cannot apply Christ but upon condition, but blessed be
God, we are not to find the Condition in our selves, or at our own proper cost
(which would never be done) but we are readily directed, where to have it. If I
cannot challenge Christ to be mine for want of an Interest, I may go to him for
an Interest. If I cannot apply him for want of Faith or Repentance, or any
other Grace, I may go to him for Faith and Repentance, and that Grace; so that
still I have something else fair before me to do, then presently to despair,
when any such straight is upon me.

2. We are to hope, R. 2. Ja. 1.20.
For consternation does no good, this like the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God. Thou think when thou have escaped thy unreasonable
presumption, thou can not be too low, nor low enough, and that it is thy duty
to cast down thy self. There is a Mean of hope between these, which is thy
duty; to despair for sin is sin, and to give way to trouble to the utter
dejection of a man's heart before God, is to give way to a sin: you think you do
but bring down self hereby, but beware You take not God down with you; this
despair brings God no honor, hinders thy doing, makes thee useless, nay,
directly reflects upon God, in that thou have such hard thoughts of him, and
actest against his express will and pleasure. It is the Command of God, that
you should believe in his Son, 1 Jo. 3.23.
that you should believe what God has graciously revealed, that there is mercy
with him, and pardon to be had from him upon repentance. Many in this case
count that a duty which is no small sin, extol Gods mercy as high as you can,
and you glorify him thereby: so be it, you conclude right of the Subject of
it; Viz. That you set not up mercy with allowance of sin in your self, and
bring self as low as you can, and it is a like good, so be it, thou include not
Gods mercy in the thing, to bring that lower then thee.

3. R. 3.
This hope will facilitate thy repentance, and reformation. There is mercy with
thee that thou may be feared: Men would not ingeniously nor filially fear
thee, if thy mercy did not give them hopes. The Assyrians might rather have
studied to have rallied their broken Forces against Israel, then have
submitted, if they had not known the Kings of Israel to be merciful Kings. Ps.
103.3. 1 Kin. 20.31. Jer. 2.25.
Thou say there is no hope, I have followed after other Lovers, and after
them I will go. I am like, it seems, to be destroyed, past cure, past care: I
cannot get off, therefore I will do as I do. Endeavors languish where there is
no hope. 1 Cor. 9.10.
He that ploweth ploweth in hope; or else the sharpness of the season and the
hardness of the labor would make him sit still. Hanun, that had so
villainously entreated David's Messengers, 2 Sa. 10.6.
saw he had done so vilely, that his Action stank in the Nostrills of Israel,
and all his Neighbors, that he had no way but to prepare for War: So sinners,
when they look upon their state as desperate, they are likeliest to go on, as
if they were tied to make it out, and to stand, or fall by it. Themistocles
would at any time make his Enemy a Bridge of Gold to fly away upon, rather then
force them to fight. When a sinner sees no hope of quarter, he has much ado to
yield to be slain, but rather being desperate, if he be without hopes of life,
he will sell his life as dear as he can. A Soldier in the Army, that had a
mortal Disease upon him, was observed to look like death, and yet to fight
most valiantly, the Emperor took him for his Valor, and had his distemper
searched into, and he became cured: After this, he was not observed to be so
daring and venturous, as before; The Emperor asked him the reason, he said,
Before he looked upon himself as a dying man, and therefore mattered not to have
been killed, but now his Disease was cured, he would take more care, for he had
a life to save now, as well as another. So when sinners think they have done
that already, that cannot be forgiven, that must necessarily ruin them without
redemption; it rather makes them more desperate in the charges and onset in
their courses, but if once they see hopes of life dawn, they will not be so
prodigal of their Souls, because they think they may escape, as well as
another. God has for the same reason made you way enough to come off upon,
golden Bridges to retreat on, which may put life into your resolutions for a
sparing course in sin, and to come off by repentance. Thy repentance would
strengthen thy Hopes, thy Hopes draw on thy Repentance.

4. R 4.
Not to hope, or to despair, though in these streights about sin, is so purely
fleshly and carnal, savouring of that emnity that is naturally in our hearts
against God, as we would little think. Rank flesh it is, as can be.

1. Thou have sinned, and thou know thou have cause to think ill of thy
self, and thou art loath to think so well of God, as that he is notwithstanding
ready to pardon. Among Men usually we see a want of Grace in men that do wrong,
and so as much want of Grace in others, that they cannot suffer it: and so the
Party offending watches to cover his own vileness in affronting, by the others
fury and impatience upon the reception of it. And so thou know thy self to
have done basely, and thou art loath to aggravate thy sin so far, as to think
thou have sinned against a God that is ready to pardon. Thou would either
trample upon patience, or deny it; Romans 2.3.
Not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance. Oh! to see
God so ready to forgive, and thou so ready to sin: thou so easily to forget
him, and he so hardly forgetting thee; thou so treacherous, and he so gracious:
Oh! how unlike are God and we? how might it break thy heart to consider it? But
we are apt to study to disparage, at least, we would not honor, the party we
injure.

2. Thou art has to be so beholden to him, as to think of hopes of pardon;
hope implies present need and poverty: thou art loath to submit, and stand
rather on thy justification, would fain come off upon another score, then
that of a pardon on thy knees: men are very loath to submit to free Grace, no
small matter to have that inward sense of wretchedness, as readily to run out
after salvation for Gods sake. There is a carnal enmity in the heart against
Christ's sovereignty, thou would not be Conquered, but stand for thy Native
Privilege; truly loath to stoop so low as to take a pardon at his hands. And
is not this sin of an high nature? Is this a temper to be indulged? there is
the highest pride in despair that looks so low.

3. This despair is pure Carnality; for thou often doubtest at the promise, when
in truth thou stumblest at the Condition: thou had rather despair then
repent; thou think God will not pardon, because thou have a mind still to
sin: thus would thou make thy choice a necessity, to delight thy self in thy
course, and cast the blame of it other-where. Thou say, there is no hope,
Jer. 2.25.
when in truth thou have no mind. There is no hope, and why no hope? For I have
followed after other Lovers, and after them I will go. I have no hope in this
way, because I am resolved another, that is the true reason of it. Who is apt to
think there is any hope in altering, in a business he has a mind to be as it
is? Obedience is the thing we stick at, we have underneath a love to sin, and
so would cover it, with this pretense, that there is no hope, if we should
repent. Men that would clear their sincerity in their troubles, might do well
to lay aside their sin in the first place, and after to get hopes as they can:
but many times persons cry out of their hopeless condition, when secretly they
hug their sin still. God says, Turn ye, Ezekiel. 18.
turn ye, why will ye die? It is not answered again, we must die, therefore
why should we turn? No, you are resolved to live in your sin, and this despair
must be your pretense for so doing; of such a nature and savor many times is
this our much dejection and consternation in the Soul, such unthought of pride
and carnality is cherished and indulged under the notion of self-humiliation:
but men should cherish their hopes for these reasons.

CAP. V.
The Use of the Observation to the un-converted, tending to the startling of
Sinners out of their security.

WE shall endeavor to apply this Observation;

1. To those that are un-converted, and this under a threefold design.

1. To rouse them from their security. 2. To inform them of the truth of their
estate. 3. To persuade them from Impenitency.
1. To rouse Sinners from their security. Sinners should take notice of their
hopes: now carnal men are not yet come into a capacity of hoping, they least
question their estate of any; they conclude their condition good at first, do
not question but it must go well with them: to tell them there are hopes about
them, is to make them worse then they were, to put a doubt in that, wherein
hitherto they have made none at all: to tell you, it is not impossible, but you
may go to Heaven, there may be hopes, etc. it is uncouth to you; you wonder we
do not peremptorily conclude on the business: like a man that is not sensible
of his sickness, and the Physician tells him, that he may happen recover: you
doubt your salvation least of all, but let me tell you, if there be hopes of
you, that is all: we would by this Doctrine raise up some men's hopes, so we
must take down others confidence: I would all that are above it were brought
down to good hopes; so be it, all that are below it, were but brought up so
far. And therefore to startle such as you are; take notice that for that great
and dreadful case of your eternal Salvation, hopes are all: but there is a
world of danger.

1. If you knew but what is in you, you would see that hope was fair for one in
your condition. Alas, there is enough done, if you never do more, to make thee
miserable at this very present, if God do but open thine eyes: poor Creature!
thou art busy healing thy self out to fin, but God looks on thee all the
while; but if God let thee but see, that he has looked on, how would thy
present condition affright thee? This witness would make thee, Job 24.7.
as in the terror of the shadow of death: If God did but take up thy lying,
swearing, Sabbath-breaking, the neglect of the last Duty, and one of these sins
set on by the Spirit of God, would put thee into fear sufficient, and it would
be well, if the fin that at present is too little to repent of, be not
presently too great in thy eyes to be forgiven, when ever God sets thy sin in
order, Ps. 50.21.
there will fearful matter enough be found against thee, to make thee stoop,
and be beholden dearly to a little hope. Alas, take carnal hearts in the
wholes, and there is nothing between them and the greatest terror imaginable
but a little blindness and ignorance of their miserable condition. If you did
but see your selves just as you are, it is well if you could hope; assure your
selves the root of terror and anguish is in you, and that some are troubled,
it is not because their conditions are not so good as yours, but their
Consciences are more tender, and they cannot swallow a bad and fearful state
as you can: the matter of all terror is ready with thee, thou artready
charged, it is but Gods priming, and putting fire to, and thou needs not stir a
foot to fetch in misery unutterable; all thy mirth may be at an end, there is
enough done, nothing but the dropping of a Scale from thine eye and thy Flames
are ready about thee.

2. Thou may be glad of the news of hope, for at present I may blank thee,
thou art not in the way that thou can possibly be saved in: things are so far
out with thee, that there is not yet any show of a foundation laid in thee for
any hopes of thee, thou do not doubt at all of being saved, and I say thou
may be saved; but let this startle thee toward a change, this way thou art
in will never do it, men never went to Heaven this way, it is a Road that will
never lead thither, there is nothing done yet that will secure thee from
eternal ruin: 1 Cor. 6.9.
be not deceived, what ever such as you may be so mad to think, be it known to
you, you cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. If you indulge your selves in
known sin, this way will put you besides all hopes. Jo. 3.36.
He that believes not; that is, is not converted to believe, he needs do no
more for falling into wrath, he is born to it already, the wrath of God never
removes from over that person, his estate is of wrath: The wrath of God abides
on him; Romans 1.18
the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of men.
It is not confidence of your condition that will make it good; sure that man
has no reason to sit still, or to think he has nothing to do, when he has
yet nothing done toward his salvation, and the way wherein he is will be his
ruin; thou hopest fairly for Heaven, when thou art in the way that never any
went to Heaven in.

3. Thou may soon be at thy Journeys end, and at thy reckoning, to make use
of all the hope thou have; there may be but a step (for ought thou know)
between thee, and death. Alas, 1 Sa. 20.3.
it is but getting a Cold, and falling sick, and dying, and then thou comst to
trial, for all the things done in the flesh. It may take thee with a diddering
and shaking, and thou may (for any thing any body can tell) begin to shake
for Hell. Oh! thou that art at peace, and dwell at ease, how soon may thy
misery come armed upon thee? Thou despisest so low a rate as hope: why? Alas!
if God set but Death before thee, thou will see thy self be-set as the
Benjamites; Thou know not that evil was near thee, Jud. 20.34
and behold, thou art be-set on all sides; an ill life behind thee, and Hell
before thee. Oh! what will become of thee? For the wicked man God has whet his
Sword, he has bent his Bow, made all ready. Psalm. 111.
Thou may not yet be stricken: The Bird yet alive, but fire ready to strike.
Alas, it is but Gods putting in any of the Creatures into the Writ, to be his
Officer, to Arrest thee and to cast thee into prison, and verily thou shall not
come out thence, till thou have paid the utmost Farthing; and that will never
be, if you ever be so miserable, as to make the Experiment of it: therefore
thou have cause to startle, thy death may be near, and thy Death may prove thy
Hell.

4. There is but one way in all the world for thee to come off upon, and that a
very narrow one; you do not think your condition so dangerous, that you are
within one, by many pleas, for your salvation: but so it is, that if Conversion
help not, you are sure for escaping, you are undone for ever, thou art upon a
narrow point, if thou could see it. It is Gods Record, that he gives
eternal life, 1 Jo. 5.11, 12.
and this life is in his Son. No other way but by Christ to have eternal life:
Sure you must many of you, either find many ways to Heaven and Happiness, or
else you must tremble to think your selves out of this way, when there is none
but this one.

Weigh these things well, and see whether here be not cause for you to tremble,
and if that a message of hope would not do well.

CAP. VI.
Further tending to enform several sorts of Sinners, especially of the
dangerousness of their present station; how little Hopes, and upon what terms
only, there are any hopes, of sundry sorts of Men.

2. THis may inform you of the truth about your Estate and Condition; we may
tell you, 1. Of some Conditions that are very and much more dangerous then
others. 2. Of some that are very hopeless above others. 3. What our hopes are
of any of you.


1. Of some Conditions that are very dangerous, and less hopeful. Oh! there is
little hopes, and therefore beware of these Sinners estates, fly from the Tents
of these men. Number. 16.26.


1. Of an old Sinner, such are rarely converted, sin rivetted, and twice
natured to them: such as these are many times very ignorant, and deeply
conceited of their wisdom, and their parts decayed, and so out of a capacity
of attaining saving knowledge; old men are hardly turned, rarely born again: to
take Nicodemus his doubt literally, Can a man be born again when he is old? Jo
3.4.
God knows it seldom comes to pass, Oh, therefore look to it in your young
time, this is the sowing time, this is the best season: Prove. 10.5
little hopes of an old Sinner.

2. Of a worldly Professor. Oh, much danger of such a one, the world holds
their heart from Christ, and their Profession keeps convictions of their
hearts, the World steals the Soul for Hell, and Profession keeps the Watch,
that the Theft is un-discovered till all be lost, the World is enough to damn
thee, and thy Profession enough to secure thee in the way of damnation; the
World satisfies thy Lust, and Profession thy Conscience, and so thou art most
certainly bound for destruction, if God do not by strong hand fetch thee out.
Our Savior says, Mat. 19.23.
How hard is it for a rich man to enter into Heaven? Easy for a rich man to
profess Religion, but hard for him savingly to be religious; easy for him to
do nothing so well, as to post to Hell and destruction. Oh, look to it all of
you, this, by this has many fallen, secretly and surely stolen their ruin: it is
the most quiet, secure, sweet, triumphing sure way to Hell that a man can go.
As Mr. Bradford said of Martyrdom for Heaven, so I may say of Worldliness
under Profession, if there be a way to Hell on Horseback, this is it: If thou
have taken up Profession, and yet in heart love the World, thy Condition is
very dangerous; when the Word and Ministry would come to heal thee, thou
salvest thy self by thy Profession, and wilt not be the carnal man, when such
a one is spoken to, and yet love the World carnally and damnably, and wilt
ruin thy self this way. And thus covertly keep thy heart wicked, to go to
Hell with them when thou die.

3. Of an Apostate Heretic. Oh, such as these are hardly saved, if saved at
all, 1 Cor. 3.15.
yet so as by fire; a stick that is in the fire may escape with scortching, if
catched before kindled. They are many of them given up to strong delusions, 2
These. 2.11, 12.
to the efficacy of Delusions, that they may believe Lies, and all this in the
end to be damned. These poor Wretches if saved at all, we save them with fear,
as plucking them out of the fire, Hellfire being ready to kindle on them, by
the light of which they seem to walk, while they are here. O! fly the Tents of
these wicked men, whose state is so dangerous.

4. Of a Deathbed Penitent. Oh! this state is very hazardous, men then to have
all their work to do, and undo, when they are unfit to do any thing, and can
have so little certainty of their own reality in any thing they profess, then
to desire to do. A man may in fear of Death seem to cast away his sin,
Instructions to afflicted Consciences.
and think verily himself he does do it, and yet if he recover, be as ready to
take it up as ever, which evidences the little hold a man can have of his own
heart at such a time. Mr. Bolton tells of a Thief that was condemned, and seemed
so penitent while under the Sentence of Death, that some, out of hopes of his
real Conversion, begged his life: and this man was within two years after
Executed for stealing again. These Experiences make us very little satisfied in
any professions of Repentance at Death, after a grossly wicked Life; God may
honor himself by your acknowledgment of him, and choosing to die in his way,
and our Charity is bound up, and we leave you, not determining of your case,
but our Charity will not certify for you, to make good your entrance into
life, you may be judged for all this according to your life, and be eternally
undone: It is good repenting therefore, when a man knows what he does, what he
himself means, which on a sick Bed one cannot do. It is poor going for any man
into another World, with that preparation only, that a sick Bed can furnish him
with.

2. Yet there be some Conditions, not only less hopeful then others, but quite
in a manner hopeless.

1. Of a Professor that turns Persecuter. Oh, this is very high, when men leave
God and revolt to the other side; it is no mean wickedness will serve their
turn, as the Philistims said of David, 1 Sa. 29.4.
How shall he reconcile himself to his Master, but by the heads of these men?
So how shall this man be taken to heart in Satan's Army, unless he recover his
Credit by more open Hostility, then ever he did act in before. No Turk so bad
as the Renegado Christian, and surely this is such an high Indignity to Christ,
and the Spirit of Grace: this is such a despite, such a trampling under foot
the precious blood of the Covenant, that such a one seldom or never recovers.
A Back-slider may return, but then he stops there: but a Backsliding
Persecutor he goes so far the other way, that there is scarce any room for him
to turn on. Mr. Latimer tells of one in his time that despaired, that had once
been a Professor; and after mocked at the Truth, judging that he had sinned
against the Holy Ghost, and how he bad him go home to his Prayers, and he would
to his Study; and another day tell him what he thought: For (says he) I
understood it well enough, but could not well declare it, but I will bungle at
it as well as I can: and so he answered, and after asserted in the case: that
Privilegium paucorum non destruit regulam universalem; This man (says he) I
knew that repented, and many to have done as he did; and yet never a one
returned but he. We would endeavor to find a Door open for such to get out at,
if they got repentance; but usually such engage so far, that they come hardly
to repent. A Persecuter at first hand may be converted, but one of these God
seldom gives repentance to, that he may turn again: and this is but too common
a thing, which I mention, to make men tremble that are secure and careless, as
too many are; that at first, when (it may be) they were low in the World, they
professed Religion, but when gotten a little great and rich, they begin to
slight their Profession, and stick not to mock and scoff at the best people,
though (it may be) under the notion of such a Party, dissenting from the worser
sort in some Disciplinary Controversle, but this will not excuse their hatred
and affront to Religion it self, and men may soon engage further, then they can
easily come off in such a desperate course: and therefore let them that have
professed, beware what they do, they bring an evil report upon Religion, they
advance the Devils Kingdom, they harden many to their ruin, and fearfully bar
out their own repentance: If you do go off, beware to take heed how far you go:
of all kind of Sinners beware of being a Persecuter, and of all Persecuters,
let the Apostate Persecuter look about him.

2. A man that forsakes the public Ordinances, profanely, or otherwise, there
is little or no hopes of: the Ordinances are the Means, which God does
ordinarily use to make men better by; and therefore this is a sin of an high
nature, because it is against the Means of being changed. This made Mr. Latimer
say, Come to Church if it be but to sleep there, for God may take thee napping;
the Minister may awake thee, if there, and God may together with it awaken thy
Soul: if you lie in Christ's way, there is hopes; if you be about the Pool,
though you cannot get in, yet you may be healed: but when men go quite out of
all high ways, their Conditions are heavily marked out for dangerous. Alas! it
is some more then ordinary service and security the Devil designs from you, if
he prevail upon you this way, to get you careless of Ordinances, and to get a
trick of idling at home on the Sabbath day. If men be wicked, yet if they go to
the public Ordinances, the Devil is not so sure of any of them: a word set on
by Preaching, may drive him out of possession of the very worst of you; and
therefore when he designs to have some more then ordinary security of you, that
you shall be true to his service, and be his for ever, never to overrun his
Colors, he would break you off from Ordinances, and then he needs look no more
after you, unless it be to set you on some eminent Piece of Work for him, which
only such a one is fit for. He may have hopes of many that go to Church; that
he shall light of a good share of them, but this puts him to pains, and he is
often made to be-stir himself, since the Ordinances of God make Batteries on his
Holds, and he is liable to be turned at every Sermon, out of some heart, and
Sinners by long Sieges may be forced to yield: but when he knows he has a
strong Garrison within, and has removed them from all Leagures, he may leave
that Soul, and find it at any time safe enough to him.

We in Christ's behalf, what Promises soever any make to us, can have no
security of you, if you keep still in loose and bad Company: No more can he
have hold of any for Hell, as long as still they are frequenting Public
Ordinances.

And those that do thus, he does not only design to be sure of them, but he
intends some more then ordinary Service from them; these men are like to serve
him in any thing he puts upon them, they keep out of the way of having any
thing to hinder them. What is there to hinder the vilest thought of taking
place? of Corruption rising to an height in the heart? go to the Church and
some word may meet it, and give check to it, that if men be wicked, yet they
cannot afford to be so very wicked: but when he has you out of the noise, of
the word, no Voice behind you, to tell you of another way, you know not what
wickedness you shall stop at. Thus have I heard of, and known some, that have
ended their days on the Gallows, that have confessed, that the first step
toward that Ignominious Death, has been their Sabbath-breaking. When men dare
turn their backs on Gods Ordinances, and sit at home, it is hard to think what
Meditations they may have at home; nay, what for vileness and wretchedness may
they not have? Sure Satan has a design to take you from Gods teaching, that he
may have you in secret, and on Gods own Day, to teach you wholly at home. If
idling at home be thy Sabbathdaies work, no marvail, if Thieving, Whoredom,
and what not be thy Sabbath-daies Meditations? Alas! it is not a matter of
Clothes.

1. Ja. 2.1.2, 3 4, 5.
God has enjoined us not to be partial in our selves, and to judge after
evil Thoughts; a poor man in vile Raiment, in case of Contest, is not to be
under-valued, but to be equally administered to in a way of Justice, as the rich
man in costly Apparel, with his Gold Ring on his Finger, and if you come into
these Assemblies, much more, we shall be as glad to see you as greater men, and
as much desire the Salvation of your Souls.

2. Sure it is a greater shame to stay at home needlessly, then to appear at
Church in the poorest Raiment.

3. The Devil will venture to teach you in Rags.

4. And besides, see what a Design the Devil has carried on against you: it
may be, you have been of better fashion among your Neighbors, and you have
drunk your selves out of your Clothes, your former going to Church has not
hindered your loose living, and now he has brought you to beggary, and so
ashamed to go to Church at all, and now he may do what he will with you.

5. But when you come to die, and find the want of what you should die with,
and this upon your Consciences, that you neglected the means of getting it,
what a rage will this leave you in?

6. And besides all this, the Damned in Hell, if they might have leave to come
to the Ordinances, would make it no matter of Clothes; they would be glad to
hear a Sermon for the good of their Souls, though in the poorest Clothes that
ever man wore.

But men that do thus, there is the least hopes possibly of them of any again.
And those that leave the public Ordinances out of Conscience, their Condition
is no better, they are to lead the Devils Van, they are gone through Profession
to the Devils Camp on the other side. They frame mischief by a Law: They
forsake Assemblies, and justify it, and doubly affront the Ordinance of
Christ; and these are more unlike to return to the Assemblies again, and as
sure as any, to feel the damning effects of their neglect of them. This for
those that are very hopeless.

But thirdly, We may show, what our hopes are of any of you, that are yet vile
and live in sin: Why, truly we may, to affect your hearts with it, open our
very hearts to you about your Estate; As indeed it were but reasonable, that
you should ask your Ministers advice about your Condition; you are not apt to
trust your Assurance for your Estates, without the advice of your Lawyer: For
your bodily Health, you are willing to ask the Physician, and and very
earnestly sometimes desire him to tell you, what he thinks of you, both because
you judge the matter is Important and that their skill in the business is
rather to be trusted then yours, since better verst in it: and how comes it,
that the Minister is so seldom Consulted with in the case of the immortal
Soul? is it because the matter is of less Concernment, or you have skill enough
to judge your selves? Or that Ministers are to no manner of purpose? As for the
use that a great many make of them, they were the needlessest Officers that
ever were set on foot) or intruth, is it because you least matter this business
of any? But we may in faithfulness tell you, what our thoughts are of you
Gratis: Sure we may say of the very vilelest that hear us, there is hopes; and
we tell you in our God, we have hopes of you, of the vilest Drunkard, unclean,
profane person in the Congregation; thus far it may be it pleases you, and we
shall endeavor your profit, as much in what we shall say further. We have some
kind of hopes about you, whilst we consider.

1. That it is out of ignorance, that any of you do as you do, if you knew what
you did, you would close with Christ presently. The God of this World blinds
your eyes, 2 Cor. 4.4
that the glorious light of the Gospel breaks not in prevailingly upon you.

2. That yet we may see a day of the worst of you, God may turn you; There is
none of you, that most grieve us at present, but God can make you to seek our
Beloved with us: Caut. 6.1. Gal. 1. ult.
God can make us glorify God in you, that you should profess the way, that
sometimes you have persecuted: we are thinking sometimes at some of you, that
are so zealously set for sin, mad against the people of God, that endeavor so
earnestly to serve sin, that you are but cutting out an example, what manner of
serious Christians you must be, when God turns you. Oh! this will be a rare
Motive to put you on, when you come in, to labor more abundantly then all,
because you stand out so long, and have done so much the other way. We delight
our selves in our God, to think what men you will be, when God works this
Change upon you: And all this wickedness is but to cut you out a Copy of high
Endeavors in the right way when you return. God can send home Onesimus, To.
6.20.
that he may depart for a season, to return home for ever into Christ's
possession. This is the worst we wish you, and this we hope in, and it is that
which God can by his mighty power work at the turning of his hand; This
despised way, God can make any of you a Professor of it, when he pleases: And
this might by a side-blow in the mean time strike upon your Consciences, if God
be pleased to set in with it, what hopes you can have in the way you are in,
when our hopes of you is to see you out of it: Ministers, thou may say, have
hopes of me, but not in the way I am in, how dare I then hope in this way? or
why should I dare to go on in it, if it be a way I must leave, If I design
Salvation? The Lord help you and your thoughts herein, for this will verily
prove just as we say.

3. This we know of you, that if you repent not, God will own his own way, and
you must never do well, if you repent not: We know thus far of the worst of
You, that if You knew what You did, You would never stand out, and that if God
set for it, it is not You that can stand out: and this we have further for our
own encouragement in respect of the event concerning You, whether You will come
in, or no, we know not, but this we know, if ever you do well, you must come
in: If ever You be saved, You must turn to Christ, we may have Your company
yet in Gods way, as averse as You are; and it must be so, or Your Souls to all
eternity must pay for it; and therefore we resolve to stick where we are,
knowing that all that will do well, must take the same course, and seek Christ
as we do: but for the course You are in, if You intend to perevere in it, there
is no hopes for You, if You will not repent and turn to Christ, we will never
ask the Lord to show mercy to You; we will beg repentance for You, or we dare
not beg mercy, for he will only show mercy to the Penitent. Psalm. 58.5.
Be not merciful to any wicked Transgressor: Prayers made by such a one as
David, are Prophetic Determinations, God will not be merciful to any wicked
Transgressors; Sinners that go on in sin, that will not repent, to give God the
Glory, they are sure to reap the fruit of their doings, God will not show mercy
on them. For You in this way to be faved. Consider, 1. It is against Gods
truth, God has declared the contrary, and think whether You have not cast Your
matters on a narrow miserable Point, that you must either be damned, or the
most holy One of Israel make himself a Liar. 2. It is against his admirable
contrivance, in this way he has appointed, wherein only Mercy and Justice is
reconciled: and is it likely, that he will go out of this Glorious way, to save
thee in a way of thine own? 3. It is against all reason that men should be
saved in a way of their own, that will not be saved in Gods way: Is it reason,
that God, or You should appoint a way of Reconcilement? Or does God so gain by
Your Salvation? Or is he sure to lose so by Your ruin? That if he cannot have
You up to his term, he must needs come down to Yours. Oh! my Brethren do not
You believe this, venture not Your precious Souls on such desperate senseless
Presumptions. And therefore now You see what You are like to trust to, if You
would know what hopes there is of You. Why, what do You intend to do? it is at
Your own selves: Psa. 58.5.
If you will frame your ways and your doings, to turn to the Lord: There is
riches of Mercy to receive You; and great hopes of You; but if You intend to
persist in the course you are in, speak no more of the business, it is
impossible. If God can cease to be true, wise, and just, then thou in
Impenitencie may be saved. What! a man be saved in his Impenitencie? do not,
Lord do not do it, says the holy man.


But this shall suffice in the second part of this Use, for the Information of
wicked men of their several dangerous Estates.

CAP. VII.
The truth improved against the impenitency of wicked men, to persuade them to
come in.

3. LEt this then be improved against your impenitency; Motives.
Since there might be Hopes if you repent, be persuaded to repent and turn
from the sinful wretched course, that you are in, Oh! leave your sins. Turn
ye, turn ye, why will ye dye?

1. Consider what an hopeful condition yours might be, if you would turn.

1. How hopeful in respect of your reconciliation. 2. Of the consequences of
it.
-- Hopes of Reconciliation -- Hopes from Reconciliation Hopes of your
reconciliation. In that --
1. Christ stands ready to receive you, if you will but come in, Isa. 38.18.
Ezekiel. 33.11.
he waits to be gracious; he will glorify himself to show mercy: how
solemnly he protests! he desires not your death, persuades you to turn, he
stretches out his hand all the day long unto you: his heart is not to be
wrought to an inclitation to be friends with you, it is wrought already; he
has been used to desperate cures, such festred sores, to such worthless
adventures; he is gracious and ready to forgive, this is a great advantage, He
stands ready for your coming, there needs no preparing of him, he is always
ready, the change is only resting at thee, if thou would be drawn to come.

2. All your former ways may be forgiven unto you; he will not remember
against you your former iniquities, you have gone on in rebellion thus long,
lay down your arms now, all that is past shall be forgotten, he will remember
ogainst you your sins no more. Isa. 43.25. Ezekiel. 33.12. to the 17.
If you will come in, your former ways shall not be remembered, the Lord will
make no difference between thee and the rest of his subjects, thou shall not be
oppressed with suspicions and jealousies, nor upon every occasion be attached;
but shall have the freedom of another subject Micah. 7, 18, 19. He 1.8.12.
I will be merciful to their unrighteousness and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember no more, Oh! what a mercy would this be to you, to
have all these fearful scores, cancelled, all these debts paid; which if you
come to reckon for your selves, would prove your undoings: It is such an
opportunity of freedom, as you may not meet with again. The Lord is as ready
to forget the sins of a convert, as the righteousness of an apostate you shall
not be admitted, to have your old services all revived upon every new
transgression, but the Lord will pardon all. What a rare thing would this be!
Psalm. 32.1.2.
they that feel the weight of their sins know, how blessed he is, whose
iniquities are pardoned, whose sins are covered; that, blessed is the man to
whom the Lord imputes not his sin, and this state if thou will come in, may be
thine.

3. 2 Cor. 5.20.
This matter is committed to the ministers to deal in, the office is on
purpose to make tenders of mercy and reconciliation by Jesus Christ unto you.
We are ambassadors for God, and we are to entreat you in Christ's stead, as
though God did beseech you by us, to be reconciled unto God: they are sent on
purpose, to drive on the match between Christ and your souls, they have full
letters of evidence, what they bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and what
they loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven: Jo. 20.23.
They are men of your own selves, subject to like passions, as your selves are,
that are to minister between God and you; who are kept by Christ on purpose in
every place, where his Church is, and it is to look to your souls, to hear
and gather the lambs in their arms, to invite you to come in, and to help you
in your Christian course this is the Ministers, very business: and by that you
may perceive, that God is in earnest in the work he sets them on, and that you
might be received if you came in, for otherwise this officer was needless, and
our preaching were in vain. It would do well if some would think well at it,
that if their lives can be right, it were to small purpose for God to keep up
his Ministers, as he does, for such lives are besides the council and design
of the Ministry altogether. But come in to these officers, appointed on purpose
to invite and entertain you: the cities of refuge were all amongst the Levites
still, so Christ is to be found amongst the Ministers, and happy is that poor
soul, that has been pursued by the avenger of blood, that is gotten among the
Levites, but as long as the Levites have a City, Number. 35.
there will not be a place of refuge wanting for humbled guilty souls: this
for the Hopes of reconciliation,

2 For the consequents of this reconciliation, or hopes from it. Oh! turn, you
little think what will follow upon it.

First, In respect of others, or the Latitude of this reconciliation. Turn and
--

1. 2 Cor. 6.17.18.
The Father will be reconciled unto you Come out of her, touch no unclean
thing, and I will receive you, you shall not want a place if you leave that,
nor want a Father if you leave your Fathers house for goodness sake. But I
will be your Father and you shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord the
Almighty; of Rebels you shall be made the Kings Sons, God will be at peace with
you, a friend, nay, a Father to you.

2. The Son will be reconciled, so as to undertake your patronage to be your
advocate with the Father: Oh! this is the Jonathan, when the father calls thee
in, will love thee (Like David) as his own soul, he will be thy advocate, put
his robe on thee; thy precious savior surety and brother, and speak a word
for thee when thou art away.

3. The spirit will be reconciled, to be thy comforter: Let men keep Christ's
commandments, and God will manifest himself unto them, nay, Christ and the
father will by the spirit come into that man, Joh. 14.21.23. and 26.
and make their abode with him. A sacred place shall that polluted heart of
thine be even a Temple for the Holy Ghost to dwell in.

4. 1. Cor. 6.19.
The Angels will be reconciled, so as to be friends with you. Some interpret
that of reconciling things in Heaven and things on earth, Cameron. Col. 1.19.
to be thus, that the Angels are against men while they are sinners, not that
sin reaches them, but because of their perfect conjuction with Christ; and as
all that are for the King in a City, are against all that are against him, so
the Angels are against all the Enemies of Christ: but when a soul is
converted, then there is joy in Heaven, then they are reconciled: before they
stood ready, if God but speak the word, to destroy any notorious sinner, but
now they are friends with them: The Angels are ministering Spirits to all that
are Heirs of salvation; Heb. 1. ult.
all that are for Heaven, though never so poor, so young ones in this way, the
Angels of God care not what service they do for them, and unto them: their
Angels called so, because ready to attend on them upon occasion, Mat. 18.11
even on the very littles one; the same Angels, that behold the face of the
Father in Heaven, are ready to come forth, and atend on any of these little
ones. If you turn, you little think, what joy there will be in Heaven about
it, and what a Guard of Angels, of the heavenly host shall be mmediately
setabout you, or frequently be employed from, and to Heaven, on dispatches for
you: Oh! a rare alliance this is.

5. Good Ministers will be reconciled unto you. Alas! while you live as you do,
be it known we cannot be friends to our Master and to you too; and therefore
know it, that while you live as you do we are not satisfied in you, our hearts
cannot be toward you, we are not friends with you, we dare not but save our
Masters quarrel, however you oblige us, or we carry fairly toward you, you
are not the men that we can repose in, or go away from you at any time without
regret and sorrow: but if you will turn you will find us your joyful friends,
ready to embrace you, council you, pray for you, and more hearty toward you,
then any relations can be. When Saul was converted, though they were terrified
to hear but of his name; Act. 9.17.
yet when Ananias understood that he was coming in, it was brother Saul at
first word; lay down the enmity of your hearts against Christ and our scruple
toward you falls therewith; but otherwise (we care not who knows it) we cannot
be toward you as toward other men, while we live. But if you take to Christ,
we shall soon take to you, and with bowels of love embrace you, you may soon
have our warm hearts, if we can see you but once breathing after Jesus Christ,
and it is no small matter to have thy Minister one with thee. Gal. 1.23.24.


6. All good men will be reconciled unto you you shall have their love and
friendship: they heard, That he which had persecuted the way, was now a
preacher of it; what? did they not take him down? did they not endeavor to be
revenged on him; now he was come into their power, for the injuries he had done
them? no, but they glorified God in him, they rejoiced exceedingly that he was
thus brought in; Psalm. 129.74.
if thou turn, The righteous will be glad at heart, when they see thee, thou will find more true love amongst the serious professors of religion, then can
be found elsewhere. Mr. Dod said he lost one natural brother for Christ, and
he had 200 Gospel brethren and sisters instead of him, and so thou will find
them ready to receive thee into the heart of them, they will help thee with
hearty council, their lips will feed thee, Pro. 27.9. and 10.21.
thou shall find thy heart made better and not worse by converse here. When a
sinner is converted the lost groat found, the Ministers call in Christians to
rejoice here, as Christ does the Angels to rejoice in Heaven: Oh the mercy to
be admitted into the affection and society of Gods children! they are men that
can help you with a prayer, they have interest in Christ, they can speak to
the King of Heaven for you, and these stand all ready to entertain you, if you
would come in; turn your own heart toward the Lord, and you turn at once all
the hearts of Gods people toward you as the heart of one man: the hopes of
your being converted will satisfy all the scruples that can be against you in
the hearts of any, and they are forthwith ready to receave you.

7. All the Creatures will be reconciled, at present there is enmity between
you and them; they grudge to serve you, while you serve not Christ, they groan
under your bondage, and take themselves subject to vanity, while subject to
you, To. 8.20.21.
and you out of Christ: they are willing any one of them to enterraine the
Office of dispatching you, and to bring you to hell, would venture to attach
you, but they would have you in; how willingly would the beer choke the
drunkard, and the air poison the swearer, etc. but now if you come in, Hoa.
2.18. Job. 5.23.
they will all be in covenant and league with you. You shall be at agreement
with the stones, and Beats and foul of the Air, all ready to serve thee, and
if any of them kill thee, yet they will not bring thee to Hell, if thou be in
Christ. This for the latitude of your reconciliation or the consequents of it
with respect unto others.

But then Secondly, in respect of your selves, if you but come in, great
advantages will follow upon this reconciliation. First, here. Secondly,
Hereafter. Here, 1. You shall have sweetness in ordinances, which you never had
before, by which these solemn duties will be made easy and delightful to you,
as also you shall receive that true and solid satisfaction, which hither to you
had been estranged from: The next to the comfort of Heaven is the joy of Gods
house and ordinances. Oh how sweet can God make his word to a soul! Oh! Psalm.
65.4.
The man is blessed whom God chooses and causes to approach near to God, that
he may dwell in Gods house, he shall be abundantly satisfied with the goodness
of his House, even of his holy Temple; there is the goodness of Gods house to
delight men's souls in, wherein so much comfort is to be had; and this you shall
upon your conversion be admitted unto, you shall now know what it is to be made
glad in the House of Prayer, Isa. 56 7. Psalm. 4.7.8.
and to have that comfort, that passes that Comfort of Corn and Wine and Oil.

2. You shall have covenant mercies; that is, that which you have, shall come
in the tenure of a promise, and not of providence only; your outward good
things are like if not to be more, yet to be better then heretofore, of a
better kind: these things when they come in love, when they come as tokens of
what God will do more for us; when they come as part of the inheritance as
having this Motto on them; This till thou come to Heaven, and Heaven it self
annexed, as the upshot of that Mercy, which brings in this unto you; why, this
makes outward mercies far more high then before. Isa. 65, 21, 22, 23. Hos. 2,
21. to the end.

3. You shall have ready support under all difficulties, be reconciled and you
shall be prayer free, the most admiral convenience for our wilderness travel,
that can be thought of: Alas! as you are, you may make much of prosperity, but
if ever you be in trouble you know not which way to turn, you are often in Gods
hand, but you know not how to deal with him, to claim the least mercy from him.
Jo 9.31.
God hears not the Prayers of sinners: but now the reconciled, Isa. 65.24.
They are made forthwith free at the throne of Grace. To the Godly, God says,
call on me in the time of trouble and I will deliver thee: but to the Wicked,
Psalm. 50.15.16.
God says, What have thou to do to take my Covenant into thy Mouth, etc. Oh
what a convenience is it! that still when any trouble or affliction comes, one
may turn aside and find that help in our own closet, that all the world cannot
afford the like to us: wicked men must abroad and seek their help at second
hand, and at many hands, and at last go without it too; when as if thou be
reconciled, there is no cross can befall thee, but thou may have free
recourse to him, that has the ordering of all matters, and may have help
from him in every business, and need no more.

4 Thou may have satisfaction to thy heart, whatever comes, godly men have
all contracted into one, whatever outward thing they want, they are sure to be
satisfied about it, for they are nearer to the thing then any one else, their
God has the disposing of it, and if they ask it of him if it be good for them
he will sooner give it them then any others. Or else 2. they can make shift
without it, the fire may as well be put out by withdrawing fuel, as throwing
on water, God can withdraw the desire, and it is all one: as if he fulfilled
the desire of his people. If God either give him the thing, or give him
something more of himself, Psalm. 4 6.7 Jer. 16.5. to 9.
either will serve his turn. Alas! you, that are at a distance from God, you
patch up a content and satisfaction from the creatures, one contributes one
part, and another another, but now if one thing be away, one string out of
tune, there is then no music, all the rest can not join together to make up
the place of that one thing, that is away: Alas! one sick child puts you all
into hurries, and imbitters all the other things which you enjoy, and so it
will be with you as long as you live as you do. I cannot see how a carnal man
can be sure of any content at al, for he must have it out of so many things,
and a thousand to one some one thing or other is still away: Now turn to God
and you may have content, you may be able to part with many things, for your
treasure is not in them, though the ship be lost yet your adventure is not in
that bottom, you will less matter; your heart will be fixed, Psalm. 112.7.
trusting in the Lord, and so you will not be afraid of evil tidings: if many
casualties befall thee yet still thou have God to delight in, and he can soon
give thee (either in another thing, or in himself in the light of his
countenance) much more than this is. 2 Chro. 25.9.


Secondly, for advantages for the future, if you would but come in.

1. You should have joy in death, and this, when we come to dye indeed, were
worth creeping on our hands and knees all the days of our lives, to have
attained rather than to be without it, in the time of need, in the hour of
trouble. Wicked men, Alas! death feeds on them like sheep the first born of
death will seize upon them; but now they that are reconciled shall come
famously off, Psalm. 49.10.
they are by Christ delivered from death, and him that has the power of death,
who is the Devil; Heb. 2.14 15.
and from that bondage which all their lifetime they were subject unto through
the fear of death; turn to God and death shall comfort you.

2. You shall have Heaven for your soul; to them that believe eternal life;
the other same body is in Heaven already, Joh. 3.15.
you come at your conversion to an innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12.
and spirits of just men made perfect; these you are associated to already, and
you shall shortly be brought to be with them, for ever to be with the Lord;
many turned proselites of the gate among the Jews, Luke. 14.15.
because of the excellency of their religion above all other religions in the
world for their religions promised nothing for eternity as this did, sure the
recompense of reward should fetch you in, many that must never come there would
yet count him blessed that might eat bread in the kingdom of God; I am
confident you count it happy to be in Heaven, and will you not labor to get
thither? To them that by patient waiting and continuance in well doing seek for
immortality honor and glory, Mat. 19.19. To. 2.7.
eternal life, they that look for immortality and glory, and seek it in such a
way as by patient continuance in welldoing, they shall have eternal life. Now
seriously think of these things which are offered, and think what a deal it is
you lose for want of turning, what a world you must part from if you keep your
bad heart, Your condition so hopeful, and all frustrated by a base heart is
very sad. This for the first consideration at large, in respect of the hopes of
and from reconciliation, which might induce you to come in.

2. Consider, these hopes all have them not, 2. Motive
you have the hopes that many have not, and if you be not the better for them,
your condition will prove worse then theirs that never had them, or are not in
your present capacity: As

1. The Devils never had any hopes afforded them, they were proceeded against
at their fall, clapped under chains of darkness, reserved in present to further
torment: when God expostulates the business with man for his fall, and reasons
it with him, to draw him to repentance, in token of a design of mercy toward
him, he proceeds to curse the serpent without any parley with him, and in his
absolute sentence and conclusion of judgment against him, lets fall a promise
of the seed of the woman for man's recovery: but delivers this in an absolute
doom against him. Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, Heb. 2, 16 Dr.
Ham mond.
he took not hold of that nature, to save it from sinking, never tried them
with a conditional tender of mercy, as he has done the sons of men, no doubt,
they would not stick to say if they had but the probability of reception to
mercy, which you have, if they had but a savior given amongst them as you
have, they would have been glad of him, and many of them have closed with him
with all their hearts on the worst terms immaginable, much more on such as he
is offered to you. As some of the fathers have told us, that the Devil on a
time when this scripture was read et carro factus est, the word was made flesh,
that he should smite some Christians, saying, why do ye not worship at this
word? for if he had taken on him our nature, we would have worshipped. The moral
of it holds, and certainly for you that have this hope, to get besides it, to
be in the same condition, that the damned Angels are in, that never had any, is
very sad: It is called the fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat.
25.41
it was primarily ordained for them. It is not fire prepared so properly for
man, for they had a mediator provided, and upon fair terms might have escaped;
but for you to partake of the Devils fire, it is but good enough for you, when
you wilfully put your selves besides your better capacity, and neglect your
hopes, which they never had.

2. Many of the Heathens never had these hopes made known to them; Ephe. 2.12
the heathen while such, before the gospel came among them they were without
Hope, and so are they still, that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death:
what hope there is of a Gentiles salvation, that never heard of the gospel, I
shall not here discourse of, and I would be loath ours were no otherwise then
theirs is, yet must hold they shall not be proceeded with, in the same manner
as Christians shall, Viz. 1. for the contempt and neglect of the gospel which
they never had. But certainly, if the mighty works had been done in Tire and
Sidon, in Sodom and Gomorrah, in India and China and Tartary, etc. which have
been done in England; London, Lancashire, and Manchester they would have
repented long ago, they would embraced Christ and closed with him; verily if
you stand out, and are never the better for the Gospel, but lead lives for all
this light, which good heathens would be ashamed of, it will be more tolerable
for those places at the day of judgment then for you. Oh! they will say, if we
had had but one of the days of the sons of men, which you have had, it might
have been in our way the salvation of many of our souls; and will you be never
the better for this privilege?

3. The damned in Hell are past their hopes, Alas? their day is now over, as
Christ says, the time will come when you shall desire to see one of the days
of the son of man, Luke. 17.22.
and you shall not see it; they would give all the world, if they had it, that
they might but have one sabaths liberty more one day which they have had here;
they would hope to put fair for it, that they might prevent thereby their
eternal misery, and it can not now be granted them. Dives would have been glad
to have brought his own message if he might as well as to have sent another to
his five brethren, to have had so much respite out of torment, but alas! he
never moves it as a thing impossible, respite is is past; there is a gulf
fixed, and there is now no passing to the hoping side. Oh, Sirs; think at it!
will you wilfully make void such a special privilege, frustrate this capacity
you are in, and make your selves, who now have hopes in as bad, nay, a worse
condition then they are in, that either never had, or never the knowledge of, or
are now past these hopes which you at present have? Oh! look well at it and in
the fear of God consider it. This may sery for the second consideration.

3. 3. Motive. Psalm. 22.20.
Consider the concernment of these hopes of yours, the matter is of the
weightiest consideration, it is the affairs of the soul, deliver my darling my
only one, from the power of the Dog, Oh! it is the case of your darling, your
only one. Pro. 19.2.
If thou be wise thou shall be wise for thy self, the profit of thy repentance
will be thine own, of thy nearest concernment within these few days, when a
fit of sickness will leave thee all in a soul, Mat. 16.26.
and if thou scornest, thou alone shall bear it: this soul of thine must thou
go out with will be sure to smart for it; and what is a man profited if he gain
the whole world and loose his own soul? or what will you give in exchange for
your soul? the matter is of such concernment, that if men would regard any
thing they should not neglect this; Alas! it is not any other thing cared for
by thee, can repair thy neglect or loss in this: It is not what you secure; if
your immortal soul go for it in the end, I wish you may never know the
preciousnesse of a soul in the loss of one for any of your own parts.

4. Consider the reasonableness of the condition, on which your hopes are
offered, 4. Motive
you may be happy if you do but repent, the Lord will have mercy, Jer. 3.12.13.
only acknowledge thine iniquity, only repent and turn to God, the Lord is
ready to forgive, will not cast off, only fear the Lord and serve him, 1 Sa.
12.23.
only be willing to come over to Christ in his ways to be regenerated, to be
ruled by Christ, to leave your vain conversation to set into a way of holiness.
If you close with this you may be saved, now it is as sad to loose such hopes,
and as sad to loose them upon such terms, the thing is not more desirable, then
the condition reasonable. For

1. It is the way which the Lord likes, he Loves the righteous, Psalm. 11.7.
and the righteous Lord loves righteousness, you think, if you leave off sin,
and turn serious, there are such men, your companions heretofore in sin, you
must never look them in the face. Alas! think at it, and how can you look God
in the face in the way you are in? come, stand not on what the rulers do, or
great men do, or most men do, not on what is done, but what should be done:
whether is better to obey, so to please, God or man, Acts. 4.19.
judge ye.

2. Psalm. 119.74. and 158
This is the way good men love, the righteous will be glad, when they see you,
and they care not for seeing you till you are such. Alas! when they behold the
transgressor they are grieved, woe to you for your selves when a good man cannot
see you without sorrow, but now if you turn, this way they love, they that have
tried both ways they sit down here, and would not for a world live as they have
done, Psa. 119.173.
and as you do, I have chosen thy Precepts, says David.

3. Wicked men confess to this way, the very Devils confess Christ. Alas! there
is not one wicked man of many, that dares own his own course in sober sadness;
and for religion, what have they to say against it, but that they are all
hypocrites; Alas! by this they witness that true religion is not to be blamed,
they ahve nothing to charge us with in our way, but that we are not serious and
through in it: they will it may be, say, such professors are drunk sometimes,
etc. All the fault they can find with religious men, is that wherein sometimes
any of them are like themselves; and though woe to those by whom these offenses
come, yet these very quarrels will rise up in judgment against them that make
them, a scandalous professor is a sad creature, yet we will not allow him so in
the mouth of a man that is scandalous and no profess our at all.

4. It is a way may be owned before any man: you heed not be ashamed of
Godliness or any good duty, whoever stands by. Romans 1.16
I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, as if there were any thing amiss in
it, you may better do that good duty then they sin, Plutarch
whoever they be that look on: as the Philosopher said, that reproved one, whom
he sound hiding himself from one that sought him, to have born false witness
for him, says he, dares he ask you to do it, and dare not you deny him? so
surely you may set a better face of your way, than they have cause to set on
theirs. It is sin that brings shame and these are ways will bring to shame,
and so will repentance never.

5. All dying men are for this way, To. 6.21.
when men are most themselves, then they are seriously preferring the way of
holiness, you see the statues of our gallants, they are not set up with the
instruments of their pleasure about them, but with hands lifted up praying, often
with their book before them, or their Bible in their hands, and these are
things of likelyest requests at such a time, never man repented on his death
bed that he had made too much ado and never any (if sensible) but did sadly
repent of their ways of sin, this that is required of thee, is that which at
death all men desire, and can only with comfort die in, though with many it is
then too late to seek for it.

6. It is the work of Heaven, holiness is glory begun, there is no sin in
Heaven, and the the happiness of Heaven is, Rev. 22.3. Psalm. 1. ult.
that there they never sin against God: there his servants always serve him,
Alas! for wickedness, it is a work that will not always last; The way of the
ungodly shall perish: Psalm. 139. ult.
It is work that shall have an end; but for the Godly man's course it is the way
everlasting, it is the way that indures for ever, that is begun here and gone
on with in Heaven, you all count heaven the happy place, and there is no sin
there, Godliness is work of the same kind, though not in the same degree, as
the work of Heaven is, this is work you need not break off when you die.

7. That which you are required to leave for Heaven, is that, which if you go
on with, the day will come, when you shall not have one friend left to stand by
you in that way in all the world, you are advised to leave that for Heaven,
which if you stick to it, you will be left desolate with it one day. For

1. God will not look at you. Psalm. 1.5 6.
sinners cannot stand in the judgment, the Lord knows the way of the
righteous, (he asserts the godly man's way) but wicked men's ways shall perish
from the Lord utterly.

2. Christ will not endure you, he bids such depart from him, Mat. 7.23.
he knows them not, they are workers of iniquity; if such, whatever they
pretend, away with them, he will not endure the sight of them; you dare never
look God nor Christ in the face in this way, you are in.

3. Angels and good men cannot pity you, they shall triumph in gods justice in
your righteous ruin, they cannot afford one drop of water out of Heaven to
cool Dives his tongue; when miserably tormented in the flame.

4. The Devils will be against you, they that have been your tempters, will be
your tormentors, as much ado as they have made to get you to sin, as forward
will they be to hale you to execution for sin, and rather then you should be
uncondemned, Satan would witness against you for the very sins which he tempted
you to: The man that said to Joab, 2 Sa. 18.12.
that if he had transgressed the Kings command in the matter of Absalom, even
thou thy self would have set thy self against me: so the Devil, that only
presses thee to sin now, Alas! he will set himself against thee in that time of
reckoning, and it will vex thee to thy heart, to see him so persecuting thee,
for the very ways, he enticed thee unto: the very Devils shortly will be
against thee, and it will torment thee to see how thou have been betrayed by
them; the Devil like the hangman, that consents or entices to stealing.

5. Wickedmen thy companions will be against them. Alas! you have taken sweet
council together, you have strengthened one another hands in the way that was
evil, you have turned off from Christ, to sit down in the bosoms one of
another: but the day will come, when ye shall be forsaken one of another. Dives
had no mind that his brethren should come to him, when he was in Hell, not as if
there was any charity there; but he knew it would aggravate his torment, to
have them come together, both to help his remembrance in the sin they had
committed together as also of the mischief he had done, by being accessorie to
their ruin. And so your intimacie, and love, and sworn brotherhood shall end
in this, that you shall curse the time that eever you knew one another, and
wish you had never seen each others faces. In this eternal fend and hatred
will all this love of yours end; Mat. 26.1.
you may with Judas think they that set you on work, should bear part of your
punishment for it, but they will turn you off; and bid you look to that your
self, others may help you to sin, but for the torment, you may look to it your
selves, they will be as if you had never known them, when you are in the depth
of your adversity (unless it be to torment you with the remembrance of them,)
by your sins which lie upon you.

6. Your own hearts will be against you, conscience will then be unmuzled and
let loose upon you, Mar. 9 41.46.48.
and your heart shall condemn you, and you shall be forsaken on all hands, this
is the worm which your sin has bred, that shall never dye in that fire that
can never be quenched.

Seriously think at it, and that it is for this, you will ruin your hopes; if
you would leave this, you might be saved, you may be eternally happy if you
will but repent, and leave that which never did you good nor never will do,
this is all that is required of you, and you may be happy for ever. Let this
fourth consideration have its force with you.

5. It will aggravate your misery another day, when you shall be past hopes, to
consider that once there was hopes, and you have thus outstood them: the day
will come when you shall be under absolute despair, the door altogether shut
upon you, you finally shut in, and then think how sad it will be, that you
shall remember, that once the door was open, and you stood out, Pro. 1.24.
as you did. God now calls and you will not; you shall then call and he will
not; he will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes, when alas!
you shall call on the rocks to cover you from the wrath of the Lamb. Oh that
you might take warning, Rev. 6.15.16.17.
that none of you may in hell lament your desperate condition, when you shall
there be past hopes, and shall remember, that this has been preached to you,
that there is hope yet for you, if you would repent; nay, that there you should
remember that we this day foretold you, what would befall you, if you still
stood out.

CAP. VIII.
The way readied for gross sinners to come over into a condition of Hope.

IF any soul be by all or any of these Motives startled as if these words, that
so nearly concern you, should amongst so many fall to the ground and none be
moved by them, none be stirred in so great a congregation to look after their
souls, I know not what to think it may signify toward us. These sermons
though by a worthless Instrument, yet as the Lords message will breed
something, either the conversion of some, or else some speedy judgment on you
for your impenitency, The removal of the Gospel or the like, which the Lord
forbid: but (if any (as I rather desire and hope) do think of turning and since
it is declared there is hopes if you turn, you think of so doing, and would
know how you might partake of those hopes; if you are of the mind, and would
know the next way over to a changed state what course might be taken what is
next to be done, that you might set about the work of salvation which you have
hitherto neglected, if you would know how to begin, and go on toward a change.
Take these directions.

Labor for sufficient knowledge of the principles of Religion, this is
necessarily to be laid, where it is not already, as the first step, Means
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard; and what are they
the better for hearing of him, if they get no knowledge by their hearing. My
people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. If men be grossly Ignorant of those
principles, Hosea. 4.6.
which we take for granted in our pressing of duty on them, how should they
ever frame to do any thing, Our Gospel is hid to them that are lost, and men
can never be in a way to escape, as long as the Gospel remains hid to them. 2.
Cor. 4.3.
There are many were brought up in Ignorance, missed catechizing when they were
young (the special time of learning) but it cannot be expected that God should
be bound to make abatement to us for our parents neglect toward us, we cannot
think to skip learning the principles of Religion, because the fittest time was
neglected on our part for the attainment of the knowledge of them; If thou art
never so old and art ignorant, thou must yet learn or thou can not be safe.
Thou say thou art an ignorant body, not book learned, were never
catechized, etc. (beware you do not so by your children as your parents did by
you) but alas to all this we can only say, why this is your loss, but not
your excuse, the more wrong you had done you, but you are not hereby discharged
from a necessary prerequisite if you intend salvation. If thou be old
Ignorant, thou must learn as old as thou art, Talk not of being too old to be
Catechized, if thou need it thou must have it. Thou art indeed too Old to be
thus shamefully ignorant, but sure if thou understandest thy danger thou
should not be too old to make have to begin now in what thou art so sadly
cast behind, and have lost so much time in. To say thou art too old to be
instructed, is as good as to say, thou art too old to be saved: For there is no
way for salvation to those that are grossly Ignorant of the main principles of
Christianity, secret things belong to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but the things that are revealed to us and to our Children. It is observed
that this Latter clause in the Heb. is written with some extraordinary pricks,
Aynsw. in loc.
which the Jewish wrirers observe to signify, that extraordinary and
necessary care should be taken about the knowledge of what is revealed, and
that whether poor or rich, young or old, care should be taken that the
knowledge of revealed things should abound among them, and be transmitted to
posterity. They are revealed and do belong to us, and notice must be taken of
them by us, Since God in the riches of mercy and his condescension to us has
not kept al things secret from us, and so all to himself as he might have done,
but consulting our good has mercifully revealed things to us without which we
could never be happy, and never but by this revelation have come to the
knowledge of; we should not so far neglect this vast privilege as to be ignorant
of what we may thus be Instructed in; They belong to us. Our privilege and
duty is to know the things that are revealed, It is sad that many of you know
not what is within you, what sin is, not how full you are of it, and what
Christ came for; nor what Ministers work is in the world, and it is impossible
you should ever do better if you never know more then you do. Levi did turn
many from iniquity, how was that? Mal. 2.6.7.
Why the Priests lips keep knowledge and they should seek knowledge at his
mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. Ministers then turn men
from sin, when people seek knowledge at their mouth, when men inquire of them
for the knowledge of the Lord, and do desire and are willing to be instructed
by them, we have it in these parts in our hearts, and have proposals of it, to
endeavor your personal instruction, for the curing of your bloody
soul-killing ignorance, and one would think the stop should not be in you, if
we are willing to put our selves on the pains. If you intend salvation, You
will heartily embrace it for there is no other way to salvation. If a man
should have followed a trade, wherein he is gotten behind, and finds he cannot
subsist, feels himself broken and undone, and one comes and tells him, there
is such an emploiment men live finely on, there is much gain and little hazard,
though some pains, and if he fell into that way, he might recover his ruins,
he might supply his necessities, and live plenteously, would he not hearken to
it? But then this would be an objection, I know not the mystery of the trade,
I was not an apprentice to it; and know not how to set about it, but if one
should tell him that there is such a one would teach him all, instruct him in
every particular, sure if the stick was not in the friend that should do the
courtesy, it should never stick at the party that needs, but he would gladly
embrace the motion and without delay set upon the matter which so much concerns
him. This is the case of many ignorant souls, it is easy for You to see, that
in the way You are in You can never subsist, If you saw your own condition you
might easily be aware of it, that this life will never hold, this way will not
serve the turn, The way of Sin will undo you, You can never be quiet while You
drive this trade, every Sermon will fright you, (as woe to us,) if we speak any
comfort to him that goes on in his wicked way, be it known to You, it is
against our will and besides our commission and intention, if You have any
thing from us, in this state You are in to minister comfort unto You. You might
fear like a broken tradseman every creature might arrest You for Hell, You are
in a sad condition for death, that in these sickly times, may come within
these 3. Or 4, days. You can never be quiet as long as this life lasts that
You live in. O that you might feel your selves utterlie broken of of the trade
of sin, that you would go on no longer in it. Well then there is a course will
serve you, many live pretiouslie of it, many thrive, (the only thriving trade,
the only happy life in the world) and that is the way of holiness, here is all
the advantage, sweetness, convenience in this way that is immaginable, none
ever were ruined or brake of this trade that ever were perfect Masters of it.
There is such a common stock to trade on that it is impossible for thee to fail
or break in this. This way would help all your old scores, a Christ would
supply all necessities, and lay in blessedly for the time to come. But now may
such a poor creature say, I, but I was not born to this privilege, not brought
up to this course, I know not how to frame to it, It is a way I cannot skill
of; I believe thee. Thou know not the manner of the God of the land, 2
Kings. 17.
(as the Lions made the Samaritanes feel they did not;) well now Ministers are
sent on purpose to teach you, they are willing to do it, Offer to do it,
enquire of the Law at their mouth, they are the messengers of the Lord of
Hosts, for this very purpose. They say Come unto me I will teach you the fear
of the Lord: If any one should be appointed on purpose, to teach all that were
broken of other trades, the mystery of the gainfullest trade in the town,
would it not be counted a great privilege, and could that Officerwant either
love or custom? Surely This if you knew your need, was a thing to be greatly
rejoiced in by You, and we should be glad or be so employed, and have cause to
be glad of the Offer, all sides would be pleased, If men's eyes were but opened,
sure if things were rightly weighed the stick in personal Instruction would
not be on the peoples side. But this is your first step, for any of you that
are not come yet unto it, you must labor for knowledge. The knowledge of
principles must be had in rich and poor, of all sorts, and Sexes, where
salvation is expected.

2. Frequent the means diligently. Be diligent at them and in them. If you
would do well lie at the poole side still, lie in the way Christ walks in, It
is both a good sign and a good means of doing well. It is said, Pro. 8.34.
Jo. 20.24.
when Christ came to his disciples Thomas was not there when he came; and you
find, Thomas that could not believe unless he saw, he was now away when he
might have seen, And so he was behind in his Faith, to the rest of the Apostles
and all was because Thomas was away when Christ came. The way not to miss of
Christ when he comes, is not to be away at any time when he could have come.
Hanna departed not from the Temple, and David desired that he might dwell in
the House of the Lord, Lu. 2.37. Psa. 27.4.
not as if there were any Mansions in the Temple for any to live in, but it is
only to signisie their constancy in attendance on the means, they were never
away when any good thing was stirring, when any thing was to be done in the
Temple and so were as constant as if they had dwelt there. It is good to be one
of the Temple dwellers, to be away from no opportunity, that thou cannot
excuse it to God himself, for it may be thy part may be dealt when thou art
away, the Angel may trouble the waters and thou not ready, something that
nearly concerns thee may be likelist to be spoken, when thou art away. Some
think when a Minister may aim at the curing of a particular soul, or God may
direct him to what may be suitable thereunto, that the Devil may know by our
notes, or otherwise, and prevent the man's coming to the means at that time,
when this thing is discoursed of that was so fit for him. However, to make
sure, wait upon God at all opportunities; For this is the way thy healing must
come, and none knows by what Sermon it must be done. Frequent all opportunities
thou can possibly for faith, that is a good sure way. Men ought not by the
late Acts, to travel on the Sabbath day or do any thing like a breach of those
Laws unless their excuse be such as is to be allowed by a Justice of the peace;
do you have a care how you pretend any Excuse for such neglect, that will not
be allowed by God himself the royal author of the Law and the searcher of all
hearts. And so for opportunities on other days, redeem time for them, approve
thy heart to God that no necessity but what he will allow be pretended or
practiced upon to neglect a Sermon at any time, when it might be heard, God may
do the more Good at some one Sermon then all: but that may be the Sermon thou
may be tempted to pass by, and that good may not come by that one, but for
thy diligent and conscientious attendance upon all, The life of thy soul may
be wrapped up in the due management of one, and thou know not which,
opportunity.

3. When God touches you at a Sermon, if ever you do well you must get into
secret. Take notice how the pulse of conscience beats, let not the word have
scope upon you, ty it not just to the time of hearing, walk with it alone, and
let it have further conference with you, let it have time to settle and soake
in upon you, to water the very root of your souls, and not be like water spilt
upon the ground, many are the highway hearers amongst us, the word is but
scatte-upon them, not received and kept at all by them. The Devil catches or
takes the word out of their hearts. For it was never in, it was but entering
and is by this carelessness often put by, Reverend Mr. Hildersham.
as one says pretiously we give advantage to Satan to steal, as the loose
laying of our goods does to our servants to become thieve. It is noted that the
disciples were never the stronger in their faith notwithstanding the miracle
and it is because they had not considered it. Mar. 6.52.
Many at Church are like sives in the water as full as they can hold, and when
out have just nothing, men would count it a great judgment and be sensible
enough of it in their temporal estate to get much and to put it into a
bottomless purse, but with many it is thus in the matter of their souls
business, in hearing the word they have little abiding with them after Sermons
and that for want of digesting the word by secret meditation after hearing.
Christ after some parables asked his Disciples If they understood all those
things, Mat 13.51
your work begins when ours end, we have all the scene in public, but yet it
is in the nature of a Treaty and Parley with you; and you are in secret to
think of and to return an answer to, what we propose to you. There is but one
part of the work done here, the other part is to be done by you. And it is not
for nothing that you have so much time besides what is spent on a Sabbath in
public, and if this other part of your work be faithfully done there will be
no time too much or to spare. Consider what I have said (says Paul to Timothy)
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. 2 Timothy 2.7.
This carnal worldly talk after Sermons spoils all, a Minister may come
after and say, where he hears no word of the Sermon mentioned, Alas here will
be no answer for me, It will be a great while before such talk as this is will
bring a Sermon to the heart, or that men should ever profit by Sermons that do
on this manner. The Minister speaks in public and then we break off, and now
it is at you, what say you? Many complain of bad memories, (The truth is, it
may be it is not without cause,) but yet if you cannot remember all, or so much
as you would do labor to take good notice of what did most touch you in a
Sermon, let that word speaks with you again, He sits alone and keeps
silence, when the word drives you into a corner to consider of things in
secret, there is more hopes by far concerning you. If the word once wound
thee that it singles thee out from the heard, there is hopes thou may be
hunted down as Naomi said of Boaz? Ruth. 3.18.
The man will not be at rest till he has finished the thing this day. But as
long as you can heard together after a Sermon, the work will never forward with
you: was ever happy match made without private conference to get acquaintance
and to settle the affections; we listen to hear the voice of the Bridgroom with
you under the canopy, Dr. Hamonds notion on Jo. 3.29.
this would make us rejoice indeed. Alas Christians we do not preach before you
but to you. It is not for you after a Sermon to say, what we have said, or done
or how, but what you intend to do, we preach not for approbation but for an
Answer. What avails it us to have you cry us up here and curse us in Hell,
you might find something else to do after a Sermon more proper and immediate
work for you, then to say what you think of the Minister. The woman thought she
had obliged Christ much by giving so large a testimony of his doctrine, Luke.
11.27.28.
as to say: Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps that gave thee
suck. And she said no more then what was true and just for Christ, yet he
returns her an answer wherein he insinuates what would better have becommed
her to look after, Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
The poorest Sermon that you can hear, has more in it I doubt then you will
do, The Sermon that is not worth your writing, will be worth your accounting
for. It is good if the word be repeated in your houses, but it never works
till it singles you out and gets you into your closets. Make use therefore of
this direction, observe wherein God strikes you at a Sermon, and take good
notice of it.

4. If one sin be discovered, search to the bottom of it. There is a nest
within when e this is at the mouth, some one sin is discovered to thee, which
thou art checked for and convinced of, but it is not a matter of one sin that
thou art to deal in; If this was the word that was so bad, or this the action
that was so unreasonable, what is the heart within that bred and brought forth
this word and action; Mat. 12 34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. There is worse within
all along. O what an heart have thou that would send forth such an unclean
filthy word; what an heart have thou that would let thee lie! What an heart
have thou, that would let thee sin thus quietly! live thus long without duties!
let thee do on this fashion and let thee sleep quietly at night after all;
Paul when God opened his eyes, he saw the Law was spiritual but he was
carnal, Romans 7.14
sold under sin, a sad thing when a man sees this true of himself, (as it is
said in this scripture famous Mr. Dod first saw himself) this every sin thou
art convinced of may be driven up into, Mr. Cla^k in the life of Mr. Dod.
and the work never goes on to purpose til it be so: alas no sin lies single an
a carnal heart. This one thou see, but it has fellows, labor to find the
rest out.

By one sin labor to find out the sin and disease of nature, or thou will
never be thoroughly cured.

5. Beg of God to humb le thee and to change thy heart, move now thou art
doing, for a total change. They that are in Christ must be new creatures, Old
things are past away, 2. Cor. 5.17.
all things are become new. Resolve upon it, the Old heart will never do better
the Old heart will not serve, thou can never get through to Heaven with the
Old Heart: A man that will repair an Old ruinous house, he knows not what he
enters on, he may be at more charges, and it neither handsome, nor. safe, but
still some piece out of Order, a meet patcht business for a while. It were
better to pull down the Old one, and build all new: never think to leave only,
such and such a sin; but beg of God to put another principle into your heart,
and you will find your self more easy for Duties and your standing will be much
more likely. Jer. 31.32 33
That promise of God giving a new heart and a new spirit, and, writing the Law
in the Heart. Lay that upon thy heart, and beg of God to work it on thee or
thou can never make any thing of it. God has promised upon your turning at
his reproof, Prove. 1.23
to power forth his spirit upon you. Move for that or you do nothing.

6. Make choice of good company, The very Heathen could say. How can he be a
good man that does not hate bad company? Psa. 119.115
David says. Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. For I will keep the
commandments of my God. I have work to do which I cannot do in your company:
Therefore depart from me. Acts. 9.26.
Paul as soon as he was converted assayed to join himself to the people of
God still wherever he came.

Let those that fear thee turn in unto me, Psa. 119.79.63.
and I am a companion of all those that fear thee. This is the way to do well,
good company if the motion be weak will ripen, nourish, and help it on. Bad
company, if it be strong are able to smother it. He must be a strong Christian
indeed that looses nothing in bad company. It was Chrysostomes saying, that bad
company after a Sermon was like turning Savine into a Garden as soon as it was
made, and Dr. Prestons that ill company after a good Motion is like continual
dropping on a firebrand. Alas, filthy, frothie, worldly, wicked talk, (and
wicked men have no better for us) corrupt the soul, and may make you the worse
for it a great while. (And woe to you by the way, when godly men cannot keep
company with, you for fear of infection, cannot be with you but they lose by
you) if you would do well, join your selves to those that fear God. Many never
get over this temptation; startled they are, but they know not now to forsake
their Old companions; If they crossed them, and they were fallen out, they could
avoid them: but it is hard to forsake any whom we are not wholly fallen out with;
and as hard it is to fall out with them for Gods sake, or else you might soon
be out with them, we can do that for a lusts sake, which we know not how to do
for Gods sake. But make thou this step further, thou will find much advantage
from it, have no needless familiarity with them that are wicked: Intimate
society with wicked men, is hardly consistent with the practice of Grace. Our
Savior tells us, we must hate Father, and Mother, and Brother, and Friends,
for Christ's sake, Lu. 14.26.
Therefore this should not seem strange or grievous unto thee to forsake a
wicked associate, who is but Obtruded upon thee by the Devil on purpose to
keep possession for him and to be a snare to thee: good company is both a mark
and a means of thy being a good man, the man may be known by his companion
both to himself and others, that is not known exactlie by any thing remarkable
as from himself; Dignoscitur socio qui non cognos cuur exse.
And so a man that shall pretend he loves not the Alehouse, nor loves not
drink, but company draws him, to me it is as odious to love drunken company as
to love drink, for what can he love such company for! It is one lust to love
drink, another to love company, That he loves to sin by, these to sin with, He
satisfies his fleshly appetite with that and his carnal fancy and delight with
these. But if such a man do not perfectly know his own state, let him look on
his company, and see if he know what they are, and then he may know himself.
And therefore I would put these companions amongst his marks, and signs to try
his state by, And say these drunken idle companions are the marks of the
present damnable estate of this man's soul. For whatever wickedness there is in
any of them, the lively habits of it are in his soul. He is of the same kind,
it is likeness that makes persons love. There is a good likeing, or no
disliking of those vilenesses, the worst amongst them, or you could not out of
choice affect their company. One may know your temper that such as these can be
endured by you, and upon the early motion of changing your course, you must
change your company or it will not be: you can not keep your old company, and
go on this way, nor lightly take better company and not be much furthered in it.

7. Fall upon the present work. The sin you are convinced of, labor to begin
in striving against that very sin, Ephesians. 4.26.
and the duty you have neglected; now set about it. Put away lying, and let him
that has stolen steal no more, lie no more, swear no more, be idle no more,
drink no more, neglect duty no more, you must begin with somewhat let it appear
you are changed by forsaking these sins at present that are next, and so
forward every sin that you meet with. Try the assistance which God will give
you in opposing these sins that are next at hand. Suffer not thy self in any
sin thou meetest, because thou have a greater to overcome, the spoil of this
may strengthen thy Force against that Other, but be doing, gathering up Forces,
clearing the coast as you go, how low soever you take up at first be doing
till greater business comes. This may be but little but it may begin a great
deal and so be a great thing: loose not thy heart in expectation of some one
adversary, but try the next idle thought Or customary bad word, Or family duty,
Or instructing thy Children, enter with the next thou meetest, And so

8. Delay not your resolutions. This is the Devils last cast, when he sees he
can carry it no other way, he will get you to delay your changing a while. But
beware of this thing, the device is to get thee off the present heat that is on
thy Soul, and then the matter would die in thee; We are not ignorant of his
devices, If thou art resolved Make have and delay not to keep his
Commandments, Psa. 119, 59, 60
Let the dead bury the dead, says Christ but follow thou me. Before that
should hinder thy following Christ, Mat. 8.22.
let the dead lie unburied till the dead could do it. Christ and the soul must
be saved first. No business comparable to this business, Lu. 5 27.
whatever it is, it must give place to this. Matthew as soon as Christ spoke
to him, to follow him, He rose and left all to follow him. Alas do not think
of repenting, and not of repenting now. Do not say when such an affliction is
over, such a wordly business dispatched I will mend. No this is not the way set
upon the duty in the first place, this is the way to have thy worldly business
easilyest, and best expedited for thee. Do not say thou art too young? thou
may happen never live to be Old. A young man may have a short life, and
eternal damnation. And therefore look about you, delay not, Psa. ^5.8 G^n.
^2.3.
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Abraham got up
early in the morning though it was to sacrifice his dearest and only Son, and
is the day far on before thou can be got forward to the altar with thy darling
lust does spend thy time as the Levite did for the first days, spend the
morning so long till it be too late to go that night. Jud. 19.5. to 10.
Thou must break through all delays: Better go early in the morning then late
at night. May thy heart say to thee as was hinted to the Levite, Let the duty
alone to night it is but a piece of a day, begin a week with it. Take up these
things when thou may have a full time to consider them. Alas beware of the
design, there will be as much to hinder to morrow as is to day, And therefore it
is better to go late to night then late to morrow night, for still the
refreshment in the morning must put it late if thou stayest till another
morning. Thou must never think to embrace Christ, if thou will do it at such a
time when nothing else shall offer it self to be entertained beside. Thou must
break through some difficulties, make some other matters, stay to show thy
sincere preferring Christ above all, delay it now, Thou shall have as much in
the way the next day, and thy heart less disposed to stand for it. The design
is to loose and put off the present heat, and then a small occasion will do
well enough with thee, And therefore oh that while thou lingerest as Lot did
when he was to go out of Sodom, Genesis 19.6.
the Angel of the Lord would lay his hand on thee (the Lord being merciful to
thee) and lead thee out of this wretched condition before the fire and
brimstone be about thy ears.

I have now done with what I shall say at this time to the unconverted sinner,
I have said what the Lord has stored me with, both by way of motive and
direction for the recovering of thee that yet there might be some hopes of
thee. I shall say no more at present, thou have the same things now transmitted
to thee that thou may look over them again and again, and consider of them.
It may be you and I may live to deal of this business again in other words to
the same purpose, but salvation can be had upon no other terms but your
conversion. And if after all that is said nothing abide with thee, God knows
where and how sad Our last parting may be, But I must needs pray and hope that
God will save you from your Lot, (according to Ps. 49.14 15.) as judging your
impenitent state an hopeless, a desperate, and wretched estate. If your
delights in the world hinder these serious thoughts of yours, and strengthen
your impenitency, I must needs pray as the Psalmist, Psa. 17.13.
Deliver me, O Lord, from the men of this World who have a few vanishing
smoking trifles for their Portion in this life, and have a dreadful portion of
Fire and wrath remaining for them in the life to come. We have thus done with
the improvement of this point to the ungodly, in all the 3 heads forementioned.

CAP. IX.
The Observation improved to the Godly, in respect of Peace and Comfort, and
that to such as are but setting out toward God: following their Fears and
Scruples, and clearing up their hopes unto them.

WE shall endeavor to improve this Doctrine to another sort, Viz. To those
that fear God; and it is to press them to the duty of the Doctrine, and that is
to take notice of the hopes that God has left them, about the several states
which they may find themselves in, and may be apt to think their Condition
little otherwise then desperate: beware of despairing, where God has left You
hopes; do not shut up Your selves, when God has yet left You a way out, [and
that 1. In respect of Peace and Comfort. 2. Of sin. 3. Of Affliction.]

1. In respect of Comfort: and this,

1. To Souls that are but beginning toward God (For we shall desire to take the
Work before us, and leave none out, which God would have us to speak unto.) You
begin to be startled, and the old life will serve no longer, The time past
suffices, 1 Pet. 4.3.
(as the Apostle speaks) You have sinned long enough, You will have no more of
it You think it is time to come in, if it be not too sat, You have had enough,
if not too much in the way of sin: but You begin now to be afraid, least You
are the first that shall come too late: You think of turning, but are afraid
You shall not now be received. This is an ordinary temper of persons that begin
to look toward Heaven. Why?

1. Consider here is a great change in Your mind, erewhile You could hope for
Heaven; though you lived in sin, and now You cannot hope for it, though You
forsake sin. Then You had so much hope, and saw so much Mercy in God that You
left him neither Truth nor Justice, and now You look so altogether at Justice,
that You leave him neither Truth nor Mercy. Alas, this is the malice of Satan,
and the crossness of Nature. The Devil would hurrie thee into another extreme,
but the Mean between these two is the right. Sinners should not hope, nor
Penitents despair: thy base heart would have no hope, unless such an one as
would let thee sin too; As if because thy false hope is routed, in anger thou will now have none. And for Satan see his hand: A long time when we persuaded
for peace You were not willing, now You are willing, he would persuade You, God
is not willing. The truth is, he is not willing the Match should go forward,
and all his design is to break it; but if You knew You humoured Corruption, and
gratified Satan in nursing these thoughts, I think you would beware of them,
and look on them otherwise then You do. But

2. There is no question in the World but God is willing, if You be willing:
God will receive You, if You come in, Penitents shall find Mercy. That you
have no cause to doubt of Gods showing Mercy on you, upon your coming in, take
these Demonstrations of it.

1. His solemn Word and Oath is gone out upon it. 2 Cor. 6.17.
Leave your base Company, part with every base thing, come out from the way
you are in, and I will receive you; nay, he swears, As I live I desire not the
Death of the wicked, but rather that he should repent, Ezekiel. 33.11. Jo. 6.37.
and live. And Christ says, That those that come to him he will in no wise
cast out. In no wise] he will make no fraudulent distinctions to evade his
Promise, he will not do it upon any terms, in any case; now thou say, the
Lord will not receive thee: How dare thou say so? When the Lord says, he
will receive thee. Thou say, thou may go in, but alas, Christ will pass
thee by; and Christ says, He will in no wise do it: Will you not believe Truth
it self when he speaks?

2. If Christ should not receive Penitents, what did Christ come into the World
for, or send his Ministers for? if Penitents shall not find Mercy, then we
must say as the Apostle in another case, Christ died in vain and our Preaching
is also vain. 1 Cor. 15.14.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ
came into the world to save Sinners. What was his Incarnation, 1 Timothy 1.15.
his life of humiliation, his painful death for? if penitent Sinners find no
benesit by it? Why did he take our Nature on him, but to pity our Nature? and
that we might behold Mercy brought nearer to us, and more like to be laid hold
of by us: and he has employed us Ministers to invite you to come in; nay, we
are Ambassdors for God, and we entreat you, as though God did beseech you by
us, We pray you in Christ's stead, to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20.
we entreat you in his Name to come in; nay, in his stead: And do you think,
that if it were no more then for the comfort of us, to our labors in this
work, that he would send us on such an Errand, and not stand to what he sends
in Embassage by us? Does he pray you to be reconciled, and when you are
willing, do you think that he will go back and not be reconciled? Far be it
from us, or you to have such a thought of him?

3. His tenders of mercy to them that refuse him, and the mercy he has showed
to thee in thy former sinful estate, may make thee believe he is not so scant
of Mercy, as to have none for thee now thou repentest. Does he stretch out his
hands all the day long to a wicked and gainsaying People, Romans 10.21. Psa.
81.11
to them that will have none of him? And will he not embrace him that will have
him, that desires after him? Does Christ so lament over Jerusalem, that she
would not be gathered, when he often would have gathered her, and says, If
thou had known in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace; Lu. 10.42.
and brings in this, even thou, even thou rebellious, murtherous Jerusalem,
even thou might have had Mercy: and sadly concludes, that she had out-stood
her day; and will he not rejoice over one that sees what makes for his peace,
and gladly embraces it, and comes in? Do you think he is only earnest for them
that will not accept of it, like some of us that have a mind to save our Gift
and our Credit too, would offer it earnestly, and invite him strongly, if we
thought he would not take it, such things are common amongst men: but certainly
the Lord invites none, but those that should find welcome if they would come
in: surely if the vilest Sinners are invited to come, Penitents need not doubt
of their being received. Besides, thou know what Mercies he afforded thee,
in the time of thy Ignotance: He may say to thee, I girded thee when thou
knew me not, Es. 45.5.
As he says to Cyrus, Many a Mercy he prepared thee with, that at last his
goodness might draw thee to repentance, and will he have no mercy now thou
do repent! It can never be: If he had intended to flay thee, he might have
taken the advantage of the time, when thou were in enmity to him, he might
have come on thee in thy blindness, and have destroyed thee, and have had thee
speechless; but now to draw thy heart after him, to throw thee off, is the
unlikelyest thing that ever was. Oh no, He that could forbear thee when thou
sinnedst, sure will pardon when thou repentest. His carriage toward others
that will not repent, and toward thee while thou were imponitent, give thee no
ground to have hard thoughts of him, as if he should refuse thee upon thy
repentance. He does not use to cast Souls from him, that ever loved him: It is
not consistent with the Tenor of the Gospel, and his hitherto constant
dealings with Sinners in the world, to cast any Souls into Hell, that will hang
about him. Most that go into Hell are easilyer shaken off, then thy Soul in
this state would be.

4. The greatest of the work is done already, Christ has paid the price
already: If Christ were yet to die, thou might be more doubtful, thou
might think it would hardly be that ever he would come into the World; for
such a (One) as thou, (though that which did bring him when he came, would
again bring him if it were to do again) Thou would have made an ill believer
under the Law, to have believed in a Christ to come, that art so hard to
believe, now the price is paid, and the Work is completed and done by him, as
it is. It is but now his giving thee a part in his satisfaction, which is a
small thing toward the painful making of it. A part in that full Price he
has laid down, will serve thy turn, which how easy a matter is it for him to
bestow on thee, that stuck not at the main, of laying down his life for thee.
The King was offended that when his Oxen and Fatlings were killed, and all
things were ready, that they came not to the Marriage. Matt. 22.
If men should come to their friends to feast with them, when they are not
provided, it is some trouble; but when the dinner is provided, and persons are
invited, persons provide nothing, but what they would have merrily eaten, and
they take it ill if persons do not come. The Feast is prepared, and God had
rather you came then not. If Christ died for us when we were Enemies, how much
more shall we be saved by his life. If Christ when we were Enemies laid down
the Price, now we would be Friends, will he not give us a share in it; shall we
not be saved now he is risen, and gone into Heaven, and the worst is over: No
more remains to be done, but giving out shares and portious, in that which is
done so fully already. Thou would hardly believe he would come to die for
thee, if it were to do now (as certainly he did when he did it, upon as little
desert in the Creature as thou can show in thy self) if thou can not
believe he will give thee a part in the price he has paid already.

5. He mightily enjoins mercy, and exalts it among men, and he enjoins us to
show mercy after his example. Be merciful as he is merciful, Ephesians. 41 l
and forgive as God for Christ's sake forgives you. He bids you do nothing in
this case, but what he will do the like upon your self if need be. The Servant
that pulled his Fellow Servants by the Throat, if he had found God such a one,
Mat. 18.32
as thou think him to be, he had not been so dashed as he was, when his Lord
called him to account: He might have said, Why should I forgive him, when thou will not forgive me, five hundred Pence with me is as great a Sum to lose, as
a thousand Talents with thee, if thou will have all, I must get what I can in
of what is owing me toward paying of thee. But you find the Lord had forgiven
the thousand Talents, when he reproves the exaction of the five hundred Pence
upon the Brother. O this pity is to be found amongst Christians, and it is in
resemblance to Christ's pity to Sinners, and yet thou doubtless whether it be
in Christ, or no! How odious is unmercifulness amongst men? David was wroth
with the man that had done this thing, because he had no pity; 2 Sa. 12 6.
as if a man, and no pity, was a thing intolerable. The Senator that killed the
Sparow which flew into his hand for refuge from the Hawk, was condemned to die,
as unfit to be a Governor, or to live, that would show Cruelty to that which
flew to him for refuge. Do thou fly to Christ pursued by Sin, Satan and thine
own Conscience, and do think, he will slay thee? The Emperor that
proclaimed, Who ever would bring in such a Rebel, should have so much money;
The man came in, and demanded the Reward himself, and the Emperor gave it him
Can such Nobleness be found amongst the Creatures? and will you think the Lord
will not pardon and reward in like manner the Sinner that brings in himself the
Rebel unto him. If a man could afford to do thus bountifully, God can much
more. Edward 1. King of England, Faxe 's Acts and Monument
when a Servant of his on the other side of the River, crossed him in his
sport, and he said, he would have rebuked him, if he had him on that side; the
man seemed to set him at defiance in that he was on the other side: Whereupon
he makes his Horse take the River, and ventures his life to revenge himself on
him; the man seeing his Rage, never overran him, but came and held his Neck to
his Sword. This submission of his cooled him, which the River could not, and he
put up his Sword and touched him not. Satis est prostrasse leoni. And do you
think the Father of Mercies, Graciousness, and Goodness, will come so far
behind, as to slay the Soul that falls down at his Feet, and humbly comes in
unto him. Certainly you distrust that in God in the present case, which you
would not doubt to obtain from many a man in the like case. Prove 19.11.
It is man's Glory (and what not Gods, too!) to pass by a transgression.

6. He has showed mercy when he has declared Judgment: and will he not show
mercy when he has promised mercy! He said plainly? Jon. 3.4.
Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be over-thrown. Joxah took it absolutely,
thought much it was not over-thrown; there was a reserve still for repentance,
a tacit exception, if they repented not. And do we think when he promises
Mercy upon this condition expressly, that he will refuse to show it? Mercy
rejoices against Judgment. The Penitent has always such influence on God,
that Judgments threatened still must be put by, if repentance come in, and shall
Mercy promised to Repentance be denied? Jonah saw God so inclined to Mercy,
that (he says) he thought it was no going of a Message of Anger from him, to
say peremptorily, Wrath should follow his prediction: Sure then, Jon. 4.3.
if Jonah had been sent of our Message, he would have gone merrily upon it, to
show Mercy to the Penitent; this was a Message of a matter of the right kind,
and that which the Lord has evermore been famous for, and never failed the
Messenger in performance of it, and fulfilling according to his word. Mercy
breaks forth when Judgments are threatened, upon the tacit condition of
repentance; can we think Mercy will be denied, where it is expressly promised to
the Penitent? Repentance is a thing the Lord has always so looked at, that he
has abated of a Judgment threatened, for but the show of it. Ahab did but
humble himself in Sackcloath, 1 Kin. 21.27.29.
and walked softly, and the Lord shows Elijah this, and defers the Judgment for
it to his Sons days Certainly if he had seen Ahab repent in earnest, he that
delaied it for a show, would have taken it quite off for true repentance, and
would have said, I will not bring this Judgment upon him at all. -- O the
gracious disposition of God to show mercy, may encourage the Penitent to hope
in his mercy, in this plain case he is in.

7. Christ Jesus did never refuse any diseased person that came to him, and
needed his help, when he was on Earth. Mat. 8.7.
He took on him our Infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. Though this was
especially done when he suffered for our sins on the Cross, as you have it
applied elsewhere; yet in this place, Christ when he saw the sicknesses of our
nature, that came on us for sin, 1 Pet. 2.24.
in tending to satisfy for sin, he was so pitiful, that he took himself
concerned in those pitiful Maladies, he found upon the Nature which he had
assumed, and as fellowfeeling with us took part with us therein, and stirred up
his Divine Power for the release of the several persons so affected. Now if
Christ did never turn back any poor diseased Creature, that came to him with
their Bodies, but still healed them all, Mat. 9.2.
and this further usually began at pardon of sin with all his Patients, and
healed the Soul into the Bargain, though seldom that was looked for by them.
Do we think that he will turn off thee, Mat 9.2.
that come to him with a diseased Soul? and further seek for pardon of sin
in the first and chief, and only place: If Jesus Christ turn a diseased Soul
off that comes unto him for Cure, he does that which he has said, he will not
do; nay, I may say, he does that which he never yet did: And further thou
find him much changed from that gracious disposition that he had when he was
here. And sure that can never be. He is not on the Throne of Mercy in Heaven,
an Advocate with the Father for his, etc. to have less pity and mercy then
heretofore he had for poor Sinners. It is triumphant Mercy now, and therefore
what he did before, he will do that, and much more now; He ows not a Mite to
Justice, he is come through all the Demands, goes to the Father, released from
the Grave, sin having no more to charge upon him, and therefore now he is in
his Royalty of Mercy, and Interest for us, and so sure can want of nothing
which ever he showed of pity to poor Creatures while he was here. Now did he
ever do as thou fanciest he will do with thee?

8. Will he not show pity? How come men to show pity to you? Ministers that see
you in trouble that can pity you, their hearts are turned toward you for all
your Aversions and untowardness heretofore, upon a change: You are to them as
if you had never rebelled, and never been otherwise. In our esteem and
affection, we look upon you in unregeneracy, and converted as not the same
persons. Our hearts are opened to you upon your coming in; and do you think
that we that are but finite, straightened, hard-hearted Creatures, can have so
much affection toward you; and God who is infinite in mercy, that is the
Fountain of all pity, that he can want favor for you? Sure if the Masters
chief Stewards be so kind to you, they have some Intimation from their Master
of his good will toward you: or they are not so good to be so forward of
themselves; or sure they do think it is not against their Masters mind, or they
durst never show that favor to you which they do That men should pity you, it
is a sign that God then may, or that he does pity you in their pity. I will
show mercies to you, Jer 42 12.
that he may have mercy upon you. God shows mercy in making men show mercy and
pity to others in their Distresses. When men show pity, they are set on work b^
God, The Lord it is that has moved their hearts to compassion, or they had
been unmoved. Surely there is something in it, that thy Minister should say to
thee as Samuel, As for me, 1 Samuel 12.13.
the Lord forbid but that I should pray for you: nay, the Lord forbid, that I
should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you, I should sin if I did
it not; nay, further to say, I will teach you the good and the right way, etc.
Sure the Lord has some mercy himself for me, when his Officers have their
hearts so sensibly set and inclined toward me: sure you have high thoughts of
us (as much too high, as of him too low.) If you think we could move our own
hearts to have any pity toward you, or to take any care of you.

9. Can you be worse then those to whom he has showed mercy? O what Sinners
Repentance has brought off! The first of the sinning kind as to man is
generally believed, were saved: Adam and Eve the Ringleaders of this dangerous
course; these escaped. God put forth a trial of his power upon them. The
Devil had not the plunder of the first Battle, could not carry it off the
Field. Adam and Eve escaped. Thou talkest of great sins. Alas, what was David's?
what was Manasses? that filled Jerusalem with Murders, Witchcraft, and what
not? 2 K. 24.3.4. 2 Chronicles. 33, 2.13.
that entangled the people in so much sin, that God would not pardon it
afterward, but Plagned the Land for it when he was gone; yet this Manasseh
comes off, and the Lord is entreated of him. What should we say of Mary
Magdalen, of the very Jews that Crucified Christ? Saul that persecuted him? If
you think he did that only to Paul, did that once which he will do no more; the
Text tells you, he did it for a Pattern to them which should come after. 1 Timothy
2.15.16.
The Lord will show mercy to as great sinners, as any he has saved yet, if
they repent and come in unto him. The Lord has a design to magnify the
Attribute of his Mercy as much in the work of Redemption, as he did the
Attribute of his Power in the work of Creation: and therefore it is a dangerous
thing to talk of great Sins, before infinite Mercy. Consider, if as much Mercy
as brought off these Sinners in Scripture, will bring off thee, thou may
hope: for God has done nothing to any, but he will do the like to thee, if
thou repent and come in as they did.

10. God has excepted no penitent sinner, what ever his sin be. And besides,
if penitent Sinners be not saved, who shall? God does not say, if such Sinners
come, I will forgive them, and others I will not, but all sorts of Sinners,
unrighteous persons, Isa 55.7.8.
indefinitely, let them come, and I will show mercy unto them.

The very sin against the Holy Ghost, Divines conceive it might be pardoned for
the sin, but that God never gives repentance for it. The Devil that tempred
the young man, and he fled to Christ's Death; I, says the Devil, How will you
prove he died for you? nay, says the young man, prove that he did not die for
me. So how will you prove that mercy does not belong to you? for if penitent
Sinners find not Mercy, what is this Throne of mercy for? It is for some
body, the Angels that stand never needed it, the Angels that fell must not
have it, the Saints in Glory they are secured, wicked men on Earth matter not
for it: There remains therefore but one sort of men more, and those are Sinners
that repent of sin, and these are they this mercy is on purpose for. Thou
talkest thou art unworthy, was ever any worthy? Thou art but unworthy, and
never any was saved by this Mercy that did deserve it.

It remains therefore clear, that God is willing, that if thou repent, God will
receive thee.

3. And sure thou art willing: This is supposed all along in the former head;
the matter is at a nearer issue than is ordinarily thought of, we need not
solicitously enquire, whether God be willing to save a Penitent, or no? Know
but that thou thy self art willing, that thou art a Penitent, and thou have the
answer. It is brought to that now; but if the Fit of doubting be on thee, thou will make ashift to get hold here, and thou will to pleasure this humor and
distemper of thy soul, question this, whether thou art willing or no? whether
thou repentest or no! If the doubt be only here, thou will doubt here though
till the other was cleared, this on thy part was little doubted of, well then
to help thee about what God has wrought in thee, and to clear thy grounds of
hope from hence, and though thou may think none knows thy mind better then
thou; yet give me leave to desire thy answer to a few questions, whereby I
think thon may clear to thy self, that it sticks not at thy willingness,
not so much to prove what is in thee, as if any thing of thy own, as what the
Lord has wrought for thee.

Have not thou forsaken the old way? given over some gross sins which before
thou could have lived in, nay did take delight in? have thou not resolved
against them, however thou farest for thine acceptance with Christ upon thy
coming in? Just like a rebel that when proclamation of pardon is out, upon his
laying down of his Arms, and coming into the King. It may be at present he
dares not show his face to the King, to claim the benefit of his pardon and the
Kings favor, but he lays down his arms and will fight no more. Why this is a
good beginning: so one may take some Souls between their sins, and their
actual sense of their application of Christ. Thou have at present laid aside
thy hostility, thou have done with thy rebellion, Though thou dare not yet
see the Kings face, yet thou have done fighting against him, as Saul when
sticken down in his way to Damascus, why he had done at first dash with his
commission from the High Priests and Elders, he had enough of persecuting, and
whether Christ would have him or no, he at present had done with his breathing
out threatening against the brethren, he would stand by at no more stonings, nor
bind no more for Jerusalem, that followed this way. It is a good preface, a
good beginning, that thou art standed in thy former course, that thou have laid
down thy Hostility, wilt fight no more against Christ, Like the man whom a
Minister overtooke after a Sermon, and asked him how he liked the Minister, and
what he remembered, says the man, I know not, but this I am resolved, I will
never do as I have done. So thou art resolved never to do as thou have done,
thou have enough of thy swearing, Sabbath breaking prayerlesness in family, and
in secret, drinking, opposing the good way, sitting with the scornful,
mocking Religion, using any unjust way of living. Thou will no more of that
whatever comes of thee, why sure this is something.

2. Art thou not willing to do now whatever the Lord would have thee to do?
Art thou not reconciled to Christ's way of Government? the course that sometime
thou could not agree unto by any means, art thou not now pretty well minded
toward it! Can thou not fancy an Holy life! the time has been when thou
could not away with an Holy life of any thing, but now thou art better
persuaded toward it. Acts. 9.9.
can thou not say as Paul: Lord what will thou have me to do? The time was
when thou wantedst no Work of thine Own, thou would not have asked a Minister
what course of life thou should follow, thou had a way of thine own thou
likeedst better. The high Priest and Elders should tell thee what to do. But
now it is at this. What God will have done. And thou do not stick at any of
the Lords Commands, If he will have thee give, forgive, take pains in Religion,
strive at the straight gate, whatever it is, thou art willing now of it, so be
it, thou may find favor in the Lords eyes. Why a natural heart sticks at
many of the Lords precepts and would come to Christ, but with reservations,
some things they have a mind of, they will have liberty for whether they be
right or no. And therefore if thou, in thy troubles art brought to an universal
desire after the will of God, that thou choosest the way of his statutes, and
art willing of every duty, sure then there is some good thing wrought upon thee.

3. Can thou be contented without a Christ The time has been, that if thou
had meat, and fine clothes, and money, and friends, respect, etc: thou
could have been satisfied, but now all those things will not content thee,
thou art troubled and unsatisfied. What is the matter, is any thing taken from
thee of what thou had? or must we have more of them? or rather if one would
make a bargain with thee, can these things serve thee? Alas thou say take
them all for a Christ. I can not live of them as heretofore, If I have all
these things and God frown on me what avails it me! These are not the things
will serve my turn, these are toys for children, that know not what better
things mean, but I am undone, if I be put off with these things, I must have a
Christ or I can have no ease. Nay I would part with any or all these things for
him, rather than be without him. None but Christ, None but Christ, why sure
this is a great matter thou art arrived unto. A naked Christ will serve a
wounded soul. Thou say thou know not whether ever thou must have him or
no, but thou art sick for him, thou keep thy love for him, and thou can
not live without him. There is no offering to thee another match, nor any other
thing in the stead of him. Now alas there are many an hundred can make a
living, of many another thing, and would choose many a thing before they would
speak of Christ.

4. What do think by this very trouble of thine? Thy heart is no worse then
it was before, but thou see it now and did not see it before, Thou did as
bad before as now, but thou could swallow things better then, than now, why
sure then there is an alteration in thee. Once thou would have said thy heart
was good, and still this was thy plea, and now thou art fallen quite out with
it, I tell thee this conceit of our own goodness is a miserable destructive
principle, and that thou art thoroughly brought off that, is no small
beginning, is noe little in thy way toward God. I verily hope it is somewhat
better, with thy heart, when thou art not so apt, to speak one good word for
it, as heretofore. Thy very trouble is an argument of thy mending condition.
Thou talkest there is nothing but what is of flesh in thee. I would allude to
that of the blind man. Why herein is a marvelous thing, Jo. 19.30.
that ye know not from whence he is, and he has opened mine eyes. And so this
is a mavelous thing, that ye know not whence this work upon you is, that you
conclude, there is no thing of God in it, when your eyes are thus opened, when
the things that before were not noted, are now such loads and burdens to you,
that such thoughts as these are made at all conscience of. Sure this is from
above, that you are thus troubled for such inward spiritual things as you at.
If grace would let you, you might be at ease as heretofore for any thing I see.
If former principles prevailed this trouble would have no ground.

5. Would you be willing to be as you were before, though you never be better,
in respect of trouble, then you are now? If thou be not willing of Christ, will
you turn back again? live in the careless, regardless way you lived in
heretofore? If you be indifferent, you will be ready enough to hearken to such
a motion. But out of thy very trouble and anguish, thou set up the head and
say, nay for the old way, I will never turn back again unto it, I am sad
now, but this wilderness is better then Egypt, I am troubled, but this trouble
is better then sin. I had rather be in this condition by far then be turned
back to live in security and sin as heretofore: sure thou art better inclined
then thou think of.

And if in these particulars thou can make out thy willingness, thy hopes are
pretty clear, and thou may believe it will end well with thee.

But 4. Suppose thou scruplest thy own willingness, in some of these
particulars, say at least thou can not say these things by thy self. Thou
can not say thou art willing of all the Commands of God, and do not so
soberly desire Christ etc: Thou have a mind to be dejected, and so thou would
put me off here, and conclude there is yet no hope for thee. But prethy stay;
suppose this, yet there is still hope for thee.

For 1. Thou may have these things really in thee, and yet not be able to
apprehend them. Grace is one thing and sense of grace is another, It is one
thing to know God, and another thing to know that we know him. 1. Jo. 2.3.
Thou may be under a temptation a discouragement of soul, under the
prevalency of bodily melancholy, and may not be able to see what God has
done for the. Thy face may shine as Moses did to others and yet thou thy self
not see it. Exodus 34.29.


2. Thou may have some of these if not all one dram of true grace must not
go to Hell. when signs are given; you must not say you need not the rest, when
you find some, nor yet, that you have none because you find not all: but take
notice of what you have, and seek for what is behind.

But 3. Suppose thou have none yet if thou art willing to have them, there is
help for thee. Thou may come to Christ for these things. Before thou leavest
off for want of them, come to him to be supplied with them. If thou be not
willing, If thou be willing to be made willing, If thou desire, to desire
sincerely and more universally, there is something already, and the rest may be
wrought for thee. One man comes to Christ doubting in part of his good will (as
some imagine) and says, Mar. 9.22.
If thou will thou can make me clean. Christ puts up this, Mar 8.2.
and it passes, says he, I will be thou clean. Another comes and says, If thou
can do any thing, help, Christ passes by this weakness too, and comes upon
terms to that man to afford help unto him. When he says If thou can. Christ
turns an if thou can, upon him. I can says Christ If thou can believe. So
thou for the pardon of sin may say, Lord if thou can forgive such a sinner
as I am, help me, says Christ, I can if thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes. The poor man could not say, and not lie, that
he did believe, but he burst out with tears Lord I believe help my unbelief. I
do believe, that is, I do desire to believe, I have some Faith and I would
have the rest, Lord I would not say I had the condition, nor yet let thee go
for want of it, there is a middle way, I need neither lie nor dye. I come to
thee for this Faith Lord I believe help my unbelief. So thy soul stirs a
little, cry to God to help thee out with the rest. I desire, Lord help me to
desire, I am willing, help my unwillingnesse, I would serve thee, help me in my
great weakness. If I be not, Lord let the day of thy power come, and make me
thoroughly willing. Joh. 9.39
The poor man was very generally inclined, and yet with a little of Christ's
dealing with him, he was suddenly brought to a notable closing with Christ;
says Christ to him, do thou believe in the Son of God? Alas says the man,
Who is he Lord that I might believe on him? says Christ. Thou have both seen
him, and it is he that talks with thee. And the poor man then says. Lord I
believe and worshipped him. Thou may not have such a distinct knowledge of
Christ as thou should have. But thou have a general good will toward him,
and if he would show himself to thee thou would directly and distinctly
close with him, and fall down and worship him. This that is in thee may be
made more particular, and instead of despairing with it, labor to have it
increased, where it may be increased abundantly. Turn ye at my reproof, I will
pour forth my spirit upon you, Do you offer for it, Prove. 1.23
and I will help you, turn you and I will pour out my spirit, that will help
you to turn thoroughly Obey the precept; and claim the promise. I have gone
astray like a lost sheep. Seek thy servant. The poor soul cries. Psa 1.9. uli.
Lord I am astray I cannot come back again, I know not where I am, lost I am.
I cannot find my self for thee, but thou know where to find me, thou
know how to redeem me, thou know my w^ndrings, Lord seek me out. Lord do
not lose me. Seek thy Servant. Why this w^^ is left open to thee, whatever yet
hinders thee, thou may beg of God to work they heart up unto it. This for
the Fourth step.

5. God may suffer they troubles to abide with thee for many precious Reasons
of good toward thee. Thou may be ready to say, But sure if God did intend
to show mercy on me he would have done it before now, he would not have kept me
off all this while if ever I must have come on, sure some token for good he
would have showed ere now; If he had liked my coming. He would have made me
welcome, signified his acceptance of my repentance before this, in some measure
or other. But I shall to drive thy trouble past this stop, show thee that God
may in love to they soul at present withhold sensible comforts from thee. Many
choice Reasons the Lord may have for his so doing.

I. God may withdraw, to make thee lay a solid foundation, not only for near
sins but in humiliation for all former sins. The terrous abides to search the
sore to the bottom. God may intend to drive up thy humiliation for the very
sins of thy youth. Ephraim bemoaned himself till he bore the reproach of his
youth. Jer. 31.19
And then God smiles on him, says he is a pleasant child. Alas, if these sins
should not be searched out, and should lie within unrepented of, thy matter
would be fowly hudled up, and when these things were at after searched for, it
would mar all thy comforts again. God would make through work with thee. Thou
would it may be quit scores with God, draw gloves with him. That all that
has past should stand for nothing, and if thou might have pardon for all
that is past, thou would mend for the time to come: But this will not serve,
thou must be willing to bring out the old score, thou must undo as much as in
thee lies what before thou have done, acknowledgment must be made, satisfaction
to God and man as much as in you lies; or God will not be friends with you. You
must be willing to take shame for your former doings, If you would find favor
for the time to come, resolve therefore to do thy duty in this thing. Humble
thy self for all former sins, hide nothing from God, make clear work, as far
as you go, for what is past, and you are so far on your way toward comfort.

2. It may be, to search thy heart for some regarded sin, that God still frowns
on thee. And indeed it would be sad for thee, if God should smile on thee, and
any sin lodged in thy soul. The sin that troubles thee most, is not always the
cause of thy trouble, that sin that is in open view, is not so dangerous, but
it is the sin that lies in a corner, that says nothing, the thing thou least
suspectest, that keeps thy wound from healing, some thing that is hidden from
the Physician, that makes the physic will not work, something that is a sin,
that thou will not have to be a sin, as David would be searched and tried, and
if there was any way of wickedness in him. So there may be some hidden way of
wickedness in thee, Ps. 136. ult.
and till thou be willing to let Christ come into every room, to throw out
what he will, to be absolute Lord in thy Soul, It is not for thy good that thou
should have comfort, Christ may have that of thee now that he knows he cannot
have afterward, and therefore stands off, till thou be of a mind universally
to close with him. It may be thou may live in passion, in the fashions of the
world in the sin of usury, Wilt have something lawful which is not. If God
love thee he will never let this way of wickedness remain in thee. The great
matter of controversy that would make way for thy peace, is, whether Christ or
thou shall make the Law? If Christ be admitted as the complete legislator, he
will shortly come to thee, but till then he will stand off, as it is best for
thee. And therefore in thy trouble do this duty, desire God to search thee,
look to all thy ways, pray the Lord to show thee thy sin, that offends him,
Job. 34 32.
in the words of Elihu that which I see not, teach thou me, If I have done in
iquity I will do no more, and this will bring the work up with thee.

3. God may withold his face from thee to bring thee more clearly and
universally over unto him, and this is much for thy good: Christ would have men
count what it will cost them to be Christians when they come to him. The great
question now upon thy turning is, as before said, who must give thee law!
whether thou or Christ, whether thou will do in all things as thou will or as
thou have been wont, or as the most use, or whether as Christ pleases in every
thing? Ephraim was chastised for he was a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke. Jer
41.18.19.20
Would not keep the furrows, nor draw quietly in his geeres. God chastizes him
till he is tamed to his will, and now he says turn me Lord and I shall be
turned. Why when he is of the mind that God should have the whole rule of him,
then God pitties him, and earnestly remembers him still, and will shortly hide
himself no longer from him, will be kept no longer off him, I will have mercy
on him, says the Lord. It may be thou would at first turn to him, would
leave some sins, and do some duties, but thou would fain have an hand in the
bargain, would make one end of it, why this will not be. Christ says we must
then each keep our own. If thou will not part with thy estate, give, and
forgive, and submit to whatever I require, It must stand as it does, I shall
not declare my acceptance of thee. But now when the soul is brought up to
Christ's terms, that it sticks at nothing, (as terrors are the likest of any
thing to bring thee unto it) then Christ will make no long tarrying from thee.

4. He may withold from thee to make thee a right bred Christian, A Christian
of the right kind. There is much difference amongst Christians; some build
their house quickly, but it is without foundation, and so stands not. Thou art
kept in a condition to lay a good Foundation. Some Men are Christians they know
not why, and they become Apostates they know not how. Some have but some
overly-sideway preparations for Christ, take up religion as the most convenient
way for the present. But now thou p^iest too dear for Christ, to let him
hereafter go for nothing. Thou art brought to see thy need to him, to have the
experience of the Gospel mysteries, to find it in thy soul, what it is to be
rescued out of the hands of Satan by the Merits of Christ, feels how hardly
thou art fetched off, and this is like to lay a foundation of a more mortified,
spiritual, lively Christian, then if thou came to comfort sooner. It is said
of Rhehoboam. He did evil because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord.
He was not fixed in his heart for God. 2 Cron. 12.18.
he was not thoroughly foundationed for Religion, his heart was never right
set, from a sound inward principle of holiness, and so upon occasion he did
fall off to do evil in the sight of the Lord. Certainly those Christians for
the most part prove best, that were either bred in the time of persecution,
wherein nothing but grace durst have looked out for Christ, and there were daily
trials to keep corruption down. Or elss that are bred and brought out by inward
sharp terrors though in a time of peace. For this makes them know themselves
the better ever after. The March birds are always the best Singers. And
therefore thou may take comfort in it, that thou art in the way not to be
cast off, but to be bred right, to have thy heart set right toward Heaven. And
therefore desire to bring up the building with thee. Thou had better have thy
troubles continue, then have them not cured. Better be in fears, then have
hopes without a foundation.

But then 6. Having brought up thy matters thus far, It may be yet thou may
have no comfort. Thou art humbled for Old sins, and all sins, and brought to
Christ universally and art thoroughly humbled to see thy need to Christ, and
would lay the foundation on the rock, yet thou have no comfort: why soul, Thy
duty is not to despair now, nor to vex and fret thy self with doubts about thy
estate. There is other work to be done. And labor to do the Duty of this thy
conditon.

1. It is thy Duty in this case. To study to reform to thy utmost. And to Order
thy conversation a right, avoid all sin, walk with God in all Duty. If thou
can not prevail with God for comfort, go to him for strength. In a sense of
your utter unability beg of him to enable you to serve him however he deals
with you. Isa. 1.16,
Cease to do evil, learn to do well, whatever is sin meddle not with it, and
what is duty go about it, I will walk with a perfect heart in the midst of my
house, says David. O when will thou come unto me: till he comes walk so, and
this is the way to have him come to thee. Psa. 101.2
Let it be the daily exercise to have a conscience always void of offense
toward God and Man. Live like a Subject till favor comes.

2 Be diligent in the use of all means public and private. Act. 24.16
Lie in Christ's way still, though thou think he has hitherto passed by
thee. Satan would draw many off from the use of means, tells them they
aggravate their Sin, by going to the Sacrament, and that their Prayer is
abomination. But let me hint this to thee, that if thou be as bad as may be and
thy duties may not be accepted, yet it is better to do them as well as thou
can, then not to do them at all. It is an excellent observation one has on
Simon Magus that Peter bids pray though he was in the gall of bitterness and
the bond of Iniquity, De. Arrow Smith. Acts. 8 12 23.
If it were Lawful and a duty for Simon Magus to pray, then sure thou may
make bold to do thy duty too, thou can not be worse then the Apostles says he
was. Satan would scruple thee about duties, for he knows that is the way by
which virtue and comfort should come from Christ unto thee. But keep close to
Prayer what ever comes. And for the Sacrament, alas if thy heart be bad though
thou go it will not mend by staying away, God may in some one Ordinance when
thou think not of it, give thee the comfort together of all the Ordinances
in which thou have waited upon him, and hitherto received nothing. He sets up a
Portion for every child that is not at present fit to have it, and thou may
have all together. But be sure to continue in Prayer and hearing, and at
Sacraments if admitted to them.

3. Be dilligent in your lawful calling. Let every man abide with God as he is
called. Work with thy hands the thing that is honest, 1. Cor. 7.24.
Lawful work is Gods work for the time of it, as well as hearing for the time
of that, fall not out with thy business, serve God in thy outward business.
Let not Religion be reproached to spoil Servants or Workmen. Let not the World
be the worse for it. Believe God is served, and may be enjoyed in those
businesses. Many have many troublous thoughts for want of lawful thoughts
about their Business. Many people have much trouble for want of better
Business. Mr. Ball (as I have heard,) when One complained to him of many sad
thoughts he gave them a task of getting Ecclesiastes without Book as an only
Remedy. Which when the party looked strangely at, he told him that he perceived
much of his trouble was for want of employment, and that would set him on work.
And so certainly diligence in an honest way is good Work for thee.

4. Abide thus in this course waiting for Comfort. Isa. 28.16.
He that believes does not make have. Be not too hasty with Christ; set not
him a time. But wait till he please to come. It is good that a man should both
Hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord: quietly tarry till the
Lord comes. Lam. 3.26
For consider thou may well afford to wait.

1. Christ waited a great while on thee, before ever thou would Offer to come
to him. It is not long that thou ever framed for it, and art thou taking off
time and quarrelling that he comes not out at first to welcome thee.

2. Christ is worth thy waiting for, It is no inferior business thou tarriest
about. One glimpse of his favor is more worth then all the world. Thou will
never repent groaning for such a birth.

3. Thou art not so good but thou may be willing to tarry. Alas to have thee
quarrelling at the foot of the ladder, that the pardon is not absolute, and
that it came no sooner: It does not become thee. The mercy is free. If thou
considerest how infinite it is that ever it should come to thee, thou will say
there is no such equivalency on thy part, but thou may thankfully tarry a time
for it.

4. Thou have no whither else to go. No other work will please thee. We say,
when a friend is not just in the way, Come, stay, he will come anon, you have
no other Business. You had as good stay here as walk about, etc. If you have
any other Work you can do, you had best go about it, you are not yet fitted
for Christ. But if you cannot turn aside after vain things. Then stay here.
This way of holiness is the best way, and therefore you may afford to tarry in
it. And blessed be God thy Heart is so disposed.

5. This condition of waiting may be a very safe condition for thee. Thou
little think that there are such difficulties about managing Comfort, as
there are. These troubles keep thee out of hearmes. Thou art now too feared,
to do as some do. Though thou droopest, it keeps thee from security and levity,
and many a scandal, that some of another temper are put to it to repent of. It
saves thee some repenting work.

6. For any thing that is done of all this while Christ may cure thee in one
moment. Thou think matters are gone a great way with thee, that thou art
very far out of sight. Alas thou art within one glimpse of a perfect cure.
Whenever the moment comes wherein Christ will appear, he can notwithstanding
all that is done, make all clear in thee. It is but causing his face to shine,
but setting on one Word, but rectifying thy heart, in some one thing, and thou
shall be whole. One look of Christ can mend all, and prayer may soon fetch it.
Who would not wait if he thought he was so near.

7. Jo. 7.6. 1 Pet 5.6. Caryl. Hab 2.3.
His time is the best and the fittest time. your time is always ready, (says
Christ) but my time is not yet. He will exalt you in due time. The vision will
speak, it will not lie. He that says more then is so, lies in word, he that
promises more then he will do, lies in deed. 1. Sam. 13.8.10.
but it will be in its appointed time, Saul waited but not long enough, in
wordly matters men must wait to the end of the day in their tenders, till
sunsetting, or they cannot escape undamnified. And art thou talking of breach of
day, when it is not yet the third hour of the day? Why it is a great while to
night Christ may come yet if it were nearer sunsetting then it is, It may be in
this case as in Daniels Vision, the thing is true, though the time appointed
may be long. Dan. 10.1.
But Christ will not fail his own in the best and fittest time.

8. Isa. 54.7.8.
The longer Christ tarries before he comes the longer he may tarry when he does
come. when he has forsaken a little moment. He gathers often with everlasting
mercies. He may not come till thou art fully prepared to make him so welcome
when he does come, that he may never leave thee. They that have a small fine,
pay a good round yearlie rent and they which fine hard pay the less rent It is
hard to say which is better. Here is a convenience and equality both ways, if
thou be not soon comforted as some others are, thou may have thy comforts
more through and abiding when they come.

9. However Heaven will make amends for all. If thou get it there, it will bear
charges abundantly. A waiting soul may get Heaven, as well as a soul ravished
with joys in believing, And thefore wait: a man ill mounted riding to such a
place, others overtake him and overgoe him, but yet this is still his comfort,
they tell him he is in the way. To be cast behind and loose the way were sad,
but this is comfortable that others can say, I left him on the road, he is in
the right way, though he drive somewhat heavily. And when he is gotten to the
City, he forgets soon his less pleasant Travel, he is glad he is There, and
they that rid faster, and easier can be no more. So though thou think others
out go thee in gifts, parts, and abilities for service, yet Thou art in the
road, and if at last thou overtake Them in Heaven it will serve thy turn. Thou
may be as welcome at thy journeys end as he that came thither with more State,
and ease, Then thou have done.

10. If thou had comfort it should not be, to set thee at Liberty ease and
idleness. He that would feign have assurance That he might unyoke in his
Christian Course, does not desire it aright, nor is like To have it, surely
thou must labor as much from comfort to improve it, as Thou do for comfort
to attain at, Labor we must, and Therefore resolve in it, and patiently wait
in this good way. It is a great question whether be the harder work to get, or
to use comforts aright, to keep from impatience in the want of them, or
security in the enjoyment of Them. Each condition has its Exercise; Though
the former has less hazard in it. It may suffice to have said all this, to
the clearing of the hopes in respect of comfort to those that are thus
spiritually tosled at their first setting out.

CAP. X.
The doubtful cases of such as have made longer Profession briefly distressed
from the Observation.

2. TO those that have made longer profession, that are walking in darkness
and have no light. Many of these are severally troubled in doubts a bout their
Estate. This doctrine seasonably presses them to hope, and it would find matter
for them in their several capacities, but to speak to these particularly,
would swe the discourse; I shall therefore speak something in the general, and
the Spirit of God is able to melt it into the particular conditions of trobled
Souls, that are of this sort.

And so 1. Take notice, That whatever was urged as a ground of Hope to the
profane, belongs to you much more. You are as near as one of them if all be to
begin now. Thou cryest out of an Hypocrite, as if his condition was worse then
any ones. But

1. Take notice, Every one is not an hypocrite that only wants strong grace,
many they try themselves for the truth of grace, by the signs of the degrees of
grace. True grace is one thing and strong and grown grace is another.

2. He is not an Hypocrite, that is not a complete Christian. A Christian may
be in preparation for Christ, and if not thoroughly come over, yet still he is
no impostor, only in the way to a true settled state.

3. He is not an Hypocrite that has some hypocrysie in him. None complain so
of a bad heart as they who have the best Heart. But if Hypocrysie be found
amongst other sins. If it be not allowed nor ontertained with delight. The soul
shall not be accounted with as the Abettor of such a way. Gal. 2.12.13.
Peter for once dissembled yet not an Hypocrite for so doing.

2. Though thou be an Hypocrite, yet there is hope; for thee, what though
nothing but an outside profession? (For that string many one is harpning on)
yet sure thou art as near as the Drunkard, profane person can be. Never tell me
that profession should hinder you in your coming to Christ: Athanasius wished
all men were Hypocrites, That they had been all so good as Hipocrites are, For
God has more examplary honor from external conformity, then from open
profaneness. And further it cannot hinder your coming in.

1. Profession has kept you from many gross sins, which would have been heavy
on you if now to reckon for. Alas if thoughts of Evil have been so tedious to
you, what then would you have done, if these thoughts had been words, and these
Words actions. Therefore your profession has not hindered you thus far.

2. Profession has entitled you to many serious Christians who would not
cease to pray for you, and would not easily lay their hands off you, for the
Hopes they once had of you, you are hereby drawn to Gods children who will be
sure to stick close to you and pull hard before they loose you.

3. Profession has inured you to the means. This is the way to get comfort,
many a startled soul knows not dutys, nor how to frame to them. But now
profession has taught thee the manner of the God of the land and in this thou
art aforehand. For this is the way to have comfort, or have the Heart brought
over, if yet thou fall short in this work. Many a new convert knows not how to
set upon the duties of Religion whence he might receive strength and comfort,
which is a great disadvantage to him. Now thy profession befriends thee with
this benefit. Thou art well used to Prayer, and reading, and hearing etc. which
is a good Thing before hand in this matter.

4. All the danger in profession, this very fear of thine about it, takes away.
That Hypocrites are in more danger then others, is not as if this sin was more
unlike to be pardoned then another, but because this kind of Sinners seldom,
or never, repent, and come in, as other sinners do. Hypocrysie hinders not
pardon so often as it hinders repentance. Now if this be thy fear and thy
burden, there is not this danger of thee. Profession if not sincere, it is
dangerous only in this, when it is rested on, when it is made a Christ, when
men are thereby whole, and need not the Physician, and so are hindered from
coming to Christ for thorough healing. But when the soul is sensible of it,
and strives to come to Christ notwithstanding it, there is no incapacity upon
it, more then on any other state for its acceptance with Christ. The Harlots
and Publicans that enter into the kingdom of Heaven before Scribes and
Pharisees; Mat. 21.31
It is not meant of Heaven above; for Scribes and Pharisees as such, and
Harlots and Publicans as such, stand at an equal distance to glory. A profane
man dying so, cannot be saved no more then an Hypocrite that dies so. But the
Kingdom of Heaven is taken here as frequently in the N. T. For the Kingdom of
Grace, for the Kingdom of the Gospel, and so the meaning of it is, Harlots and
Publicans, are sooner converted, brought to repentance, to close with the
Gospell-Kingdome, then the other are. Now this does not imply that no Pharisees
should come in, nor that they should be esse welcome if they did come in, then
Harlots and Publicans. Nay sure if professors come to Christ to deny their own
Righteousness, come off the condition that it is so hard to come off from,
they should be the rather entertained. It is not profession that hinders
acceptance unless it hinder repentance, if it hinder not coming, it cannot
hinder your welcome. Paul was a Pharisee a liver without the Law, yet Paul,
when repented, Mat 21.29.30.
was received as soon as any other Sinner. The Similitude in that other place
of the two Sons who were asked to Work in the Vineyard. The one denied, the
other broke his promise, now as the former repented of his unmannerly denial,
and went, so if the other had repented of his unfaithful breach of promise,
and had gone too, no doubt he had found acceptance. Thou talkest of an almost
Christian. But sure an almost Christian may be an altogether Christian, or else
Paul had prayed for this in vain: Acts. 16.29. 2. Pet. 2.21
For that place, Better never to have known the way of God etc. This is not to
this purpose.

For 1. It is spoken of such Christians as were turned Seducers, Ringleadres of
Heresies, Persecutors, Wolves, that were risen up not sparing the flock. Thine
is not any gross apostasy from profession, but only a discovery of
insufficiency. And

2. It is meant of them as finally persisting in that state. It may be since
thou professedst, thou may have fallen by some great sin, but thou have no
heart to continue in it. It lies not quiet in thy bosom, thou have no rest in
thy bones by reason of it, Thy Hypocrysie if such, is not maintained, and thou
art weary of the state and willing to come off from it, these very Apostates if
they had repented, there was hopes of their yet coming off. And therefore by
all this it appears that they fear and trouble does take off the danger of thy
profession, the foolish virgins if they had mist their oil in time it had been
happy for them. If thou be one of them thou have this advantage that thou
missest oil, before they that sell it have shut up their shops. There is yet
hope in this thing. It appears then that all the encouragements that have been
given to that other sort, of new beginners, do belong to you much more, you
may set in as beginners, and share with them and welcome. All those comforts do
belong to you. Besides a gross mistake may hereby I hope in some measure be
removed that many a soul thinks their hope is behind them altogether, that they
must either evidence it from what is past already or else have none the matter
is not so, Thou art as free to take Christ as any other man. It thou can not
clear it from thy profession already that thou have taken him, thy profession
puts no incapacity upon thee but thou may set in for him now as well as any
man. And

2. There is hopes for you. For God may withdraw from you (as he witholds from
the other) for choice ends of good unto you. Though you walk in darkness and
have no light, yet this may be for your interest exceedingly.

1. God may do it to fetch some sin out of thee. There is some evil way in
thee, some way of lying, some way of false gain, some way of pride,
humoursomeness, indulged passion, etc: no marvel if thou he one of a troubled
spirit. Much if not most usual trouble of spirit is observed to arise (as
occasioned at least) either,

1 Out of melancholy as one in that bodily distemper (Mr. Baxter says) one may
as well cure a man of a palsy by a Sermon, as such a man.

2. Or out of ignorance of the nature and mystery of Grace by Christ the tenor
of the Gospel covenant.

Or 3. From some disobedience now, it may be for some thing of this last kind,
and it is fatherly in him to withold from thee till this evil way be rooted
out.

2. It may be to fetch thee on to some further degree of Holiness. There are
after work of conversion. And the change they make are as considerable almost,
as if never any work had preceded. The disciples who had left all for Christ,
Ma. 18.3
yet they must be converted again, and more converted to this grace of
humility, which yet was wanting in them. God will afford comforts at first on
those terms, on which after he will not continue them. He will bear with that
in a beginner, that after he will stand upon to have it mended. He will not
carry always toward us as babes, he looks we should grow toward strong men
in Christ. New wine must not be put in to old Bottels. Mat. 9.17.
At first he would have thee spared in some things, but he expects that thou
should in time get thy bottles so renewed, as to hold the strongest Wine he
has for them: And so he withdraws from thee now; not because thou art worse
then formerly but because thou art not better. He has a design not to cast
thee of, but, to put the forward by this withdrawment. Some after work is on so
t, It is not if I am to be converted now, o I had nothing before; thou art
mistaken. Some may have been before, and some may be to be added still; God
will have thee of the fashions of the world, more humble, close and serious
then formerly, nothing so like to make thee a right mortified Christan, as
terrors are.

3. He may design thou should be more established and settled then heretofore.
He that has his comforts dearest, usually has them surest. Thou know how
thou came by Christ, and so art like to keep thy hold of him. The spouse that
had lost her beloved when she found him, Cant. 2.6.
she would not let him go, she charges by all the Hinds and Roes of the field,
that they should beware of awaking him. Christ is gotten into the believers
heart, he charges the affections to keep the lumber of the world, and the lusts
of the flesh at a distance, that they awaken not Christ, nor disturb his soul
and him together. O such a one came not so easily by him, as to give way to
Lusts, to loose him for trifles as many do. Thou art like of any one, Cant.
8.6.
To go through the Wilderness leaning on him. Thou have come to Christ so
importantly that thou can not trifle with him. Thy terrors are like the wind
that shakes the tree to make them more rooted. The winter frost nips the trees
at present to make them more fruitful: So these troubles of thine will tend to
thy greater settlement and make thee more steadfast in the Lord.

If thou have brought the matter to waiting thou shall never loose the thing,
nor yet thy waiting for it. If thou have searched thy heart for sin, and about
duty, and put thy self to God to be searched, Job 34 32.
and says^^ thou shall search and find none, no sin that I love and delight in.
Job. 34.32 Psa. 17.3.
but had rather have it taken away, then to have it tarry, you shall find you
shall be considered herein. Now as long as any sin remains in this kind that
the soul retains and from which it will not part. Christ may answer such a one,
the matter sticks not at me. Thou art not yet prepared thou art not yet
resolved on the match for thine own part. But if it be come clearly to this,
that the matter is at waiting, thou will find that either 1 Christ will come
speedily; or 2, make it easy to thee to wait for him, (as if he do either, it
will serve thee, and be a great mercy to thee.) and 3. When he comes he will
abundantly recompense his delay, a small moment I have forsaken thee, but with
everlasting kindness will I gather thee. Es. 54.
And therefore study to bring it to this and thou will have no reason to cease
from hoping in such a way.

3. Consider you are not alone of Gods children in this affliction. God has
had many of his children in this wilderness, has made their valley of Achor
their door of Hope. David, and Heman, and Hezekiah. etc, now this sure might
stay thy heart a little in this condition of thine, to think,

1. That many of Gods eminent servants have been thus heretofore. 2. That many
of Gods children besides thee are so now or have been.

3. That it is a condition many have escaped from, many have blessedly been
delivered out of this state. A disease many have been recovered from, and few
have perished of: a curable, a comfortable disease.

4. It is the condition, which God has still chosen to lead his best children
through; eminentest Christians, for life, and experience, God has thus trained
them. Therefore this might stay thee at present, thou art under the
chastisement of Sons, the discipline of Children, in these bitterest conflicts
thou can be in, as to instance, Jon. 2.4.
Jonah said, he was cast out of Gods sight, yet he would look again toward
Gods holy Temple. He thought in the Whales belly he should never have been seen
nor found out more, but he would have the other look at Christ (for the Temple
was a type of him) before he quite gave up all, and you know he was brought out
of that miserable deep, and manifold prison again. Ephraim is bemoaning
himself. Jer. 31.18.19.20.
For afflictions that stuck by him, God chastised him, and he was chastised.
God makes afflictions to tarry if he sets them on, Lan. 3.3.54.
he was likewise troubled with an unruly heart, Was like a Bullock unaccustomed
to the Yoke. Yet he begs of God to turn, and this bemoaning Ephraim is a
pleasant Child in Gods eyes and he remembers him still, nay earnestly remembers
him still, and will have mercy on him. The Church concludes her self to be cut
off, and laid in the dungeon and a stone upon her, made sure for coming forth,
yet she thence cried to God; and though none else could hear her where she was,
yet she got the Lord to hear in that place, and he drew near to her,
notwithstanding the dungeon and stone, and says, fear not. Nay the Church is
gotten into further misery, Ezekiel. 37.11. to 16.
she is not only in the grave, but rotten, come to dry bones, and says her hope
is lost, and she is cut off for her part, Whatever the Lord will do with
others, says many such a soul, I think for my part I may as well sit still as
stir any further, I am gone I think for one. But God says, he would come to
their very graves and open them, and call them forth and put his spirit into
them, and make these very dry bones to live. The soul in a very far gone
condition, the Lord will make it to live again. He will fetch it out of the
grave and bring it back from corruption, when it says, it is cut off, for its
part. The soul now in this condition from these considerations, may move the
Lord as David; Deal with me, Psa. 119.132.
as thou usest to do to those that love thy name, or according to thy custom
to those that love thy name. Men that give freely at their doors shall not want
custom, and so if they intend not to be troubled, they will say at first, If
we use them to this we shall never be without such guests; now God has a
design to show mercy, and so he has still used poor people to his doors. They
can challenge nothing at his dole door, but only his custom of giving. He has
always been wont to show favor to those that were distressed; and thou may
hope he will be no worse to thee then to another, and thou may be well
assured of it. It is a good house, very good to the poor, and therefore if thou
be needy call at it, and hope for relief.

4. In this very condition thou art in. Es 57.15.16. and 66.1.2.
The Lord has tender thoughts toward thee. The Lord, the high and lofty one,
whose name is Holy, etc. These are attributes that fright a poor sinner, of
any, The Lord, the high and lofty one. If I were righteous I would make
Petition my only plea, so infinite is he, and I am nothing before him. But then
he is, an holy God, and dwells in the holy place. I, says the sinner, this
affrights me, for he will not endure sin, I am unclean, I am a sinful man, my
hope is gone to deal with so pure a God; God has mentioned these affrighting
attributes on purpose, and this high God, this holy God, will single out this
man also, will look at him, dwell with him that is of an humble and contrite
spirit, that is broken in pieces for sin, and that trembles at his word. His
greatness will condescend to thy meaness, his purity to thy sincetity, and to
thee of all other will he look. And so he speaks affectionately of a bemoning
Ephraim, Jer. 31.20.
since I speak against him, I earnestly remember him still. The child cries in
secret, and the mother that has beaten it, is ready to cry too. Joseph's
Brethren are pitifully troubled and Joseph gets into his chamber and weeps too,
one would have thought they had been of no kin to hear them talk together,
but Joseph did but this to bring them to repentance, Joseph chides to their
faces, and weeps in a corner, and at last weeps on their neck as their dear
Brother Joseph. The Lord hides great bowels from you all this time of your
correction, but you will know he is choice of you while he speaks bitterest
unto you, sure thou art one very gracious with God. An eminent divine says, if
he were to choose a man's prayers he would desire the prayers of such an one
above any man's, Isa. 54, 11.
O thou afflicted tossed too and fro, and not comfortea, etc. The Lord takes
notice of all these passages, can call her by the name of all afflictions and
sufferings, which shows how much his heart is toward poor reatures in this
condition. Nay he says plainly in all their afflictions he was afflicted. Isa.
63.9.
Why thou will say then why did he not spare himself and me too; prithee why
does the mother whip the child whilst at the same time she could cry rather
then strike it, but she will rather grieve her self then undo the child, and
so is thy fathers Wisdom and affection tempered toward thee.

5. Souls in this condition, should not untowardly put off comforts, when they
are offered unto them, sometimes the word brings something near you, you know
not how fairly you can put it off. And yet you do not take it, you are afraid
of applying any comfort. Take heed you be not wilful in your trouble.

1. Corruption and Satan is often gratified in a despairing humor in the
hearts of Gods children: some they study industriously to evade comfort. Set
themselves to doubt, think it good for them, count all them unfaithful, that
would tender any comfort unto them. Alas corruption has gotten an end in these
troubles, Psa 77.7.8 9. verse. 10
and this pevish discontented sadness pleases thee, and thou art therefore thus
resolved on it. Now this is thy infirmiti. So David complaned of such an humor
in him, he describes how he said God had forgotten to be gracious, etc. After
he censures it, says, This was his infirmity. And so this is thy infirmity and
corruption in thee, thou studdyest to be sad. Never did carnal man study so to
presume as some troubled Souls in a righthand-extreame, study to despair.

2. It is a great sin for thee to do on this fashion.

1. It brings up an evil report on the good Land: It is not only thy own
suffering or self denial, but Religion suffers herein. Alas, what will carnal
men say of Religion? but that it makes folk mad? makes them mopish, and they
will bless themselves from Religion. As indeed who would not be discouraged
from putting himself into that Physicians hands, if all his patients lay
languishing, and pining in a pitiful condition. Certainly our sorrow is
better then their carnal mirth, but our cheerfulness would be better then our
sorrow. I cannot but think some of you that are dejected and resolvedly
sorrowful out of hatred to your selves, yet you would be loath to be s^, out
of your love to Religion, if you knew you prejudiced others by it.

2. 1. Jo. 3.23.
It is disobedience. It is the command of God that we should believe. Yield to
Christ and lay hold of him, have honorable thoughts of Gods tenderness and
mercy, and readily cast your selves upon him. Though I judge that in believing
there is more then affiance, yet I think affiance is not excluded. 1. Jo. 5.10.
He that believes not, that God will accept of a poor sinner, that desires to
come to him, in his way, has made him a liar. And therefore this unbelief is a
matter of high concernment, sure thou would not sin, if thou knew it,
shall I tell thee thy great sin at this day, is thy studied drooping, thy
invented tricks to put off the Lords consolations. This is thy sin.

3. It hinders thy Christian course. Thou cryest, O I could be cheerful if I
could but do such and such duties. Labor to be cheerful, and that were the
next way to be able to do those duties. Thou talkest of deadness and
unaptnesse to any thing that is good, why alas, thy soul is under a general
discouragement, and this must needs make thee unactive, but if thou had
comfort, this tree would thrive in the warm sun, and on the back of the
chimney if any where, Neh 8.10
The joy of the Law is our strength, Our joy in God puts us on and makes us
much more able for service, then otherwise we could be.

4. It is a dishonor to God not to trust him upon his word: not to believe him
further then we see him. We will believe nothing he has said further then we
can find it evidenced upon our own hearts. The vilest usurer will trust when he
has a pledge as good or better then the thing he lends, Jo. 2^.29
so thou will trust God if he lay in a pledge with his word. Thomas would
believe if he might see. Blessed says Christ is he that has not seen yet
has believed. Herein is the Lord glorified when we believe his word, and rest
in that, though we find not things within our selves as we could desire. In
these respects it is thy sin to put off comforts.

3. Put not off comforts, for cheerful holiness is better then sinning sorrow.
Thou think thou do well to be sad: I tell thee no sorrow, even not holy
sorrow, is a condition to dwell in, but only to pass thorough. Our aim should
not be at it, though we should be content in it, but the height of Christianity
is holy rejoicing in the Lord, Psa 37.4.
To delight in God. Our very sorrows are better then the worlds joys, but our
joys are better then our sorrows. This is not the condition we should rest in.
To take pleasure in God, Isa. 58.14.
to bless him, to serve him in Holiness without fear, is that the Lord
delights most in. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him in those that
hope in his Mercy. He takes delight to be hoped in as well as feared. Psa.
147.11.
Cheerfulness should be aimed at: sorrow is often our way but not our choice,
proper or chief work.

4. Remember and treasure up comforts formerly received, As Mr. Baxter says,
what are our memories for, if we will believe Gods kindness to us no longer
then he is just telling us of it? David remembered the days of old. Art thou in
trouble, has the Lord never comforted thee! is there never a piece of a ring,
nor old Gold, no token of love a great while since given thee? whom he loves
once he loves for ever, and therefore think of what is past for thy comfort.

5. In this very condition thou art in, Bless the Lord Surely, there is very
much in this thing. Thou can not pray, it may be, thou art so dark-hearted,
so overpressed with fears, see whether thou can not praise him. Praise him
say thou, how! Or for what?

1. For thy life. Though thou art a troubled soul bless him thou art a living
soul. Thou mighst have been dead and out of all Hopes, and at the farthest of
thy fears.

2. That thou have an healthful body, if it be so with thee that thou art not
taken off the means of thy souls good.

3. That God has showed many Mercies to thee of old. For all these troubles,
those old favors must not be forgotten. Isa. 45.5.
The Lord girded thee when thou did not know him.

4. That he still does provide outwardly for thee. Many a one is poor and has
much ado to live. If thou were so it would be a great addition to thy present
trouble. If thou were in doubt about thy soul, and put to it for thy body too.
We count often our troubles great because no greater are upon us. Job was sadly
deprived of all, and not spared in soul neither, surely the Lord is good in
this to thee.

5. That thou art out of Hell. Many it may be of thy companions are in the
condition which thou fear, and are past fear and hope too. That thou art
spared out of hell for a time (if it must be but a time) thou might do well
to thank God for that. The Devils and damned are not spared a minute from their
torture.

6. That thou art kept from gross sin That thou art troubled rather then
wicked, better God trouble thee then thou trouble the World as many a Drunkard,
Swearer, Cheater, and profane Person does. Bless God thou art not one of those.

7 That thou have the prayers and pity of Christians, and thy Ministers.

8. That Christ has not left off treating with thee, but is dealing with thy
Soul and upon terms with thee. That thou art troubled, art sick of Love, he
has left thee, Cant. 5.4.
yet such mirrh is on the handles of the door, that thy Bowels are moved for
him. It is a Mercy that thou art not secure, if thou be all out as bad as
thou talkest of.

Besides take notice of his hearing thy prayers, saving thee from trouble, his
daily passages of preservation toward thee. For all this fancyed unkindness
take notice of his love and bless his name. And I tell you, you little think
how near a way this is, and of how excellent an use this may be to the
recovering of thee from thy trouble of mind.

1. It may help thee by diversion, variety of Work may help much under
discouragement. Thou art all for numbling, and this has quite dulled thee,
turn thee to the duty of praise, and it may call up other affections, which may
change the current of thy heart, and work an alteration.

2. It may affect thee and let thee know all is not wanting: though I have not
all, yet I have some. I have a great deal to praise God for, for all my
troubles, now thou carriest like one utterly destitute.

3. It might secretly afford some evidence of thine own sincerity. If thou can
delight to set up God, though thou fear thy share in him, sure this is not
of the damned kind that is in thee, there is cursing God, but no praising in
Hell. There is ingenuity in thy praises, and enough it would show thee of Gods
grace upon thee.

4. It might affect others with Religion, Cant 5.10.
The spouse that wanted her beloved and spoke so in his commendations, it drew
the daughters of Jerusalem to desire, Cant. 6.1.2.
to seek him with her. If a Christ wanted be thus lovely, what, is a Christ
enjoyed, may the stander by say? And sure in this very fit, thou have much to
say in Christ's commendations.

5. This Service would be hugely well taken from thee. The Sacrifices of God
are a broken Spirit. Psa. 51.17.
But sure then the praises of a broken spirit would please much.

6. This might make way to Mercy more then any thing, nay may God say, If thou
blessest me in this condition, it is pity but thou should be in a better,
and then thou would bless me more. The Soul resolves to serve him, if it
may not have him, And to commend him to others if it must never enjoy him her
self, this is great ingenuity, and this is the ready way to comfort. But thus
let troubled souls cherish and improve their hopes about their estate. And
thus we dismiss this part of the improvement of this point to the Godly, both
beginners and others, in respect of their darkness or want of comfort.

CAP. XI.
The truth improved to the Godly in respect of any prevayling Sin.

2 MAke use of the duty of this doctrine in respect of sin: And this will. be of
use in respect of comfort toe. And it may be some Souls sit down in this recess
of sorrow, and despondency because of sin, some prevalent sin is still in them,
and they think they shall never get the better of it, that there is no hope
about that vein and way of sin they find within them. But God has not shut
you up in this thing.

Some sin that is prevalent, and you have long striven against do not conclude
that it will never be otherwise, and so to despair about it, either 1. Thence
to give over striving, and to make some dishonorable truce, to give some
tolleration to that corruption, to strike some way to cast that to the latter
ends, to put it among thy necessary infirmities, as it is hard to fight long
with a Sin. Or 2. Thence to conclude thy estate to be carnal because of the
prevalency of that sin. Do not either conclude for the sin or against thy
self, because it is so with thee: there is yet Hope left thee about this
thing. For,


1. Thou know the badness of no bodies heart but thine own. It may be thou
concludest thine to be desperate because thou think none like to it, but
thou know none but it, that makes thee think so. There are few of Gods
children, but they can vye for thoughts with the worst thou have; if thou knew
as much as they know. Thou concludest if others knew thy heart they would abhor
thee, when as they know enough of their own and cannot abhor themselves, when a
young Divine asked Luther what he thought by such a one that did not believe
what he himself preached, Melch. Adam.
thinking that Luther would have pronounced some dreadful sentence on such a
state. Luther answered, I am glad to hear there is some body else like me,
which did immediately much comfort the young Divine. Thou think no body else
is like thee, when as the best of Gods Children, could show the same things
thou speak of, do not hear thy sins sometimes confessEd in public, and
if none had them but thou how should others confess them! It seems by that
these things are stirring elsewhere as well as with thee, many a one, whom thou
think to be free, (or notwithstanding would not conclude that he wanted
sincerity for such thoughts) has the same things in him which thou have, and
thinks the like concerning thee.

2. Thou art the better for thy striving, in that it would be worse with thee,
if thou strivedst not at al. Though thou have not such success as thou would
have, yet thy labor is not lost. For that corruption which remains
notwithstanding thy striving, how would it prevail much more if thou strivedst
not at all? If the wind and water carry down thy vessel notwithstanding thy
toil at the Oars, how fast, and how far would it carry thee if thou toyledst
not all. Therefore this contest of thine though it has not a positive yet it
has a privative success. Though, it bring not that good thou would, yet it
hinders a greater degree of evil. Thou art not sensibly better but thou art
prevented of being sensibly worse, by this contest of thine. Here is the
profit, that thou art kept from being worse hereby.

3. This is thy work, this is the state of the Godly. These are the Cananites
left in the land to prove thee These are to learn thee war, these are left in
thee and must be so while here, there is much grace exercised, and left on
purpose for this end, viz: about the sin that remains in the Godly. The sin is
evil but thy contest with it is part of thy task, thy work which God requires
and accepts of ^t thy hands, Gal. 3.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh, and
these two are contrary. Thou think that all should be of one side and one
party in thee, but it is consistent with the work of grace, to have twins
stirring in the womb. These principles are contrary and no marveile if they
strive and lust one against another. This is the Messenger from Satan to buffet
thee, to keep thee from being exalted above measure. These very corruptions
keep thee out of harms another way. The Canaanites remain to put thee in mind
of the native inhabitants of the Land, that thou may be humbled
notwithstanding any better entrance that is made upon thee. Hezekiah God left
him in the matter of the King of Babylon, and it was not to let him know he was
an Hypocrite, 2. Chro. 12.31.
or because he was one, (as thou art apt to conclude, if thou were right God
would not leave thee as he does, such a sin should not Lord as it does.) but it
was that he might know all that was in his heart, might know what dangerous
seeds there were still remaining with him, that he might understand what his
heart might be trusted in, better then he did before, which might make him
carry humbly under the signal mercies the Lord had afforded to him.

4. There is room for growth in the best of his Children! They are not so good
but they may mend, grace should increase and thrive when it is in truth, now
thou must not take that stature to be necessary to denominate thee a true
Christian, that thou art to grow and thrive unto. These may be things to be
endeavored for; and not to be had at first setting out. Thou would have it
all at first. There is a kind of pain and lameness in young ones, that is
called the thrift, which is not a downright lameness. And so may this trouble
of thine, not be so much concerning the truth as the growth of thy grace: many
of these things thou complainest of should rather be the matter of thy future
endeavors to overcome them, then marks to judge thy present estate by: rather
things to be striven against, then despaired from.

5. There is hope about this thing, for thou can not go to God about a
business that does better please him then this is. The Lord will give to his
Children riches, and honor and health, etc: which are not things immediately
for their souls good, and yet he will not deny them these things, because they
are dear to him: now if thou go to God for power against sin, and strength so
duty, These are things the Lord delights in. In these things I delight says
the Lord, Jer. 9.23.
and therefore sure thou may hope this petition of thine shall in time find
acceptance. It is a great advantage to petition a King for that which he loves
to be asked. Thou have Gods will on thy side, thou can not be so against sin,
but God is against it much more. And therefore thou may hope that in his own
time he will help thee about it, and however that he has his glory from it, or
it must not abide in thee so quite against thy will and his will too.

6. The Lord can easily help this thing, matters are not so far gone in thy
heart, but the Lord can with one touch of his hand cure all, If Christ do but
look back on Peter, he shall leave his denying, and swearing, and cursing, and
fall a weeping. The Spouse that will not stir to let in Christ, if he leave
but the droppings of his fingers in the hole of the doo^e, her very bowels
shall be moved for him. Alas thou think this heart of thine is far sunk,
that it cannot be recovered, at least in no small time, but thou art mistaken,
the Lord can mend all this with one glimpse of his countenance, It is he that
strengthens with strength in the Soul. Psa. 138.3.
He has a notable hand at these inward cures, and indeed what cannot
almightyness do? There is no sin so interwoven with thee in thy constitution
and by custom, but the Lord can take thee off it, and no duty thou art so
averse unto, but he can bring thee on unto it. It is but the wakening of the
wind, (and you know that often is on a sudden) and the garden spices send forth
their pleasant smell. Cant. 4.16
The power is in God there is a root in thee, It is but this power stirring,
and the root in thee shall answer to it, and thou may soon be of a right
temper, and in a right order before him. Saul persecuted David because he
feared his supplanting him in the matter of the crown, and no doubt there was
not any thing in the world, that went so against Saul's stomach, he could down
with any thing better then to let David be King. But yet Saul in a fit, when
overcome with David's kindness, could yield to this, and could covenant with
David when he should be King, to show kindness to his family: 1. Sam. 24.20.
now he could let David be King or any thing; and so God can bring that temper
upon thee that thou shall yield to any Duty. Nothing shall be stuck at by thee,
how averse soever thou sometimes were unto it. The Lord can change habits and
customs in thy heart, Davenant on Col. 2.2.
he can take thee off. The mighty power of God can alter this heart of thine.
The man in Gersom that studied against atheism, and could never get the better
of it, at last he prayed that God would help him in it, and he was clean rid of
all his horrid temptations this way, and was as really persuaded of the truth
of unseen things as of the chair he sat in. The heart of man is deceitful and
desperately wicked above all things, who can know it? Worse then men can think,
worse then we ourselves can discover, but he adds, Thou Lord know, etc: Is
this any comfort? yea sure. The Lord can discover and cure this deceit to the
very bottom, he knows the heart altogether, thy Soul it may be is like a
curious Watch, that at present will not go, the fault thou do not know, but
go it will not, what course is to be taken with such a piece? why take this
heart this Watch to God. 1. Who made it. 2. Who is the best workman. 3. Has
always mended it, and knows the course of it, and he is like of any to set it
a going. An heart that has stood by thee a long time and has not gone, this
glorious artist can set it a going again, make it as perfect and better then
ever it was, He can soon see what the matter is with it, whether the fault be
in the spring, whether any wheel wanting, whether any thing broken, whatever
it is, he that made it, can soon discover. It is but his touching it, and he
can set it straight and put it into good order as ever it was, and much better:
so may thy heart be ordered by God which thou so much complainest of. There is
hopes of getting the better of any of these sins for all this.

7. Romans 7.24.
This is to make thee willing to dye. Paul cries out to be rid of this body of
death. And so some sin will abide with thee, while thou art here, to make thee
willing to leave this world to be rid of it. And there is hope we shall one of
these days dye, and then all this sin shall be parted with.

But in this labor of thine about thy sin thou may see there is yet ground
for thy hope.

CAP. XII.
The Observation improved to the Godly in respect of their afflictions.

THe third and last improvement of the point to the Godly is, In respect of
their affliction. The godly are apt to be discouraged and dejected about their
outward afflictions. We shall make use of the doctrine as to them, that are in
this estate. Do not sit down discontented about your state whatever it is,
there is yet hope in this thing whatever the trouble is, instead of concluding
it remedyles and letting down your heart about it.

1. Humble your selves for the sin that you think brought this affliction on
you. The Lord does not willingly afflict, he does not do it out of his heart
(as the marg. nath it) out of his mere pleasure as the phrase elsewhere
signifies, Neh. 6.8.
when there is no ground for the thing does not strike, Heb. 12.9.
because he will strike as sometimes our fathers of the flesh, strike children
in tyranny, in passion, when angry with other matters, but he does not strike
us so, he does not usually do it out of a will, though this were to be humbly
submitted unto, but he does it out of some blessed design upon you, search
therefore thy heart for former sins as the Church did. Lam. 3 40 Jer. 31.19.
Ephraim is chastised and bears the reproach of his youth. And so God may bring
thy youthful sin to thy remembrance, or some other miscarriage, and it is
rather thy duty to search for this, then to despair about thy affliction.

2. Labor to part with any sin your affliction discovers. If it be not the
sin, yet part with that which comes next to hand, make clean work as you go,
this is worth the finding, and this is the way to find out the rest: God may
strike thee to have thee leave this sin, though thou think it is not the sin
the Lord strikes at in thee. Isa 27.9.
This is the fruit unto Jacob to purge away all sin, part with all you can
find; and then you may be sure you shall part with the right one. If God strike
at one, he intends thou should leave all thou find. If the chief be not
yet light on, deal with these thou meetest, to be doing with.

3. Do the duties your affliction requires at your hands. You are willing it
may be to think such a business helpless, because you have no mind to be at
the cost of using the means for it; Concludest such a friend incurable because
thou have a mind to give over praying for him, and dealing with him: the Church
cries there is no hope, because she had another way to go, had other business
she minded more then deliverance this way. Thou let this thing lie
desperately because thou have no mind to be importunate in prayer, unwearied in
thy endeavors about it, unless it would come with ease, it will not come at
all, as if nothing that is difficult were possible. Come let this despair of
thine save thee no labor take pains about this thing, cry mightily to God in
it, leave it not off, unless the Lord has said to thee say, no more to me of
this matter, many would have matters with ease and it will not be.

4. Thou art not alone in thy trouble, There is no temptation has taken you
but that which is common. Many of the precious servants of God have had their
sore afflictions and all Gods servants still aile something this way. If you be
without chastisement whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards and not
Sons, would you be privileged as none of Gods children are! Alas there are
none but have their exercise, some one way and some another, every one must
have somewhat to ballast an heart of vanity with, whilst he sails through
this world. The parable of the hares being hunted on every hand and in
continual fears, in discontent they would go together and drown themselves;
but as they went to the bridge of the river the frogs at all adventure leap
into the water before them, whereupon they took courage that they were not the
most miserable creatures in the world, in that some were more affrighted then
they. And so no doubt some are determinately miserable in the very cases,
wherein you a little suspect your condition.

Do not conclude any one child without affliction. For many one may have
secret afflictions which they speak not of, nay afflictions about such secret
things as is not fit for them to speak of, thou know not what sorrow they
sup in silence, what they suffer, and commit to God only, no friend has the
knowledge of it. And so this way those thou think to be most free, may have
a greater burther then thine is, because they have no ease by complaining as
thou have. Do not say any one is free, unless you hear any one complain for
want of affliction. These are rare but if such a one should be, I would say to
him, it is time enough yet. There is room for many afflictions to stand,
between this and his latter end, and therefore this need not trouble, he may
meet with his childs part time enough yet. Directions for peace. p.
Mr. Baxter has communicated to us an experience concerning himself this way.
That he was sufficiently helped against such a temptation. But conclude thou
art not alone in thy trouble. Socrates used to say, if all men's loades were
laid in a common heap, each man would take up his own again. Plutarch.
Pittacus when he had invited many strangers to dinner and his shrewd wife came
among them, and overthrew the dishes: he said, no man is without his cross,
were it not for this one thing I were the happyest man. Jer. 10.19.
This is a grief and I must bear it. Every one has some, and this is mine. It
is but one bundle and I must make it part of my work to carry it as strongly
and patiently as I can, some men are of singular use whose chief work is to
carry burdens.

5. Thou have cause to bless God that it is neither carnal prosperity, nor
carnal adversity, the former would not have been so good as affliction, the
latter much worse. As long as thou art in the state of a Child no matter what
thy condition is. If thou had the world at pleasure, and wantedst grace what
would it avayle thee, and if thou be in adversity, and yet art not wicked,
withal, it is some ease to thee. There are many that are godly may be in
prosperity, and so there are many wicked men that are afflictted and wicked
too, and therefore herein thy condition is better, thou bear fruit in this
affliction of holiness which is better then prosperity, like the flower in
china that in Winter looses its leaves yet has another flower though not so
beautiful, yet sweeter then the summer flower was. So though not so fair in
the outside yet thy winter fruit may be more savory, but thou bear fruit all
along.

6. Psa. 116.6. and 25.17.
Many of Gods children have been brought out of their afflictions. David was
brought low and the Lord helped him. The troubles of my heart are enlarged, O
bring thou me out of my distresses. The Psalmist when his troubles increased
upon him, yet the Lord could free him out of them all. Many of Gods children
have been brought off in harder cases then these are. Cum duplicantur lateres
tunc venit Moses. The Hebrews have a proverb, When the Bricks are doubled then
Moses comes, when things are at the worst, they may then begin to mend; God
has used to help his Servants in the very time of their extremity, and so he
may help thee.

7. As much as thou art troubled the Lord could cure thee at an Ordinance. And
that either 1. By diversion, to set thy heart on these great things before thee
here. One great thing in affliction is we set our heart on it, pore upon it are
always about it and this increases it much, but now at an Ordinance thou may
have thy mind taken up with some greater thing, that this pane shall be
swallowed up in it.

2. By showing thee the example of the affliction and patience of the Saints,
Romans 15.4.

3. Or by casting in some better comforts. The Lord can soon give you much
more then this, One glimpse of his face, like wine to the man with an heavy
heart, would make you forget your sorrows, Prove. 31.7
and remember your miseries no more. This might make us think our afflictions
to be less, and Ordinances to have more in them then ordinarily we think at.
But the Lord can set thee free in a great measure here.

8. There is help for thee in thy God. David never feared till the Enemy began
to say there was no help for him in his God. Psa. 3.2.
But the child of God has this sure enough. The Lord can, and the Lord will
help.

1. The Lord can. And 1. The Lord can help in kind there is nothing can hinder
his almighty power when means are most unlikely he is not at all restrained
hereby, when there is neither wind nor water the Lord can send rain. Their
strength is to sit still; 2 K^: 3.17 1 Chro. 20.17. Psa. 112.4.
when they can do nothing, let them sit still, and God may then show his power
for them. To the upright there shall arise light in darkness when it is least
looked for, the Lord can for his own children make light appear. The thing is
not out of Gods reach nor past his power to be effected whatever it is.

2. He can do it in equivalency, he can help you against it, and he can help
you with it. It is possible for thee to make a shift to live though this
affliction should tarry The Lord can turn it into good for thee. 2 Cor. 12.9
If this messenger depart not my grace is sufficient for thee. God can make a
change in thy mind as well as thy condition, and all may yet be well with thee.
Psa. 3.1.
David might well say, Lord how are my foes increased! when his Son for lack of
worse enemies must rise against him, for the Psalm was penned when he fled from
Absalom. This sure was a grievous affliction, many of you think if your
children are not dutiful, if they deny you the comfort you look for from them,
it is a sore trial, but if they be rebellious and seek to do evil to you,
you would count this grievous indeed. The affliction of a child's sin, the
parent knows not of any thing how to take, yet David, the Lord had dealt with
him, that he could take a nights rest in the midst of this trouble, The Lord
sustained him and he would lay him down to sleep for all this. Psa. 3 5
The Lord can come in, and stay the heart under the sorest troubles. To read
Psa. 89. ult. How the Psalmist complains all along of their afflictions and
miseries, and yet concludes with, Blessed be God for evermore Amen, and Amen.
Sure the Psalmist saw some what else then afflictions, that could make him
conclude these complaints with thanksgiving. Cleark in the life of Mr. Dod.
But take notice of it, this the Lord can do, he can satisfy thee with it
whatever it is. It is reported of Mr. Dod, that when some very sad news was
brought him, That fetched Tears out of his eyes, he said notwithstanding he would
go bless God for this affliction, for the good he believed it would do him,
though at present he did not see it. God can so deal with thy heart for thy
ease under afflictions, as Antipater that was blind, and one pittyed him, he
said, could there be no delight in the night? and another that was working when
his gangred leg was cutting off, Neirenber^. de ante volunt.
That one said Tam aberat a dolor quam ab otic. As if indeed much of our
troubles arose from our setting our whole mind on such passages. As he that
said his pains were great even to shouting, but although I feel them in the
greatest extremity, yet I yield not my self to them but unto God. If God thus
take the heart of thy sorrow it is as much as to take thy sorrow off thee, as
one says, The fire may be put out as well by withdrawing fuel as casting on
water. This God can do in thy case of affliction. Thus God can help.

2. God will, He is gracious and merciful though thou have sinned thy self
into affliction, yet he will remember thee in the multitude of his tender
mercies. Though we have sinned against thee, aer. 4^.6 Psa. 86.5.14.15.16. and
106.43.44.45.46. Psa. 69.32
yet do thou it for thy own names sake. He despises not his Prisoners. We
usually when men get low in the world are apt to vilify them and despise them.
If a man get poor, this of all afflictions is usually looked on as a fault,
and men are apt to look strangely at such persons. If a sin be visible they may
have repented of it, and we should hope they have, and be glad to be reconciled
to them, many a one may have committed the like sin, yet if not brought down by
it we do not despise them; well God will not despise them, though men do, the
Lord will look at them though they are in affliction and that for sin too. Yet
he will have thoughts of pity toward them, has he forgiven thee sins without
afflicting! and will he not forgive though he does afflict! I am poor and
needy, Bsa. 40. ul.
yet the Lord thinks upon me. God has a pitiful heart toward thee whatever
thy ^^^dition is. Ephraim saw his sin under his chastisement, and yet even then
God looked at Ephraim as a pleasant child, Jam 1.5.
and earnestly remembered him still. If any man lack wisdom let him ask of God,
that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given
him. This wisdom is to be able to suffer, to have patience under afflictions.
If any man know not how to suffer, and carry not as they should do under
affliction, let him go to God for wisdom. I but it may be this affliction
comes on me for my sin, and how can I for shame ask the Lord wisdom to help
me to suffer for the punishment of my sin. Yea that thou may, thou may ask
wisdom of him in this very case; For he gives liberally, and upbraideth not.
He will not dash thee in the teeth with the occasion, he will not upbraide thee
but will give thee the wisdom thou need, whatever the occasion of thy need
is.

Thou may thus comfort thy self in God.

9. Thy affliction is not great all things considered. Alas thou that deservest
hell, to complain of a temporal burden. Mephibosheth never grieved to part
with half the land, when David before had given it him all, when he considered
he could not have claimed his life nor any thing at the first. Alas, says he,
what should I trouble my Lord the King any more with these matters. I consider
not what I would have, but what I could claim, and I am well content, half the
land is better then dying. When Baruch was complaining, that he had no larger a
portion, God takes him in hand, Jer. 45 5.
and schools him, and tells him, when God was pulling down, did he seek great
things for himself. Let him not do it, come. says he, I must take thee down a
little, I will offer thee fair, Thou shall have thy life for a prey, in all
places whither thou go and that is fair for thee, we are so tender and
dilicate we complain and murmr, if every thing be not fine about our homes,
but the time may come when we may be thankful if we can save our lives, and
not be kept to any certain place neither. Thou may be removed and be in many
places, a stranger here and there, but in all places, if thou can escape with
life it is well for thee, when we complain under present burdens, God shows us
greater, and lets us see how little we can claim, and how glad we may be of
lower terms before we part. Come this is well for thee whatever it is, Thy very
life thou may be glad of, ere thou die, and let all thy great things go, men
may be high in their demands, but the market may bring them down.

10. These afflictions make work for heaven. Then will Christ wipe away all
tears. One would not want them when Christ shall come to wipe them off, Rev.
21.4.
surely thy glory will be the more for the afflictions thou have gone through
unto it, and it is enough, that they shall end in glory whatever they are. Alas
this is but a sick fit for heaven, it may well be born. One day in etrenity
will make amends for all. 2. Cor. 4, 17
These light afflictions which are but for a moment work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Massy glory, glory that you cannot bear
no more then the weak eye can bear the glory of the Sun, under which it does
succumbere, ly down, as the back or body should bow under an intolerable
burden; even such shall this glory be, a weight not conceiveable by us. And
therefore the thoughts of it should keep us quiet, and much satisfied under our
present afflictions, you may hope under all your afflictions since heaven is
before you. And till the true Christian shall have attained to the end of his
hope, to this glory where hope shall be swallowed up in fruition: Let him make
it his study to cherish, and live upon the hopes that God has left him about
his estate in the several changes of it, according to this Doctrine.

The End.
ERRATA.
IN Mr. Angiers Ep: for Shepherds v. Sheapherd. In the Ep:to the Reader p. 4.
l. 22 r. abler. p. 5 l 29 potior pars. p. 6. l. 18 dele when.

P. 7. l. 22. r. save p. 10 l. 6. r. slew. l. 23. r. into p. 62. l. 1. r.
letters of credence. l. 9. r. heard, p. 65. l. 9. of. be it known add to you.
p. 69. l. 15. admirable. p. 75. l. 9. r most. p. 77. l. 5. r must after thou.
p. 85. l. 4. a parenthesis to begin at ( as if these words etc. to end in 16
line. after the word but) p. 87. l. 5. r. old and ignorant p. 91. l. 18. r. and
you have cause p. 93. l. 9. for for faith r. for sailing. p. 114. l. 11. r.
doubtest p. 138. l. 21. r. thy. p. 139. l. 4. r. bids him pray. In the title of
chapter 10. for distressed. r. discussed. p. 155. l. 30. r. to turn him. p. 158. l.
27. r. all her afflictions. p. 161. l. 18. r. Lord. p. 175. l. 25. r. in the
marg. Lam. 3.33.

Books printed and sold by George Eversden at the Maidenhead in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
AN Exposition with practical Observations upon the IX. first Chapt of the
Proverbs Grammatical, Rethorical, Logical and Theological; By Francis Tailor,
B. D. Late Minister of Canterbury, in 4.

An Exposition on the whole book of the the Canticles by John Robotham late
Minister of Dover, in 4.

A form of Church Discipline by John Rogers Minister at St. Thomas Apostles.
London, in 4.

The Censures of the Church revived, and wherein, First, The danger of
admitting moderate Episcopacy is showed; Secondly, The Jus Divinum of the
Ruling Elders Office is asserted and cleared; Thirdly, the aspersions of
Schism and Perjury are wiped off from those that disown Episcopacy: etc. by
the Ministers of the first Class of Manchester in Lancashire, in 4.

The Natural man's case Stated, or an exact map of the little world Man: In XVII
Sermons: by Christopher Love, in 8.

The doctrine of Mortification with the hearers Duty, by Christopher Love, in 8.

The divine Right and Original of the civil Magistrate from God as it is drawn
by the Apostle St. Paul; Rom: 13: 1. There is no power but of God, the powers
that be are ordained of God; Illustrated and Vindicated by Edward Gee, Minister
of the Gospel at Eccleston in Lancashire, in 8.

A treatise of Prayer and of divine Providence as relating to it, by Edward Gee
Minister of the Gospel at Eccleston in Lancashire in 8. The 2. Edition
corrected and amended.

A comment on the II first verses of the 4 Chap of St. Matthew concerning
Christ's temptations by Tho: Fuller, B. D. and Minister of Waltham Abbey in Essex.

A comment on the First, and Second chap: of Ruth by Tho: Fuller, Minister of
Waltham Abbey in Essex, in 8.

Mr. Culpeppers treatise of Aurum potabile being an universal remedy for all
diseases, in 8.

Sion and Pernassus being divine Eppegrams on several, Texts of Scripture by J.
H. Gent. in 8.

The Life and death of Sir Tho: More sometime Lord Chancellor of England.

The Mystery of rethorick unvailed, wherein above 130 Tropes and Figures are
severally derived from the Greek into English, together with lively
distinctions, and variety of Latin, English, and Scriptural examples pertinent
to each of them apart, by John Smith Gent: in 8.

Enochs Walk; being the substance of sundry Set: digested into a Treatise by
William Bell M. A. and Pastor of the Church at Highton in Lancashire, in 8.

The Grand Trial of true conversion, a Treatise of the thoughts by John Bisco
late Minister at Thomas Southwark, and now Minister of Abbington in
Oxfordshire, in 8.

The Lords prayer unclasped, or a Vindication of it against all Schismatics,
and Heretics, by James Harwood B. D. in 8.

The mystery of the two witnesses unvayled by John Robotham, late Minister of
the Gospel at Dover in Kent, in 8.

The christians Diurnal or daily dutys to be practiced toward God, our
Neighbors, and our selves; by Anthony Morgan D. D in 8.

(...) Biceps, or several choice pieces of Poetry composed by the (...) that
were in both the Vniversityes before their dissolution collected and published
by Abraham Wright Fellow of St. John's College in Oxford, in 8.

Gods Glory in man's happiness, with the freeness of his grace in electing us
altogether with many Arminian objections answered by Francis Tailor B. D. and
late Minister of the Gospel in Canterbury, in 12.


