A New Years-Gift, OR A Token of Love, To all Persons of what PERSUASION soever.
By a Friend, and Lover of all Men.
REflecting with my self, that the All-wise God, who does nothing in vain, has
given some Talents more or less to all Mankind, to Traffic withal, but
especially to those that live under the Gospel; and considering that he who had
received but one, was called to an account for it, as well as he that had
received five, and the terrible and just Sentence pronounced against the
unprofitable Servant, that had not employed his Talent for his Lords use, I
tremble at the thoughts of it, and in the sense thereof, am made to reflect
what I have done for the glory of my Lord, with that one Talent which his Free
Grace has bestowed upon me; and finding how unprofitable a Servant I have been
with it hitherto, I am moved (I trust by the Spirit of Grace) to delay no
longer, but to improve my Talent as well as I can, for the glory of my Lord.
And also that by my Example, the meanest may be encouraged to employ and
improve the least measure of Grace and Knowledge bestowed upon them, for God's
glory and our mutual Comfort and Edification. Exodus 25. 2, 3, 4, 5.
We read in God's Word, That God commanded Moses to speak to the Children of
Israel, to bring every one his Offering, and to take the same of every Man that
should give it willingly with his heart, not only, Gold, Silver, Blue Purple,
Scarlet, fine Linen, and precious Stones, etc. all costly Things, and
Offerings, proper for the Rich; but also Rams, and Badgers Skins, and Goats
Hair, which were Gifts accommodated to the Ability of the Poor; the meanest
Offering of the People, that was presented with a willing heart, being as well
accepted by God, as the most sumptuous Gifts of the Rich. Which may be a great
Encouragement even to those that have but the least measure of grace, to
endeavor to improve and lay it out for the glory of God, and the good of their
Neighbor. And accordingly we see, that our Savior also accepted and commended
the two Mites of the Poor Widow, Luke 21. 2, 3, 4.
above all the Oblations of the Rich and Wealthy.

Wherefore, I hope, that this my poor Mite will be accepted, not only by my
great Lord and Master, but also by Men of good will, since I trust, I have no
other End, but his Glory and the good of poor Souls, who may stand in need as
well as I, to be put in mind, not to wrap up their Masters Talent in a Napkin.
Give me leave therefore to deliver here what shall rise in my mind, in a plain
and simple style, and suitable to my meanness, who am without Learning.

And in the first place, I will begin with that which I have had a long time on
my heart, viz. to tell the world I am in charity with all Men, through that
Spark of divine Love I have received in my heart, but more especially with
those that love the Lord, and seek his Glory in all their Actions, of
whatsoever Persuasion they are: For love is not a Sect or an Opinion, but a
fruitful Mother full of Bowels of Mercy, that comprehends all, but chiefly
those of her own Bosom, and afterward those that are without, whether Jews or
Gentiles, and takes them in also. Wheresoever Love is, tho but as a Spark, she
soon spreads on the right hand, and on the left, behind and before; an Enemy as
well as a Friend is welcome to her, yea, Mat. 5. 44. Romans 12. 20, 21. Colos. 3.
12. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 7. Prove. 10. 12. Psalm 34. 14.
she entreats them to be at peace with her; she remembers no wrong, but covers
all sins, and seeks peace, and pursues it. Wherefore in imitation of her, I
freely pardon without any Reserve, any that may have said any thing against me
for want of that Love which I now feel in my heart, the Lord in his Mercy
forgive them, as I desire to be forgiven: For what are all the Injuries that
Man can do to me all the days of my Life, in comparison of one sin committed
against my God, who daily loadeth me with his Benefits? Shall I have Ten
thousand Talents, yea Millions forgiven me by my Lord, and shall I think much
to forgive an hundred Pence to my fellow Servant, to my poor Brother, or Sister
in the Fall? No sure, I will rather pity him, and pray for him, than render
evil for evil, and railing for railing. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15.
And as I by Love freely forgive all, so I desire that all would forgive me, if
at any time, I have said or done any thing contrary to the Love I owe to all
Mankind, and more especially to those that are of the Household of Faith, by
Inadvertence, Undiscreetness, or Rashness occasioned by want of watchfulness.

The next thing that has moved me to send these mean lines abroad, is, because
several thoughts have risen in me, that this Year may probably prove my last,
and therefore my Year of Jubilee, in which I shall be delivered and set free
from the Bondage of Sin and Corruption, and return to my first Possession and
Family, which I have in God through Christ; wherefore seeing that I hope to be
set free from my Bondage, I desire also, as far as in me lies, to set every one
free, that throughout my whole Life, I have had occasion to converse or deal
with, that is, any who have judged hard of me, and have put a bad
interpretation on my good will and purpose; I desire, I say, to set them free,
by forgiving and forgetting. For it is said in the above quoted place of
Leviticus, And ye shall hallow the Fiftieth Year (the Year of Jubilee) and
proclaim Liberty throughout all the Land, unto all the Inhabitants thereof. If
under the Law, God would have every one to proclaim Liberty to those that were
in Bondage, and that had alienated their Lands, to the end, they might return
to their Fathers Inheritance; much more ought this to be done spiritually under
the Gospel, by celebrating a spiritual Jubilee, when the Trumpet of God's Love
sounds in our hearts, proclaiming pardon and forgiveness of Transgressions and
Sins, by which we are set free, and inspired in like manner to proclaim Liberty
to all those that may have Trespast against us.

The Trumpet of the Love of God sounds from the Heart, first to God's People,
and next to those that are without, and may as yet stand in Enmity against
them.

Beloved Brethern and Sisters, with what words shall I express that love which
the Lord has kindled in my Soul in a double measure toward you this NewYear?
My thoughts are too short, and my words too narrow, to display before you the
Burning Love which at this time flames in my heart toward you all; from which
Love I once more, this New Year, do freely forgive and forget whatsoever has
been done amiss to me, by any of my fellow Christians, begging of God to set
you free; as I my self also desire to be set free by you all, for any thing
whereby I may have offended you, against the bent and inclination of my Soul,
and that Spark of Love which is in it, which would not offend any one. Pray
bear with my Repetitions; for it is from the abundance of the heart that my
mouth speaks; and Love is Mat. 12. 34.
never weary of showing her good will to all Men.

This Divine Love and Charity is the true Principle of on Evangelical Life,
without which no person can live so as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Of how
great value therefore is this love? Of whom we may say, as Solomon says of
Wisdom, She is better than Rubies, and all the things that may he desired, are
not to be compared to her. Prove. 8. 11.
Love is of such an Attractive and Assimilative Virtue, that she changes all
things, she touches into her own Nature, she is the true Philosophers Stone,
that changes all baser Metals into Gold, Mat. 13. 44, 45.
she is the Pearl of great Price, and the Treasure hid in the Field, in order
to the purchasing, of which the wise Merchant sells all. Ephesians. 3. 19. 1 John
4. 16.
Oh Love! Love! who can take thy dimensions? who can comprehend thee? For God
is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. Where
this Love is not found, neither is God there; tho a Man should shine never so
glorious with all Parts, Gifts, and deep Cor. 13. 2 Pet. 1. 1. Gal. 5. 6.
Learning, all would signify nothing without this. Precious Faith it self is
of no account, except it work by love.

Wherefore, O Christians, let us be led by this Spirit of Love, and readily
obey the Commandment of our Lord, who says, Love your Enemies, bless them that
curse you, etc. Matthew. 5. 44.
And you that call your selves Protestants, and profess the same Religion, be
entreated by the love of Christ, who died for All, to be Enemies to None,
especially of your own Brethren, that would fain live in love and peace with
you. Why should you fall out by the way? and be at variance Genesis 45. 24.
with your Brethren that cannot comply with you in all things that you think
lawful, and they may be so to you, tho not to them; for whatsoever is not of
Faith is sin. Romans 14. 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 23.
One believes that he may eat all things, and another who is weak eats
Herbs. Let none of you therefore judge his Brother, but rather bear with one
another in love. They whose Hearts are sincere, and truly love God, will never
be angry with their Brethren, that are stronger, and see further than they do,
or are more able to promote the Glory of God, and the Good of their Neighbor
than they are. The holy Man Moses, when his Servant told him, that some of the
People Prophesyed in the Camp, Number. 11. 27, 28, 29.
was so far from being jealous upon that account, that he rejoiced and said,
Would to God that all the People of the Lord were Prophets, and that the Lord
would put his Spirit upon them. And the Apostle St. Paul declares, that tho
there were some that preached Phil. 1. 15. 18.
Christ, even of Envy, and Strife, yet that therein he rejoiced, and would
rejoice. We see how far different these holy Saints were from the Spirit of
those who are Envious at the Gifts of others, not to say worse: For I would
rather heal all Breaches, than make them wider; and with the Mantle of Love
hide the nakedness of my Fathers and Brethren, and heap Coals of Divine Charity
upon their heads, to melt their hearts, and to induce them to love the Lord,
and his People. This is that which my Spirit groans for, to have all set at
liberty by the Spirit of Love and Peace, that Brethren Psalm. 133.
may dwell together in Unity. Nay, what is more, my Spirit groans for the whole
Creation, that it may be delivered Romans 8. 19. to 28.
from the Bondage of Corruption into the glorious liberty of the sons of God;
for through sin it is made subject to Bondage and Misery.

My Prayer is to Almighty God, who at first made this Universe so glorious,
that he would be pleased to restore it to its first Beauty and Purity, as it
was before the Fall; then 2 Pet. 3. 13.
shall the New Heaven and the New Earth appear, not only inwardly in Man, but
also in the outward Creation, that we may once more see and enjoy the Divine
Harmony between Heaven and Earth, when the Morning Stars shall sing Job 38. 17.
Isa. 11. 9.
together, and all the sons of God shout for joy. Then shall the Knowledge of
the Lord cover the Earth, as Waters cover the Isa 30. 36.
Sea. And the Light of the Moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and the Light
of the Sun shall be seven fold, as the Light of seven days. But before this
glorious Day appears, the Lord will debate with his People, and not withold
his Rough Isa. 27. 8. 9.
Wind in the day of his East VVind, that he may winnow them from their Chaff;
but all this will be only to make way for this Day, by purging away the
Iniquity of Jacob, and taking away his sin.

For we are not fit to be made Partakers of this Great Redemption, Act. 3. 19.
1 Cor. 6. 14.
which is the Time of Refreshment, till this be done; for Light and Darkness
cannot agree together, Holiness and Sin cannot be inmates of the same Soul.
Therefore, let us pray, that this New Year we may see the Destruction of Sin in
us; tho we may, before this Work be accomplished, pass through his Fire, which
is in Zion, and endure his Furnace, which is in Jerusalem. Wherefore, let none
of Isa. 31. 9.
us flatter our selves ever to be delivered, save only this way; for the Lord
will thoroughly purge his Floor. There is Luke 3. 17.
a Purifying Work, must go before the Times of Refreshment: Mat. 3. 2, 1.
And therefore let us all turn inwards, judging our selves, and searching our
own hearts before the Lord comes to judge and search us; and let us not cry,
Peace, Peace, as long as we go on in a Course of sinning without Control, but
let us rather resolve, in the strength of the Lord to fight this Man of Sin,
resisting even unto Blood. Let us this New Heb. 12. 4.
Year engage in this holy Warfare more courageously than ever; let us fight
against sin not only now and then, but at all times, and in all places; and
against all manner of sins, whether Bodily or Spiritual, which are more hid.
Let us remember, that we are Christians, who by their Baptism, are engaged to
fight against the world, the flesh, and the Devil. This is our Holy Calling and
Employment, to fight resolutely and and constantly against these three Potent
Enemies. Wherefore, we have great need to be continually upon our Watch, and to
put on the whole Armor of God, and never put it off: Ephesians. 6. 11.
For it is not with this Spiritual Warfare, as it is with that of the world,
where Soldiers have their Winter Quarters allowed them to take their Rest; for
Christians from the first moment that they are listed under the Captain of
their Salvation, and have their eyes opened to see their Spiritual Enemies,
Ephesians. 6. 12.
begin that fight, which is never to cease, till the laying down of the Body:
Isaiah 45. 24.
but with his Armor, and in his Strength, for he is the Lord, in whom is our
strength.

MEDITATION.
THis is that, O my Soul, which thou must resolve upon this New Year, together
with all the Children of God, even to fight the good Fight: And having once put
our hand to the Plough, we must not look back. The way is 1 Cor. 9. 24. Luke 9.
60.
narrow and difficult, but it is only so to sinful self, which must be
destroyed; for to the Soul that is renewed by Grace; All the ways of God are
Pleasantness, and all his Paths are Peace. This is that Path, O my Soul, in
Prove. 3. 17.
which thou must walk this Year, and all the rest of thy Life, here in this
mortal Body. Faint not, but be of good Courage, be strong in the Lord, and in
the Power of his might: For he has said, Ephesians. 6. 10 Josh. 1. 5.
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; Be not dismayed, neither be thou
afraid, O my Soul, for the Lord thy God is with thee. Heb. 13. 5. Josh. 1. 9.
Job 5. 19.
And, he will deliver thee in six troubles, yea in seven, there shall no evil
touch thee. Believe it, O my Soul, Psalm 56. 4, 11.
it is the Word of thy God: In God have I put my trust, I will not fear what
flesh can do unto me: No, nor what the Devil and all the Powers of Hell can do
against me. I must expect, that the nearer I come to my Journeys end, the more
violent and sharp the Combat will be; Satan will be loath to quit his hold of
me, without making his last, and most terrible Assault. From my very Youth up,
the Lord has made known something of the hatred of that Roaring Lion against
my Soul: But now I am in good earnest and strong desire, to overcome all his
Temptations, and Wiles, he will attack me with greater force and cunning than
ever: But my God, I trust, will fight the Battle for me, and I shall be more
than Conqueror, through Christ that loved me, and gave himself for me, that I
in his Conquest should triumph over the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

Blessed be my God and Father in Christ Jesus, that he has opened my Spiritual
Eye, the beginning of this New Luke 11. 13.
Year more than heretofore, to see what is required of me, and has promised me
his Holy Spirit, who will enable me to perform it.

Christian People and Friends, help and assist me in this my undertaking by
your earnest Prayers, for I am come to the last Quarter of my Life, the Winter
of my Age; yea, and if I mistake not, I am come to the last hour of my day;
therefore great need have I to double my Diligence in working in the Vineyard
of my Lord, ploughing up the Fallow Ground of my heart, and casting out the
Stones of Unbelief, and plucking up the Roots of Bitterness, and Weeds of
Corrupt Nature? And to resolve with my self in the strength of my God, to lay
aside every weight, and the sin Heb. 12. 1, 2.
that does so easily beset us, etc. that I may be simple and naked in the sight
of my God, that neither my corrupt Nature, nor any Creature, may draw my Soul
any more from him, but that he may work in it how and whatsoever he pleases,
till he have purged and purified it, to be a meet 2 Cor. 6. 16.
Habitation for his holy Majesty, that I may now more than ever, experimentally
know, what it is to have God walk in me, and dwell in me, that so the latter
end of my life may be better than the beginning.

O that this Desire and Longing may not only be wrought in me, and those that
are as low in grace as I am, but also in those that are Men in Christ, and old
Disciples, for a greater manifestation of Christ in them, by an exemplary
Holiness in all manner of Conversation; and that they may be enabled to bring
much Glory to God, by improving their Talents to a double increase, and by
doing all their works from the Motive of Divine Love and Charity. The more we
love the more we work, and the less we love, the John 14. 23, 24.
less we work. If you love me, says our Blessed Lord, keep my Commandments.
And the Beloved Disciple assures us, That this is the love of God, if we keep
his Commandments. And the 1 John 5. 3.
farther we advance in this love, the more we shall find, that his Commands are
not grievous.

This Love is All, O my Soul, and whosoever has it, cannot want any thing; it
is the want of this that makes Obedience to the Will of God difficult to us,
and makes us apt to complain of the want of outward things. For if we had Love,
1 John 4. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
we should have God, and having God, should have all things. O that this New
Year we might be made Possessors of all things, in this one thing love: For in
it we shall have true Repentance, deep Humility, strong Faith, total
Resignation, continual Self-denial, with all long Suffering and Charity toward
all Men; and all other Graces that are comprehended in this word Love, which
restores the Image of God in the Soul. And seeing God has spared us another
Year, we are now to double our Endeavors, with earnest Prayer to obtain all
these Graces, and the rather, because his Judgments abroad, and his long
Suffering with us at home, seem to call for it.

But what need I to say any more, since you all know this, and perform it also,
I hope, better than I do; only it was strongly impressed upon my mind, to burst
forth into these broken words to my Betters and Equals, for Inferiors I know
none, as being the least of those that have received any Spark of true Grace,
yet am forced to cast in my Mite into the Treasury. The Lord knows for what end
he makes use of such a poor Instrument! Yet, if the least Glory may thereby
accrue to God, and his Children may get any good by it, it is enough, I have
obtained my end, and my desire of so many Years standing; I have satisfied my
Mind, and eased my Heart, and now shall die in Peace; hoping that this my
Talent, by the Blessing of God upon it, and your Prayers, may be increased to
two, at the last Day, when the Lord shall say, Well done, good and faithful
Servant, enter Mat. 25. 21.
into the joy of thy Lord. Amen. Lord, so be it. Hallelujah.

What shall I say to you, my Fellow Christians, and Men of Good Will, who truly
fear God, tho you differ in Judgment; and what shall I wish you this New Year,
but that you may all agree in one, to serve the Lord in Spirit and in Truth,
and Romans 7. 6.
not in the oldness of the Letter; that you may be all built up into an Holy
Temple for Christ to dwell in, and become a Royal Pristhood, partakers of the
Blessings of the Priests and Levites of Old, in the Spirit. And herewith I
shall end this my New Years Gift, turning these my Wishes into Prayers to God
for you all: Deuteronomy. 33. 11.
Bless Lord his Substance, and accept the Work of his hands, smite through the
Loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise
not again. The Lord hear thee in the day of Trouble; the Name of the God of
Jacob defend thee; Ps. 20. 1, 2.
send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion.

O England, live for ever, but let no more Enmity live in the midst of thee.
Behold how good, and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to live together in
Unity. Ps. 133. 1.
This is the way to bring that Blessing upon thee mentioned by the Prophet,
when he says, Surely his Salvation is nigh them that fear him, that Glory
Psalm 85. 9, 10, 11, 12.
may dwell in our Land. Mercy and Truth shall meet together, Righteousness and
Peace shall kiss each other. Truth shall spring out of the Earth, and
Righteousness shall look down from Heaven. Yea, the Lord shall give that which
is good, and our Land shall yield her Increase. Amen. Lord, let this be the
Portion of England, yea, of thy whole Church, all the World over. Amen.
Hallelujah.

A NOSEGAY presented by the Hand of Love, to all the Well-wishers of ZION.
WAlking in the Paradisical Garden of the Scriptures, I have gathered here and
there several Flowers to present to you that are Well-wishers of Zion, and that
prefer Jerusalem above your chiefest Joys; Psalm. 137. 6. Mic. 6. 8. 2 Pet. 1.
5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6. Gal. 5. 22, 23, 24. James 3. 17, 18. Cant. 1.
that you may all this New Year, and many more, smell the most sweet and
refreshing Odor of this Nosegay of Divine Graces (which the whole Scripture,
especially those places in the Margent point to) springing up in you, in the
life and power of them. But above all those other Flowers which breath
sweetness and life, let me recommend to you and my self, the Rose of Sharon,
and the Lilly of the Valleys. These are the Flowers that will revive and
quicken you in the time of Deadness, refresh and comfort you in the time of
Trouble, and sweeten you in Bitterness and Anguish. This Rose will tincture all
the Faculties and Powers of your Souls, with its Holy Fire and Redness; and
this Lilly of the Valley will perfume you throughout, with its sweet Meekness
and Innocence; the one will make you all flaming with the Divine Love, the
other will procure you the ornament of a meek Spirit, and deep Humility, which
in the sight of God, are of great price. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
In a word, they will make you Partakers of the Nature of Christ; the Rose
representing his Divine Nature, and the Lilly his Holy Humanity.

Surely, Beloved, you that ask the way to Zion, with your faces thitherward,
who take pleasure in her Stones, and favor her Dust, Jer. 50. 5. Ps. 132. 14.
will fall in love with this Nosegay, as soon as you begin to perceive the
sweet Odor of it, the Power and Spirit thereof will transport you so, as that
you will hardly know where you are, by reason of the surpassing sweetness and
comfort this Rose and Lilly will afford you. If that Woman in the Gospel
received Virtue from a Touch only of Christ's Garment, for the cure of her
inveterate Malady, what will not your Souls find in this sweet Rose of Sharon,
in this humble Lilly of the Valleys? What Diseases, what Evil can stand against
this powerful Antidote? this Divine Mixture and Composition of Red and White,
of the Divine and Humane Nature? The Divine conveighing the strong force of
Love, and the Humane sweet Meekness, and lovely Humility. Strong Faith, and
earnest Longing after this Divine Nature, will make all that is his to be
yours: For, he is made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and
Redemption.

Hear therefore, ye that go from strength to strength in Zion, Ps. 84. 7.
the Voice of your Beloved calling upon you, Rise up my Cant. 2. 10.
Love, my Fair One, and come away. Come away from Vanity; come away from Gain
and Profit; yea, come away from all things that steal away thy heart from me,
and bid an eternal Farewell to all the love of the World; and let me see Cant.
2. 14.
thy countenance, and let me hear thy voice; for then sweet shall be thy voice
to me, and thy countenance comely. Yea, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee: I will be unto thee All Things: Hebr. 13. 5.
Thou shall taste of my sweetness, and be refreshed with the water of life,
which I will give thee, if thou will continue and persevere Mat. 10. 38. Mark
8. 34. Hebr. 12. 5. 10. Luke 22. 30. Rev. 3. 21.
in my ways; Denying thy self, and taking up thy Cross daily, and following me;
and taking patiently my fatherly correction of thee, seeing that my only aim
therein, is to make thee Partaker of my Holiness. And after I have thus fitted
and prepared thee, thou shall eat and drink at my Table, in my Kingdom: For to
him that overcomes, will I give to sit with me in my Throne; even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne.

PRAYER.
O Sweet Rose of Sharon, that have been dyed in thine Isaiah 63. 1.
own Blood, to take away the Spots of Sin, that had stained all Mankind, have
mercy on my Soul, that is all over defiled by Original and Actual Sin; and wash
me in that precious Blood of thine, wherewith thou wast covered all over, in
the Garden, and on the Cross. O let me never forget that inconceivable Love of
thine, which made thee willingly to bear the Cruelty of Man, the rage of Hell,
and the Romans 6. 14.
wrath of thy Father, to deliver me from the Infernal Pit, and from the slavery
of Sin, which is the worst of the two; for sin is the cause of Hell. Oh, what
shall I say of thy Love! Oh that I might express it in my whole life! O Lord,
thou know, I can do nothing, no, not so much as think a good thought, but all
my sufficiency is of thee; who have said by 2 Cor. 3. 5. Ezekiel. 36. 27.
thy Prophet, I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them. Lord, increase my Faith,
that I may ask without doubting the fulfilling of this Promise, and all other
thou have given to thy Church, to uphold her in her Wilderness Condition, where
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil fight against her. Sweetest Jesu, thou who
have said, Ask, and it shall be Mat. 7. 7.
given you, seek, and ye shall find, give me to ask by fervent Prayer, and seek
by diligent Endeavor, thy Holy Spirit, who may enable me to answer thy love
toward me, that I may begin this New Year, to live more to the glory of thy
Name, and the Edification of my Neighbor, than ever heretofore. Comfort me
with thy strong Perfumes, thou Rose of Sharon Mat. 11. 29.
refresh me with the sweet sent of thy Meekness and Humility, thou Lilly of the
Valley! Adorn me with the Power of thy Love, and the sweetness of thy
Innocence, that my Life and Conversation may be so lovely in the sight of
others, that they may be led to thee, by thy Grace and Gifts to me. Amen.

Beloved, ye that follow on to know the Lord, this is the Nosegay the Spirit
has caused me to gather for you; and which I present to you the beginning of
this New Year. Which if you shall wear in your Lives and Conversations, the
sweetness Romans 13. 14.
thereof will make you truly happy, both in this life, and that which is to
come. There is such transcendent sweetness in it, that not only you that wear
it, shall be sweetened and perfumed thereby; (...) likewise, all that come near
you, will be in love with this Rose of Sharon, and Lilly of the Valley, and
shall know that your Beloved is more than another Beloved; and seeing he is so
incomparably, lovely we also ought to love him above the rate of other Lovers,
and be more careful and circumspect in all our Thoughts, 1 Pet. 4. 7, 8. Mat.
12. 36. Ephesians. 5. 5.
Words, and Actions, than others, that it may appear to all, that we always
carry this Nosegay about with us, which is composed of all the sweet and fair
Flowers of Paradise, viz. the Graces of God's Spirit, which are the Virgins
constantly attending the King's Daughter, who is all glorious Psalm 45. 13.
within.

The Letter of the Scripture pointing us to these Divine Mat. 26. 7. Mark 14. 3.
Graces, is like the Alabaster Box, filled with precious Ointment, whose very
outside does not want its Beauty and Fragrancy: But when the Box is broken, and
the Spiknard poured out, than it is quite another thing; for the whole House is
filled with Perfume of the Ointment: So when the Spirit opens the Letter in us,
then the ineffable Sweetness of the Name of God, which is as Ointment Cant. 1.
3.
poured forth, diffuseth it self every where, and fills the whole House of the
Soul and Spirit, yea, and of the Body too. But before we can attain to this
Spiritual Knowledge, our Old Man must be crucified with Christ, that the Body
of Sin Romans 6. 6.
may be destroyed, and we no longer serve sin. And when we are thus made one
with him in his Death, we shall also be made one with him in his Resurrection.
And if we make it our business this New Year, and all the rest of our Life, to
enter into the Death and Resurrection of our Lord, then the sweet Odor of this
Divine Nosegay, and the precious Perfume of the Ointment, will make the Virgins
in love with our Beloved, and make them seek him together with Cant. 6. 1.
us. Be it so, O Lord.

Amen. Hallelujah.
The Conclusion of this New-Years-Gift, by PRAYER.
O Most holy God, whose Thoughts are not as our Thoughts, nor thy Ways like our
Ways; for as the Heavens are Isaiah 55. 5.
higher than the Earth, so are thy Ways above our Ways, and thy Thoughts above
our Thoughts, etc. Thou do manifest this Truth in me this Day: For who would
think, that the Lord should humble himself, to visit a poor sinful Worm, and to
speak in and through it, to the Glory of his great Name. Thou show thy self,
O Lord, to be no Respecter of Persons, and that thou can work by the most
weak and despicable Means, and that the Vessel is nothing, and has nothing that
is Good, but what it receives from above. I Jam. 1. 17.
humbly entreat thee, O Heavenly Father, in the Name and Merits of my precious
Redeemer, to own what is of Thee in this Writing, to bless it, and make it
prosper. O thou who searchest the Hearts and the Reins! thou know I have no
other aim in the publishing of it, but only thy Glory: Yet, since the heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9.
if there should be any sinister end, lurking in my Heart, Lord, discover it
unto me, and nail it to the Cross of thy Son; for through thy Grace, I utterly
detest and abhor it. Wherefore, I am bold, most glorious God, Father, Son, and
Spirit, to implore thy Blessing upon this Newborn Babe. O Lord, thou know,
that from my Youth, thou have made me conceive a longing desire, to send forth
a few Lines (were it possible) throughout all the World, to incite all Mankind
to love thee; and this longing Desire has still grown in me, till at last thy
rich Mercy and free Grace, has made me to bring it forth in my Old Age.

Wherefore gracious Lord, be pleased to take this New Birth into thy
Protection, against the many Oppositions it shall meet with from those that
reject every thing that has not the Ornament of Learning and Eloquence; and do
thou cover this simple Naked Child, with the Garment of thy Blessing, that it
may be received into the hearts of Men of Good Will, of what Persuasion soever.
O Lord, my God, thou did command the Children of Israel to Offer to thee
their Firstborn, accordingly, I here offer unto thee (...) First Born. The
Conception Exodus 22. 29.
is thine, the Birth is thine. Let not the De^^^^nt it has contracted in the
Womb of my Soul, hinder thy Blessing upon it, nor any of my Sins and
Transgressions, but let them all be washed away in that Fountain Zech. 13. 2.
which is opened to the House of David, etc. for Sir and for Uncleanness. Let
all these Egyptians he drowned in the Red S^a of my Saviors Blood, and let me
hear the same comfortable Promise, thou made to the Children of Israel by the
mouth of Mos^^; The Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again
no ^ore forever. The Sins that have pursued you all your Life time, you shall
never see them any more having the Dominion over you; and if I leave any
Canaanites in the Land, it is only to keep you humble; and that you may know
that the Land is mine, and that it is I that fight for you against your
Enemies, and will do so till your last Breath. Amen. Lord, so be it. Hallelujuh.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Whitledge over against the Hatt and Feather, on
Addle-hill, near Doctors-Commons, 1693.


