A DECLARATION AND SVMMONS Sent by the Earl of Newcastle, to the Town of
Manchester, to lay down their Arms.

With the Resolute ANSWER of the Commanders in chief, and Soldiers in
MANCHESTER, To spend their blood for the honor of the King, the Protestant
Religion, and Privileges of Parliament, against the Papists and Malignants how
under his Lordships command.

Imprimatur,

John White.



London, Printed for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at the Glove in Co^nhill.
July 15. 1643.

A Declaration and Summons sent by the Earl of Newcastle, to the Town of
Manchester to lay down their Arms, etc.
I Presume you are not ignorant of the success it has pleased Almighty God to
give unto His Majesty's Army under my Command, and the great desire J have to
avoid the effusion of Christian blood, which moves me before J proceed any
further toward you, to make you an offer of His Majesty's Grace and Mercy, if
you will submit your selves, lay down your Arms, so unjustly taken up in
contempt of the Laws of this Kingdom, and immediately return to your due
Allegiance, His Majesty is graciously pleased to authorize me, to receive you
into His Favor and Protection, which J am as willing to do, as to enforce your
obedience; if you will refuse J cannot but wonder, while you fight against the
King and His Authority, you should so boldly offer to Profess your selves for
King and Parliament, and most ignominiously scandalize this Army with the Title
of Papists, when we venture our Lives and Fortunes for the true Protestant
Religion established in this Kingdom: Be no longer deceived, for the blood
that shall be shed in this quarrel will assuredly fall on your own heads; J
have no other ends in this, but to let you see your error, if you please; for
my condition is such, that I need not Court you; Jf not, let me receive your
answers by this Messenger, and you may expect to find little favor, (if you
force my nature) but such as is due to so high Contemners of His Majesty's
Grace and Favor, now offered to you by

W: NEWCASTLE.
Bradford. 5. July. 1643.
Manchesters Answer.
Right Honorable;
IT has been ever since the first fomenting of the unhappy differences in this
Kingdom, and so, shall be our principal care and endeavor to preserve the
true Protestant Religion by Law established in this Realm, the Honor of the
King in all Regal Rights, and Prerogatives, and Privileges of Parliament, and
the true and Native Liberties, and Privileges of the Subject by Law
established; And then it is not to be wondered at, that having been oppressed by
Papists, and other Malignants, we have by defensive Arms, labored to repel
such as by color of His Majesty's Commission, have endeavored to overthrow
Religion, His Majesty's Regal Rights, and Honor, with all the immunities of
this Kingdom, in the preservation whereof, His Majesty's noble Progenitors have
so long and honorably flourished; By which we hope it is apparent to all
indifferent, judicious, and religious people, that we have not put our selves
out of His Majesty's protection, nor cannot possibly enter into our
understanding, that the true Protestant Religion cannot be intended to be
defended by so great a company of Papists, as have been, and now are in Arms
under such protection; Nor the Propriety of the Subject, by so many Aliens, and
other Malefactors as daily resort unto them; And we could wish so honorable a
person as your self might be separated, and freed from protecting such
Delinquents.

Sir, we are nothing dismayed at your force, but hope that God, who has been
our protector hitherto, will so direct our just Army, that we shall be able to
return the violence intended, into their bosoms that shall assay the
prosecution of it, which shall be the endeavor of

His Majesty's most Humble and Obedient Subjects.
Rochdale, 7. July, 1643.
FINIS.

