A new Plot against the Parliament.

ENGLANDS DELIVERANCE, OR, A GREAT DISCOVERY being a true relation of the
treacherous practices of the Papists now resident in this City.

Likewise the reason of the guard placed at the Earl of Worcesters, and Sir
Basil Brooks, and my Lord Peter's House in Aldersgate Street.

With the Heads of those orders given by the Honorable House of Parliament,
concerning the raising of Forces to suppress the Commotions in England, and to
guard the I Will of Wight.

LONDON: Printed for John Greensmith. 1641.

ENGLANDS DELIVERANCE.
THe mercies of our God are manifold, as may be plainly feen, by this strange
Discovery, which he has made known in a most miraculous manner, for which we
of England, and all true Protestants have just cause to praise God, and to cry
out with David, Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him: or the Son of
man that thou regardest him? What are we sinners that thou should protect
us? what have we done, worth this great deliverance? Surely the mercies of our
God, are manifold, and his love endures for ever, as may appear in this
affair which I am now to discourse of.

The manner of the Plot, and how it pleased God to bring it to light.
ON Monday being the fifteenth day of November, it happened that a poor man
being necessitated, and wanting a lodging, fearing Officers, and being
imprisoned was constrained to take up his lodging in a Ditch, near the
Pesthouse, where lying, some small time, two Gentlemen came and lay down upon
the bank, who after they had lain so me small time, began to discourse of
business of eminent danger, which induced this poor man to give ear to their
discourse, and softly to creep by degrees nearer and nearer, so that he could
easily understand their discourse, and their intentions.

The substance of their discourse.
Their discourse was this, That they wondered that their friend did not come and
declare what Noblemen they were, that were to be cut off in this enterprise:
withal, the manner how they should proceed in their attempt, and many other
things of dangerous consequence, which made the poor man very desirous to see
what outsides those men had, that were so fraught with Treason: At last rising
up hastily, he was discovered by the men, whose guilt and fear to be known,
urged them so far, that they (...) ready to add Murder to Treason: as if
that had not been enough to sink them into the bottomless pit of endless
misery: For immediately one of them drew his sword and ran at the innocent man
and wounded him dangerously, so that he fell down, as if he were killed, then
immediately they ran away. The poor man when they were gone, got up as well as
he could and came to some members of the house of Parliament, and discovered
it, whereupon the house then sent out three Warrents for to take three French
men which they did suspect, who being taken were brought to the Parliament
house the 16. day of November, and upon their examinations there was command
given that the Earl of Worcesters house in the Strand should be guarded, and Sr
Basill-Brooks, because they did suspect that a Papist Prist was harbord there,
which was a chief incendiary and inventor of this treachery.

Likewise it was ordered by the House of Commons that forces should be raised
with all speed to secure the I Will of Wight.

1 That their should be an account taken of all the Papists about London.

2 There was two Lords nominated that should be appointed to raise forces to
secure the Kingdom, one beyond Trent and the other on this side Trent, and for
all other officers they are to be appointed by the Parliament.

3 That there should be a privy scarch made for the priest aforesaid, in the
house of the Earl of Worcester and Sr Basil Brook and to prevent further
mischief there is a guard set about them by the command of the house of
Parliament.

Being the 16. of November
Likewise this day there was an order from the Parliament, for disarming of
Papists, and for the better proceeding they began at my Lord Peeters in
Aldersgate Street.

This is the whole relation of this great deliverance which it has pleased
God to lay open and bring to knowledge, wherefore let us praise God, for though
our enemies are innumerable, though our troubles be many, yet the Lord delivers
us out of all, let us amend our lives, let us truly repent, let us not
displease so gracious a father, so gracious a redeemer, let us bless God for
the means of our deliverance, let us bless God for our gracious King. let us
bless God for this happy Parliament: and last of all let us pray for the
establishment of Religion, let us love one another, and live in unity and
peace together, so shall God protect us and bless us here one earth, and
crown us with eternal glory in the Kingdom of heaven.

FJNIS.

