A NEW REMONSTRANCE FROM THE SOLDIERY, To his Excellency the Lord General
FAIRFAX,

AND Their Proposals, in the name of themselves, and all the Commons of England
for a just and righteous Government, to be established within this Nation,
abhorring and detesting against all Anarchy, Confusion, and levelling of men's
Estates;

WITH Their Proclamation to the Kingdom concerning the putting of violence
upon Authority.

ALSO, A new Representative, and the Heads of the Agreement of the People the
King nor Lords, to have no voice in it; the Parliament to be dissolved on the
last of April next, and a new one to be called once in two year, and to
continue but six Months.

LIKEWISE, The manner and form of the Government, and no Corporation, above
one, except the City of London. Together with a Letter from the Earl of
Warwick, to the House of Peers, concerning Prince Charles, and the two Navies.

London, Printed for Robert Williamson, 1648.

A new Remonstrance and Proposals from the Officers and Soldiers of the
Regiment, commanded by Colonel Thomas Pride. To his Excellency the Lord
General Fairfax.
Whereas it has pleased the Lord of Hosts (who was called upon to decide the
controversy of this Nation) to write his name upon your Sword in very legible
eharacters, as appears upon record twice, viz. in the year -- 45, where we had
114 Victories, and now this last Summer above 30, even to our astonishment, who
were used by you in that service, that those proud Billows in Wales, England,
and Scotland, have bin bounded and calmed, in less then six months, yet
behold, we have our sorrows repeated, and our fears increased, making our
wounds even to bleed afresh.

Wherefore, we desire, in the name of our selves, and the abused and betrayed
people of England, that your Excellency will be pleased to assist us, in these
ensuing requests and groans of our souls, which may not long be denied us,
lest we faint or struggle as we can for the life of good men, and a good Cause.

1. That justice may suddenly and equally be dispensed, according to the
desires of our honored friends in London, Liecestershire, and others
manifested by their several Petitions, and the Parliaments Declaration
concerning the Kings evil asserted, or bewailed, and repented of.

2 That your Army be instantly reckoned withal, and paid and so dealt with for
future (if they must be used) that every Reg. may know their own country, and
there receive their pay immediately, without any other Treasurers or ways of
trouble, that so the people themselves may see what they have for their money.
In this we are impartent, or so passionately affected, that we gasp for help:
this Regiment has had but one months pay since May, having marched 1300 miles
this Summer.

3 That the people may know in print, with all speed, which way all public
moneys are disposed of in all counties and places, and that of all kinds, which
may be done, if every collector and receiver of money be forthwith enjoined to
print their receipts and disbursments; for if the soldiers be not paid, the
people ask what is become of the Revenue, Compositions, Sequestrations, Excise,
Lands, etc.

4 That we may have just and righteous Government settled in this Nation
advancing Godliness, we abhorring Anarchy, Confusion, and levelling men's
estates; so often charged upon us: for which end, we desire these two things,
in pursuance of which (by help from Heaven) we are resolved to venture all.

First, that the grand and capital enemies, may without delay, be brought to
Justice, which is the maine root of our misery, we finding all other ways
attempted altogether invalid to carry on this work of common safety.

Secondly, for the dispatch of Justice upon all Delinquents for rectifying all
crooked things among us, and for the good of us, and the Generations to come,
we humbly conceive our last and surest way will be for your Excellency and this
army, to make a speedy offer to the Commons house in your name and the Armies,
and in the behalf of all England, that such of them as have been faithful to
the Kingdoms interest, to declare with you and the Nation; and that the
contrary minded, false, royal, and neutral party may know, that our enemies
must not be our rulers, we professing, that good men, rather then good laws
must s^ve us, though we disjoyn them not. And if any shall object, we put
violence upon authority, we hereby proclaim to the world, that neither your
Excellency, nor our selves, have received Co^missions from the parl as now
constituted, but from that good party in it, who strugled through many hazards
to model this army for the kingdoms fafety; nor are we to attend forms and
customs in this extremity; we can as willingly sit down as march, suffer, as
act, would but the godly party in the Kingdom call us thereunto, and think
themselves preserved by it.

But the people call to us for these things, and we to your Excellency, your
known worth invi^ing us hereunto: in prosecution of which, as an unparalled
instrument, we shall live or die with your Excellency, having solemnly promised
to attempt and attend these two last expedients through all hazard. We cannot
so undervalue our God, and the rich experience we have had in the behalf of
this Nation, as to see them lie (like Issachar) under these sinful burdens, our
colds nakedness, want, hunger, hardship, difficul^i^s, dangers, out of which
our blessed, and ever to be praised God has brought us, suggesting these
things unto us, for that flock of slaughter in this Kingdom.

Sir, we can die, but not endure to see our Mother England die before us.

ON Tuesday December. 12. 1648. a Troop of Horse and a party of Foot of the Army
marched to St. Clemens lane, unto the house of Alderman Viner, one of the
Sheriffs unto whose house also came Major Genesis Brown in his Coach, where the
said party seized on him, and from thence guarded him to the Headquarters at
White Hall, and being brought before his Excellency, and the Council of the
Army, some questions were asked, and matters of charge propounded, which were
to this effect.

That whereas by the confederacy of the said M.G. Brown (now Sheriff of London)
with the said impeached members, and others, the Scots were invited and drawn
in to invade this Kingdom the last Summer, insomuch as when upon the actual
Invasion the House proceeded to declare them enemies, and those that adhered to
them traitors; yet the said confederates and other treacherous members (to the
number of ninety and odd, as upon the division of the House appeared) did by
their Councels and Votes endeavor to hinder the house from declaring against
their confederate invaders.

The Proposals of the Army, concerning his Majesty.
HIs Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, and the General council of
Officers, upon mature and serious deliberation, touching the transaction of
affairs, in order to the settlement of the peace of the Kingdom, have
declared, That (for the love and honor they bear to justice and
righteousness, and for the real love they bear to the silver cords of amity
and concord) they will endeavor the composing of all differences, and
executing of impartial justice both upon King, Lords, and Commons, and all
others (even from the highest to the lowest) who have acted contrary to the
known Laws of the Realm, and the trust reposed in them by the People. And the
Army do further remonstrate to the Kingdom, 1 That no Magistrate have power to
make any compulsive Law, or execute any matters of punishment, touching matters
of Conscience. 2 That all Statutes, Laws, and Acts of Parl. be mane and run
only in the name of the Comm^ns of England assembled in Parliament. 3 That no
persons whatsoever that are Lawmakers, be Law executioners, but that a clear
distinction be preserved and kept inviolable betwixt these two principles and
pillars of the Commonwealth for ever. 4 That all Officers of the Commonwelth
be made to enjoy their places, but for a time prefixed, and at the expiration
thereof to give an account of their Stewardship. 5 That no man be kept in
prison above a month, but in that space to be brought to trial by a lawful
Jury of his equals, or else to be discharged of course. 6 That no man be
impressed or forced to serve in future wars. 7 That our Laws be few and plain,
free from all ambiguous meanings, and all in the English tongue, and to be
printed in a Volume, and one to be provided, to be kept in every church
throughout the Kingdom, and to be read over at several seasons in open
Congregations. 8 That all persons stand alike liable to the Laws of the Land,
in all cases both criminal and civil. 9 That no more trudging up to Westmin.
from all parts of the Land, for the trial of suits of Law be had, but that
(as of old) all suits both criminal and civil, be ended in the several
Hundreds. 10 That a solemn Contract upon these and the like Principles be
drawn betwixt the People and their Representatives for ever. 11 That till the
accomplishment of this work, (in behalf of the Army and People) that no Forces
be disbanded, except persons ill affected, and dissentors from this Expedition.
For these things we do declare, and with our Swords in our hands, as we are
Soldiers, we challenge them as the price and purchase of our Blood, to live and
dye for them against all opposers whatsoever.

His Excellency and the General Council of Officers, sit close at Whitehal,
and are agitating some particulars of very high concernment to the Kingdom, in
order to the settling of the peace thereof; and its said that the Agreement of
the peeople will be speedily presented to public view: In the mean time, take
some certain heads thereof, viz. That neither King nor Lords, are to have any
voice in the subscribing of the new Representative, which is to be called the
Agreement of the people, containing 1 The dissolving of the Parliament on the
last of April, commencing it self the first of June. 2 That a new Parl. be
called once in two year, and to sit for the space of 6 Months, and no longer.
3 That they shall consist of 400. in number some Countries more, some less,
and no Corporation above one, except London. 4 That the said Representative
shall have full Legistative power, etc.

The Lord Admiral has sent a Letter to the House of Peers, showing the reason
of his return from the Netherlands shore (notwithstanding diverse of the
revolted ships remain in the River, who prepare for going forth, whose Saylors
are now brave and full of money) viz that he should have bin frozen up, and
wanting victuals, which would not have bin furnished to him from the Countries,
but ships and men must have perished: with other weighty reasons.

Duke Hamilton has sent a message to Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, desiring him to give
him a visit, for that he has something of great consequence to impart.

FINIS.

