A SERMON, TENDING To set forth the Right Use of the DISASTERS that befall our
ARMIES.

PREACHED Before the Honorable Houses of Parliament, at a Fast specially set
apart upon Occasion of that which befell the Army in the West.

In Margarets Westminster, Sept. 12. Anno 1644.

BY Matthew Newcomen, Minister of the Gospel at Dedham in Essex.

JUDGE. 20.26. Then all the children of Israel, and all the people went up, and
came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the Lord, and
fasted that day until Even, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings
before the Lord.

1 SAMUEL 14.58. And Saul said, Draw ye near hither all the Chief of the
people: and know and see wherein this sin has been this day.

1 SAMUEL 26.19. And David said unto the King, If the Lord have stirred thee up
against me, let him accept an offering: but if they be the children of men,
cursed be they before the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

Die Veneris, 13. Septembr. 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Thomas
Cheek do return the Thanks of this House unto Master Newcomen, for the
great pains he took in his Sermon yesterday, being a particular day of
Humiliation: and also Sir Robert Harley to do the like to Master Coleman, and
to desire them to print their Sermons, And it is ordered, That none shall
presume to print their Sermons without leave under their hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I do appoint Christopher Meredith to print this Sermon,

MATTHEW. NEWCOMEN.



TO THE HONORABLE The Houses of PARLIAMENT.
THe publishing of this Sermon (what ever the preaching of it was) may seem
(Right Honorable) as unseasonable as that Consolatory Embassy the Trojans sent
to the Emperor Tiberius upon the death of his son Drusus, Sueton. in Tiberio.
which came so extremely late, that the Emperor, to requite their kindness,
tells them, That as they were sorry for the death of his son, so was he for the
death of their Hector; implying that they were both equally forgotten. Possibly
that sad Accident in the West, which first ministered occasion for the preaching
of this Sermon, is so too, and then quorsum haec? if at all, why not sooner? if
not sooner, why now? I might plead many things in mine own excuse, why not
sooner? My avocations and employments since the preaching of this Sermon have
been so many, that had I been most desirous of obeying your Command for the
printing of it; I could scarce sooner have accomplished it, but I must confess
my desire was that this unworthy piece (the conception of so few hours) might
never have outlived the hour in which it was delivered, except (by the
blessing of God) in the hearts of those that heard it. But then why now? why at
all made public? God is my Record, the only reason that extorts this from me
at this time is, because we are still encompassed with the Evidences of that
Displeasure, which in the West began to break out upon us, which makes me
fear, that some of that heart-searching, sin-discovering, heart-humbling,
Covenant-acting work which God then called us to, has on some hand or other
been neglected. We whom God has made Seers to his people must not shut our
eyes, Ez^k. 33.^3. etc.
and refuse to see what God reveals, nor lay our hands upon our mouths, and
fear to declare what we see. And certainly you have it from the mouth of more
then one or two, or a few of those that preach before you, that God is very
sore displeased still. There are manifest signs of Gods displeasure against a
Nation, such as every eye that beholds them, may read wrath and indignation in
them. And there are secret intimations of Gods displeasure, (...) oculi (...)
ex^on^ (...), ipa^^^s ^amen quo ^^ram Dei indi ^nt, cognoscuntur. Ma^^. loc.
com.
which though they be visible in themselves yet few know how to interpret them,
and to collect the displeasure of God from them. The sword is a manifest sign
of Gods wrath against the Nation. Job 19.29. Be ye afraid of the sword: for
wrath brings the punishment of the sword, that you may know there is a
Judgment. But besides this, there are Characters, though all cannot read them,
of Gods indignation against his own people in this Kingdom, against those that
have appeared and engaged themselves for him. There is, that says, When God is
angry with a people, Less: de Perfectionibus Divinis, li. 13. c. 10.
and intends to dash them in pieces, he leaves them sine animo, sine concilio,
etc. without heart, without Council, without strength, without fit Commanders;
so involved with difficulties foreign and domestic, they know not how
possibly to extricate themselves. If one give good counsel, presently another
by captious arguments overthrowes it, and those that should judge of both, have
not light enough to discern, which is for the public safety and which
destructive. If any opportunity of Service be presented, either there is no
notice taken of it, or to save a little charges, it is neglected, or none
knows how to improve it. Dangers imminent, are either not foreseen, or
slighted: Traitors creep in, that discover their Councels to their enemies.
There are jealousies and factions among their great men, in favor whereof, one
studies to cross the designs and successes of the other, though the Public
be undone by it. The Treasury is wasted in needless expenses; the soldiers
mutine and are seditious, and when they have plundered a Country, must have as
much given them to forbear plundering as would maintain a war. Finally, while
all seek their own profit, and no man's heart is upon the Public good, all runs
to ruin. On the contrary, the enemies whom God intends to punish that people
by, though they be far more wicked and ungodly, yet they prosper, their
courage, their strength increases; they take opportune counsels, they know how
to improve and pursue advantages; there is great concord among their Leaders;
no man seeks to undermine and overthrow another; no man blends his own private
quarrels with the Public Cause. In a word, all things succeed as if God
favored their cause, and directed their counsels, when yet their cause is
unjust, and their intentions wicked, and there is nothing further from their
heart then God.

But this Discourse you need not, much less any Application of it, who are
apprehensive of this already, and have therefore set your selves very lately to
seek the Lord, and Atonement with him, by Fasting and Humiliation, in such
away as never Parliament did before you. That God who has put it into your
hearts thus to seek him, In the East i^ Linco^nes-Inne Chapel, kept December.
18.
grant that you and we may find such fruit and success thereof in your selves,
Counsels, Armies, as this poor Church and Nation, after so many days of
mourning, may once take up that song of praise, Isai. 12.1. O Lord, I will
praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, yet thine anger is turned away,
and thou comfortedst me. This is the Prayer of

Your Honors most unworthy, yet faithful and sincere Servant MATTHEW. NEWCOMEN.

A Sermon preached before both Houses of Parliament at their extraordinary
solemn Fast, Sept. 12. 1644.
JOSHUA 7.10, 11. And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore lie
thou thus upon thy face?

Israel has sinned, and has also transgressed my Covenant which I commanded
them.


The Introduction. HOw well this Text suites this Day, this Assembly, and the
Occasion of it; I persuade my self there is none here but upon the first
reading understands. The Lord grant that the handling of these words may be as
profitable, as the Scripture it self is seasonable.

In the former verses of this Chapter you have a sad story, to which ours is
this day parallel, I had almost said in too great a measure; but I lay my hand
upon my mouth, because thou Lord have done it, who does all things in measure;

But in the Story of this Chapter you may read our Calamity, and Duty.


In the fifth verse you have a people, Gods people, Israel, smitten, scattered,
trodden down; before their enemies, Gods enemies. That Is our Calamity.

In the sixth, seventh, and eighth verses you have Joshua and the Elders
expressing a pious sense of this breach that God had made upon them. The
Multitude possibly might miscarry under this hand of God; they might fall into
their accustomed discontents, or sink under discouragements, as it is said
ver. 5. The hearts of the people melted, and became as water. But as for Joshua
and the Elders, Men of more Noble and Religious spirits, their demeanor is
gracious, and humble, and holy, And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the
earth upon his face (he and the Elders of Israel with him, ver. 6.) and poures
out his heart before the Lord in words expressing a sorrow too big for any
words to express, ver. 8. Oh Lord what shall I say when Israel turns their
backs before their enemies? as if he had said: Lord, this is the saddest
thing, the saddest Token of thy displeasure! The thoughts of it amaze,
overwhelme me: I know not what to say: O Lord! what shall I say? O that we had
such a grieved and burdened heart as Joshua had when he spoke these words!
Surely this is our Duty, to have our hearts filled with the sense of that hand
of God that is gone out against us: and in the sense thereof to abase our
selves before the Lord. To the performance of this Duty we are met this day,
the Lord help us in it; yet that is not all: there is a further Duty God calls
for at our hands; and that the words of my Text lead us to: The sense of the
words.
And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up, wherefore lie thou upon thy
face? Israel has sinned, etc.

Our English expression, Get thee up, sounds more harsh then either the
Original or other Translations, (...): Illud quid hoc it is prostratus jaces
infaciem tuan? non est objurgantis, au^ precandi Ritum illum reprehendentis:
quo ritu Christus ipse usus est: sed jamdudum se paratum esse significantis ad
opitulandum. Ma^us ad locum. Non est ignorantis, aut inquirentis, aut arguentis
vox ista, sed insinuantis, quod no^ sufficit supplicare, sed alio opus esse
Remedio. Cajetan. ad locum. q. d. Surge: Noli te diutius affligere; Scio quid
velis, faciamque ut scias quid facto sit opus ad cladem, a tuis acceptam
resarciendam. Ego enim cor tuum contritum, and humiliatum, despicere nequeo,
sed benign aspicere a mea pietate quasi cogor. C. a Lapide ad locum.
Which words are not words of Inquiry, God does not demand of Joshua the reason
why he lay at his feet in this sad posture; Joshua had given him an account of
that already in his Prayer. And God knew it even before he prayed. Nor are they
words of Rebuke and Increpation. But rather words of Advice and Direction; God
does here as it were with a hand of Grace and Mercy lift up Joshua from the
earth where he lay grovelling, and says thus, Arise, Joshua, afflict thy self
no longer, I know what thy Desire is, and I will let thee know what thy Duty
is, there is somewhat to be done which yet thou think not on; Get thee up,
Joshua, wherefore lie thou on thy face? Israel has sinned.

In the words you may please to observe something that God took notice of in
Joshua: The Division.
and something that God gave notice of to Joshua.

The thing that God took notice of in Joshua was the Deep sense he had of the
hand of God against Israel in the late disaster that befell their Army: under
which he lay confounded, astonished at the feet of God. This in the first
words. The Lord said unto Joshua, Arise, wherefore lie thou upon thy face?

The thing which God gave notice of to Joshua was the sin that Israel had
committed which was the Cause of this Disaster. Israel has sinned, and has
also transgressed my Covenant which I commanded them.

with The Proof.
From the first of these I commend this to your Observation. That when a
Disaster befalls the Armies of Israel, it well becomes a generous Gracious heart
to be deeply affected with it.

I say, when a Disaster befalls the Armies of Israel, for this here it was not a
Discomfiture, it was but a Disaster: a Party of about three thousand beaten,
ver. 4. and about six and thirty men slain in the fight, and in the Chase,
ver. 5. What Is that in an Army of six hundred thousand men of war? That was
Isreal's Number at their last Muster. Numb. 26.51. Some Nimrod, some Cyclops
would have thought this an inconsiderable loss, a blow not worth the taking
notice of. But Joshua, though as gallant and daring a spirit as any the Earth
had, he thinks not so: he thinks that this calls him and the rest of the Elders
of Israel (what ever others do) to rend their Clothes, and put dust upon their
heads, and in the mournfullest plight that may be to pour out their Prayers
and Tears before the Lord: O Lord! what shall I say?

So when the Children of Israel were smitten before Benjamin, though that was
not such a discomfiture, but they were able to rally themselves again, and
renew the fight a second and third time, and at length got the victory by fine
force; yet All the people went up and wept before the Lord. Judge. 20. Once and
a second time, and the second time they wept and fasted until Even, and
offered burnt offerings and peace offerings unto the Lord. ver. 26. This a
Disaster will work.

But a Rout, a Discomfiture? what an Impression that will make in a Gracious
holy heart, see in that mournful Story 1 Samuel 4. where you shall see how the
Tidings of Isreal's discomfiture and slaughter broke the heart of Reverend and
Honorable Eli. There comes a Messenger from the Army with very sad Tidings.
ver. 17. Israel is fled before the Philistims, and there has been also a great
slaughter: and thy two sons Hophni and Phineas are slain: and the Ark of God
is taken. Every Incisum of this Message gives a stab, a wound to his gracious
heart; and no sooner is the story ended, but his life is ended too. Israel is
fled before the Philistims; there is One wound. And there has been a great
slaughter among the people; there is a second wound. And thy two sons Hophni
and Phineas are slain; there is a third wound. And the Ark of the Lord is
taken; there is a fourth, a Deaths wound that dispatcheth him. He can now live
no longer: It came to pass when he made mention of the Ark of God, he fell
from off the seat backward. I could incline to think that the Pramaereris
magnitudine obtenebratus senior cecidit de sell iuxta Janua^ and contriu^ est
dorsa^cius. Chrysos. Inquiri po est utru^ Nuntius de captivitate Arcae fuit
adaequata Causa mort^ Eli. ita ut ill^ audito repeni^ in^^riit, and postea
cecidi^, and cervices freg^ri^, an potius, etc. ^rior modus mihi non videtur
imprebabilis Mendoza ad locum. ^^d^lile est ipsum sic voluisse mori. Ma^^.

Non crepta vita, (...) mori ei videtur. Cicero.


fall of Israel had broke his heart, before the fall from his seat brake his
Neck, and killed him as much or more then his own fall. Good man unhappy in
his Government, unhappy in his sons, happy only in this that he died with
grief for the Israel and Ark of God: so deeply was his tender gracious heart
affected with the disaster of Isreal's Army.

Reasons. tender and gracious heart in such occasions. First, Because every
gracious heart, (and indeed every generous heart, every man that has not the
heart of an Atheist in him) knows, that when a disaster befalls the Israel of
God in their Armies, it is a sign that God is displeased with his people.
Every disaster that befalls their Armies, is a check, a frown, a rebuke from
God, a token of his displeasure, and therefore a gracious heart cannot stand
under it: This is it perplexeth Joshua here. Alas the death of 36. men it had
been nothing: The slaughter of 36000. it had been nothing, had their Army yet
had the favor of God upon them. But God is angry; Joshuah's tender heart can
feel it in this lighter stroke as well as if the blow had been heavier, God
is angry, therefore Israel cannot stand before their enemy, therefore Joshua
cannot stand before the Lord, but falls at his feet saying, o Lord what shall I
say unto thee? And whom would not this become? whom would not this become? when
God shows himself angry with his people, to show themselves deeply sensible
of it, to cloth themselves with trembling and with mourning, whom would it not
become? I am sure it would become us this day, the Lord help us so to do.

disaster befalls the Armies of Israel, it well becomes a generous gracious
heart to be deeply affected with it; because disasters in the Armies of Israel
are of very sad consequence. This Joshua had his eye upon, and this his heart
was affected with, as you may see, ver. 9. For the Canaanites and all the
inhabitants of the Land shall hear of it, and shall inviron us round, and cut
off our name from the earth; and what will thou do to thy great Name. There
are two things mentioned as the sad consequence of this disaster. First, The
increase of rage and courage against the Israel of God that this would occason
to their enemies. The Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the Land shall
hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from off the
earth. One disaster will make those to whom Israel was before terrible, resume
new courage, and enter into new confederacies, and nothing will now satisfy
but utter extirpation; cutting off the name of Israel from the earth. In this
respect; it well becomes a generous gracious heart, as he tenders the good and
welfare of the Israel of God, to be deeply affected with such disasters.

rage of the enemies against the Israel of God, so against the God of Israel
himself: this is intimated in the last words of the ninth verse, and what will thou do unto thy great Name? as if Joshua had said. Lord, though our name were
cut off from the earth for ever it were no matter; But o the reproach, the
scorn that these uncircumcised ones will cast upon thy great and dreadful
Name! o to hear the enemies insulting, where is your God that brought you up
out of the Land of Egypt, where are all those mighty wonders which he wrought
at the Red Sea and in the Land of Ham, etc. Joshuah knew that these would be
the darings, this the language of the enemies, and his gracious heart cannot
bear it: o what will thou do to thy great Name? If then in the disasters of
an Army, we may see that God is provoked, and foresee that the glory of God
and the safety of his people is much endangered; we may conclude, It well
becomes a generous gracious heart to be much affected with such disasters.

Application of it. The Application of this Truth is easy. It may let you see,
Right Honorable and Beloved, how well this mourning praying posture into which
you have cast your selves this day becomes you, For Information.
You who are to England as the Senes Israel intelligit Iudices Magni Syne. drii
quibus praecrat eo tempore Joshua. Deus. ad difficil. Loca Iosuae.
Elders were to Israel, the Governors and Representers of the whole Nation,
should for your selves and for the Nation whom you represent, in this solemn
manner to testify your humble and deep sense of the hand of God upon his
people in that disaster that has befallen our Army in the West. God has
smitten our Army; shall not we smite our hearts? our Army is broken: will not a
broken heart now become us? Our Forces are brought low; shall not we endeavor
that our hearts may be so too? If her father had spit in her face (says God to
Moses concerning Miriam, Number. 12.15.) should she not be ashamed seven days? o
how many days would it become us to bear the shame of that rebuke that God
has given us. Thou have cast off and put us to shame, and go not forth with
our Armies: Thou make us to turn our back from the enemies, and they that
hate us spoil for themselves, was the sorrowful complaint of the Church of
old, Psalm. 44 9, 10. and may be ours this day. The Lord help us to bear this
indignation in a right manner, and to mourn aright under it.

So far as my poor observation enables me to judge, This is the saddest
rebuke that God has given us since the first beginning of this action: and
therefore calls for as sad hearts this day as ever we brought with us into the
presence of our God. Sure I am that what ever there was in this disaster which
befell the Army of Israel, that might be matter of grief and consternation to
Joshua and Isreal's Elders, the same is in this disaster that has befallen us,
and calls for the like affection in men of Noble, generous, gracious spirits,
such as you are.

Joshua plainly see the anger of the Lord in their disaster? we may (if we be
not blind) see the same in ours much more. The wound, the breach that God has
made upon us by this disaster, is deeper, wider. Theirs was but the loss of
36. Men, Ours the dissipation of a Brave, Gallant, hopeful Army: An Army that
was sent out with solemn fasting and prayer, and since they came to be in the
streights wherein they unhappily mis-carried, were solemnly again sought of
God by fasting and prayer: And yet this Army lost; and lost in a week of
fasting and prayer, that has used to be a week of deliverances, victorys,
mercies: Can you think of this, and not think God angry? even with our
prayers as well as with our Armies; And can we think God angry, and not fall
at his feet every one of us with Joshua, and cry o Lord what shall I say unto
thee?

circumstances accompanying this disaster, that might make it yet more grievous
unto Joshua and the Elders? and do not the same circumstances accompany ours?
It was indeed Omnia subita videntur majora. Cicer. Praecogitati mali molli^
ictus venit. Senec.
an unexpected blow, a blow that Joshua did neither fear nor foresee; this
made it the heavyer. 1. Joshua knew the Cause he managed by the sword was good:
God owned it and warranted him in the prosecution of it. 2. He had lately
received a testimony of Gods favor toward it before the walls of Jericho. 3.
And this was the first time that ever the Armies of Israel under the conduct of
Joshua, turned their backs before their enemies. This makes him amazed, it is
such a thing as never was before: o Lord what shall I say (says he) when
Israel turns their backs before their enemies? And that 4. A despised enemy,
an enemy that upon good advice they thought not fit to engage their whole
strength upon; but only send out a party, ver. 3. Let not all the people go
up, but let about a two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai, but let not
all the people labor thither, for they are but few. Now for Israel to fall in
such a Cause, at such a time, before such an enemy, all this concurres to make
the measure of Joshuah's grief and consternation the more full, o Lord what
shall I say when Israel turns their backs before their enemies? And do not
all these circumstances meet in ours, to make our disaster equal unto theirs?
o that the senoe of it might be as equal! was not this a blow unexpected? Did
not 1. The goodness of our Cause (wherein we have not only the witness of our
own consciences, and the witness of Neighbor Churches, Scotland, Zealand,
Helvetia, etc. in their Letters to the Assembly of Divines.
but the witness of God himself with us.) Did not 2. That ^ccent and much to
be remembered testimony of Gods favor toward us in it by that great and
glorious victory given us before the walls of York, make us hope for a good
issue of this Expedition into the West. And 3. Is not this the first time that
ever your Army under the Conduct of his Excellency turned their backs or became
a spoil unto the Enemy? And was not the Enemy (I mean the adverse Army)
despised in our eyes? It is not long since they did nothing but flitt and
sculke; their whole strength being shrunk up into some Numbers of Horse, and
now they had drawn together a Body of Foot: did we not look upon them all as
an inconsiderable Rabble rather then an Army? forced men, raw Soldiers, not
worth the engaging all your Powers upon: I fear it was our fault Politically,
(I do not say our sin Theologically) to undervalue the Powers of our Enemies
so far. But all this makes our disaster the sadder, and should make our sense
of it the deeper, for such an Army, in such a Cause to be given up to such an
Enemy, and at such a time as this is, when if God had blessed us, in all
probability, we might have seen a speedy and happy end of these calamitous
wars, o Lord what shall I say?

any consequences that did fall in upon the thoughts of Joshua as aggravations
of Isreal's disaster and his grief. Consider if the same consequences do not
fall in here. Did Joshua fear not with a Pannick but with a rational,
prudentiall fear, a fear becoming a man of wisdom and resolution? Did
Joshua thus fear, that the Nations (who not long before trembled at the
thoughts of Israel, Josh. 5.1.) would now resume their courage and join their
strengths together for the utter extirpation of the Israel of God? And have not
we cause to fear the like? It is not long since the outstretched Arm of God
at York struck a trembling into the hearts of our enemies, that they began to
say as Exodus 13.25. Let us flee from the face of this people, for the Lord
fights for them. And many of the malignant enemies of the Kingdom began to
think of making their peace, and made at least feined submission. But now, you
are wise enough to think what flocking together there will be of Papists and
Malignants: what gathering together into bodies: what an Army, or rather how
many armies you may quickly have against you of English, Irish, Popish, and
others (if the overruling Providence of God prevent it not as here) whose Rage
will be satisfied with nothing less then the Cutting off our Name from the
earth. If not the Name of England, yet the Name of Parliament, the Name of
Protestant Religion, etc.

Possibly some may say, What if they do strengthen themselves, and multiply
their Armies: thanks be to God we have yet Armies as many and as considerable
as any they have: we have so many thousand in the North; and so many thousand
yet in the West; and so many thousand advancing from the North into the West.
And what then? might not Joshua have said as much as this? he had six hundred
thousand fighting men in his Camp still; and what if all the Inhabitants of the
land come against them? they are enough are they not to deal with them; yea,
but Joshua saw that God was angry, he went not forth with their Armies: and
Joshua knew that if his 600000 Men were 600000 Millions, if God continue still
angry with them, they should all fall before their enemies: we talk of
thousands, were our thousands multiplied into Millions, if God frown still
upon our Armies, as he now begins to do, we are but bread for our enemies.
Believe it, it is a sign of a carnal heart, that would shift off this stroke
of God, and is loath to lie under the sense of it, to comfort it self, at such
a time as this is, in our remaining Armies. If God will not withdraw his anger
the proud helpers stoop under him. Job 9.13. If we will not believe this, God
will make us feel it. Joshua had men of war enough to have comforted
himself in, but he could not, durst not do it.

Joshua fear that this Disaster would give occasion to the proud heathen to
blaspheme the Name of the God of Israel? therefore he says, What will thou do
to thy great Name? And may not we fear the same upon this of our Army? Nay,
do we not know it? how have they heretofore? how often have they as with a
sword pierced the hearts of Gods people, Witness Bristoll and Bolton, etc.
while they say daily in their reproach, Where is now your God? Psalm. 42.10.
Where is now your God? your God to whom you have prayed? before whom you have
wept and fasted? of whom you have made your boast, Where is now your God?
Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear. Open thine eyes, O Lord, and see; and
hear all the words of thine enemies, whereby they reproach the living God.
Isai. 37.13.

(...)
But, O Brethren, shall not all this affect our hearts? shall not all this cause
us to lie in the dust before the Lord, seriously and sincerely humbled under
him and mourning before him? Oh that I could find this disposition in my self
O that I could behold it in you, especially in you Parliament men! O that I
could see your Eyes speaking the sense which your hearts have of this sad hand
of God upon us, even in Tears. Believe it, Right Honorable, it would become
you, nay, it is your duty. O that I might obtain it from you, or obtain it at
the hand of God for you!

O Parliam^nt Tears are precious Tears: would you drop but every man a Tear
this day before the Lord for England, O what a Balm might it be for this
bleeding Kingdom: I tell you, Brethren, it is more to that great God, before
whom you stand, and whose face you desire to seek this day, to see you
Parliament men, to see you unfeinedly judging your selves, sitting in the dust
at his feet, giving him glory in all his righteous dealings with you; Mourning
under this frown that he has cast upon you, it is more to God to see you
doing this, then to see some thousands of others in such a Posture. Are not you
as all the Tribes of England? is not all England epitomized, contracted in you?
If you be humbled, All England is humbled, virtually, eminently. If Joshua and
the Elders be humbled, it is as if all Israel were humbled; if Rehoboam and the
Princes of Judah be humbled, it is as if all Judah had been humbled. God will
grant some deliverance, and things shall go well in Judah, 2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7,
12.

It has often been the Prayer of some of your Remembrancers at the throne of
Grace, upon our days of Humiliation: that whatever God do with private
Congregations: yet that in this place and upon your hearts there might be a
mighty Presence and Effusion of the spirit of Humiliation; the same is my
desire and prayer this day: O that God would humble us all, every soul of us:
but if not all, if there be any of us whom God for our personal sins will
leave to the hardness and dedolency of our hearts this day; yet the Lord be
merciful unto you, and unto us all in you; That your hearts may be as Gideons
fleece moystened with a dew from Heaven, though we round about you should be
dry, (which yet to us would be exceeding sad.) But somewhat it would comfort us
concerning England, would the Lord please to humble you. Now the Lord humble
you: The Lord affect your hearts with his dealing: the Lord cast you down at
his feet with Joshua; that with a hand of mercy he may lift you up as he did
Joshua, and say, Arise, wherefore lie thou upon thy face?

Thirdly, for Reproof. But if there be any Man here (especially any Parliament
man) to whom it were more fit to say as the Master of the ship did to Jonah. Up
sleeper, and call upon thy God, if so be that God will think on us, that we
perish not: then as here God to Joshua; Arise, wherefore lie thou upon thy
face? If there be any man here that upon such a Day and such an Occasion as
this is, has an unstirred and unawakened heart within him. (And I fear there
are too many such, I seldom come in a Fast into any Congregation where it is
discernable by the face and garb of the Assembly, that they are in a duty of
Fasting and Mourning. Our monthly Fasts are degenerated into most loathsome
Formalities, into less then a formality, less then an outside, then an
appearance of Fasting and Mourning. But) that Man that can be so this day has
a heart more Atheistical then the very Heathens had. Inops Senatus auxilii
humani ad Deos populum and vota convertit, lussi cum conjugibus ac liberis
supplicatum ire pacemque exposcere ^^cum: omnia delubra imp^ent, Stratae passim
Matres crinib^ Templa verrentes veniam irarum coelestium exposcunt. Live. lib. 3.
He that reads the Roman Story will find how they upon such like occasions as
is this day presented unto us, kept solemn days of Supplications, and with
what throngs of men, women, and children their Temples were filled! how sad and
mournful their demeanor was! how their Ladies and Matrons rolled themselves
in the dust and swept the very pavements of their Idoll-Temples with the hair
of their heads! o how far are many amongst us from any such affection,
consternation? I cannot but fear that there is a great deal more Atheism,
and a great deal less sense Irarum Coelestium, of the Anger of a God against
us in the Calamities now lying upon us, then was in those very Heathens. O that
their Days of Supplication may never rise up in Judgment against ours to
condemn them! The Lord humble every Soul of us that has not yet been
humbled: (Even this alone is sufficient Cause why we should now be humbled,
because in all our Days of Humiliation we have been unhumbled hitherto many of
us:) The Lord so humble every one of us by the mighty working of his own
blessed Spirit, that he may please to take notice of his own work in us as he
did here in Joshua, and say, Arise, wherefore lie thou upon thy face?

I have done with That which God took notice of in Joshua. But before I pass
to That which God gave notice of to Joshua. Let me entreat you to take notice
of something in God, from God; taking notice of something in Joshua, ^
and that is Gods tender and gracious regard to a humbled mourning heart.

No sooner does Joshua here humble himself but God presently takes notice of
him, speaks comfortably to him. Joshua, Get thee up, wherefore lie thou upon
thy face? Lord what is man that thou art thus mindful of him? that no sooner
can a poor sinner in humbleness of soul cast himself to the earth, but the
great God reaches his hand from Heaven to raise him up again. Lord what is
man that thou should thus magnify him, and set thine heart upon him? If the
glorious Majesty of our God abase himself to behold the things that are done
in Heaven. Psalm. 113.6. o then what a Condescension is it in our God to behold
a Man, a worm abased upon earth. But Joshua was no ordinary man. Joshua was a
Saint, a Friend, a Son of God. A man of such rare and matchless Piety as in
all the thousands of Israel, nay, in all the world, there was scarce such
another man. But One that we read of (if One) in his Days that was to be
compared to him. No wonder if when such a man be humbled God takes notice of
him. But will God regard the Humiliations of other Men, Men that are not of
such rare and extraordinary holiness, when they are humbled will God take
notice of them? I will give you but two instances more to consider of, for the
proof and illustration of this point, and judge by them.

My first Instance is of Rehoboam, who certainly was none of the best men: nay,
as far as we can take his Character by all that Scripture speaks of him
first and last, he was a very bad man. For it is said of him in the 2 Chronicles.
12.1. that he forsook the Law of the Lord, he and all Israel with him. And if
you would know what was the degree and measure of their wickedness, how far
he and his people had forsaken the Law of the Lord; look in 1 Kings 14.22, 23,
24. and read what their wickedness was. And Judah did evil in the sight of
the Lord, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they had
committed, above all that their fathers had done. For they also built them high
places, and images, and groves on every high hill, and under every green tree.
And there were also Sodomites in the land, and they did according to all the
abominations of the nations which the Lord cast out before the Children of
Israel. These sins within a very few years after Rehoboams coming to the
Crown had made them ripe for the judgment of the sword: for so 2 Chronicles. 12.2.
In the fifth year of Rehoboam King of Judah, Shishak king of Egypt came up
against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed against the Lord. The terror
of this invasion is such as Rehoboam and his Princes cannot but humble
themselves, Whereupon the Princes of Israel, and the King humbled themselves,
and they said, The Lord is righteous. ver. 6. Now does the Lord despise their
Humiliations, because they had been an idolatrous, unclean, wretched people?
No read and wonder at the goodness of our God toward humbled sinners, ver.
7. And when the Lord saw that they humbled themselves; (so then God took
notice of this even in these) the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying,
They have humbled themselves, therefore I will not destroy them, but I will
give them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured out upon
Jerusalem, by the hand of Shishak. And because God would have us take good
notice of this his respect unto their Humiliations, the holy Ghost mentions it
again in the 12. verse. And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the Lord
turned away from him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in
Judah things went well. God did not only deliver him out of his present danger,
but prospered all the affairs of his Kingdom in his hand; and yet certainly
he (even after this his Humiliation) none of the best men, as we may collect
from that Censure which after this the Lord leaves of him. ver. 14. And he did
evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord.

My next Instance shall be of a Man who was so far from having any thing of
Piety at all in him, that he was a man of the most transcendent Impiety that
ever any (almost) was. King Ahab is the man: Do but remember what the holy
Ghost says of him. It is said 1 Kings 16.30. That Ahab did evil in the sight
of the Lord, above all that were before him, and ver. 33. he did more to
provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger, then all the Kings of Israel that were
before him. and in 1 Kings 21.25. But there was none like to Ahab, etc. None of
all that went before him or came after him like to him in wickedness. There
were twenty Kings in Israel from the time that the ten Tribes revolted from the
house of David, to the time that God removed them out of his sight. Of these
twenty Kings there was only One good, Jehu. And yet his Integrity may be
doubted too. But the other nineteen were all wicked, and yet not One among them
all to be compared to Ahab. But there was none like unto Ahab. An Oppressor he
was, and a murderer, and an idolater, and a persecuter of that holy Truth
which God had plentifully revealed to him by his Prophets, and powerfully
confirmed to him by miracles, and mercifully sought to endeare to him by many
gracious deliverances. There were not such Prophets in Israel in any Kings
days as were in his: Nor such miracles wrought as in his: Nor had any King
more glorious Victories and Deliverances, and Providence manifested toward
him then he had: and therefore in all likelihood he was an obstinate sinner,
and as some think very near the sin against the holy Ghost. This is that King
Ahab against whom God by his servant Elijah thunders dreadful things, 1 Kings
21.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. The very hearing whereof something breaks the pride of
his heart, ver. 27. And it came to pass that when Ahab heard those words, he
rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly. But will God regard it? cares God for Ahab? Truly
we should have been ready to think, that if such a wretch as Ahab should not
only have rent his clothes, but have rent his flesh, his heart: should he not
only have fasted, but have starved, not only have shed Tears, but Blood; all
this should never have prevailed with God to relent any thing at all toward
him; or reverse one Tittle of the wrath denounced against him, we would have
thought so; had not God left the contrary upon record in his holy word; to
teach us, That his thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his ways as our
ways. Therefore the word of the Lord came to Elijah saying, See thou how
Ahab humbles himself before me? because Ahab humbles himself before me, I
will not bring the evil in his days. Let all the earth now keep silence
before the Lord; and after so manifest a proof of Gods regard to Humiliation,
even in an Ahab, let sinful dust and ashes never murmr more, nor dare to
say, What profit is it that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?
Mal. 3.14.

England that has more Strugglings in her womb then Rebekah had, say as she,
If it be thus, why am I thus? If it be thus, as we have heard, that God does
vouchsafe so gracious a tender regard unto the Humiliations of his people, Why
am I thus? Why am I yet after so many Days of monthly, and other occasional
Humiliations, a Stage of war, a Field of Blood? Has God forgotten to be
gracious? or has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Is his Mercy clean
gone, or does his Promise fail for evermore? Has not the Lord promised 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my People, which is called by my Name, shall humble themselves,
and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their evil ways, then will I
hear from Heaven, and I will forgive their sin, and I will heal their Land.
And again Levit. 26.42, 43. etc. If they shall confess their iniquity, and
the iniquity of their forefathers, etc. and if then their uncircumcised heart
be humbled, and they then accept the punishment of their iniquity, then will I
remember the land. Now what shall we say? has God forgotten to be gracious?
was God gracious not only to Joshua and the Elders when they humbled
themselves; but to Rehoboam and his Princes when they humbled themselves: Nay,
even to Ahab when he humbled himself; and will not the Lord be gracious unto
us? Has God promised that if his people humble themselves, and pray, and seek
his face, he will forgive, and heal, and does his Promise now fail? God
forbid we should thus think or speak! the failing is on our part, not on
Gods: we fail in that which God has made these Promises; and usually bears
this Tender regard unto: We are not humbled, we are not humbled; we are not
humbled. After two years of extraordinary judgments, and three years of
extraordinary Means and Days of Humiliation, we remain an unhumbled people:
where can we find the Evidences of such a Humiliation as was here in Joshua?
or such as was in Rehoboam? or such as was in Ahab? or such as was in Nineveh?
Oh England, thou have destroyed thy self, thou have destroyed thy self, even
with a double destruction: Thou have destroyed thy self Once by thy sins,
thy ancient idolatries and persecutions: Thy late Apostacies, Superstitions,
Oppositions to the Power of godliness, hating to be reformed, etc. these have
called the destroying sword, upon thee. Thou have destroyed thy self by these
a first time. And a second time thou have destroyed thy self by thy
unhumblednesse and impenitencie under the present judgment; Thy sins began,
thy not being humbled perfects thy destruction. I am as confident as confidence
it self can make me (for I have Scripture for it) that if England were
humbled, England should be healed. God would say unto his sword that now
devoures, Return unto thy place, Rest and be still. Nay, though All England
were not humbled, yet if King and Parliament were but humbled, the Breach
between King and Parliament (yea between God and the King, between God and the
Kingdom) should be healed. God would be reconciled to King, Parliament, and
Kingdom, and God would reconcile King, Parliament and Kingdom one unto
another, if King and Parliament were but humbled: and things should yet go
well in England. That Example of Rehoboam and the Princes of Judah induces me
thus to think: Nay, if the Parliament were but humbled, if you Lords and
Gentlemen were but humbled, I durst promise that things should yet go well in
England. God would prosper your Counsels, your Armies, things should succeed in
all according to your mind, if you were humbled according to the mind of God.
This sad blow whereby God has called you to his foot this day (even in your
own understandings) speaks thus much, that God would have you, even you be
more humbled then yet you have been; The Lord sanctify it, and bless it, that
it may produce such and such a measure of Humiliation in you, and in us all, as
that for time to come our gracious God be no more enforced to use such severe
ways to break our hearts and humble us.

I come now to that which God gave notice of to Joshua, in these words, Israel
has sinned, and has also transgressed my Covenant: wherein you may please to
consider, first, the thing that God gives Joshua notice of. Secondly, the
Manner, how God gives Joshua notice of it.

The thing that God gives Joshua notice of is Sin: Haec Thesis Israel
deliquit sic quasi per gradus amplificatur graviter deliquit Israel, nam quod
nuper jussera^no^ observarant, feceru^t enim nonnullas reliquas res quas
perdidisse oportuit, and quod gravius est non reliquat modo fecerunt, sed sibi
usurparint, tum quod majus est flagitiu^ surtine usurparunt ad haec me^daciis
insuper ^allere conati sunt. Denique quod maloru^ est extremu^ obsirmarunt
animu^ rebus subtractis in suum suppellectilem relatis. Mas. in loc.
Israel had sinned. The Manner of Gods giving Joshua notice of it, is first by
way of gradation. God first in the general tells him, Israel has sinned. Then
secondly, descends a little nearer to the Nature of the sin, And they have
also transgressed my Covenant: And then thirdly instances the particular sin,
And they have taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen. Then fourthly
follow the aggravations of the sin, And they have dissembled also, and they
have put it even amongst their own Stuff.

Or, if you please, you may consider in the words: 1 Gods Charge against
Israel: and 2 the Amplification of it. The Charge it self is this, Israel has
sinned. The Amplification is in several particulars. First, their sin was a
breach of Covenant, They have also transgressed my Covenant. Secondly, this
breach of Covenant was in an accursed thing, For they have taken of the
accursed thing. Thirdly, this breach of Covenant in the accursed thing it was a
Theft, And they have also stolen. Fourthly, they have added Lying to their
Theft, They have also dissembled. Fifthly, they have so far hardened
themselves in their sin that they think I will never call them to account
for it; And they have put it even among their own stuff.

Several Observations may these words afford us, as,

There is no sin so secretly committed, nor so closely carried, but God sees
and knows it.

Not one eye among the hundred thousands of Israel had discovered Achans Theft,
the conveyance was so close; yet the eye of God saw it. darkness of Night, no
shadow of Death: Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. ad v. 14.
no depth of hell, or of the deceitful heart of Man can cover any thing from
the All-seeing eye of God. The darkness and the light to him are both alike.
Psalm. 139.12. Hell and destruction are before the Lord: how much more then the
hearts of the sons of men? (...). Paten^ia, Beza.
Prove. 15.11. There is not any Creature that is not manifest in his sight.
Aperta. Vulg. Manifesta. Tre^. Resupinata. Er. Per medium dissecta. Parcus. Per
Anatomia^ dissecta. Illy^^.
But all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to
do. Heb. 4.13. The smoothest closest hypocrite does but dance in a Net; he may
deceive himself, God he cannot deceive. Our secret sins are in the light of
his countenance. Psalm. 90.8.

consider this, this day, how might it humble us? how would it fill every heart
with trembling and every face with shame, to consider that the God with whom we
have t is day to do knows all our sins, our secret sins, our darkness
sins, our midnight sins, our Closet sins, our Curtain sins, our Bosom
sins; All things are naked and open to this ^od: would we seriously consider
this, how would it help to humble us for sins past?

And would we remember this, how might it preserve us from sinning for time to
come, could we when temptations are upon us, remember, That when we have
sinned, we cannot hide it from the righteous God? how would it make us Stand in
awe, and not sin? Could men find a veil to cast before the Eyes of God, a
Mask to blind the All-seeing Eye of God, a Curtain that might hide them from
the sight of God; Then might they sin without fear. But if we can be no
where, nor do nothing but before Gods All-seeing eye; then again, I say, Stand
in awe, and sin not. The Heathen could say, Maxima debetur pueris reverentia
siquid turpe paras. -- The presence of a child should keep a man from
filthiness. There are some sins which he that has not put off Man and
native modesty, would be loath the eye of a Child of five years old should
see him in them. Might not the sight and knowledge of the great God be a more
powerful means of Restraint, if men would remember it. That Man that can
think thus, If I commit this sin, The great God, The Righteous Judge of all
the world will see and know it; and yet can dare to sin: That man is more
impudent in sinning then was Absalom when he spread a Tent upon the Top of the
house, and went in into his Fathers wives in the sight of all Israel and of the
Sun.

remembrance of this Truth be from that detestable and too too common sin of
Hypocrisy. O the thoughts of this, That there is no sin so secret or close,
but God can and will find it out! o how would it make us in all Simplicity and
Godly Sincerity, study to approve our selves unto God. Abhorring to do Gods
work for our own ends, as Jehu did. For God will find it out, though men
cannot; and will charge it home, which is the next thing you may observe out of
this part of the Text.

That where God comes once to charge sin, Vo^ula (...) etiam quae sapi^s hoc
loco iteratur, auxeses continuas significat, ut Hebraeis quoque videtur.
Masius. ad loc. Exaggerat causam quae poterat levis videri. Pellicanus. Cri^.
en exaggerat particula (...) quae toties repetitur. Calv.
he will charge it home in all the degrees and aggravations of it. So here,
Israel has sinned, and which is worse, they have transgressed my Covenant: and
yet worse, they have even taken of the accursed thing: and worser yet, they
have also stolen: and worse still, they have also dissembled, and they have
put it even among the Stuff. According to this form God draws up a Charge
and Indictment against David, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand
of Saul, And I gave thee thy Masters house, and thy Masters wives into thy
bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, and if that
had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such
things. Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil
in his sight? Thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with the sword: and have taken
his wife to be thy wife, and have slain him with the sword of the children of
Ammon. How sorely does God charge this sin upon his Dearest Favorite, King
David in the depth of its bloody Horror, twice telling him, Thou have killed,
Thou have slain. In the Height of its Rebellion against God, Thou have despised
the Commandment of the Lord. In the fullness of that violence it offered to
all the mercies of God. I anointed thee, and I delivered thee, and I gave thee;
and wherefore have thou despised, etc? It may be long ere God comes to make
this charge; But when he does he will do it to purpose, Psalm. 50 21. These
things have thou done, and I kept silence: and thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins
in order before thee.

if it be possible, to prevent Gods charging sin upon us; which certainly if
it be so full cannot but be very dreadful. Now it is possible, There is a way
whereby we may prevent it, and that is by charging our sins home upon our
selves. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord,
1 Cor. 11.32. So if we would accuse our selves, indite our selves, we should
not be accused, indicted, of the Lord; if we would charge sin upon our selves,
God would not charge our sins upon us; if we would remember them, God would
forget them; if we would set them this day before our faces, God would cast
them this day behind his back: Therefore let us accuse, indite, charge, jud e
our selves, that we may be cleared, acquitted, released, absolved of the Lord.

But to come to something that we may fix upon, Israel has sinned, says God:
both rendering the Reason why Israel was smitten, and directing Joshua to what
he would have done. Israel has sinned. Whence observe,

That God would have his People, in all the Disasters that befall their Armies,
take notice of their own sins.

Up, Joshua, wherefore lie thou upon thy face? What do thou weeping and
breaking thy heart? There is other work for thee to do: Israel has sinned,
go find out that.

You know this was that which God instructed his people in long before: that
nothing should ever cause their Armies to miscarry but their own sins, so
Levit. 26.14, 17. If you will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
Commandments, I will set my face against you, and you shall be slain before
your enemies: and ver. 36. upon them that are left alive of you, I will send a
faintness into their hearts in the land of their enemies, and the sound of a
shaken leaf shall chase them etc. so Deuteronomy. 28.15, 25. If thou will not hearken
to the voice of the Lord thy God, to do all that I command thee, the Lord will
cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies, thou shall go out one way
against them, and flee seven ways before them. And in all experience the
people of Israel found it so; They never were worsted in their battles, but
when they had sinned against their God. Israel from the time of their coming
up out of Egypt had been but once put to the worse before their enemies, till
this Time: and the Story of that you have Numb. 14. ult. The Amalekites came
down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in the hill, and smote them and
discomfited them even unto Hormah. But the reason of this you may collect from
the former verses, Israel had sinned. And all along the whole Story of the
Bible you shall constantly find it thus, when Israel was faithful with their
God, they ruled with their God and prospered in their wars whithersoever they
went. Nay, even Balaam himself could tell, that while Israel kept themselves
from sin, God would keep them from mischief in their Army. The Devil himself
should not hurt them. Numb. 23.21, 23. He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob,
nor has he seen perverseness in Israel. Vide Drus. ad diff loc Numer. and
Ainsworth ad locum, and Weems upon the Moral Law. part. 1.
The true meaning of which Scripture (what ever sense the Antinomians would put
upon it in favor of their opinion, That God sees no sin in his people) is
this. That at this time when Balaak hired Balaam to curse Jacob and defy
Israel, there was no Peccatum flagrans, no sin lying upon the Congregation
flaming in the eye of God, or stinking in his Nostrils, that might provoke his
wrath against them, or cause him to suffer any calamity to befall them:
therefore ver. 23. says he, Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob,
neither is there any Divination against Israel. No, it is in vain for men and
devils to plot mischief against the Armies of Gods people, when there is no
sin among them to pull that mischief upon them. All our Disasters of this kind
they are the fruits of our own sins, and God would have us look upon them as
so: God would have his people in the Disasters that befall their Armies to take
notice of their own sins. And that,

Atheism, and Apostasy from God: from thinking either that there is no God, or
that the God whom they have commended their cause unto is a God that cannot,
will not succor them; a thing that the Nature of man is very subject to; you
may remember what is said of King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.23. Ahaz sacrificed to the
Gods of Damascus which smote him, and said, because the Gods of the Kings of
Syria help them, therefore I will sacrifice unto their Gods, that they may
help me also. There is a Root of this Atheism and Impiety in the heart of
every man. And such as God does not teach to read the cause of their defeats
in themselves, are ready to think the enemies cause, Religion, God to be the
better. Now that his people may be preserved from this, God will have them know
that their sin is the cause of their Disasters.

And secondly, God will have them take notice of this, that they may with the
more quietness submit to these dispensations of God, and say, The Lord is
righteous. That they may not murmr, repine, nor be too querulous at such a
time as this: therefore the Lord says to us, as it is Ier. 4.18. Thy way and
thy doings have procured this unto thee, this is thy wickedness: and as it is
again Ezekiel. 14.23. Ye shall know that I have not done without cause all this
that I have done, says the Lord. That our hearts and mouths may justify God,
God will have us know that our sins are the cause of our Disasters. It is not
enough to Take notice of the stroke and Mourn for that: But we must Take
notice of the sin, and mourn for that. Up, Joshua, wherefore lie thou upon
thy face? Israel has sinned.

our God have us in all the Disasters that befall our Armies take notice of our
own sins? Ah Lord! when did we do thus? Is this the first time that God
has frowned upon our Armies? No, no: who has not heard of the disappointment
at the Vises, where a glorious victory slipped out of our hands when we were
almost possessed of it. The loss of Bristoll, The raising of the Siege at
Newarke. I know the mention of these things may expose us to the scorn of our
enemies; And let them scorn us, so we may give glory to our God. But have we
in these disasters taken notice of our sins as the Causes of them? Nothing
less. Men that are not led by Principles of Judgment and Conscience, but by
success; that do not own the cause for it self, they upon such Providence
as these are ready to desert it, and take over to the enemies. And others are
ready to impute it to Cowardice or carelessness, or falsehood or treachery, to
something or other in those who are the instruments of managing the business,
as if there were not those sins among us that might provoke the Lord to
cross the endeavors of the most able and faithful Instruments, as if we
could all say with that Roman Emperor, Antoninus Philosophus: ut refert
^u^at. Gallic^n A^^dro Gassio.
Non sic Deos coluimus, aut sic vivimus, ut ille nos vinceret. We have not so
served God, nor do we so live as that such an enemy should overcome us. We
still cry out of Treachery, Treachery, and accuse others. But O how few are the
men that upon such occasions as these enter into their Chambers, and there
between God and their souls inquire and say, What have I done?

Vt nemo in sese tentat descendere, Nemo? Pecl.
The Lord hearkened and heard, but no man spoke aright. No man repented him of
his evil deeds, saying, What have I done? There is indeed an opinion, That
Believers, the Children of God ought not to think that their sins have any
influence into the Judgments that are upon a people. A soul perverting, a
Land destroying opinion it is: The Lord preserve us from it. I am sure David
was not of this opinion: Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, says
David, 2 Samuel 24. when Israel was consumed by the Pestilence, and the Spirit
says expressly 2 Chronicles. 32.25. That for the sin of Hezekiah, and for the
pride of his heart came wrath upon him and upon all Jerusalem* And yet David
was a Believer and a Child of God. Hezekiah was a Believer and a Child of God.
If Hezekiah to his former pride that brought wrath upon Jerusalem, had added
this further pride to think that his sin had not at all provoked that wrath,
because He was a Believer, a justified Person, o what a provocation would that
have been; The Lord deliver all his people from such pride of heart: it is too
bad out of a slightness and carelessness of spirit not to take notice of our
sins in our Disasters: But when this proceeds from an opinion, from a fixed
Principle of Judgment and Reason. This makes it much worse.

Is it the will of God that his people should take notice of their sins in
the disasters of their armies? Then I beseech you, let us labor to do this
will of God: and as before I called you to take notice of the Blow, to be
sensible of that, so let me now call you to take notice of the sin, and the
Lord help us that we may be sensible of that.

The Lord speaks to us in this Disaster as he did here to Joshua: Israel has
sinned. But who shall give us a particular discovery of the sin or sins
that are the cause of this Disaster? we cannot go and as Joshua did here, or
as Saul did, 1 Samuel 14.38. cast the lot that we may know and see where this
sin has been. Who is the prudent man that knows this, and who is he to
whom the mouth of the Lord has spoken, that he may declare it, for what the
land perishes? Jer. 9.12. Oh that we could discover it. It is a Discovery that
might more advantage England then the Discovery of as much Treasure as is in
both the Indies. It might be the saving of the rest of our Armies, of the
Cause, and therein of All. What may we think the sin, the cause of this
Disaster to be? I will tell you what we may not think it to be. We may not, we
must not think that there is sin in the foundation of the Action. That the
Ground and cause of the war is unjust and sinful, because of this Disaster:
no more then Joshua's here, or the Benjamites, Judge. 20. no though God should
frown yet further upon us, and break us with breach upon breach. We must yet
say as the Church, Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19. All this is come upon us; yet have we
not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant. Our heart is not turned
back: neither have our steps declined from thy way. Though thou have sore
broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of Death.
Never repent that we have imbarqued our selves in the quarrel; for the sin
lies not in the cause it self. But where then? I profess sincerely I cannot
tell you where: if I could I durst not be so unfaithful to God, to your
souls, to the Kingdom, as to conceal it: All that I can say is, That as God
in this his Providence has frowned upon not only our Armies, but the
Parliament, the City, and the whole well-affected Party both Ministers and
People, so All have sinned: and possibly all our sins have an influence into
this calamity that is now upon us. And therefore let All of us, Parliament Men,
Commanders, Soldiers, Citizens, Ministers, People, All of us, o let us search
our selves, and enquire in our several Orbs and Activities what our ways
have been, that so, if possible, we may find out what and where this sin is.

There is a spirit in man which is as the Candle of the Lord searching the
innermost parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27. that consulted with will discover
hidden things. Now therefore every one of you consult your own spirits.

And first, you that are Members of the Honorable Houses of Parliament (for I
must speak to you; God and your selves have called me hither this day, to what
end if not to speak to you.) Oh how do I fear least some sins of yours may
have a great influence into this Disaster that is now upon us; This I am sure
of, Parliament sins, and sins of Parliament men are great Provocations.
Look how much honor God has put upon every One of you singly more then upon
others of your Rank that are not Members of this Honorable Body; and look
how much more honor God has put upon you jointly as a Parliament more then
upon other Parliaments, so much the greater is your Engagement unto God; and if
you sin it is so much the greater Provocation: o that you would ever remember
it, Was there ever Parliament that had so many Prayers, Deliverances, Wonders
waiting upon it as you? Was there ever Parliament that had God so near unto
them in all things? o such a Parliament should as ( Caesar said sometimes of
his wife) be free not only a culpa, sed and a suspitione. In the Name of Jesus
Christ, whose Minister I am, and to whom I must give account of the discharge
of this days service, I beseech you (Right Honorable) let this hand of God,
(under which you are met to humble your selves this day,) cause every one of
you seriously and impartially to review your ways (not as men but as
Parliament Men) commune every one with your own hearts and say, What have I
done? How have I discharged the trust that God and man have committed to me? o
remember God and man have entrusted you with that which is dearest to them
both. God has entrusted you with his Gospel, with his Glory, with the
affairs of the Kingdom of his Son, with the welfare of that Church which he
has purchased with his own Blood. Men have entrusted you with their Estates,
Liberties, Lives: o that these things were written upon the walls of the Houses
where you daily sit: as over the gate of the Senate house in Rome was written,
Ne quid Respublica detrimenti capiat. Let the Commonwealth receive no damage.
But your care must be not only for Commonwealth, but for the Church and
Religion to; both are committed to your Trust. But o that you would inquire
this day how you have discharged this Trust. Every man reflect upon himself
and say, Am I the man that have been cold and lukewarm in matters of Religion,
that have retarded businesses of Reformation. That have said, It is not yet
time to Build the Lords house. If we settle any thing in matters of Religion,
we shall be loosers by it? Am I the man that am afraid to hear of Government
or Discipline, lest it should give check to some lust or opinion of mine? Am I
the man that have made use of the Power and Interest God has given me in
Parliament, to turn aside the right of a man, to subvert a man in his cause;
to oppress the righteous cause of an enemy, or advance the unrighteous cause
of a friend: To obstruct or pervert that course of strict and impartial
Justice, which God and man call for the execution of? Am I the man that have
driven my own designs in public service; that have made it my work to seek
great things for my self, at such a time as this, when God seems to be taking
down what he had built up, and plucking up what he had planted, and should
thou seek great things for thy self? Jer. 45. Am I the man, etc? Pardon me,
Beloved, if I mention these particulars: your very friends that Love you,
Honor you, Pray for you, that have it in their hearts to live and to dye with
you, cannot but mourn to see your proceedings in Religion and Justice so
fore-slowed, though where the fault is, we know not o that you would enquire
among your selves this day. Again and again in the bowels of Jesus Christ, I
humbly beseech you, Search, Search and try your ways. o if there should be any
corruption, any perverseness, any rottenness, any selfe-end, any ungodly
design in any of you, God will search it out, if you will not: your sin will
find out you, if you will not find out it. I say unto you from God as Moses did
to those of Israel. Numb. 32.23. Be sure your sin will find you out. And
remember, I beseech you, what the Spirit of God says, Eccles. 9.18. Wisdom
is better then weapons of war, but one sinner destroys much good. The
Wisdom of a Parliament is better then the weapons of an Army, and may do
much good; but one sinner may destroy it all, and may make the Counsels of a
Parliament, and the weapons of war in the hand of the gallantest Army in the
world miscarry. Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the
accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the Congregation of Israel? and that man
perished not alone in his iniquity. Josh. 22.20. o Better thou had never
known Parliament, then to sit in Parliament, and by thy sin destroy all the
good that a Poor Bleeding Kingdom, that THREE Poor Bleeding Kingdoms might
reap by it.

Were I to speak to our Soldiery this day, I would be as earnest with them
that they would search themselves. I would turn them to that Scripture Deuteronomy.
23.9. When thine host goes forth against thine enemy, then keep thee from
every wicked thing. For (ver. 14.) the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy
Camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee: therefore
shall thy camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away
from thee. I would ask our Soldiers how they have kept this Commandment of
the Lord. I would say to them as the Prophet Oded did to the Army of Israel: 2 Chronicles. 28.10. Are there not with you even with you sins against the Lord your
God. Nay, I would dare to say, There are. And therefore in the Name of Jesus
Christ would charge them every one to consult their own Consciences, and say,
What have I done? Is it my drunkenness, or my blasphemy, my uncleanness, my
rapine, my violence, my oppressing the Godly and well-affected party, for whom
I pretend to fight: (these Pests our Armies are too full of) is it my etc. that
is the cause of this Displeasure, this disuster?

Yea, I would speak to our Commanders, and bid them say to their own hearts,
Is it my doing the work of the Lord negligently, Jer. 48.10. is it my height
of spirit, my ambition, my standing upon Punctilio's, my preferring my own
interest and honor before the good of an Army, of a Kingdom, etc. o that men
of brave Heroicke spirits, Christians should not be able to deny themselves in
point of honor or interest, (...). Herodot. in Vran.
or personal wrong or difference, for a Public good, as much as heathens. How
memorable is that of Themistocles and Aristides, who forgetting old grudges and
injuries could in a time of common danger join their Counsels and forces
together against the common enemy. It is time now, says Aristides, to lay by
other contentions, and contend now who should do most good to his Native
Country. But of all, the spirit of that Roman Fabius justly called Maximus was
most admirable, who being advanced to a place of highest dignity and command,
to be Dictator of the City of Rome, (an office of absolute and unlimited Power)
met with the most unworthy and undeserved affronts and discouragements, and
overcame them with the greatest constancy to his employments and counsels and
faithfulness to his Cause and country that ever (almost) man did. Live li. 2^.
c. 18.
Minutius the master of the horse (the next man in command to himself,) first
clancularly traducing him in the army for a heavy slothful man, a man of no
courage or activity, only because he was not so precipitate and rash to put all
to a push as he would have him. Cap. 14.
Then after daring publicly in the head of the Army to declaime against him,
and make a speech tending to no other end but to put the army into a mutiny. In
Rome the people are filled with prejudice against him by letters and rumors
from the Army. Metilius one of the Tribunes of the people makes a bitter
invective against him in a solemn and public audience. Cap. 25.
The Senate (the Parliament as it were) of Rome whereof himself was a member
will scarce hear him with patience make his own defense. In conclusion things
are brought to that pass, that the Dictator is tantum non, put out of office.
But contrary to all former President they make a Law that Minutius shall have
equal command with him, Cap. 27.
and the supreme command to be equally shared between them both. Accordingly
the Legions are divided, Fabius has one half and Minutius the other horse and
foot. Some man (nay, almost any man) would have flung down his sword,
abandoned the service, let such an indiscreet, such an ingrate people sink or
swim. But says the Historian, qua animi gravitate criminantes se ad populum
tulerat eadem and populi in se saevientis injuriam tulit. Nay, within a little
while after when Minutius and the party under his command had like to have been
all cut off by Hannibal, he (not listening to what Envy, or what Revenge might
dictate to him) came in to their relief presently, and not only rescued them,
but by that courtesy reduced Minutius to his obedience again; the man is as
willing to resign his command as ever he was ambitious to take it up. Truly
these glorious sparklings of something humano majus, even in heathens, of
self-denial, of faithfulness, of Zeal for a public good, swallowing up all
other interests of Faction, Honor, Priority, Power. These things even in
heathens, make me blush, wonder, tremble. Si faciunt hoc Ethnici ut fama sua
nomen extendant, Dan.
quid agendum est Christianis ut in coelesti sibi gloria seeds acquirant? If
Heathens will do thus much for a Bubble of vainglory upon Earth: what should
Christians do for a Crown of Glory in Heaven?

Or were I to speak this day to the Ministry of England that are rightly
affected to the glory of God and the Public good: I would entreat them to
consider with me, whether we may not fear that some of our former sins in the
matter of Gods Day and Worship may at this time come in remembrance before the
Lord (especially seeing we have been no more humbled for them?) and whether our
present divisions and dissentions, and the undue managing of them may not have
an influence into our present calamities? I remember in the beginning of the
first Reformation there fell an unhappy difference between Luther and
Zuinglius, and their followers, which was managed with a great deal of
bitterness, and remains to this day uncomposed. And both parties smarted
under the sword of the common enemy the longer, it is probable for their
disagreement among themselves. The Lord grant it fall not out so to us. O that
we could all of us both Ministers and people remember that vehement obtestation
of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment. Oh that at least the advantage that redounds
to our enemies and disadvantage to our selves from these our differences, might
compose them for us. And that we would imitate Basil and Eusebius, who
perceiving the common adversary the Arrians, to improve a difference which was
between them to the prejudice of the Orthodox Churches, were soon reconciled:
and employed their united strengths against those enemies. But I digress too
far: to return therefore to my present Auditory.

You that stand here before the Lord this day (Men and Brethren) I beseech you
every one ask your own Consciences, and say, What have I done? what sin is
it of mine that has awakened this hand of God against us?

Is it my unsensiblenesse of the indignation of the Lord in this civil
destructive war? Is it my pride, my luxury, my eating flesh, my drinking
wine, my clothing my self with scarlet, my walking with an outstretched neck
at such a time as this, when the Lord calls to weeping, and mourning, and
baldness, and girding with sackcloth every day? Believe it, brethren, it is a
great provocation in the eyes of our God to behold so much bravery and
joviality as he sees every day in this great City at such a time as this, when
he is making his sword drunk with the blood of our slain. There are three
Texts of Scripture, Oh that all the children of pride and vanity would but
study them, Ezekiel. 21.9.10. A sword, a sword it is sharpened, and also
fourbished. It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is fourbished, that it
may glitter: should we then make mirth? Isai. 22.12, 13. And in that day did
the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and to mourning, and to baldness and to
girding with sackcloth. And behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and
killing sheep, eating flesh, and dinking wine. Isai. 3.16-25, 26. Moreover, the
Lord says, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with
stretched forth necks, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and
making a tinkling with their feet. Therefore thy men shall fall by the sword
and thy mighty in the war. And her gates shall lament and mourn, and she
being desolate shall sit upon the ground. Little do our Ladies think that
their Gallantry (which that third of Isaiah gives an Inventory of) may make our
mighty men fall in the war, and our strongest Cities sit upon the ground.

But, say again: Is it my trusting to an arm of flesh, my putting confidence
in the Gallantry of our Army (and ah Lord! in this thing, the Lord be merciful
to us, who almost can plead Not guilty) that has made this Arm of flesh to
wither? Is it my neglect of Prayer? Am I the man that when I heard our Army was
in streights; nay, when his Excellency sent to desire Prayers, my wretched
heart would not lift up one Prayer: Nay, if it were to do again, if One Prayer
would save the Army, save the Kingdom, I could not do it? Am I the man that
have with those perverse Israelites despised the pleasant Land, the Land of
desires, as it is Psalm. 106.24. When Israel was in Egypt there was nothing they
desired more then the Land of Canaan; when they were come out of Egypt, and
were upon the borders of that Land, then they despised it, and wished
themselves in Egypt again. o that it were not so with us: It is not long since
a Parliament, an Assembly of Godly Divines, the Reformation of the Church in
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline was the desire of all the well-affected in
the Nation. But now the Parliament -- the Assembly of Divines despised. The
Reformation (which we are now even upon the borders of) in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, despised. Men wish themselves in Egypt again. And had rather be
under Prelaticall Bondage then under a Government most conform to the Word,
and to the Government of other Reformed Churches. No Reformation of Religion
now: now nothing will satisfy some but a Toleration of all Religions and all
Opinions. Church Government, Discipline is to some a fiction, to others Tyranny
and Persecution. Ah Brethren this is a Provocation, and will be a Provocation,
for this God may turn us into the wilderness again.

It were an endless task to enumerate the rest of the particular sins that
possibly the people of this City and this Kingdom may be guilty of: and that
God may have his Eye and Hand upon in this Rebuke that he has given us. And
therefore I must not prosecute this any further. Only again, I beseech you
all, Lords, Gentlemen, Soldiers, Ministers, Men, Women, Every one of you say
to your selves, Sure we have sinned. Israel has sinned; and every one of you
ask your own Consciences, saying, What have I done? And let us all in the
fear of God make it one part of this days Supplications, that God would
please to show us where this sin is, and say with Job, Chap. 10.2. Show us
wherefore thou contendest with us.

And if you please to take but one view more of the Text, God may please to
show us something more then we yet see. Israel has sinned, (says the Lord)
and they have also transgressed my Covenant; wherein the Lord lets Joshua
understand, that as sin in general, so in particular breach of Covenant was
the cause of the disaster, Israel has sinned, and they have also transgressed
my Covenant. Whence I commend this to your observation;

That the violation of the Covenant of God is such a sin as will make Israel
turn their back before their Enemies.

I do not intend a large discourse about violation of Covenant, to set out the
odious and provoking nature of that sin. I shall only briefly do two things.
First, I shall show how a Covenant may be called the Covenant of God. Secondly,
I shall prove that the breach of any Covenant that may be so called, is such a
sin as will make Israel turn their backs before their Enemies. For the first
of these; How a Covenant may be called a Covenant of God. For of such a
Covenant the Text speaks; They have transgressed My Covenant: and so the
Doctrine, the violation of the Covenant of God, etc. Now a Covenant may be said
to be a Covenant of God, two ways. 1 Either per modum obligationis: or 2. Per
modum attestationis.

First, per modum obligationis, when we do directly and immediately engage and
bind our selves unto God, when God is the Party covenanted with, as in our
Sacramental Covenants, and in all Covenants purely Religious both for matter
and manner.

Or else a Covenant may be said to be the Covenant of God, per modum
attestationis, when a Covenant (though made between two equal parties) is yet
made in the Name of God, and in the Sight of God; God is called to be a
witness to it, and an avenger of the Breach of it. So in that Covenant that
Laban made between himself and Jacob. Genesis 31.44. Come let us make a
Covenant, I and thou, and mark what he says after this Covenant, ver. 50. God
is a witness between me and thee: Such a Covenant as this, wherein the
Obligation is unto Man, made in the Name of God, God counts his own, no less
then a Covenant, the Obligation whereof is immediately to himself: so you find
Ezekiel. 17. the Covenant which the King of Judah had made with the King of
Babylon, God calls his Oath and his Covenant, ver. 19. Mine Oath that he has
despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his head. Now the Doctrine comprehends both these, and tells us that the
violation of the Covenant of God, (that is of a Covenant either made directly
and immediately with God; or made with others in the name and in the sight of
God) is such a sin, as will make Israel turn their back before their Enemies.

For the proof of this (which is the second thing I have to do) besides the
Text before us, I shall only bring a Text or two, look in the 78. Psalm. ver.
9, 10. you shall read there, the children of Ephraim being harnessed, and
carrying bows, turned back in the day of battle: They kept not the Covenant
of God. The Children of Ephraim were daring men, courageous men, mighty men of
valor: for so we read of them in Scripture. The children of Ephraim, being
Armed, that is with defensive Arms: it may be as completely armed as that
giant of Gath, that had a helmet of brass, and a shield of brass and greaves
of brass; Armed they were: and carrying bows: furnished with offensive arms
that could eminus ferire, reach their Enemies at the best advantage at
distance. The children of Ephraim being thus armed and carrying bows, turned
back in the day of battle; what ayled thee o Ephraim that thou were afraid?
what ayled thee o Ephraim that thou fleddest backward? They kept not the
Covenant of God. There, there is the reason, had they kept the Covenant of God,
God would have kept them; but they kept not the Covenant of God, and therefore
it was not their Bow nor Harness that could keep them: being armed, and
carrying bows they turned back in the day of Battle: They kept not the
Covenant of God.

So Ezekiel. 17.11. Iehoiakim King of Judah had made a Covenant with the King of
Babylon to be his Tributary, afterward repents him; breaks his Covenant with
the King of Babylon, sends to Egypt for horses and much people, and a mighty
Army. Now says God, shall he prosper? shall he escape that does these things?
shall he break Covenant and be delivered? verse. 15. No: Pharaoh and all his
mighty Army shall do him no good: They shall all fall by the sword, and they
that remain of him shall be scattered toward all winds, ver. 21. His breach
of Covenant shall break his army, were it never so mighty, and make it be as
dust before the winds, So Ier. 34. The Princes and people of Judah had made a
Covenant, (ver. 15.) that at the end of seven years they would every man let
his brother an Hebrew that had bin sold unto him go free, according to the law
of God in that case, Exodus 21.2. Deuteronomy. 15.12. yet afterward they violated this
Covenant, and caused their servants whom they had set free, to return again
to their service: therefore thus says the Lord, ver. 18. I will give the men
that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not performed the words of the
Covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the calfe in twain, and
passed between the parts thereof. I will even give them into the hand of their
Enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life. See the proper
punishment of breach of Covenant, is giving up to the lust and will of
blood-thirsty Enemies.

To these stories recorded in Sacred writ, I shall add but one of latter
times, the memorable story of the famous battle of Varna, ^^ales ^^lefior^.
Chr^^. Carton. Lib. 15.
fought Nov. 10. 1444. between Amarath the sixth, Emperor of the Turks, and
Vladislaus King of Hungary, one of the gallantest Soldiers the Christian
world the^ had: which Vladislaus having made a solemn League or Covenant of
peace, with the Turk, Knolls his Turkish have ^y.
was afterward persuaded by Julian the Popes Legate to violate that League,
and make war upon the borders of the Turkish Territories; whereupon the Turk
rayseth a mighty Army, takes the field: they join battle, the first
Skirmishes seem to promise victory to the Christians; the Turks were even
almost put to flight: when Amurath plucks out of his bosom the writing,
wherein the late League was comprehended, and holding it aloft in his hand,
with eyes cast up to Heaven, says thus; Behold thou crucified Christ, this is
the League thy people in thy name made with me, and now have violated without
cause: If thou be a God, as they say thou art, show thy power, and power out
thy wrath upon this perjured people. Dictum, factum, God did justice upon the
Appeal of an Enemy a Turk, who in his very appeal spoke Blasphemy: yet God
will do him Justice; presently the battle turns, and it prooved a very bloody
fatal day to the Christian Army; the King and many of their chief Commanders
slain, the whole army routed, a great part of that Country lost; nothing the
cause of all this, more then breach of Covenant. The Violation of the Covenant
of God is such a sin as will bring disaster upon any Army under Heaven.

Now to apply this to our selves.

even in this place, Swear a SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT, in a most solemn
and religious manner. I may say to you, as Joshua did unto the people, when
they had renewed their Covenant with God, Joshua 24.27. Behold these stones are
a witness unto you, that you have made a Solemn Covenant with God, as ever
people made. Sure you have not forgotten it. I am sure God has not; God
remembers it, God has remembered it in mercy all this year hitherto: and now
God seems to begin to remember it in Judgment. Me thinks this stroke of God
upon us so near that time Twelve-moneth, wherein we took the Covenant, seems
to speak as if God intended once a year to require an account of this
Covenant at the hand of England. o that we could call our selves to account
this day. The Jews have a proverb, Non est paena super Israelem in qua non
sit unci^ vituli. There is no punishment upon Israel, in which there is not one
ounce of the Golden Calfe, meaning thus; That was such a transgression, as it
is in Gods remembrance, every time he plagues them, and has some influence
into every calamity that falls upon them. In like manner we may say, Non est
poena super Angliam in qua non sit uncia Foederis. We fall under no punishment,
but there is an ounce of our Covenant in it. I beseech you please to review a
little, some of the chief Articles of that Covenant, and see how we have
observed it.

In the first, we engage our selves sincerely, really and constantly to
endeavor the Reformation of Religion in England and Ireland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God, and the
Pattern of the best Reformed Churches. A blessed and glorious work, which as
it has the first place in our Covenant, so challenges and deserves the first
and chief in our hearts. But what has been done in this great work since the
Covenant was taken? It is that God and man enquire after: What has the
Assembly done? what has the Parliament done in the Reformation of Religion?
When will some Order be settled for the Worship of God? When will the Government
of the Church be established according to the Word of God? I fear, God takes
it very grievously, that since we have made a Covenant for Reformation, we have
spent now a year, and done so little in it.

We have covenanted in like manner, without respect of Persons, to endeavor
the Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Schism, Prophannesse, and
what ever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine and the Power of
Godliness. And blessed be God for the extirpation of Popery, Prelacie and
Superstition, much has bin done. But (I know not by what unhappiness it is,
but) so it is that this last year since we all covenanted to endeavor to our
utmost (without respect of Persons) to endeavor the extirpation of Heresy and
Schism; Heresy and Schism have increased upon us more then ever. We are
grown beyond Arminianisme, Brownisme, Anabaptisme, we are come (I mean many
among us) to downright Libertinisme. There are two opinions, which if
encouraged, (and they are encouraged, if connived at) will open a door to
Turcisme, Iudaisme, Atheism, Polytheisme, any monster of opinion. The one is,
That every man is to be left to the Liberty of his own Religion, an opinion
contended for by the bloody tenets, John Baptist, Liberty of Conscience, and
the like Pamphlets: An opinion most pernicious and destructive, as to the souls
of men, so to the Commonweal of the Kingdom. Gerhard (...). com. de
Magistratu. 199.
Libertas illa quidlibet credendi (says Gerhard) nihil aliud est quam libertas
errandi, etc. That Liberty of believing what men will (or of holding what faith
they please) is no other then a Liberty of erring, and of erring in a matter
that concerns the Eternal Salvation of the Soul, wherein to err cannot but
be most dangerous and destructive; and therefore (says he) as it cannot be
safe for sheep to be left alone to wander in mountains and deserts, and graze
in what pastures they please: Lest they fall upon some unwholesome herb, or
become a prey to the Wolf: And as it cannot be safe to leave a Ship to it
self to be driven by the winds and waves without any guide or Steerage, lest
it dash it self against the Rocks: So it cannot be safe for Magistrates to
leave people to a Liberty of being of what Faith and what Religion they please;
Lest being carried away from the true Faith and Religion, they become a prey to
destruction. Nor is any thing almost more destructive to a State or
Commonweal. Praecipuum Concordiae vinculum est Religionis similitudo and de
cultibus Divinis Consensio. Likeness of Religion, and agreement in the Worship
of God is the strongest Bond of Concord. Bucholc in Chronol.
Nor is there any thing that does more unite the Minds of men then the same
opinions of God, and Communion in sacred things. On the contrary, Diversity of
Religion dis-joynts and distracts the minds of men, and is the Seminary of
perpetual hatreds, jealousies, seditions, wars, if any thing in the world
be, and in a little time, either a Schism in the State begets a Schism in the
Church, or a Schism in the Church begets a Schism in the State. That is,
either Religion and the Church is prejudiced by Civil Contentions, or Church
controversies and disputes about opinions break out into cruel wars. Quod a
nobis avertat Deus!
Men will at last take up swords and spears in stead of Pens: and defend by
Arms what they cannot do by Arguments. Nor do we want Examples that tell us,
that Bella sacra are managed with more enraged minds then common wars are.
Gualth. in Luc. cap. 10.
For (as another says) Constat nulla esse atrociora odia, etc. It is apparent
that no hatred is so cruel, no dissension so bitter, as that which arises
from difference in Religion. For such is the Power of Religion, that it
possesses the whole man, and if once it degenerate into superstition, does so
inflame men's minds against those of the contrary party, as they not only hate
them, but are even mad against them, etc. And the more we have been sometimes
united in Religion and the ways of God, the greater will the mischief be that
this Diversity, shall I say, or Universality of Religions and opinions pleaded
for by some will lay us under. Philip. Cawer. in oper. sacris. cap. 92.
For Odia acerbiora and immortalia inter eos existere solent qui in fide and
Religione conjunctissimis animis fuere, etc. The bitterest and most immortal
hatred is usually between those that have sometimes been of the most
concordant minds in Faith and Religion; and afterward begin to differ: for
nothing does more alienate the minds of men quam similis vel dispar Religio.

Once for all, it is the Preservation and Reformation of Religion which you
have covenanted to endeavor, and not a Liberty of opinion, that will consist
with neither. It is the Extirpation of Heresy and Schism that you have
covenanted: which if to be connived at, why does the Apostle Paul reprove the
Corinthians for their Schisms so much? and why does our Lord Jesus commend the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus for trying those which said they were Apostles,
and were not? And why is the Angel of the Church of Thyatira reproved for
suffering that woman Jezabel, who called her self a Prophetess, to teach and
seduce. If once we come to this that any man be suffered to teach what he
pleases, to seduce whom he lists, to be of what Faith, or Religion seems good
in his own eyes, farewell Covenant, farewell Reformed Religion, farewell the
Peace and Glory of England. If that day once come. But you (Right Honorable) I
hope better things of you, though I thus speak. I hope while you live and sit
in Parliament this shall never be. Greg. Tholoz^^de Repub. lib. 8.
Fieri nec solet nec potest, ut quit Deum sincere and ex toto cord diligat,
qui diversas Religiones simul fovere desiderat: certissimum enim ost neutram
credere qui contrarias admittit. It is not usual, nay, it is not possible that
they which love God sincerely should desire to cherish differing Religions: for
it is most certain, he that admits contrary Religions believes neither of them.

There is a second dangerous opinion (give me leave in the name not only of all
the Ministers of Christ in England, but of all the Ministers that Christ has
in the world to complain of it, it is this) That there is no Jus Divinum upon
the Calling of the Ministry. To this purpose there was a Pamphlet lately put
forth, bearing the Name of the compassionate Samaritane, that under pretense of
pouring Wine and Oil upon the wounded Anabaptists, (as he fancies them) poures
the venom of Dragons and the gall of Aspes not only upon the Assembly (who yet
are to no other end an Assembly then that they may be serviceable to God and
you in the things of Jesus Christ) nor only upon the Ministry of the Church of
England, for then I had held my peace at this time; but upon the whole Ministry
of Christ through the world; and would make that Sacred and Tremend Function to
be as mere an Imposture, as very a mystery of iniquity, as arrant a juggle as
the Papacy it self. I shall not need tell you what Anvill this was forged
upon, nor that the Principles of Anabaptisme are as destructive to the
Magistracy as they are to the Ministry. All that I say is this, the Lord make
you mindful of your Covenant, and wise and able to apply apt and seasonable
Remedies to these growing evils before they be incurable.

We have covenanted against Prophannesse too. But what has been done against?
True it is you have made pious Ordinances for the strict Observation of the
Lords Day, and days of solemn Humiliation. But for want of a strict course
prescribed, for the bringing of such as shall yet dare to profane these days
to severe and exemplary punishment, not only in the Country, but here in the
City, and before your eyes, Sabbaths and Fasts are as much contemned as ever.
It would be worthy of your second thoughts, what further course to take for the
better sanctifying of those Days. As also for the stopping of that Rage of all
manner of prophannesse that in these loose and arbitrary times breaks in as a
flood upon us: and no wonder; Perverse opinions, and perverse manners always
walk hand in hand together. Buchol. in Chronol.
O^^nibus seculis Doctrinae coelestis corruptionem comitatur pu^^^u morum
corruptela: quae tandem Regnis ultima fata attrahit. Common corruption of
manners has ever attended corruption of Doctrine; and this at length brings
desolation upon a Kingdom. We live in a strange age for licentiousness of
opinion, and as strange for licentiousness of living; There was a thing done
not many days since, not far from this place, I think the like was hardly
ever done before in England, or in the Christian world, I mean that scandalous
abominable -- I know not what to call it, I doubt not but you know what I
mean; how far your wisdoms will think fit to take notice of it, and
enquire after it, I know not. But certainly it was such an affront to the
Justice of God, such a dare to the power of his wrath now burning against us;
such a scorn to the whole Nobility, Gentry, and Parliament of England, as both
your own Honor and Gods call upon you to show your just indignation against
it: Had some young Gallants in Rome (while heathen) played such a Trick the
Censores morum would have at least degraded them.

Covenanted, to bring Incendiaries, Malignants and evil instruments to
punishment. Since this Covenant, God has delivered many of yours, and the
Kingdoms chief Enemies into your hands. I will not inquire what Justice you
have done upon them; That may upon some prudentiall considerations be deferred
possibly. But whether it be right in the sight of God, that his and the
Kingdoms Enemies, when God has shut them up in your hand, should not only
have their Lives and their Ease, but their lusts, their sins indulged them,
and (which is the common complaint) in your prisons Swear, and Drink, and
Gluttonize, and be as joviall, and as filthy, as in their own Garrisons:
whither this be right or no, consider. Some possiby are ready to say to you,
Petr. Nicol. Gelstroup.
as that poor smith in Thuring did to the Landt-grave of that Country (who was
more mild then was for his peoples good) Duresce, Duresce, o infoelix
Landtgravie, etc. I know there ought to be in those, into whose hands God has
put the sword, a contemperature of Severity and clemency. The sword of Justice
must be fourbished with the Oil of Mercy; yet there are cases in which
severity ought to cast the scale. I know not what to think of that saying of
Tully: Si clementes esse voluerimus, Cicero Epist. ad Brutum.
nunquam ^^^erunt Bella civilia: yet there is a great deal of reason in that
which one speaks in confirmation of it, Zevecotius in Observatis Politi^is.
cap. 14.
Paena Lenior majorem peccandi occasionem suggerit etc. a slight punishment
does but tempt men to wickedness, while all men hope they may escape, and
never be discovered: or if they be, they know before hand they shall go away
with it pretty cheap. Therefore says the same writer, Laudo Venetos apud ques
unicum publicae pecuniae denarium intervertisse, non infame solum est, sed and
Capitale. Consilia and decreta patrum revelasse quempiam raro auditum est,
semper graviter punitum.

We have all Covenanted for our selves, and all that are under our power, both
in Public and in Private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to amend our
Lives, and each to go before other, in the example of a Real Reformation: had
we kept this Covenant, o what Saints should we have bin: all our families would
have bin as so many Churches: England would by this time have been the Holy
Island: we had not now been fasting, and weeping, and mourning, but rejoicing,
and singing, and praising. But, I beseech you Beloved, tell me, is there that
Evidence of Personal and Family Reformation, that such a Covenant as this did
seem to promise? Look upon the Families of Lords, Gentlemen, Citizens, where
is such a Reformation as this Covenant binds us to? Me thinks in all these
particulars, It is too too evident that we have transgressed our Covenant. We
have sinned, and transgressed our Covenant. The Lord help us to lay this sin to
heart. There is indeed a double violation of Covenants: the one through
wilfulness, this I hope you are free from. The other through unmindfulnesse;
This may be chargeable upon Gods own Servants, They were not mindful of his
Covenant, says the Psalmist. Now even this is cause of Humiliation to us. I
remember the Day wherein we took the Covenant together in this place, was like
the Day of laying the foundation of the second Temple. A Day of shouting, and a
Day of weeping. A Day of joy, and a Day of trembling. A Day of joy and
shouting, to see Parliament, Ministers, People, so willingly offer to join
themselves in Covenant to the Lord; 'twas such a Day as England never saw
before: and yet withal a Day of Trembling and Weeping. The Lord knows there
was many a gracious heart trembled that day, for fear we should transgress the
Covenant we then made. And now, behold, your eyes see, even yours; we have done
so in too great a measure. O what should our Weeping, and Trembling be before
the Lord this Day. O let every one of us take up a Lamentation and cry with
Ezra: O my God, I am ashamed, and confounded, and blush to lift up my face unto
thee, o my God. Behold, we are before thee in our sins and trespasses: and
cannot stand before thee because of this. O let us be humbled for our Covenant
breaches past, and if we would not have God go on to break and blast our
Armies, let us not only renew our Covenants (which is a part of the work of
this day) but let us be mindful of and faithful to our Covenants; or never
look to have God more with our Armies. The Lord tells Joshua plainly in the 12.
verse of this Chap. Neither will I be with you any more, till you have
destroyed the accursed thing from among you. Breach of Covenant is an accursed
thing. It is a polluting of the great and dreadful Name of the Lord our God.
The Lord our God is a jealous God. We cannot expect he should be any more with
us, while such a provocation is among us.

FINIS.

