Die Mercurii 30. December. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Sir William Massam do
from this House give thanks to Mr. Marshall and Mr. Newcomen for the great
pains they took in their Sermons they preached this day before the Commons at
St. Margaret Westminster (being a day of their public Humiliation) and desire
them to Print their Sermons.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Stephen Bowtell to print my Sermon.

Stephen Marshall.

THE ALL-SEEING UNSEEN Eye of GOD. DISCOVERED, IN A SERMON PREACHED before the
Honorable House of COMMONS; at Margarets Westminster, December 30. 1646. being
the day of their solemn Monthly Fast.

By Matthew Newcomen, Minister of the Gospel at Dedham in Essex, and one of the
Assembly of Divines.

PROVE. 13.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and
the good.

2 CHRONICLES. 16.9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth,
to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect toward
him.

Deus totus oculus est, quia omnia videt: Totus manus est, quia omnia operatur,
totus pes est, quia ubique est. August. Published by Order of the Honorable
House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. M.DC.XI.VII.

Die Mercurii 30. December. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir William Massam do
from this House give thanks to M. Marshall and M. Newcomen, for the great pains
they took in the Sermons they preached this day before the Commons at St
Margarets Westminster, being a day of public Humiliation, and desire them to
Print their Sermons.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Christopher Meredith to Print my Sermon.

MATTHEW. NEVVCOMEN.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
GOD has called You to sit at the stern of this tempest-shaken Kingdom; the
helm whereof God has put into Your hands in a very difficult time. Some years
now You have been conflicting with cross and boisterous winds and seas, and
are not yet in safe harbor. Being called at this time to speak unto You, I
know not better how to improve the opportunity for the good of Your souls and
of the public, then by directing Your eyes unto that only Loadstarre the eye
of God; upon which if you can fix, You may from thence fetch both light and
Psalm 32.8. I will guide thee with mine eye.
guidance, to steer Your course so, as You shall save Your souls, and may save
this poor Kingdom, so as it do not in portu naufragium. I know You are yet
encompassed with rocks and shelves, Scylla's and Sirens, temptations on the
right hand and on the left, but eying this eye of God, will enable You
steddily, unappalledly, inflexibly, to shape Your course to Gods glory, the
public good, and Your own happiness: which that You may do, is the prayer of

Your servant in the Lord and in his work, MATTHEW. NEVVCOMEN.

A SERMON PREACHED at the Monthly Fast, before the Honorable House of
COMMONS, December. 30. 1646.
HEBR. 4.13. -- But all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with
whom we have to do.


THat we have to do with God at this time, I am confident we all know: O that
we did as well know, who, and what this God is, with whom we have to do. This
Scripture, which you have now heard read, will help us to understand that, if
God be pleased to help us to understand this Scripture: Wherein you have three
particulars: The two first concerning the knowledge of God: The other
concerning the God in whom this knowledge is.

Concerning the knowledge of God, you have here, First, the extent of it:
(...), All things. Secondly, The quality or kind of it. First, It it is a
clear or evident knowledge. All things are, (...), Naked. Secondly, It is a
full and through knowledge, All things are naked and (...), Open. Thirdly, It is
a perfect and infallible knowledge, All things are naked and open, (...) unto
the Eyes of him. Lastly, You have here the God in whom this knowledge is: It is
he (...), with whom we have to do (...).

The first thing in the Text, is the extent of the knowledge of God, it
reaches unto all things, (...), all things: Quaecunque and in Deo sunt;
quaecunque and extra Deum: Divina, and non Divina: Angelica, humana: Coelestia,
Terrena: Bona, Mala: Occulta, Manifesta: Maxima, Minima: Vniversalia,
Singularia: Necessaria, Cotingentia: Nobilissima, vilissima: Quae sunt; Quae
non sunt sed esse possunt: Futura, non futura: Praesentia, praeterita: Quae
fuerunt, and non fuerunt: atque adeo infinita etiam ea quae numquam futura sunt.
All things that are in God, and all things that are without God. All things,
Divine and not Divine. All things, Angelical or Humane: Heavenly or earthly:
All things good or evil, great or small: secret or open. All things that have
been, or have not been: that are, or that are not; that shall be, or that may
be, or that never shall, never can be: All things past, present, future,
contingent, impossible, All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him,
with whom we have to do.

This field would be too large for me to travel over at this time, I shall
therefore only thrust my sickle into one corner of it, and confine my discourse
unto that knowledge which God has of men and their affairs, not only because
that will be most profitable, but also because that seems to be the very reason
why the Apostle mentions the Omniscience of God in this place, that we might
make application of it to our selves and our own actions, therefore he says;
(...).

That knowledge then, which God has of men and of their ways, I shall
endeavor to set before you in these ensuing particulars.

Psalm. 139.15, 16. Psalm. 139 15, 16.
My substance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought beneath in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my
substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book were all my members written,
etc. and from hence it follows, that God does fully know the sinfullnesse of
that state and condition that every one is born in.

God knows all the ways and works of men, from the birth, and from the womb.
Job 31.41.
So Job 31.41. Does he not see my ways, and count all my steps? Nor was this
Gods singular exactness and observation over Job. For Job 32.21, 22. 32.21, 22.
His eyes are upon the ways of man (any man every man) and he sees all his
goings. There is no darkness or shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity
may hide themselves, Jerem. 32.19. Jer 32.19.
Great in counsel, mighty in works, for thine eyes are open upon all the ways
of the sons of men.

God knows all the speeches of all men: Every word, every syllable that the
tongue of any one does mutter, or whisper, God knows it. Psalm. 139, 4. Psalm.
139.4.
For there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it
altogether. No man, that speaks a word for God, his Cause or People, but God
knows it; No man that speaks a word against God, his Cause or People, but God
knows that too; let it be spoken never so closely, secretly. Enoch tells us,
that God will at that great day execute judgment upon ungodly men, for all
their hard speeches which they have spoken against him, Jude 15. And our
Savior tells us, Jude 15.
that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account in the
day of judgment, Mat. 12.36.
Mat. 12.36. therefore God knows them all.

God knows not only the ways and the words, Isa. 66.18. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
but even the thoughts of men, Isa. 66.18. I know their works and their
thoughts. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. The Lord searches all hearts, and understands all
the imaginations of the thoughts.

God does not only know the ways, and words, and thoughts of men present, at
that instant, while they are thinking, speaking, doing these things: but when
they are past and forgotten by men, they are still present in the knowledge of
God, Job 13.27.
Job 13.27. Thou look narrowly to all my paths, thou set a print (a
mark, a memento) upon the heels of my feet, Job 14.17.
Job 14.17. My transgression is sealed up in a bag: Amos 8.7.
and thou sowest up mine iniquity, Amos 8.7. The Lord has sworn by the
excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works.

God knows all the ways, words and thoughts of men present and past, so he
knows all the ways, words and thoughts of men that are to come. Psalm. 139.2,
Psalm. 139.2.
Thou understandest all my thoughts afar off. Isa. 48.8. Isa. 48.8.
I knew that thou would deal very treacherously. God knew what Israel would
both think and do, when once they came into the land of Canaan, and tells it
them before ever they came there. Deuteronomy. 31.21.
Deuteronomy. 31.21. For I know their imaginations which they go about, even now
before I have brought them into the land of Canaan. God knew what horrible
outrages Hazael would commit when he should come to be King of Syria, and tells
him of it, when he could scarce think there was such villainy in his heart, 2
King 8 12, 13.
2 King. 8.12, 13. God knows not only what men have done, or do, but what they
will do.

God knows not only what men will do, but he knows also what men would do, if
they were in such or such cases, upon all occasions, emergent and possible.
Deus cognoscit non solum quae fieri possunt a singulis, sed etiam quae reipsa
fierent, quavis hypothesi facta: quavis occasion proposita, hae tamen
occasiones sunt infinitae, imo infinities infinitae. God knew Abimelech would
have defiled himself and Sarah, if he had not with held him, Genesis 20.6. Genesis
20.6.
God knew the men of Keilah would have betrayed David into the hands of Saul,
if he had stayed among them, 1 Samuel 23.12. 1 Samuel 23.12.
Here is one that's now a private man, God knows what he would be and do, if he
were advanced to place of public office and authority. Here is one that is
linked into a godly family, has gracious kindred and company: God knows what
he would be, if transplanted into another family. There is one that died in his
infancy, God knows what he would have been and done, if he had lived 40, or 50,
years. God knows all the ways of men, past, present, future, contingent,
possible.

all the ways, words and thoughts of men, past, present, future, possible: But
(in the next place,) God knows the hearts of all men, 1 King 8.39.
1 King. 8.39. For thou, even thou only know the hearts of all men. God
knows the hearts of all men, what frame and constitution they are of, whether
they he holy or sinful, sincere or hypocritical; therefore it is, that God in
Scripture is so often said to search, and try, and ponder the hearts of men. 1
Chro. 28.9. 1 Chro. 28.9.
The Lord searches all hearts. 1 Chro. 29.17. I know also, my God, 29.17.
that thou tryest the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness. Prove. 17.3.
Prove. 17.3.
The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, but the Lord tries
the heart. Prove. 21.2.
Prove. 21.2. The Lord pondereth the heart. These three words of searching,
trying, pondering, the holy Ghost used to set out that full, exact, discerning,
critical knowledge, which God has of the frame and temper of men's hearts.

God knows the frame and temper of all men's hearts; so God knows all the
purposes and intendments that are in the hearts of men. In the verse before my
text, it is said of the word of God, That it is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12.
(...) are properly the secret and inward workings of passions and affections,
and (...), are the secret and first workings of men's understandings and
apprehensions: Now both the one and the other, God sees them: and therefore
that is rendered as a reason why the word of God does discern them. The word of
God is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart: for there is no
creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and open,
even the intents and purposes of men's hearts. Job. 33.17. These and these
things, Job 33.17.
says Elihu, God does, to withdraw man from his purpose, etc.

God knows the iuclinations and desires of all men's hearts. Isa. 32.6. The
vilde person will speak vildely, and his heart will work iniquity: Isa. 32.6.
God sees the hearts of wicked men, hankering and propending after their
wickedness: Ezck. 33.31.
his heart will work iniquity. Ezekiel. 33.31. They come before thee as my people
comes, and they sit before thee as my people sits, and they hear thy words,
but they will not do them, but their heart goes after their covetousness.
God faw, that though they pretended to be devout and religious attenders upon
his word, yet the bent and by as of their heart was after the world. Their
heart was toward their covetousnes. And so again God sees how the bent and
inclination of his peoples heart is toward him. Jer. 12.3. Jer. 12.3.
Thou O Lord know me: thou have seen me, and tried my heart toward thee.
All their inward breathings, and secret liftings up of desire after God, are
known to him. Psalm. 38.9. Psalm. 38.9.
Lord all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee.

God knows all the designs and Projects of all men's hearts. I mention these as
distinct from purposes and intendments, because men's purposes, are many times
but sudden and slight motions, and of little value with themselves. But
designs and projects are deep and elaborate things, have more study and pains
bestowed upon them: you shall have a man forging a design, weeks, months,
years; and working it with that secrecy, that as Alexander said, if he thought
his shirt upon his back knew it, he would pull it off and burn it. But God
knows all these designs and projects be they never so deeply laid, Job
12.22. 1 Cor. 5.5.
never so closely carried, Job 12.22. He discovers deep things out of
darkness, 1 Cor. 4.5. God will both bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart, Job 5.12. Job
5.12.
He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their work. An instance of this you have, Dan. 11.20, -- 27.
Dan. 11.20 -- 27. where God foretells the several projects and devises
whereby Antiochus should work himself into the kingdom of Syria, and almost
into the kingdom of Egypt, and then verse. 27. how he and Ptolomee King of Egypt
shall project to overreach one another: And both these Kings hearts shall be
to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table, but it shall not
prosper. As if God had said, after the war between these two Kings, there
shall be an interview, or a treaty for peace (pretended at least) but there
will be nothing but mischief in their hearts; no though they may entertain one
another with complements, and fair words; yet they are but lies and pretenses,
they shall both speak lies at one table. God knows all the designs and
projects of Kings, and great politicians, both in their managing of wars, and
in their treaties of peace. Thus you see, God knows all things: all persons,
all their actions, all their words; all their thoughts, past as well as
present, future as well as past, contingent or possible; all their hearts, all
their intendments and purposes; all their inclinations and disires, all their
projects and designs. And so you see in some measure the extent of the
knowledge of God, all things. The next words will show us the nature of this
knowledge which God has of all things. It is 1. a clear and distinct
knowledge, all things are naked. It is 2. a full and through knowledge, all
things are naked and open. It is 3. an Intuitive, comprehensive, infallible
knowledge, all things are naked and open unto his eyes.

First, This knowledge which God has of all things, it is clear and distinct.
All things are naked. Men may put such colors and dresses upon themselves, and
ways, as they may make a shift to hide themselves from the eyes of men: But no
pretenses, no excuses can hide them from the sight of God, no more then a piece
of transparent glass can cover them from the beam of the Sun. All things are
naked, unmasked, unclothed, their dress and paint taken off. God beholds all
things in their naked and simple realities. What a fine color had Simeon and
Levi, Genesis 34.14.
for their urging circumcision upon the men of Shechem? they pretended Religion
and the Law of their God; whereas in truth, it was revenge and thirst of blood
acted them, and this God saw, though Hamor and Sechem saw it not. What a color
did Jeroboam put upon his Idols which he set up at Dan and Bethel, 1 King.
12.15, 30.
as if he studied nothing but the peoples ease, and because it was too far for
the people to go up to Jerusalem, therefore he would accommodate them with
Chapels of ease. But the naked truth was, a design to establish the Kingdom
to him and his, and to keep the people from returning to the house of David,
and this God saw, and did so blast him, that that which he intended for the
stability, proved the ruin of his house and Kingdom. What a face of Zeal for
God did Jehu put on in executing the judgment of the Lord upon Ahaz and his
family? and when he has done, can vouch warrant from God for it. 2 King. 9.25,
36.
This is that which the Lord spoke by his servant Elijah: and can say, Come see
my zeal for the Lord of hosts. But God knew it was to rid himself of
competitors for the Kingdom, and to assure the Throne to himself and his, that
Jehu did this, and therefore God threatens to avenge the blood of Iezreel, Hos.
1.4. on the house of Iehu, because though he did the thing that God commanded,
Hos. 1.4.
yet he made the command of God but a color for his own ends. How pious and
devout did the Pharisees seem! the people thought them the only Saints upon
earth: but our Savior tells them; that God looked upon them, not according to
what they did appear, but according to what they were; their colors, and
shows, and visards of holiness, could not blear the eyes of God. So our
Savior, Luke 16.15.
Luke 16.15. Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows
your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the
sight of God. Men may be such artificial dissemblers, as not only to be able
to justify themselves before men, but to gain a high esteem among them, and
yet be an abomination unto God who knows their hearts, and unto whom all things
are naked.

All things are naked and open: (...): aperta, so the Vulgar: Chrysostom. ad loo.
Resupinata, so Erasmus: intime patentia, so Beza. Chrysostom says, it is
(...), a metaphor taken from the skins flayed off from the sacrifices: (...)
etc. for as when a man (says he) has slain the sactifice, and flayed off the
skin, (...), all the inwards of the beast are laid open and bare to any eye: so
all things, the very inside of them, are naked and open unto God: And
Camerarius approves this explication of the word. Beza carries it further, and
says, it is a metaphor taken from beasts, which are not only flayed, but
chin'd down the backbone; Vt totae foris and intus oculis pateant. So another,
Sicut cum animal per cerviceni and spinam dorsi ita dividitur, ut viscera omnia
pateant. Camero thinks it a metaphor, a re Palaestrica. Some make the three
words in my Text, three degrees of the knowledge of God, videre, denudare,
aperire; a thing may be seen. (says Athanasius) but not seen naked; or it may
be seen naked, but not open. It is one thing to see a sheep alive with the skin
and the fleece on, another thing to see it naked and flayed; and yet a further
thing to see it opened: and certainly this phrase does signify a most
intimate, Ad populum phaleras, ego te intus and in certe novi. Pers.
full and through knowledge of all things, and has the force of that
proverbiall speech, intus, and incute.

All things are not only naked, without clokes or colors, but ripped open,
unbowell'd, anatomised, turned inside outward in the eye of God. There is
nothing so reserved, so hidden in man or from man, but it is open to the eye of
God. Many men have their Arcana, their secret ways of lust which they would
not discover, no not to their friend which is as their own soul: but even these
are open unto God. Psalm. 90.8.
Psalm. 90.8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee, even our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance. And there are two things in all men which are
hidden secrets, the principles from which, and the ends for which they act;
these are like that path, of which Job says, the Vultures eye has not seen
it, Job 28.7. but even these are naked and open to the eye of God* All things,
are naked and open.

All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him. This shows that the
knowledge which God has of all things, is not an uncertain, conjecturall,
fallible knowledge; but a certain, intuitive, infallible knowledge: That it is
not an imperfect, successive, potentiall knowledge, but a perfect,
comprehensive, actual knowledge. All things are naked and open unto the eyes
of him.

This knowledge which God has of all things, it is (I say) not an uncertain,
conjecturall, fallible knowledge, but a certain and infallible knowledge; a
knowledge that has in it, evidentiam and certitudinem. The knowledge of the
eye is the most certain and evident knowledge; we say, visus non fallitur circa
proprium objectum: if the organ and the medium be rightly disposed, a man's eye
cannot deceive him; therefore we say, we will believe our own eyes against all
the world. Now Gods eye is (as I may so say,) both the organ and medium of his
seeing: We see things by the light of the Sun, but the Sun sees all things by
his own light, so does God. Et totus videt and totum, quia minime fallitur quia
minime claudit, quia extra se lumen non quaerit ut videat: ipse enim est qui
videt and unde videt. Bern.
All that is God sees, and God sees all that is, and is not deceived, because
he needs not light from without himself to see by, for he it is that sees, and
from himself it is that he sees.

Again, This knowledge which God has of all things, it is not a potentiall,
partial, imperfect knowledge, but an actual, comprehensive, perfect
knowledge. God with one infinite, individed act of his understanding, knows at
once, all things that ever were, are, or shall be, yea infinite things that
never were, nor ever shall be. God does not take up the knowledge of things as
we do, per discursum, or per successionem, or per compositionem. God does not
know, unum post aliud, one thing after another; nor unum per aliud, one thing
by another; but his infinite understanding grasps all things, simul and semel:
to his infinite eye all things are naked and open at one view. Non enim mere
nostro ille vel quod futurum est prospicit: vel quod praesens aspicit, vel quod
praeteritum est respicit, etc Aug.
God does neither look back upon what is past, nor look forward upon what is to
come, nor look right forth upon what is before him, as our manner is; but in a
manner far differing from what we are wont to do. God does not remove his
thoughts from one thing to another, but sees all things altogether
unchangeably. God does not see things otherwise with his mind, then with his
eye, for he is not made up of soul and body. Nor does God see things otherwise
now then he did heretofore, or then he will hereafter; for in Gods
understanding there are not those differences of time past, present, and to
come, as there are in ours; for in his incorporeall view, all things are
present together, thus Augustine. Oculus Dei and longinqua capit, quia ubique
praesens est, and intima, quia in omnibus est, and subtilia, quia perspicax
est, and maxima, quia omnia in ipso sunt. Hugo de S. Victore. Potest oculus
hominis in visione facile praepediri ac decipi spissitudine tenebrarum,
profunditate noctis, obscuritate nubium, alteratione aeris, longinquitate loci,
inequalitate objecti, turbatione humorum, dissipatione specierum, velocitate
motus, and centum id genus illusionibus ac impedimentis internis, externis,
naturalibus and artificiatis, veris ac praestigiosis, hominum and diabolorum.
Non item oculus Dei, qui solus seipso per infinitum and increatum lumen,
eliminat tenebras, dispellit noctem, caliginem dissipat, obscuritatem irradiat,
consumit nubes, coelumque aeremque serenat. Solus ille neque nimia objecti
propinquitate retunditur, neque longinquitate superatur, nec lassescit
diuturnitate exercitij, nec humorum alteratione inficitur. Solus non mendicat
cognitionem suam vel ab objecto and specie, vel a sensibili luce and color,
vel a motu and medio. Solus non mensuratur tempore, non coercelur loco, non
concluditur termino, non excluditur impedimento, non debilitatur senio, non
corrumpitur morbo, non decipitur art, non fascinatur praestigijs, sed videt
quocunque loco, ac tempore, omnem curam and occupationem, omne bonum and malum,
quodvis damnum, dictum, factum, tentatum, and cogitatum. July Mazarinus in Psalm
50.
The eye, of God, my brethren, is not like the eye of man, that cannot see at a
distance, or cannot look upon many things at once, fixedly: No, the eye of God
sees the remotest things, because he is every where: the most secret and
inward things, because he is in all things; the most subtle things, because
his eye is sharp, and piercing: the greatest things, because all things are in
him. The eye of man may be hindered from seeing, or deluded in its sight, either
by blackness of darkness, depth of night, thickness of clouds, alteration of
of air, distance of place, indisposition of the object or organ, scattering of
the species, change of the medium, swiftness of motion, and an hundred such
impediments, inward, outward, natural, artificial. It is not so with the eye
of God, who alone by his own infinite and uncreated light, chaseth away
darkness, dispels the night, inlightens obscurity, etc. his eye is neither
hindered by too much neernesse, nor by too much remoteness of the object, nor
is it wearied with continual seeing. He alone does not borrow his sight,
neither from the object nor from the species, nor from light and color, nor
from motion. His sight is neither limited to time, nor confined to place, etc.
but he sees at all times, and in all places: every endeavor, every employment,
every wrong, every word, deed, attempt, thought: All things are (at once) naked
and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do.

Of him with whom we have to do. These words set out the person in whom this
knowledge is, and that is he, (...). The words are diversely translated and
interpreted.

The Syriack renders it thus, Teost is. Tremell.
of him to whom we must give an account. And this sense Chrysostom gives of the
words, (...), with whom we have to do, for unto him we must give account of
what we have done. So then it is worth our considering, that all things are
naked and open to the eyes of him, unto whom every one of us must give account
of himself.

The Vulgar Latin reads it, ad quem nobis sermo, and so Erasmus and
Camerarius, quem alloquimur, whom we speak to. And this also is worthy our
consideration; Everytime we come to speak to God in prayer, that all things are
naked and open unto the eyes of him, to whom we are speaking when we are in
prayer.

Calvin and Beza render it, Phil. 3.21.
quicum nobis est Negotium, which is according to our translation, with whom we
have to do. The whole life of a Christian is a Negotiation with God. (...), Our
traffic our business is in heaven, with God, even then when we think we have
to do with this, and that man, even then we have to do with God. In every thing
we do, we have to do with God: o that we could remember this, and withal
remember that all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we
have to do.

Others from the connection of this verse with the former, wherein the Apostle
had been speaking of the Ministry of the Gospel, and the efficacy thereof, give
this sense of the words, Deus quicum nobis res est, quando cum verbo ejus nobis
res est, omnia perspicit: God with whom we have to do when we have to do with
his word, sees all things. Now o that we could Remember this: That when we
have to do with the word of God either to handle, or to hear it, we have to do
with God: and withal remember, that all things are naked and open unto the
eyes of him, with whom we have to do, when we are speaking or hearing this
word. And thus you have the meaning of these words, all things are naked and
open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do.

And it must needs be thus. First because of the infinite perfection of God.
God is a being of infinite perfection. All excellencies and perfections are in
God after a most eminent and infinite manner; Omnia quae fecit, id est spiritus
and corpora; summa and ima; coelestia and terrestria; viventia and quibus
facultatem vivendi non dedit, ineffabiliter, ubique and totus, implet and
continet Deus Aug. lib de fide ad Peir.
and therefore as life, and power, and goodness, and other excellencies are in
God, so also knowledge. Which is one of the highest excellencies and
perfections of life, is in him, in infinite perfection. If there were any thing
which God did not know, God could not be perfect nor happy in his life and
being.

Secondly, This is demonstrated from Gods emnipresence. God is in all things,
and therefore knows all things. God after an unspeakable manner does everywhere
fill all things which he has made, spirits, bodies, things that are above, and
things that are beneath, things in heaven, Qui tenetonnia, imples omnia,
circumplecter is omnia, sup^r. excedis omnia, sustines omnia: nec ex alia part
imples, ex alia part circumplecteris: sed circumplectendo imples, and implendo
circumplecteris, sustinendo superexcedis, and superexcedendo sustines. August.
and things in earth, things that have life, and things that have no life. Thou
hold all things, and fillest all things, and encompassest all things, and
art above all things, and sustainest all things: neither do thou fill them on
the one side, and encompasse them on the other, but by encompassing do fill
them, and by filling do encompasse them: by sustaining them, thou art above
them, and by being above them, thou do sustain them. Needs must that God that
thus fills all things, know all things. Si animo as mente sphaeram contemplemur
magnitudine ac virtute infinitam, cujus centrum ubique sit, circumferentia
nusquam: Suppose we in our thoughts, a sphere of infinite greatness and
efficacy, whose center is every where, but has no circumference; it will
necessarily follow, that what ever thing or things be, besides this sphere,
must necessarily be within this sphere, encompassed by it, and contained in it:
and all things existing within this sphere it will follow, Arias Montanus in
Historia naturae.
nihil agi posse quod ab illa non sentiatur, There is no action nor motion but
this sphere will perceive it. Such is God, a sphere of infinite Being, Life,
understanding, encompassing all things, filling all things, and therefore
knowing all things. David proves God omniscient from his omnipresence, Psalm.
134.2. Thou know my downsitting, my uprising, thou understandest my thoughts
afar off: There is not a word in my tongue, but, Lord, thou know it
altogether: there is his acknowledgement of Gods omniscience. But then, thou
compassest my paths, and my lying down, verse. 3. Thou have beset me behind and
before, verse. 5. and whether shall I go from thy spirit, and whither shall I
flee from thy presence? ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. They are acknowledgements of Gods
omnipresence as demonstrations of his omniscience. And so God himself argues,
Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him,
says the Lord? do not I fill heaven and earth?

Thirdly, This omniscience of God is further demonstrated, from that influence
which God has into all things. It is God that gives life, being, motion,
power, activity, action, unto all things, Act. 17.27. In him we live and move
and have our being. All things that have being, God gave that being to them;
all things that have life, God gave that life to them; all things that move,
God gives that motion to them, not only the power, but the act; no man can move
a hand ora foot to any action; no man can move his tongue to speak a word; no
man can move in one thought of his heart, without Gods concurrence to that
motion: There is no action or motion of any creature man or Angel, but God
concurs to it, by way of support and cooperation as it is a natural action, or
motion, by way of special assistance, if it be a gracious and holy action; by
way of permission and sufferance, if it be sinful. Even in our sins, the
action, qua actio, is from God, the (...) irregularity of it is from our
selves. Now this is a further demonstration that God knows all things; and this
argument also David uses in the 139. Psalm. 15, 16. And thus now I have done
with the explication of the Text, and demonstration of the truth contained in
it; I come now to the application of it.

point shall be for Information. All things are naked and open unto God. God is
Omniscient; If so, then this informs us, that Jesus Christ is God, and the
holy Ghost is God, for Jesus Christ is Omniscient, and the holy Ghost is
Omniscient. Omniscience is an incommunicable attribute, and therefore the
servants of God from those Scriptures that attribute omniscience to Christ and
to the holy Ghost (as many Scriptures you know do) have successefully and
invincibly maintained the Deity of Christ and of the holy Ghost, Joh. 2.24, 25.
Joh. 21.17. Luke 10.12. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11.
against the blasphemous oppugners of it. Chrysostom applies these words of my
text unto Christ, (...) he speaks of the Son, and says, with whom we have to
do. I speak not this as if I suspected any in this auditory guilty of so foul a
crime as the denial of the Godhead of Christ, or of the holy Ghost (though I
fear, there is as much of this blasphemy in England at this day, as ever was
since the name of Christ was known in England.) But I speak it only to let you
see, how pious and just it is in the Honorable houses, that as they have begun
to declare their zeal for God in making a law that men may no longer impune
wickedly, and pertinatiously blaspheme his glorious essence, and attributes: So
to show the like zeal for the glory of his eternal Son, and Spirit. This is
the will of God, that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father, he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, Joh. 5.23.

In the days of Theodosius, the Arrians through his connivence were grown very
bold, and not only had their meetings in Constantinople, the chief City of the
Empire, Theodo. 5.16.
but would dispute their opinions; etiam in foro, and no man could prevail with
the Emperor to lay restraints upon them, because, says the Historian, he
thought it, nimis severum and inclemens esse; at length comes to Constantinople
one Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, a poor Town; an honest man but no great
politician for the world, Sozom. 7.
he petitions the Emperor to restrain the Arrians, but in vain: Next time he
comes to the Court, finding the Emperor and his son Arcadius (whom he had
lately created joint Emperor) standing together, he does very low obeisance to
the father, but none to the son; but coming close up to him, in a familiar
manner stroketh him on the head and says, Salve mi fili, God save you my
child. The old Emperor taking this for a great affront, being full of rage,
bids turn the man out of doors: As the officers were dragging him forth, he
turning to the Emperor says, ad hunc modum extstima, o Imperator, etc. Make
account, O Emperor, that thus, even thus is the heavenly father displeased
with those that do not honor the Son equally with the Father: which the
Emperor hearing, calls the Bishop back again, asks him forgiveness, presently
makes a law against Arrianisme, forbids their meetings and disputations,
constituta poena. Here was a blessed artifice, by which the zeal of this
Emperor was suddenly turned into the right channel: and he was taught by his
tenderness over his own honor, and the honor of his son, to be tender over
the honor of God and his Son Jesus.

all things are naked and open unto the eyes of God, confutes those that say,
God sees not, knows not sin. And secondly, That say, God sees not sin in his
children.

Averroes. Vorstius.
First, Such as say, God sees not sin. God (say they) knows all things by
knowing himself, and by looking upon himself, sees all things in himself,
tanquam in speculo. Now God, say they, cannot see sin in himself, for it is not
in him, therefore God cannot see sin. Besides, Hab. 1.13.
Scripture says, Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and
can not look on iniquity. I answer, God does know the sins of men, not as if
our sins were or in speculo: but sin being a privation, that (as all other
privations) is known by the contrary habit or act, ut caecitas per visum, and
tenebrae per lumen; so God knows sin, per virtutem oppositam, and per
bonitatem actus oppositi: and as for that text in Habbakuk, it is to be
understood, not descientia simplicis intelligentiae, but de scientia conjuncta
cum approbatione: Deus non cognoscit peccata per scientiam approbationis: and
of this knowledge the text speaks: That God did see the sins and violences of
wicked men, that text tells; and the Prophet under a temptation, did almost
impute unto God an approving of them, which was contrary to his nature. Thou
art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look upon iniquity,
wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously and hold thy tongue?

Secondly, Antinomians.
This confutes those that say, God sees not the sins of his justified
children. Certainly, if all things are naked and open unto the eyes of God,
then even the sins of his own dearest Saints and children. No, say some, by no
means; their sins are all covered. And the great text they pretend unto, is
that, Numb. 23.21. He has not seen iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 23.21.
nor beheld perverseness in Israel. Now true it is, the sins of justified
persons are covered: David, Paul, tell us so: but withal they tell us how: not
simply and absolutely, so as God cannot see them; this would argue impotency
and imperfection in God; but secundum quid, so covered as God will not impute
them. And for that which is their Locus palmarius, it is never a whit to their
purpose, He has not seen iniquity in Jacob, nor beheld pervernesse in Israel,
so it is ordinarily read: but a reverend and learned Author, M. Gataker, in
his book entitled, Gods eye upon Israel.
has with much dexterity and strength proved, it should rather be read, He
has not seen, or will not see, or cannot endure to see any wrong against
Jacob, or any grievance against Israel (for so the words (...): and (...):
there used, do often signify trouble and grievance) as he has at large
proved from Scripture, and the context does exceedingly favor this
interpretation.

But take the words in the ordinary reading, they will no way favor this
opinion: He has not seen iniquity in Jacob, nor beheld perverseness in Israel:
of whom does Balaam speak this? only of believers, of justified persons? No, of
all the hundred thousands of Israel, that were now before him upon the plain;
of all the mixed multitude that came up out of Egypt, which sure were not all
believers not justified persons; therefore the meaning of the place is, that at
the present there was no common sin lying upon the people, Chaldee Paraphrase
and others.
no Idolatry (for of that many understand this place) nor any other peccatum
flagrans, that might provoke the Lord against them. God saw no wickedness in
the Camp, that might cause him to pour a curse upon them. God saw none, because
they had since their expiation and atonement committed none, if they had, God
would have seen it; for in the 25. Chapter, when the people fell to whoredom
and Idolatry, God could quickly see it and avenge it, and yet the persons
remained still the same. These very persons of whom it is said, Chap. 23. God
saw no Iniquity in them: in these very persons God saw and avenged iniquity
within a very few days. And certainly whatever misapprehensions of God and of
sin men may have now, the Saints of God before us have had far other
apprehensions. O God thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from
thee, says David, Psalm. 69.5. Thou have set our sins before thee, even our
secret sins in the light of thy countenance, Psalm. 69.5.
says Moses, Psalm. 90.10. If we have forgotten the Name of our God, Psalm 90.10.
or stretched out our hands to any false god, shall not God search this out?
for he knows the secrets of our hearts, says the Church, Ps. 44 20, 21. Does
God by his Spirit maintain a war in the hearts of his children against their
secret lusts, and can God do this, and not see and know their lusts? Does he
help his children to see, and loath, and sigh under their lusts and sins, and
can it be imagined, that God should cause his children to see that which
himself sees not? Do not the sins of Gods children fall under the counsel and
decree of God? are they not bounded and ordered by God, and shall we yet say,
God does not see them?

repreve the great and common forgetfullnesse of this glorious attribute of the
Lord our God. Not to speak of the common sort of men, that are without God in
the world, that live more like Atheists then Christians, more like beasts then
men; but give me a man even among the best of men, that does fully believe,
consider, remember, improve this truth, All things are naked and open unto the
eyes of him, with whom we have to do. Do we when we have to do with God in
prayer, remember, that all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with
whom we have to do? (...)? Our preparations, motives, affections,
dispositions, aims, all are naked and open unto his eyes: do we remember this?
and can we rush upon that duty so unpreparedly, so inconsiderately? can we be
in the duty, with wandering, dead, straightened hears? We have to do with God
in the hearing of his word, and do we here remember, that all things are naked
and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do? Do we believe, do we
remember, that the God with whom we have to do, knows why we hear, and how we
hear? sees what thoughts and what affections are stirring in our hearts, while
we are hearing his word: and is it possible we should hear the word with scorn,
with slighting, with indignation, with disdain? The good Lord be merciful unto
us, that even in those things wherein we have to do with God, we forget the
eye of that God with whom we have to do, and let our eye slip off from him,
whose eye is ever upon us. What do we then in the common actions of our lives?
in our buying, selling, converse with men, communing with our own hearts? Where
is the man, that so speaks, and so thinks, and so lives continually, as in the
eye of that God, to whom all our thoughts, words and ways, are naked and open.
Not that we are ignorant of that all-seeing eye of God, which the very Heathens
had some apprehensions of: and therefore Seneca could give this rule, Sic vive
cum hominibus tanquam Deus videat, sic loquere cum Deo, tanquam homines
audiant. So live with men, as if God saw thee, so speak to God, as if men heard
thee. There is something of the notion of this from the light of nature in all
our hearts, and much more by revelation from the word of God: but alas, we know
and do not: none of us all live up to the full of our knowledge in this
particular, the Lord humble us and pardon us.

that all things are naked and open to the eyes of him, with whom we have to
do, it speaks Terror. First, unto all sinners in general. Secondly, unto some
sinners more especially.

First, This that All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom
we have to do: how may it fill with terror the heart of every sinner, of every
one that goes on in his trespasses? you know what Job speaks of some sinners,
the murderer, the thief, the adulterer, that it is to them the greatest
terror that can be, to be discovered in their wickedness: If a man see them
(says he) they are in the terrors of the shadow of death, Job 21.17.
Job 24.17. The same is true in proportion, of every other sinner. What sinner
is there that has such a heart of Adamant, and forehead of brass, as would
not be exceedingly troubled, to have all his sins that ever he committed, or
thought, intended, purposed to have committed, to have them all immediately
published, and laid open before this whole congregation, it would not a little
trouble him: well sinner, this truth tells thee that, which if thou have not
wholly put off man, will trouble thee infinitely more: It tells thee that All
thy wickedness is naked and open unto God. It tells thee that all thy
thoughts, all thy proud, covetous, unclean, filthy, abominable thoughts; all
the thoughts that ever thou had in thy heart, they are All naked and open
unto the eye of God. All thy oaths, blasphemies, bitter, virulent, malicious,
unchaste, unsavory, ungodly speeches, that ever fell from thy uncircumcised
lips: they are all before the eye of God. All thy wantonness, luxury,
impurities, filthinesses not to be named; all thy cruelty, oppression,
injustice, bribery; all thy sins how secretly soever contrived, and committed,
they are all naked and open unto the eye of God. Thy midnight sins, thy closet
sins, thy curtain sins, thy bosom sins, thy heart sins, all the sins thou have
committed, and all the sins thou would have committed, they are all naked and
open to the eyes of God. Do thou believe this? if not, thou art an Atheist,
if thou do, and yet tremblest not, thou art -- I know not what to call thee:
if possible, thou art worse then an Atheist, that beleevest all thy sins to be
this day naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, and yet
thou tremblest not. Do thou know poor man, worm, do thou know with what
an eye God looks upon thy sins? It may be thou think God beholds thy sins as
Gallio beheld the Jews abusing and beating Sosthenes before the judgment seat,
But Gallio cared for none of those things. And think thou so of God? Let me
tell thee then,

First, God beholds and looks upon all thy sins, with a strict, watchful,
observing, censorious eye, Prove. 15. 21. The ways of man are before the eyes
of the Lord, Prove. 15.21.
and he pondereth all his goings. God does so strictly and exactly eye thy
sins, as that he knows not only the number of them, but the measure,
proportion, weight, of every one of them: 1 Samuel 2.3.
1 Samuel 2.3. God is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. God
weighes and observes, how much wilfulness, presumption, contempt of God is in
every sin, how heavy and heinous thy sins are. That eye of God unto which all
thy sins are naked and open, it is a strict, observing, pondering eye.

Secondly, It is a pure, holy, severe eye, an eye flaming with indignation
against every sin. Habab. 1.13.
Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look upon
iniquity. Indeed, if God saw thy sins with such an eye as men do, it need not
much trouble thee. Men can see thy sins and wink at them; see thy sins, and
like thee never the worse for them. But O could thou see that angry,
flaming, revengefull eye wherewith God sees all thy sins, it would make thy
heart even die within thee. I have read of Marius and Attilas, and some others,
that they have had such fiery sparkling eyes, as that when they have been set
upon by enemies, the very sparks of fire darting out of their eyes, has struck
such a trembling into the hearts of their assailants, as has made them let
fall their weapons. O that thou could see, with what an eye God looks upon
thy sins, (...), God has a revenging eye: one aspect of this eye of God, is
able to make the whole earth to tremble, Psalm. 104.32. He looks on the earth
and it tremileth, Psalm. 104.32.
and shall this eye of God be upon thee and all thy ways, and yet thou not
tremble?

Thirdly, Consider, this God, unto whose pure, pondering, severe, revengefull
eye, all thy sins are naked and open, is the God which will one day judge thee
for these sins of thine, which his own eye has seen. For God will bring every
work into judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be good or evil,
Eccles. 12.14.
Eccles. 12.14. Ipse autem Testu and Iudex est, quem nulla peccatrix
conscientia effugere poterit; Omnia enim noda and aperta sunt oculis ejus.
Nunquid Dominus judicans, quaefiturus est testes per quos discat quis s^s? unde
potest falli quis sis, qui noverat quis esses suturus? Te interrogat non atrum
de te: interrogat autem te, non ut discat a te, sed ut consundat te.
Ipse autem and Judex erit and Testis, etc. And he himself will be both the
Judge and the witness, whom no guilty conscience can escape, for all things
are naked and open unto his eyes, says Augustine: and again, will God when he
comes to judgment, call in witnesses to be informed by them what manner of
person thou art? how can he be mistaken in judging what a one thou art, who
knew before thou were, what an one thou would be? God will question thee,
and not others concerning thee, and God will question thee, not to get
information from thee, but to put confusion upon thee. And, O my brethren,
think, I beseech you, how great confusion will fall upon every sinner in that
day, when the righteous and holy God, shall from his own sight and knowledge,
convince the drunkard of his drunkenness, the adulterer of his uncleanness,
the perverter of Justice of his bribes, and every other sinner, of their
several, secret, personal sins: when God shall say unto them, as Elisha did
to Gehezi, Went not my heart with thee, when the man turned back from his
chariot to meet thee? So when God shall say to thee in that day, Went not my
heart with thee, when thou and thy companions in wickedness met in such and
such a place? when you plotted, acted such and such villainies, did not I stand
by and look on? O would proud and sinful man think of this eye, and this day,
how would it make him come down, sit in the dust, and cloth himself with
trembling. In In illo magno and metuendo district^que judicio, nudi miseri and
contristati contriti humiliati excervicati cum temere and metu, etc.
assistemus. Nobis aderunt Angeli and Throni, and Libri de Actibus nostris
aperientus, Iudicium mirum audire trenendum autem videre omnem hominem subito
rationem reddentem de, verbis, de actibus, de cogitationibus per diem and
noctem quemad. modum ipse peccavit. August. Sermon. 8o. de adventis ad-judicium.

Ecce in quo periculo incessanter confisto nisi quia non semper cogito* Eo
autem miserior quo oblivisci possum. Semper enim videt me Dens and peccata mea
semper mihi intimatur districta sententia, sic sum positus cum vigilo, cum
dormio; sic cum rideo cum laetor; sic cum superbio cum irascor; sic cum
contristor cum delicia^ amplect or denique sic sum semper and ubique August.
Medit, cap. 22,


that great, dreadful and strict judgment, we shall stand naked, sorrowful,
trembling (says Augustine) the Angels and Thrones of Heaven shall be about us,
the books and records of our lives shall be opened, every man presently, shall
give an account of himself, of all his thoughts, words, actions, of all the
sins that ever he has committed, by night or by day: This is a judgment
(says he) wonderful to see, and dreadful to hear: The thoughts and
remembrance of it, made such deep impressions upon the heart of this holy man,
that in another place he says; Behold in what danger I stand continually,
though I do not continually think of it; and the more wretched I, that I can
forget it: for God always sees me and all my sins, a strict sentence always
awaits me; in this condition I am, when I wake, and when I sleep, when I laugh,
and when I am sad; when I am proud, and when I am passionate; sic sum semper
and ubique, thus I am always and everywhere. O could sinners when they are in
their pangs of pride, and passion, and mirth, and madness, with Augustine,
consider themselves as set under the eye of that God, whose severe sentence
they mustabide, it would quell and awe them.

Secondly, This truth, that all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him
with whom we have to do: It speaks terror as to all sinners in general, so in
particular unto all hypocrites, and dissemblers, that pretend to be much for
God, and the Gospel, and Religion, and the public good, and all this while,
they are but pretenders to these things, and make God, and the Gospel, and
Religion, and the public good, but serve their lusts and ends; but be as
stirrups to get up into their saddle, but as steps whereby to mount unto their
heights: as Jehu made his zeal against idolatry, his breaking down the house,
and abolishing the worship of Baal, a pair of stairs to get up into Ahabs
throne; as the Pharisees made their strictness in Religion, their great
devotion and long prayers, but an artifice to insinuate themselves into the
peoples esteem, and to devour widows houses. Well, who ever thou be, that
art guilty in this kind, know it (and know it to thy terror,) there is no
sinner upon earth, whom God hates more then he hates thee: for there is no sin
that is more directly and formally contrary to the nature of God who is truth
it self and cannot lie, then this sin of dissembling is. And there is no sin
that does more either deny or dare this glorious attribute of Gods omniscience,
then this sin does. Do thou think thou can as easily blear and delude the
eyes of God, as thou can blind, and elude the eyes of men? can thou with
all thy colors, shows, pretenses, disguises, blind the eyes of God? All
things are naked and open unto his eye, God sees thee as thou art, and not as
thou would seem. Jeroboams wife thought to have put a cheat upon Ahaziah the
Prophet, because his eyes were dim with age, and he could not see; therefore
she disguiseth her self, and faineth her self to be another woman. But God
could see, though his Prophet could not, and God could tell his Prophet who she
was, for all her disguise, and the Prophet calls her by her name, come in thou
wife of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14.5.
wherefore fainest thou thy self to be another woman. Men may so disguise
themselves, as they may put a cheat upon Gods people (yea and Prophets too,)
for their sight is but dim. They may seem Saints in the eyes of the most
judicious men, and pass with them for others then they are. But God sees thee
as thou art, and God will call thee by thy name: God will say unto thee, come
in thou hypocrite, thou pretender, thou menpleaser, thou self-seeker, wherefore
fainest thou thy self to be another? I say unto thee in the name of God as Paul
did to Ananias; God shall smite thee thou whited wall, thou painted sepulcher.
God will wash of all thy paint and varnish, all thy smoothness and thy colors
from thee, God will discover thy filthiness and rottenness even unto men, to
the loathing of thy person. You shall seldom know a gross hypocrite go to
the grave undiscovered.

There is yet another sort of sinners, to whom this truth is matter of
trembling. And they are such as drive a trade of projects and designs. And we
live in an age that's full of them, never any more. I confess wisdom is good,
it is Gods gift: and counsel is necessary. But look to it, that your designs
be good, that your consultations be for God, and for his glory. But if any of
you be found in a plot or consultation with those of whom the holy Ghost
speaks, Psalm. 2.
Psalm. 2. They take counsel against the Lord, and against his Christ. If you
drive a design any of you, to hinder what God would have promoted, or to
promote what God would have suppressed, or divide what God would have united,
or the like; God who sees and knows what are the designs that are in all
men's hearts, from heaven will blast them. God will cramp you, that your hands
shall not be able to perform your work. There is a text very worth our looking
on, Isa. 29.15, 16. Isa. 29.15, 16.
Woe unto them that dig deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their work
is in the dark, and they say who sees us, and who knows us? Surely your
turning of things upside down, shall be as the potters clay, etc. Where you
have first the men deseribed, secondly their misery. The men are described
first from the closeness of their plots, they dig deep, and their work is in
the dark, and they make account no man knows what they are plotting, and they
say who sees us and who knows us? Nay they do the best they can to hide
their designs, not only from men, but from God, they dig deep to hide their
counsel from the Lord. Secondly, they are described from their industry to
compass their designs: omnem movent lapidem, they try all ways, they turn
things upside down. If their plot will not take one way, they will try a
second, if not that way neither, they will try a third, a fourth, and never leave
turning of things every way, upside down, to bring about their designs. These
are the men here spoken of. The misery and woe here threatened against them is,
that they shall loose all their labor, the designs they travel so much with;
they shall be as an abortive birth, Their turning of things upside down shall
be as the potters clay. That look as the potters clay, when the potter has
spent time and pains in tempering and forming it upon the wheel, and now the
vessel is even almost brought to its shape, a man that stands by, may with the
least push put it clean out of shape and mar all that he has been forming
upon the wheel. So (says God) shall all your plots, and all your turning of
things upside down be. When you think you have brought them even to maturity,
to perfection, when you look upon your business as if it were almost done, God
that stands by and looks on, with one touch will dash and mar all. This is
the woe that the Lord here threatens against them. And there can be no greater
woe upon earth, to a mere Politician, then to be baffel'd and fooled in his
designs; when God deals thus with them, he pierces them in the right vein.
God gave Achitophel, that great Oracle of his times, but one such foil as
this, and his spirit was not able to bear it, he went home and hanged himself.

All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do.
How should it abase and humble every one of us, in the sight of that God before
whom we stand, and with whom we have to do this day? That God before whom we
stand this day knows all our sins, and knows all our hearts. The sins that we
know not, having committed them through ignorance, he knows them: they have
escaped our eye, but they cannot escape the all-seeing eye of God. O God thou
know my foolishness, Psalm. 69.5. The sins that we have committed and
forgotten, God knows them, they are still present unto him, and he is able to
present them unto us. Psalm. 50.21. I will reprove thee and set thy sins in
order before thee. God is able, exactly to set before us all our sins, from the
first to the last, in the same order wherein we committed them, for he fully
and exactly knows them all. What we did in our infancy, what in our childehood,
what in our youth, what we thought, or spoke, or did at such a time, and what
at such a time, and what in such a place, and what in such a company, what in
the morning, and what at noone, and what in the evening, and what at midnight:
what you did last night, and what this morning before you came together, and
what you have been, and what you have done here, what preparations you made for
these duties, what thoughts and affections you have had in these duties. God
knows what roaving thoughts, what vile thoughts have been in any of your
hearts, how dead and unaffected your hearts have been in confessing, praying,
hearing. Now how should this humble us, and fill our faces with shame in his
presence! Were all our sins, and sinful thoughts written this day with a sun
beam (as Tertullians phrase is,) that every man could read, and know, what we
have done, and been, and are, how should we blush in the presence of men? and
shall we not much more in the presence of God that knows all things? O let us
in humble acknowledgement of our former iniquities, and of this days sins,
every one of us say with Ezra, O my God I am ashamed and confounded, and I
blush to lift up my face unto thee, O my God, Ezra 9.6. and again, verse. 15.
Behold we are before thee in our trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee
because of this.

all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do,
may serve, to exhortall of us to sincerity, and singleness of heart; to study
to approve our selves unto God in all our ways: This is that unum necessarium,
which though neglected and disesteemed by most men, will in the issue be found
most comfortable and advantageous, even singleness and plainness of heart.
You know what is said of Jacob and Esau* Genesis 25.27. Esau was a cunning hunter,
Genesis 25.27.
but Jacob was a plain man. Esau, he had his game and his venison, but Jacob
the plain man got the blessing. The world is full of cunning hunters, that may
get the venison, the fat morsels (and much good may it do them,) but, believe
it, the plain-heatted Jacobs will go away with the blessing; they will at
length prevail with God, and prevail with men. Plainheartednesse, will prevail
more then ten thousand policies and cunning tricks. Now to establish every one
in this plainheartednesse, I know no more powerful and effectual means then
the frequent remembrance of the all seeing eye of God upon us, that searches
into all the dark and crooked windings of every one of our hearts.

And therefore that's a second thing, I would from this truth exhort unto, to
eye this all seeing eye of God, to labor to get hearts always to set and
observe him, who always sees, and observes us: that we may say with David,
Psalm. 16. I have set the Lord always before me, and, Mine eyes are ever
toward the Lord, Psalm. 25. and there are especially two sorts of men to whom I
would commend this duty.

First, To Kings, Princes, Rulers, Judges, Magistrates: They are Gods deputies,
vicegerents, for them to remember, hour that God who has committed power and
trust unto them above other men, has his eye continually upon them, strictly
observing how they discharge that trust, and manage that power. O how careful,
how exact would it make them? how would it make them impregnable in all
^^i^^es, flatteris, corruption, entreaties of friends, respects of blood or
brethren? how would it make them administer justice by a tiue and even
balance, without respect of persons? therefore that good King Jehosaphat, when
he set Judges over Judah, he gives them this charge, a Chron. 19.6. Take heed
what you do, for you judge not for men, but for the Lord, who is with you in
judgment (not only to assist you, but to oversee you,) wherefore now let the
fear of God be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with
the Lord, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. So David, Psalm. 82.1.
God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges among the Gods.
Right Honorable and beloved, whom God has called to fit in Parliament, and
has devolved upon you the highest power and judicature, that this Kingdom
knows: you have often heard, that the eyes of all the people of this Kingdom
are upon you; that the eyes of these three Kingdoms are upon you; that the eyes
of all the Churches of Christ are upon you, and therefore you had need take
heed what you do; and in truth. so you had, even upon that consideration. But
let me now put you in remembrance, of that which is more then all this, the
eyes of God are upon you. And O let (in the Name and fear of God, I beseech
you) let these words link deeply down into your hearts, the eyes of God are
upon you* if you do not prosecute your vows, Covenants, engagements to God and
men, with your utmost strength and vigor, shall not God search it out? if
among you there be any found that are secret enemies to the power of
godliness, secret encouragers of any wickedness, either in opinion of
practice perverters or fore-flowers of justice, accepters of persons in
judgment, shall not God search it out? for he knows the secrets of the
hearts, Psalm. 44.21. O that you would think of this every time you come up into
your House, every time any of you stand up to speak in that Honorable
Assembly; O that you would remember, that all things are naked and open unto
the eyes of God. Other Senates and State assemblies, have had Mottoes written
over the doors of their Senate-houses and Councel-Chambers; over the
Senate House in Rome was written, Nequid Respublica detrimenti capiat: O that
over the place where the Commons of England sit, might be written, All things
are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do. O that it
might be written upon the walls of the Chambers where your Committees sit. But
what do I speak of writting it upon walls and doors? O that God would write it
by his Spirit, in every one of your hearts, that where ever you are, or what
ever you are doing, you might still have this in your actual remembrance, that
all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

Another sort of men to whom I would commend this consideration, are Ministers,
Preachers of the word: They also are men immediately employed by God, they are
his Ambassadors: Now, could we, did we continually remember the eye of God
continually upon us, how diligent, how abundant would it make us in the work of
the Lord! how faithful, how courageous, how unbyassed, how above the frowns
and smiles of men! This was it made Paul so faithful, and incorrupt in the
work of his Ministry, 2 Cor. 2.17.
2 Cor. 2.17. For we are not as many that corrupt the word of God; but as of
sincerity, as of God, as in the sight of God, so speak we in Christ. That which
made Paul handle the word so uncorruptly, and with such sincerity, was this, he
spoke it as in the sight of God. I have heard a story of that holy Martyr of
Christ Jesus, M. Latymer, that having in a Sermon at Court in Henry the eight's
days much displeased the King, he was commanded next Sabbath after to preach
again, and make his recantation: according to appointment he comes to preach,
and prefaceth to his Sermon with a kind of Dialogisme in this manner. Hugh
Latimer, Do know to whom thou art this day to speak? to the high and mighty
Monarch, etc. that can take away thy life if thou offend, therefore take heed
how thou speak a word that may displease his Majesty, etc. But (as recalling
himself) Hugh, Hugh (says he,) do know from whom thou come, and upon
whose message thou art sent? even the great and mighty God, that is able to
cast both body and soul into hell fire for ever, and therefore take heed to thy
self, that thou deliver thy message faithfully, etc. and so comes to his
Sermon; and what he had delivered the day before, confirms and urges with
more vehemence then ever. Sermon being done, the Court was full of expectation,
what would be the issue of the matter. After dinner, the King calls for
Latymer, and with a stern countenance, asked him how he durst be so bold as to
preach after that manner? He answered; That duty to God and to his Prince had
enforced him to it, and now he had discharged his conscience and duty in what
he had spoken; his life was in his Majesty's hand. Upon this the King rose from
his seat, and taking M. Latymer off from his knees, embraced him in his arms
saying, he blessed God, that he had a man in his Kingdom, that durst deal so
plainly and faithfully with him. Had never King in England since his time,
wanted such a faithful, plain-dealing Chaplain, to preach to him, it might
have been better with England then it is at present.

all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do;
it may serve to admonish us, to take heed of sin, every sin, how secret and
small soever: for there is no sin so small, that God will not, nor so secret,
that God cannot take notice of it; but all things are naked and open unto the
eyes of him, with whom we have to do. It was the prescript of Epicurus the
Philosopher to his followers, ut semper cogitarent vitae suae testem aliquem
adesse, ever to think that some or other stood by, as witnesses of every
passage of their conversation; and Seneca's counsel to Lucilius, ever to think
himself in the presence of Cato, or Scipio, or Laelius, or some other man
eminently virtuous: that by imagining himself under the aspect of so grave and
austere an eye, he might be kept from absurdities and indecorums: And sure
there is much in the eye of man, to repress and restrain from sin. Potest
miles coram Rege suo non irasci, ob solam Regiae dignitatis eminentiam, says
Basil: A soldier (though wrath and revenge seem to be the proper and
essential qualities of a soldier) can bridle his rage, and put up an injury
in the presence of his King: such majesty is there in the eye of man; yea there
is a kind of authority and awe in the eye of a child: Maxima debetur pueris
reverentia, si quid turpe paras, says Invenal: But O this eye of God, this
pure, piercing, flaming, glorious eye of God; could we remember that, and set
our selves under that, O what an awe would it lay upon our hearts! Sure I can
scarce think, there is any heart under heaven so wicked, but would be awed by
that eye of God. You have heard of Paphnutius, and Ephrem Syrus, that converted
two notorious and impudent strumpets, only by pressing upon them this
consideration of the eye of God. Ah brethren, it is (as Paul says) it is a
shame to speak, what things are done of some in secret. Do not many men do that
in secret, which if their own father, wife, child, or any other, stood by and
looked on, they would not dare to do? well, God has stood by all the while,
and looked on thee; he saw thy secret adultery; he knows when, and where, and
with whom, and with how many thou have committed folly: his eye saw thee, when
thou thoughtest no eye saw thee: Psalm. 130. Jerem. 23, ^4.
darkness is no darkness unto him. If thou can find a time when, or a place
where Gods eye is not upon thee, cannot reach thee, there go, and sin boldly,
sin without fear. But whither can thou flee from Gods presence, whither can
thou go from his sight? Read that Psalm. 139. Can any hide himself in secret
places, says the Lord, that I shall not see him? do not I fill heaven and
earth, Jer. 23.24? A man ( Falens facere aliquid mali de publico recipis te in
domum tuam ubi nemo inimicorum te videat, de locis domus tuae promptis and in
saciem constitutis removes te in cubiculum, times and in cubiculo and aliunde
conscientiam secedis in cor tuum and the meditaris: ille in cord tuo imerior
est. Quocunque ergo fugeris ibi est: quando and teipso interior est, etc.
August. in ^sal 74.
says Augustine) when he has a mind to some sin, gets him out of the
public, betakes him to his house, recites himself from that part of his house
which is most exposed to view, into his closet or bedchamber; and yet being
afraid to be discovered there, he retreats into his heart, and there pleases
himself in contemplative wickedness; Ille in cord tuo interior est, God is
within thy heart, and therefore whithersoever thou fleest, God is there, for he
is more within thee then thy self. Poor soul, there cannot rise so much as one
proud, unclean, lustful, covetous, revengefull, vain thought in thy heart, but
God presently sees it, much less can any of thy actual sins be hid from his
all-seeing eye: O how should this make us stand in awe, and not sin! You know
what that great Monarch Ahashuerus said concerning Haman, when coming in, he
found him cast upon the Queens bed on which she sat; Esth. 7.8.
What (says he) will he force the Queen, before me, in the house? There was
the killing emphasis in these words, before me; will he force the Queen before
me? What, will he dare to commit such a villainy, and I stand and look on! O
brethren, this is the killing aggravation of every sin, it is done before the
face of God. This is that God looks upon, as the great affront and indignity
done unto him: What (says God?) will he be drunk before me? will he swear,
blaspheme before me? will he be unclean before me? will he break my Laws before
me? Ah brethren, to consider, the infinite horrible wickednesses that are
committed in this Kingdom, and that they are all before the eye of God, that
God stands and views them all, God stands and looks on, it would amaze any man,
and make him in astonishment cry out, Sen. Trag.
as once the Heathen did, Magne regnator coeli, tam lentus audis scelera? tam
lentus vides? Great God of heaven, can thou with so much patience, hear and
see such wickednesses?

Secondly, This, that all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him, with
whom we have to do, should admonish us, as to take heed of all sin, so
especially and in particular, to take heed of putting off or delaying any part
of that service we owe unto God, or that duty he requires of us, either toward
himself or men, upon any pretenses or excuses, how just soever they may seem to
men or to our own consciences: for God knows us better then men, better then
our own consciences. There is a singular text for this purpose, Prove. 24.11,
Pro. 24.11, 12.
12. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn to death, and those that
are ready to be slain: if thou say, Behold we knew it not: does not he that
pondreth the heart, consider? and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know
it? and shall not he render unto every man according to his work? In this text
is counsel, and caution, given to all in their several places, to endeavor
with their utmost ability, to deliver those that are unjustly oppressed and
like to be ruined, and to take heed that they do not put off this duty from
themselves, that they do not seek excuses, and plead ignorance, to say they
knew not such a one was in trouble, or if they did, yet they knew that he
suffered trouble as a righteous person; for ought they know he may have pulled
this trouble upon himself: or if they know that too, yet they knew not how to
help and succor him. Take heed of such excuses as these. If thou say,
behold thou knew it not, etc. Ought thou not to have known it? might
thou not have known it? Certainly it is the duty of every good Christian in his
place and sphere to do as Job did, Job 29.16, 17. I was a father to the poor,
and the cause which I knew not, I searched out, and I brake the jaws of the
wicked, and plucked the spoil out of their teeth. It is not enough for thee to
say, Behold thou knew it not: That which thou knew not, thou ought to
have searched out, else thou do excuse one neglect by a worser, and
assuredly God will find this out, for does not he that pondereth the heart
consider it? and he that keeps thy soul does not he know it? and shall not
he render unto every man according to his work?

And here Right Honorable and beloved let me in humility and faithfulness
direct a few words more especially unto you. You know, beloved, and we all know
how the good hand of God, Nehem. 9.27. Obad. 21.
raised you up to be saviors to these kingdoms in a very necessitous time.
When these kingdoms were (to keep the language of the text,) drawn to death,
and even ready to be slain, the Lord then raised you up to be saviors to us,
to save these kingdoms from present and imminent destruction: and O with what
Zeal and forwardness did you gird your selves unto this great work! how ready
were you to enquire and be informed, of all grievances, and pressures, public
or personal? how wholly did you devote and give up your selves to understand
the estate of the kingdom, and to reform abuses and grievances both in Church
and State! And through the good hand of God upon your counsels and labors,
many particular persons, that were drawn to death, and ready to be slain; yea
even buried alive in perpetual exile and imprisonment, have been restored to
their lives and liberties: yea and this whole kingdom, has been by you, under
God, saved and preserved unto that condition in which we are this day. Yet give
me leave Honorable and beloved, to set before your eyes and hearts, a sad
spectable of some that are at this day drawn to death, and ready to be slain,
who stretch out their craving hands to you, for succor and deliverance. And in
the fear of God, and in the bowels of our Lord Jesus I beseech you, to take
heed how you turn away your eyes from them, and think another day to say,
Behold we knew it not.

I will not mention those many widows and orphans whose cries are daily in your
ears, and plead their cause more pathetically then I or any else can do. You
have done very Nobly and justly in putting your selves into a way of releeving
them: only remember, Pro. 3.28.
Bis dat qui cito dat.

Nor will I urge you to a compassionate sense of many poor decayed men, who lie
in our prisons rotting (as it were) alive: You have begun already to take pity
upon their woeful condition, and have appointed a Committee to consider of some
way for their relief, as may stand with the justice and goodness of this
Honorable house. Only I humbly pray you, what may be done for these poor
creatures, let it be done speedily. Nor will I insist upon the complaints of a
third fort among us, who are as it were drawn to death, and ready to be slain,
and they are many honest men, such as those of Zebulon, 1 Chronicles. 12.33. who
were not of a double heart, who having singly and firmly adhered to you in all
the time of your troubles, and done you faithful service, cheerfully obeyed
your orders, and vigorously prosecuted them upon their delinquent landlords or
neighbors, as the necessity of those distracted times did require; hereby they
are become the objects of the envy and malice of these delinquents: some being
vexed and molested with suites in law, having actions of battery and false
imprisonment laid upon them, others oppressed by their delinquent landlords in
their fines and leases, or in the redemanding of those rents, which they have
already paid into the hands of your sequestratours. I know that upon complaint,
any that are unjustly molested, shall find relief at your hands. But in the
mean time it is a matter of joy and triumph to your enemies, if they can create
a vexation to your friends: and to your friends it is a petty death to be thus
vexed, for nothing but favoring your service. Might not your wisdom think
upon some course to check this insolency in delinquents?

But these are but private evils, and they are but some few persons and
families that groan under them, for relief at your hands: I will show you
Kingdoms, Nations, dying, perishing, if you make not have to succor them.

There is Ireland, poor Ireland, that is drawn to death, that is ready to be
slain, that is more then half slain already; that lies bleeding, gasping, ready
to give up the ghost: do we not with trembling hearts expect every day when we
should hear that Ireland is dead, perished, lost? I am sure you will not, you
cannot say, behold we know it not. O then do not fore-slow your aid, and their
deliverance. Now God has given you so glorious a conquest over your enemies at
home, O let your eyes and hearts be upon Ireland, and do something speedily,
vigorously, for the delivering of your brethren, that are drawn to death, that
are ready to be slain, that are killed all the day long: so shall not the blood
of Ireland be required at the hand of England.

There is also another object of your commiseration, and that is England, our
own dear England, that has languished of a bloody issue, almost half as long
as that woman in the Gospel, till the very strength and vitals of it are almost
exhausted. I may say to you of England, as Pharaohs servants did of Egypt,
Know thou not that the whole land is destroyed, Exodus 20.7? I know you have
used many means for the gaining of our pea^e, go on in those endeavors still,
and prosecute them now more then ever: and the Lord so bless them with
success, that your enemies may see and be forced to acknowledge (what we have
affirmed all this while) to wit, that a holy, righteous, safe peace, a peace
with truth, a peace with reformation, was all you aimed at in your wars.

There is yet another dying object of your pity; and that is Truth, Religion,
the Gospel, the Lord Jesus Christ, that lies a bleeding, that is drawn to death,
ready to be slain: O do not I beseech you forbear to deliver them. There is
scarce any truth of Christ, any Doctrine of the Gospel, any point of our
Religion, but by some temerarious hand or other has been invaded, assaulted,
maimed, ready to be slain. The Doctrine of the Trinity, of the Godhead of
Christ, and of the holy Ghost, of the verity of the Scriptures; the Doctrine of
Election, of Redemption, of Vocation, of Justification, of Sanctification; the
work of the Spirit, the rule of life, of holiness; the Doctrine of the
Sacraments, of the Immortality of the soul, etc. We may say with the Prophet
Isaiah, Truth is fallen in the streets, Isa. 59.14. And there me thinks it
lies, breathing out David's sad complaint, I looked on my right hand, and there
was none would know me; Refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul, Psalm.
142.4. Me thinks I see truth and Religion lying in the streets, and crying as
the poor creatures do that lie by the Palace wall, or in the hole at Ludgate,
Some merciful man have pity upon me for the Lords sake: but as generally
neglected and disregarded as those poor creatures are. Truth it is, Right
Honorable and beloved, that when first you met in Parliament, we were in great
danger of losing our Religion. There was a Popish, Arminian faction, that had a
design to robus of our Religion: God gave you hearts to be very sensible of
that danger, and to be very zealous for the prevention of it: I, and thousands
more, must and will bear you record, that if it had been possible, you would
have plucked out your own eyes, rather then have parted with the least Apex or
Iota of divine truth, out of a lenity or indulgence to Papist, or Arminian, or
any other Heretic: where is then your former Zeal? is Religion and truth less
dear and precious now then it was before? God forbid. Is it in less danger? O
that it were. But, surely beloved, our danger in this particular is but a
little changed, not quite removed: then indeed Religion was in danger of a more
violent and quick dispatch, and now it is in danger of a more lingering, but as
sure a death: then it was like to have been dispatched with one thrust of a
sword, or one chop of a hatchet, by the hand of known and undoubted enemies;
now it is like to be stabbed to death with bodkins, with variety and
multiplicity of errors, that have wounded our Religion in every vein: And this
assassinate upon Religion, committed by those that would be counted her chief
and only friends. Lift up your eyes and consider; do you not see the body of
our Religion, lying like the body of Caesar, after he was murdered in the
Senate House, with above twenty several wounds, given him by the hands of his
own friends and confederates? or like the body of Cassianas, whom two hundred
of his own school-boyes stabbed to death with the pins of their writing-Tables?
May we not say of Religion, as Pradentius does of that Martyrs picture?

Pruden. Perist. Hymn 9.
Plagas mill gerens, totos lacerata per artus
Ruptam minutis praeterens punctis cutem.
Truly when I behold the face and state of Religion among us, it is in mine
eyes, as if the Lord Jesus Christ were crucified afresh, and put to open shame
in the midst of us. Here comes a blasphemous Arrian, and he wounds his head, by
denying him to be God. There comes a sectary that is a flat Arminian, though he
has not wit enough to know it, and he wounds him through the heart, by
maintaining universal redemption, and that Christ shed his blood for all men,
a thing, that never entered into the heart of Christ. There comes an Antinomian,
and he pierces his hands and his feet, by denying that exact walking and
working by the rule of the Moral Law, which Jesus Christ came not to give an
indulgence or dispensation from, but to give himself an example of: Atque haec
impune. Can you plead ignorance of these things, and say, behold we know it
not? you cannot; blessed be God you do not: you have begun to set your faces
against these blasphemies and heresies, that (servis dormientibus) are broken
in upon us. Go on in this your might, to stop the mouth of all ungodliness,
and the zeal of the Lord of hosts be your strength. I know it has been said by
some, that because a heart to know and embrace the truth is the gift of God,
and the Magistrate cannot by forcible means work such a heart in men, therefore
the Magistrate must use no compulsion or coercion in matters of Religion: but
certainly, though the Magistrate cannot give grace, yet he may compel men to
attend upon those means where God does usually give that grace: 2 Chronicles. 34.
38 Ezra. 10.7, 8.
Else you must not only repeal the Laws that enjoin Papists to come to our
Churches, but repent of them, as yours and the Nations sins. And though the
Magistrate cannot give men a heart to know and love the truth, yet certainly
the Magistrate may make Laws to restrain and punish errors and blasphemies
that are against the truth: else, pari ratione, because a chaste heart, or a
true and loyal heart, Dan. 3.29.
is the gift of God, and the Magistrate by all his penal Laws, cannot make men
have such hearts, therefore the Magistrate may not make Laws, to punish,
adultery, incest, theft, treason: were this good Divinity, or good policy? Go
on, go on Right Honorable and beloved, let not such shadows as these stay you:
Remember the vows of God are upon you, for the extirpation of heresy,
superstition, schism, profaneness, and of whatsoever is contrary to sound
Doctrine and the power of godliness, as well as of Popery and Prelacy.
Remember, the vows of God are upon you, and the eyes of God are upon you, and
the Lord give you strength so to perform your vows, as you may find acceptance
in his eyes. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

