A NEW PETITION To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Knights Gentry, and Freeholders of the County of
YORK, who have subscribed hereto: Presented to his Majesty at York, April 30.
1642. Desiring a happy Union betwixt the King and the Parliament.
Humbly shows;
THat at the last Assizes they with all Loyal Duty presented a Petition to
your Majesty, and another to the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
containing their humble requests for the declaration of such means as might
take away all distances, and produce a blessed Union most necessary to this
afflicted Kingdom which then was, and we are confident yet is the earnest
Prayer and desire of all in this County who are well affected to your
Majesty, the true Protestant Religion, and the peace of your Dominions. And
since by a Letter from the Speaker of the House of Commons directed to the
Sheriff we are assured that we are accordingly framing their humble desires
to your Majesty, such as chiefly tend to the honor of God, the greatness and
prosperity of your Majesty, and the public good of the Commonwealth. Yet
since (most gracious Sovereign) with much sorrow of heart we understand that
a few Gentlemen of this County have taken upon them to anticipate these
demonstrations of Duty, which both Houses are preparing, and your Majesty's
gracious resolution thereupon in the name of the Gentry and Commons of the
County of York; whereas (indeed) they were a very small part of the Gentry
only, as we are informed in a Petition to your Majesty directly opposite to
the Petition of both Houses of Parliament concetning the removing of the
Magazine at Hull, tending to foment division betwixt your Majesty, and your
great Council.

We therefore encouraged by that expression from your Majesty's own mouth
concerning other Petitioners that you had not gone about to discourage them
from petitioning in an humble way, and being most assured that our loyal
affections to your Majesty, your Crown and Dignity are not inferior to any
of your Subjects whatsoever, and that we have better ground and warrant to
represent the sense of the Gentry and Commons of Yorkshire then those few
Petitioners had; yet are we not possessed with so much arrogancy as to believe
that a few amongst us, or all the County together can judge of the fitness
where to dispose that Magazine, or of the state and safety of this Kingdom
and of your Majesty's Person so well as your great Counsel, whose judgment we
are bound to prefer before all private Counsels, and whose endeavors have
given us much assurance of their care and fidelity to the public, which we
doubt not all tend to the honor, satisfaction and greatness of your sacred
Majesty and Royal Posterity.

And that your Majesty would graciously apply your self to all good means of
Union, that those Duties which by the Laws of God and men we own (expressed
in our late Protestation) may not become a divided Proposition since the
defense of your Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate; the power and
Privileges of Parliament, and the lawful Right and Liberties of the Subject
taken jointly, do all serve to strengthen each other, which we shall equally
labor to preserve to the utmost of our Lives, power and Estate.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray for your long and prosperous Reign.

FINIS
Imprinted at London by R. O. and G. D. for John Frank. 1642.


