TWO LETTERS From Lieutenant General DAVID LESLEY, TO The Right Honorable the
Commissioners of Scotland residing at London,

Together with A VOLUNTARY CERTIFICATE of diverse of the well-affected Gentry in
Notingham-Shire; with their Names subscribed:

Concerning the Carriage of the Scottish Army in those parts.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, at the King's Head in Paul's Churchyard.
1646.

Right Honorable,
IT does exceedingly grieve me to hear there are so many false reports spread
of the carriage of this Army; yet it is some comfort unto me that the Gentlemen
of Nottingham-shire, where the Army does reside, not being desired, have been
pleased in a Letter to me, to give a better Character of our proceedings. And
although I know my testimony would weigh sufficiently with your Lordships not
to give ear to those Calumnies, yet because this may prevail more with others,
I have sent your Lordships the Original, to make use thereof as you shall think
fit. I have likewise thought fit to acquaint your Lordships that I have
received Discharges from the several Villages where the Army quarters; and you
may rest assured nothing shall be wanting which lies in my power for easing
the Country. I could wish that a Bridge were made over the River timously,
that we might join with the Forces on the other side, for blocking up the Town
on all parts* The Bearer will inform you that many things are wanting for
carrying on this Service, which gives no small trouble to

Keiham, Febr. 26. 1646. Your Lordships most humble servant, DAVID LESLEY.

Right Honorable,
THough our burdens have (of necessity) been very great, by the access of your
Invited Army, yet when we consider how (by the wise and happy concurrence of
your Honor, your Commanders and Officers, with our Committees of Parliament
now resident at Southwel) the same burdens have been equally and regularly laid
upon us in this small barren and exhausted North part of our County of
Notingham, we cannot but cheerfully (in the midst of our pressures) acknowledge
our great Thankfulness for your favor, and readiness (as much as in you
lies) to ease us, and so to order and regulate your Army, as to do your best
endeavors to preserve us.

We are sorry that our poverty and weakness cannot answer your merits and
Nobleness: But we hope your Honor, (with the rest) will still be pleased to
accept of our willingness, and we shall remain in this Confidence, that the
expression of this our readiness will (in such noble Spirits) not only
continue, but also increase your pity and goodness toward us and ours: And we
shall ever pray for the increase of your Honor and Happiness; in the
manifestation whereof, we have now at Southwel, in the behalf of our selves and
many others, subscribed our names this third day of February, 1645.

F. Molineaux Sa: Bolles Miles Newton George Maison John Walker. Lawrence
Newton. Will. Clarikson Tho. Ludely William Wild Original Biron Edw. Southworth
Obadiah Martyn George Ruin Jo. Goslin Tho. Fox Roll. Sands Edw. Nevill Edw.
Piscough Geo. Glover Edw. Edlington Robert Hind George Nightingall John
Wastall Edw. Munke Jer. Hatshide Edw. Blewet Thomas Newton. Franc. Thornhill.
John Cross Rob. Noddell William Cayworth Cor. Woodhouse William Samson Stephen
Cor Robert Royston Edw. Philips Jo. Odingsell Jo. Moseley Matthew. Palmer. Rich.
Brough Robert Air William Streyley Park Cressey John Wood Acton Burnell Jo.
Samlo Tho. Sherbrooke

For the Right Honorable, Lieutenant General David Lesley.

Right Honorable,
I Acknowledge with all thankfulness your fredome in acquainting us with the
base calumnies and misinformations invented, and spread abroad against our
Army, which I dare say do proceed for the most part, from the Activenesse,
Industry, and malice of our enemies; of purpose to render us hateful to our
friends, and to divide (which God avert) the Kingdoms if possible: I have been
ever-most willing to redress the least injury and wrong done by any under my
Command; and at this present have the most of them, who are complained on by
the Inhabitants of Tickill in prison, upon whom I shall do Justice most
severely, so soon as any of the crimes they are charged with shall be proved;
by which your Lordships may see how unjustly we are dealt with. In the best
regulated Armies that ever were, there have been disorders and miscarriages:
neither is it to be expected but there have been, and are some in ours,
considering how much we have been neglected in our maintenance, that sometimes
for the space of seven or eight months together, we have received no pay, and
as it is no small matter of grief to me, when any miscarriage falls out; So no
sooner is any disorder made known to me, but I put it to trial and
examination, which is clear in that of Tickill, so much aggravated; for I no
sooner heard of the abuses said to be done there, but I caused imprison the
persons complained on. I entreated the Commissioners from the Parliament to
send to Tickill some from them, where I appointed honest and able men from our
Army to meet with them, to hear the complaints, and report to me, that I might
accorly punish, or clear the persons complained on: These appointed by me went
to the place, but there were none there to meet with them, and the reason
pretended was, because the Inhabitants durst not complain, as long as there
were in the place a Regiment to overawe them (which I dare say is a calumny.)
Wherefore I have removed that Regiment, and have again renewed my former
entreaty to the Commissioners; That they will be pleased to send some from them
to Tickill, where I shall meet them with the persons complained on, that if
they be found guilty, they may be punished according to the nature of their
faults; and if innocent they may be cleared, As to that of Major Blaire, it is
a wild Calumny; for since his coming to Nottinghamshire, he had no order from
me to return to Yorkshire; neither did he return, or quarter there since;
but is yet lying with his Troops in Derby-shire. And for our Army,
notwithstanding of all the heinous crimes we are charged with; I dare say,
never Army did live more peaceably, and soberly, then we have done. And that no
Army in the Kingdom is more willing to accept of a competency, for
subsistence, and to offer themselves when commanded, with all cheerfulness for
the advancement of the public service; I am confident that God, who knows the
sincerity of our hearts to this Kingdom, and the cause we fight for, will in
his own time make the truth of this appear. I have sent you here enclosed a
Copy of a Declaration, which I have caused publish this last Sabbath in all
the Parish Churches where our Forces lie, A Copy whereof I have also sent to
the Commissioners of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and to the Committee
of Yorkshire, which I entreat you to represent with this Letter, to the
Committee of both Kingdoms, and to the Parliament, as also to give assurance
to our friends, that whatsoever reports may be spread of our Army, that they
notwithstanding may rest confident, that there shall be no disorder, nor
miscarriage in it, which shall not be severely punished: And that I expect so
much Charity and Justice from them, that they will believe nothing to our
prejudice, upon bare and naked informations, and reports: And that they will
suspend their judgments till due trial and examination be made: And then I
doubt not, but that we shall receive a good testimony from our friends, and
make our Enemies and Accusers ashamed of their lies and calumnies wherewith
they have charged us, who have and ever shall be zealous in abhorring and
punishing such villainies, and shall ever remain:

Kelhame the 22. of February, 1646. Your Lordships most faithful Servant,
DAVID LESLEY
Whereas both Houses of Parliament have lately given Order for providing 15000.
l. per mensem, for the maintenance of the Forces before Newarke, under my
command: and it is expected the Honorable Commissioners of Parliament will
take special care for due performance thereof, whereby the Army may in some
measure subsist, and be enabled to prosecute the service, where in they are now
engaged: And whereby diverse complaints have been made else where against some
in the Army, without making any address to us here upon the place, who have
ever, and shall still be most ready and willing to redress all just
grievances; we have thought fit to make known to all the Inhabitants in these
parts, that we have issued our Edict and Proclamation, commanding all Officers
and Soldiers, not to presume upon pain of death, to offer the least wrong or
violence to any whatsoever in their persons or goods: And we do hereby invite
all such as have, or shall receive any wrong or injury, from any within this
Army, to to make their appearance freely to our Quarters, to exhibit their
complaints against any Officer or Soldier whatsoever: And we do faithfully
promise that severe punishment shall be inflicted upon all such as shall be
found guilty upon trial; as on the other part we do expect that none will be
so forgetful of their duty, or injurious to this Army, as to make complaints
elsewhere, when Justice has not been denied them upon the place.



FINIS.

