IRENICVM; OR, AN ESSAY Toward a Brotherly PEACE and UNION, Between those of
the Congregational And Presbyterian
Way;

Showing out of the most Learned and Renowned Divines of the Congregational
Way, that their Positions Concerning 1. Church Matters and Members. 2. Church
Constitution and Form. 3. Church State. 4. Church Officers and Ordination. 5.
Church Government and Censures. 6. Church Combinations and Synods. 7. Communion
with and Separation from Churches.


Are sufficient for the establishing a firm and lasting Peace between them and
the Presbyterians.

Drawn up and published by Discipulus De Tempore Junior.

In pursuance of the good design begun at the Savoy, where it was agreed, and
declared. That such Reforming Churches as consist of Persons sound in the
Faith, and of Conversation becoming the Gospel, ought not to refuse the
communion of each other, so far as may consist, With their own principles
respectively, though they walk not in all things according to the same Rules of
Church Order, Canon 29.

London, Printed for Nathanael Webb and William-Grantham, at the black Bear in
Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door. 1659.

THE Preface.
BUt who would write Irenicums, seeing they who attempt it, reap (usually) no
other fruit, then he who running in between two men that are a fighting, with
an honest intent to part them and make them friends, brings both their fists
about his own ears, or turns both their swords into his own bosom, and makes
them both his enemies? at least the prevailing party and he that thinks he has
the better of the cause, will take it exceedingly ill, as the Lutherans do
Pareus his Irenicum, which some of them call (...), and the Scotch non
Conformists the Irenicum of their Country man Forbes.

The consideration of this made the Collector of these Papers, though often
solicited with thoughts of that he has now attempted, to lay them by, till
being a little awakened, first with the report of some thing toward an
accommodation of dissenting parties endeavored, and (as they say) effected in
Cumberland and Westmerland, and in other Counties, and with an expectation of
some thing that was agreed by the Congregational way, in their meeting at the
Savoy, that might conduce to that end, he judged it now seasonable to present
these Papers to public view, that he might suum confer symbolum; If this may
procure a right understanding and composing of the differences between
brethren, the Collector has his desire and reward; if it fail and miss that
end, yet he hopes his reward is with the Lord, having this testimony in his own
conscience, that in singleness of heart he has managed this cause not
knowingly or willingly falsifyng and wresting the words of those reverend men
whom he cites; from which crime if his own protestation be not enough to clear
him, thou shall by and by Reader have the deposition of two sufficient
witnesses. If thou will not believe them neither, get the Books and trust thine
own eyes. If any say these authors elsewhere express themselves otherwise; all
that I answer, is, that my design and work was, not to reconcile them to
themselves, but if I could to their Presbyterian Brethren, which how far it is
done read (but read with understanding and without prejudice) and then judge.

Thine in the Lord D. T.

The Attestation.
WE have examined all the several Quotations here alleged, by the Books out of
which they were taken, and find them to be punctually and syllabically true;
and that there is no falsification, nor violation of them; and this, we being
persons no ways interested in the controversies between the Presbyterian and
Congregational Brethren, nor engaged to either Party, Testify under our hands.

L. K. R. N.

To the Judicious Reader.
AMongst the manifold divisions both in Church and State, whereby England has
been, and still is damnified and endangered; the doleful differences betwixt
Presbyterians and Independants, are not the least, nor least lamented by
gracious hearts, as in other respects; so because the loud noise thereof, both
from the Pulpit and the Press, does cause their adversaries sinfully to
rejoice. 2 Samuel 1.20.
In this regard the Popish, the profane, and Prelatical party do encourage
their hopes, that the good work of Covenanted Church-Reformation in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, will ere long wither and come to nothing. True it is,
that as neither kingdom nor house, so no other society divided against it self
can stand; Mark. 3.24, 25.
for division makes way for dissipation. Genesis 49.7.
Upon this account in pursuance of that Machivilian Maxim, Divide and impera;
the Jesuited Papist, and the self-seeking Statist do vigorously endeavor to
maintain and increase our divisions in matters of Religion at this day: errors
and contentions which are like tares, hindering the growth of grace amongst
Christians, Mat. 13.23.
are sowed by the Devil, their implacable enemy. And it is an expression of
great displeasure from the Lord, when the evil spirit is sent or suffered so
far to prevail upon them which should be one in mutual amity, that they in
passion deal treacherously one with another. Judge. 9.23.
As it cannot be denied, but that animosities causing sad separations, may be
found amongst good men ( For the contention between Paul and Barnabas was so
sharp that they departed asunder one from the other) so experience amongst our
selves confirms, Act. 15.39.
what Solomon long since asserted, A brother offended is harder to win than a
strong City, and their contentions are like the bars of a Palace. In the late
Assembly of Divines called together by Authority of Parliament, many hours, yea
days were run up in serious debates, that the Presbyterians and their
dissenting brethren might be reconciled in matters of Church discipline. And
since that time many books have been published by godly Ministers of both;
persuasions to drive on that good design, but the end intended has not
hitherto been accomplished. Now the good hand of the Almighty, the God of Peace
has stirred up the heart of a faithful and able Minister of the Gospel (whose
name would add authority to this work, though he see cause to conceal it) in a
new way to attempt a brotherly agreement; His design is to stitch up our rents,
and to heal our breaches by discovering the concessions and positions of the
chief Patrons of the Congregational way, that in reference to Church
constitution of members and officers, and in reference to Church
administrations by Classes and Synods, there is not so great opposition betwixt
the Presbyterians and them, as the Independent Brethren here amongst us do
pretend and publish. And let the indifferent Reader (who is not biased with
prejudice and partiality) judge whether there be not much ingenuity with
meekness of wisdom, and solidity of judgment in the Narrative and inferences
herein tendered, without any unbrotherly reflections or bitter exasperations.
The whole Treatise both in regard of the matter and manner of managing it,
speaks the Author to be a man of Peace. That this his undertaking might be
the more successeful, he produces and improveth the judgment of those Divines
only, whose parts and piety have rendered them eminent, who also have published
to the world their apprehensions in this Controversy, viz. Mr. Cotton, Mr.
Hooker, Mr. Norton, Mr. Shepherd, together with the Platform of
Church Government in N. Engl. which was attested by all the Elders convened in
a National Assembly there; and because the names of Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Hooker,
are superlatively famous in the Churches of Christ, therefore their judgment
is most frequently insisted upon. During their abode in old England they were
of one mind, heart, and way with the good old Non conformists, who were real
Presbyterians, so far as the Brethren of their most intimate acquaintance did
conceive; and it is strongly believed, that they would not have left their
native Country for conscience sake, in case they might have been freed from the
unsupportable yoke of Episcopal subscription and conformity, whereof this may
be a probable evidence that very few, if any Non-conformists of special note,
who stayed in England, ever turned Independents. As for the most (if not all)
of our English Independents, they did at once step over the heads of
Non-conformists, from conformity unto Independency, or (as reverend Mr. Ball
was wont with dislike to express it) they did at one jump leap out of the
Surplice and Church Assemblies also. Our brethren of the Savoy Assembly, are
too lavish in nominating some worthy men, as favorites of their cause, for no
other reason, yet appearing, but because they were known Non-conformists. Dr.
Reynolds by appearing at the Hampton Court conference, discovered himself a
friend unto Nonconformity, but he was ever opposite to them who made a Schism
in or from the Church of England. Dr. Chadderton also (a known Nonconformist,
did dislike separation from the Church of England) Dr. Whittaker and Mr.
Perkins also were of his judgment. And it would be no hard task to undertake
the nomination of many Non-conformists, who publicly in print have witnessed
their hearty dislike of all ways of separation from the Congregations in
England, notwithstanding the sinful mixtures in them (vid.) Mr. Cartwright, Mr.
Travers, Mr. Hildersam, Master Dorrel, Master Bradshaw, Master Vide Mr. Balls
answer to Mr. Cans book, entitled, Necessity of Separation from
Non-conformists groun^s.
Ball and Mr. Rathband; Mr. Hildersam did much grieve when he understood that
the Brethren in New England did depart from the Presbyterian Government; and he
said, This mischief had been prevented, if my counsel at Mr. Higginsons going
over, had been taken; which was, that brethren driven thither by Episcopal
persecution, should agree upon the Church Government, before they depart from
hence. And it is well known, that many Presbyterian non-conformists, did by a
letter sent unto New England, bewail their departing in practice (as they
heard) from the way of Church government, which they owned here. As heretofore
Mr. Parker, Mr. Knew-stubs, Mr. Udall, Mr. Sherwood, Mr. Fen, Mr. Egerton, Mr.
Balmford, Mr. Baines, Mr. Foord; and the many scores suspended in Q. Eliz. and
K. James's reign; so of later times, Mr. Dod, Mr. Cleaver, Mr. Wight, Mr.
Bourne, Mr. Pierson; as also Mr. Hind, Mr. Nicolds, Mr. Langley, (whom Bishop
Morton mentions in his Defense of Ceremonies) as Non-conformists; Were
Presbyterians, and utterly against even Semi-separation. Unto these might be
added Mr. John Paget, Mr. Pot, (Ministers of the Reformed English Church at
Amsterdam) and Mr. Hering, with Mr. Thomas Paget, their Successors. The godly
Ministers of Scotland are generally Non-conformists; but the world knows,
that they are Antagonists to Independency. And is it not probable, that if Mr.
Cotton and Mr. Hooker had stayed in their Native Country, they would not have
been at such a distance from Church Fellowship with their Presbyterian
Brethren, as old England Independents are? For doubtless their conscientious
tenderness would have wrought them to practices answerable unto their
judgment, held forth in this book. These two Worthies all their life long were
studious and laborious in the Work of the Ministry, they were Patterns of
Humility, Meekness, Love, self-denial, and all pious practices in their
Families, Relations, and whole Conversation; By them Gods Ordinances publicly
Administered, were highly prized, constantly frequented, and the Sabbath
strictly observed as holy to the Lord. They neither covetously nor
vain-gloriously sought great things in the world by engrossing places of Honor,
command and profit for themselves. The life of faith, and the power of
godliness shined most gloriously in them, all their days; and how few in old
England who boast of these Worthies as their Predecessors in ways of
Independency, do merit such a character of commendation, let them determine who
are best acquainted with their conversation in their several stations and
capacities, And when this book has been seriously perused, let the Judicious
Reader give sentence, whether in their Church-administrations, they be not so
unlike unto them, that they must either disclaim their Patronage, or change
their present practices. It is a high commendation given of learned Mr.
Calvine, that in his Institutions, Commentaries, and other works, he does sibi
constare, always agree with himself, whereas many others especially such who
are much versed in Polemical debates, do often cross shins with themselves
through inconsiderateness or forgetfulness. This is not spoken to cast reproach
upon any good man, but to give an Item unto all, wisely to weigh what they
Puhlish, and what they Practice. The Peacemakers are blessed, but those that
sow discord amongst brethren, are an abomination to the Lord. M^^ 5.9. Prove.
6.19.
The wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated; Therefore follow peace and holiness: L^^. 3.17.
Love the truth and peace. Consider what is said, Heb. 12.14. ^ath. 8.19.
and what may be suggested in this ensuing Treatise, and the Lord give a right
understanding in all things.

An Advertisement to the READER.
LEt the Reader take notice? that these words in the second line of the fourth
page, Nations holy by Covenant, therefore Churches: and these words in the
fifteenth line of the same page; and according to this sense may we not say
Saint Saul, Saint Demas, Saint Judas? and that a Church made up of such as
these, is a Church of Saints? Both these sentences should have been put in the
margent, being not the words of the Reverend Author there cited, but
Observations which the Collector conceived he might justly make upon his words.

IRENICVM. OR, AN ESSAY Toward a Brotherly PEACE and UNION,
CHAP. I. Of the matter of a Church under the New Testament, and who are fit to
be Church Members.
Question. I.

WHat is the matter of a Church now in the New Testament?

Answ. The Church of the Old Testament consisted of no other matter, than of
such as professed the faith of the God of Israel, and of their seed; and the
Church of the New Testament consists of the like. Mr. Cotton of Infant
Baptism, page. 132. line 11, 12.

Quest. 2. Who then may be admitted, or accounted members of the Church in the
New Testament, and who not?

Answ. The ignorant, persons that are grossly ignorant of the first principles
and foundations of Religion, are not to be received members into the Church; or
if born in the Church, yet so continuing in their ignorance to their ripe age,
are not to be confirmed members, That is, they are not to be admitted to the
seal of the Lords Supper, and so are not to be admitted to other rights of a
Churchmember, as election of officers, admission of members, censure of
offenders, etc. Mr. Cotton, Holiness of Church Members, page 19. line 32.

2. Atheists, Witches, Papists, and all Heretics, who either deny the faith,
or profess a false faith against the foundation of Christian Religion, they are
not to be received members into the Church, without reformation and repentance.
Page 20. l. 4.

3. Notorious persons, scandalous for any gross crime, as Idolatry, Adultery,
Fornication, Drunkenness, Oppression, Perjury, Profaneness, Lying, are not to
be received into the Church, or not continued in it. Ibi. page 20. line 11.

Quest. 3. Yea, but if a man be not tru^ly converted and regenerate, is not
that enough to make him incapable of Church Membership, though he b^ neither
grossly ignorant, nor notoriously scandalous?

Answ. Irregeneration alone does not keep any from Church fellowship, Mr.
Cotton.
unless it be accompanied with such fruits as are openly scandalous, and do
convincingly manifest unregeneration; as gross ignorance, palpable hypocrisy
or such like spiritual wickednesses. Mr. Cotton, Holiness of Church Members, p.
92. line 35. And therefore though it be comfortable and desirable in the
admission of members into the Church, when the whole Church and all the members
thereof are satisfied in the sincerity of the regeneration of such who are to
be received, especially in the first planting or gathering of Churches: yet
neither in judgment nor in practice do we suspend their admission, till we be
convinced in our consciences of the certain and unfallible signs of their
regeneration. Mr. Cotton, holiness of Church members, p. 2. line ult. And as
for that the Members should at several times in several companies repair to
those that are to be admitted to examine the time and manner of their
conversion; I am afraid it is a presumed kind of liberty, which wants precept
and example for any thing that ever appeared to me in the Scripture. Mr. Hooker
Survey of Discipline, part 3. page 5.

Object. 1. But is it not said, John 3.3, 5. except a man be born again of
water and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven;
therefore he cannot be admitted into the Church (for that is the kingdom of
heaven) except he be regenerate.

Answ. By the kingdom of heaven there is meant, not the Church of God, but the
state of glory. Mr. Cotton of Infant Baptism, page 139. line 2.

Object. 2. But it is spoken of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27. which is the
Gospel Church, that no unclean thing shall enter thereinto; therefore no
unregenerate person ought to be admitted into the Church.

Answ. That text is a part of the description of the pure Church of the Jews
after their last conversion called the new Jerusalem, by the condition of such
Proselites as from among the Nations shall enter into fellowship with them;
they shall not be profane persons, corrupters and defilers of others, nor
makers of images, which are abominations and lies: and that the description
agrees to infants (though unregenerate) as well as to others. Mr. Cotton of
Infant bapt. p. 133. l. 24.

Quest. 4. But is there not more required to Church Membership, then that a man
be neither ignorant nor scandalous? Is there not positive holiness required?
why else are the members of the Churches in the New Testament, so frequently
called Saints?

Answ. Saints by external calling as distinct from Saints by internal calling,
are the true matter of the visible Church. Mr. Hookers Survey of discipline,
part 1. page 21. line 28.

Quest. 5. Who then are Saints by external calling?

Answ. There are three sorts of holiness; one by imputation from Christ; a
second by regeneration from the spirit; a third by separation to God and his
worship, and to participation of the Ordinances through the Covenant; many
enjoy this last holiness though they do not enjoy the two former. Mr. Cotton of
infant baptism, p. 125. line 1. And they may be holy by covenant, who are not
yet holy by the spirit of regeneration. Ibid. page 67. line 30. and they w ho
believe with temporary or historical faith only, may be holy by covenant.
Ibid. line 28. And the covenant of grace is holy, because it gives right to
holy privileges, and denominates them holy, whether persons, families, or
Nations, nations holy by covenant, therefore Churches, those whom God calls to
such covenant with himself. Mr. Cotton of infant bapt. for it separates them
from other people, and sets them apart to the Lord, and his holy worship, as it
is Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. Ibid. page 111. line 11.

Quest. 6. But can any be said to be in or belong unto the covenant of grace,
but those that are in the state of grace?

Answ. There is a twofold state of grace; one adherent, which some not unfitly
call federal grace, sanctifying to the purifying of the flesh, Heb 9.13. the
other inherent, sanctifying the inward man. And of this there are two sorts,
one whereby persons in covenant are sanctified by common graces which makes
them serviceable and useful in their callings (as Judas, Demas, and such like
hypocrites; and according to this fence may we not say Saint Saul, Saint Demas,
Saint Judas? and that the Church made up of such as these, is a Church of
Saints?) The other whereby persons in covenant are sanctified unto union and
communion with Christ. Mr. Cotton of infant baptism p. 43. l. 16. Now though
all that are in the Church be not sanctified and in the state of grace in this
last and strictest fence, yet in the two former they may.

Quest. 7. But seeing faith is the condition of the covenant, are not all who
believe not excluded from the covenant? and must they not first come to faith
before they can come to the Covenant?

Answ. 1. There is no place proves all are excluded from the outward
dispensation of the Covenant, but Believers only, Mr. Cotton of infant baptism
p. 58. l. 12. If the covenant were only to them that believe, then the faith
whereby we believe, is not given to any by the covenant. Ibid. p. 62. l. 3. If
the Church consists only of real Saints; then real sanctifying grace is never
given to any in the Churchy but always in the world.

2. It is not first faith, and then to the covenant; but first the covenant,
and then faith written and wrought in the heart by the spirit to fulfill the
covenant. Mr. Cotton f infant baptism, page. 54. line 38.

Quest. 8. But is not men's consent to and acceptance of the covenant, necessary
to the bringing them into covenant?

Answ. Gods appointment makes a covenant, whether the creature assent to the
agreement or no. Mr. Cotton of infant baptism, page 64. line 35.

Quest. 9. But yet men must have faith before they can be in covenant, must
they not?

Answ. The children of the faithful are not first converted, and so come under
the Covenant; but first under the Covenant, and so come to be converted. Mr.
Cotton of Infant Bapt. page 29. line 7. God did establish his Covenant with
Isaac, Genesis 17.21. yet it does not appear that Isaac had any faith then, much
less was. it visible. Idem. page 33. line penultima.

The Apostle expounds the Covenant, as given not only to them who are
converted, and so brought on to believe, but to them who yet want faith and
conversion; Acts 3.25, 26. Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. page 34. line 16.

Quest. 10. But is not the admitting of such, who have no true faith nor saving
grace, to be Church Members, and to have right to the Covenant; is it not a
dishonor to God and Jesus Christ? Does it not make Christ the head of an
heterogeneal body, and to have members unsuitable to himself, a living head and
dead members? surely Christ will admit of no such members; Will any man admit
of dead branches to be set in his Vineyard?

Answ. 1. It is true, the Church which is the mystical body of Christ, ought to
be suitable to Christ her head, and so she is many times, but not always every
Member, yea, very seldom every Member, if at any time. Mr. Cotton of Infant
Bapt. page 102. line 36.

It is utterly untrue to say that Christ admits not of any dead Plants to be
set in his Vineyard; or that he takes not to himself a compounded body of
living and dead Members, or that the Church of God is not a mixed company, etc.
Ibid. line 14.

2. Though no man will admit of dead Plants to be set in his Vineyard, or
grafted in his stock, yet many Plants that are grafted and set may prove dead.
Men indeed will not admit dead Plants to be grafted or set, because they know
not what to do with them when they are dead: But if dead Plants after they are
grafted, would grow either to be fruitful, or if not fruitful, good firewood,
it would be no bad husbandry to set and graft dead Plants. And so it is here,
God thinks it no bad husbandry in him to admit dead Plants to be set, and grow
in his Vineyard; and if they grow fruitful, well; if not, to tolerate them
there till they grow up to fulfill their iniquity, as he did the Jews, Matthew.
23.32. because he knows then how to illustrate the glory of his justice, in
casting them into the fire of hell, John 15.6. Matthew. 3.10. Idem, page 101.
line 31.

3. Dead persons if in Covenant, are alive to God, Luke 20.77, 38. And though a
twig cannot receive life from the stock, unless it bring life with it before
it be engraffed, yet Christ can give life to dead branches that are put to him,
as well as the dead Corpse of Elisha could give life to the dead man cast into
his grave, 2 Kings 13.21. Idem, page 150. line 13, etc.

Quest. 11. But will Christ being spiritual, endure a natural wife?

Answ. To say he will not, were to charge Christ himself with folly and with
indignity offered to himself, that he being spiritual, should take so many
thousand Infants into Covenant with him, who for the most part are natural; for
one that is born of the Spirit, there are twenty born of the flesh. Mr. Cotton
of Infant Bapt. page 160. line 14.

Besides, though Christ by taking a company to be a Church unto himself, does
enter into a Marriage-Covenant with them, yet not into Marriage-Covenant with
each Member at first. Ibid. line 20.

Quest. 12. May any man be admitted a Member of the Church, but upon profession
of his faith?

Answ. Profession of faith and repentance is required from Converts of grown
years, whether Jews or Pagans. Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. page 154. line 12.
But as for those that are born within the Church, and have been baptized in
their infancy, Baptism is a Sacrament sealing unto them, as other spiritual
benefits, so their initiation into Church Membership. Mr. Cotton, Holiness of
Church Members, page 96. line 27.

Quest. 13. But seeing some are to be admitted upon profession of faith, and
you said before that a man may be a Church Member and in Covenant, that has
but a temporary or historical faith; if you put such a man upon the profession
of his faith, do you not cause him to dissemble and lie, and play the hypocrite?

Answ. True or false profession may be attended either in respect of the
doctrine of faith professe^, or in respect of the grace of faith professing it,
if the profession of the doctrine of faith be true, though the grace of faith
in the proof ^or of it be uncertain. Or it may be hypocritical and false, yet
we dare not deny the nature and power of a Church to such. As the Church
judges not of hidden crimes, so neither does the faithful Judge, of the
Churches by their hidden hypocrisy, but by their open scandals in doctrine or
life. God would have his people live without anxious perplexity, as in
marriage, 1 Cor. 7.32. so in every society. It were an inextricable perplexity
to suspend the essence and validity of Churches and Church Administrations upon
the hidden sincerity of Churches, and Church Officers or Members. Mr. Cottons
way of the Churches cleared, part 2. page 40. line 20.

Doctor Ames makes it most probable that there is no particular Church wherein
the profession of the true faith does take place, but there are some found that
are true believers in the same place. Ibid. page 91. line 2.

Quest. 14. But is it not a dangerous thing to account wicked men and
hypocrites Church Members, and in Covenant? Does it not harden them in their
sins, and make them promise themselves life in the way they are in, and keep
them from returning from their evil ways?

Answ. We do not promise life to any by the Covenant, unless they be Elect;
and because though they be Elect, yet that is unknown to them, and till they
repent and believe, we tell them they cannot partake in the saving benefits of
the Covenant till they be regenerate, and quickened by the Spirit, as Christ
told Nicodemus. Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. page 33. line 25.

Quest. 15. But God approves and receives none but believers, Heb. 11.6.
Without faith k is impossible to please God; and how can the Church approve or
receive any whom God does not approve and receive?

Answ. 1. That text, Heb. 11.6. shows that no man can be accepted of God
without faith; but not that God cannot receive any into outward fellowship of
the Covenant without faith. Mr. Cotton of Infant Baptism. page 57. line 31.

2. God may approve a man to be admitted into the Covenant, whose person he
approves not. Mr. Cotton, Infant Bapt. page 66. line 39.

3. For it is one thing for the Word of God to approve men to be in Covenant,
another thing to approve them in the Covenant. God he did never approve Saul
nor Jehu in their Kingdom, yet he approved both should be admitted to their
Kingdom. Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. page 68. line 19.

Object. But is it not said, John 4. that God seeks such to worship him, as
worship him in Spirit and truth? therefore none but such may be admitted to the
Ordinances of God. And is it not said, Acts 2.47. the Lord added to the Church
daily such as should be saved, or saved men, as some translate it? therefore
none but such as are in the state of grace and salvation, should be added to
the Church.

Answ. It is said God seeks such to worship him, as worship him in Spirit and
in truth; but it is not said God finds such in every Church. Mr. Cotton of
Infant Baptism. page 103. line 35. Much less none but such.

2. It is said, Acts 2. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be
saved; but it is not said he added none other: Were not Ananias and Sapphyra
added to the Church, and Simon Magus also, who yet for ought appears, were none
of them saved? Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. page 67. line 35.

Object. But as none invisibly before God are by him approved at all to have
right to any privileges of grace, but only as he looks upon them in his
Son: No more are there any before man visibly to be approved of, so as to
have right to the same, but as they appear to be in Christ by some effect of
faith declaring the same.

Answ. If you mean by grace, saving grace, it is true, none have right to any
privilege of saving grace, Mr. Cotton.
but as God looks at them in his Son, either by faith or by election unto
faith; if you mean by grace the outward dispensation of the covenant of grace
and of the seal thereof, it is true none have right to any privilege of the
covenant or the seal of it, but as they are in Christ, either by faith or by
election unto faith, or by the fellowship with the Church, whereof Christ is
the head; in which respect all the members of the Church and their seed are in
Christ, as branches in the vine or olive, and may be cut off for want of faith
to make them fruitful in him. Mr. Cotton of infant bapt. p. 55. l. 28, etc.

2. But when you say none have right to the covenant or the external
privileges thereof, but as they appear to be in Christ by some effect of faith
declaring the same, that you cannot make good from Scripture Light. Mr. Cotton
of infant bapt. p. 56. l. 1, etc.

Hitherto of Church matter and Church Members. Now out of this that has been
spoken, I draw these plain positions with some inferences.
1. The Church of the old Testament and new do not differ one from another in
the qualification of their matter and members. See the answer to the first
question. Therefore the Church of the old Testament consisted of visible Saints
as well as the Church of the new.

2. Sole want of grace does not make a man incapable of Church Membership,
unless ignorance and scandal do accompany it. See the answer to the second and
third question. Therefore no man may be denied membership, because it does not
appear to the Church in the best judgment of charity and discretion thar he
has true saving grace.

3. The members of the visible Church are Saints in respect of outward calling,
not inward inherent grace. See answer to the four th question.

4. The holiness from which the members of the visible Church are denominated
Saints, is not by imputation or regeneration, but by separation to God and his
worship. See answ. to quest. 5. According to which Saul and Judas, and Demas
may be denominated Saints. See answ. to quest. 6. Therefore all assemblies of
people thus set apart to the worship of God, are Churches of Saints, and one
Church may not say unto another, stand apart from me, for I am holyer then thou.

5. The covenant of grace separates men and women from other people, sets them
apart to the Lord and his holy worship, gives them right to holy privileges,
denominates them holy, or Saints. See the answer to the fifth question.
Therefore the covenant of grace (and not any other) constitutes the Church and
gives Church membership.

6. Neither faith nor consent to the covenant is necessary to the bringing of
men outwardly into covenant. See the answer to quest. 7, 8. Therefore an
explicit consent is not required to the constituting of a Church.

7. The covenant of grace is applied to men, not only because they have faith
and are converted, but that they may have faith and be converted. See answer to
question 7. and 9. Therefore by a like reason men are to be admitted members of
the Church, not only because they have faith and are converted, but that they
may have faith and be converted; for the Church and the covenant are
commensurate.

8. Though Christ be a living head, yet he counts it no dishonor to him to
admit of dead members in his Church, which is his mystical body, as knowing how
to glorify himself in or by dead members. See answer to quest. 10. And though
Christ be spiritual, yet he does not despise to take into covenant with himself
those that are but natural. See the answer to the 11. quest. Therefore they
arrogate to themselves to be wiser and holyer then Christ himself, who despise
and depart from Church assemblies and communion, because of the mixture of
those which are not spiritual and have nor the life of grace.

9. Christ though he be married to the Church, is not presently married to
every member of the Church. See answer to question 11.

10. Profession of faith in order to admission unto Church Membership is only
required of those that from Judaism and Paganism are converted unto Christ, and
not from such as being born in the Church are admitted in their infancy; for
their baptism seals to them their initiation into Church Membership. See answer
to question 12. Therefore it is an injury done to any that have been baptized
in their infancy, to deny them admission into the Church, unless they make a
profession of their faith, and that before the whole Church.

11. It is not the grace of faith, but the doctrine of faith, the profession
whereof is required in Church Members. See answer to question 13. Therefore it
is irregular to put people upon the relation of the time and manner of their
conversion.

12. It were an inextricable perplexity to suspend the essence and validity of
Churches and Church administrations upon the hidden sincerity of Churches,
Church Officers, or members. See answer to question 13. Therefore they make
desperate snares for their consciences and the consciences of others, that say
none may be Officers or members of a Church, but such as are really converted
ones.

13. God approved Saul and Jehu to be admitted to their kingdom, though he did
not approve their persons or way of administering their kingdom. See the answer
to question 15. So (by a parity of reason we may conclude that) God approves
some men to be admitted officers or members of the Church, whose persons and
ways he does not approve.

14. It cannot be made good by Scripture Light, that none have right to the
covenant and external privileges thereof, but as they appear to be in Christ
by some effect of faith declaring the same. See answer to the last question.
Therefore to reject any for want of evidence of faith, is not warrantable by
the word.

CHAP. II. Of the Form and constitutions of a Church.
Question 1.

WHether had the Church of England ever a true constitution?

Answ. To say that the Church of England never had any true constitution, Mr.
Cotton.
is a rash and a false speech; rash, for can you say it, or do you know it
because you were then born? or because the number of your days is great? as
God questioneth with Job in another case, Job 38.21. Or have you found such a
matter by reading of ancient records and stories? If you dare credit them (as
doubtless they are more worthy of credit that lived near those times, and had
the view of ancient records, then some of your later books, who speak either
out of partiality to Rome, as the Jesuits; or out of prejudice against the
state of the Church of England, some rigid Separatists do.) But those ancient
records will tell you that England received the faith of Christ, by Joseph of
Arimathea, and Simon Zelotes, and others of those primitive Apostolic Saints,
who doubtless planted Churches not after the pattern of Antichrist, but after
the manner of the Apostles. Mr. Cotton of infant Baptism; page 186. line 3.
Therefore to say the Church of England never had a true constitution, is not
only rash but fals^; for the Churches of England were rightly gathered and
planted at the first. Mr. Cottons way of the Church, page 111. line 26.

Quest. 2. But have not the Churches of England been woefully corrupted since by
Antichristian usurpations and innovations?

Answ. 1. Yes; yet that did not cast them into a worse estate than the ten
tribes in Israel under Jeroboam and his successors, especially under Ahab and
I^sabel, Mr. Cotton.
and the time succeeding them when yet God owned them for his Church, and their
circumcision was not a nullity. Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. page 187. line 9.

2. For the Church now in being, most of their members had their admission into
the Church sealed in Baptism. For many children are born in the Church, to whom
the pastor is by office a Pastor, and whose conversion he is bound to attend
and intend. Mr. Cotton of holiness of Church Members, page 51. line 21. And
their baptism seals to them their initiation into Church Membership. Ibi. page
96. line 31.

Quest. 3. But they who are now Church Members, were baptized upon the account
of the baptism of their forefathers; and they (that is their forefathers) were
bap ized under Antichrist, and so their baptism was a stone lying in
Antichrists foundation; and how can this give right of admission into the
Church of Christ?

Answ. The baptism of believers and of their seed, is no more a stone lying in
Antichrists foundation, then is the doctrine of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; Mr. Cotton.
three persons in one God, into which we and our children are baptized. That
and other Gospel Ordinances, they were in Rome but as the vessels of the temple
were in Babylon reserved for the use of the Church after their return. Mr.
Cotton of Infant baptism, page 163. line 28.

Quest. 4. But to the true and right constitution of a Church, entering into
covenant is necessary, is it not?

Answ. 1 That was done in King Edward and Queen Elizabeth's days; Mr. Cotton.
and whereas they say our Church is but a Parliament constitution, that does
not weaken but establish our Church. Mr. Cotton on the 1 Epist. of John, 2
chap. 19 verse. page 157. line 43, 44, amp;c.

2. The substance of the Church constituting covenant is ke^t where there is a
real agreement and consent of a company of faithful persons to meet constantly
together in one Congregation for the public worship of God, and their mutual
edification, which agreement and consent they do express by their constant
practice of coming together for the public worship of God, and Religious
subjection to the Ordinances of God: Their Platform of Church discipline agreed
upon by the Elders and messengers of the Churches in New England, chap. 4.
sect. 4.

3. The people in the Parishes of England, where there is a Minister put upon
them by the Patron or Bishop, they constantly hold them to the fellowship of
the people of such a place, attend all the Ordinances there used, and the
dispensation of the Minister so imposed upon them, submit thereunto, perform
all services that may give countenance and encouragement to his person in the
work of his Ministry. By such actions and a fixed attendance upon all such
services they declare that (consent and covenant) by their practice which
others do hold forth by public profession. Mr. Hooker Survey of discipline,
part 1. page 47. line 36.

Quest. 5. What then is the work that is now to do in the Churches of England?

Answ. The work which is now to do in the Churches of England, is not to make
Churches where there were none, Mr. Cotton.
but to reduce them to their first primitive institution. Mr. Cotton way of the
Churches, page 151. line ult.

Hitherto of the constitution and form of a Church: Now out of this I shall
also draw some few plain positions, with some inferences.
1. To say that the Church of England never had a true constitution, is a rash
and false speech. See chapter 2. answer to the first question.

2. The Antichristian usurpations and innovations that have overgrown the
Church of England, have not nullified the first constitution of it. See chapter
2. answer to question 2.

3. The baptism administered and received in the Church of England, is no more
Antichristian then the doctrine of the Trinity. See chapter 2. answer to
question the third. Therefore they are condemned who refuse to be present in
our assemblies, when baptism is administered.

4. Not only baptism, but other Gospel Ordinances were reserved in Rome, for
the use of the Church in after times, as the vessels of the temple in Babylon.
See chap. 2. answer to quest. 3. Thence quere, why not ordination reserved
there for the Churches use as well as baptism, and yet no more Antichristian
then baptism.

5. The engaging of the people to reformation by Edward the sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth, had the virtue of a covenant to constitute the Church. See Chapter
second, answer to question the fourth. Therefore much more the late solemn
league and covenant.

6. Peoples ordinary and fixed attending together upon one Ministry, and
joining ordinarily together in the duties of public worship, has the nature
and virtue of a Church covenant. See chap. 2. answ. to quest. 4. And therefore
they who most urge the necessity of a covenant, cannot condemn our Parochial
assemblies as no Churches for want of such a covenant.

7. The work now to do in England, is not to make Churches where none are, but
to reduce them to their primitive institution. See chap. 2. answ. to quest. 5.
Therefore they who have troubled themselves and the Church so much with
constituting and gathering new Churches, have troubled themselves and others
with a work they have nothing to do withal; and so have cause to fear that the
Lord Christ will say unto them another day, Who has required this at your
hands?

CHAP. III. Of Church State.
Question 1.

WHat think you of the Assemblies and Congregations of England?

Answ. The faithful Congregations in England are true Churches of Christ. Mr.
Hooker Survey of discipline, preface a 3. Mr. Hooker


Quest. 2. But what is meant by faithful congregations?

Answ. 1. There is the nature of a true visible Church, where the word of God
is purely preached, Mr. Cotton.
the Sacraments duly administered, with discipline also according to the word
of God. But then the Sacrament must not be administered to undue persons, such
as are the ignorant and scandalous; nor the ignorant and scandalous must not be
admitted into the Church, if discipline be rightly administered; yea though all
these do not concur jointly, yet the essence of a true Church may be found,
though defective for integrity. Mr. Cotton, Holiness of church members, page
10. line 17.

2. For where there has been a Church that has yielded professed subjection
to the Gospel of Christ, then in case a settled Ministry be continued there,
God still continues a true visible Church there. Mr. Cotton holiness of
Church Members, page 5. line 12. And the essence of a true visible Church is
preserved though there be found in it some hypocrites and some notoriously
scandalous both in judgment and practice. Mr. Cotton holiness of
Church Members, p. 19. l. 1.

3. Neither does the hypocrisy of sundry members of the Church, and the
toleration of some open scandals presently take away the nature of the Church.
Mr. Cotton, holiness of Church Members, page 2. line 8.

4. For the members of the Church though orderly constituted, may in time grow
corrupt, which though they ought not to be tolerated in the Church, yet their
continuance therein, through the defect of the execution of discipline and
Church Censures, does not immediately dissolve the being of the Church, as
appears in the Church of Israel, and in the Churches of Galatia, Corinth,
Pergamus, and Thyatira. Platform of discipline from New England, chap. 3. sect.
3.

5. Yea if all the members of the Church should make but an hypocritical
ignorant and verbal profession of Christ and faith in him, yet I will not deny
but such a society may have the name of a Church; and thus far the nature of
it, that the actions thereof are not null. Mr. Cotton holiness of
Church Members, p. 62. l. 33.

Quest. 3. But there are many precious promises made to, and many glorious
things spoke of the Church of Christ, and can they be truly applied to such a
Church as this?

Answ. Look what promises are made to the invisible Church, Mr. Cotton.
they are for their sakes offered to all the members of the visible, whereof
the lively are the chief. Mr. Cotton of infant baptism, p. 6. l. 9.

2. It is one thing to prophecy of the transcendent glorious happiness of an
exact pure Church in some age of it; another to command and foretell the
perpetual continuance of it in such a degree of purity. Mr. Cotton of infant
bapt. p. 134. l. 20.

Quest. 4. But were it not better therefore to gather the Saints, those that
are really gracious and holy into bodies by themselves separate from the rest
that are corrupt members?

Answ. This were upon the point to cast them upon supposal that these corrupt
members be such as receive her membership in their infancy out of the Church,
Mr. Cotton.
and the Lord has allowed but two causes for the casting off any person out of
the Church; first, obstinacy persisted in after the admonition for an offense
first private, Mat. 18.17. Secondly, breaking ou^ into some heinous crime
against the light of nature, 1 Cor. 5.11. Mr. Cotton holiness of
Church Members, p. 56. l. 21.

Quest. But if such members as these are, be not to be cast out, nor withdrawn
from, what is to be done?

Answ. Such as are born of Christian parents, and baptized in their infancy
into the fellowship of the Church, Mr. Cotton.
are initiated members of the same Church, though destitute of spiritual grace,
until they justly deprive themselves of the privilege of that fellowship, for
even of such is the Kingdom of God, Mark. 10.14. Mr. Cotton holiness of
Church Members, page 1. line 16.

2. Such members of the Church as were born in the same, and received their
membership in their infancy by virtue of the covenant of their parents, when
growing to years of discretion they desire to be made partakers of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, unto which, because holy things are not to be
given to the unworthy, therefore it is requisite that these as well as others
should come to their trial and examination, and manifest their faith and
repentance by an open profession thereof, before they be received to the Lords
Supper, or otherwise not to be admitted thereto. Platform of discipline from
New England, chap. 12. sect. 7.

3. Yet these Church members that were so born, or received in their childhood
before they are capable of being made partakers of full communion, have many
privileges which others, not Church Members, have not, they are in covenant
with God, have the seal thereof upon them, to wit, baptism; and so if not
regenerate, are in a more hopeful way of attaining regenerating grace, and all
the spiritual blessings both of the covenant and seal, they are also under
Church-watch, and so consequently subject to the reprehensions, admonitions,
and censures thereof for their healing and amendment as need shall require.
Platform of discipline, chap. 12. sect. 7.

Infants though born in the Church, yet if when they grow up to years, they
shall degeenrate into a profane or scandalous course, they shall not be
tolerated to abide in the Church; yea if they shall not take hold of the
covenant of their fathers, but content themselves in an ignorant civil worldly
course of life, they shall not be allowed to enter into the holy communion with
the sincere members of the Church at the Lords Table. Mr. Cotton of infant
baptism, page 134. line 12. And this he speaks of as the perfection of the New
Jerusalem.

Hitherto of Church State, now to draw some brief positions and inferences from
these particulars.
1. The faithful Congregations of England are true Churches of Christ. See
chap. 3. answer to the first question. Therefore not to be departed from, nor
their communion to be desipised.

2. Where Word and Sacraments are duly administered, there is a faithful
Congregation a true Church. See Chap. 3. quest. 2. answer the first. Therefore
such a Congregation may challenge from every member of it, what ever duty is
owing to any Church of Christ.

3. The essence of a true Church is preserved though there be found in it some
hypocries and some notoriously scandalous both in judgment and practice. See
chapter 3. quest. 2. answ. 4.

4. Though all the members of a particular Church should make but an ignorant
hypocritical verbal profession of Christ and faith in him, yet there remains
not only the name, but the nature of a Church; so far that the actions thereof
are not null. See chap. 3. quest. 2. answ. 5. Therefore quere whether there be
any Congregation in England, so ignorant or scandalous as not to be capable of
the name and nature of a Church according to this position.

5. Promises made to the visible Church, are made to it for the sake of the
elect that are therein. See chap. 3. answ. 11. quest. 3.

6. God allows none tote cast out of his Church, but for obstinacy and heinous
crimes against the light of nature. See chap. 3. answer to question 4.

7. Such as were baptized in their infancy, as they are not to be received to
full communion till they make profession of faith and repentance, so neither
are they to be rejected, but suffered, to enjoy many privileges in the Church;
as Church-watch, etc. for their healing and amendment, chap. 3. quest. 5.
Therefore the more injurious they who cast off some hundreds of baptized ones
in their congregtions, and surfer neither them nor their children to enjoy any
more Church-privileges than mere Turks or Heathens.

CHAP. IV. Of Church Officers and their Ordination.
Question. 1.

WHat need is there of Officers in the Church of Christ?

Answ. Though Officers be not necessary to the simple, being of Churches when
they be called, Platform of Discipline from N. E.
yet ordinarily to their calling they are, and to their well-being; and
therefore the Lord Jesus out of his tender compassion has appointed and
ordained officers, which he would not have done, if they had not been useful
and needful for the Church. Platform of discipline from New England, chap. 6.
sect. 2.

Quest. 2. What officers then has Christ appointed and ordained in the Church?

Answ. These officers were either extraordinary, or ordinary; extraordinary, as
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, or ordinary as Elders and Deacons.
Platform of discipline, chap. 6. sect. 3.

Quest. 3. How many sorts of Elders has Christ appointed in his Church?

Answ. Of Elders (who are also in Scripture called Bishops) there are two
sorts; Platform of Discipline from N. E.
some attend chiefly to the Ministry of the Word, as the Pastors and Teachers,
others attend especially unto rule, who are therefore called ruling-Elders.
Platform of discipline Chap. 6. sect. 4.

Quest. 4. Have the Pastor and Teacher a like power in the Ministry of the Word?

Answ. They are alike charged with the preaching of the Word, Platform of
Discipline from N. E.
and the application thereof, and either of them to administer the seals of the
covenant unto the dispensation whereof they are alike called, as also to
execute the censures, being a kind of application of the Word. Platform of
discipline, chap. 6. sect. 5.

Quest. 5. Is there any such thing as an outward call necessary to the
constituting of a Pastor or Teacher? Mr. Hooker.


Answ. 1. It is a standing and a staple rule, No man takes this honor to
himself, Mr. Hooker.
but he that is called, is Aaron, Heb. 5.9. Mr. Hookers Surney of discipline,
part. 2. page 42. line 33.

2. Without this call none can warrantably do any act that belongs to any
officer. Ibid. page 45. line 28.

3. Without this whatever is done in that behalf is void and of none effect.
Ibid. line 30.

Quest. 6. May none then preach the Word and administer the Sacraments in the
Church, but the Pastor or Teachers?

Mr. Cotton.
Answ. We are far from allowing that sacrilegious usurpation of the Ministers
office which we hear of, (to our grief) to be practiced in some places, that
private Christians ordinarily take upon them to preach the Gospel publicly,
and to minister the Sacraments. Mr. Cotton of the Keys. page 6. line 33. It is
a frenzy of the Anabaptists that begins to labor with the loathsomeness of it
self, that any Christian gifted, who can teach or minister a word of
instruction to win a Disciple after him, that he in a corner may baptize him
also whom he has won to his opinion. But as Paul said of Jannes and Jambres,
their madness is made appear to all who are not willing to shut their eyes
against the Sun when it shines in its beauty.

For if the Lord Christ in his infinite wisdom and Kingly care, conceived it
necessary for the honor of the place, and the execution of the work of the
Deacon to appoint choice men, and solemn ordination to authorize them to the
work, that they being called and fitted to the work, might be accepted therein
of the people, and blessed of him who did appoint them to the employment. In
reason, what greater need is there that persons who are peculiarly gifted, and
furnished with grace and abitity, should be called to this work of preaching
and dispensing these holy mysteries, a service above all other of greatest
weight and worth.

Add hereunto that the Apostle, as by a flaming Sword does stop the way to all
pretenders, and therefore lays in this prohibition. No man takes this honor
to himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron, he must have a special call
from God, who must dare to meddle with a service which is of such peculiar
eminence in the house of God; yea, the Lord himself does appropriate this, and
that to some persons whom he puts in place. He gave some to be Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. Are all Apostles? are all Governors? are all Teachers?
1 Cor. 12.29. This would bring confusion, and so destruction to the whole. Mr.
Hookers Survey of Discipline. part 3. page 9. line 8, etc. and part 2. page 42.
line 23.

Object. 1. But does not the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.31. say, you may all prophecy
one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted.

Answ. 1. That place in the Corniths does not speak of ordinary private
members, Mr. Cotton.
but of men furnished with extraordinary gifts, the Members of the Church of
Corinth, (as of many other Churches in the primitive times) were enriched with
all knowledge, and in all utterance, 1 Cor. 1.5. and the same persons which had
the gift of prophecy in the Church of Corinth, had also the gift of tongues,
which put upon the Apostle a necessity to take them off from their frequent
speaking with tongues, by preferring prophecy before it, 1 Cor. 14. from ver.
2. to 24. so that though all they might prophecy having extraordinary gifts
for it, yet the like liberty is not allowed to them that want the like gifts.

In the Church of Israel, none besides the Priests and the Levites did
ordinarily prophecy, either in the Temple, or in the Synagogues, unless they
were either furnished with extraordinary gifts of Prophessie, as the Prophets
of Israel; or were set apart, and trained up to prepare for such a calling as
the sons of the Prophets. When Amos was forbidden by the high Priest of Bethel
to prophecy at Bethel, Amos does not allege nor plead the liberty of an
Israelite to prophecy in the holy Assemblies, but alleges only his
extraordinary calling, Amos 7.14,15. It appears also that the sons of the
Prophets, that is, that men set apart and trained up to prepare for that
calling, were allowed the like liberty.

2. But neither the sons of the Prophets, nor the Prophets themselves were wont
to offer sacrifices in Israel, (except Samuel and Elias by special direction)
nor did the extraordinary Prophets in Corinth take upon them to administer the
Sacraments. Mr. Cotton of the Keys. page 20. line 16.

Object. 2. But if the Prophets in the Church of Corinth had been ended with
extraordinary gifts of Prophecy, they had not been subject to the judgment of
the Prophets, which these are directed to be, 1 Cor. 14.22.

Answ. It follows not; for the people of God were to examine all Prophesies by
the Law and Testimony, Mr. Cotton.
and not to receive them but according to that rule, Isa. 8.20. Yea, and Paul
himself referred all his doctrine to the Law and the Prophets, Acts 26.22. And
the Bareans are commended for examining Paul's doctrine according to the
Scripture. Idem. page 21. line 14.

Quest. 7. But though every private Christian may not, yet may not the
Magistrate either inferior or supreme, preach and administer the Sacraments?
has not he a power Paramount?

Answ. As it is unlawful for Church Officers to meddle with the Sword of the
Magistrate, Platform of Discipline from N. E.
so it is unlawful for the Magistrate to meddle with the work proper to
Church Officers; the acts of Moses and David who were not only Princes, but
Prophets, were extraordinary, therefore not imitable. Against such usurpation
the Lord witnessed, by smiting Uzziah with leprosy for presuming to offer
incense. Platform of Discipline from New Engl. chap. 17. sect. 5.

Imberare, (that is to rule) and praedicare, (that is to preach) are not
compatible, (that is, cannot agree to one and the same person) has been a
ruled case, admitting no contradiction in an ordinary way. Mr. Hookers Survey
of Discipline. part 1. page 13. line 25.

Quest. 8. You we even now mentioning Ordination, are then these Officers which
Christ has appointed in his Church, to be ordained to their Office?

Answ. Church Officers are not only to be chosen by the Church, Platform of
Discipline.
but also to be ordained by imposition of hands and prayer, with which, at the
Ordination of Elders, fasting also is to be joined. Platform of Discipline
from New England. chap. 9. sect. 4.

Quest. 9. But is not Election alone enough without Ordination?

Answ. No; for as Dr. Ames says, Election gives jus ad rem; Ordination gives
jus in re. Mr. Hooker.
Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipilne. part 2. page 40. line penult.

Quest. 10. Is then the right of Ordination immutable?

Answ. That which is a fundamental point of Religion, Mr. Hooker.
that has divine institution, and so becomes immutable, unless Christ himself
repeal it. Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipline. part 1. page 7. line 21.

But Ordination is a fundamental point of Religion, Heb. 6. Laying on of hands,
being by a Metonymie of the adjunct, put for Ordination. Mr. Hooker. part 1.
page 7. l. 21.

Quest. 11. To whom then does the power of ordaining Officers. in the Church of
Christ belong?

Answ. 1. Ordination is an act of rule, Mr. Cotton.
and pertains to the Presbyters. Mr. Cotton way. page 49. l. 4.

2. When the Churches are rightly constituted and completed with all the
orders and officers of Christ, the right of Ordination belongs to the teaching
Elders, the act appertains to the Presbytery constituted of teaching and ruling
Elders. Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipline. part 2. page 76. l. 1.

Quest. 12. But what if there be no Elders in the Church, who shall ordain the
Officers then?

Answ. In such Churches where there are no Elders, and the Church so desire,
Platform of Discipline.
we see not why imposition of hands may not be performed by the Elders of other
Churches. Platform of Disc. from N. E. chap. 9. sect. 5.

Quest. 13. Are the Word and Sacraments to be dispensed by the Ministers
thereof, only in public or in private also?

Answ. They must be dispensed publicly in the presence, Mr. Hooker.
and with the concurrence of the Church solemnly assembled. It is not in the
power of the Church to confine preaching to corners; for wisdom cries openly
in the str^ets, Prove. 8.2, 3. And of old, the Church of the Jews erected
Synagogues in every City, besides the Temple at Jerusalem, for the hearing and
preaching of the Word. And the Apostle, as he compares the Supper of the Lord
to their ordinary supper; so he opposes manifestly the Church or Congregation
to the private house, and declares that the Lords Supper should be celebrated
in the Congregation, as the banquet should be kept in their private house. Yea,
the scope and nature of the Ordinance calls for such an administration, for
since the Sacraments are badges to show our separation from all other profane
societies, and to signify our communion one with another, visibly in the
profession and confession of the faith, as our spiritual union and communion
with Christ our head myistcally; therefore the administration of them should be
such as should suit the nature of the Ordinances, and serve the end of it. And
therefore it is that in times of persecution when the Church dares not, nor is
meet she should show her self to the enemy; yet not then is the Word nor
Sacraments privately preached nor administered neither, yet ought to be; for
though they be done in the house of a private man, yet because they are and
ought to be administered in the presence of the Congregation, there is neither
private preaching, nor private celebrating of the Sacrament. Mr. Hookers Survey
of Discipline. part 3. page 28. line 15, etc.

Quest. 14. To whom are the Pastors and Teachers of the Church to dispense the
Sacraments.

Answ. A person has his first right to a Sacrament, because he has an
interest in the Covenant of the Gospel, Mr. Hooker.
of which it is a seal; but he must come to it in a right order of Christ; that
is, the party must be a Member of a visible Congregation, because the seals can
there only be rightly and orderly administered. I say it is sufficient the party
be a member of a visible Congregation, not this or that particular. Mr. Hookers
Survey of Discipline. part 2. page 65. l. 26.

Yet it is requisite that such members of a particular Church as were baptized
and received their membership in their infancy should come to their trial and
examination, and manifest their faith and repentance by an open profession
thereof, before they come to the Lords Supper, or else not be admitted
thereunto. Platform of Discipline from New England. chap. 12 sect. 7.

Quest. 15. How is this trial and examination to be made?

Answ. In case any through excessive fear or other infirmity, Platform of
Discipline.
be unable to make the relation of their spiritual estate in public, it is
sufficient that the Elders having received private satisfaction, make relation
thereof in public, before the Church, they testifying their assent thereunto;
this being the way that tends most to edification. Platform of Discipline.
chap. 12. sect. 4.

And this is necessary for some, and warrantable for all, (women) it is most
without exception to receive all, (women after the same manner) Mr. Hookers
Survey of Discipline. part 3. page 6. line 37.

Quest. 16. But may those that are members of one Church partake of the
Sacraments in another?

Answ. The members of one Church occasionally coming to another, Platform of
Discipline.
we willingly admit them to partake with us at the Lords Table, it being the
seal of our communion, not only with Christ, nor only with the members of our
own Church, but with all the Churches of the Saints. Platform of Discipline.
chap. 15. sect. 4.

Quest. 17. But this privilege is restrained only to members of gathered
Churches, is it not?

Answ. The members that come commended from the faithful Congregations in
England to ours here, Mr. Hooker.
so that it does appear to the judgment of the Church whence they come, that
they are by them approved, and not scandalous, they ought to be received into
Church communion with us, as members of other Churches in New Engl. in like
cases so commended and approved. Hookers Survey. Preface. A. 3.

Quest. 18. Are the administrations of men outwardly called to the work of the
Ministry, valid though the persons themselves be destitute of inward sanctity
and saving grace?

Answ. Who ever in a regular way has received this outward call, Mr. Hooker.
is a complete and true officer, and may act any part of his office, though not
inwardly graced, and fitted worthily for such a place and work by God. The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, had this outward call to that
office, therefore they must be heard by Gods own charge, though they were most
unworthy men, had neither sufficiency of parts to do the work of the place, nor
yet sincerity of heart and life to endeavor, much less to discharge the
weight of the services which should be done by them, being blind guides,
painted sepulchers, grossly hypocritical, and scandalously vile in their
general course, corrupting the Law by their false and unlearned glosses, and
perverting the simple by their lewd carriages, polluting all Gods Ordinances by
their corrupt handling, and administration thereof. Mr. Hookers Survey of
Discipline. part 2. page 45. line 34.

Quest. 19. Is the office of the ruling Elder distinct from the Pastor and
Teacher?

Answ. The ruling Elders office is distinct from the office of the Pastor and
Teacher. Platform of Discipline.
Platform of Discipline from N. E. chap. 7. sect. 1.

Quest. 20. Why is this officer called a ruling Elder?

Answ. The ruling Elders are not so called to exclude the Pastors and Teachers
from ruling; Platform of Discipline.
but because ruling and governing is common to these with the other, whereas
attending to teach and preach the Word is peculiar to the former. Platform of
Disc. chap. 7. sect. 1.

Quest. 21. How do you prove that there is such an Office as a ruling Elder
appointed by Christ in the Church?

Answ. That there is such an office and officer appointed by Christ, Mr. Hooker.
as the Scriptures are plain to him whose spirit and apprehension is not
pre-possess't and fore-stalled with prejudice, so this has been maintained by
many of Christ's worthies of former and of later times.

So that we have no controversy here but with hierarchical persons, the force
of whose argument lies especially in a pursevant and a prison, armed with
authority of a high Commission. Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipline. part 2. p. 8.
l. 11.

Quest. 22. But what Scripture have you to bottom this office upon?

Answ. The first argument we have from Romans 12.7. Mr. Cotton.
He that rules with diligence. Mr. Hooker part 2. p. 8. l. 28. Mr. Hooker.
Mr. Cotton of the way of the Churches, page 13. line 31.

The second argument is taken from 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set in his Church
governments. Mr. Hooker part 2. page 10. line 15. Mr. Cotton of the way of the
Churches. page 15. line 29.

A third argument is taken from that famous place which is full to the purpose;
Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17.
Mr. Hookers Survey. part 2. page 11. line 25. Mr. Cottons way. page 19. line 17.

Quest. 23. What is the work of the ruling Elder?

Answ. The ruling Elders work is to join with the Pastor and Teacher in those
acts of spiritual rule which are distinct from the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments committed to them, Platform of Discipline.
of which sort are these that follow.

1. To open and shut the doors of Gods house by admission of members,
ordination of officers, excommunication of offenders, restoring of penitents.

2. To call the Church together when there is occasion, and seasonably to
dismiss them again.

3. To prepare matters in private, that in public they may be carried on with
less trouble and more speedy dispatch.

4. To moderate the carriage of all matters in the Church assembled, to
propound matters to the Church, to order the season of speech and silence, to
pronounce sentence according to the mind of Christ with the consent of the
Church.

5. To be guides and leaders to the Church in all matters whatsoever pertaining
to Church-administrations and actions.

6. To see that none in the Church live inordinately, and out of rank and
place, without a calling, or idly in their calling.

7. To prevent and heal such offenses in life or doctrine which might corrupt
the Church.

8. To feed the flock of God with a word of admonition.

9. And as they shall be sent for to visit and pray over their sick brethren.

10. And at other times as opportunity shall serve thereunto. Platform of
Discipline from New* England. chap. 7. sect. 2. Mr. Cotton of the way. Mr.
Cotton
page 36. line 20. Idem. of the Keys. page 20, etc. Mr. Hookers Survey of
Discipline. part 2. page 16.

11. And by the same parity of reason if any want comfort, sinking under
discouragements and sadness of spirit, or through ignorance are not able to
understand the things delivered, they may call for the help of the Elder in
private, that they may be informed and comforted by him. And hence it follows,

12. That he has power to enquire into the condition, and take account of the
special state of such of the members; for else how should he be able to
administer seasonable and suitable support? Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipline.
part 2. page 17. line 33.

And that these especially the last mentioned, are works belonging to the
Ruling Elder, the nature of the thing would easily persuade a man's reason to
yield thereunto; for how unequal and unreasonable would it seem to a man
acquainted with the weight and work of the Ministry, that when the Pastor or
Teacher should be attending upon reading and searching the sense and mind of
God in his Word, and the mysteries of God therein, (who is sufficient for these
things) that they should be then taken off their studies, and forced to attend
upon men's special weaknesses and wants in private, when they should prepare for
the public dispensations, so that the one must of necessity be neglected, or
they distracted in both. Whereas this appointment of our Savior provides for
both without prejudice or disadvantage to either. Mr. Hookers Survey. part 2.
page 18. line 24.

Quest. 24. You have shown fully what is the work of the Ruling Elders; but I
pray tell me what is that power they are clothed with in th^se acts of theirs.

Answ. 1. Negatively it is not. 1. Any Lordly pompous power. Mr. Shepherds.
2. It is not any Antichristian unlimited power. Nor. 3. Is it and Magisterial
power. Mr. Shepherds wholesome caveat for a time of liberty. page 97.98, 99.

But positively.

1. They have power given them of ruling and governing from Christ by the
people; hence they are called Rulers, and have a strict charge and command from
the Lord to rule. Idem. page 99.

Hence those cast off the Lords government over then who will have no Rulers
nor Governors in the Church, but leave all to themselves and their liberty,
and so by this means they are not only single members or officers, but Pastor,
Teacher and Elder, and all. This generation of men, sons of Korah, are risen up
in these later times, especially among Anabaptists and rigid Separatists, whose
condemnation sleeps not, Satan carrying them to extremes, and pride lifting
them up above themselves, above men, above Officers, above Ordinances, above
God. Idem. page 100. line 4.

2. This power which the Ruling-Elder has, is more than any one member has
which is not an Officer. It would be a most simple ridiculous thing if there
should be Election, Ordination, many prayers, much trial of men to rule and
guide and govern, separation from the rest, and yet to have no more power than
any other private member; therefore says the Apostle, submit to them that are
over you, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Obey them that rule over you, Heb. 13.17. Master
Shepherds wholesome caveat, etc. page 100. line 28.

Hence those that do acknowledge Gevernours in the Church for names sake, but
they are such as have no more power than a private brother: They are to watch,
say they, so are private members, to admonish, so is every private member, etc.
these allow the name, but deny the thing. Idem. page 101. line 8.

Hence also when men shall cry for liberty to speak, an Elder forbids it; what
may not the Church have liberty? yes true, but you are not the Church. An Elder
reproves, they will reprove again; what shall not the Church have liberty? An
Elder gives reasons strong and unanswerable for something to be done, a young
fellow steps up and says without ground or show of it, that is your light, and
mine is otherwise; what may not the Church have liberty? yes, but you are not
the Church. This is very sad, and has been a root of greatest scandal that
ever Gods ways had. Idem. page 102. line 9, etc.

3. In the execution of their office according to Christ, they are over the
whole Church, Heb. 13. Obey them that rule you; he speaks to the whole Church.
Mr. Shepherds wholesome caveat. page 102. line 26. Their power rightly executed
is the power of Christ. Hence refuse it, you refuse to be subject to him, if
men will not be ruled by ordinances, but will rule ordinances, they go about to
rule Christ. Ibid. page 104. line 28.

4. They have power to oversee when they see cause, Act. 20.28. and to enquire
into the state of the flock, to know their spiritual condition. Mr. Shepherd
page 105. line 20. Hence men cast off the government of Christ when they will
not have their spiritual condition searched into; the Elders foot is now too
great for his shoe. I am to give an account to God, so are they also of theirs.
Now thou can not give it if thou inquire not how thy condition stands,
neither can they with comfort, unless thou tellest them how it stands with
thee. Ibid. page 106. l. 3. The Ministers charge is to cast the seed, the
Elders duty is to enquire after the fruit in the husbandry of Christ; but you
can quarrel and snap at the Elders when they come to enquire of your condition;
and why do you enquire? you take too much upon you. Ibid.

5. They have power to guide counsel, and warn the Church, at least in all
weighty affairs which may concern them and their common good, Heb. 13.17.
Malac. 2.7. Mr. Shepherd page 106. Hence for men in matters of great and
weighty affairs which concern the good of the whole Church, nay all Churches,
never to enquire at Abel, is a casting off the Lord: as in election of Officers
in the Church, or Magistrates in the Commonwealth. Hence to receive any opinion
different from all the Elders in the Church, and never so much as speak, much
less come to a sad debate about it, is to cast off this yoke: Hence to propose
a doubtful question to the Church which may trouble or bring an offenders sin
to the Church without council of the Elders; hence when men will not take
warning from the Elders of evil to come, it is a casting off the Lords yoke,
Ibid. page 107.

6. They have power of public reproof of any member of the Church, in case of
plain, open, and public offenses, others without leave cannot nor ought not.
Reproofs are part of the power peculiar to the Governors in any society where
Governors are present and at hand. In a family no wise man will suffer brawles
among children and servants, but says he, Tell me, 1 Timothy 5.20.

Now this is sad when a man cannot bear reproof of others, nor bear reproofs of
Elders, but turns again and will be judge in his own case, though never so
gross; a sign of an extreme froward high spirit. Mr. Shepherd page 108.

7. They are to feed in power, as the word (...) signifies, every one in their
places. Hence when men despise their food, and they are poor things they speak,
and they can see no matter in them (and that after study, prayers and tears)
and so cast it by, that is to cast off the Lord; when men grow glutted and
full, that they eat not a bit, these things call for chains. Mr. Shepherd, page
109.

Quest. 25. But why are you thus large in setting out the work and power of the
ruling elder?

Answ. 1. Because the Apostle in many of his Epistles lays a special charge
upon the people to have a care of the Officers, Mr. Shepherd.
and obey them, Heb. 13.7, 17. It is twice repeated; first least officers be
sadded in their work that is heavy. Secondly, least it be unprofitable for you;
you think to get this and that good by it, but it will be nothing in the
conclusion.

2. Because we lie under the slander of many, and that godly, as if Elders in
Churches were but only ciphers.

3. Because people begin to run into extremes, Elders taking all to themselves,
and people all to themselves.

4. Because if here be not attendance, you will quickly see the miserable ruin
and fall of Churches more sad than the burning of Solomon's temple. It is
observed of Jeroboam that when he stretched out his hand against the Lords
Prophet it was withered, but not when he sacrificed; for the Lord will not bear
here; they may be despised and you may think your selves Kings without them, 1
Cor. 4.8. and men will say so, they may rule as they will, but you will do as
you list, but the Lord will be provoked for this. Mr. Shepherd his wholesome
caveat for a time of liberty, page 109, 110.

Quest. 26. But seeing there is such plain ground in Scripture for the office
of the ruling Elder, and seeing it is so useful and necessary in the Church,
what is the reason there is so much gainsaying and opposing this office?

Answ. 1. Mr. Hooker.
It is no wonder to see the contention grow so hot touching a ruling Elder,
because if he be confined within his compass, the wings of the Pope and Prelate
will be exceedingly clipped, arid their power empeached. Mr. Hookers Survey of
discipline, part 2 page 12. line 8.

2. All Satan's subtilty lies here, Disgrace the Elder says one, divide them
says another, pull them down says a third, that there may be no King in
Israel, no nor in Sion, that we may do what is right in our own eyes. Mr.
Shepherds wholesome caveat, page 110. line 19.

Quest. 27. What say you of the other Officers called Deacons?

Answ. Mr. Cotton.
All men do acknowledge them both to be instituted by Christ in the Scriptures,
Act. 6. 1 Timothy 3. and continued in the Church throughout all ages. Mr. Cotton
of the way, page 38. line 7. Mr. Hookers Survey, part 2. 32. Platform of
discipline, chap. 7. sect. 3, 4, etc.

Quest. 28. What is the Deacons office?

Answ. His Office is to attend tables, i. e. to lay out the treasury and
revenue of the Church as may be behoveful. 1. For to provide elements for the
Lords table when that should be attended. 2. For the table of the poor for all
their wants that they may be supplied (whether of their own body or
strangers.) Mr. Cotton of the way, page 38. line 26.3. For the table of the
Minister, whatever provision the Church shall put into their hands to be
administered to them according to that debt which the Church owes them in way of
wages. Mr. Hookers Survey, part 2. page 38. line 3.

Quest. 29. Is then the Ministers maintenance and the Poors to come all out of
one stock or common treasury?

Answ. Mr. Hooker.
1. No: for first all are not bound to pay it to the treasury of the poor, but
all are bound to pay to the maintenance of the Minister, Gal. 6.6.

2. People are bound to make their teachers partakers of all their good things:
not so the poor.

3. This coupling of the poor and Ministers in one common treasury, confounds
the works of Justice and Mercy. Mr. Hookers Survey of discipline. part. 2. page
30. line 23.

Quest. 30. What was the chief aim of our Savior in setting these officers in
his Church?.

Answ. The chief aim of our Savior (under the glory of his name) was to
provide for the especial good of his elect; yet because those his elect were
mingled here with the wicked in the world; nay, many an elect child proceeds of
a reprobate parent, and because it is impossible for the eye of man to search
into heart secrets and inward sincerity which is covered there, but must judge
of men, and dispense Ordinances unto men according to the limits and laws of
rational charity; therefore it is that our Savior has bestowed these Offices
as a royal gift upon the visible Church over whom he is a head Political by
outward guidance and government, as well as a head mystical by his special and
spiritual conveyance of his grace. Mr. Hookers Survey of discipline, part. 2.
page 2. line 29.

Hitherto of Church Officers, etc. now to draw some positions out of these
particulars with inferences thereupon.
1. Officers are ordinarily necessary to the calling of a Church, and to the
well-being of it, when called, Chap. 5. quest. 1. answ. Therefore the way of
gathering or calling Churches as it is used here in England, is preposterous
where the Church calls and constitutes it self first, and then afterward
constitutes an Officer or Officers.

2. None can warrantably do any act that belongs to an office without a call to
that office; and if he do, it is void and of none effect. Yea, it is a
sacrilegious usurpation, an Anabaptistical frenzy for private Christians to
take upon them ordinarily to preach the Gospel publicly, etc. Chap. 5. quest.
4, 5. Therefore let the brethren of the Church Way consider their practice of
sending out their private brethren and members to preach ordinarily in the
Country Parishes, how warrantable it is: and if every act of an office done
without a Call to the office, be void and null, whether such public preaching
of private Christians, be not a taking Gods name in vain, a mocking of God and
the souls of his people, and sacrilege instead of sacrifice.

3. That famous text, 1 Cor. 14.31. gives no countenance at all to preaching of
private men, and such as are not in office. to quest. 5. Obj. 1.

4. Christ has appointed in his Church not one but many Officers, Pastors,
Teachers, Rulers, and Deacons, and none of these superfluous, but all useful
and needful, all given in wisdom and compassion to his Church. quest. 1, 2. 3.
Therefore how those Churches can be said to come nearest the rule, and walk
closest to the rule, who either have no officers at all, as the Church of H.
and the Church of N. or else content themselves with one officer, a Pastor,
having neither Teacher, Ruler, nor Deacon, as most of the gathered Churches in
England; is this to walk according to rule? is not this either to slight the
compassion of Christ in giving these officers, or to contradict the wisdom of
Christ, and proclaim those offices needless and useless, which Christ judged
needful and useful, and therefore appointed in his Church?

5. Ordination is a fundamental in Church discipline, and gives the officer
right in his office, jus in re. See quest. 9, 10. Therefore ordination is more
than election, which only gives jus ad rem; And quaere how many Ministers of
our gathered Churches can have a full right and authority to administer all
ordinances, having only election of the people, which gives but jus ad rem,
and not ordination which give jus in re.

6. Ordination is an act of rule, and pertaines to the Presbytersy or
Presbytery Que. 11. Therefore not to the fraternity or body of the people.

7. The Word and Sacraments are to be dispensed in public.

Quest. 1^. Therefore why do many of the Church Way so frequently baptize
children in private?

8. The Sa^raments are badges to show our separation from all profane
Societies, and to signify our communion one with another in the profession and
confession of the faith, as our spiritual union and communion with Christ our
head mystically. See qu^st. 13. answ. Therefore the Sacraments are notes of the
true Church, as the Protestant writers have always maintained against the
Papists.

9. A person has his first right to the Sacrament, because he has an interest
in the covenant of the Gospel, of which it is a seal. Quest. 14. Therefore the
Church covenant, as they call it, gives not a man his first right to the
Sacrament, for that is not the covenant of the Gospel, nor is the Sacrament a
seal of that.

10. For the receiving of the Sacrament in a right order of Christ, it is
sufficient that the party be a member of a visible Congregation, not this or
that particular. Quest. 14. Therefore whether the Congregation be constituted
after this or that form, by express covenant or not, whether it be an
Independent Congregation or a Classical Congregation, it is all one if a man be
a member of a visible Congregation, he comes in a right order of Christ.

11. It is requisite that those who were baptized and received their
member-ship in their infancy, should come to their trial and examination,
before they be admitted to the Supper; and this examination may be made by the
Elders, yea in some cases it is necessary it should be so; and for all women it
is most warrantable and most without exception. Therefore such examination in
Presbyterian Churches, is not sinful and unlawful, nor deserves so much
ignominy and scorn, as some have cast upon it.

12. The Sacraments are seals not only of our communion with Christ, and with
the members of our own Church, but with all the Churches of the Saints. See
quest. 16. Therefore they who will partake with none but the members of their
own Church, or a Church of the like constitution, nor suffer their members to
partake in none but their own Churches, are guilty of the greatest breach of
Christian love that can be, unsainting and unchurching all the Churches that
Christ has upon the earth but themselves, and with a kind of Papal pride,
judging and (as much as in them is) excommunicating all other Churches,
contrary to their own principles that say, No one Church has power over
another.

13. The wickedness of a Minister does no ways make void the acts of his
Ministry, nor give the people a dispensation to contemn it. See quest. 18.

14. The ruling Elders office is so clearly and fully grounded in Scripture, as
none can controvert it, but he whose spirit and apprehension is prepossest and
forestalled with prejudice. Quest. 21.22.

15. The power and work of the ruling Elder, is very great, and his office very
needful in the Church. Quest. 23, 24. Therefore they that will have none of
these ruling Elders over them, but leave all to themselves and their liberty,
and by this means are not only single members or officers, but Pastors and
Teachers and Elders and all; This generation of men cast off the Lords
government, are sons of Korah, whose condemnation sleeps not, etc. Quest. 24.
answ. 1. Quaere, whether some others be not guilty of this as well as
Anabaptists, Familists, etc.

16. If the ruling Elder be confined within his compass, the wings of the Pope
and Bishop will be clipped, and their power exceedingly impeached. Quest. 25.
Therefore there is neither truth or modesty in them that say the Presbyterian
Government which is managed by ruling Elders as well as the Congregational, is
as tyrannical as Prelacy, and as Antichristian as Popery.

17. It is the devils subtilty to disgrace, divide, pull down the ruling Elder.
Quest. 23. Let them therefore consider whose work they do, and what reward
(without repentance) they are like to have who drive such a design.

18. Deacons are officers instituted by Christ, and needful to be continued in
the Church. Quest. 26.

19. The maintenance of Ministers is an act of justice, not mercy; debt, not
alms. Quest. 28.

20. Officers and Ordinances are bestowed upon the visible Church, not for
their sake, but for the sake of the elect that are among them whose good (next
under his own glory) Christ principally intended. Quest. 29. Therefore the
visible Church is not first in Christ's intention. Therefore the visible Church,
especially the Church of a particular Congregation, as such, has no reason to
boast her self in her privileges, as the Spouse, and Lacy, and Queen of
Christ, seeing these and all other privileges are given her, not for her own
sake, but for the sake of the elect.

CHAP. V. Of Church Government and Censures.
Question 1.

WHo are the seat or subject of Church Rule or Government?

Answ. Church government or Rule is placed by Christ in the officers of the
Church, Platform of discipline.
who therefore are called Rulers; the holy Ghost frequently, yea always when
he mentions Church Rule and Church Government, ascribes it to Elders;
whereas the work and duty of people is expressed in the phrase of obeying
their Elders, and submitting themselves to them in the Lord. Platform of
discipline from New England, Chap. 10. Sect. 7.

Quest. 2. How is Church government to be considered?

Answ. Church government is to be attended, either in regard of the essentials
or circumstantials of it, Mr. Hooker, part. 1. page 3. line 18.

Quest. 3. What are the essentials of Church government?

Answ. The essentials required to the completing of Church government, are
partly in the persons that dispense, partly in the Ordinances that are
dispensed. Ibid. p. line 20.

Quest. 4. What is essential in the persons that dispense the Ordinances?

Answ. In the persons that dispense, the kinds of officers appointed to that
work, the nature, bounds and limits of their offices, all these are essentials.
Mr. Hooker, ibid. line 22.

Quest. 5. What are the Ordinances that these are to disperse?

Answ. The Ordinances that these are to dispense, are, Preaching, Prayer,
Seals, Church censures, etc. These all are to be found in the Word, an fetched
from the Word, and now under the Gospel, they are and ought to be the same in
all places, amongst all people, at all times in all succeeding generations
until the coming of Christ. Ibid. line 25.

Quest. 6. May there then be no alteration in these things which you call
essentials?

Answ. It is not left in the power of persons, Officers, Churches, nor all the
States in the world, to add or diminish or alter any thing in the least
measure: But as God did appoint all in the old Testament, and those
Institutions did endure there ever (as Scripture speaks) until the coming of
Christ, when the same power which appointed, changed them: So in the new
Testament where are to expect no alteration, Christ the Lawgiver he only
appoints; none but he can; and he has made known his will, that he will not
change them. Mr. Hookers Survey, part 1. p. 5. l. 32.

Quest. 7. What are the circumstantials of government?

Answ. The circumstantials of discipline, as time, place, the carrying on of
these dispensation in civil decencies suitable to the quality of the things and
conditions of the time, as peace and persecution; the general rules of these
are in the Word delivered; but the particular application admits varieties,
mutabilities and alterations according as necessities or conveniences shall
appear by emergent occasions. Mr. Hookers Survey part 1 page 6. line 3.

Quest. 8. You have spoken already of most of the essentials of Church
government, namely Officers and Ordinances of worship; but what say you of
Church censures? are they necessary?

Answ. The censures of the Church are appointed by Christ for the preventing,
removing, and healing of offenses in the Church, for the reclaiming and gaining
of offending brethren, for the deterring others from the like offenses, for
purging out the leaven which may infect the whole lump; for vindicating the
honor of Christ, and of his Church, and the holy profession of his Gospel, and
for preventing the wrath of God which may justly fall upon the Church, if they
should suffer his Covenant and the seals thereof to be profaned by notorious
and obstinate offenders. Platform of discipline from New England, chap. 14.
sect. 1.

Quest. 9. How many censures are there in the Church?

Answ. Three; the first admonition, the second suspension, the third
excommunication.

Quest. 10. What is admonition?

Answ. Admonition is of two sorts; the first more private, when the offended
brother admonishes the offender of his offense, according to the rule of
Christ, between him and the offender alone. The second less private, and yet
not public, when he takes one or two with him. Platform of discipline, chap.
14. sect. 2. Mr. Cottons way page 89.

Quest. 11. But what if the offending party be not gained by either of these
admonitions?

Answ. The offended brother tells the Church of it, to wit, in Gods way. Mr.
Cotton of the way, page 90. line 12.

Quest. 12. What do you mean by telling the Church in Gods way?

Answ. The offended brother is by the mouth of the Elders to tell it the
Church. Platform of discipline from N. E. chap. sect. 2. That is, he tells
the Elders who are the mouth of the Church, that by them it may be presented
before the Church. Mr. Cottons way, page 90. line 13. The matter must first be
brought to the Elders, and by them debated and delivered to the Church. Mr.
Hookers Survey, part 3. p. 36, l. 2.

Quest. 13. But why must the mattor be first brought to the Elders, and debated
by them?

Answ. 1. For that they are guides and leaders of the Church, Heb. 13.17. the
watchmen and overseers of it; and therefore they must know the causes and
controversies; to the full in all circumstances, difficulties, windings and
turnings thereof, that they may be able to lead the Congregation in the way of
peace and truth, which they cannot do unless they know the way themselves. Mr.
Hookers Survey, part 3. page 36. line 3.

2. To them it appertains to judge, whether the things be of weight and worth,
and so need and require the presence and assistance of the body to express
their judgment against them, and the party guilty of them or no; for if they
be petty businesses, and altogether unfit and unworthy to trouble the
Congregation withal, it is in their power to prevent such causeless and
needless disturbance, and therefore to suppress any further proceeding
therein. Mr. Hooker, part 3. page 36. line 10.

Object. But by this means, if the Elders be corrupt in judgment, or partial
in affections, they may silence the weightest cause that can be, and so
prejudice the innocence of those they are not friendly to, and hinder the
reformation of those whom in a corrupt and partial way they sinfully favor.

Answ. Therefore as it is in their power to suppress such petty occasions as
are not worthy the times, pains, and disturbances that must be spent upon them:
So yet to prevent injustice and partiality in such cases, the party who takes
himself wronged, may complain of the Elders in that behalf; and if the
Congregation see apparently that they have dealt unjustly and partially, it is
in their power to rectify; but if the complaints prove unjust and
unreasonable, be it at the peril of him that complains; for he is to be
censured sharply and severely, as out of pride and perverseness, refusing to
listen to the seasonable advice and counsel of those who were set over him by
the Lord; as also because he had needlessly disturbed the peace of the
Congregation as much as in him lies. Hookers Survey of discipline, part 3. page
6. line 26.

Thirdly, the preparation is to be made by the Elders, because if the body of
the people be numerous, they will be unable with any comely convenience to
weigh all the circumstances and difficulties which will certainly and
necessarily occur in such agitation, nor can in reason bestow their times and
pains upon them, as the intricacy and perplexity of the work will sometimes
require. Ibid.

Quest. 14. But what is the work, or power of the Members then in order unto
censures?

Answ. As the Brethren have a power of order, and the privilege to expostulate
with their Brethren in case of private scandal, according to the rule, Matthew.
18.15, 16. So in case of public scandal, the whole Church of Brethren have
power and privilege to join with the Elders, in enquiring, hearing, judging
of public scandals, so as to bind notorious offenders and impenitents under
censure, and to forgive the repentant: Mr. Cotton of the Keys, page 13. But yet
this enquiring and hearing is not to be understood as if the complaint were
immediately, and pro prima instantia, to be brought to the Church or
Fraternity. No, but it is first to be brought to the Eldership, prepared and
ripened by them, and by them related to the Church, for the Elders, before that
have not only examined the offender and his offense, and the proofs thereof
privately; but, do also publicly revise the heads of all the material passages
thereof before the Church, and do withal declare the counsel and will of God
therein, that they may rightly discern and approve what censure the Lord
requires to be administered in such a case: Mr, Cotton of the Keys, page 14.
line 36.

Quest. 15. But yet after the Elders have thus examined the case, and declared
their judgment concerning it, the Church have yet a power to judge; have they
not?

Answ. Yes; but not as an act of rule and authority; for there is a judgment of
discretion by way of privilege, as well as of authority, by way of sentence;
that of discretion is common to all the Brethren, as well as that of authority
belongs to the Presbytery of the Church. In England the Jury by their verdict,
as well as the Judge by his sentence, do both of them judge the same
Malefactor; yet in the Jury their verdict is but an act of Popular liberty, in
the Judge it is an act of his judicial authority. Mr. Cotton of the Keys, page
14. line 11.

Quest. 16. What is the difference then between the judgment which the Brethren
pass in the censure of Excommunication, and that which the Elders pass?

Answ. Great is the difference. For though the Jury have given up their
judgment and verdict, yet the Malefactor is not thereupon legally condemned,
and much less executed, but upon the sentence of the Judge. In like sort here,
though the Brethren of the Church do with one accord give up their vote and
judgment for the censure of an offender, yet he is not thereby censured till
upon the sentence of the Presbytery. Mr. Cotton Keys, page 14. line 20.

Quest. 17. Have then the Brethren no power of authority, but only of
privilege and liberty? Is not binding and loosing an act of authority? and
power to bind and loose, given to the Church of Christ?

Answ. The whole Church may be said to bind and loose, in that the Brethren
consent and concur with the Elders both before the censure, discerning it to be
just and equal, and declaring this by lifting up their hands, or by silence;
and after the censure, in rejecting the offender censured from their wonted
communion. Idem. line 4.

Quest. 18. Whither is this consent of the Brethren unto the judgment and
sentence of the Elders concerning the Excommunication of a Member an act of
authority, or of obedience?

Answ. The people give consent in obedience to the will and rule of Christ:
Hence is that speech of the Apostle, we have in readiness to revenge all
disobedience, when your OBEDIENCE and is fullfilled, 2 Cor. 10.6. The Apostles
revenge of disobedience by way of reproof in preaching, does not follow the
peoples obedience, but proceeds whether the people obey it or no; it was
therefore their revenge of disobedience by way of censure in Discipline which
they had in readiness when the obedience of the Church is fulfilled, in
discerning and approving the equity of the censure, which the Apostles and
Elders have declared to them from the Word. Mr. Cotton of the Keys, page 15.
line 6. And if the people cannot convince the Elder of his error or mistake in
the sentence, they are bound to join their judgment with his in the
completing of the sentence, without impertinent questions, needless scruples,
wilful and disorderly gain-sayings. Mr. Hookers Survey, P. 3. page 42. line 7.

Quest. 19. But what if the case prove doubtful, and there arise a difference
between the Elders and the Brethren?

Answ. If the case be doubtful, and the difference grows wide and great, it is
then seasonable to crave the counsel and help of neighboring Churches. Mr.
Hookers Survey, part 3. page 40. line 15.

Quest. 20. May not the Brethren proceed to the sentence of Excommunication
without the Elders?

Answ. Excommunication is one of the highest acts of rule in the Church, and
therefore cannot be performed but by some Rulers. Mr. Cotton of the Keys, page
16. line 6.

Object. But the twenty four Elders, (who represent the private Members of the
Church, as the four living creatures do the four Officers) had all of them
Crowns upon their heads, and sat upon Thrones, which are signs of Regal
Authority?

Answ. The Crowns and Thrones argue them to be Kings no more than their white
garments argue them to be Priests, verse 4. but neither Priests nor Kings by
office, but by liberty to performs like spiritual duties by grace, which others
do by office and grace both. Mr. Cotton of the Keys, page 16. line 19.

Quest. 21. What are the things or cases for which the censure of
Excommunication is to be inflicted?

Answ. It must not be for petty and small aberrations, but for such evils as
the mind and conscience of a man enlightened by the Church of God would condemn
in himself, or any upon the first serious consideration, was his understanding
left to the liberty of reason to act thereby, and not crack-brained and
perverted with prejudice and selfishnesse. Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipline,
part 3. page 34. line 30.

Quest. 22. But tell us somewhat more particularly and expressly, what is the
matter of Excommunication?

Answ. Such evils as are either heinous or abominable; as fornication, murder,
adultery, incest, treason, or if not so gross, yet carry the face of evil in
their forehead, upon the first serious and well-grounded consideration of
reason, and have been pertinaciously and obstinately persisted in after all
means improved for their conviction and reformation. Mr. Hookers Survey of
Discipline, part 3. page 34. line 37.

Quest. 23. You did a little above (Quest.8.) mention suspension as a censure
distinct from Excommunication; in what cases is that practiced, or used in the
Church of Christ?

Answ. In two Cases. First thus; Members born in the Church, and having
received their Membership in their infancy, being grown to years of discretion,
must come to trial and examination, and manifest their faith and repentance by
an open profession thereof before they be received to the Lords Supper, or
otherwise not to be admitted thereunto. Platform of Discipline from New Eng.
chap. 12. sect. 7. (see before chap. 3. Quest. 5.) though thy suspension be not
strictly a censure, being rather actus charitatis, than potestatis; and as they
call it, suspensio per modum cautelae. Secondly, thus; while the offending
brother lies under the censure of admonition, he stands in the judgment of the
whole Church as a convinced public offender; and therefore till he be
reconciled to the Church by the penitent and public acknowledgement of his sin
before them, he does abstain from the Lords Table, according to the direction
of our Savior who would not have an offender present himself nor his gift
before the Altar, while the guilt of the offense of his brother lay upon him,
Mat. 5.23, 24. Or as the Priests in the Law did forbear to eat of the holy
things whilst they lay in uncleanness, Lev. 22. 3, 4. Or as one Who lying in
his uncleanness, did rather pollute the holy Ordinance of God by partaking of
it, than receive any holiness from it. Mr. Cottons way of the Churches, page
91. line 26.

Object. But this seems to be but a voluntary act of the offending party; this
is not a Church censure.

Answ. If the Church discern the offending brother to be willing to hear, but
not yet fully convinced of his offense, as in case of Herefie, they are to
dispense to him a public Admonition, with declaring the offender to be under
the public offense of the Church, who does thereby withhold or suspend him
from the holy fellowship of the Lords Supper till his offense be removed by
penitent confession. Platform of Discipline from N. E. cap. 14. sect. 2. and
this is truly and properly s^spensio per modum censurae.

Hitherto of Church Government and Censures. Now out of these particulars draw
we these positions with inferences thereupon.
1. Church Government or rule is placed by Christ in the officers of the
Church, who therefore are called Rulers. See answ. to quest. 1. Therefore the
fraternity are not the seat or subject of Rule or power.

2. The essentials of Church Government are unalterable: See answer to quest.
1. Therefore they who believe ruling Elders to be essentials of government, and
yet constitute none in their Churches, live in a neglect of duty contrary to
their judgment and persuasion.

3. Church Censures are Christ's appointments. See answ. to quest. 7. and cannot
be dispensed, at least some of them without Rulers. See answ. to q. 19.
Therefore Churches that have no Rulers, do not nor cannot observe all the
Ordinances and appoinments of Jesus Christ.

4. Petty matters and small aberrations, are not to be censured by
excomunication; but such evils as are either heinous and abominable, or at
least are such as the mind and conscience of a man enlightened by the truth of
God, would condemn in any upon the first serious consideration. See answer to
quest. 20, 21.

5. Offenses are not immediately and at the first dash to be brought to the
Church or community, but first to the Elders to be considered, debated, ripened
by them, received as serious and weighty, or rejected as slight and frivolous.
See answer to quest. 11. And therefore that Tell the Church (which is the next
immediate step after the first and second, brethren and private admonition) it
is not Tell the fraternity or community, but Tell the Elders.

6. The power which the brethren have in censures, it is not a power of rule
and authority, but a power of liberty; and the judgment they pass, it is not
a judgment of authority, but a judgment of discretion; they are but as the
Jury, the Eldership is as the Judge. See answer to quest. 14, 15, 16.

7. The Church binds and looses only by consenting to the judgment and
sentence of the Elders, which consent of theirs is an act of obedience, and
they are bound to yield to it, unless they can manifest that the judgment of
the Eldership is corrupt and erroneous. See answer to quest. 18.

8. In doubtful cases, and in matters of difference, it is seasonable to crave
the help and counsel of neighboring Churches, See answer to quest. 19.

9. There are two sorts of Church Members, some complete who are admitted to
all Ordinances, some incompleate who having received their Membership in their
infancy, are suspended from the Lords Table, and other Church Priviledges, till
they have passed a trial, and have received approbation of their fitness for
those enjoyments. An offending brother lying under public admonition, is
suspended from the Lords Table, before he be excommunicated; therefore
suspension is a censure distinct from Admonition and Excommunication.

CHAP. VI. Of Combination or Consotiation of Churches into Classes or Synods.
Question 1.

WHether is it lawful for particular Congregations, consisting of Elders and
brethren, and walking with a right foot in the truth and peace of the Gospel,
to join together in consotiation on combination of Churches?

Answ. Though the Church of a particular Congregation, consisting of Elders and
Brethren, Mr. Cotton.
etc. be the first subject of all Church power needful to be exercised within
it self, and consequently be independent from any other Church or Synods in the
use of it; yet it is lawful, yea it is an useful, safe and wholesome, and holy
Ordinance of Christ, and in some cases necessary for such particular Churches
to join together in holy covenant or communion and consotiation (so I think it
was intended by the Author, though the printed copy say consolation) amongst
themselves to administer all their Church affairs which are of weighty and
difficult and common concernment, not without common consultation and consent
of other Churches about them. Mr. Hookers Survey of discipline, preface A. 3.
Mr. Cotton of the Keys page 54. line 27.

Quest. 2. Why do some say this consotiation of Churches is, useful?

Answ. The consotiation of Churches is not only lawful but useful, serving not
alone to search out the truth, but to settle the hearts of all that are
sincerely minded in a right apprehension of the same. Mr. Hooker.
Mr. Hooker Survey of discipline, part 4. page 1. line 2.

When many, and those select and eminent, lay the best of their abilities
together, improve their parts and prayers, disquisitions, consultations,
determinations to promote the knowledge and practice of the things of Christ,
the establishment of the Churches in the unity of the faith and their eternal
peace. Mr. Hooker Survey of discipline, part 4. page 2. line 2.

Quest. 3. Why do you say it is safe?

Answ. It is safe; for in the multitude of Councellers there is safety, as in
civil so in Church affairs, Prove. 11.14. Mr. Cottons Keys page 55. line 4. Mr.
Cotton.
The light of nature and right reason forces men out of their own necessities
and experiences to confess this that in multitude of Counselors there is
safety, Et plus vident oculi quam oculus, etc. The issue of the Council
evidenceth as much, Act. 16.4, 5. They delivered the decrees, etc. and the
Churches were established in faith. Mr. Hookers Survey of discipline, part 4.
page 2. line 9.

Quest. 4. But if the Church be of a good and strong constitution and walk with
a right foot in the truth and peace of the gospel, what need of such
consotiation?

Answ. Though this or that particular Church may be of a good and strong
constitution, and walk with a right foot in the truth and peace of the Gospel;
Mr. Cotton,
yet all Churches are not in a like athletick plight, and they that are not so,
will be loath to call in, or look out for help as much or more then others,
though they have more need then others; yea and the best Churches may soon
degenerate and stand in as much need of help as others, and for want of it may
sink and fall into a deep Apostasy, which other Churches might have prevented
if they had discerned it at first. Mr. Cotton Keys page 55. line 7.

Quest. 5. Why do you say this combination and consotiation of Churches is
wholesome?

Answ. It is wholesome as tending to maintain brotherly love and soundness of
doctrine in Churches, Mr. Cotton.
and to prevent many offenses which may grow up in this or that particular
Church, when it transacts all such things in it self without con-Mr. Cotton of
the Keys p. 55. line. 17.

Quest. 6. But how do you prove it an Ordinance of Christ?

Answ. It is an holy Ordinance of Christ as having just warrant from a like
precedent; the Apostles were as much independent one from another, Mr. Cotton.
and stood in as little need of help one from another, as Churches do. And yet
Paul went up to Jerusalem to confer with Peter, Jam^s and John, lest he should
in vain run in the course of his Ministry, Gal. 2.2. And though in conference
the chief Apostles added nothing to Paul, ver. 6. yet when they perceived the
Gospel of uncircumcision was committed to Paul and Barnabas, as that of the
circumcision was to Peter, James and John, they gave unto one another the right
hand of fellowship. Now then it will follow by just proportion, that if the
Apostl s who were independent each of them one of another, had need to consult
and confer together, to procure a freer passage to their calling, and to their
doctrine; than surely Churches, and Elders of Churches, though independent one
of another, had need to communicate te their courses and proceedings in such
cases one with another, to procure the freer passage to the same. And if the
Apostles giving the right hand of fellowship one to another, did mutually
strengthen their hands in the work of the Ministry; then the Elders of
Churches giving the right hand of fellowship one to another in their
ordination, or upon any fit occasion, cannot but much strengthen the hearts and
hands of one another in the Lords work. Mr. Cotton of the Keys. page 55. line
22.

Quest. 7. Is there any thing which may be added, if not for confirmation, yet
for illustration of the point.

Answ. Yes, by comparing the dimension of the new Jerusalem, which is the
perfect platform of a pure Church, as it shall be constituted in the Jewish
Church State at their last conversion. Mr. Cotton.
The dimensions of this Church, as they are described by Ezekiel, chap. 48.30.
are twelve furlongs, that is, about three miles in length, and as many in
breadth. But the dimension of the same Church, Rev. 21.16. is said to be twelve
thousand furlongs. Now how can those two dimensions stand together, that are so
far discrepant one from another, as twelve, and twelve thousand? the fittest
and fairest reconciliation seems plainly to be this; that Ezekiel speaks of
the dimension of any ordinary Jewish Church of one particular Congregation, but
John speaks of the dimension of many particular Jewish Churches combining
together in some cases, even to the communion of a thousand Churches. Mr.
Cotton of the Keys. page 56. line 7.

Object. But Theologia Symbolica non est argumentativa; Arguments from Parables
and mystical resemblances are not valid.

Answ. If there were no argumentative power in Parables, Mr. Cotton.
why did the Lord Jesus delight so much in that kind of teaching? and why did
John and Daniel, and Ezekiel, deliver a great part of their Prophesies in
Parables, if we must take them for Riddles, and not for Documents or Arguments?
surely if they serve not for Arguments, they serve not for Documents. Mr.
Cotton of the Keys. page 56. line 36.

Quest. 8. But is this Combination of Churches necessary, as well as lawful?

Answ. The Consociation of Churches is not only lawful, Mr. Hooker.
but in some cases necessary. Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipline. preface. a. 3.

Nemo, inquit Parkerus, quod sciam, Ecclesiae alicujus reformatae alumnus ante
Hugonem Grotium negavit Synodos esse necessarias quibus nos (...) libenter
profitemur. Norton adversus Apollonium. page 112. Mr. Parker says, that no man
that was a Disciple of the reformed Churches, did ever deny the necessity of
Synods before Hugo Grotius; and we do unanimously confess the necessity of
them. Mr. Norton against Apollonius. page 112. line 17.

Quest. 9. How many sorts and degrees of Consociation of Churches are there?

Answ. This Consociation is of several sorts and degrees, some lesser, some
greater, as Classes, Synods, Mr. Hooker.
and these Provincial, National and Ecumenical; thus far we agree. Mr.
Hookers Survey of Discipline. part 4. page 2. line 15. and 25.

Quest. 10. What is a Synod?

Answ. Synods we acknowledge being rightly ordered, as an Ordinance of Christ.
Mr. Cottons Keys. page 23. line 21. And though not absolutely necessary to the
being, Platform of Discipline.
yet many times necessary to the well-being of Churches. Platform of
Discipline from N. E. chap. 16. sect. 1.

Quest. 11. How is a Synod to be composed, and of what Members ought it to
consist?

Answ. Because it is difficult, if not impossible, for many Churches to come
altogether in one place, Platform of Discipline.
in all their Members universally; therefore they may assemble by their
delegates or messengers, as the Church of Antioch went not all to Jerusalem,
but some select men for that purpose; because none are, or should be more fit
to know the state of the Churches, nor to advise of ways for the good thereof
than Elders; therefore it is fit that in the choice of the messengers for such
Assemblies, they have special respect unto such; yet, in as much as not only
Paul and Barnabas, but certain others also were sent to Jerusalem from Antioch,
Acts 15. and when they were come to Jerusalem, not only the Apostles and
Elders, but other Brethren also do assemble and meet about the matter,
therefore Synods are to consist both of Elders and other Church Members, endued
with gifts, and sent by the Churches, not excluding the presence of any
Brethren in the Churches. Platform of Discipline chap. 16. sect. 6.

Quest. 12. Whether may there be called and k^pt a National Synod or no?

Answ. It may so fall out that the State of all the Churches in the Country may
be corrupted, Mr. Cotton.
and beginning to discern their corruption, may desire the concourse and
counsel of one another for a speedy and safe, and general reformation; and then
so meeting, all conferring together, may renew their Covenant with God, and
conclude and determine upon a course that may tend to the healing and salvation
of them all: this was frequent in the Old Testament in the time of Asa,
Hezekiah and Josiah; these and the like examples were not peculiar to the
Israelites as one entire National Church; these examples hold forth no
superiority in one Church or Court over another, but all of them in an equal
manner give advice in common, and therefore such examples are fit precedents
for Churches of equal power within themselves, to assemble together and take
order with one accord for the Reformation of them all. Mr. Cotton of the Keys.
page 24 l. 22.

Quest. 13. But what is the work that properly belongs to Synods?

Answ. It belongs unto Synods and Councels to debate and determine
controversies of faith and cases of conscience, Platforin of Discipline.
to clear from the Word holy directions for the holy worship of God, and good
government of the Church, to bear witness against maladministration, and
corruption of doctrine and manners in any particular Church, and to give
direction for the Reformation thereof. Platform of Discipline from N. E. chap.
16. sect. 14.

In any part of the Churches way, Mr. Cotton.
which is more hard to hit right upon, as in Elections, Ordinations and
censures of eminent persons in office, it is a safe and holy faithful office of
the vigilance of the community of Churches, to be present with them, and
helpful to them in the Lord; and at all times, when a particular Church shall
wander out of the way, whither out of the way of truth or peace, the community
of the Churches may by no means be excused from reforming them again into their
right way according to the authority which the Lord has given them for the
public edification of all the several Churches within their Covenant. Mr.
Cotton of the Keys. page 58. line 36.

Quest. 14. What is then that power or authority which Synods and Combinations
of Churches have in these cases? is it only declarative and directive, or
consultative?

Answ. We dare not say that their power reaches no further than giving
counsel; Mr. Cotton.
for such as their ends be for which according to God they do assemble, such is
the power given them of God as may attain those ends. As they meet to minister
light and peace to such Churches, as through want of light and peace lie in
error (or doubt at least) and variance; so they have power by the grace of
Christ, not only to give light and counsel in matter of truth and practice, but
also to command and enjoin the things to be believed and done. The express
words of the Synodal Letter imply no less, It seems good to the Holy Ghost
and us to lay upon you no other burden; this burden therefore to observe these
necessary things which they speak of, they had power to impose; it is an act of
the binding power of the Keys to bind burdens; and this binding arises not
only materially, from the weight of the matters imposed, (which are necessary,
necessitare praecepti, from the Word) but also formally, from the authority of
the Synod, which being the Ordinance of Christ, binds the more for the Synods
sake. As a truth of the Gospel taught by a Minister of the Gospel, it binds
to faith and obedience, not only because it is Gospel, but also because it is
taught by a Minister for his Callings fake; and surely also a Synod sometimes
meets to convince and admonish and offending Church or Presbytery; they have
power (if they cannot heal the offenders) to determine to withdraw communion
from them; and further, seeing they meet likewise sometimes for general
Reformation, they have power to decree and publish such Ordinances as may
conduce according to God to such Reformation, examples whereof we have, Nehem.
10.32, 39. 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13. Mr. Cotton of the Keys. page 25. line 10.

Quest. 15. How far then are particular Churches bound to submit themselves
to the directions or decrees of Synods?

Answ. Particular Churches are so far subject to the Consociation of Churches,
Mr. Hooker.
that they are bound in case of doubt and difficulty to crave their counsel,
and if it be according to God to follow it; or if the particular Churches err
from the rule, and continue obstinately therein, the Consociation have
authority to renounce the right hand of fellowship. Mr. Hookers Survey. part 2.
page 80. line 10.

The Synods directions and determinations so far as consonant to the Word of
God, are to be received with reverence and submission; not only for their
agreement therewith, but secondarily for the power whereby they are made, as
being an Ordinance of God appointed thereunto in his Word. Platform of
Discipline from New England. chap. 16. sect. 5.

Particular Churches are bound to acquiesce in the lawful decrees of Synods
received by the major part of the Churches, and approved by the Christian
Magistrate. Mr. Nortons answ. to Apollonius. page 118. line 3. And this, 1.
Under the danger of incurring the guilt of disturbing the order of the Church.
2. Under the penalty of non-communion by the rest of the Churches. 3. Under the
penalty of civil punishment to be inflicted by the Magistrate, as the matter
shall require. Mr. Norton, ib. l. 9, etc.

Quest. 16. But has the Synod authority to determine or conclude any thing
that shall bind the Churches, but according to the instruction which they have
received before from the Churches?

Answ. We do not so apprehend it; for what need Churches send to a Synod for
light and direction in ways of truth and peace, if they be resolved before hand
how far they will go? but if the Elders be gathered in the Name of Christ in a
Synod, and proceed according to rule the (Word) of Christ, they may consider
and conclude sundry points expedient for the estate of their Churches, which
the Churches were either ignorant or doubtful of before. Mr. Cotton of the
Keys. page 26. line 33.

Quest. 17. But what if the Synod conclude and determine against the truth, and
the Church stand for the truth?

Answ. 1. It is not readily to be granted (though neither is it simply to be
denied) that in Reformed times, Mr. Norton.
the opinion of a particular Church should be more sound than the opinion of a
Synod.

2. As it is in civil things, there is an absolute truth, and there is a
judicial truth; and the sentence of the supreme civil Judge, (suppose the
Parliament) is true quoad homines, though it be not absolutely true; so it is
in Ecclesiastical things; the Synod being the supreme and highest Judge of the
question, the sentence of the Synod, though it be not absolutely true, yet it
is Ecclesiastically true. Scil. in foro exteriore.

3. Although, the truth after some new decrees of a new Synod, repealing the
act of the former, may remain with the Church.

4. If the error be not fundamental, public order is to be preferred before
obedience to an affirmative precept that is not fundamental; though therefore a
hoof of truth is to be preferred before the liberties and lives of the ten
thousands of Israel; yet when the whole community is more endangered by the
want of public order, than by the present not observing of some affirmative
command not fundamental, we ought to have more regard to public order, than to
the present obedience of such a command.

5. Therefore the particular Church in this case may and ought to submit it
self to such order, but yet without sin. Mr. Nortons answ. to Apollonius. page
118.119.

Quest. 18. But how can that been done?

Answ. 1. The truth is not to be dissembled, Mr. Norton.
but the Church is modestly and peaceably to bear witness to the truth.

2. Effor is never to be approved though for awhile, in regard of the iniquity
of the time it is to be tolerated.

3. Wisely and patiently we must wait in our stations in the due use of means,
till God in his own proper season shall reveal the truth. Mr. Norton against
Apollonius. page 119. line 30.

Quest. 19. Have all the Members of a Synod equal power?

Answ. A Synod consisting, Mr. Cotton.
as we have heard it does, of Elders and Brethren, their power is not the same,
but distinct; the power which the Brethren have, it is a power of liberty; the
power which the Elders have, it is a power of authority. The Brethren have
first liberty to dispute their doubts modestly and Christianly among the
Elders; so in that Synod at Jerusalem, Acts 15.7, 12. Secondly, they had
liberty to join with the Apostles and Elders in determining the same, as the
common sense of them all. Thirdly, they had liberty to join with the Apostles
and Elders in choosing and sending Messengers, and in writing Synodal letters
in the name of all, for the publishing of the sentence of the Synod, Acts 13.
ver. 22, 23. to 29. But the authority of the decrees lay chiefly, if not only,
in the Apostles and Elders, as appears, Acts 16.4. So then it will be most safe
to preserve to the Church of Brethren their due liberty, and to the Church of
the Elders their due authority. Mr. Cotton of the Keys. page 26. line 1.

Quest. 20. Whether may a person or persons wronged by particular Churches,
appeal to a Synod or no for redress?

Answ. There is a right of appeals in weighty causes from an inferior to a
superior sentence. Mr. Norton.


And seeing that in Ecclesiastical causes, and among Ecclesiastical persons
many differences do arise, who can deny but that this right of appeals must be
granted there?

Appeals are of divine and natural right, and necessary in all societies,
because of the ignorance and unrighteousness of many who are Judges. Mr.
Nortons answer to Apoll. 3. page 112. line antepenult. and page 114.

Hitherto of the Combination or Consociation of Churches, and of Synods, and
their power. Now from these particulars that have been delivered, let us draw
some positions with their inferences.
First, it is lawful for particular Churches to join together in a holy
Covenant and communion amongst themselves to administer all Church Affairs of
weight and difficulty, and common concernment, not without common consultation
and consent about them. See answer to quest. 1. Hence it follows,

1. That if an express consent and Covenant be the formalis ratio, and
constitutive of a Church; then these particular Churches thus joined together,
make up one Church; not representative and improprie, but truly and properly,
having the true formale of a Church, and that which dat essentiam.

2. If they have thus covenanted together to transact things by common consent,
then every Church of the Consociation has the same power in all matters that
the fraternity of a particular Church has, to wit, of consenting or of
dissenting.

3. If they Covenant to administer all their affairs not without common
consent, then quere whether every particular Church has not a negative voice,
which is more then the Presbyterians contend for.

4. If they Covenant to administer all matters of weight and common
concernment, NOT without common consent, then the excommunication of any person
being a matter of weight, (as doubtless the delivering up of a soul to Satan
is) and also a matter of common concernment, (he that is cast out of one
Church, being cast out of all) will it not from the concession follow that no
particular Church can excommunicate a Member, without the consent of the
associated Churches?

2. This Consociation of Churches, is safe, useful and wholesome, and in some
case necessary. See answ. to quest. 2.3, 5, 8. they therefore who refuse to
associate with other Churches when it is offered, let these consider whether
they do not forsake their own mercies.

3. Even the strongest and best Churches have need of Association; first, that
they may help the weak; for all Churches are not in a like athletick plight;
and secondly, for themselves; for the best may soon degenerate, and for want of
Association, may sink and fall into deep Apostasy. See answ. to quest. 4.
therefore,

1. These Associations ought not to be elective; for then the strong and
athletick Churches may combine together, and exclude the weaker and less
athletick, saying, we have no need of you; which would frustrate the end of
combination; and therefore the best way is for Churches that are in vicinity to
combine together.

2. If the strongest Church may need Consociation to prevent degeneration and
Apostasy, then the best way is to have these Consociations fixed and stated,
not occasional only, and pro re nata.

-- Sero med cina paratur,
Quum mala per long as invaluere moras.
4. Combination of Churches is an holy Ordinance of Christ. See answ. to quest.
6. Therefore let them consider how they will answer it to Jesus Christ, who not
only live without this Ordinance, but despise it, and speak evil of it, and yet
have covenanted to walk in all the Ordinances of Christ, and would be thought
so to do.

5. Combination of Churches is no more destructive to the power of particular
Churches, than the Consociation of the Apostles was to their Apostolical power.
See answer to quest. 6.

6. As the Apostles giving the right hand of fellowship one to another,
strengthened their hands in the work of the Ministry; so the Elders of
Churches giving the right hand of fellowship one to another upon any fit
occasion, cannot but strengthen the heart and hands of one another in the Lords
work. See answ. to quest. 7. Therefore for the Elders of Congregational
Churches to refuse to associate with their brethren of another judgment, and to
refuse to give them the right hand of fellowship, what does it declare but
this, that either they do not think we in our Ministry work the work of the
Lord, or else that they are resolved to weaken our hands, and hinder our work
as much as they can, because though we do Gods work, yet we do not do it in
their ways?

7. A Combination of Churches, or a Classical Church, is a pure Gospel Church,
according to the most perfect platform; it is the new jerusalem that came down
from heaven, Rev. 21.16. See answ. to quest. 7. therefore they are much
mistaken that say it is an Antichristian platform.

8. Classes and Synods Provincial and National are lawful, and warrantable. See
answ. to quest. 9. therefore they exceedingly prevaricate, who go about to
render them either ridiculous as some, or odious as others.

9. A Synod is an Ordinance of Christ, necessary, though not to the being, yet
to the well-being of Churches. See answ. to quest. 10. therefore it is as
necessary as the rest of discipline, which is necessary only for the well-being
of Churches, not to their being. And secondly, therefore it is no more improper
to have Combinations or Synods fixed and stated, than it is to have other
meetings for Discipline so fixed.

10. Delegation to be a member of a Synod, is a lawful Gospel-employment. See
answ. to quest. 11.

11. All the Churches of a Nation may meet together to consult, and to renew
their Covenant for Reformation; if the Covenant constitute the Church, quere,
whither they be not now a National Church? See answ. to quest. 12.

12. The practice of the Church in Hezekiahs days, and in Josiahs days, is a
president for National Synods and Councils. See answ. to quest. 12.

13. Synods are useful, and have power in cases of difficulty, and in such
cases particular Churches are bound to make use of them. See answ. to quest.
13. and 15. and in case of maladministration, and in such cases the
Consociated Churches are bound to take cognizance of it, and redress it. See
answ. to quest. 13.

14. Synods have power and authority from Christ, not only to direct and give
counsel, and declare the mind of Christ, but also to command and injoyne. See
answ. to quest. 19.

15. Synods have some part of the binding power of the Keys. See answ. to
quest. 14. Quere, why not all as well as some, and where Christ has made the
Partition.

16. The decrees and injunctions of Synods so far as they are agreeable to the
Word of God, bind not only materially, because they are agreeable to the Word,
but formally, because they are the decrees of a Synod, which is the Ordinance
of Christ. See answ. to quest. 14. and 15.

17. In the determination of the major part of a Synod, approved by the
Christian Magistrate, particular Churches are bound to acquiesce upon pain 1.
Of being guilty of disturbing the order and peace of the Church. 2. Of
non-communion. 3. Of punishment by the Magistrate. See answ. to quest. 15. if
so, then first, the Magistrate may use compulsion and coercion in matter of
Religion. Secondly, the vote of the major part of the late Assembly at
Westminster, had more obliging power than some body would own, and some body is
guilty of something.

18. The decrees of Synods though erroneous, yet, if not fundamentally erring,
are not to be rejected or scorned, but received and submitted to, rather than
peace and order disturbed. See answ. to quest. 17. If I understand this aright,
our brethren say as much as can be desired, if not more; O that any thing near
this had been practiced!

19. It is not easily to be granted that Synods err, and particular persons
and Churches that are contrary-minded have the truth. See answ. to quest. 7.

20. Appeals are warrantable by the Law of God, and the Law of nature, and
necessary in all Societies, because of the ignorance or iniquity of them that
are Judges. See answ. to quest. 20. therefore great is either their ignorance
or their iniquity, who deny the members of their society this just and
necessary liberty of appeals.

CHAP. VII. Of Communion with, and Separation from the true Church.
Question 1.

WHether there is an universal visible Church?

Platform of Discipline.
Answ. There may be acknowledged an universal visisible Church. Platform of
discipline, chap. 2. sect. 3.

Quest. 2. What relation or respect do particular visible Churches bear to the
universal visible Church?

Answ. A Congregational Church by the institution of Christ, is a part of the
militant visible Church. Platform of Discipline, Platform of Discipline.
sect. 6. This Catholic Mystical Church is the Materia prima, out of which
Political Churches by their combination are formed. Defense of the 9.
positions, page 104. The Catholic Church is in some respects the first Church,
and particular Churches ortae. Ibid. page 78.

Quest. 3. Is every particular person bound to be of some particular
congregation?

Answ. Every faithful person is bound by virtue of positive precept to join
himself to some such single congregation, Mr. Owen.
having the marks and notes by which a true Church may be known and discerned.
Dr. Owen in his Eshcol, Preface A 3. It is the part of all Christians who look
for salvation by Christ Jesus, to join themselves to one or other particular
Church of Christ. Mr. Cotton of the way, etc. page 2. line 10.

Quest. 4. But is a man bound to join himself to the Church of that place where
his dwelling is?

Answ. Members ought to join themselves to the Church where they do inhabit, if
it may be; Platform of Discipline.
otherwise they can neither perform the duties nor receive the privileges of
members; such an example tolerated in some, is apt to corrupt others, which if
they should follow, would threaten the confusion and dissolution of Churches,
contrary to Scripture. Platform of discipline, chap. 13. sect. 6.

2. All believers of one place are bound to join together in one congregation,
unless through their being too numerous they are by common consent
distinguished into more, which order cannot be disturbed without the guilt of
schism. Dr. Owens Eshcol Prefao? A. 3.

Quest. 5. But is a man bound after he has once joined himself to a Church, to
continue a member of this Church all his days?

Answ. 1. Church Members may not remove and depart from the Church, Platform
Discipline.
and so one from another as they please, but ought to dwell together. Platform
of discipline, chap. 13. sect. 1.

2. Peoples joining with a Parish at the calling and electing of a Minister at
his first coming, has such just weight in it, and is such an engagement, as we
do not judge it safe for such to remove from such a Minister, unless it be upon
such grounds as may give him due satisfaction. Platform of discipline, Preface
page 7.

3. To separate from a Church, either out of contempt of their holy fellowship,
or out of covetuousness, or for greater enlargements, with just grief to the
Church, or out of Schism, or want of love, or out of a spirit of contention in
respect of some unkindness, or some evil only conceived, or indeed in the
Church which might and should be tolerated and healed with a spirit of
meekness, and of which the Church is not yet convinced, though perhaps himself
be, nor admonished from these or like reasons to withdraw from public
communion in word or seals, or censures, is unlawful and sinful. Platform of
discipline, cap. 13. sect. 5.

Quest. 6. But what if there be many wicked and scandalous persons, and the
Church tolerate them in it, ought not the godly to withdraw and depart from
such a Church?

Answ. 1. To separate from a Church for want of some Ordinances, or to separate
from the true worship of God, Platform of Discipline.
because of the sin of some worshippers, is unlawful, Mr. Hookers Survey of
discipline, Preface A. 3.

2. The suffering of profane and scandalous livers to continue in the Church,
and partake in the Sacrament, is doubtless a great sin; yet the godly are not
presently to separate from it, nor to ^bstain from communion with such a Church
in the participation of the Sacrament. Platform of discipline, chap. 14. sect.
8, 9.

3. The hypocrisy of sundry members of the Church, and toleration of some open
scandal does not presently take away the nature of the Church, nor is
separation presently to be made from it. Mr. Cotton of holiness of Church
members, page 2. line 8.

4. Christ and his Apostles in their times, and the Prophets and other godly in
theirs did lawfully partake of the Lords commanded Ordinances in the Jewish
Church, and never taught nor practiced separation from the same, though
unworthy ones were permitted to be therein. Platform of discipline, chap. 14.
sect. 8. And the Apostles kept communion with the Jews as a Church,
notwithstanding their want of faith in Christ. Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. page
56. line 28. And the faithful in the Church of Corinth, wherein were many
unworthy persons and practices, are never commanded to absent themselves from
the Sacrament because of the same; therefore the godly in like causes are not
presently to separate. Platform of discipline, chap. 14. sect. 8.

Quest. 7. But if I can go to a Church that is more pure, and where things are
better ordered, and more according to the mind of Christ, why may I not leave
communion with one Church and go to another? As suppose I think the
Congregational Churches purer then the Presbyterian, may I not leave the
Presbyterian and join to the Congregational?

Answ. We do not judge it safe or meet for any member of a Presbyterian Church,
Platform of Discipline.
forthwith to desert his relation to his Church, and betake himself to the
fellowship of a congregational Church, though he may discern some defect in the
estate and government of his own.

1. For first, Faithfulness of brotherly love in Church relation requires that
the members of the Church should first convince their brethren of their sinful
defects, and duly wait for their reformation before they depart from them; for
if we must take such a course for the healing of a private brother, by way of
brotherly love, with much meekness and patience; how much more ought we to walk
with like tenderness toward the whole Church?

2. Secondly, By the hasty departure of sound members from a defective Church;
reformation is not promoted, but many times retarded and corruption increased:
whereas on the contrary when sincere members breathing after purity of
reformation abide together, they may by the blessing of God upon their faithful
endeavors prevail much with their elders and neighbors toward a reformation;
it may be so much that their Elders in their own Church shall receive none to
the seals but visible Saints; and in the Classes shall put forth no
authoritative act touching the members of other Churches, but consultative
only, nor touching their own, but with the consent (silent consent at least)
of their own Church; which two things if they can obtain with any holy, humble,
meek, faithful endeavors, we conceive they might by the grace of Christ find
liberty of conscience to continue their relation to their own Presbyterian
Churches without scruple. Platform of discipline, preface page 5. line I.

Object. But we scruple not only these but many other things: As first, Your
Ministers many of them had their Ordination from the Bishops, and they theirs
from Rome, and so your Ministry is Antichristian; and those that are not
ordained by Bishops are Ordained by a Classis or Presbytery, which is a power
foreign and extrinsecal to the Church whose Ministers they are?

Answ. First, For the Ministers that were ordained by Bishops, take it thus.
Mr. Cotton.
The power whereby the Ministers in England do administer the Word and
Sacraments, is either spiritual and proper, essential to their calling, or
adventitious or accidental. The former they have received from Christ by a
twofold act of his. First, He has furnished many of them with ministerial
gifts. Secondly, He has inclined the hearts of his people to choose them, and
call them as in many Parishes in the City, and in sundry Market Towns and
elsewhere, or at least to accept them, and submit to them, being commended to
them by the Patron.

The latter power which is adventitious and accidental, that which they receive
from the Patron who presents them to the Bishop, and from the Bishop who
ordains and licenseth them to Minister to Christ, and to his people; This power
though it has been established by the Law of the Land, yet it is both
adventitious and accidental; for the Ministers power is complete without it,
and it is also usurped; For neither had the law lawful power from Christ to
give such power to the Patron and Bishop neither had the Bishop or Patron
lawful power to receive it, neither could the people then choose their Minister
without the leave of their Patron, nor induct him into the Church without the
ordination or leave of the Bishop. Thus when Pirates have invaded a ship, no
man in it, neither Officer nor Passenger can come by his own goods, but by
leave of the Pyrate, who upon their submission will give them their keys of
their own vessels and chests; this power to come to their own goods received
from the Pyrate, it is not that which gives them true and proper right to enter
upon the possession and use of their own goods; for that right they had by a
former just title which Pirates cannot disannull, Mr. Cotton.
but it is only adventitious and accidenttal. I need not apply it to the case
in hand; the application is obvious. Mr. Cotton of Infant Bapt. page 181. line
25. And as for those Ministers that are ordained by Classes or Presbyteries, as
you call them; I answer, first, Ordination is a work of rule and pertains to
Presbyters. Mr. Cotton way of the Churches, page 49. line 4. And secondly, In
such Churches where there are no Elders, and the Church so desires, we see not
why imposition of hands may not be performed by the Elders of other Churches.
Platform of Discipline from N.E. chap. 9. sect. 5.

Quest. 8. May then we who are members of gathered or constituted Churches,
hear their Ministers as Ministers of the Gospel, and hold communion with them
in their Churches?

Answ. We may hold and retain communion with them in baptizing our children (as
occasion may fall out by absence of our Ministers) in their Churches,
Apologetical Narration. They say but do not, Mat. 23.
and by occasional receiving the Supper of the Lord in their Churches, and
receiving such member of theirs as are duly qualified unto communion with us
occasionally; also our Ministers to preach in their Congregations, and receive
theirs also to preach in ours as Ministers of the Gospel. Papers given to the
Committee of accommodation, by Thomas Goodwin, Philip Nigh, William Bridge,
Sydrach Simson, Ierom. Buroughs, page 29. line 17.

Quest. 9. What shall we judge then of the Separatists or Brownists? are they
of Antichrist?

Answ. Sure their practice is blame worthy:

1. Because they separate where Christ keeps fellowship, Rev. 1.18. and that he
walks with us we argue, Mr. Cotton.
because he is still pleased to dispense to us the word of life, and edifies
many souls thereby; and therefore surely Christ has fellowship with us; and
shall man be more pure then his Maker? where Christ vouchsafes fellowship,
shall man renounce it? if they be converted, where had they their conversion?

2. Have not many of Gods servants heretofore kept company with Churches as
corrupt as ours are? did not Peter and John keep company with their persons,
and shall they be more pure and curious?

3. Christ commands, if thy brother offend thee, admonish him, Mat. 18.17, etc.
then tell it to the Church; and if he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee
as a heathen or a publican, he does not say let the Church be unto the as a
heathen or a publican if the Church hear not thy complaint. Now there are many
of our Separatists never admonish their brethren, nor made their complaint to
the Church; and if they did, and the Church heard them not, must they therefore
excommunicate the Church and renounce it? Therefore unless you find in it
blasphemy, or idolatry, or persecution, there is no just ground of separation.
Mr. Cottons exposition of the first epistle of John, fol. 156. l. 38.

Object. I. They say our worship is corrupt.

Answ. Suppose there were and are sundry abuses in the Church, Mr. Cotton.
yet that is no safe ground of separation, Ezekiel. 5.11. Ezekiel. 9.4. So when the
sons of Eli corrupted the sacrifices of God, their sin was great; yet it was
the sin of the people to separate and abhor, 1 Samuel 2.17. Mr. Cottons
Exposition of the first epistle of John, fol. 157. line 10.

Object. 2 They say our government is Antichristian?

Answ. We say it is that Government that expelled Antichrist, and sundry have
witnessed it with their blood; and I say further, That there is no such
corruption in our state as was in Jerusalem, when Christ and his Apostles kept
fellowship with them, as two high Priests, etc. Ibid. line 13.

Obj. 3. They say our Ministry and Calling is Antichristian?

Answ. We say we do not profess our selves enemies to Christ; Mr. Cotton.
and for our Calling, many of us are elected by the peoples approbation, or by
such as are set up by the King or State, and if God bless our Ministry to
convert thousands to God, it is an evident sign God approves our Calling; for
if it were Antichristian, they would not convert souls unto God. Ibid. line 18.

Object. 4. They say our people are corrupt, and some such as Paul bids not to
have communion with, 1 Cor. 5.11. as drunkards whoremongers and the like.

Answ. We cannot deny but that there are very many corrupt and scandalous
persons in our Church: But, Mr. Cotton.


1. Private Christians have no authority to put them out.

2. For Ministers, if they see it would turn to the dissipation and destruction
of the flock, it were better to forbear, 1 Cor. 5. Mat. 13.29, 30. Ezra. 4.20.
they ceased from building the Temple, when there came a command against it; O
that you were wise to consider these things!
therefore they had better forbear when it cannot be redressed without greater
prejudice to the Church.

3. The corruption of some does not corrupt the Church nor the ordinances of
God; he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself,
not to the whole Congregation; and you shall find many Churches as corrupt, as
the Church of Corinth; yet the Apostle would not have them renounce it. Mr.
Cottons exposition of the first epistle of John, fol. 157. line 28.

Hitherto of communion with and separation from the Church, now to draw some
positions from these particulars, with some inferences upon them.
1. There may be acknowledged an universal visible Church, which is the materia
prima of particular Political Churches, and may in some respects be called the
first Church, and particular Churches ortae. Chap. 4. answ. to first and second
question. Therefore the Catholic visile Church is not a Chimaera, nor a chief
pillar of Popery, as some please to speak.

2. Every faithful person, yea every one that looks for salvation by Christ,
is bound to join himself to some or other particular Church of Christ. See
answ. to quest. 3. chap. 4. Therefore some or other particular Church is bound
to receive every one that looks for salvation by Christ, and desires to join
himself unto them; for to say that every Christian is bound to join himself to
some particular Church, and yet no Church bound to receive him, is to lay an
impossible obligation upon a Christian.

3. All the believers of one place (be it Town, Village, or Parish) are bound
to join together in one Church, and this order cannot be disturbed without
guilt of Schism; and it is most for edification for men to be of the Church
that is in the place where they dwell. See chap. 4. answ. to quest. 4.
Therefore the practice of those who gather into one Church members dwelling in
three, four or six several places distant many miles each from other, tends not
to edification, nor cannot be excused from guilt of Schism.

4. Peoples joining with a Parish in choosing and calling a Minister, is such
an engagement as it is not safe for such to remove from such a Minister, but
upon such grounds as may give him due satisfaction. See chap. 4. answ. to
quest. 5. Therefore they have provided but an uneasy pillow for themselves to
lay their heads on another day, who have cast off those Ministers with contempt
and scorn (to the breaking and sadding of their hearts) whom themselves chose
and called, as most of the members of the gathered Churches (so called)
throughout England have done.

5. To separate from a Church, either out of contempt of their holy fellowship,
or out of covetousness, or for greater enlargements with just grief to the
Church, or out of Schism, or for want of love, or out of a spirit of
contention in respect of some unkindness or some evil only conceived, or which
might be tolerated and healed, etc. is sinful and unlawful. See chap. 4. quest.
5. answ. 2. Therefore, O that those who have rent themselves from us, to gather
themselves into distinct Churches, would be wi^ling to behold the face of what
they have done, in, and judge it by this friendly glass, and repent of what
they have done unlawfully and sinfully!

6. Neither the hypocrisy of some members, nor the toleration of open
scandals, nor want of some Ordinances is a sufficient ground for men to
separate from the Church. Therefore our brethren can allege no sufficient
ground for their separation on from the Churches, whereof they were sometimes
members.

7. Faithfulness of brotherly love in Church relation, requires that the
members of the Church should, first convince their brethren of their sinful
defects, and duly wait for their reformation before they depart from them. For
secondly, By the hasty departure of sound members from a defective Church,
reformation is not promoted, but many times retarded. Chap. 4. answ. to quest.
7. Therefore let those who have separated themselves the Ministry and
assemblies they did sometimes attend upon, lay their hands upon their hearts,
and seriously as before the Lord, consider whether they have thus endeavored and
waited for a reformation in the Congregation where their fixed abode is, or
whether they have not by their hasty departure (or by other indirect means)
hindered the work of reformation as much as in them lies; the Lord lay it not to
their charge. If for this they be not condemned by their own consciences, I am
sure they are by their friends and brethren.

8. The Ordination of Ministers in England by the Bishops, is adventitious and
accidental to their calling. See chap. 4. quest. 7. answer to Object. 4.
Therefore their ordination by the Bishops does not make their calling null and
void; nor is it necessary that they should renounce that call, and put
themselves upon a new call, unless withal they change their station.

9. The difference between Independents and Presbyterians, is not so great, but
that it might be healed, and there might a be an union, if some distempers and
carnal corrupt respects did not prevail above principles of judgment and love
to peace and truth. See chap. 4. answ. to quest. 8.

10 No just ground of separation from a Church, unless you find in it
blasphemy, idolatry, or persecution. See chap. 4. quest. 9. answ. 3. Therefore
none of these crimes being proved against the Churches of England, they have
done unjustly who have separated from them.

The Conclusion.
ANd now Brethren, If I could with Jotham get up into some Mount Gerizim, where
I might be heard and not seen, or at least where I might be extra jactum
lapidum, I would speak plainly to you, and not as he in parables: And I would
numbly, and as in the sight and fear of God desire you to give (not me, but)
the Christian world, some conscientious and satisfactory reason of your
departing, and yet continuing so departed from the Churches, into which you
were baptized, wherein you were converted (which reverend Mr. Cotton is not
ashamed to own, saying, We cannot, we dare not deny to bless the womb that
bare us, and the paps that gave us suck, Mr. Cotton let. print. A. 1641. page
3. line 27.) (the most of you that are converted) and whereof many of you were
sometimes Minister; yet now you have not only made a Negative secession from
them, but a positive: and have drawn and culled out of those Congregations
(whom yet you confess to be true Churches) as many of the choicest members as
you could, and gathered them (as you speak) into Churches, not only distinct
from, but opposite to the Rest of the Churches and Congregations of the Nation.

I say opposite; for verily if you lived among Papists or Jews, you could
scarce show a greater opposition or abhorrence of their assemblies and worship,
than you do of these. Some of you may be will hear some of their Ministers
sometimes preach (though others of you will not vouchsafe that) so some of you
have heard a Rabbi in a Jewish Synagogue; you know this is no act of Church
communion, you know you hear them Equivocally, not as Ministers of Christ, but
as gifted brethren. But who of you will break bread in their Assemblies, though
the principal leaders of your way have given it under their hand (see Pap. of
accommodat.) first to the Parliament, and since to the world, that they could
do it? who of you will vouchsafe your presence at the administration of Baptism
in their Churches, let it be the infant of never so holy parents, but make as
much have out of their Assemblies, as John the Evangelist did out of the Bath
when he heard Cerinthus was in it? What is this but to lay all these Churches,
and all the Members of them at least under the sentence of non communion.

And for this practice I could never yet hear any thing alleged, but what is
here fully answered and refelled out of your own Authors.

1. If you say, Their Churches are no true Churches. See cap 3. per totum.

2. If you say these Churches, they have not the matter of a true Church, which
is visible Saints.

Answ. This has been answered already: First for the matter Master Cotton has
told you, Chap. 1. quest. 1. That the Churches of the New Testament consist of
no other matter than the Churches of the old consisted of; and what visible
Saints they were, the books of the Kings and Chronicles, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and
the rest of the Prophets tell you, That unregeneracy, unless it be accompanied
with such fruits as are openly scandalous, does not keep any from Church
fellowship. Answ. to quest. 3. cap. 1. that federal holiness, or holiness by
separation, admits to the ordinances, cap. 1. quest. 4. And that persons who
received their membership in their infancy, proving notoriously scandalous,
ought not to be continued in Church Membership, yet if they be, that separation
must not presently be made, is the judgment both of Master Hooker and the rest
of the Elders of New England. See this chap. 7. answ. to quest. 6.

3. If you say, These Presbyterian Churches have not the right form and
constitution, that is, express consent and covenant.

Answ. Why this has been answered; for Master Hooker and Master Cotton, and
the rest of the Elders agree, that the Congregations of England have that which
does as truly constitute them Churches, as if they were constituted by
covenant, as appears cap. 2. answer to question 4. See more cap. 3.

4. If you say, In these Presbyterian Churches the Officers Lord it over the
inheritance of the Lord, and rob and spoil the brethren of the power which
Christ has purchased for them, and bequeathed to them.

Answ. It is clear by what has been spoken already, that the brethren in the
Congregational way have no more nor other power than what the brethren in the
Presbyterian way; for M^. Cotton says the power which the Brethren have, it is
but a power of liberty, but the power of Authority is in the Elders. See cap.
5. answ. to quest. 14, 15, 16.

1. If you say, The brethren In the Presbyterian way have not so much liberty
as in the congregational: For first they have not the liberty of exercising
their gifts in prophesying.

Answ. Master Cotton and Master Hooker both have told us how far they are
from allowing this liberty which some presume to take to themselves. See before
cap. 4. answer (...) question 6.

2. If you say, They in the Presbytery have not that liberty of consenting or
dissenting in the admission of members, as the congregational have, but the
examination is taken in private by the Elders.

Answ. So it is frequently in the Congregational Churches, and for some persons
constantly, as we have seen above cap. 14. ans. to quest. 14, 15.

3. If you say, The brethren in the Presbyterian way have not the same liberty
and power in censures that they have in the congregational.

Answ. Yea the same; for the brethren in the Congregational way have not power
to receive complaints in the first place, to hear and examine witnesses; but
these things are transacted before and among the Elders.

Secondly, The Elders they make reports of matters to the Church of brethren,
and withal declare what they judge to be the mind of Christ concerning the
censuring or not censuring of the person.

Thirdly, The people, they upon this relation judge of the whole, but with a
judgment of discretion, not with a judgment of Authority.

Fourthly, They thus judging, bind the offender by consent, not Authority.

Fifthly, This consent is an act of obedience, not of power; all these we have
seen clearly asserted cap. 5. in answ. to quest. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Now all
this the brethren may and do enjoy and exercise in the Presbyterian way.

If you say, Brethren in the Presbyterian way cannot excommunicate without
their Officers.

Answ. No more may they in the Congregational way, as appeared cap. 3. answ. to
quest. 20.

If you say, The Brethren of the Presbyterian way have not power to choose
their own officers, as they have in the Congregational.

Answ. According to the Presbyterian principles they have; and the practice is
so in France, Netherlands Geneva, Scotland; and if it be otherwise in England,
it is because the laws of the land do yet invest the Patron with a power of
nominating and presenting a Minister; but the brethren have their vote in
choosing the other officers, Elders and Deacons; and the Presbyterian affirms,
and they grant they ought to have it in the choosing of their teaching Elders
much more; besides there are many instances of Presbyterian Congregations in
London and elsewhere in England, that do choose their own Officers.

If you say, The brethren of the Presbyterian way cannot depose their Ministers
or other officers, without the consent of a Classis or Synod.

Answer. No more may the brethren of the congregational way, regularly
according to their own principles and assertions. See cap. 6. quest. 1.13, 14.

If you say, These Presbyterian Churches have Ordinances that are not of
Christ's institution: As,

1. They examine those whom they admit to the Sacrament, although they own them
for members.

Answ. Yet they nowhere say that this is an Ordinance of Christ, but a
prudential practice, which the brethren of the Congregational way own and
practice as well as they. See cap. 4. answ. to quest. 14, 15.

2. If you say, The Presbyterian Churches have suspensions of persons not
excommunicated as an Ordinance of Christ.

Answ. They own and use it no otherwise than the brethren of the Congregational
way do, as appears cap. 3. answer to quest. 22, 23.

If you say, They have Classes and Synods as an Ordinance of Christ.

I answer, The Congregational Churches own them for such, and ascribe more than
a consultative power to them. See cap. 6. per totum.

If you except against the ordination of their Ministers, See cap. 7. quest. 7.
answ. to the objection.

If you say, Their-Churches are true Churches but not pure, you have purer
Churches and purer ordinances.

I answer, These are indeed the devices whereby people are drawn away from them
to you; but I beseech you tell us particularly what Ordinances have you purer
then your brethren? Is the Word more purely preached amongst you than amongst
them? came the Gospel forth from you, or came it unto you only? are there
purer prayers and purer Sacraments amongst you than amongst them? do not they
call upon the true Jehovah in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ as you do,
abhorring and renouncing all other objects and means of worship? do not they
Baptize with water in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as you do? do
not they break the same bread, and drink the same cup according to Christ's
institution, in memorial of his death as you do? Where then, or what are these
purer Ordinances which you have more than your brethren?

And for the purity of your Churches, I am loath to answer, as our Reformed
Divines answered the like cavil of the Anabaptists and Brownists by
Recrimination. Yet I think I may say, Are there not with you, even with you
also sinners against the Lord? but I will refer you for answer to your own
friends, cap. 1. per totum, and cap. 7. quest. 6, 7.

And now brethren I beseech you consider the grounds upon which you have made,
and do yet continue this sad division, and if you have no other than these, as
I think you have not, let all the world judge whether they be not destroyed and
overthrown by your own concessions.

And let me be permitted to speak to you once again in the words of Iotham,
Hearken to me that God may hearken to you; you have been studying the purity of
Churches to the utmost apex of it (and it may be beyond) there may be a purity
supra statutum as well as a devotion. But O that you would study the peace of
Churches, and that not only these of your own Idea and Platform; but of all
the Churches of Christ, I have heard some much complain of rigid Presbyterians:
Do not you derive that title of rigid to your selves. The brethren of the
Presbyterian way have sufficiently declared their readiness to peace in their
several models of association published by several Countries, to which these
collections out of the Authors of the Congregational way, come so near, that if
you refuse to come in and unite (especially at such a time as this, when we
have seen already such ill fruits of our divisions, and have cause to fear yet
worse) the rigidnesse will lie at your door. Seeing your Brethren and you agree
in faith and worship; why should you live like Jews and Samaritans, like
Protestants and Papist, like Lutherans and Calvinists? Know you not it will be
bitterness in the end? Why, seeing your selves are convinced, and have
declared, That Members of reforming Churches ought not to refuse communion one
with another, so far as may consist with their principles respectively. And
communion with Presbyterians may consist with your principles, at least it does
with the principles of these from whom you profess to have received the
principles of your way. Why should ye yet abhor their communion? if you do,
judge whether your own mouths and hands have not condemned you. Hearken
therefore to me, that God may hearken unto you; or if you will not hearken unto
me, yet hark to

Irenaeus, lib. 4. adv. haeres. cap. 4. Probatio vera and minime contradictioni
obnoxia, quae etiam ab adversaries ipsis symbola testificationis profert, i. e.
That's a true proof, and not to be contradicted, that brings forth the
Testimonies even of the adversaries.

Hearken to Basil, homil. in Chr. Nativ. (...). i.e. The witnesses of
adversaries are most worthy of credit.

Hearken to Chrysostom homil. 82. ^n Johan. (...). This is an unrefragable
demonstration of Truth, if a man call adversaries to witness what he speaks.

Hearken to Cyprian de Uni. Eccles. Quomodo possunt duo aut tres in nomine
Christi colligi, quos constat a Christo and ab ejus Evangelio separari? non
enim nos ab illis sed illi a nobis recesserunt. Et cum haereses and schismata
postmodumnatae sunt, dum conventicula sibi diversa constituunt, veritatis caput
atque originem reliquerunt. i. e. How can two or three be gathered together in
the name of Christ, when it is manifest they are separated from Christ and from
his Gospel? for we have not departed from them, but they from us, etc.

Hearken to Aust. Epistola ad orthod. Con. Donat. Quicunque de Christo and
scripturis sanctis consentiunt and unitati Ecclesiae non communicant, non sunt
in Ecclesia. Libr. 3. Cont. Donat. Non habet dei charitatem, qui Ecclesiae non
diligit unitatem. i.e. They that agree concerning Christ and the Scriptures,
and do not communicate in the unity of the Church, are not in the Church.

He has not the love of God, who does not love the Churches unity.

Hearken to Paul.

l Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ,
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies;

Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind.

Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowllness of mind,
let each esteem other better than themselves.

Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others.

Gal. 5.15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed
one of another. Errata.
Page 9. line 3. read on, p. 22. l. 13. r. endued. p. 29. l. 24. r. Governors,
p. 43. l. 35. r. this, p. 46. l. 36. r. or, p. 47. l. 32. r. consotiation, p.
54. l. 1. r. be.

FINIS.

