GENERAL LESLEYS SPEECH ^n the Parliament of Scotland, the 25. of October,
1641. In defense of himself upon certain slanders which are reported of him.

Wherein be expresses his affection to the King and Kingdom of England.

Also concerning the Traitors of Scotland which did lay a plot to take away his
life.

General Lesley, richly dressed, on a rearing horse

General Lesley's SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT.
My Lords,
TO purge my self of some slanderous accusations, I have presumed to present
my self before your honors, thereby to stop the mouths of my enemies, and
to revive the former good opinion which true and loyal subjects have had of
me: There have been some lately my Lords, which have not been ashamed to
say, that whatsoever of late I attempted in the defense of piety and truth,
were all for my own ends, not for the good of my Country.

Whereas God is my true and best of witnesses, that all my intents were real
and for the good of both Kingdoms.

My Noble Lords, it is unknown to very few of you that I have exercised arms
these many years, almost from my childehood, and yet did I never take part
with the Church of Rome, but have always been a sworn foe against it.

Many battles have I fought since fortune was my friend to make me a
Commander; but (I praise God) not speaking in a boasting way, as yet I never
left the field but was crowned with victory.

I was your General against England, and yet not against it but for it, as it
has now happened by the most happy pacification.

Ye see my Lords now, that nature does claim its due, old age overcommeth the
strongest, but yet were there occasion in England for to employ me against a
foreign foe, my service should attend the Kings command, I would make use of
my best of skill to overthrow his foes: I know my Lords that I have been
censured hard of abroad, but I hope that my truth and loyalty to my Sovereign,
shall stop the lying tongue of flying same; a long time was I branded with that
accursed title of traitor which my soul abhorres, and to defend my innocence,
my heart at all times is ready.

My Lords, give me license to make use of a doleful expression, which is for
the ingratitude of those for whom I feared not to venture my dearest blood, yet
these deceitful Iudases have agreed together to betray me and snatch away my
short breathing life.

How many days when they have been sporting and taking their pleasures, have
I been taking pains, and studying for to preserve both them and their
families? How many nights have I watched, when they have been mantled in their
silks, and prostrated upon their down beds, taking their sweet, silent and
quiet rest: And yet for all this my Lords, am I the mark they have chiefly
shot at to destroy, for which the great God forgive them, for my own part I
freely do appealing to their consciences which I know can truly tell them,
whether I have deserved their hate or no.

But yet my Lords, give me leave to speak both pro and con, although I freely
forgive them the particular injury which they thought to have wrought upon me,
yet must the Law have its proceeding against them for they which will go about
to rob the King of his true and loyal subjects, will not be afraid in time
to try their utmost skill to destroy the King himself.

O Ambition, Ambition! How loftily do thou soar? For it is thee and none but
thee which does steer the actions of each disloyal traitor for being great,
yet because they do not daily arise to be greater, they will strive to swim
to their intents through a sea of blood: What honor would these Lords have got
to take away my life? O but they had greater prises which they did aim at, but
God did hinder them, who always has been and always will be the defender
of those which put their trust in him the living God.

In what a miserable estate are these men in now? They have gained themselves
the everlasting hate of all good men, they have lost their honors, stained
their Ancestors same, and prejudicated their own lives: Oh did a traitor but
think before what he went about when his mind is first hampering upon
treachery! he would change his wicked resolution; for first, let him think of
the danger which will follow, and then of ten hundred thousand times much more
in the world to come.

My Lords, may I find the joys of heaven, but as truly as I mean faithfully
both to my King and Country, and then were I certain of an everlasting, most
happy, joyful and heavenly estate: That God would always bless King Charles
our lawful native King and Governor, and his true subjects shall always be my
prayer, and so is it I know of all those which wish well unto Sion.

FINIS.

