Die Sabbathi, 5. November: 1642.
SIR William Massam is appointed to return thanks to M. Newcomen, for his great
pains taken in the Sermon he this Day preached at St. Margarets, at the
entreaty of this House, and to desire him forthwith to print his Sermon, and to
give a Copy thereof to the Committee for Religion, that when they shall have
liberty to sit, they may consider by it, how to prepare and provide for the
extirpation of Popery; And it is further Ordered, that he shall have the usual
privilege for Printing his Sermon.

Hen: Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I Appoint Christopher Meredith to Print this Sermon,

MATH: NEVVCOMEN.


This is Entered,

HEN: WALLEY.



THE CRAFT AND CRVELTY OF THE CHVRCHES ADVERSARIES, Discovered In a SERMON
Preached at St. Margarets in Westminster, before the Honorable HOUSE of
COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT. November. 5, 1643.

By Matthew Newcomen, Minister of the Gospel at Dedham in Essex.

Quid facit in Pectore Christiano Luporum Feritas, Canum Rabies, Saevitia,
Bestiarum, Veneuum Lethale Serpentum?

Cyprian. Cum sitis Impij Crudeles, Homicidae, Inhumani, non amplius eritis
Christiani,

Lucifer Calazit. Published by Order of the House of COMMONS.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Sgne of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard, M.DC.XLIII.

TO THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF COMMONS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IF there be any History in all the Book of God that may parallel our times,
sure it is this of Nehemiah.

The People of Israel though delivered from their long and sorrowful captivity
in Babylon: yet long it was ere they could see Truth and peace established in
their Church and Commonwealth, the Temple of God reedified, the worship of God
restored, the walls of the holy City repaired, the Lords Sabbaths sanctified,
the Priests in their several Orders and stations attending the service of
their God: Long it was ere matters of Church and State attained unto a
Beautiful Regularity; c Pembl.
some reckoning above a a 100. other above 150. Perk. Chronol. Red. cap. Anno.
3431. Secundus Nehemiah praefectus, Anno Mund. 3537. Calvetius and Helvicus,
redit populi, 3418. Secund Nehem. prefect. Anno 3575.
some 200. years. d The vulgar Latin and the English Geneva, make Ezra the
writer of this Story, but it is a mistake. Nehem. 1.1. See Pembl.
Three on sets were given to this great work: thrice did the Lord raise up and
employ blessed and glorious instruments in it before it arrived at it is
perfection. The first was Zorobbabel, Ezra 1. The second was Ezra, Ezra 7. The
third was Nehemiah, the Author of this Book, according to the good hand of his
God upon him, Neh. 4.2, 3.
with invincible courage and indefatigable patience against the insolent
scoffs, multiplied conspiracies Cap. 4.8, 11. cap 6.2, 4.
and terrifying reports of his enemies, Cap. 4. cap. 12. cap 6.6, 9.
against the treacheries of some of his own Brethren and Nobles, and their
base compliances with the public Adversaries Cap. 3.5. cap. 6.10, 17.
against the murmurings of the people Cap. 4.10.5.1, 2, etc.
with great expense of his estate Cap. 5.8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
and hazard of his life Cap. 4.23.6.2.
carried on this great work, and gave it a full and blessed period, to the
comfort of the Jews and terror of their enemies Chap. 6.16


To parallel this: the people of England, though through the mercy of God they
have bin in a gracious measure delivered from the spiritual Captivity of
Romish Babylon, which our Forefathers were enthralled in so long a time; yet
now almost a 100 years have passed over us, since that first deliverance, and
yet we see not that purity of Truth, that beauty of worship, that orderlines of
administrations, that strength of discipline, as walls and bulwarks about this
our Jerusalem, which has bin the desire, prayer, expectation of us and the
ages that were before us. God seems to me to proceed by the same steps with us,
that he did with the people of the Jews, and has made 3 visible and memorable
on-sets upon the Reformation and restoration of his Church among us. The first
by that famous Prince, the miracle and glory of his people and age, Edward the
6. of ever blessed memory, whose beginnings though exceeding hopeful and
promising were soon stopped by acountermand, as it were from the God of Heaven,
as Zerobabells beginnings were by letters from the King Ezr 4.23, 24.
. Soon after the work was revived again by his dear and gracious sister Q.
Elizabeth, in whose hands the Lord caused the work to prosper to some further
perfection, yet not unto that beauty and glory we hope our God intends to raise
it to therefore this 3d time has God raised up Instruments for the advancing of
this work, even your selves, Honorable and Beloved: who though you have met
with the same oppositions in this great employment that worthy Nehemiah did:
Malignant scoffs, bloody conspiracies, reports full of various terrors,
desertions of some of your Brethren, murmurings of not a few of the people: yet
in the midst of Armies and changes of Oppositions and discouragements, have
hitherto with unwearied patience and undauntable Resolutions, not without great
expense of your estates and hazard of your lives, attended upon this work now
these two years. At the present to the great grief of all loyal and honest
hearts, we see you in the same posture that Nehemiah and his assistants were,
Cap. 4.17. Every one with the one of his hands working, and with the other
holding his weapon, a sad condition: yet go on, the work of reforming the
Church is Gods: he called you to it, he will maintain and defend you in it, he
will give perfection to it, God is not as Man, that he should begin to build,
and not be able to finish.

The sutablenesse of this History to our times, invited my thoughts (upon
Summons received to this service) to look into this Book, and see if there
were not something there might fit the Day, and the sutablenesse of that
portion of Scripture, which is the Basis of this ensuing Discourse unto the
Day, concluded my thoughts upon this Text. My desire and prayer was, that I
might speak something that might give glory to God for the manifold and great
Deliverances he had wrought for us, and something that might give encouragement
to your selves in the great things you are to work for God. This latter part of
my desire was intercepted by a fear of consuming too much of that time, which
(though your Piety could willingly have bestowed upon the work of
Praise-offering) yet the extreme necessities of State, could hardly spare. This
made me silence, much of what I had prepared to speak, both in the Explicatory
and Applicatory parts of the Sermon: which yet (seeing it is your pleasures to
command what you heard to the Press) waits now with the rest upon you. I dare
not think there is any thing, (...)
either in the one or in the other, that can add unto your light: if any thing
spoken or written may excite or increase your heat, I shall enjoy much of the
end I propounded in this Service. I dare not undertake to direct in any thing,
if in any thing, I may erect your spirits in times so full of distempers, with
a Christian holy dedignation of all oppositions to carry on the great business
of the Lord Jesus, in establishing Religion, Reforming the Church, rooting out
Popery. I have enough, if I fail of this, it is the sin of my infirmity, not
my intention.

Luther in sad tumultuous times was wont to say to his Brethren and those about
him, Come let us sing the 40. Psalm. Me thinks you (Right Honorable) in
these sad conflicting times may say one to another, come let us read the Book
of Nehemiah, there you may read experiences, encouragements, quicknings,
directions, presidents, to spread them before you is not the work of an
Epistle: nor is it needful, having been fully and excellently offered to your
view in a Fast Sermon, Dr Gouge his Sermon.
only this, as you have made the same preparations to this service you are now
upon, Nehem. 1.
which Nehemiah did, addressing your selves thereunto by Fasting and Prayer:
and have met the same varieties of oppositions and discouragements, so
persisting in the same paths of Zeal for God, compassion to his Church,
dependence on his power, adherence to his cause, constancy in his Service,
Doubt not but the same merciful hand of his and your God (after your Nehemiah
like conflicts) shall crown your faithfulness with Nehemiahs successes,
which were so glorious, that when all their enemies heard thereof, Nehem. 6.16.
and all the Heathen round about, they were much cast down in their own eyes,
for they perceived that the work was wrought of God. And they that are of you
shall build the old waste places, shall raise up the foundations of many
Generations: Isa. 58.12.
and ye shall be called the repairers of the breaches, the restorer of paths
to dwell in, which has been and is, the Prayer of

The least and unworthiest of your and the Churches servants. MATH: NEVVCOMEN.

A SERMON Preached to the Honorable House of Commons now assembled in
PARLIAMENT. November. the fifth, 1642.
NEHEMIAH. 4.11. And our adversaries said, they shall not know nor see till we
come in the midst among them and slay them and cause the work to cease,


The Introduction.
THis chapter gives you a veiw of the various discouragements, which that
gracious man Nehemiah met in that glorious work of repayring Jerusalem, and
restoring the lapsed State of Church and commonwealth. Discouragements you
shall behold in this chapter breaking in upon him like waves of the Sea, while
he stands as a rock unbroken, unshaken in the midst of all. Like Jobs
Messengers: before the first be dispatched, there appears a second before that
be answered, a third like Ezekiels prophecy, mischeife, Ezekiel. 7.
upon mischeife and rumor upon rumor,

In the first verse, you have the adversaries rage. When Sanballat heard that
we built the wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation. In the second
you have this rage venting it self in foame, in scoffs, and sarcasmes cast
upon Nehemiah his brethren, and their undertaking. What do those feeble Jews?
will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a
day etc and Tobias said, even that which they build, if a fox go up he shall
break down their stone wall.

But this is the coolest of their rage, the heat of it reaches unto blood, so
you find verse the 7. and 8. When Sanballat and Tobiah, and the Arabians. etc.
heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made up, they conspired all of them
together to come to sight against Jerusalem and to hinder it; Withal the
people at the same time begin to murmur, verse the tenth: And Judah said the
strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbish, so
that we are not able to build the wall. And this (as it is probable) gives
encouragement to the adversaries to antidate their triumph and glory, as if the
Jews had been their request, their prey already. And our adversaries said,
etc.

Division of the Text.
In which words you may please to observe: First, a strong combination against
the church of God. And our adversaries said. Secondly, a wicked design they
were combined in. To cause the work to cease, this is first in their thoughts,
though last in their words. Thirdly, a bloody means propounded, and agreed on
for the accomplishing of that design; and that is slaughter. Slay them, and
cause the work to cease. Lasty, a subtle way projected for the effecting of
that slaughter; we will come upon them secretly, suddenly, they shall neither
know, nor see, till we are in the midst of them, and slay them, and cause the
work to cease. I intend not to prosecute the particulars of the text, but to
give you the sum of the whole in one observation. The Doctrine.
The great design of the enemies of the church, is by craft or cruelty, or
both, to hinder any work that tends to the establishment, or promoting of the
churches good.

All the visible enemies of the church of God, are but the Emissaries of Satan
his agents: and therefore they observe his Ephesians. 6.11. (...).
methods, his rules of art in their attempts upon the church. Now as Satan
himself, sometimes opposes the church by force, and then he is Isaia 27.16. His
allegoricis appellationibus figuratur sublimitas omnis tam spiritualis quam
corporalis, quae adversus deum se extolleret vi fraud vel utroque simul. Iuni:
ad locum. Esai. 34.16.
a piercing Serpent, and sometimes circumvents the church by craft, and then
he is a crooked serpent, vel rectus venit, vel tortuosus, vel leonem agit et
saevit, vel draconem agit and fallit. So do his auxilliaries those that fight
under his colors against the churches peace and good, craft and cruelty are
their chief engines of mischief: and not one, but both they use, that as the
scripture speaks of those birds of prey and desolation, none of them shall want
their mate. And as some write of the Asp, he never wanders alone without his
companion with him so the craft of the enemies of the church, is never but
accompanied with cruelty, and their cruelty seldom without craft, and both
bent to hinder any work that tendes to the establishment and promoting of the
churches good.

Proved by Exemplification.
To give you ocular proof of the crueltyes whereby the enemies of the church
have from time to time endeavored to cause the work to cease, would be the
business, not of a sermon, but of a volume, and yet easily done, had we but
time, because their cruelty ever appears in its own likeness, in the shape
of one of those beasts that Daniel saw in his vision, that had three ribs in
the mouth of it, and they said unto it, arise, devour much flesh. Dan. 7.5.
You may trace the monster foot by foot, from Abel unto this present in steps
of blood. The persecutions of the Jewish church under Pharaoh. Nebuchadnezar,
Antiochus, and of the christian church under the heathen, and after them the
Arrian Emperors and Bishops: since them under Antichrist, on the one side, and
the Turk on the other, are so known, I need not mention them: but this they
all declare, that the indeavoures of the adversaries, have always bin by
cruelty to cause the work to cease. And indeed if we consider those floods
and seas of blood, which in the successive persecutions of the church have
been exhausted, we may wonder the church is not quite extinct, save only the
blood of Martyrs, extra venas, is not cruor, but semen, and by the irradiation
of the sunn of righteousness, becomes miraculously fruitful to the producing
of a new succession of Saints.

But to trace the adversaries of the church in their craft, Secondly of the
oraft of headversaries which are several. Prove. 30.19.
hic labor, hoc opus: they are serpentina soboles the seed of the serpent; and
as the way of the serpent upon a rock is unknowable, so are their ways of
undermining the church: yet as far as either in history or scripture I may, I
shall trace them, and give you a breife veiw of the several arts and crafts,
whereby the adversaries of the church have sought to hinder their proceedings,
and cause the work to cease.

First.
The first design that ever was against the Church of which we read in
Scripture is that of Pharaoh and his Counselors Exodus the first; Come let us
deal wisely with them, and what is the result of this consultation? not to
deny them presently the liberty of their Religion we take away, but by
burdening and oppressing them in their liberties and estates to break their
hearts and imbase their spirits, that they should have no heart to mind
Religion or any thing, because of their great anguish and affliction. a design
that has bin practiced against the church of God many a time. Thus the Persian
Tyrant thought to have subdued the spirit of Hormisdus that noble christian. He
would not kill him but enthrall him: Turn him out of his possessions, throw
him from his honor, give his wealth, diguitie, wife, to the basest of his
slaves, Turn him naked our of doors to keep Mules in the Wilderness, by this
means thinking to choke and smother that holy fire God had enkindled in his
heart.

And this is the art of the great Turk at this day though he pretend to let
the Christians in Greece and those countries under him enjoy their lives and
their religion, yet so heavy is his yoke upon them, that they have little joy
of their lives, and for the most part as little care of their religion scarce
any thing more than the name of Christ generally to be found among them.

Second.
The second art whereby the adversaries of the church have sought to prejudice
it, has been by procuring matches, and mixtures of some of the members of the
church and some of their own that were Idolaters. This was the art of Balaam,
when he saw he could no otherwise fasten a curse upon the Israel of God, he
gave the King of Moab council to ensnare the men of Israel with the daughters
of Moab, whereby they were drawn not only to corporal, but to spiritual
adultery. The history of this, you have Number. 25, 1, 2, 3. The people began to
commit whoredom with the daughters of Moah, and the people did eat of their
sacrifices, and bowed down to their gods, and Israel joined himself to
Baal-Peor. And that this was the plot of Balaam is clear, Numbers 31.16. These
caused the children of Israel through the council of Balaam, to commit
trespafle against the Lord, It was Balams council this, and wicked council it
was. This mixing with unbelievers has bin ever looked upon as a thing of
dangerous consequence to the Church of God which is the reason that Nehemiah
was in such a heat of indignation against the people for this thing. Nehe,
13.25, 26. ver. I contended with them* and cursed them, and smote certain of
them, and plucked off their hair and made them swear by God, saying, you shall
not give your daughters to their Sons nor take their daughters unto your
sons, did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these thing? yet among many
Nations there was no King like him who was beloved of his God, Nevertheless
even him did outlandish women cause to sin.

Great dangers the Church of God is exposed unto by this design. First, of
being corrupted by this means, and drawn from the true Religion which is the
very reason why God forbad such marriages in the old law. Deuteronomy. 7.4. For they
will turn away thy sons from following me that they may serve other Gods so
will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you and desroy thee suddenly.
And sad experience of this sad effect and consequent of marrying with
Idolaters, and those that are enemies to the Church, The Church of God has had
not only in Solomon, whose heart his jd^^^^rous wives turned away from God and
so capti^^ted that he did publicly tolerate their idolarour worship, 1 Kings
11.4, When Solomon was cold his wives turned away his heart after other Gods,
and verse. 7. Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh the abomination
of Moah and for Moloch the abomination of Ammon, and likewise did he for all
his strange wives and sacrificed to their Gods. Nor only in Iehoram the Son of
Jehosaphat, the reason of whose deflection from the practice of his father, and
the principles of his education unto Idolatry is rendered by the holy ghost
this, for the daughter of Ahab was hie wife, 2 King. 8.18. Nor only in other
of the Kings of Israel and Judah, but even in christian Kings and Princes, when
they have matched though not with Pagans and Heathens but with such as have
professed the christian Religion, only not in purity. Valens the Emperor was
at first a true Orthodox Professor, but being married to an Arrian Lady she
soon ensnared him with her flatteries and captivated him to the same heresy
with her self, and he proved a most bloody persecutor of the true Orthodox
Church. Theod. 4.11


Or secondly, If there be such establishment of heart in the truth that the
unbeliever dares not attempt to draw the believing yoak-fellow from the true
Religion, or attempts it but in vain. This inconvenience yet follows
thereupon, that the unbeliever will as much as they can, viis et modis, promote
the false Religion and subvert the true.

The Church of God had experience of this in Justinian the Emperor, Evagr.
4.10.
whose wife Theodora addicted to the heresy of Eutyches, did no less foster,
encourage promote and reward the teachers and maintainers of that heresy than
the Emperor did the true orthodox professors yea prevailed so far with her
husband as to make Severus, a chief leader of the Eutychian faction Bishop of
Constantinople.

Thirdly, By this means not only the present age but posterity is indammaged.
For put case the unbelieving party does survice, there is danger least the
children (specially if young) should by the authority of an Idolatrous father
or the persuasion of an Idolatrous mother to be drawn away from the true
Religion. An instance of this we have in Valentinian the younger, whose father
dying and leaving him in the tutelage of Justina his mother who was an Arrian
(though all the time of her husbands life she had concealed ir, Socr. 5.2.
Theod. 5.13.14. Sozom. 7.13.
knowing her husbands zeal for the Orthodox Religion) she taking the advantage
of her husbands death, and the tender and flexible age of her son to advance
the Arrian faction easily corrupted him, that he was scarce warm in his throne
but he falls a persecuting the true Religion. These and many other
inconveniences have bin observed to attend such kind of mixtures between the
Church and their adversaries, which the adversaries are not ignorant of, and
that is the reason sometimes they are so willing to offer their daughters in
marriage to the members of the church, 1 Samuel 18.21.
but it is only as Saul gave Michal unto David that she might be a snare unto
him.

Third.
The third Art whereby the adversaries of the church have endeavored the ruin
and over throw of Religon is by covering their intent to alter religion with a
pretense of public emollument, So Jeroboam to cover his Idolatrous projects,
pretends the peoples ease, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, 1
King. 12.28. a great journey, a great charge, you may serve God nearer and
better cheap at Dan and Bethell, as if he meant not to alter Religion, but
only to let them have it with more ease and bettex accommodation. Like that of
some of late time: For people to hear two Sermons a day, it is too much, one
well heard and remembered is enough: For young folk to be kept from sports on
the Lords Day, it is too much, It is too much for you to go up worship at
Jerusalem. The like pretense was sometimes used to Theodosius, justly called
Great, who having abolished in Egypt their Heathenish sacrifices, and forbid
their Idolatrous worship, upon pain of consiscation and death; the people
fearing the omission of their accustomed superstitions, would make the River
Nilus (whom they honored as a God) keep in his streams, and not water their
land as in former years, began to mutiny, and things tended to sedition:
whereupon the President ofthe Country, wrote to the Emperor, beseeching him
for once to please the people, by conniving at their Idolatry. To whom he
answered; It is better to continue faithful and constant unto God, (...) Soz.
7.20.
then to prefer the overflowing of Nilus, and the fruitfullnesse of the earth
before piety and godliness. Nay I had rather Nilus should never flow, then to
have it raised by sacrifices and enchantments. A brave resolution, and
becoming a true Christian Prince. Let people be pleased or displeased, come
loss, come gain, let truth and godliness be maintained.

A fourth fraud or art whereby they endeavor to supplant the Church, is, By
counterfeiting a friendly compliance with the Church of God, as if they meant
to help and farther the businesses thereof, when in truth, they intend nothing
but to overthrow and hinder all. So the Adversaries, Esra. 4. When the people
of God were about rebuilding the Temple, the Adversaries came and offered to
join with them. verse. the second. Let us build with you, for we seek your God
as you do. When they intended nothing more then to betray them. This was the
great art of the Adversaries in the Apostles days, when many false brethren
joined themselves to the Church, Galat. 2.
merely to spy out their liberty: and many false Apostles that seemed to
preach Christ with abundance of zeal and forwardness, but it was only that
they might withdraw Disciples from the true Doctrine and Apostles of the Lord
Jesus, and fill the Church with rents and schisms, as they did the Church of
Corinth. Thus the Arrians would often counterfeit themselves Orthodox men, and
mingle themselves with Orthodox professers, that they might with less
suspicion, sp^ead the poison of their errors. That good Prince Constantine the
Great, was much abused by that Generation in this kind, his great admirer
Euschius, confesses he retained near him. (...). Eusebius. de vita Constantin.
4.54.
Sceleratos Nebulenes qui simulaverunt Religionem Christeanam. Specially one
potorious one, who had bin Chaptain to the Emperors Sister and by her dying,
was commended to the Emperor, and received into his Family, and though all the
time of Constantine the great, he kept his poison hid; yet no sooner was he
dead, but he began to play his pranks. First inveigling the chief Gentlemen of
the Emperors bed chamber, then some of the rest, after these the Empress, and
soon after the Emperor himself; winning them all to the Arrian heresy: who if
in Constantines time he had not complied with the Orthodox party, he had never
had the access to Constantine, and so never this opporrunity of spreading that
heresy. This is a trick not unusual with Rome, I have heard that the Jesuits
have a practice of running over to the Lutheran Church, I find a passage in
Frantrius, that may give some credit unto this. Oracula Sacra. 129. p. 842.
pretending to be converts, and to build with them, but it is only to keep up
that bitter contention that is between the Calvinists and the Lutherans, the
virulency whereof, is much fomented by these r^negado Jesuits.

The first way is. To ingratiate themselves to Kings and Princes, with much
officiousness and pretended care of their profit and honor, that so being
potent with the Potentates of the earth, they may have the more power to do
the Church a mischief. So the Adversaries of the Jews pretended, that in duty
and conscience, they could do no less then complain of the Jews to King
Artaxerses, Ezra 4.14. Now because we have maintenance from the Kings palace,
and it was not meet for us to see the King dishonored, we have sent and
certified the King. Wretches that cared no more for the Kings honor then a
straw, only pretend this, that they might the more easily draw out the Kings
power, for the suppressing of the Church: So Haman, Esth. 3.8. seemed to mind
only the Kings profit, when his mind is only set upon the Jews destruction. It
is not for the Kings profit to suffer them. So the Jews themselves in
prosecuting and murdering the Lord Christ, pretend nothing but loyalty and
respect to Caesar. We have no King but Caesar. And if thou let this man go,
thou art not Caesar's friend. So that Arrian Priest, of whom I was even now
speaking, that corrupted Constantius, the son of the great Constantine,
insinuated himself first into the favor of that young Prince by his
officiousness, (...). Soz 8.1.
in carrying his Fathers will to him, and the advantage that he made of his
favor, was to corrupt and poison him. It has always bin observed, that the
greatest Heretics, have bin the greatest Courtiers. The Arrians in their age,
and of them the Jesuits learned it, and of the Jesuits the Arminians. All of
them have made it their masterpiece, to insinuate themselves into the favor
of Princes, and then make bold with their power, for the oppressing of the
truth.

A sixth stratagem of theirs is, To charge the Truth and Professors of it with
false accusations, thereby to render them odious, either to Princes or people.
So the Gospel of Christ was called heresy, Paul a pestilent fellow, and a
mover of Sedition. So Ezra 4. The King is told, if the Jews rebuild the wall,
they will pay no tole nor tribute. ^ozom 2 24. ^heod 1.^0. ^ocrat. 1.21. Athan
Ep. ad ^olit vitam ^gintes ^ozom. 2.8.
So the Primitive Christians, had horrible unnameable crimes, laid to their
charges. Thus the Arrians charged Athanasias with Adultery, Murder,
Witchcraft. Thus the Jews of Persia, in the time of Sapores, accused Simeon
Bishop of Sileucia,(...), as a friend of the Roman Emperors, and one that
gave intelligence to them of the Persian affairs, which was the occasion, not
only of the death of Simeon, but of a general persecution against the whole
Church. Thus deal the Jesuits with the Protestants. And thus the Adversaries
of the power of godliness, charge it with Heresy, Faction, Rebellion, Willets
Pillars of Papistry. Ger. Con Cath. l. 1 p. 2. c. ^9.
and all that will make it odious, either to Prince or people.

The 7h. way is, By procuring and enacting Laws, whereby they may either
ensnare the consciences or the lives of the people of God unawares. Such as
that was Daniel 6.7. when they come and tell the King, All the Presidents of
the Kingdom, the Governors and Princet, Councillors and Captains, have
consulted together to stablish a royal Statute. That whoever shall ask any
Petition of God or man, save of thee o King, for thirty days, shall be cast
into the Lions Den. Darius was newly ascended upon the Throne, and his Princes
seemed to have studied nothing, but the increasing of his power and might, they
pretend it will much add to his magnificence, and strike a greater awe into
the hearts of his new conquered Subjects, if such a Law as this be made. Now
when all the Presidents, and Councillors and Governors shall commend a thing
to the King, as the unanimous result of all their councels, and desire such a
Law to be made for the Kings Majesty and Honor, it is easily obtained, though
their design was by this Law to ensnare the people of God, either to wound
their consciences, by making them sin, in neglecting that duty of worship they
owed to God, or else to cut off their lives in the pursuance of that worship.
The King could not find this out, nor it may be most of the common sort of the
Jews: but Daniel did, and resolved rather to transgress the Laws of the
King, then the Law of God, rather to be cast into the Den of Lions, then to
carry about a Lion in his bosom, even an enraged conscience. So Julian that
subtle enemy of the Church of God, ensnared the poor Christians unawares, for
calling his Soldiers to appear before him, that they might receive their pay,
Theod. 3.^5, 16
he caused an Altar with fire upon it to be set by, and a Table of Incense, and
commanded every soldier, as he came to receive his money, to cast some Incense
into the fire upon the Altar, which some of his Christian soldiers
understanding to be an implicit and interpretative Idolatry, refused to do,
and would rather loose their pay: others not knowing the depth and mystery of
this i^iquity, suspecting no hurt, did it, and so defiled their consciences;
which filled them afterward with such extreme grief and horror, when they
came to the knowledge of it, as they did offer to expiate their sin with
their blood. Had Darius known, that the intent of his Princes, in that which
they called their Royal Law, had been to entrap the life of Daniel, he would
never have signed it. Had the Christians known, that the intent of Julian, in
commanding them to sprinkle some Incense upon the burning Altar, had been to
make them deny the Faith, they would never have done it. But this is the craft
of the Adversaries, to procure and enact Laws, that may look one way, and
strike another, that may seem to be for Majesty, or Honor, or Decency; but
are indeed for the insnaring and supplanting of the Church of God.

Another way is, By secret conspiracies and treacherous combinations against
the Church, to undermine and ruin it. So here Nehem. 4.7, 8. The Arabians and
the Ammonites and the Ashdodites, conspire all of them together, to come and
fight against Jerusalem. So Psa. 83.3. They take crafty counsel against thy
people, and conspire against thy hidden ones, they have consulted together with
one consent, they are confederate against thee: Gebal and Ammon and Amalek,
etc. So Act. 23.12, 13. Certain of the Jews banded themselves together, and
bound themselves under a curse, saying, that they would neither eat nor drink,
till they had killed Paul. Such was the Str^tagem of our Adversaries, the
deliverance from which, we celebrate this day, a conspiracy of men, that had
bound themselves by a curse to destroy us, and had not only said, but sworn.
The Doctrine proved by Reason. 1. Drawn from the Adversaries 1. Hatred of the
Church.
We will come upon them, and they shall neither know nor see, til we are in the
midst of them and slay them, and cause the work to cease. Their design was by
craft and cruelty, to disturb and destroy the Churches peace.

And truth is, in Reason we can look for no other, if we consider the innate
disposition of the enemies of the Church.

First, in regard of that implacable hatred the Adversaries bear unto the
Church. It is a true saying, Odia Religionum sunt acerbissima, Immortale odium
and nunquam sanabile bellum. Ardet ad-huc combos. and Tentyra summus utrinque.
Inde suror v^lgo quod Numina vicinorum. Odit uterque tocus, cum solos credat
habendos Esse Deos quos ipse colit. Juve. Sat. 15. Omnis Contentio quae Dei
causa suscipitur stabilis sutura est and diuturna. Drus. Apotheg.
Hatred grounded in differences of Religion, are the most bitter and incapable
of Reconciliation. And it is a true observation of some D. Day upon. 1 Cor.
16.9.
, that the nearer any are unto a conjunction in matters of Religion, and yet
some difference retained, the deeper is the hatred; as he observes a Jew hates
a Christian worse then he does a Pagan or a Turk; a Papist hates a Protestant
worse then he does a Jew; and a Formalist hates a Puritan worse then he does a
Papist. No such hatred under Heaven (says he) as that between a Formalist and
a Puritan. Now Truth being one, the true Religion one, and this the possession
and profession of the true Church, this inrageth all the world against it,
Pagans, Jews, Turks, Papists, Formalists; that as they every one Idolize their
own Religion and opinion, and seek to suppress each other, so they all
combine, to suppress the true Religion, to keep that from flourishing, from
shining forth in it is original beauty and glory.

And then secondly are full of craft. 2 Craft.
The seed of the Serpent, for so God calls them, Genesis 3.15. thereby letting^us
know, That as the Serpent was moae subtle then any beast of the field, Genes.
3.1. So the Adversaries of the Church are more subtle then all the men of the
world, whereas the Church of God, they are the Seed of Jacob, Psalm. 22.23. Genesis
25.27.
He was a plain man, Sine fraud and fuco, and so are his Seed, Prudentiam
habent, fraudulentiam horrent, but their Adversaries they are full of Psalm
83.3. Io^ 15.35. Psalm. 10.7. Psalm. 119.110.
craft, therefore sometimes in Scripture called Foxes Cant. 2.15. Luk 13.12.3.
Cruelty.
.

3. And as full of cuelty as craft, therefore in Scripture proclaimed bloody as
well as Psalm. 55.23.
deceitful men. And in that respect compared to Psalm. 22.12, 13, 16, 21.
Lions, Bulls, Dogs, Unicorns, Mat. 10.16. Act. 20.19.
Wolves. The Churches enemies are men of cruel bloody dispositions, such as
was Francis the first of France, whose rage against the truth of God, and the
Reformation in Luthers time, was so bloody, that he did in a solemn assembly
protest. If he knew any part of his body infected with that contagion ( of
Lutheranisme) he would presently tear it from him, Si quam sui Corporis
partem ista Contagione sciret infectam revulsurum illico nelongius serperet.
Sleid. com. lib. 9.
that it might spread no further. Or that of the Germain Count Felix of
Wartenburge, A memorable thing fell cut, anno 1550. Diverse Noblemen being at
Supper together, and threatening hotrible things against the Professors of our
Religion, among the rest Count Felix of Wartenburge a great Warrior, and that
had bin in place of command under Maximilian the Emperor, said he hep^d ere he
died to ride up to the spurrs in the blood of the Lutherans; but being smitten
by God, that very night, he fell a bleeding in that violent manner, that his
blood choked him and he dyed. Flac. Illyr. So let all thine enemies perish o
Lord, and give them blood to drink, for they are worthy.
Who, he said, h^ped ere he dyed, to ride up to the spurrs in the blood of the
Lutherans. These are the dispositions of them all, Prove. 27.29.
for as face answers to face in water, so the heart of man to the heart of man.
Now look upon the Adversaries of the Church thus, as full of innate craft,
cruelty, malignity against the Church of God and the true Religion, and what
can you expect, but that they should by all deceitful, bloody ways, hinder
and oppose any work that tends to the stablishment and promoving of the
Churches good.

But if you add to this, Reason drawn from the power of Satan in the hearts
of the Adversaries.
the mighty power that Satan has in the hearts of the Churches enemies, to
every one of whom it may be applied, which Peter said to Ananias, Satan has
filled thy heart, yea Satan has not only filled them, but as the Holy Ghost
in one word tells us, Ephesians. 2.2. (...). Ioh. 6.44.
is continually active and mighty in them. And again tells us, they are as
spontaneously subject to his power and motions. That native malignity, craft,
cruelty, that is inherent in the Churches Adversaries is principle enough to
carry them on in designs against the Churches good, though Satan should never
incite them; and that power and energy of Satan in them, is enough to carry
them in that way, though there were no such natural disposition. But when both
meet, a strong propension of nature in themselves, and a mighty energeticall
power of Satan over them, needs must they with most impetuous violence be
carried on by any craft or cruelty, 3. Reason from Gods permitting this. 1. For
his people. Trial.
no matter what or how to hinder all that tends to the Churches good. They
having an act^vity of their own that way, and Satan who is mighty in them,
acting them that way too.

True it is, God could restrain the rage of his Churches Adversaries, bind
down the malignity of their natures (though he leave it in them) with a band
of brass or iron, as the stump of that tree in Nebuchadnezars vision, and
retund even the Devils own malice. But it pleases the wisdom of God to
give scope thus to the malice of Satan and his instruments, and that both, in
reference to his people, and to himself.

To his people. First, for their trial, the reason the Apostle gives, why the
Lord permits heresies in his Church, may let us see why the Lord suffers other
opposition against his Church, 1 Cor. 11.19. Vt qui probati sunt and haeresoes
fermento se non in ecerunt manifesti fiant in Nobis. Profi^iant in cognitio^e,
cluceant in confessione, o len luntque sidem suam, constantian veritatem opera,
ut glorificetur Pater noster qui in coelis est. Cram. Haeresiolog.
There must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be
made manifest among you Cum Ecclesia pace and con^ordia fruitur, nec
afflictione extrinse^us aut dissensione intrinsecus laborat, qui Christi sunt
non agnoscuntur, vixque seipsos invicem dignoscunt quia prosperitatis tempore
facile est Deo ^ervire Camer in Joh. 6.
. Who will not own the Churches cause, when it prospers, meets with no
opposition? Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 8. 2 For his peoples exercise.
The Samaritans were wont to challenge kindred of the Jews, when the state of
the Jews flourished, but when it was afflicted then disclaimed them. Many will
imbarke themselves in the Churches cause in a calm, that with the Soldiers in
the Acts will fly out of the Ship in a storm. Therefore that his own which
are approved may be manifested, God suffers Satan and his instruments to
oppose, to use all their craft and cruelty to hinder his Churches good.

And not only that his people may be tried, but also exercised in swisdome,
faith, patience, courage. When there was deliberation at Rome about the
demolishing of Carthage Sinenda est Carthago ut ejus metu disciplina a
majoribus tradita jam Laba, cens rest ituatur. Appian de bellis puntcis.
, let it stand says Scipio, least the people of Rome should want an occasion
or object whereon to exercise their valor. God could soon annihilate his
Churches enemies; but let them live, says God, let them do their worst, they
shall but be for the exercise of my peoples wisdom, faith, zeal, constancy,
courage and whole panoplie of grace.

3. For the further illustration of his own Glory.
And yet God has a further end in permitting this, then his peoples exercise
and trial, and that is, The illustration of his own glory, by the crafty and
cruel attempts of the Churches enemies, that the glory of his wisdom and power
in the preservation and prosperity of his Church might be the more illustrious.
Archimedes had never been so famous, if the City where he dwelt had not been so
long so violently besieged, and a long time preserved only by his means. If
the Church of God, the city of the habitation of his holiness, should not
often be surrounded with enemies, besieged with difficulties and oppositions,
the wisdom and power of God, in preserving and prospering his Church, would
never be so glorious, therefore the Lord suffers the Adversaries of his Church
to design and endeavor by craft or cruelty, or both, to hinder any work that
tends to the Churches good, gives them leave to plot and conspire against his
Church, and lets them say. They shall not know nor see, til we are in the midst
of them, etc.

The Doctrine applied. 1 By way of Commemoration.
And now if ever Text were verbum diei, as the vulgar Latin reads it, or
verbum super rotas, as some others: Surely this Truth, this Text is such. Every
word of this Text is a Wheel of that triumphant Chariot, Pro. 25 11. (...)
Mercer.
in which our Church and State this day glories over a design of our
Adversaries against us, fraught with all the subtilty and cruelty, that hell it
self was able to infuse into it, This day thirty seven years, was this
Scripture fulfilled in England.

This day thirty seven years, the King then sitting upon the Throne, had
summoned the Peers and Commons of this Kingdom to an Assembly of Parliament.
The intent of that meeting (as was hoped by Gods people, and feared by their
enemies) was to surround Jerusalem, and the Temple, with walls and bulwarks,
to secure the Church, the true Religion and worship of God, with needful,
healthful Laws: this was the work intended. Wherefore should a Parliament
meet, but for that work? and our Adversaries said, they shall not know,
neither see till we are in the midst of them and slay them, and cause the work
to cease.

And our Adversaris.
Our Adversaries: Who are they? Consider and then judge. Who are they that
(when time was) filled their loathsome Prisons with the bodies of our
Forefathers? Made our land drunk with the blood of Martyrs? In the space of
less then 4. years sacrificed the lives Balthaz. Hol. in Chron. and Osiand.
Cen. 16 Histor. Eccles. Anno 1555.
of 800. Innocents unto their Idols? And ever since God has put a stop to
those bloody outrages have travailed with nothing but Englands destruction now
these Fourscore years? Who are they that have made so many desparate stabbes
at the breasts of our Prineces? so many deadly blows at the heart of the
State? given life and vigor to so many insurrections and rebellions in the
bowels of the Kingdom? Are they not the Papists? It is easy then to point
out these Adversaries. The Papists: they are our Adversaries, so they have
been, so they are, so they will be, as long as Christ is ours, his Gospel
ours, the Reformed Religion ours. Sooner shall a man find honey and balm in
the nests of Aspes, and the Dens of Dragons, then we true friendship and
peace with Papists. Said.
Sooner shall East and West meet and kiss, the Arc and Dagon, Jerusalem and
Babylon, Christ and Belial cease to be Adverse, then they cease to be our
Adversaries. These were, these are our Adversaries.

And our Adverssaries said. These our Adversaries had had many a saying to us,
they had said in eighty eight, Psalm 83 4.
Come and let us cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of England may
be no more in remembrance. They had said, as Moab 2 Kin. 3.2^.
Up Rome, to the spoil, presuming the victory was theirs before the fight. And
when that Saying was disappointed, yet they said there was a day a coming
which should pay for all, that was the day of Queen Elizabeth's death,
concerning which their Balams prophesied, Parsons ans. to the libell of Eng
Just. p. 176 181.
That by the uncertainty of the next heir the Kingdom was in a despeat case,
in the greatest misery that ever it was, since or before the Conquest, and
far worse then any Country in Christendom Cujus sepulchrum velut totius
Regni voraginem and naufrrgium, tanquam sub oculis contemplemini: -- Ingentes
moles tempestatum and conturbationum, cruentorum imbrium conglomeratas nubes
vestris impendere cervicibus despicietis. Vndiquaque Anglia in praedam
expetitur and expectatur. Weston de triplici hominis, officio: in perorat ad
Academ.
That Clouds of blood hung over England, which waited but her dissolution for
their dissolving, that upon her death England would be a common prey, and her
tomb would be Englands grave. This our Adversaries said then, and from these
sayings, issued all that prodigious variety of murderous complotments against
the sacred person of that ever honored Queen, The miracle of her Sex, the
glory of her Age, the astonishment of the World. But the silver line of her
precious life being hid in the hollow of Gods hand from all their desperate
assassinates, she full of years, and more full of honor, went to the grave in
peace: and God who frustrates the tokens of the Liars, Isa. 44.25.
and makes Diviners mad, contrary to the hopes and confidences of our
Adversaries, brought in a peaceful King, and established his Throne in peace.

What Say our Adversaries now? are they not so ashamed and confounded in their
former disappointments, as they can open their mouths no more? No, they are
saying still, the malice of our Adversaries is as incapable of disheartning, as
Balaam was in his attempts of cursing Israel. Let God appear never so often
against them, let the Angel of God stand with a drawn Sword in his hand, they
will on, yet again our Adversaries said, etc.

What Pharaoh said to his Servants, that our Adversaries said one to another,
Exodus 1.
Come let us deal wisely, our former projects against this people, have bin
too shallow and open, our preparations in 88. proclaimed our intentions, and
made them frustrate, the treasons of Parry, Lopez, Sanders, etc. were common,
ordinary and poor attempts, now for some rare stratagem, some depth of
darkness, some mystery of unheard of treachery, that may be acted by unseene
instruments, they shall neither know nor see, till we are in the midst among
them. And what was this, but the Pouder-Treason. Look upon the cunning
projecting and carrying on that Treason, you will hear our Adversaries saying.
They shall neither know nor see till we are in the midst of them. And look
upon their bloody intent in it. And it was to slay and cause the work to ccase

They shall not know.
First for the crafty projecting and managing the plot, because they will make
sure, we shall know nothing^, none shall be admitted to consultation about the
thing, but those that will by Vows and Oaths, and Sacraments, and all that is
Sacred, bind themselves more then once, Sr. Edward Cook his Speech at the
arraignement of Garnet.
neitheir directly nor indirectly, neither plainly nor by circumstance to
discover the plot. Hence it was that in two years space (for so long was this
Treason forming) not the least inckling of it came to any of our ears, our
Adversaries had sworn, They shall not know, and if ever they were true to
their Oaths it was here. They shall not know.

Nor see. Therefore all their work lies under ground, Nor see.
and is dispatched in the night, when deep sleep falls upon men: If either
the darkness of the night, or the depth of the earth can hide it, we shall
not see. And how did God for a while seem to smile upon their project, and to
facillitate their work, when providence offered the convenience of a Celler to
them, whereas they thought they must have dug a Vault by strength of hand,
to lay their Powder in. How did God seem to have cast this Kingdom and City
into a dead-sleepe, that 36. barrells of gunpowder should be conveyed into a
Celler so near the Parliament House, and a Parliament so near and none have
the least suspicion of Treason. Could this have bin if God had not stupefied
Men. God himself seemed to take their part, and they who not many years
before had sworn God was turned Lutheran, In 88.
began to hope, God was turned Catholic again. God seemed to have conspired
with them, and to say, They shall not know nor see. etc.

In the midst of them. Till we are in the midst of them. Joh. 20.19.
How? As Jesus in the midst of his Disciples, saying, peace be unto you. No.
But as the Enemies were in the midst of the Congregation. Psalm. 74.4.
O GOD thy Enemies roar in the midst of thy Congregation. They made account to
have come into the midst of them with such roaring as would have astonished the
Heavens, and made the Earth tremble. In the midst of them, as the Daughter of
Herodias was (...), Mat. 14.6.
only to suck blood, to slay them, that is the end why they would be in the
midct of them. And our Adversaries said, they shall not know nor see, till we
are in the midst of them and slay them.

Slay them. Slay them.
Whom? The whole Assembly of Parliament, and therein to quench the light, and
extinguish the glory of the English Nation. Never any Treason before this so
destructive. Others were but petty Treasons compared with this. This was the
master-peice of all the policy of Rome and Hell. Unless it were the Treason
of Satan against the state of Man in Paradise, to blow up all Mankind in Adam,
the representative of it at once, no Treason like to this. This was second unto
that, of which they say, as he sometimes of Goliahs sword, None to that, None
to that, wherein the flower of our Gentry, our whole Nobillity, the Princes of
the blood, the Lords anointed, the Royal seed were all devoted to one
stroke of destruction. And our Adversaries said they shall not know nor see,
til we are in the midst of them and slay them.

Slay them. Aye such Instruments of cruelty had they prepared for this
slaughter, as no one of that Assembly could have fled from the fury of, had
they the wings of Eagles, nor resisted the force of, had their flesh bin as
brass, or their strength as stones, or their bodies armed with the scales of
the Leviathan. They were not Swords, nor Pistols, nor poisons, the ordinary
weapons of Romes warre-fare, but Instruments more inevitably killing. 36.
Barrells of gunpowder, enough to have blown to dust, the strongest Fort in
Christendom. These were the Instruments of their cruelty, such as were never
found in the habitations of Simeon and Levi. With these they intended to come
in the midst of them and slay them. And that with such a slaughter, as was
never heard before. Show me in any History a president of the like slaughter as
was intended here. Wicked Abimelech slew upon one stone threescore and ten of
Gideons sons, yet one escaped: Ietham had his life saved. Bloody Saul caused
Fourscore and five of the Priests of the Lord to be slain in one day, yet
Abiathar the Son of the high Priest had his life given him for a prey.
Ambitious Athaliah sought to destroy all the Kings seed, yet Ioash the Kings
Son was preserved. In the Massacre of France, above threescore thousand
slain, yet some escaped even of those that were appointed to the slaughter.
But here Oh merciless cruelty, not one man that had escaped, neither King,
nor Prince, nor Lord, nor any of that Honorable Assembly, though all of them,
as Zeba said of the brethren of Gideon, were men cach one resembling the Son
of a King, yet they had all perished together, in a moment, not one escaping.
The Devil dealt more mercifully then thus with Job when he slew his Sons and
Servants, he still left one alive to carry the tidings, but here all dye or
none. And that in such a crafty sly way, as they shall never know who hurt
them. They shall not know nor see. Nay the craft of our Adversaries extended so
far, as to provide, not only to hide themselves from the sight of them, whom
they intended thus to cut off, See a letter of M. W. Perkins to M. Vicars
before his Poem on the 5. of Novem.
but from the rest of the Nation. You know the ways they had taken to cast the
Odium of that horrid Treason on the true Protestants, under the name of
Puritans, if God had not in mercy delivered us from that conspiracy, we had
borne not only the misery, but the infamy of it.

And cause the work to cease
And our Adversaries said, They shall not know nor see till we are in the
midst of them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease. It is the work
they were about, that is the cause of all their rage and malice: They were
about to make Laws for settling true Religion, and repressing Popery. And as
Pilat came upon the Galileans, when they were sacrificing, and mingled their
blood with their Sacrifices. And as the Adversaries hear made account to come
upon Nehemiah and his builders, and temper their mortar with their bloods, so
did ours plot to come upon our Law makers, they shall write no Laws, but in
their own bloods.

And Oh Lord, if this plot had taken, What a That which P. Valderama fables
concerning Ignatius his Lodgings, indeed would have bin true of these
buil^ings. Cum pri^^um proposuit apud se militarem vitam abdicare, Do nus in
qua tum s^^t ^ota contren u^t, par^etes ejus concussa suerant, lig^a omnta and
trabes concre^uerunt Quemad^^dum accidit cum in Mont^ aliquo Sulp^u eo ^^neum
os a^eritur and Flammae exinde erumpere i^cipiunt, fic, etc mill Terrores,
mill Pavores, mill edium inceudia consequu^a fuerint. Nu us un qu^n Aetea out
ign^us mons paria secit.
Vesuvius, what an Etna had this place bin? What an Aceldama, what a Golgotha
had this Land bin? What a Chaos had this Church and State bin? how had our
Laws, Liberties, Religion bin swallowed up in that Fiery gulf, and buried in
those ashes. How would that man of sin, that son of perdition have satiated
his thirst of blood in the archivements of this Day, and have looked upon those
piles of mangled, dismembered bodies, and that horrid face of death, such as was
never seen before, with as much content as Haniball did upon a pit full of the
blood of Men, when he cries out, O formosum spectaculum. Or Valesus the Asian
Proconsul, when trampling over the carcasses of 300. Men whom he had slain,
he cried out O rem regiam. Or that Queen who when she saw some of her
Protestant subjects lying dead and stripped upon the Earth, cried our. The
goodliest tapestry that ever she beheld. Many goodly bloody sights has
Antichrist glutted his cruel mind with. The Funeral piles of England in Queen
Mary's days. The Massacre of France. The wars of Germany. The butcheries of
Ireland. Goodly sights in the eyes of Antichrist. But to have seen a whole
Parliament, and therein the peace and Religion of a whole Kingdom, blown up
in a moment! Thuarus writes that the Pope caused the Massacre of Paris to be
painted in his Palace, surely had this Plot succeeded it should have been For
though the plot succeeded not, yet F. Garnet had the honor to have his picture
set among the reit of Romes Saints, in the Jesuits Church at Rome. Voluisse
sat est. Gir. 1. Apol. contra Iesuitas.
portraied in his Holiness Chapel or Oratory.

And how came it to pass, that it succeeded not. Was there any thing wanting
either in the wills or endeavors of our Adversaries. No, our Adversaries said,
They shall not know nor see, till we are in the midst of them and slay them.
Nor did we till that very night, that Morning the fatal blow should have been
given. And then it was not any State vigilance or prudence, but merely divine
providence that brought to light this work of darkness. The particular acts
of which providence, I need not instance, you know the Story, and all that know
it will acknowledge, That if ever the arm of GOD were revealed in any
deliverance, it was in this; only that by all which has been spoken, our
hearts may be raised to the higher strain of thankfulness, Let me as I have
set before you the subtilty and cruelty of our adversaries in the invention of
this Treason, present unto you the mercy of God in the prevention of it.

O how freely did God deliver us from the bloody intendment of our Adversaries.
Many Deliverances has God wrought for our Selves, for other Churches, for his
Church in former times, but was there ever any so free as this? Esth. 4.16.
God delivered his Church, from the bloody conspiracy of Haman. A work of
astonishing power and mercy. But what Prayers, what Tears, what Fastings and
Wrestlings did it cost Esther and Mordecai, and the whole Church, ere they
could obtain that Deliverance? It was a gracious Deliverance, GOD wrought for
his Infantile Church, in rescuing Peter from the hands of Herod, but it was
wrought by abundant importunity, uncessant Prayer. Act. 12.5.
Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto GOD for him. But this
Deliverance came not upon the wings of our prayers, but Gods free mercy, we
knew not our danger, and therefore could not make Deliverance the subject of
our Prayers. Masses were said in Rome, for the good success of the Catholic
design, but no Prayers in England for our Deliverance from their Treason, and
yet we delivered, admirable Mercy! A people to be delivered by their God,
before they seek Deliverance.

2. And delivered so fully. You know the Plot was laid for a full destruction,
to cut off every Person in that Honorable Assembly: to blow them all up, tear
them all in pieces, and in and with them the whole Nation. But see how fully
God prevented their mischievous design. That not a limb of any one of them
was shaken, not one bone broken. The Deliverance was like that of the three
Children in the fiery furnace. There was not so much as a hair of their head
sindged, neither did the fire so much as take hold upon any of their Garments,
neither was there so much as the sent thereof upon them. Like that of
Jerusalem, from the fury of Senacherib, who coming up against the Church full
of pride and rage, intending nothing, but to break in pieces and destroy:
says GOD, He shall not come up against this City, nor shoot an arrow there. So
said the LORD to our Adversaries. You shall not come up against this Assembly,
nor fire one corn of Powder, nor shed one drop of blood there, where they
intended to have filled all with blood and fire, O admirable Deliverance: Has
GOD delivered Germany thus. Is Ireland thus delivered, O England, England! The
ashes of Germany, The blood of Ireland, proclaim thy Deliverance this day,
glorious in the fullness of it.

3. And not only in the fullness of our Deliverance, but in the confusion of
our enemies, whom God took this day in their own Pits and snares. And the
plot they had laid to blow us up, did recoyle and blow up themselves. God
turned it to their own destruction. That which they had designed for the
advantage of their Catholic cause and Religion (a good cause and a good
Religion, that must be advanced by such sinful, devilish ways) has been
the greatest disadvantage to their cause: All the streams of Tyber will never
wash off that blot of just infamy which this Treason has fastened on them, till
Babylon sink like a Mil stone into the bottom of the Sea, it will never be
washed off, This was the Lords doning: This turning the Wheel upon our
Adversaries, this bringing their mischief upon their own heads, it was the
Lords doings, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

But now as that great King, Esther 7. When he read in the records of the
Chronicles, that Mordecai had discovered a Treason against the King, presently
enquired, What honor and dignity had been done to Mordecai for this. So do
you. You have seen this day a brief record of that which deserves a larger
Chronicle. You have seen how the God of Heaven prevented and disappointed a
Treason as dark and cruel as Hell, intended against the whole State and
Kingdom. Now your parts it is (Honorable and Beloved) who representatively
are the whole Nation, your parts it is to enquire, what honor, what dignity
has been done to God for this.

True it is the Parliament then assembled, whose the Deliverance more
immediately was, did ordain this Anniversary, which we celebrate this Day.
But besides this, what honor, what dignity has been done to God. What has
been done for the advancement of his Glory, the propagation of his Gospel, the
repressing of Popery from that Deliverance unto this Day. Do you in your
consciences think, that the bare keeping this deliverance inmemory, or an
acknowledging of it in our assemblies, as at this day, is sufficient
retribution of dignity and honor to our great deliverer. Did not Hezekiah do
as much as this; did not he indite a Song in the praise of that God, that had
delivered him from the sentence of death. You have it Isa. 38. to. yet is it
not said, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. But Hezekiah returned not unto the LORD, according to
the benefit done unto him. Hezekiah returned praise unto the Lord, even a
Psalm of praise. But Hezekiah returned not unto the Lord, according to the
benefit done unto him: Therefore was wrath upon him and upon Judah and
Jerusalem. May it not be said so of England for all our Anniversaries, our
Sermons and Songs of praise, But England has not returned unto the Lord,
according to the benefits done unto them. Quid verba andiam, facta cum videam.
Care I, says God, for the flattering praises of England, when I see the cursed
practices of England! Have not my purest Truths been adulterated in England,
and Romes grossest errors entertained in England, and that even since this
Deliverance? Have not my purest Ordinances been polluted in England, and Romes
grossest superstitions practiced in England? Have not Masses been openly
celebrated with a greater confluence of multitudes to them, then to Sermons and
Sacraments? Have they not published edictes against the Sanctification of my
Day, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
but none against the Idolatry of the Mass? Have they not without Law, against
Law persecuted my Ministers, my Servants, imprisoning them, compelling them to
voluntary exile, while they have neglected to put in execution their own Laws
against Romish Priests and Jesuits* Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish
Nation and unwise? Did I deliver you this Day from Romish cruelties, that you
should deliver up your selves to Romish Superstitions and Idolatry? Is this to
return to the LORD, according to the benefits he has done?

Arise, arise ye Princes of the tribes of England, ye members of the honor
able houses of Parliament act something this day, worthy of your selves, worthy
of this day, worthy of this deliverance, worthy of your great deliverer. God (I
persuade my self) has reserved unto you the glory of returning unto him
according to this days mercy. You have begun to do more for the repressing of
Popery, for the reforming of the Church in doctrine, worship, discipline, then
your forefathers have done ever since the first hand was put to the work of
reformation. Go on in the name of the Lord, in the power of his might, in the
multitudes of his strength: Go on to root out, not only Popery but all that is
Popish. Let this day add something toward the perfection of that work. Some
such thing I suppose was in the hearts of the honorable Houses when they made
choice of this particular day for the assembly of Divines to meet on. Why to
meet this day, if not to deliberate and advise something that might tend to the
farther honor of the Author of this days deliverance and the farther
confusion of the Author of this days treason, the Romish Religion? Well, that
assembly by the said distempers of these bleeding times is yet suspended. I
beseech you make this the work of yours: and when you return to your
Parliament House again let the first question put to vote this day be David's
Quid retribuam? psalm. 116. What shall I render to the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? Let this be the question, and the God of wisdom and grace
direct you in your Resolves.

And what ever God shall reveal to make most for his glory, his Churches peace
and good, the union of the Kingdoms, the extirpation of Popery let that be the
Crowning Act of this day. Scripio Africanus being accused before the Tribunes
of the people and the day of his trial falling upon the same month and day in
which be had some years before won a great victory over Hanniball in
Afric. Iiv 8. c 40.
Upon his first appearance addresses himself to the people in this wise. Hoc
die, Quirites, cum Annibale faeliciter pugnatum est etc. This day Gentlemen did
I fight with Hanniball in Afric with good success: therefore leaving Law
suites I pass directly to the Capitol to salute the Gods and give them
thanks. Hoc die Quirites. This day, Knights and Gentlemen, God himself fought
for you against Rome, o do not think it enough that you have come to salute God
in his Temple this morning and give him praise; but when you return to your
Parliament House again letting all other businesses sleep a while, in the
first place Resolve this question Quid retribuam? What shall I render to the
Lord for all his benefits?

Application second by way of Information.
And this I would the rather excite you to ( Honorable and beloved in our Lord
because, due thankfulness for former deliverances is a happy means to
procure new. God is never weary of delivering a people that studyes
thankfulness. And has not England, has not the Parliament need of the arm
of God to be stretched out again for their deliverance. For have we now no
adversaries? or have our adversaries changed their natures, put of their wo^^ed
craft and cruelty forgott their old note to say, They shall not know nor see
till we are in the midst of them and slay them and cause the work to cease?
No certainly. Sooner shall the Leopard change his sports or the Ethiopian his
skin then our adversaries change their scrafty bloody dispositions or cease to
plot ruin against us, till they have utterly ruined themselves by their own
plots. Have our adversaries think you bin sleeping ever since this powder
treason? You that have bin now these two years wrestling with them, you know
what their Molitions have bin and in your several Remonstrances have made them
known: yet give me leave to inform the rest of our brethren a little of them.

Our adversaries in Ireland have bin plotting their present rebellion these
seaventeen years as some have deposed. See the Fri^sh Remonstrance
These seaventeen years they have bin making fireworks and laying trains for
the kindling of that combustion which now devoures that miserable Kingdom. And
what have our adversaries bin doing here the mean while, Think you, nothing?
Whence then proceeded those long intermissions of Parliaments that we began to
fear our Parliaments would prove like those Roman solemnities: Ludi seculares.
Alexan. Genesis Dier. li. 6. c. 18
Quos nemo mortalium vidit unquam nec visurus est. Which no man lived to see
twice being held but once in a hundred years.

Whence came the immature dissolutions of so many Parliaments? but from the
plots of these our adversaries? He that knows not where the strength of
England lies, may learn of Englands enemies. For as the Philistines when they
knew that Samsons strength lay in his hair plotted to cut off that and then
they easily bound him, put out his eyes and made him grind in their mill. So
our adversaries knowing our strength to lie in our Parliaments have bin ever
plotting to cut off them. One Parliament they attempted to blow up with powder
but many a Parliament they have blown up without powder that so our Parliaments
being intermitted, interrupted they might at once lay bands upon us, and put
out our eyes that we should not see our own bondage, lay us in our Laws and
liberties and we should neither know nor see.

Esth. 7.4.
And if only in our Laws and liberties, If as Esther said, We had only bin
sold for bondmen and bondwomen the mischief had bin more tolerable. But had
not our adversaries plotred to slay us as the two witnesses were slain in the
Revelation? To slay us by taking the word of truth and life from us? Did they
not say, we will come upon them and they shall neither know nor see tell we are
in the midst of them and cause that work to cease.

I know there are many in the Nation (and may be some here) that cannot yet be
persuaded there was ever any design for the alteration of Religion amongst us.
Such I beseech in the spirit of meekness to lend me a patient and unprejudiced
ear. I stand not hear to declaime against any persons or ranks of men: but to
speak the words of truth and soberness. I know that I stand this day not only
before a great Court but before a greater God to whom I must give account for
what I now speak.

Contzen. Politic. li. 2. cap. 18. Lays a plott for the altering of Religion
in a Protestant Kingdom: which is Laid down in certain rules.
Adam Contzen, A Jesuit of Mentz in his second book of Politickes the
Eighteenth Chapter, has drawn a plot for the cheating of a people of the true
Religion by sleight of hand and the serving in of Popery again upon them by
art of legerdemaine, that they shall neither know nor see. The method of this
(which certainly is one of Satan's Methods) he lays down in certain rules.
Be pleased but to observe how exactly the late times have moved according to
those Rules and then judge of their designs.

His first rule.
His first rule is this. To proceed as Musicians do in tuning their
instruments: Who strain their strings with agentle hand and set them up by
little and little. Or as Physicians do in curing diseases who abate noxious
humors by degrees and pauses. This rule was observed both for the destructive
and adstructive way. For the destruction of the true Religion, and the
advancing of the false they had learned this wisdom to proceed by degrees and
pauses. And first for the destruction of the true Religion. To suspend all the
Orthodoxe preathers in the land at once would have made too great a noise
therefore proceed by degrees. And first suspend all Lecturers which will not
constantly practice the ceremonies. Then after a little pause, Clap down all
Lecturers as an order of Vagrants not to be toller ated in the Church. When
that is done: Forbid all Pastors and Incumbents preaching in their own parish
Churches upon week days. Next inhibit preaching upon the Lords Day in the
After noone under pretense of advancing Catechizing by that means: and yet
with in a little while after forbidding all Catecheticall exposition, tying men
to the bare words of the Primmer Catechisine: As soon after they forbad all
praying but in the words of the Canon. Now what can any ingenuous man think
the design of all this was; But to rob us of preaching and praying, and
thereby of the Gospel and true Religion wholly in conclusion? Only to do it
by degrees for fear of noise and tumult, to do it so as we should neither
know nor see.

And for the adstructive way. The rebuilding of Rome among us did they not
proceed by the me steps?

First, Urging the constant and full practice of the old Ceremonies beyond the
intention either of Law of or Canon. Then bringing in an Idolatrous fardell of
new pop shisuperstitions without warrant either of Law or Canon but their own
paper injunctions; forcing their observance upon Ministers and people: but by
pauses and degrees.

First, the Table must be railed in; soon after set in an Altar posture.

Then thirdly, All must be compelled to come and kneel before it or not
receave the Sacrament.

Then it must becried up as the Sanctum Sanctorum; the place of Gods chief
residence upon earth; the Seat and Throne of God Almighty. And there upon,
Fifthly, All men's faces in prayer must be turned toward that. Men may, yea
must say some, adore and bow before it, etc.

What could the intent of all this be? but after the Altar to bring in the
sacrifice, and with their wooden worship the breaden God. Only to do it by
degrees that we should not know nor see. So in doctrine. First, bring in
Arminian doctrines, then the popish will easily follow. Let the Serpent but
wind in his head, he will soon work in his whole body. Let Arminianisine but
obtain countenance and license in the kingdom; Our Pulpits, Schools,
Presses, will soon be filled with popish doctrins: witness the publishing of
so many points of popery one after another, specially those two. That the Pope
is not Antichrist. And that the Church of Rome is a true visible Church. Alta
sic surgunt maenia Romoa. Thus (according to the rule of their Master Jesuit)
they seek to re establish Rome by degrees. They said, they shall not know nor
see.

His second Rule.
His second Rule is this. To press the examples and practices of some as a
good means to draw on the rest. And was not this familiar with them? to dazzle
the eyes of the meaner and less judicious people of the kingdom, with the
practices of great persons. If any begun to tartle or be troubled at the matter
what was their present answer? My Lord Bishop does thus and thus: and my Lords
Grace of Canterbury does thus and thus. The Knights of the most noble order of
the Garter bow. Versus Altar, A C. Speech in the Star Chamber, p 47
toward the Altar at their installement, His Majesty's Chapel is thus and
thus adorned. By these and the like pretenses casting a mist before the peoples
eyes that some did not, others durst not see any thing tending toward the
altering of Religion. Our adversaries said they shall neither know nor see.

His third Rule.
His third Rule is this. That arch Heretics and such as are teachers of
Heresy must be banished the Common wealth, at once if it may safely be done,
but if not by degrees. It is easy to know who are the Jesuits,
Arch-Heretickes, the most active, orthodoxe Protestants. For the rooting out of
such the Jesuit prescribes a method of twelve or thirteen steps. Cout. Pol.
lib. 2^. c. 18.. 6.
For which (though well worth the relating) I refer you to his book, least
this discourse should swell to much. Only in sum. Let me show you how their
operation has been according to this Rule. The Arch-Heretickes and Teachers
of heresy in England have been counted the Puritan Preachers, though they
teach nothing but consonant to Scripture and the public Doctrine of the
Church, yet they are the teachers of heresy: and being too many to root out
(...) once, it must be done by degrees, that it may effected with more ease and
less noise, and therefore,

First, east all those out of the ministry, that will not be punctual and
full conformists to the old Ceremonies. Next (because there were a company of
conformable Puritans as themselves styled them) they procure an edict for
recreations upon the Lords Day and this must be published by Ministers: that
such as could stand under the ceremonies (though groaning for the burden) might
fall and be broken in pe^ces under this. And yet because some men suspected of
Puritanisme might have a latitude here bey and their brethren; They have a
third engine and that is injoyning new Ceremonies and adorations, that if any
could swallow the book yet they might discover and cast them out by straining
here. To this they add a fourth. Prayers and Proclamations to be read against
our brethren the Scotts. And their last and greatest engine which was like the
powder plot against the godly ministry of the nation to blow up the relics
of them at once was the oath for Episcopacie. By these successive stratagems
they made account utterly to extirpate those Arch-Hereticks.

As it was sometimes said to Elijah, 1 King. 19.
Him that escapes the sword of Hazael, shall Iehu slay-and him that escapes
the sword of Iehu shall Elisha slay. So had they said. Him that escapes the
dint of the Ceremonies shall the book of sports slay, and him that escapes the
book of sports shall the new injunctions slay: and him that escapes the new
injunctions shall the proclamations slay, and him that escapes the
proclamations, shall the oath slay. And this by degrees and pauses that they
shall neither know nor see till we slay them and cause the work to cease.

His fourth Rule.
The fourth rule is this. That those which are adversaries to the true Religion
(which with him is Popery) be put by their dignities, places and offices. I
think none here is such a stranger in England but from his own knowledge can
wi^nesse this. The bestowing of all offices, the collating of benefices, the
election of Masters, and fellows of Colleges in both Universities, who had
the overruling hand in them all, the power of mandamus, but Canterbury and his
faction? And whom were they conferred upon Usually? Men infamous for and So
Leontius Bishop of Antioch a dissembling concealed Arrian was observed to
disrespect all Orthodox men and prefer no one in the Church but such as
inclined to Arrianisme: (...) etc. Theod. 2 24. Quis enim non facile Pruitanos
in Anglia redig^^ in Or ^inem si Episco^or m approbationem ab it is ex. torqueat,
Contz vbisupra paragrap. 9
impudent in Arminian and Popish opinions. Protested Arminianisme and bold
faced Popery the only speedy unerring way to Church preferment.

To make the Protestant Religion odious, by laying load upon such tenants as
are most subject to harshest constructions. In this our adversaries have not
bin sparing. Quot plaustra convitiorum have they poured out upon some doctrines
of our Religion specialy the points of grace? The pulpits of Italy and Rome
never spitt more gall and venom against the doctrines of Election, free grace,
justification by faith, perseverance, etc. nor never sweat more to exaggerate
the seeming absurdities, which carnal men would draw from them then some of
ours have done.

To foment the quarells that are among the Protestants and strengthen that
party that is nearest compliance with Rome. And here, the wretch has the
unhappines to prescribe one thing as the proper means of Englands cure. For
who (says he) might not easily reduce the Puritans of England into order (you
know what the Jesuits reducing into order is) if he could extort from them an
approbation of the Bishops? And had they not attempted and almost effected
this? They had made us their slaves before and were they not about to make us
swear we would be so for ever? Certainly though nothing but Episcopacy floated
in the surface of that ^ath, yet Popery was in the (...), in the etc. of it o^
reducing the Puritans of England into order, sensu Pontificio.

His seventh rule.
His seventh is this. That all private Conventiles and public meetings must be
forbidden. For private Conventicles you all know, that to meet together to pray
or to confer (which with them was a Conventicle) was Peccatum irremissible. A
man might at a better rate almost answer any thing then such a meeting.

For public meetings. The ancient laudable exercising of prophesying (I mean
not in that sense the word is lately taken for private spirits to interpret
Scripture, but prophesying by men in office peculiarly gifted and called to
that work) these are banished. The public and most frequentod lectures
blasted. Public fastes by consent of Ministers (which had of long time bin
used in many parts of the Kingdom) were become piacular. A sermon at next
Church, the forbidden fruit, when they had none at home or worse then non. Our
adversaries have bin but too diligent to suppress not only private Co^venticles
but public Assembl.

His eighth rule.
The eighth means is. By severity of Laws and punishments to compel the
obstinate unto duty and yet the rigor of the Law must be slowly drawn out and
not against all, but only such as be most dangerous. Now what severity, not
only Ad summum jus to the highest apex of the Law but even Supra jus beyond the
extent and rigor of the Law, has bin used to such as stood in the way of
their great design, let the walls of their high Commission speak. Our
Chronicles report, That when our forefathers demollished the Abbeys they found
in their walls and vaultes and pondes heaps of sculles and bones, the
monuments of their Smoothered crueltyes. I doubt not but the abolishers of that
high Commission have found as manifest evidence of their cruel practices:
heaps of the blood of innocents, whose skin has bin flead from of them and
their bones broken and they and their families chopped in pieces as flesh for
the cauldron. Micah. 3.
And this fruit they reaped of their severity managed with this art which the
Jesuit promised. Itaque reformatio quae provectos non ad juvat, aetatem tamen
puenlem Catholicam reddet.
That though compulsory Reformation could do no good upon old standers yet it
would render the younger sort Catholics.

His ninth rule.
The ninth means and (as he says) of all the rest most effectual is. That
such as are in authority do religiously practice and maintain integrity of
life and purity of manners. The reformation of Religion (that is the
introducing of Popery into a reformed Church) will go on very slowly and prove
very difficult unless the Prelates and Doctors shall outshine the whole Common
wealth not only in innocence but in reputation and fame of integrity.

And certainly this rule they had conned (some of them) Ad amussim or else they
could never have obtained so far upon the heart of our Sovereign as to leave
the disposing of all Church affairs wholly unto them. The Arts of Dissembling
Heretics have for the most part been Excellently skilled in and Sometimes a
good Prince has been overreached by it. Quem ubi vident constanter Religioni
adhaerentem non adeo temerari sunt, ut direct calu^nientur and traducant apud
cum Orthodoxam Religionem: sed occasiones commodas accipiunt, quibus deplorent
turbatam pacem Ecelesiae, hortantur Prineipem ad eam restituendam, id facile
esse dicu^t, auferatur modo Contentionis studium: quod dissidium non sit in
rebus Magni Monumenti, sed exigui Pondexis etc. Vedell. de Prud. vet. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 5. See the Ep. Ded. of the relation of the Conference between a Jesuit
and W. L. fol. penult.
If they had not in his eye, demeaned themselves as the only Saints upon earth,
as incarnate Angels, men wholly composed of devotion to God, compassion to his
Church, grief for the rents and breaches of it, zeal for the peace and good of
it: what but this should prevail with our sovereign to abandon this Church
into the hands of that faction, I know not. But undoubtedly it stands not with
reason. That a Protestant Prince should knowingly and willingly give way to the
re-establishing of the Popish Religion and therein Ipso facto, divest himself
of his supremacy and lay his head at the Popes feet for him to kick of the
Crown from his Royal brow with a spurn of his disdainful foot at pleasure.
But why the Bishops (specially such of them have bin observed to wish well to
Popery Abincunabulis) should contrive and carry on such a plot some reason may
appear. For could th y once have obtained this; That Popery should have
triumphed over the reformed Religion. The Miter would soon have trampled upon
the Crown. Haec enim est veritas, says Bellarm. Haerc enim est v^^^tas
quicquid i^trocuxe^t consue^^^o, Episcop^s est Pater and Pastor and Doctotam
Princip^s quam reliqu^ populi. Et se, cundum haec Nom^^ PRINCEPS, SVBDITVS esse
DEBET suo EPISCOPO and NON EPISCOPVS PRINCIPI: Bellarm, de officio Principis
Christ. l. 1. c 5.
This is the truth what ever custom has introduced that the Bishop is the
father and pastor and Doctor as well of the Prince as of the rest of the
people. And according unto these appellations the Prince ought to be subject to
his Bishop and not the Bishop to his Prince. Vnusquisque says Vnusqu sque Rex
subditus est suo Episcopo in Soiritualibus nisa a Pontifice eximatur. Suarez
defens. fid. l. 3. cap. 17. sec. 18.
Suarez. Every King is subject to his Bishop in spiritualibus unless he be
exempted by the Pope. A brave world this had bin for the Prelacy and the whole
Clergy too. To have bin exempted from the power of Laws and civilly dicature.
Leges non obligant Clenicos ex vi Iurisdictionis Laicae nec POSSVNT Reges
obligare Clericos Legibus illis peculiariter impositis Id. l. 4. c. (...) sec.
16.17.
Leges non obligant, says Suarez again. The law does not bind the Clergy by
virtue of any Laick jurisdiction neither can Kings bind the Clergy by laying
any special Law upon them: and again, Pesona Ecclesiastic^ gaaudent
immanit^te si^e privi egio fort n^^ solum in Criminibus Ecclesiasticis sed
civilibus. Id. ea. 15. Sect. 1.
Ecclesiastical persons are privileged in Court, not only in case of
ecclesiastical but of civil crimes. An immunity which a corrupt Clergy would
be glad of.

And therefore though there can be no reason conceived why a Prince professing
the Protestant Religion should decline to Popery: Yet you see there is reason
why a proud Prelacy and a corrupt Clergy should underhand endeavor to bring
it in: and you see the method and ways whereby they may compass their
designs and neither Prince nor people know nor see. These were their pract ses
for many late years you all know, let any ingenous spirit judge of their
intentions. I have only let you see from whose quiver they have drawn their
shaftes; judge by that of the mark whereat they aimed. You have seen whose
heifer it is they plowed with; judge by that of the seed they would have sown.
If they never knew that a Jesuit had delivered these Rules for the altering of
Religion in a Christian state, they were very unhappie in complying so exactly
with them when they did not know them. And what can we think but that they
were acted by the same Genius or the same Angelus informans, that the Jesuit
was, when he penned them. But if they did know (as i^ is most probable they
did) that these were the rules, this the art delivered by a Jesuit for the
subverting the true reformed Religion, and the introduction of popery again
and yet did knowingly and de industria conform to them and made proof of
them, what can we think was their intention but to alter our Religion. They
had said they shall not know nor see, till we are in the midst of them and
cause that work to cease.

But blessed be the Lord who has not given us up as a prey unto their teeth.

Blessed be the Lord, that by the hand of this Parliament has frustrated that
plot. (We all hope) for ever.

Information of some present practices of the adversaries.
But did I say for ever? May we hope it? What? are our adversaries all
destroyed? or have they left of plotting? Neither; And yet I hope we may say,
for ever. This great plot of altering Religion, prevented for ever. As for our
adversaries verily, if ever the did strain their Wits to exceed themselves in
plotting mischief, it has been since this Parliament. Such a succenturiation
there has been of plotts that we may say of them as she of Gad. A Troop
comes. Many of them indeed have proved abortive, miscarried before they came
to a growth capable of full discovery and so are more easily denied then
proved. Besides some ridiculous things have been sent forth into the public
of purpose to outface the truth and sully the glory of our deliverances from
many and real dangers, which possibly may be the reason why some men are so
incredulous, they can see no adversaries, they apprehend no dangers, the
Parliament needs no guard; there is no necessity of settling the MILITIA of the
Kingdom. If there be any such here and you be men of reason hearken alittle.

First, Do you not think, there are as many Papists in England now, as there
were at the time of the powder Treason? I know not how there should be fewer
but more; unless the preaching of popish doctrines, complying with popish
ceremonies, setting up public Masses, tolerating a convent of Friars, relaxing
the Laws against popish Priests, be a means to convert papists, there cannot
be fewer then was at the time of the powder treason.

Secondly, Consider whether the papists have any better doctrines, d
spositions, principles now then they had then. Their faith was then faction;
their Religion, Rebellion, in the judgment of the State who spoke as they
found. Have they since changed their faith, altered their Religion, that our
State should alter their judgment of them? Do they not yet hold it, as
lawful, as meritorious to promove the Catholic cause Vi vel fraud, by
violence or treason, now as they did then? Have they retracted that doctine of
theirs. Reges et principes non Romano-Catholici possunt de jure occidi etiam a
privata persona and illud factum est gener^su^, cum virtute conjunctum and
heroicum. Compa^^n d^m cum maximis and sum^a Laud dignis factis esse,
Sanctissimum, humanissimum, dignissimum, la^datissimum, commendatissimum, etc.
Es qui in vitam talium Regum es principium conjuram, esse animosos machinato
res fortititudinem Eorum esse plusquam humanam, supplicia eorum non nisi vera
martyria appellanda qui fint aliquand^ praemium accepturi in vi^a aeterna:
Francis: de Veron. Constant. in Apol: Part. 1. Cap. 7.


That Kings and Princes which are not Roman Catholics may be lawfully killed
by any private person, And that the killing of them is a generous, virtuous,
heroic exploit? To be compared with the greatest and most praise worthy
actions? A most holy, worthy, commendable, praise-full work? Those that
conspire against the life of such Kings and Princes are magnanimous persons.
Their courage is more than humane, heroic, divine. Their punishments are true
martyrdom, they shall receave reward in the kingdom of Heaven?

Have they yet revoked that assertion? Necessarium quocunque casu Religionem
confirmari etiam ^orte Regum. Id. pat. 2 c 12 and. 15.
It is necessary in any case that Religion be maintained even with the death of
Kings. Or that of the Jesuit Non pass ab a^iq^^ fi^ri ullu^ mag^s meritorium
opus quam si Regem interfi^eret Anton. Arnold. in Ora: contra Iesutias.
Varadius to Barerius. That there could not be a more meritorious work, then
for him to kill the King. Do they not to this day honor Garnet that Arch
powder Traitor as a Saint? have not their Co^nel: a Lapid. in Apocal: cap. 7.
ver. 3.
Late Writers crowned him with fresh Encomiasticks? And has not our State
reason to have a watchful and prudent jealousy over men informed with such
desperate principles and thus encouraged to all bloody designs? specially such
of them as are Jesuits and Seminaries of whom we may truly say as Amilcar did
of his sons, He bred them, Plutarch.
Tanquam leoninos catulos in pernitiem Romani imperij; Se quam primu^ posset
hostem fore populo Rom capitalem Live: li. 21 c. 1. Appian: de bellis Hisp:
as Lions Whelps for the destruction of the Roman Empire. So do they breed
their Novices, As Lions whelps for the destruction of the English Church and
Kingdom. And as Hannibal when he was but nine years old, swore upon the
Altar of their Gods that as soon as he was able he would be a deadly enemy
to the people of Rome: So do they in effect swear as much against us. Ad
defendendu^ and retinendum papatum Rom: contra omnem ^omine^ adjutor ero:
Haereticos, Schismaticos and qui alicut ex Dominis nostris successoribus
p^aedictis Rebel^es fuerint persequar and impugna ^o Szeged: speculum
Pontificum.
I will help to defend and maintain the Roman papacy against every man:
Heretics and Schismatics, And all such as shall rebel against our Lord the
Pope and all his successors, I will persecute and oppose. The whole fry of them
are Conjurati hosts Ecclesiae and Reipublica They declared themselves so in
their powder treason: and as long as they retain their old Religion, they
cannot but retain their old disposition.

Thirdly, there being papists among us now as there was at the time of the
powder Treason. They being infected with as bloody doctrines, and principles,
now as then.

Consider Thirdly, Whether they may not pretend to themselves as just causes to
put them upon all bloody and desperate designs now, as then they did. Were
they crossed in their expectations of a tolleration of their Religion then?
Their expectations were raised higher now. They hoped for a revolting to their
Religion, and are crossed in that. Did they fear the State would make some
further provision for the suppressing of popery then? And did they not fear
the State would make some farther provision for the utter extirpation of it
now? Were they so enraged then? Surely they are mad and desperate now. Were
their thoughts so full of blood then? Sure they are full of hell now. And of a
truth, if there had not been one plot nor one treason discovered all this
Parliament time: yet good reason why the Parliament should upon these
considerations arm the Kingdom for its defense. (And the whole Nation is bound
to them for their care herein) to prevent our adversaries, least they should
say. We will come upon them and they shall neither know nor see till we are
in the midst of them, and slay them and cause the work to cease.

But what need these Ambages? when the bloody monsters of Ireland speak out
and tell all the world, the war they have kindled, is against the puritan
Parliament of England. So that ex profess there has been treason against this
Parliament, and our adversaries have said (varying the words of the Text a
little,) We will come upon them, though they know and see it, and slay them,
and cause the work to cease.

And, o that Ireland had been guilty alone! That England, England had not
been conscious of such treacherous practices. But it is to too apparent now.
That even in England, in the midst of us, in our hosomes have been the most
dangerous, and desperate practices against our peace and Religion that ever yet
were known. Let me not seem to detract from the glory of that great
deliverance, if I say, they do exceed the powder Treason. Those traitors laid
their trains and fire works in the bowels of the earth: These have laid
theirs (which every true loyal heart (...) leeds to think of) in the bosom of
our Sovereign. They covered their treason with earth: These with Heaven: with
pretenses of defending the Protestant profession, the prerogative of the King,
the Laws and liberties of the Land, whereby they have not only captivated many
of the injudicious mul^^^de; but even the Throne it self. Lamen. 4 20.
The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord is taken in their pitts;
Of whom we said, under his shadow we shall live. Their pretenses have so far
prevailed with our Sovereign. That he confides more in a popish party then in
a protestant Parliament. Ezekiel 19.4.
This is a lamentation, and must be for a lamentation. They now pretend to be
all for the King, the King; John 19.15.
as much as the Jews for Casar. We have no King but Caesar: no King but
Caesar. As if Caesar had had no such loyal Subjects in the world as the Jews
were: but when they had served themselves of Caesar and abused his power to the
murdering of Christ, they soon discovered themselves: and Caesar had no such
desperate rebels, and implacable enemies upon earth as they were. So the
Papists and their faction cry out, The prerogative, the King, and Caesar: as if
the King had no such subjects and friends upon earth as they are. But mark my
words. If ever they can serve themselves of His Majesty: and by the abuse of
his power have their wills, to murder Christ in His members and root out the
Gospel and the professors of it (which Lord in mercy preserve His Majesty
from) but if they once obtain but this. If they do not prove the most deadly
and desperate enemies His Majesty ever had, let me dye the death of a false
Prophet.

The searcher of hearts knows (Oh that our Sovereign knew as well) how the
hearts of all His loyal Protestant subjects bleed within them for the soul of
our Sovereign. To see his confidence removed from his true Protestant
subjects, whom he can only confide in, and whom Catholic Princes trust
rather then those of their own Religion. To see, I say, his confidences
withdrawn from ^^em, and leaning upon a company of popish, blou^ ^^^^^^es,
whom no protestant prince but himse^^^ (...) ^^urst trust. Lord give thy
judgments to the ^ing (...) Does not His Majesty know that with the p^p^^^
(...) protestants are Heretics: and with Heretic KINGS and Princes they
take a short course, have a quick way of dispatch? Does not His Majesty know,
or will none of his great Divines inform him, That ^he Catholic Doctors
Reges and principes possunt de jure etiam a prvata persond occidi: Francis. de
Veron ubi supra:
hold it lawful for any pr^vate person to kill a Heretic King? Yea and th^^
though he be not sentenced, excommunitated, or deposed by the Pope, if his
heresy be notorious says Cajetan, 22 ae. q. 4.2.2.
Cajetan? Or if he be Andreas Eudaemon. Apol. pro Garnetto. c. 10. p. 276. Et
Mariana de Rege and Regis institutione Lib. 1. c. 6.7, 8. page 58.60.63.67. Fas
est subditis Reges and Principes quibu^ viri graves haereseos Crime^ impegerint
^uavis Ratione e medio tollere.
publicly defamed for an Heretic; or so reputed by grave and judicious men?
Nay, that it is not only lawful, but Obligati sunt subduia^ principes
haereticos depell a^os and hujusmodi principes suos non tantuns le^^time
possunt detu^bare sed etiam ad hoc praecepto Divino and vincu^^ ^^ctil simo
(...) extrem^ A^^ma^^^^ peri^^^o ^enen u^. Creswell in Philopat. (...) 2 Number.
160.162.
necessary: not only that they may do it but they are bound to do it. And
that by the command of God upon peril of their souls. And this is not a
Vniversa Theologorum Schola tenet, and est certum ac de fide Quem cunque
Principem Christianum si a ^o^^ano Catholi (...) Religione (...) se^e
destex^^^^ and a^^es ^^oca^^ voh^e it ex^^^^e sia^m ^b (...) po^^sta^e and
Digatate ex ipsa vi juris Di^^ai and huma ni: ^oc que and a^te Omnem senten^iam
Pontificis. Et should tos quoscunque Liberos esse aboumi Iuramenti obligatione
quoad de Obed entia praesti tissens posseque and debere bujusundi hominem
tanquam Aposta tam ex dominatis eijcere ^^e alios inficjan. Cresw. Number. 137 Non
est propria Iesui^arum sed Totius Ecclesia (and quiden. ab aniqu^ssi^ is
Temporibus) conscasion^^ ^^cepta nostra Doctrina est. Eudaem. Apol. cap. 3.
private opinion, but the opinion of all their Divines, ana of their whole
Church, if we may believe themselves. Nay it is not only lawful and necessary:
but if Pendet Chri^^ianum Reg^um a Pontifice in hoc ut possit non ^^^^um
consulere aut consentire ut Regnum Regem sibi pernitie. sum deponat sed ^t^^^
praeciper^ and ^ogere ut id facias. Suares: defens: fid: Lib. 6. cap 4. ^^ct.
17.
people should be loath to offer violence to their PRINCE the Pope may command
and compel them to it.

When the Papists shall as publicly and unanimously d^sclaime this Doctrine,
as they have proclaimed it, And the Parl^ament broach such doct i^es and the
protestants drink them in. Then let His Majesty fly from his Parliament and
protestant subjects to secure his life and Crown among the Papists. But in the
mean time, O what a piece of Arch Treason was it! By sowing contention
between His Majesty and Parliament to draw His Majesty to betray Himself
into the hands of a generation, that in Conscience think they may kill him when
they please.

Nay are taught. That in conscience they are bound to kill him, if he please
not them in Matters of Religion and may with a Nodd from Rome be commanded to
kill him. Oh what an inextricable labyrinth, have these wretches brought our
Prince into, by persuading him, The intentions of his Parliament are against
his Dignity and prerogative? The Lord rebuke them that so persuade him: Yea the
Lord rebuke thee Satan. But what better suggestions can breath from them that
are Parl^ament adversaries from generation to generation. This is it that has
moved his Majesty to cast himself into the arms of Papists: Where he is as
safe as a lamb in the midst of wolves. Suppose that party ( pretending his
prerogative and thereby seducing a great part of the Kingdom to assist them.)
Suppose they prevail.

What a condition is his Majesty in? Either he is in danger of losing his
Religion, and being reconciled to Rome, Or if not, of losing his life and
forfeiting his Crown from himself and his posterity. Nay possibly he may lofe
all, though he should abandon Religion and be reconciled to Rome. For so
Simanca determines. Si Reges autal^^ Principes Christian^ facti sunt Haeretici
protinus subjecti and vasalli ab eorum Dominio liberantur, Nec jus hoc
recuperabunt quamvis. post a reconciliantur Ecclesiae and propter haeresin non
solum Rex regno privatur, sed etiam ejus filii a regni successionne pelluntur.
Simanca de Occult. tit. 42. see. 2
If Kings or other Christian Princes be turned Heretics the^r subjects are
presently freed from their Dominion, neither shall they recover their right
again though they be afterward reconciled to the Church. And as a King
loses his kingdom by Heresy so his children lose their right of succession.
And to look no farther then Henry the fourth of France. Did his being
reconciled to Rome, secure either his life or Crown? Lord give thy judgments to
the King. Lord give thy judgments to the King.

I but no fear of this. The Papists have taken the oaths of supremacy and
allegiance. And what are we the better? An oath upon the conscience of a Papist
is like a collar upon an Apesneck: that he will slip on for his Masters
pleasure, and slip off again for his own. Hear but how Pascenius scoffs King
James for the invention of that oath and you will see his son has little
cause to trust them for all their taking it. Vide in tanta astutia, quanta sit
simplicitas. Iuramentum tot circumstantiis connexuisse existimabat, ut salva
conscientia, nulla ratione a quoquam dissolui possit. Sed videre non potuit si
Pontifex juramentum dissolverit, omnesejus Nexus sive de fidelitate Regi
praestanda sive de dispensatione pariter non admittenda pariter dissolutos
fore. Imo ali^d dicam admirabilius. Iuramentum si iniustum aperte declaretur
Neminem obligat. Sed ipso facto nullum est. Regis vero juramentum iniustum esse
ab ipso Ecclesiae Pastore sufficienjer declaratum est.
He says he, Vide in tanta astutia^ quanta sit simplicitas Iuramentum tot
circumstantiis connexuisle existimabat vt salva conscientia nulla ratione a quo
quam dissoluiposset, sed vidore non potuit ei Ponti ex luramentum dissoluerit
omnes eius Nexus sive de fidelitate Regi praestanda sive de dispensatione
pariter non admittenda pariter dissolutos fore etc. Vides igitur jam in fumum
abiisse illius obligationem, ut vinculum quod a Sapientibus ferreum putabatur
minus sit quam stramincum Pascenius in Resp. ad Episc. monit. Iacobi Regis. 2 Samuel 16.21.
how simple they are, in all their craft: he thought he had composed an oath
with so many particular circumstances, that it could not with a safe conscience
be dispensed with: but he could not see that if the Pope loosed the oath, all
the knots of it whither concerning allcageance to the King, or not suffering
the oath to be dispensed with, they are all untied. Yea that which is more
admirable. If the oath be publicly declared to be unjust, it binds none, but
ipso facto is made void. Now the Pope has sufficiently declared this oath of
the Kings to be unjust; so that the obligation of it vanishes into smoke and
that bond, which those wise men thought to be as strong as brass is less then
a straw. And now what Faith can his Majesty give to or what Confidence can his
Majesty have in the oath of these men?

And yet as if it were not enough. To withdraw the heart of our Sovereign from
confiding in his subjects, The venom of this treason reaches farther. And as
Achitophel knowing that if Absalon were reconciled to his Father again, it
would be his destruction, put Absalon upon such a business as he knew was a
scarec capable of reconciliation. So this cursed faction knowing that upon
union between his Majesty and Parliament follows their deserved ruin: have
councelled yea even compelled his Majesty to that, which (if any thing) might
make the breach between his Majesty and his subjects incurable. Oh that vast
effusion of English blood which has bin already not only in Ireland but in
England! The sun has not seen so many carcasses of English men lying upon
their native soil in many hundred years. The Lord see and avenge it upon them
that are the original cause of this bloud-sheading. The violence that is done
to me and my flesh be upon thee, o Papacy, shall the Inhabitante of Ireland
say. And my blood upon thee, o Prelacy, shall England say That That Is the
Helena for whose sake all these wars are. For the defense of the Prelacy the
Scotck war was commenced (though P crogative and Monarchy was pretended) and
for the same we may conceive the war of England is pursued. We may say to
that faction as Ioah did to David. 2. Sam 19.6.
Thou regardest neither Prince nor servants for this day I perceave that if
Absalon had lived and all we had dyed, it had pleas^ thee well. They regard
neither Prince nor people for we may easily perceave; that if England and
Scotland imbrue themselves in one another bloods; or England tear out its own
bowels, though all we dye so the Hierarchy survive, they would be well
pleasen. Shall they escape by their iniquity? thou Lord in tey displeasure
shall cast them down.

As for our Sovereign. Thou o God in whose hands the hearts of Kings are, free
his heart from the counsels and engagements of mischeivous men and men of
blood. Give him a true understanding of and a due confidence in the loyal
affections of his Protestant subjects. Bring him back among us rather in the
prayers and tears then in the bloods of his people.

And you my brethren so many as have any spark of loyalty in your breasts and
I hope you are all full of it, desire and seek the same thing, ye of this
City: Ye of the honorable Nation of the Scots be not ye the last to bring the
King back to his house. 2. Sam. 19.11.12.
Ye are his brethren, ye are his bone, and his flesh, why should ye be the
last in bringing the King back to his house again? even to his house of
Parliament? Assuredly if his Majesty's life were bound up in one hair of his
head, as Nisus was, Cui sple^ didus Ostro, Inter ho noratos medio de vertice
canos crinis inhaerebat magni fiducia Regni. Ovid. Metam. Application the third
by way of Exhortation first to the Parliament
he might be more secure there then he can be among Papists and Cavaliers if
every hair of his head were a life.

I come to a few words of Exhortation. First To you the Members of the
honorable House of Parliament. Secondly, To you the rest of my brethren. First
for you honorable and beloved. This text, this truth tells you what you must
look to meet with. God has opened to you a great door of opportunity for the
promoving of his Churches good but their are many adversaries. God has called
you together to a great work: but you must look our adversaries will do their
utmost either by craft or cruelty to cause the work to cease. That which our
Savior spoke to his Disciples to confirm their hearts against the
persecutions of their adversaries. The same say I to you to steel your hearts
against the oppositions of your adversaries. Matthew. 5.
So says our Savior persecuted they the Prophets that were before you. The
same say I to you. So maligned they the Parliaments that were before you. So
slandered they the Parliaments that were before you. So plotted they against
the Parliaments that were before you. So said they of them. We will come upon
them and they shall neither know nor see till we are in the midst of them,
and slay them and cause the work to cease. Therefore be you in nothing
terrified of your adversaries.

Durate and vosmetrebus servate secundis. Bear up against their oppositions.
After ages shall keep thankesgiving days for your deliverance, as you now do
for the deliverance of your forefathers. You have the rememberance of that
great deliverance as an encouragement to your hearts this day. Drus. Apopht^.
Qui custodivit Patres, custodiet etiam filios. Deliverances past are the
pledges of future deliverances. And this advantage you have above your
forefathers. That whereas they neither knew their danger nor sought deli
verance, yet were they delivered. You see your danger, flee to God by prayers,
tears, fastings for deliverance: You have the pray^rs, and tears of all the
Churches and Saints of Christ poasting incessantly to Heaven upon the same
Embassage and can you fail of deliverance? Remember again the goodness and
greatness of your cause, and what Luther said to Melancthon. When upon that
opposition, which the German reformation met with all, he was much troubled a
and disquieted in his spirit, Cum effet Melancthon animo admodum anxio non tam
sui quam ipsius exitus and posteritatis causa: Lutherus mo^et, vt quia non
hominum sed omnipotentis Dei sit hoc negotium omni deposira sollicitudine totam
molem in illum reiiciat. Cur, inquit, te Cruci as? si Filium suum Deus pro
nobis impendit, quid trepidamus? quid metuimus? quid angimur and tristamur? an
Satanas est illo potentior? Cur mundum a Chirsto debellatum reformidamus? Si
malam causam defendimus: cur non mutamus propositum, si-piam atque jastam cur
Dei promissis non confidimus? praeter vitam certe nihil nobis Satanas etipere
potest; at vivit tamen and in sempiternum regnat Christus sub cujus tu^ela
veritas est. Peccatores quidem sumus non uno modo sed tamen Christus idcirco
non est mend ^x cujus causam agimus. Fremant Reges atque populi quantum
volent', qui caelos inhabitat, deridebit cos. Causam hanc Deus absque concilio
nostro gubernavit ad hoc usque tempus and protexit, is quoque ad optatum sinem
tandem perducet. Sleid com. l. 7.
not for his own sake out for the works sake and the issue of it, and
posterityes sake, Luther gives him council. That seeing the business was not
man's but Almighty Gods. Laying aside all care he would cast the whole weight of
it upon him. Why (says he) do you vex your self? If God have bestowed his
Son upon us, why are we afraid? what tremble we at? why are we distracted
sadded? Is Satan stronger then he? Why fear we the world which Christ has
conquered? If we defend an evil cause, why do we not change our purpose? If
the cause be holy and just, why do we not trust Gods promises? Certainly there
is nothing beside our lives that Satan can snatch from us: and though we dye,
Christ lives and reigns for ever, under whose tuition the truth is. We are
indeed sinners more ways th^n one, but our sins shall never make Christ
(whose cause we are engaged in) a lier. Let the Kings of the earth and the
people rage as much as they will: he that sits in heaven shall laugh them to
scorn. God has hitherto ruled and defended this cause without our counsels he
alsowill bring it to the desired end. May not all this be applied unto you? but
specially this last clause? God without your counsels, above your counsels by
naked and immediate providence has carried on his work in your hands
hitherto: and he will give it the desired, prayed for issue: you may be
confident of it.

Only: as your cause is good, so see that your ways be good. Remembering what
the holy ghost says; Proverb. 16.7. When a man's ways please God he makes his
very enemies to be at peace with him. Let your personal ways. Your public
ways. What you act as men. What you act as Parliament men, please God: and
reap the fruit of it in peace with or triumph over all your enemies. For your
personal ways, your conversations as men. Oh, me thinks, if any of you when
you came to this Assembly were of vain conversations (as other men are.) Yet
so many prayers, so many sermons, so many Fast-dayes, so many dangers, so many
deliverances, such variety of admirable, astonishing providence, as you have
known: should have prevailed with your hearts to abandon all, and become
eminently gracious, exact in all your ways. But if not. If there be yet any
sin found upon any of you. If any of you be conscious that any of his ways:
though never so secret, be displeasing unto God: Let me in the fear of God and
in the bowels of our Lord Jesus beseech you. As you desire success either to
your counsels, or arms. As you tender the good of your native country (which
I know is dear unto you, why else should you put your lives in your hands to
do it service?) Oh break off your sins by repentance: why should men of
brave and honorable spirits, stain and diminish their glory by any one sin?
That as it was said of Naaman he was a mighty man of vaiour: but a leper. So of
any of you. He is a prudent man, abrave speaker, but -- a profound statist: a
worthy patriott but -- Oh let there be no But, For Gods sake, be you all as the
Sun, without one spott. Why should a man denude himself of the protection of
the Almighty for one sin? It was said of Achilles that he was. Styge armatus.
Fulgent. Myth.
But he that repents of his sins that believes in Christ whose ways please
God is Caelo, Christo, Deo, armatus: armed with heaven, with Christ, with God.
Would any at such a time as this, in such a service as yours be without this
armor? Oh let your ways please God, and you shall not need fear your
adversaries.

And as your personal ways: So your public ways. The things that you
transact as public persons: let them be exact. Walk and work by rule.
Appelles being asked why he used such exact care in limning pictures made this
answer: Pingo aeternitati: I limne for eternity. The things that you have now
to do, are not only for the present but future ages. Your actions will live in
the memory of men, as long as men shall live upon earth. You work for eternity:
Therefore be exact: work by rule, by line and plummet. Let all your aims be
pure and good. Fix your eye upon Gods glory. Drus. Apopth.
Quicquid agas, propter Deum agas. Let that be your motto which was his.
Propter te Domine: propter te. Aim at God in all. And walk with God in all.
See the pillar (...) fire go ng before you.

(...) ^^orant, That your taking up of arms is (...) of d^spute. Now no time
for that. (...) ^ay. It is no more then other of the (...) of Christ n^v^b^n
driven to before, you, the (...) to* French, the high and low Dutch Churches.
(...) Germany when the Protestant Princes and States were tre^t^^g about a
defensive league In con^aiue adhibin fuer^^ non lure nsul imo^^ ^ed Th^o^^
(...) qu^ qu^: Lu h^^^ au^m (...) do^^ (...) stratu ^on ^s reusten^um and
ext^bat e us h^^d reliberlus (um utem in h^c deliber tione per^t^ ^uris doce
r^nt Legibus esse perm^ssum resistere nonnunquam, and nune in eum casum de quo
inter-l^a ^eges me^tionem f^c^n^ rem esse deductam: Luti erus iogen^e^
profice^^ s^ hoc nesciviss. Et qu^a Leges Politicas Eva^geliam a^^^m. pugnet
ant aboleat: deinoe quoni^m tempore t^m cubio and f^rmidoloso multa possunt
accidere ^ta ut non modo ^us ips^m ^ed conscien^ae vis ae ^ecessitas arma nobis
porrigat defensionis cuisa faedus posse^niri dicit. sive Caesar ipse sive quis
alius forte bellum eius Nomine faciat. Sle^d. l. ^.
not only Lawyers but D^vines were called to give their council in the thing.
Luther who had always taught, That the Magistrate ought not to be resisted, and
in the times of the Anabaptisticall tumults, had written a book to that
purpose. Being one in the Consultation, and hearing the lawyers declare. That
it was permitted by the fundamextall Laws; sometimes to resist: and that now
matters were brought to that very state of which the Laws made mention. Luther
did ingenuously profess that he knew not so much before. And because the
Gospel does not impugn nor abolish national Laws. And because in such a time
as that was, uncertain, and full of fear, many things might fall out so as not
only Law but conscience and necessity might put arms into their hands:
Therefore he did conclude. They might lawfully enter into a league of defense
whether Caelat himself, or any other in his name should make war upon them.
And presently published a book: therein admonishing all men that they should
not yield obedience to the Magistrates commanding them unto that war against
the league.

I know many in the Land charge the preachers of the Kingdom, and those that
have petitioned you so often for reformation in doctrine, worship and
discipline as the kindlers and formenters of this unnatural war. But O Lord
if we have done this* if there be such iniquity in our hands, then let the
enemy persecute our soul and take i^^let them tread down our life upon the
earth, and lay our honor in the dust. We have not desired this woeful d^y O
Lord thou know it, our desire was to have obtained the establishment of
religion in purity and peace without blond, o Lord thou know it. Quod si non
aliter. --

But if the sins of England be such, and the engagements of our adversaries
to their superstitious ways be such. That there is no other way to have popery
cast out, the Church reformed the Gospel assured to us and our posterity then
this. Hac mercede placent. The will of the Lord be done. Go you on undauntedly
in that blessed work of reformation. Think you hear Christ speaking to you
as Caesar did to his Ferrie-man in a storm. Perge contra Tempestatem forti
Animo Caesarem fers and fortunam Caesaris. Bear up cou agiously against the
storm you carry Caesar and Caesar's fortune. Think you hear Christ so saying
unto you.

Pergite contra Tempestatem forti Animo Christum fertis and fortunam,
Ecclesiam, gloriam Christi. Bear up courageously against the storm; you carry
Christ with you, and the Church the fortune, the glory of Christ. If the
Tempests and floods of the ungodly rise against you, remember you have not only
the sighs and tears of Gods people for you, but Christ embarked with you, who
is able to rebuke the storms and command a calm. You are a Parliament of
prayers and tears, if ever any: and as Amb. said to Austins Mother. Non potest
perire tantarum lachrimarum filius. A Child of so many prayers and tears
cannot miscarry.

And yet as you are to be courageous, so to be cautelous. As to be confident,
so vigilant: To have a watchful eye over, and a prudent care to suppress your
adversaries. Herodot: in Terpsi^h. c. 1 9^.
Darius the Persian being enraged against the Athenians by a treachery of
theirs, laid this injunction upon one of his servants, that always as he
sat at meat he should thrice cry, Here memento Atheniensium. You need no such
Monitor. This fifth of November, in its yearly revolution cries loud in your
years. Domini memento te papistarum. Not so much to inrage you against their
persons, as against their Religion. Not to say as he did there. o Jupiter, etc
Lord grant that I may be revenged upon the Athenians. Not to study revenge upon
the Papists, so much as upon popery, not to suppress the Papists, so much as
to suppress popery, if the one could be done without the other. What need
there is of this, let a Divine that had searched into the bowels of popery tell
you. Doctor John white in his Sermon at Pau's Cross. Dicretum fuit in
Conciltis Toletanis ut quisquis succedentium Temporum Regni sortiretur apicem,
non ante conscenderet Reg^am sedem qua^ inter Caetera Sacramento polliceretur
Nullum fe non Catholicum permissurum in suo Regno degere, sed armis haereticos
persequeretur Ribadeneira l. 1. de Principe christiano: c. 2^
Papistry (says he) can neither stand with peace, nor piety. The State
therefore that would have these things, has just cause to suppress it.

But what course is to be taken for the suppressing of it? Shall we take that
course for the suppressing of popery which some of theirs prescribe for the
suppressing of the truth. Decretum fuit in consiliis Toletanis, etc. They made
decrees in some of their counsels. That every King before he be installed
should, swear among other things. That he would permit no man to live in his
Kingdom, that is not a Roman Catholic, but will pursue all Heretics with the
sword. I know it is disputed among Divines. Whether it be lawful to use
compulsory means in matters of Religion. And no less among Politicians
whither it would be successful. I shall neither take upon me to determine
those disputes. Nor direct the wisdom of the great council of the kingdom in
a course for suppressing popery. Only in brief the means to be used to this
end are, either sacred, or civil: Acts of Religion, or of State.

For religious means, I conceive that as the re-establishment of Popery in
Queen Mary's days was an Act of State and of the whole Kingdom assembled in
Parliament: so if the State, the Parliament now assembled would please to
indict some Day or days of solemn, National, professed humiliation, for that
sin of the Nation, (which as far as I could ever learn, was never yet
done) it might be a happy means to expiate that sin, and to purge the Land
from that blood of Martyrs, which it yet groans under, and would blessedly
prepare the heart of the Nation for a more through perfect Reformation. We
observe it in particular persons that if they slide out of profane and sinful
ways, into ways of more retiredness without any evidence of a sincere and
proportionable Humiliation: That Reformation seldom proves lasting or saving.
I know not why the same may not be verified in National Reformations. And
among other things which possibly might be causes why the wrath of the Lord
was not removed from Jerusalem, notwithstanding Josiah's so glorious
Reformation, this may be one because the Land was never humbled for the
Idolatries or Bloudsheds of Manasses, but looked upon the reformation as
sufficient without humiliation which verily has been Englands course to this
day: we have blessed our selves in a kind of Reformation: But never took to
heart the Idolatrous and bloody Laws enacted by our forefathers to be humbled
for them.

Next to this as a second means for the suppressing of Popery, I would subjoy
ne the casting out from among us of all appearances of Popery; every that
looks like Rome, every thing of which the Papists may say, this you borrowed
from us. True it is the Israelites by Gods express commandment, borrowed of
the Egyptians, Jewels of silver, and Jewels of Gold, but when they employed
those Egyptian Jewels to Egyptian worship, and turned their Egyptian gold into
an Egyptian God, you know what followed. I condemn not every thing received
from Rome as simply evil: But certainly as long as the Papists see any such
things among us in our public worship. They will but scorn us, and our
Religion as imperfect, and unable to furnish us in the service of our God
without being beholding unto them.

The third Means is; To ridd the Church of scandalous Ministers, that, what by
their corrupt doctrine, what by their abominable lives, have exceedingly
hardened the Papists against our Religion and strengthened them in their own.

Fourthly, By complying as near as possible may be with other reformed
Churches in all things. The resolution you have put on for uniting with the
Church of Scotland is one of the blessed'st things for the utter subversion of
popery that has been since the first reformation.

And lastly, Plant a faithful, painful, powerful, Ministry through the
Kingdom. And give maintenance and encouragement answerable. But O Lord, in
such a corrupt State of Clergy and Universities, where shall we find
faithful men to plant the Nation with? The harvest is great the laborers few,
O pray ye the Lord of the Vineyard to send forth laborers into his harvest.
To give the word, that great may be the multitude of them that preach it.

As for Civil means of rooting out Popery, I shall wholly leave them to the
Council of the State.

Only one thing more let me add, which I cannot without sin forbear.

If ever you would root popery out of Engl^nd, with the uttermost of your
vigor prosecute the affairs of Ireland. If Popery prevail to the suppressing
of the true Religion there: Do not think you can prevail to suppress popery
here. I know your Domesticke affairs are great, your occasions of expenses
vast; yet I remember what the Historian says of the Roman State. There was
nothing did more evidence the greatness of their spirits, then that at such a
time, as Hanniball was even Ad portus. Their treafure exhausted by long Wars,
Their Armies routed diverse times, The State at the lowest ebb that ever it
was in: Yet even then; when a mighty War lay upon their backs, They did not
remit the care of any affairs, though never so remote from them. And nothing
did more make Hannibal despair of taking Rome; Then that he heard, supplies of
Soldiers were sent out of the City into Spain, even then, (...) 22. c. 3^.
when he with his whole army lay before their walls. I know not whither any
thing would more please God or procure a blessing upon your affairs at home, I
am sure scarce any thing would m^^e dant your adversaries at home and abroad,
then to see you at such a time as this, sending supplies into Ireland.

And you my brethren the rest of you that stand before Exhortati^^ the people
the Lord this day. Withdraw not your assistance from the honorable Houses of
Parliament, in that or any other work so just, Honorable and pious. You see
they meet with opposition from their adversaries: impossible it is, it should
be otherwise. Oh let them not meet with discouragment from their friends, from
their brethren. No question it was worse to Nehemiah to hear Judah say. The
strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed and there is so much rubbish, we
cannot build the wall: Then it was to hear the adversaries say. We will come
upon them and they shall neither know nor see till we are in the midst of them
and play them, and cause the work to cease. That which the adversaries said
was no more then he looked for. But this of Judah was unexpected. O let not
London say, let not England say. The strength of the bearers of burdens is
decayed. The expenses of the Irish war and of the English affairs are such a
burden, we can bear no longer, our strength is decayed: we cannot build the
wall: the work must cease. I know your burdens this way have been great, and
in this City far greater then in other places of the Kingdom, and are like to
continue still. For though I hope it is not in the purposes of God to destroy
England, nor to destroy London, yet I have thought sometimes: The purpose and
intent of God has been to humble, and attenuate London, and England. For
Englands long continued peace, had abundantly increased Englands wealth, and
the abundant creased of Englands wealth had proportionably increased Englands
pride. The age before us knew not that excess of bravery in clothes and
utensils that we were grown unto. And the generation growing up, was like to
exceed us in both. God saw us labor so dangerously of a plethory as his
wisdom and love judged it needful to abate and exhaust our fullness at least
so much as is super fluous, and not matter of subsistence, but matter of pride
unto us: which if we can willingly and chearefully resign up to the disposal
of God we may possibly thereby obtain and secure our lives, Laws, Religion,
the things that are, or should be dearest to us. But if we hug our wealth,
when God would have us let it go, Take heed we lose not that, and all the
rest. Me thinks I read it in the footsteppes of God toward England. God has
said. I will abate the wealth and pride of England. Me thinks the succession
of these three wars within these few years (which comes not without the
special providence of that God who rules in the kingdoms of men) the
expenses of all which must lie upon England, speaks it. That the purpose of God
is to abate the pride and wealth of England. And me thinks we should say as
Mephibosheth did, 2 Samuel 19.30. Yea let him take all for as much as my Lord the
King is returned again in peace to his own house: might we but see our
Sovereign Lord the King brought in peace again to his own house, and to His
Houses of Parliament. Might we but see the King of Kings upon his holy hill of
Zion. Christ in his beauty, on his Throne. The Church reformed, truth and peace
established: let him take all.

I persuade my self every honest heart that is loyal to God, to the King, to
the public weal would willingly speak it and seal it, did not our
adversaries by their crafty insinuations endeavor to divide as much between
the Parliament and people as they have done between the King and Parliament.
That would feign persuade the people of this Nation, with the Ape in the emblem
to cut in under the arm of the tree whereon they sit and plunge themselves
into a gulf and sea of misery.

To this purpose as they have told his Majesty, so now they tell the people.
That the Parliament will alter Religion. A charge like that of Rabshakeh
against Hezekiah and as true. When he would persuade the people God, would not
help them: because Hezekiah had altered Religion. Isaias 36.7. If thou say to
me we trust in the Lord our God; is it not he whose Altars and high places
Hezekiah has taken away and said to Judah and Jerusalem you shall worship
before this altar? Truth is. This is all the alteration of Religion the
Parliament has made. They have taken away the high places and Altars: that
they have done and intended to proceed to command all worship to be according
to the rule of Gods word. To say to England, you shall worship according to
this rule. And this is he great crime of altering Religion. My brethren be not
deceived. ^^^e^^tio Perse^riva. o^ruptiva.
As in natural so in civil and moral things there is a double alteration.
There is a perfective alteration. And there is a corruptive alteration. To
alter Religion so as to corrupt Religion, was the plot and work of the Popish
Prelates and their faction. To alter their alterations, to antiquate their
innovations, to reduce Religion, to its pure original perfection (which cannot
be done without alteration of some thing introduced) that was the purpose and
work of the Parliament, and for this it is our adversaries cry against them.
They will alter Religion.

I but then the Parliament will alter the government of the Kingdom. Yes. Just
like as they altered Religion. As in Religion such alterations as tend Ad
perfectionem are not to be condemned: So likewise in Polity and civil
government. Plato tells us, That in all Commonwealths upon just grounds there
ought to be some changes. And that Statesmen therein must beehave themselves
like ski^f^^l Musicians, Qui artem Musices non mutant, sed Musices modum.

But they do things without his Majesty's consent. I that is our grief and our
adversaries triumph. That our adversaries have so far prevailed upon the
heart of our sovereign as to persuade him to with draw first his presence, then
his assent from the great Council of his Kingdom. And thereby force them,
Either to do things without the consent of our sovereign, Or else, do nothing,
but sit still, and expect their own, and the Kingdoms ruin And in such a
case is it so high acrime to determine things, necessary for the safety of King
and Kingdom, without consent of his Majesty when it cannot be obtained? I
have read that the Persian Monarchs were wont to call the Peers, and
Presidents of their Provinces to Council; but giving them no freedom nor
liberty of Council. For every one of them had (...) plate, or tile of gold* to
stand upon in the Council house and if he gave council that the King thought
well of, Kecker Polit.
the plate of gold was given him for a reward: but if he delivered any thing
contrary to the Kings mind, Valor. Maxim. l. 9. c. 5.
Flagris caedebatur And one writes that Xerxes in his expedition against Greece
called his Princes together, and spoke to them to this purpose. Least, says
he, I should seem to follow only my own Council, I have assembled you, and
now do you remember; that it becomes you rather to obey, then advise. Our
adversaries would feign have it so with the Peers and Parliament of England:
and have a long time bin laboring to persuade his Majesty it ought so to be,
and would make the like impression upon the people now. But you my brethren
beware of their insinuations and know. That they that devide between his
Majesty and Parliament or between Parliament and people are the greatest
enemies of King, people, and Parliament. This is the first time that ever
loyalty to the King was set in opposition to fidelity to the Parliament. The
first time that ever it was thought possible to draw the English Nation to
desert their Parliament under the notion of adhering to their King. Oh let not
this age bear the date of such infamy. Did ever Parliament do more for the
Laws, and liberties of the Nation with more danger and detriment to
themselves: And will you when they have need of you leave them: well here is
our comfort: God has not left, God will not leave his cause, 1. Kings
8.57.58.59.60.
his work, his people. 1. Kings 8. The Lord our God be with us as he was with
our fathers: let him not leave us nor forsake us; that he may incline our
hearts unto him to walk in all his ways and to keep his commandments and his
Statutes and his Judgments: He, even he maintain the cause of his servants
and of his people Israel at all times as the Matter shall require that all the
people of the earth may know that the Lord is God and that there is none else.

FINIS.

