BEing commanded by his EXCELLENCY the Ld MARQUIS of NEW CASTLE to publish the
following Articles for his new Course, I am first to inform you, that the
work was begun so late, and is so great, viz: the plowing of five miles in
length, and a considerable breadth, with the harrowing of it twice over, and
sowing it with Hay-seed to sord it, that there will be no firm riding on it
before the last of July, when my Lord intends to give a Cup of 5l and the same
he will do on the last of August and September, then ending the Course for this
year: But the next year (if God grant his EXCELLENCY life and health) he means
to begin it on the last of April, continuing it on the last of each month
till the last of September inclusively, Six months in all, giving each month
a Cup of 5l.

The ARTICLES.
1. The Horses are all to meet at Sparton-hill-top between eleven and twelve,
where the Riders are to be justly weighed, the weight ten stone down-weight, by
the weights (as they call them) of Aver-du-poyse: the Horses are to be bridled,
sadled and shod. After the Riders are justly weighed by such a Gentleman as
shall be desired to be a just Judge, not only of the Riders weight, but also
to judge impartially who comes first to the stoup; another Gentleman must be
appointed at the Twelve-score-stoup, to judge what Horse is rid out of
distance, which is a main business: and a third must be desired to see them
start fair. 2. The Horses must be led down from Sparton-hill, to the
starting-place; and there must be three heats, the first heat to Sparton-hill,
there to rub half an hour, and then the Judge is to give them warning to get
up and start: but if in that halfe-houre they relieve their horses with any
thing but fair water, or if they ride out of distance, or the riders want
weight, they must lose the Cup; only there is allowed two pound for wasting.
The second heat is to end where they begun last, and two Gentlemen must be
desired to see, not only who comes first to the stoup, but at the
twelve-score-stoup, who rides out of distance, and who not: and 'twere well to
have a flag at the ending stoup of each heat to be let down as soon as the
first horse is past the stoup for the Judges easyer discerning who rides within
distance and who not: the riders must be weighed every heat, the relief is to
be only water, the Rub but half an hour, and then the Judge is to bid them
mount. 3. There being three heats, he that wins the most heats wins the Cup, so
he rides within distance, not otherwise, but that horse which is foremost the
last heat; this will make them ride for it. The stakes are ten shillings an
horse, and to be put into the hands of the Judges who are to deliver them to
the second horse. 4. He that wins the Cup saves his own stake, the second horse
shall have all the rest. 5. It is to be considered that if any Rider whip
another Rider, or his horse on the face, or pull back another bridle; he shall
lose the Cup. 6. No by-stander must ride in with the Horses, to face, stop, or
turn them over, or any other way to hinder them, but must ride aloof from
them. If any such fault be committed, I must implore the Gentry to help me in
the Legal punishing of the offenders. His EXCELLENCY says, that, seeing he
makes this Course only for the pleasure of the Gentry, he hopes they will take
it in good part, he having no other end in it, except his Lordship's own
contentment. But his Excellency adds, that he never yet knew any public thing
which was not found fault with, and that every where there be many teachers,
for if people did not find fault with every thing, they would not be thought
wise in any thing: but his Lordship is very confident he shall find nothing of
this humor amongst those Noble Persons whom herein he desires to serve. And he
commands me to tell you, that, though this be not the Law of the Medes and
Persians, yet he will alter nothing in it. Every man may put in his horse, mare
or gelding at his pleasure, it is the Liberty of the Subject, and so his that
sets up the Course. When any man does the like, he may make the Law what he
pleases. In the mean time his Lordship hopes this Course will please you all,
since he has no other end in it.
His EXCELLENCY further commands me to let you know, that his course or heats
continues no longer then his Lordships good liking.

Thus I have obeyed his EXCELLENCIE's commands IO: ROLLESTON.


