New Quaeres OF CONSCIENCE, Touching the late OATH; Desiring Resolution.
Q. How it consists with 1. The threefold conditions of an Oath in general of
Truth, Judgment, Righteousness Jer. 4.2. 2. The threefold Oath taken in
particular Viz. of 1. Allegiance. 2. Supremacy. 3. Protestation.
3. Their own introduction, Limitation in special, in order to the security
and preservation of the True, Reformed, Protestant Religion.

I. Quaere. How it consists with the three Conditions of an OATH.
1. OF Truth, which excludes falsehood, doublings, fictions, mental evasions,
aequivocations, and reservations, and requires simplicity and sincerity,
according to the sense and purpose of the imposer. 1 Liquide jurare,

2. Of judgment, not unadvisedly, lightly or wantonly, to satisfy the times,
to comply with great persons, for advantage, or carnal security, not upon a
Popish implicit faith, but to let every man be persuaded in his own mind,
that it be grounded upon a necessary Cause, and taken soberly, advisedly,
discreetly, reverently, and in the fear of God.

3. Of Righteousness, That it be not to the prejudice of my Neighbor.

He that takes it with his private Reservation inconsistent with the Sense and
purpose of the Oath, offends against the first. He that takes it for favor of
men, offends against the second. He that takes it out of emulation and rage, to
the damage of his Brother, offends against the third.

For these Causes, D. Augustine concludes; Falsa juratio exitiosa est, vera
juratio periculosa, nulla juratio secura. False swearing is pernicious; True
swearing is dangerous; no swearing is secure. Ser. 28. de verb. Apost.

By an ancient Law of the Church, No man was to be sworn but fasting.

Quaere II. How can it consist with the Oath?
1 OF Supremacy. For if he be once supreme over all persons, in all causes
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, how can I swear to subject him, or bring him
under any person, in any Cause whatsoever? and though the chief occasion of
that Oath was upon the Popes pretending jurisdiction, yet the intention and
extention was to shut all his Subjects under the same condition of Obedience.

2 Of Allegiance, For I am bound First, To defend the King and his Successors
to the uttermost of my power against all Treasons, and Conspiracies against his
Person, Crown and dignity. Secondly, To do my best endeavor to reveal all
Conspiracies I know or hear against him or any of them, and Third, That no
person whatsoever has power to absolve me of the Oath, and All which seem to
be endangered by taking up Arms against him, or his lifeguard, or the forces
raised by him.

3. Of the late Protestation, in regard of a double seeming Contradiction. For
I promise, vow and protest, to maintain the Protestant Religion, expressed in
the Doctrine of the Church of England. But this assertion (That in my
Conscience I do believe that the Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament,
are raised and continued for their just defense, and for the defense of the
true Protestant Religion) seems to contradict the Protestant Religion and
Doctrine of our Church. For though there be many strange Fancies, and doctrines
in the Church of England, yet there is but One express Doctrine of the Church
of England, and that is contained in the 39 Articles, and Book of Common Prayer
(to which all the regular Clergy must subscribe) and are confirmed by an Act of
Parliament. Now one Protestant point of our Religion, expressed in the Doctrine
of this Church, is in the 37 Article, Viz. 1. The Kings Majesty has the Chief
power (id est, supremacy) in this Realm of England, unto whom the Chief
government of All Estates of this Realm, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, in
all Causes does appertain, To Rule All estates and degrees committed to his
charge, and to restrain with the sword the Stubborn and evil doers, which he
cannot do if the Sword or Militia be taken from him.

2. That a man may take up Arms when the Magistrate (id est Supreme power)
commands.

3. That a man may swear when the Magistrate requires in a cause of Faith and
Charity. Implying that no man ought to swear, take solemn Oaths, or Bear
Arms without the injunction of the supreme Magistrate.

4. That the two Books of Homilies contains a godly and wholesome Doctrine and
are to be read in Churches by the Ministers (not only reading Ministers)
diligently and distinctly, that they may be understood of the people.

5. Homil. 21. Against Rebellion, That it is not lawful for Subjects to raise
up Arms against their Sovereign, under color of Religion.



Eccles. 4.12. A threefold cord is not easily broken, except by such as
furiously rage together, and lightly imagine a vain thing. By Rulers that take
Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, Let us
break their bonds asunder, and cast away their Cords from us. But he that sits
in Heaven, laughs them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision.

And yet will I set my King upon his holy hill of Sion: He will bruise them
with a rod of iron, and, Be wise therefore, and kiss the Son, lest he be angry.

Psalm. 2.1, 2 3. Quaere III. How can it consist with the Protestation in the
second particular, Against all Popish Innovations within the Realm, etc. For to
tak^ up Arms in Case of Religion, against the supreme Power, is a plain Popish
Jesuiticall Innovation, taught and maintained by them in this last age.
And in the third particular.

For I vow and protest to maintain with my life, power and estate, according to
the duty of my Allegiance, his Majesty's.

1. Power. 2. Honor. 3. Estate.
Now the Quaere is, How can I maintain?
1. HIS Person, with my life, power and estate, if I swear, To assist an army
of men, which he declares (as is thought by many pious and judicious men) to be
utter enemies to his life, honor and estate.

Or how can I maintain?
2. His Honor, when by the Oath I profess not only in my heart and thought
to curse him, contrary to the word of God. Eccles. 10.20. Exodus 22.28. but
openly wirh my mouth to blaspheme him, and in effect say, (which is Nefandum)
He is an utter enemy of Gods true Religion, a violator of all sacred Vows,
Oaths, Bonds and Covenants. And shall I yet say, I maintain his honor? Am I
thus presumptuous to judge him, and not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, and
yet maintain his Honor, or the Protestant Religion? Did Cham honor his
father, when he discovered his nakedness? And do they honor their father that
cover and extinguish his virtues and glory, and cast aspertions of disgrace and
calumny upon him? Would such Honor be taken of the Father from his children?
of the servant from his master? Go and offer that honor to thy Father, thy
Master, thy Governor, and see if he will take it at thy hands. Mal. 1.6.8.

Or how can I maintain?
3. His Estate, when I take part with them that withhold, and withdraw it from
him. 2. That put him to such an exhausting and consuming charge by maintaining
an Army to guard and protect his Person and his Subjects.

Nor will the after Limitation serve to heal the breach of the Oath, by saying,
It was not to be extended to the maintenance of any Form or Worship, Discipline
or Government of the Church of England) for first all the ordained Ministers
have subscribed and sworn to all the Doctrine of the Church, etc. and cannot be
absolved from any lawful Oath by any power whatsoever.

4. Though it should not be extended to Church government, yet it will reach to
the Civil Supremacy and power of the sword, which it avoucheth to be only in
the King, and not in any Subjects whatsoever.

Quaere IIII. How can it consist with its own
Introduction, id est. That there has been, and now is a Popish and Traterous
Plot for the subversion of the true Religion. First, How can I believe it, and
believe the Kings Protestation to the contrary. Secondly, And how can I honor
the King, and not believe him? Thirdly, How can I call it a Popish Army, when
the better and greater part by far are Protestants, and against all Popish
Plots.

And Expression,

1 IN declaring my sorrow for my sins past, and purpose to amend, if in the
very Oath I commit greater sins of Disobedience, perjury, and blasphemy then I
repented of; if the Repentance it self be a mockery, a sin, and a
Transgression, its a Repentance to be repented of; and if the light which is in
us be darkness, how great is that darkness? if the Repentance it self include
a Transgression, how great is that Transgression?

2. How is it in order to the securing of our Protestant Religion? When as it
is clear by that which is above said, it is directly contrary to the Doctrine
of our Church? which clearly assents the Kings Supremacy over all persons, in
all Causes, and plainly denies any power of Arms to be used by Subjects
against the King under color of Religion. Besides, what our Lord answered for
himself, Luke 12. we his servants may follow him to the like offers. Quis
constituit me divisorem super vos? when one desired him to speak to his Brother
to divide the inheritance, he answered, Man, who has made me a divider or
judge over you? if any speak to us to take up Arms. Quaere, Who has made me a
Judge over my Sovereign? When he has protested by all that is sacred, That he
will defend the true Protestant Religion, and Liberty of the Subject, etc. Who
has made me a judge over his heart? to sit in Gods Tribunal? or who has made
me a divider betwixt the King and his two Houses of Parliament? or who has
made me a Defender of the faith? by any power coercive, or force of Sword? Am I
not rather excluded from it by our Savior? He that takes the sword, shall
perish by the sword.

How can it consist with former Oaths, Viz.
To maintain the Kings Person, honor and estate, and all and every person (in
order to the Protestation) in whatsoever they shall do in pursuance of the
same. And yet assist to the utmost of my power, First, Those that hazard his
Person, honor and Estates, 2. those that go contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of England (in taking up Arms against the King, under color of
Religion) in all that they shall do in pursuance of the same. What if I should
be required to kill my own father natural, civil, or spiritual, my
Sovereign, my Parents, my Pastors, if they shall oppose their force by word or
deed, and maintain the Kings Cause against them; and all this may be encluded
(in pursuance of the same) and we have cause to fear it is so intended, or may
be on occasion extended, when it is taken by some (I fear) for good doctrine,
That every man may consecrate his hand and fall upon his brother, if he judge
him an Idolater. And that the tribe of Levi by that severe execution, did
expiate their slain of the Fathers Transgression, in their bloody excision of
the Sechemites circumcision. Perhaps the comparison holds in part in their
furious zeal, of Simeon and Levi, who under an hypocritical pretext of
Religion, and Circumcision, wrought the utter destruction and excision of the
Shechemites. Which made Jacob complain, You have troubled me, and made me to
stink among, etc. Genesis 49.5. Simon and Levi, Brethren in evil. O my Soul, come
not thou into their (Counsel) id est Secret, and into their Assembly, my
honor, be not united. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their
wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel.

Woe to them that draw iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin, as it were with
Cart-ropes.

Isai. 5.18, 28. Chrysostom, As children pulling a rotten Rope at both ends,
contrary-wayes, at last it breaks, and both fall and break their heads and
legs. So in a doubtful Twisted Oath, rotten and unsound, when contrary parts
pull several ways, or when Conscience holds one way, and worldly affection
pulls another way; The Cord or Oath breaks, and both sides fall into a Gulf of
perdition. The one by provoking the Oath, the other by breaking the Oath.

Conscience falls one way, and breaks his peace. World pulls and falls another
way, and breaks his credit.

The Spirit of a man would sustein his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who
can bear.

Prove. 18.14. Hear Saint Chrysostomes suit and request to his flock. This I now
ask, and well never leave asking, That whenever any is about to swear, Let Us
take John Baptists head, and with loud cries show it, and cry out against
Oaths, and imagine you heard that tongue yet speaking as the voice of a Crier,
Hate and abhor an Oath my Murderer; For what my reproof could not effect, an
Oath did, And what a Tyrants fury could not do, that a necessity of Perjury
effected. He that once heard him gladly, and did many things, and reverenced
his Sanctity, now murdered him cruelly, and that by virtue of an Oath, for two
causes, First For his Oaths sake. Secondly, For Companies sake, id est, in
pursuance of his Oath, he cuts off the head of a Saint worth the whole world.

NOw let those who are already entangled with this unhappy Covenant, judge
rightly of Herod's Case, Whether it had not been much better to have violated
his rash Oath, and confessed his folly in making it, before all that were
present, then so bloodily to have kept it. Let them remember the School
Doctrine, No man can be so immured or enclosed betwixt two sins, but he may
find the way out without a third. If it be a deadly crime to keep such an Ooth
it can be no sin to break it. We see the Israelites found a way to evade their
severe vow against the Benjamites, not to give them their daughters. Judge.
21.21. and it is not laid to their charge. We read of the peoples delivering
Jonathan out of Saul's hand, notwithstanding his fathers vow to put him to
death. 1. Sam. 14.45. And neither the people are blamed for so doing, nor Saul
taxed for yielding to the people. What need more be said, when we find David
himself repenting of his rash Oath, to destroy the household of Nabal the
Carmelite. 1. Sam. 25.34. How many Christians in the Primitive time may we read
of, that having once abjured their Savior, repented, and turned again and were
crowned with Martyrdom! How many of later days, that notwithstanding they have
once subscribed and sworn against the Protestant Doctrine, yet have lamented
their inconstancy, and suffered death valiantly in defense of it! It is a most
certain Rule, that in rash Oaths, poenitenda promissio, non perficienda
praesumptio: The promise ought to be repented of, presumption ought not to be
executed. And in unjust and wicked ones, such as this Covenant, Injusta vincula
rumpat justitia. Unjust and unrighteous fetters, let Righteousness burst asunder.

FINIS.
Oxford Printed for William Web. 1643.


