An hundred and six Lessons, or Christian Directions, composed together by
three godly Divines, for the benefit of all those which desire to walk
according to Gods Word. Occasioned and begun by Mr. Newman, increased and
enlightened Mr. Johnson, multiplied and ordered by Mr. Breercliffe. Also, a
brief and profitable Exposition on Psalm. 119. 9.
IT is of absolute necessity to be a Christian, B
that, is, to dwell in Christ and Christ in you.

2 Be assured that can never be, till you hate, deny, get out of your selves,
and prize Christ above all.

3 This cannot be attained, till you truly know your self and Christ.

4 It is the safest to forbear the search of any or all knowledge, till thou
know thy self.

5 The better you know your self, the greater will your terror be.

6 That terror will whip you to confess the necessity of a Christ, and
compel you to seek and long for him, be restless, tremble, despair, be in
Hell till you find him.

7 Let every lust of thy heart stand back, I
to make room for Christ.

8 Let self-righteousnesse be odious to thee, when Christ's Righteousness comes.

9 Welcome the spirit of Christ into thy heart with joy.

10 Hunger after Christ in the purest way of revealing himself.

11 Use no ordinance without some advantage or growth.

12 Soake thy heart often in the feeling natures misery.

13 Break not prison from under the Spirit of bondage, till God set you free.

14 Dwell continually in the thoughts of thy sins, till they appear thy
greatest ill, and Christ thy greatest gain.

15 Stand loose from all earthly comforts.

16 Choose any suffering rather then the least sin.

17 Let sin lie heavy, that affliction may lie light

18 Get solid proof of your interest in Christ.

19 Take heed you blot not your evidence for heaven.

20 Keep close with God in your general and particular callings.

21 Evidence your title to Christ's Legacies.

22 Take heed of that, N
that breeds estrangement between God and you.

23 Eye God that eyes you in all your enterprises.

24 Go any whither rather then lose Gods company.

25 Think nothing too dear for God when he calls for it,

26 Reckon that your gainfullest and sweetest time by Gods communion. I


27 Labor to keep in long the fire of heat, which Gods presence has kindled.

28 Resolve to eat the bitterest Roll, God reaches you.

29 Be most in the duty you find God most in.

30 In all Companies, keep Company with God

31 Account thy self most honored in Gods honor.

32 Let every injury to God and his cause injure you.

33 Let neither God nor Devil find thee idle.

34 Be in daily expectation and readiness for Christ's coming.

35 Serve God as heartily as ever you served sin.

36 The nearer-home, the more long for it.

37 Prize the least mercy of God, at the highest rate. N


38 Employ every talent received, to the utmost advantage for God.

39 In every duty go out of your self into Christ's strength. I


40 Let the enlargement of Christ's Church enlarge thy heart.

41 Bewail the Churches misery above thine own

42 Affect no perferment, but such as may perfer you into Gods favor, in the
Court of Grace.

43 Account no pains or cost great to please God and his children. B


44 Contempt for Grace and Christ will certainly end in honor, believe it.

45 In the least tempest think not thy self safe in any labor but in Christ

46 You shall never be free from horror, if you yield to sin horribly against
God.

47 Welcome God into thy house, and thou shall be welcome into his, not
otherwise.

48 For Commerce, Prove. 11. 1, For Converse, Prove. 11. 42.

49 Leave the savor of grace in every company

50 Let them be dearest to thee that are dearest with God. I


51 Desire no delight in the friendship or fellowship of the godless. B


52 Fear their friendship who are great without God.

53 You shall find more loss and hazard then comfort and gain, I
in the tillage of great men's favor

54 Countenance grace in the meanest member.

55 Remember them to God that you desire should remember you. N


56 Make great account of them who are in Gods stead to you, B
and declare it faithfully.

57 Seek not friends for earthly but heavenly ends

58 Be as willing to get friends on whom you may sow, as from whom you may
reap.

59 The brighter thy virtues be, the greater are thy sins.

60 Think thy soul to be as a God inhabiting humane body, use it not as a
beast.

61 That God will require an exact account of thy particular calling.

62 That all persecutions we suffer, are seeds, whose fruit is glory.

63. That grace and glory shall once meet.

64 Be resolved it is a sweet thing, to want the sweets of this world.

65 That if you would be content with herbs, you need not flatter a Dyonisius.

66 Having bags of bread, i. e. Scriptures, know not a stint-stone, i. e.
humane curiosity.

67 A holy man is for a good infinitely above earth it self, and delights in
that good.

68 Take heed of a snare even in every lawful pleasure. I


69 Pleasures in ill, B
renders thee unpleasant to God and good men.

70 It is observed for him that has a soul, to affect practice beyond the
body, birth or earth.

71 Desire and get learning and grace too, and so possess all that excellency
in heaven and earth.

72 Desire not to have for possession, but for dispensation to God and his
children. Of a steward be not a theife.

73 Choose the fattest pasture for thy soul. I


74 Determine to be trusty, desire not to be trusted. B


75 Esteem of sin by its parting, I
not by its coming.

76 Be sure you prize not credit, nor any thing else at a higher rate then
godliness. B


77 Esteem no price too great for truth and wisdom.

78 Know that an unclean body cannot be the harbor of a chaste and loyal
soul.

79 Be not disposed to sloth, which is the loss of health, wealth, grace and
glory.

80 Incline not to anger but love, which brings ease, gain and safety.

81 A meek spirit is the best preserver of Christian peace, and Christian
communion.

82 To be inclined to curiosity in search of our own faults, is a virtue; a
sin, in search of others.

83 Stand a loofe from appearance of sin, and the practice must needs stand
far from thee.

84 Get ground daily of your corruptions.

85 Be ashamed to commit the least sin, I
that the master of great sins may be afraid of thee. B


86 Give not liberty to any passion in natures way, without God.

87 Godly and righteous living will bring esteem in despite of malice and envy.

88 Confider how much work thou have to do in so small a time. I


89 The earlier you begin, the easier will thy days work be, B
whether in general or particular calling.

90 Resolve to make the decay of thy body or estate, the renewing of thy soul.

91 Resolve not to go one step out of the way to heaven.

92 Resolve next to thy heart, to keep thy tongue from straying.

93 Be sure no excellency is attained, where humility, temperance, and
diligence make not the way

94 Credit got by seeming graces will not last.

95 A sincere heart gives the best relish to any holy duty.

96 Perform holy duties as well as do them, and mark the success.

97 Attend holy duties though they bring not present profit, cease not though
thou speed not; be not like a Cripple that follows a little way and falls off.

98 Resolve the higher you are, the nearer you will be to Heaven.

99 Great wings ought to take high flights, not like Swans having feathers
enough, and flies naught

100 Having got a gracious spirit let it not run out in extravagance; we let
water out and not wine.

101 Be sure, better fruit is expected in a garden, then in a wilderness; from
the tree of life, then from the corrupt root of nature.

102 Know that self-love will make thee hateful to either.

103 Few hate them who hate none, and truly love all.

104 Resolve to begin at the beginning of Christianity, or never look to
attain to the end.

105 Resolve to be a through Christian, or never begin it to deceive thy self,
and displease God.

106 Consider what Christianity will cost thee, and resolve to bear it, or
never begin to profess it.

David's Question and Answer in Psalm. 119. 9. very brief and profitably
expounded.
IN that place he puts forth this Question, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse
his ways? He answers in general, By taking heed to Gods Word. I suppose it
may be resolved in seven several particulars, thus:

There is a way, 1. Of the mind. 2. Of the tongue. 3. Of the affections. 4. Of
the actions. 5. Of the relations. 6. Of our Vocations. 7. Of our Conversations.
Its necessary to cleanse all these ways according to Holy Scripture.

1 For the way of your mind, take heed your thoughts concerning God be holy,
high, and thankful: concerning others, sparing, impartial, and respectfull:
concerning your selves, true, lowly fruitful.

2 For the way of your discourse, let your words be few, gracious, pertinent.

3 For the way of your Affections, let them be rightly fixed, well ordered,
fully exercised.

4 Concerning your Actions, see they have a good ground, a straight rule; the
best end.

5 As for the way of your Relations, let the duties of them all be destinctly
known, diligently practiced, and faithfully discharged.

6 In the way of your visible Calling, express the purity, power and
privilege of the Gospel.

7 In the way of your Vocations, whether Christian or Civil, let it be
conscientious, industrious, and unwearied.

FINIS.
Printed at York by Tho: Broad. 1646.


