THE DVTY of such as would WALK WORTHY OF THE GOSPEL: TO Endeavor UNION, NOT
DIVISION nor TOLERATION. OPENED, In a SERMON at Paul's, upon the Lords Day, Feb.
8. 1646.

By MATTHEW NEVVCOMEN, Preacher of the Gospel at Dedham in Essex.

1 COR. 1.10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye ALL SPEAK the SAME thing, and that there be no DIVISIONS among you: but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the SAME MIND and in the SAME
JVDGEMENT.

(...).

Ignat in Ep. ad Polvcarp. (...).

Ignat. in Ep. au P^^lodelph. (...)

Idem. ibidem. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Crane
in Paul's Churchyard, M.DC.XLVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS ADAMS, Lord Major of the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
THis Sermon as it was first preached at your appointment, so at the same
appointment of yours it is now published in print. It befell this Sermon in the
preaching of it, as it did Paul's, Acts 13. Some contradicted, etc. ver. 43.
others were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, ver. 48. To have your
Lordship and the rest of your Venerable Colleagues in this later rank of
hearers, has been to me no small comfort against the censures of others.
Though my chief comfort is this, the testimony of my conscience; that as of
sincerity, that as of God and as in the sight of God, this Sermon was preached
unto you, not as seeking to please men, but to edify the Church of Christ, and
to contribute something toward the composing of our differences and closing of
our breaches. If any thing then communicated to the ear, and now offered to the
view, may be successful in this kind, herein I do rejoice and shall rejoice.
God has called your Lordship to the Government of this great City, and I doubt
not but you find the divisions of this City, amongst the greatest difficulties
of your Government: We are at this time like men at sea, that have not only a
tempest upon them, but a commotion among them; not only the winds and waves
raging furiously against the ship, but the Mariners (who should do service in
the storm) raging as furiously one against another. (...), N^^zia^z Orat. 32.
My Lord, the hand of providence has placed you at the helm of this City, he
will give you wisdom, strength and courage, to bring this ship (this City)
safe out of this double tempest: which is and shall be the prayer of him who is

SIR, Your servant in the Lord and in his work, MATTHEW. NEWCOMEN.

A SERMON at PAVLS upon the LORDS Day, February 8th 1645.
PHILIP. 1.27. -- That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind.


HAving formerly spoken in this place of the later words of this verse,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel: I shall at this time crave leave
to lead you to the words immediately foregoing (in one spirit, with one mind)
as containing matter of Instruction, which if the Lord help us to draw forth,
may be both seasonable and profitable.

(...): Some join both these with the former (...); and so read the sentence
thus: That you stand fast in one spirit, with one mind; So the Syriack; so
Theophylact; so some Greek Copies; and to that sense the Vulgar Translation,
quia statis in uno spiritu unanimes. Others refer the first part of this clause
to the words foregoing; That ye stand fast in one spirit; the other to the
words following, thus; with one mind striving together for the faith of the
Gospel. So Beza, Zanchius, Estius and others.

By one spirit here some understand the Spirit of God, which is One in it self,
and One and the same in the hearts of all believers. So Beza, so Zanchius and
Meelfhurerus; therefore Zanchius reads it* per unum spiritum, not in uno
spiritu.

Others make the words, Estius. Velasquez.
(...) and (...), Synonymous, and by both understand the spirit or soul of man;
and observe that usually (some say always) in Scripture, where these two,
spirit and soul, or spirit and mind are joined together, they are both but
one: Only by spirit is understood the superior and rational part of the soul,
the understanding: and by soul, the inferior and affecting part; so that one
spirit and one soul here, I conceive to be the same with one mind and one
heart.

So that the thing which the Apostle in these words commends to the special
care and endeavor of the Philippians, it is concord and union: and this union
it must be, First a strict and close union; they are all to stand as firmly
united together as if they had but one soul. Secondly, a sweet union, not
forced upon them, but naturally flowing from an inward uniting principle; one
spirit and one soul. Thirdly, a holy union, it must be in and for the faith of
the Gospel. Fourthly, a lasting constant union, out of which they must never be
shaken, they must stand fast in one spirit, with one mind.

That all those who would walk worthy of the Gospel, must endeavor* a sweet,
close, holy, lasting union among themselves.

If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, Phil.
1.1, 2.
if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercies, fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind: as if the Apostle had said; If ever ye tasted sweetness in Christ, if
ever ye found comfort in Gods love, if ye be Christians and have any fellowship
of the spirit, if ye be men and have any bowels of mercies, if ye pity me in my
bonds, and would do any thing to rejoice the heart of a poor prisoner of the
Lord Jesus, fulfill ye my joy in this, that ye be like minded, having the same
love, yea the same soul, (...): Vehemens quidem or atio, non verborum solum sed
sententiarum etiam congerie abundans, and ad deliniendos permovendosque animos
plurimum valens: A most powerful exhortation this is, wherein the Apostle
heaps up not only words but arguments (quot verba tot tonitrua; as Hierome of
another passage of Paul's Epistles:) One would think the Apostle had said
enough of this particular now, Phil. 3.16. Fort assis baec ipsa verba (...),
est illa ipsa regula ad cujus praescriptum nos vult in^edere Apostolus.
and that he need not speak one word more to these Philippians about this, yet
he cannot think so: therefore ye have him again, Phil. 3.16. insisting upon
the samething: Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind the same thing. Beza conceives that the very rule
which the Apostle would have us walk by, is this rule of union, (...), to
mind the same thing. Nay, the blessed Apostle cannot content himself with this
yet, but if there be but two in the Church of Philippi, and they but women that
are at some difference, Paul cannot forbear, but he must exhort them by name,
Phil. 4.2. I beseech Evodias and beseech Syntyche, Phil. 4.2.
that they be of the same mind in the Lord. These were two women in Philippi
(so Theodor. Theoph. Zanch. and others,) and it seems there was some breach,
some dissension, either between them two, or between them and the rest of the
Church: Zanchy brings many reasons to prove that it was in some point of faith
and religion, wherein that difference lay; and of this mind were Anselme,
Primasius and Remigius before him. Some would have looked upon this so small a
breach as a contemptible thing; what if a couple of weak women have taken up a
singular opinion, need the great Apostle trouble himself with that? But Paul
knew how great a matter a little fire kindles, a dissension of two women may
quickly divide a whole Church, therefore Paul powers water (or rather milk,
which they say will quench wild fire) upon this burning presently: I beseech
Evodias, and I beseech Syntyche, (...), to be of one mind in the Lord; as who
should say, I would not have any one of you, no not one woman among you be of
another mind from the rest of the people of God.

But was not this the Apostles peculiar and extraordinary care for the
Philippians? and was it not a peculiar injunction upon them? No, you shall
find the like in other Epistles, Romans 12.16.
Romans 12.16. Be of the same mind one toward another, (...): And 1 Cor. 1.10.
see with what authority the Apostle injoyns this upon them. Now I beseech you,
1 Cor. 1.10.
brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And again in 2
Cor. 13.11. where the Apostle is about to take his leave of the Saints there,
see what he leaves as his last advice with them; Finally, brethren, farewell,
be perfect, 2 Cor. 13.11.
be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of peace shall
be with you. It is observable how the Apostle makes this the Alpha of his first
Epistle, and the Omega of his last. The first duty he commends to the
Corinthians in his first Epistle, is this union, and the last duty he commends
to them in his last Epistle, is this union, as if this were the Alpha and
Omega, the primum and ultimum, the beginning and perfection of Christianity, to
be All of One Mind.

So again, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech ye
that ye walks worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called, with all
lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, for bearing one another in love,
endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. See how
affectionately, and with what a powerful heavenly Suada the Apostle here again
presses this duty; I therefore such a one as Paul the aged, now in bonds, the
prisoner of the Lord, ready to be offered up in the service of your faith: I
therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you; though as your father in
Christ, and as one that has been rapt up into the third Heaven, I might
command you, yet I beseech you, I have but one request to make to you before I
die, and it is this, that you walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you are
called. God has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light, now
let it be your care to walk worthy of this high, holy and glorious calling. If
you ask how you may do that, take this rule, with all lowliness and
meekness, etc. endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace: where you have three things, quid, quomodo, quibus medys; 1. The duty to
be performed. 2. The manner of performing that duty. 3. Non jubet facere, sed
in Christo factae unitatis non perfunctoriam sed accuratissimam rationem
babere: Ne ip si eam turbent, ejusve perturbandae ullam occafionem praebeant,
quin potius ab alijs datam summa diligentia and sollicitu line praecident, and
contentiones subortas pro virili legitime componere conentur, omniaque, toto
faciant cord quoe ad unitatem tuendam sunt neces: saria and commoda Croc. ad
locum.
The means whereby they may be enabled unto that duty. The duty is, to keep the
unity of the spirit, (...), endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit. The
word signifies no slight or low endeavor, but an endeavor full of diligence
and industry, endeavoring to keep. Non jubet facere, etc. The Apostle does not
bid make unity, but to have, not a perfunctory, but an exact care of that unity
which Christ has made and wrought, that they neither trouble it, nor give any
occasion for the disturbing of it, but rather with all care and diligence cut
off occasions given by others, laboring with all their might to compose such
differences as might arise, and performing with all their hearts all things
that might tend to the preservation of unity. The manner how this duty is to be
performed, or how this unity of the spirit is to be kept, is, (...). The
Apostle does not say, keeping the unity of the spirit in peace, but in the bond
of peace, ut significetur, says Hyperius, that to the preserving of this
unity, is required a solid peace amongst Christians, that cannot by any means
be dissolved, sed arctissime juncta moneat. Vbi enim pax decollat, ibi cessit
unitas spiritus, says another; If this peace be cut off, farewell the unity of
the spirit. The means whereby we may be enabled to perform this duty in this
manner, to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, are the graces
commanded in the second verse, with all lowliness of mind and meekness, with
long suffering, forbearing one another in love. And so full was the heart of
this blessed Apostle with zeal for this peace and union, that in the three
following verses he prosecutes the same subject, and by seven arguments
enforces this endeavor of union upon them, of which more anon.

Nor was this Paul's zeal and care alone: you shall find other of the Apostles
of the same spirit. So the Apostle Peter, 1 Ep. 3.8. Finally brethren, be ye
all of one mind, (...), omnes estote concordes. So Beza, 1 Pet 3.8.
Vnanimes, so the Vulgar, love as brethren. So the Apostle John, that first
Epistle of his, 1 John.
seems almost to be written on purpose to persuade to brotherly love, which is
the root of union. Now if you add to these Scriptures, wherein the Apostles do
most industriously labor this in the hearts of the people by exhortation,
those other Scriptures, where they do in the behalf of the people endeavor
this in Heaven by prayer, that the God of peace and unity would work this
unity and peace among them, you will see that this endeavor after union, is a
duty still of more worth and necessity. Of this kind is that of the Apostle
Paul, Romans 15.5, 6. Romans 15.5, 6.
Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded one
toward another, (or to be of one mind among your selves, (...). Ipsum sapere
in alterutrum, so the Vulgar) according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one
mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. But
instar omnium is that of our Savior, Ioh. 11.17.
Ioh. 17. in that admirable comfortable prayer which he there makes for his
Church, see how often he lays in requests for this union, and presents this as
his great suit to his Father, that his people may be one; v. 11.
ver. 11. Holy Father, keep through thy own Name those whom thou have given me,
that they may be one as we are: 20. 21. 22. 23.
and again, ver. 20, 21.22, 23. Neither pray I for those alone, but for them
also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they may also be in us, that the
world may believe that thou have sent me. And the glory which thou gave me, I
have given them, that they may be one as we are one, I in thee, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou
have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. (Where the word of
comparison, ver. 22. (...) shows, qualitatem, not aequalitatem unionis. Now,
consider, if this union be such a thing, as not only the Spirit of God in the
Apostle Paul, but even the Son of God himself in the days of his flesh, made
such earnest intercession for; is it not worthy our endeavoring after? And
that you may see that this holy sweet close union, is not a mere Idea
Platonica, an imaginary perfection and blessedness, that never was, nor never
will be attained in this life; look but upon the first and best times of the
Church, and there behold the lovely face of this holy union: Acts 1.14.
Acts 1.14. it is said, they continued, (...), with one accord in prayer and
supplication. Acts 2.46.
And again, Acts 2.46. They continued, (...), with one accord in the Temple,
and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart. And again, Acts 5.12. They were all (...), with one
accord in Solomon's porch. And again, Acts 4.32. Arguuntur exemplo hoc nostri
seculi mores, quos ab unanimitatis and concordiae studo alienissimos esse
constat. This reproves the manners of our times (says Reverend Gualter
long-ago,) which have wholly cast off all care of concord and union. Audimus
inter Evangelicae Doctrinae and fidei professores factiosa Zwinglianor^m, and
Lutheranerum Nomina: Et aemulationum studio and favore couso progressum est, ut
cum alterutri parti periculum imminet, reliqui fratres periclitantes deserant,
and omni commiserationis affectu posito taciti in sinum goudeant, imo gaudium
suum non raro acerbis scommatis testantur; adaoque Christi membris in cruce
pendentibus acetum fell mixtum propinent. Vt interim de contentionibus,
convitijs, opprobrijs and obtrectationibus mutuis unbil dicam. Change but the
name of Lutheran and Zwinglian, and see if this be not too true of us?
The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart and of one soul: (...):
They had but one heart and one soul among them. But alas, my brethren, how may
the Church of Christ take up the sad complaint of Job; O that I were as in
times past, as in the days when God preserved me, as I was in the days of my
youth, when the secret of God was upon my Tabernacle. Now in stead of (...), we
have, quot capita tot sensus, But however it be with us, you see there wants
neither precept, nor prayer, nor president in Scripture to commend to us the
endeavor after a close, sweet, holy union, as our duty.

If you desire to know what are the particulars wherein those that would walk
worthy of the Gosptl, Explication.
are to endeavor an union among themselves; Be pleased to review again the
Scriptures brought for the proof of the point, and they will direct you in them.

1 Unity of heart to be endeavored.
I find some making mention of a threefold union or unity: Vnitas cordis,
unitas oris, unitas operis; an unity in heart, in word, in work.

First, in heart; this you have, Acts 4.32.
Acts 4.22. The multitude titude of believers were of one heart and of one
soul; Anima una quoad intellectum per unitatem fidei: Cor unum quoad affectum
per unitatem charitatis: They were of one soul in regard of their judgment by
unity in the faith: they were of one heart in regard of their affections by
union of love. Cordis and animae unius nominibus intelligitur summa tum in
doctrina, tum in volunt atibus consensio: By one heart and one soul, is meant
an exact agreement both in doctrine and in will, says Beza; and subjoins, that
in his ancient Copy were added these words, (...): which Beda also found in
several Greek copies, and translates, non erat in illus separatio ulla, there
was no separation among them. Cypr. li. 3. ad Quirinum; Nec fuit inter illos
discrimen ullum, there was no difference among them. Beza, Nec erat inter illos
controversia ulla, there was no controversy among them. Happy men, and happy
times, in this union of hearts that was among them.

And that twofold.
This union of hearts is twofold, or implies two things; first, an unity of
mind and judgment in marters of faith; secondly, an union of affection in
love: both which it is the duty of those that would walk worthy of the Gospel
to endeavor after.

First, 1. In opinion and judgment.
it is the duty of those that would walk worthy of the Gospel, to endeavor
after unity of judgment: Some observe that from my very text, in one spirit
with one mind; Velasquez.
Philippenses non solum de animarum and voluntatum conjunctionis unitate, sed
and de doctrinae etiam and sententiarum consensione admonet, mutuam ab illis
charitatem, and eandem mentem efflagitans. Paul adm onisheth the Philippians,
not only of union of minds and wills, but of confent of doctrines and
opinions, requiring mutual love, and the same mind. But this is very clearly
and expressly required, 1 Cor. 1.10. I beseech you, brethren, 1 Cor. 1 10.
by the Name of our Lord Josus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, that
there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and in the same judgment, (...): The word (...), signifies a
man's judgment, sentence, opinion in a matter, and is so used in this 1 Cor.
7.25. where speaking of a case concerning Virgins, (...), I give my judgment,
or my opinion, says the Apostle: And ver. 40. speaking of the widow, she is
happier if she so continue, (...), after my judgment, or mine opinion; so that
when the Apostle requires that they be perfectly joined together, (...);
Consensionem requirit in eodem in religionis capitibus sensu, says Beza upon
the place; he requires an agreement in the same sense, opinion, judgment, in
the heads of Religion. This also is intended in all those Scriptures, where the
Apostle writes to the Saints, (...), to mind the same thing, or to be of one
mind. So Phil. 2.2. (...), So Hen. Stephanus in Thesan. translates it. ijsdem
sententijs uniti.
which Beza translates, unanimes, sententijs uni, agreeing and being one in
your opinions: And says in his Annotations, ab animorum (id est voluntatum)
conjunctione transit ab doctrinae consensum, ut plena justaque sit concordia.
The Apostle passes from agreement in wills to agreement and consent in
doctrine, that the agreement may be full and perfect. So 2 Cor. 13.11. So 1
Pet. 3.8. All these call upon Christians for oneness and samenes of mind,
judgment and opinion in the things of God in the doctrines of faith: and do
utterly condemn as sinful, that universal unlimited liberty of judgment and
opinion, which in these times is so much contended for; for if it be lawful
for every man to entertain and hold what opinion he pleases, how differing
soever from the opinion and judgment of the rest of the Church and people of
God, yet this is his opinion, and his judgment is persuaded of it, and he must
follow his own judgment, and this liberty of judgment be (as some say)
Liberty of Conscience, part of the liberty purchased by Jesus, and to restrain
it, or set bounds to it, is in their language Persecution, Tyranny, etc. If
this were true, sure Paul did very ill, to charge the Corinthians with so much
authority, to be of the same mind, and of the same judgment. Might not some
among the Corinthians have said to Paul, This is hard usage, this is to rack a
low man to the same length with a taller, and to cut a tall man to the same
stature of one that is low? What, the same judgment? and the same mind? will
not Paul allow difference of lights and sights? Might not some one among the
Corinthians have said, What if I am of opinion that there is no resurrection,
what has Paul or any man to do with that? it is my conscience, and it is my
liberty, and what has any man to do with my conscience more then I with his?
might not Hymaeneus have said; What if it be my opinion, that the resurrection
is past already, what has Paul to do with that? Yes, says Paul, if ye persist
obstinate I will excommunicate you, I will deliver you up to Satan, that you
may learn not to blaspheme: Certainly this shelter, this Asylum of error,
falsely called Liberty of Conscience, I find nothing in Antiquity nearer it,
then that opinion of Rhetorius, of whom Philastrius says, quod omnes
laudaverit haereses, etc. That he commended all heresies, and said they did all
mean well, and that none of them erred, but did all walk well, and did not
believe amiss: Of which opinion of his Augustine says, it is nimium mirabilis
vanitatis; and so full of absurdities, ut dogma incredibile videatur, that it
seems incredi le; and Cramer the Lutheran, calls the Author of it, Omnium
Haereticorum haereticissimum; and the opinion, omnium mendaciorum mendacissimum.
was not thought of in former times.



Paul prayed for, which the Lord Jesus Christ himself prayed for, and therefore
certainly it is that which we are to pray for and press after. And for any man
to be of another mind then the rest of his brethren the people of God are,
certainly it is to be looked upon as an affliction, as matter of humiliation,
and not as matter of rejoicing. Optandum quidem nobis omnibus, iterumque,
iterumque, optandum, ut in minimis quibuque, consensus firmus teneatur a tot a
Ecclesia, says Aretius; It is that we should all desire, and again and again
we should desire it, that there might be a full agreement even in every the
least matters in the whole Church. Sed cum eventus votis non respondeat (says
he) forte peccatis aliud promerentibus and infigni ingratitudine, Aretius de
Concord. Ecclesiae.
dissidentia judicia a multis proferenda esse; But seeing the issue does not
answer our desire, it may be, our sins and our notorious ingratitude deserving
the contrary, many will be of differing judgments. And indeed it can scarce be
but through the imperfection of our knowledge and corruption of our wills,
there should be some differences of opinion and judgment among us; but then it
is that we should (not glory in, but) sigh under, as part of our imperfection
cleaving to us while we are here upon earth.



holy Ghost calls upon us to endeavor to be of one mind, of the same mind,
and of the same judgment; it is easier to tell you, wherein we may not differ
in judgment, and wherein differences in judgment may not be tolerated, then
to tell you wherein they may.

First therefore I say, that as an absolute unity in judgment, that we should
all be of the same mind in all things, is scarce to be attained in this life,
though it be to be endeavored; so an universal and absolute liberty of
judgment, for every man to differ when he pleases, and in what he pleases,
to be of what opinion and faith he will, is not to be endeavored, if it might
be attained, nor is it to be tolerated or permitted. I know no warrant, no
pretense of warrant for it in all the book of God: Scripture no where says,
Let every man be of what opinion and of what faith he pleases, Neque etiam
quicquam argumentorum occurrere posse putandum est, quod vel leviter in speciem
afferri posset, nisi quis fortasse illud Pauli and Habacuc buc torqueri velit,
Iustus ex fide sua vivet, etc. At vero si uterque dixisset, Quisque fide sua
vivet, etc. But (says he) if both of them had said, Every man shall live by
his faith, possibly it might have afforded some favor to such an opinion, but
they do not say, every man, but the just shall live by his faith; Now the faith
of the just, justa fides est non indiscreta, nonconfusa, non ex quovis trivio
petita, aut e cujusvis cerebro nata aut sata phantasia. The says of the just
is a just faith, not an indistinct, not a confused faith, not a faith raked up
in every highway, not a fancy bred and borne in the brain of every private
man. Cramer. Arhor Haereticae consang.
let every man be left to his own judgment.

Si quis ex verbis Pauli, Romans 14.5. patrocinium petat, etc. if any man think
these words of Paul, Romans 14.5. do patronize this opinion, it is but as they
are mis-translated in the vulgar Latin, Vnusquisque abundet sensu suo: but
there is no such thing in the text, and therefore Beza rejects it, and says
plainly, Beza ad loc.
haec sententia Christiana esse non potest, as being in his apprehension
contrary to that express Scripture, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Ye shall not do after all the
things that you do here this day, every man that which is right in his own
eyes. And certainly this absolute liberty (or rather licentiousness) in
opinion, which is so eagerly contended for by some, is not to be indulged unto
men. Gerhard. in loc. com loc. de Magistratu.
Libertas illa quidvis credendi, nihil aliud est quam libertas errandi, and
quidem errandi in re animae salutem concernente, in qua proinde error est long
nocentissimus and periculosissimus. That same of liberty of believing any
thing, is nothing else but a liberty of errring, and of erring in matters
concerning the salvation of the the soul, and an error there is most hurtful
and dangerous; and therefore (says he) as it cannot be safe for sheep to be
left to wander alone, through mountains and deserts, and graze where they
please, lest they fall in upon some unwholesome food, and poison themselves, or
fall into the paws of the Woolf, and become a prey. And as it cannot be safe
to leave a ship to it self, to be driven along before the wind, without any
guidance or steerage: So neither can it be safe to leave a liberty to men to be
of what faith or Religion they list, or to hold what opinion they think good,
etc.

Particularly, Liberty of opinion or judgment is not to be granted or indulged.

Judaisme, Arianisme, Socinianisme: in the Doctrine of the Trinity, and of the
Lord Jesus, Non licet luxuriari: a wanton liberty of opining and believing what
men please, is not to be borne. If Hymeneus and Alexander once come to
blaspheme, away with them, cast them out, deliver them to Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20.

Popery, Arminianisme, Libertinisme, Gal. 1.8. Though we, or an Angel from
Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto
you, Let him be accursed, verse. 9. As I said before, so say I now again, if
any, (...), if any, (whether man or Angel) preach any other Gospel to you then
what you have received, Let him be Anathema, Revel. 2.20. Notwithstanding I
have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezebel, who
calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit
fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols. So then here TOLERATION
is abominable.

Nor thirdly, is there liberty left in those things, wherein our judgments and
opinions in the discovery and practice of them will give just offense unto
others, 1 Cor. 10.32. Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.

Nor fourthly, in such things, as wherein the difference of judgment and
opinion will necessarily and unavoydably, ex natura rei, produce a rent and
schism in the Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you, brethren, by
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that
there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and in the same judgment, Romans 16.17. I beseech you, brethren,
mark them that cause divisions and offenses among you, contrary to the Doctrine
that you have received, and -- what? Tolerate them? No, avoid them, Gal. 5.12.
I would they were even cut off that trouble you. Nothing can be cleerer then
these Scriptures are against the Toleration of all Doctrines, and particularly
of those that trouble, rend, divide the Church.

A grave and judicious Divine delivers his judgment in this particular thus,
1. Qui palam (...), sunt, non sunt ferendi. 2. Qui (...) inducunt. 3.
Quimagistratum tollunt. 4. Qui bella non necessaria movent. Aretits Probl.
5. Qui aperta flagitia tuentur. 6. Qui articulos ad salutem necessarios
tollunt, negant, aut in dubium vocant. 1. They that are open Atheists are not
to be borne. 2. Nor they that would bring in confusion. 3. Cavendum estsedulo
ne haere ticsrum and fanaticorum sub sanctimoniae specie, pijs obrepentium si
mulationi ti^ulum inf^r^^i t^^is facile perm^^ta^us quo cr^^^i v^^us s^u^n
in^^utioribus ^^sl^lent and abistentes nostra tolera^tia, ^^^ge lateque
spargant. Cro^ius in Ephesians.
Nor they that would abolish magistracy. 4. Nor they that move unnecessary
war. 5. Nor they that maintain open sins. 6. Nor they that take away, deny,
or call in question any articles of faith necessary to salvation. I doubt if it
were well examined, many of those opinions that infest our times, would fall
under some part or other of this sentence.

But (to speak a little to the Positive) if there be a latitude and a liberty
of judgment left, it is first in such things as are not clearly and positively
laid down in Scripture, and therefore are not of the fundamentalls, and
essentialls of faith and worship, for there is for these clear and undoubted
light in Scripture.

Secondly, It is in things that are of private and single practice, and not of
open converse, or Church Fellowship and communion. Those cases of eating or not
eating, discussed by the Apostle, in his Epistles to the Romans and to the
Corinthians, in which the Apottle shows, there might be a liberty or
indulgence, and Christians ought to bear one with another, in holding or
practicing thus or otherwise; They were points of Personal and Domestic
practice. Duas species proponit Apostolus, in quibus vesci liceat Idolathytis,
says Beza. Beza in 1 Cor. 10 27.
There were two cases in which it was lawful to eat things offered to Idols;
one, if a man bought them in the shambles, and eat them privately in his own
house, ver. 25. The other is in case he bid to a private feast by a heathen,
ver. 27. But to do this openly and professedly, in the Idols Temple was a
detestable thing. And yet even in these things this liberty is not to be
assumed, at least not to be practiced without much tenderness and
circumspection.

First, Care must be had of keeping those opinions wherein we differ from
others, private to our selves; not troubling and perplexing the consciences of
others with them. This is the injunction, Romans 14.22. Have thou faith? have it
to thy self before God. The faith there spoken of, is a particular persuasion,
touching the free use of all Creatures, and the liberty of all days. And this
faith, this persuasion was according to the truth (as is clear by the Apostles
argumentation in that chapter) yet faith the Apostle, have thou faith? have it
to thy self before God: do not say, Ego fidem habeo libertatis, ergo debeo eam
profiteri, and factis oftendere, Parcus ad loc.
quicquid fit de alijs: Do not say, I am fully persuaded of my liberty, and
therefore I ought to profess it, and hold it out in my practice, whatever
become of others; It is the truth of God, and I must hold it forth. No, says
the Apostle, have it to thy self. And if a man who has a private opinion, in
re media must keep it to himself, though it be a truth, much more must they
whose opinions are false and erroneous. Certainly there is scarce any
difference of judgment so small, and in it self inconsiderable, but the
divulging and propagating of it may prove very dangerous and pernicious, and in
the event intolerable. Suppose a man should be of this opinion, that it is
unlawful to eat things strangled, or blood. If such a man keep his opinion to
himself, and make it a rule only to his own practice: let him enjoy it, till he
can be otherwise informed, and persuaded in his conscience. But if he will now
go publish this opinion, and entangle the consciences of others, and seek to
draw disciples after him, and make a party, and cause division and dissension
amongst the people of God; this is not to be tolerated; Personae privatae,
(says a learned Divine) diversum sentientes, si quiet vivant, etc. Private
persons of a differing judgment, Personae privatae diversum sentientes, si
quiet vivant, Sacris publicis utantur, nec occultis machi nationtbus politiae,
aut Ecclesiae pacem turbare anima^ veriantur, spe conversionis, and pacis
publicae causa ^o^erand^e sunt Quod si vero idem er^ores suos public
sparge^e^atios ad se allicere, simpliciores ^allere, and pacem publican turbare
incipiant, coercendi sunt. Geth^rd loc. com. loc. de Magistratu.
if they live quietly, frequent the public Assemblies of worship, and are not
discerned to disturb the peace either of State or Church, by any secret
underminings, are to be tolerated, in hope of their conversion, and for public
peace sake. But if these men shall begin to spread their errors in public, to
inveigle and draw others to them, to beguile the simple, and so to trouble the
public peace, they are to be restrained, says he, speaking of the duty of the
Magistrate in this case. So then, that is the first caution: If men have
private opinions, opinions of their own, that they cannot be of the same
judgment with the rest of their brethren; Let them keep them private: Let them
be domestica judicia, as Tertullian calls them, (...), as another calls them,
let them keep home, and not be seen abroad, Have thou faith? have it to thy
self before God.

A second condition to be observed in case of difference in judgment and
opinion, is, that though we cannot be of the same mind and judgment with
others, yet we do not judge or despise those that differ in judgment from us.
Romans 14.3. There was difference of judgment among the Saints in Rome, some
thought it was as lawful to eat all kinds of flesh, as it was to eat herbs,
and were ready to think them a company of weak simple people, that would make
scruple of it; others thought it absolutely unlawful to eat flesh, and thought
none would do it but profane men, men of no conscience, and therefore were
resolved they would eat only herbs: Now, this is that the Apostle reproves,
forbibs; Let not him that eats despise him that eats not, and let not him
that eats not judge him that eats: whatever our differences in judgment
be, we must take heed of despising and condemning one another.

A third condition is, that even then we cannot be of one mind, we yet labor
to be of one heart; though we do dissentire, yet we must not discordare; though
we cannot attain unity of judgment, yet we must maintain unity of affection,
which is the second part of that unitas cordis, that union of heart which the
Gospel requires. This is it which is required of us, Romans 12.10. Be kindly
affectioned one toward another in love. So 1 Pet. 3.8. having said, Be ye all
of one mind, he adds, love as brethren; q. d. if it should so happen, that you
cannot in all things be of one mind, yet notwithstanding love as brethren,
(...), says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.15. which Beza in his first edition
translates (as the vulgar does) veritatem sectantes in charitate, following the
truth in love: which I conceive both the notation of the word, and the scope of
the place, if you consider the verse going before, will bear: And so the text
imports, that love must set bounds to all our inquiries after truth, and we may
not, under pretense of seeking truth, transgress the laws of and rules of
love: If we cannot meet in every point of truth, yet let us embrace in love: If
there be difference in judgment, yet let there not be distance in affection:
Aretius.
Paul and Peter may differ, Hierome and Augustine, Moscopolus and Philelphus,
and yet be friends still, love as brethren.

And surely had we walked according to these rules, our divisions in England
had not been so sad, so fatal as they are this day. Had all that profess the
Gospel in England made conscience to be of the same mind, and the same
judgment with their brethren, and the rest of the Churches of Christ, as far
as possibly; and where they cannot, where there is a necessity of differing,
had they made conscience to keep their differences from appearing in public,
to have their private opinions and faith to themselves, and not entangle the
weak with their doubtful disputations; forbearing to judge or despise those
that are not of their opinion, loving them still as brethren, not censuring
them as profane, antichristian, fighters against God, men that will fully shut
their eyes against the light; had these things (I say) been attended to on all
hands, our breaches had never been so great as now they are, nor should the
lovers of truth and peace have had so much cause to lament them. But thus much
of the first kind of union that is required in those that would walk worthy
of the Gospel, unitas cordis.

The second kind of union or unity required, is, unitas oris: as the people of
God should have but one soul, so they should have but one lip; as one faith,
so one confession of faith, one expression of themselves in matters of faith,
Therefore the holy Ghost calls upon us not only to think, but to speak the
same things, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing: Not only think, but speak. So
Romans 15.6. That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God. The people of
God should not only have one mind, but one mouth. It was a happy and peaceable
age, when the whole earth was but of one lip, one Language; the confusion of
tongues at Babel brought in a world of other confusions: It is a happy thing
when all the people of God can content themselves with the same language and
expressions in the things of God. That same (...), and (...), that affectation
of new and strange language, has ever been found prejudicial to the Church of
God: Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib 10 cap 23.
Non parum interest ad Christianam charitatem quibus verbis utamur, says
Augustine; Qui novas phrases, terminos, definitiones rerum excogitant, etc.
They which coin new phrases, Paraeus in 1 Cor 1.10.
and new terms, and new definitions of things, for the most part are forging
some new doctrines: for they refuse to speak as others do, that they may seem
to be wiser then others are. Semper ex mutata temere phrasi secuta est dogmatum
mutatio: Change of phrases has always ushered in change of doctrines. Et
videmus eos qui ad nullam formam loquendi se alligant mirifica portenta
doctrinae gignere: Ioach. Meist.
They that will not be bound to any form of speaking, at length bring forth
strange monsters of opinions. It is that which both Peter, 2 Ep. 2.13. and
Jude, ver. 16. make a piece of the character of false Teachers; They speak
great swelling words of vanity: Calvin. Instructio adversus Anabags.
And it is that Calvin observes of the Anabaptists and Libertines in his days,
they spoke such strange and uncouth high-flown language, as could not be
understood by others: scarce if at all by themselves. Now we should take heed
of this, and in the things of God, content our selves with those phrases and
expressions that are passant in the Church of God, and not affect novelties:
The greatest heresies that ever troubled the Church of Christ, have come out of
the womb of new phrases and expressions; which made Melancthon wish, Vtinans
possimus eadem quae bona and utilia sunt, non tantum ijsdem verbis, sed and
ijsdem syllabis and literis efferre. Melanch in Chron. part 3.
That we were able to utter those things that are good and profitable, not only
in the same words, but in the same syllables, and in the same letters: I set my
Amen to it: O that we could be of one mind, and one mouth, all speak the same
thing: that is the second particular of union we are to endeavor after.

A third particular of that union we are to endeavor after, is, unitas operis,
union in way and practice: This the Lord has promised as a blessing to his
people, Jerem. 32.39. I will give them one heart and one way, that they may
fear me for ever for their good, and the good of their children after them. And
Zeph. 3.9. That they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, and serve him with
one consent. Teneamus illud, etc. ut idem (apiamus credendo, and permaneamus in
eadem regula disciplinae, id est, recte vivendi, scilicet ut nosno propter
novam inventionem vel intelligen^iam suam deserat communem sensum sidei. s^u
regulam just vevendi. Anselm.
Now that which the Lord promises, we may pray for, and that which we pray
for, we must endeavor after one way: Phil. 3.16. Nevertheless, whereto we
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing: That is, says Anselme, Let us all have a care of this, that whereunto
we have already attained, we mind the same thing by believing, and walk by
the same rule of discipline, that is, right living, that no man out of novelty,
or leaning to his own understanding, desert the common faith or rule of right
living. Thus much the text clearly tells us, that those who cannot be of the
same mind in all things, should yet walk by the same rule, so far as they
have attained unto agreement: unity in practice is to be endeavored, as well
as unity in judgment: And thus now you have the explication of the point, what
that union or unity is, which it is the duty of all those that would walk
worthy of the Gospel are to endeavor after.

I might bring abundance of reason for the further confirmation of this point;
but I will bring no other then what the Spirit of God uses to enforce this
doctrine by, and I will but point at them neither.

Look in Ephesians 4th, the Apostle there in the three first verses, exhorts
unto this unity, as you have heard already: Now mark how many testimonies the
Apostle there heaps up to strengthen this exhortation by;

Inter membra naturalis corporis nulla est discordia, nulla invidiae, sed mutua
sypathia auxilium mutuam. Crag.
First (says he) There is one body, ver. 4. whereof you are all members,
therefore be ye one, let there be no discord among you.

Secondly, There is one Spirit, ver. 3. Even as in the natural body there are
not diverse spirits or souls, according to the diversity of members, but one
spirit that gives life and motion to every member, so is it in the body of
Christ, there are not as many several spirits as members, but one Spirit,
which is so in the whole body as he is in every member, and gives life and
motion to every member; For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, 1
Cor. 12.13. and we have access unto the Father by one Spirit, Ephesians. 2.18. And
though there be diversities of gifts, yet there is the same Spirit, 1 Cor.
12.4. There is one Spirit, therefore be you one; keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace: This bond cannot be broken, this unity cannot be
violated, without offense to this one Spirit.

Thirdly, You are called in one hope of your calling, ver. 4. So many of you as
are called by the Gospel, one and the same salvation, Heaven, glory is promised
to you, and so many of you as have obeyed this calling, you are all commanded
to hope for this salvation and glory all of you, there you shall live sweetly
and blessedly together for ever; therefore your peace and union ought no more
to be divided here, then your inheritance can be divided hereafter: It is a
shame for them to quarrel and fall out in via, that must live for ever together
in patria. Indeed if God had not called all of us to the hope of the same
inheritance in light, but had called some to a better, others to a worse
condition, given some a double portion as Joseph did Benjamin, or a
party-colored coat above others, as Jacob did Joseph, there might be some
pretense for strife and envying, something that might give occasion to a
falling out by the way; but (...), says the Greek Scholiast: God gives not to
one believer more then another; but gives unto all of them immortality,
eternal life, immortal glory; the brotherhood, the inheritance, you are all
called into one hope of your calling, therefore be ye one: O si animis nostris
insideret, says Calvin, etc. O that we would consider that we are under this
Law; Calvin. ad. loc.
that the children of God may no more differ among themselves then the Kingdom
of Heaven can be divided; oh how wary would we be in preserving brotherly love,
how would we tremble at contentions, if we did consider as we ought, that they
all estrange themselves from the Kingdom of God, that divide themselves from
their brethren: But I know not (says he) how it comes to pass, that we can
securely boast our selves to be the children of God, and yet forget brotherly
love one to another. The children of God have all but one hope, one
inheritance, therefore should all be but one.

Vnum Dominum oppoponit multis Paganorum penat thus es Dijs rutularibus quos
tanquam Dominos suos varijs officijs demerebantur.
Fourthly, says the Apostle, There is one Lord, ver. 3. even the Lord Jesus. Ye
are not as the Heathen, that have many gods, and many Lords, but to you there
is but one Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. and ye are all his servants.
Therefore be ye one; It redounds to the disadvantage and dishonor of him who
is your only Lord, if there be envying, divisions, strifes among you that are
his servants, therefore be ye one.

Fifthly, There is one faith, ver. 3. Both one grace of faith, qua, whereby ye
believe; and one doctrine of faith, quae, which is believed: for all the
Saints, do by one and the same grace, believe in one and the same Christ. Not
in one Christ before the Law, in another under the Law, in another after the
Law. Nor the Jews one way, the Gentiles that are converted another way: Non
aliter in orient, aliter in meridie, aliter in occidente: therefore all
believers ought to the utmost, to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace. There is one faith, therefore be ye one.

Sixthly, There is one baptism, ver. 5. Christ has not instituted several,
but one baptism: All are baptized with water in one Name of one God, Father,
Son and holy Ghost. The Jew converted has not one baptism, the Grecian
another; the free one, the bond another; the rich one, the poor another; but as
they are all one in Christ Jesus, so they are all by one baptism baptized into
Christ: your baptism is but one, therefore be ye one.

Seventhly, says the Apostle, there is one God and Father of all, therefore be
ye one. If all believers call upon one and the same God and Father, how dare
they, how can they break the bond of brotherly love? To see brethren, the
children of one father, live in rankor and malice one agains another, is a
displeasing sight to all, but O how wounding is it to the heart of their own
Father? So is it to God, to see his children out of charity, at discord. There
is one God and Father who is over all, and therefore able to punish the
miscarriage of all, and in all, and therefore thoroughly acquainted with the
miscarriages of all, and in you all, for you are all the temple of God, and one
God dwells in you all: Ergo qui fidelium scindant unitatem, proinde faciuns ac
si^nnum Deum patremque in parts vellent scindere: They that would divide the
unity of the faithful, do as much as it were to divide God that dwells in them.

Here then you see a sevenfold argument which the Apostle uses for the
enforcing of this duty of my Doctrine. Quotles unum hic iegitur toties nectatur
conclusio: Quod unum est discerpt non possit. Beza ad to^uia.
There is one body whereof you are all members, therefore be you one: There is
one Spirit whereof you are all temples, therefore keep the unity of the Spirit:
Ye are called in one hope of your calling, therefore be ye of one heart: There
is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, etc. therefore
be you one, seeing you are one in all these particulars, there is abundant
reason, you should be one among your selves.

Look again into this fourth chapter to the Ephesians, verse. 12, 13. you shall
find another argument for this endeavor after unity: He gave some Aposties
and some Evangelists, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, etc. The Text
shows clearly, that one main end which Christ aimed at in all the officers
which he has set in his Church, and the gifts bestowed upon those officers,
it was to bring his people to Unity: Not only to faith and the knowledge of
the Son of God, but to unity in the faith, and in the knowledge of the Son
of God. Magnum argumentum suggerit Apistolus, studiose servanda unitatis
spiritus. The Apostle here supplies us with a weighty argument, to persuade us
to keep the unity of the spirit, which so precious and of such esteem with
Christ that for the sake of it, (among other things, he has instituted the
Ministry) and officers which he has given unto his Church. But this may
suffice for the Explication and proof of the point. I come now to Application.

That it is the duty of all those that would walk worthy of the Gospel, to
endeavor a sweet, close, holy, firm, union, and to be one in judgment and
opinion, one in heart and affection* to speak the fame thing, walk by the same
rule: then this may serve in the first place, to justify that solemn league
and Covenant which we have all taken; (I am sure at least all should have
taken) and which you, Right Honorable and beloved lately have renewed, even in
that branch of it, and in those particulars which some do most cavil against:
namely that last branch of the first article, wherein we engage our selves to
endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to the nearest
conjuction and Uniformity, in Religion, confession of faith, form of Church
government, Directory for worship and Catechizing, that we and our posterities
after us, may as brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may delight to
dwell in the midst of us. As also the second Article, wherein we swear in like
manner without respect of persons, to endeavor the extirpation of Popery,
Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, etc. That the Lord may
be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms. I would there were none that a
few years ago, would have thought they could never have blessed God enough for
such a Covenant, that now spurn and scorn it, even in, nay for these very
clauses. But I beseech you, what is there in any of these particulars, but what
is a duty incumbent from God, upon every one that would walk worthy of the
Gospel, as you have heard abundantly proved this day. You have sworn to
endeavor the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion: what is that but
to endeavor to be of one heart and one soul, Act. 4.32. to endeavor to be
perfectly joined together, (...), in the same mind, and in the same judgment,
1 Cor. 1.10. you have sworn to endeavor the nearest conjunction in confession
of faith, what is that but to endeavor all to speak the same thing? 1 Cor.
1.10. and with one mouth to glorify God, Romans 13.5. you have sworn the same in
reference to one form of Church Government, directory for worship and
Catechizing; what is this but to endeavor to walk by the same rule? Phil.
3.13. you have sworn to endeavor to extirpate Popery, Prelacy, Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, Profaneness. What Is this but to endeavor that there be no
divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together, 1 Cor. 1.10.
All this is but your duty. And the purpose and intent of all this is; That the
Lord may be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms: And that we and our
posterity after us, may as brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may
delight to dwell in the midst of us, what is, if this be not a sweet, close,
holy, firm union.

Q. If any shall demand, how does it appear that we should endeavor such an
union of all the Churches in a Nation, in three Nations; we grant indeed, that
the Saints of a particular Congregation, ought to have one heart and one way,
to be of one mind and of one judgment. But how do you prove that such a thing
is to be attempted and endeavored in a Nation. The Philippians, Ephesians,
Corinthians, upon whom the Apostle injoynes this unity, were Churches of a
particular Congregation.

A. I answer, this is gratis dictum, that the Churches of Ephesus, Corinth,
Philippi, consisted of no more then might ordinarily meet together for all
duties of worship in one individual Congregation. I have often heard it said,
but never could yet hear or see it proved, but I have seen good proof of the
contrary: However, sure I am, if union in a particular Congregation be good,
union in the Churches of two or three Nations is better; for Bonum quo
communius eo melius Mulrum valet ad propitiandum Deum fraterra concordia. Si
duo ex vobis ait Dominus conveneritis in terra, quicquid petieritis fiet vobis.
Si ^uobus hominibus qua^to magis duobus popu^is? Si^^ul nos Deo prosternamus,
participamini nobiscum unitate^ participemur vobiscum dolorem, etc. August.
lib. 20. de Bapti. cont. Do natistas. Suitable whereunto was that expression of
M. Nigh, in his Exhortation to the Honorable House of Commons and Assembly of
Ministers, September. 25. 1643. If (says he) when but two or three agree or
assent upon any thing on earth, it shall be confirmed in Heaven; and for this,
because they gather together in his Name, much more when two or three Kingdoms,
shall meet and consent together in his Name, and for his Name, That God may be
one, and his Name one amongst them, and his presence amidst them.
. And sure I am, the reasons upon which the Apostle urges this care of unity
upon the Ephesians, bind not only to a particular Congregation, but to all
upon whom the Name of Christ is called. There is one body, one Spirit, one hope
of calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all; not
only the Saints in a particular Congregation, but of all the Saints upon earth.
And Christ gave Apostles, Prophets, etc. for the work of the Ministry, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ (not till
those of this or that Congregation come, but) till we all come in the unity of
the faith, etc. And sure I am, the prayer which our Lord Jesus Christ made,
Joh. 17. was not only for a particular Congregation, but for all that should
believe in him, that they all might be one, and that not by a spiritual and
mystical union only, but by a visible union, such an union as the world might
take notice of; ver. 21. That they may be one in us, that the world may believe
that thou have sent me; ver. 15. That they may be perfect in one, that the
world may know that thou have sent me. And sure I am, the time will come, when
all that believe in Christ shall be visibly one, when the Lord Jesus having
destroyed the Antichrist and all his other enemies, there shall be one
sheepfold, and one sheephard, Joh. 10.16. And therefore I think we ought to
desire, not only that all the Churches in the three Kingdoms, but that all the
Churches in the world may be one, in Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and
Government according to the word of God: and to endeavor it as much as in us
lies.

That it is the duty of all those that would walk worthy of the Gospel, to
endeavor a sweet, close, holy, lasting union among themselves, calls us to
bewail the great want of that unity that should be amongst Gods people, and
such as profess to desire to walk worthy of the Gospel: and not only want of
unity but want of care and endeavor after that unity, which is too too
discernable in these times wherein we live. We live (beloved) in very sad
times, sometime I am even ready to call them (in respect of the breaches and
divisions that are amongst us) the saddest times that ever the Church was
under. But I correct my self, when I remember how the Church of God in all
ages has been exercised more or less in this kind with breaches and
divisions. In the first (which were the purest, and therefore we may conceive
were the peaceablest) times of the Church; in that famous Church of Antioch,
where the Disciples were first called Christians, Acts 11.26. where they had
the presence and labors of many Prophets and Teachers, as Barnabas, and
Simeon, and Lucius, and Manaen, and Paul, Acts 13.1, 2. yet even there, there
was (...), no small dissension and disputation, and that within 4 or 5 years
after the Gospel first came among them, Act. 15.1, 2. So in the Church of
Corinth, within almost as few years after its plantation, there were both
(...), and (...), Schisms and Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. In the Church of
Rome, there were (...) and (...), sects, or divisions and offenses, Romans 16.18.
yea, and these dissensions, divisions, offenses, were not only inter plebem,
among the ordinary sort of Christians, but among those that were the pillars of
the Church, the very Apostles themselves: So Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13. in the
second verse, they had no small dissension with the false teachers in the 39.
verse of that chapter, Medicu^ medico verbo acerbitatem and virulentiam
dissidij experimere voluit. Brent. ad loc.
ye read there was (...), a very sharp and bitter contention between
themselves: So Paul and Peter, there was a public contest between them; Paul
withstood him, (...), to his face, and before them all, Gal. 2.11, 14. So in
aftertimes, the difference between Polycrates the disciple of John, and Victor
Bishop of Rome, though it were in re nihili, being but about Easter day, yet
how they did divide and distract the Christian world, and engage, yea even
enrage the Eastern and Western Churches one against another, adeo ut sese
mutuo excommunicarint and anathematizarint, that they did excommunicate and
curse one another. I might mention the difference that fell out in after ages,
between Cyprian and Cornelius, Basil and Domacus, Chrysostom and Epiphanius,
Cyril and Theodoret, Hierom and Augustine, Prosper and Cassianus, Luther and
Zwinglius, Luther and Calvin: But I mention these things, only that you may
see, that the differences that are among our selves, among the godly, among
Ministers, are no new thing under the Sun; sic fuit ab initio, it was so in
the ages that were before us; and therefore there is no reason, that any of us
should be scandalized or offended at them, yet reason there is that we should
all bewail and lament them.

What sober gracious heart would not bleed, to see how small a matter some men
make of dissenting from all the Churches of Christ, and embracing opinions, not
so much new and strange as Heteradox, witnessed against and condemned by all
the Churches? To see how many under pretense of pursuing truth and liberty,
have clean forgot that there is any such thing to be regarded as unity: Every
thing that to them is new, is in their apprehension truth, and every thing
which they think truth, they presume they have a liberty to hold, and to hold
it forth without any regard to unity. Men are not able when once they have
drunk in an opinion, to keep it to themselves according to the rule of the
Apostie, it must forth, Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter: To
see how men multiply opinions, and roll and run from one error to another,
waxing worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, till at length they come
to downright blasphemy, renouncing all Ordinances, Scriptures; yea (we should
tremble to think of it) some are fallen so far, as to renounce Christ and God
himself; and which is worst of all (if some men's doctrines be true) all this
must and ought to be tolerated; and it is now (in some men's judgments) more
lawful and safe for men to err and blaspheme, then either for Ministers to
reprove, or for Magistrates to repress these errors* But these things I had
rather mourn over, then speak of them. It is not words, but tears and prayers
(it any thing under heaven) that must heal these sad evils. To provoke you and
my self to contribute something of this kind to this purpose, let me propound
but two particulars to consideration.

First, Consider the detriment and prejudice that Religion suffers by the
divisions that are amongst us. Secondly, Consider the prejudice and detriment
that we our selves may suffer by it.

First, The Divisions and Dissensions that are amongst those that profess the
Gospel, brings a great deal of scandal upon Religion it self, and upon the
Gospel which we profess: I dare confidently speak it, there is scarce any one
thing that has been more prejudicial to the Gospel, from its first going
forth into the world, then the divisions and differences which have fallen
among the professors of it. Clemens Alexandrinus (who lived about the year of
Christ 200. and in whose time there were more then 20 Haeresiarchae, arch
heretics or Masters of opinions in the Church, who had every one of them their
peculiar disciples, and catus Ecclesiasticos, and peculiar Church-meetings,
among whom, ^latius de Sectis dissensionibus, etc Relig. Papisticae, etc. Clem.
Alex. lib. 7o Strom.
doctissimi and excellentissimi viri reperiebantur, were some most excellent
and learned men,) he tells us, that the Jews and Heathens in his time, were
wont to upbraid the Christians with this, (...), etc. You, O Christians, cannot
agree among your selves, but have so many, and so differing sects among you,
who though they all challenge to themselves the title of Christian, yet they do
all extremely detest and curse, and condemn one another; wherefore your
Religion (fay they) can neither be true, nor come from God, Chanes is fuit
Chiauses Mamaluchus, cui ^ntea Eust achio nomen fucrat, and qui non procal an
Alba Iulia in Oppidos Tordo, multes annos Ludimagistrum profess^^ pueros in
iriviae docuerat. Philp. Camer. in Oper. Succes. cap. 39.
otherwise undoubtedly it would be one, certain and agreeing with it self. See
what desperate arguments against our Religion our divisions furnish our
adversaries with.

Philippus Camerarus tells a story of one who had sometimes been a Christian
and a Schoolmaster, but afterward turned Turk, and was sent Ambassador to
Stephen King of Poland: Is libere dicere solitus fuit, etc. who was wont to
profess freely and openly, That he was moved to renounce Christ, by the
notorious jarrings, and enmities, and discord of Christians differing in
Religion; and showed a writing, Valde atrox and amarulentum, a sharp and
bitter writing, composed by a certain Polonian; the scope whereof was to prove,
that Mahomet was better then Luther. Et hos inquit libros vestrarum
discerdiarum and heresium testes in Thraciam nunc asperto. Musulmanis meis
fidei vestrae unitatem certissimis rerum argumentis ostensuirat. These Books,
says he, the witness of your discords and heresies, will I now carry into
Thrace with me, and will show to those of my Religion, the vanity of your faith
by most certain and real arguments. Such as are, the Compassionate Sainaritan,
and the whole brood of him who calls himself Young Martin*
God grant that none of the scurrile Pamphlets of these times fall into such
hands.

It has been one of the greatest objections of the Papists against the
Reformed Churches, That the dissensions among themselves, are evident signs of
an heretical spirit; so Bellarmine, Stapleton, Becane, etc. Fitz-Sinnonde an
Irish Jesuit, has writ a justum volumen, about the differences of the Divines
of Britain among themselves, which he intitles Britanomachia. It is true, Quis
tulerit gracchos, etc? and Cl^dius accusat Maechos, etc. We could recriminate
with ease, and turn them to Flarius his Tractate, De Sectis dissensionibus
contradictionibus and consusionibus Doctrinae and Religionis Scriptorum and
Doctorum Pontisiciorum. Or we could remit them to Pappus, who has enumerated
237 differences they have among them: Or tell them of a Divine of Britain,
that to requite the Jesuits Britanomachia, has reckoned up 300 differences
among them at Rome; and this might stop their mouths, but can never justify
nor excuse our divisions; If there be confusion and division in Babel, must it
be so in Bethel too? God grant our divisions do not give advantage to some of
that crew to write a second book, De Britannomachia against us.

But if Religion should not suffer by our divisions abroad, yet it suffers
enough among our selves here at home: For certainly there is nothing does more
expose Religion and the intended Covenanted Reformation, to obloquie and
scorn, nothing that does more confirm and harden people in their idolatry,
superstition, malignity, profaneness, atheism, then the woeful divisions that
are among the godly party, the party that all this while have cried up and
called for Reformation: Cum enim sine intermissione sic altercantes vident,
etc. for when men see the endless contentions of those, who all profess
themselves to be for truth and for the glory of God, that these cannot agree,
one says, This is truth; another says, That is truth; one says, This is the
way of Christ; another says, No, it is the way of Antichrist: Men of profane
and carnal minds, take occasion from hence, to call in question, not only the
things that are thus questioned, but all other points of Religion, and think
that all that which we call Religion and divine truth, is but a fancy and
opinion: One man thinks thus, another thus; but there is nothing certain. This
makes men of carnal and profane spirits, think Religion not only a fancy, but
a frenzy. If the Church (says the Apostle) be come together into one place, 1
Cor. 14.23
and all speak with tongues, and there come in the unlearned and unbeleevers,
will they not say you are mad? What will they say then, when in the Church they
shall hear several and contrariant doctrines, what a door does this open to
Epicurisme and Atheism? what fatal and destroying stumbling blocks does this
lay before the face of sinners? and how many poor souls may hereby be turned
aside for ever from seeking after God, his ways and truth, the Lord only
knows? But O that this consideration might help us to bewail these
differences, and might be a means to heal them: I have read of Basil and
Eusebius, between whom there was a great contest, that when they heard how the
Arians, the common enemies of Christ and of his truth and Church, began to make
use of their difference to prejudice of the truth, they presently laid their
controversy asleep, and both joined against the common adversary: We cannot be
ignorant what advantage Papists and malignants make of our differences, that it
is a principal weapon whereby they fight against the cause and work of
Reformation, a principal engine, whereby they have drawn in and engaged many
of the judicious multitude against us: And shall we yet uphold and continue our
differences? shall we yet put weapons into our enemies hands, wherewith to
fight (not only against us, but) against the Gospel and truth of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Consider how prejudicial these differences must needs be to the
godly party amongst us, I mean the whole body of those that have adhered to the
cause of God and of Religion managed by the Parliament, for I can by no means
permit that title of godly party, to be impropriated, ingrost, monopolized, as
some would have it. There are two things that (in mine eye) seem to threaten
the godly party in this Kingdom; the one is, the rage, the bloody rage of the
Antichristian faction against them; the other is, their emulations and
contentions one against another; and to me the later ever was a great deal more
dreadful then the former: The rage of the enemies against them, is
extrinsecall and accidental, but their divisions are intrinsecall and
intestine; and men die more frequently from intrinsecall causes, from diseases
bred within, then from such things as are extrinsecall and adventitious to
them; more Kingdoms and Commonwealths have been ruined by civil and intestine
wars, then by invasions and conquests: And if God should be so good to us, as
not to suffer our rents to be our ruins, yet I fear (it may at least deprive
us, of seeing that which we profess we would all be so glad to see,) the peace
of Zion, the good of Jerusalem, the Reformation of the Church, Quam stulti
essent duo volentes videre solemn oriturum si contenderent inter se, qua part
ori urus esset, and quomodo videri posset, and mota inter se controversim
litigarint, litigando se cederint caedendo oculos juos exringuerent ut illum
ortum videre non possent. Aug lib. cont. Adium.
the Lord Jesus upon his throne. Quam stulti essent duo volentes videre solemn,
etc. says Augustine, What a folly were it in two men that did both desire to
see the rising Sun, if they should fall a quarrelling among themselves, which
part of the heavens the Sun would rise in, and how it might be seen, and in
this controversy fall out, falling out fight, fighting put out one another
eyes, and so when the Sun risieth neither of them can see it. I need make no
application of this to us and our times.

But where is the fault you will say? True it is, there are divisions, sad
divisions, danger-threatning divisions among us, but where is the fault? I know
there are many, that lay all the fault upon those whom they call Presbyterians,
and say it is their rigor, and their pride and ambition, their spirit of
domination that is the cause of all these divisions; thus say the Antinomians,
and thus the Separatists, and thus the Anabaptists, and thus the others say.
Now the Lord judge between us and them, and let his people that hear judge this
day.

Who are they that divide in judgment from all the Reformed Churches of Christ
in the world, that have opinions and judgments differing from the opinions and
judgments of all the Reformed Churches? we or the Anabaptists? we or the
Separatists? we or the --? Possibly they will all say they are of the same
opinion with the Reformed Churches in fundamentalls as well as we, and their
differences, are but in Minutioribus. Now supposing this to be true (as it may
be in some of them) why then do they transgress the Apostles rule? why do they
not if that it be in matters of lesser moment wherein they differ from us, why
do not they keep their opinions private, and have their faith unto themselves
before God? why do they upon so small differences (if the differences be so
small) withdraw from communion with us and the rest of the Churches, and gather
themselves into distinct and separate Churches; some of them not holding one
body with us, others neither holding one body nor one baptism with us? Their
agreeing with us and the Reformed Churches, in Doctrines that are fundamental;
their holding one head and one faith, does not excuse them from being guilty of
breach of unity and downright schism, Aug. contr. Faust. lib 20. cap. 3. item
de fide and operibus, cap. 3. and contra Crescon. Gram. lib. 2. cap 7.
as long as they hold not one body, one baptism. Schisma (says Augustine) est
eadem opinantem and eodem ritu utentem solo Congregationis delectari dissidio.
Schism is, when a man that professes the same faith and worship, is delighted
only with the difference of an Assembly or Congregation. And again,
Schismaticos facit non diversa fides sed communion is disrupta societas: It is
not a differing faith, but breaking the fellowship of communion that makes men
schismatics. And again, Schisma est, Recens Congregationis ex aliqua
sententiarum diversitate dissensio: Schism is a new or late dissension or
disagreement of a Congregation, arising from some diversity of opinion. It is
Beza's observation, That the Corinthians did agree in the fundamentals of
Religion, and yet they had schisms among them, from whence he takes occasion
to say; Beza annot. in 1 Cor. 1.10.
That (...), sive (...), est cum alij alijs hominibus sive externis ritibus it
a sunt addicti, ut quamvis alioquin in ipsis Religionis capitibus consentiant,
tamen animis sint ab alienati and factiones quasdam ineant: Schism or division
(says he) is this, when men are so addicted to some men, or to some outward
rites, that though they do agree in the chief points of Religion, yet they are
estranged in their minds, and engage themselves into parties and factions: Now
who are they that though they profess to agree with us in Doctrine, have yet
made a secession, with drawn themselves, gathered Churches, engaged parties?
Consider and give sentence.

Who are they that have most broken the band of love? There is great fear what
the Presbyterians will do if once they get power into their hands; But in the
mean time what do others? Who are they that brand their brethren with the title
Proud, Time-serverves, Prelaticall, Tyrannical, Antichristian? And what is
this less then persecution?

Who are they that have been farthest from condescending descending to their
brethren for peace and union sake? were it fit, I could say something of this,
yea much: I could tell you much has been yielded, and much more would be
yielded, yea almost any thing but that one thing that would lay a foundation of
perpetual division and disunion in families, Church, Kingdom? Who are they
that profess an utter impossibility of reconciliaton or union, and plead for
nothing but Toleration, Toleration, and some for Toleration in the utmost
latitude, to Papists, Jews, Turks, Vid. Praefotionem ad Acta Synodalia and
Vedet de Arcanis Ariaini.
(the very artifice whereby the Arminians in Holland sought to gain a party and
strength unto themselves; Resolve these questions, and they will resolve you
who are most guilty of these divisions. But as Augustine said sometimes of
Original sin, so say I of these our divisions, Non tam inquirendam, etc. It is
time better spent, to inquire how we may come out of them, then who has
brought us into them. It was a memorable speech of Calvin, who said he would
willingly travel over all the seas and Countries in the world, to put an end
to the differences that were in the Reformed Churches: And I think there is
never a gracious heart, but would be willing to suffer banishment, death, yea
could almost with Paul, wish himself Anathema, accursed, so he might but put an
end to these unhappy differences of our unhappy times. Toward which, give me
leave to speak a few words to you in a third Use.

That it is the duty of all those that would walk worthy of the Gospel, to
endeavor a sweet, close, holy lasting union: serves in the the third place, to
exhort and excite every one to these endeavors; and it is impossible to
propound this exhortation in more persuasive and prevailing language then that
of our Apostle, Phil. 2.1, 2. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ,
if any comfort in love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and
mercy, full sill you my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, of one mind. And O that I were able so to repeat these
words, that they might reach not only your ears, but yours hearts, and not only
yours, but the ears and hearts of all that have a seed of grace in them
throughout this whole Kingdom. It is said of John the Evanglist, who was the
Beloved Disciple, and the Apostle of love, that as in his life time he did
often and much exhort to love, saying, Little children love one another. So
when he died, he died breathing out the same exhortation, Little children love
one another. Me thinks I could even live and die with those words of Paul in my
mouth; If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort in love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, be ye like minded, having
the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

For Motive, I will use but two; and you have them both in one Scripture,
Psalm. 133. the whole Psalm is nothing else but a commendation of this grace
and duty whereof we have been speaking: (...), etc. Chrysostom. in Ps. 132.
In intend not to undertake the whole Psalm at this time, but only cast your
eye upon the first verse of it, and there you read two things of this unity;
first, it is good; secondly, it is pleasant; and it is admirably good and
pleasant: Behold how good! how wonderfully good? how beyond expression good it
is, for brethren to dwell together in unity: Some things are good but not
pleasant, some things are pleasant but not good; but unity is both good and
pleasant.

First, it is good, wonderful good many ways; good, first in reference to our
selves, as it is an evidence of our election and grace, received from Jesus
Christ. This may at first seem strange: Many do not think that a harmonious
spirit sweetly complying with the spirits of Gods people, desiring to keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; to maintain close union and communion
with the Saints, is a sign of election, and of an evidence of grace. But
Scripture makes it so: Joh. 11.17, 11. Father keep through thy holy Name those
whom thou have given me, that they may be one. So ver. 22. and the glory which
thou have given me I have given them, that they may be one. Phil. 2. If there
be any consolation in Christ, if any fellowship of the Spirit, be ye of one
mind. This oneness then is a grace peculiar to those that have the fellowship
of the spirit, that have received of the grace of Christ, (...). Chrysostom in 1
Cor. Hom. 32.
that are given to him by the Father. Not but that there may be an external
and visible union where there is none of this, and so there may be an external
visible Faith, Repentance, holiness in those that are not elect, that have no
grace and true, real faith and sanctification; a believing, holy frame of
heart, is an infallible sign of election: So is a sweet, loving, peaceable
frame of heart, a heart naturally closing with the Church and people of God,
tender of differing and parting from them, studying ways of love and union:
Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you have
love one to another.

Secondly it is good, as in reference to our selves, so in reference to our
Lord Jesus Christ: (if any thing that is in such poor creatures may be said to
be good for Jesus Christ) this unity among Christians, among professors brings
honor to Jesus Christ; Joh. 17.21, 23. That the world may believe that thou
have sent me; that the world may know that thou have sent me; as if there were
no such efficacious means to convince the enemies of Christ, that he is indeed
the Son of God, and came forth from him, as this union and agreement of those
that profess him; whereas on the contrary, disunion and discord among them, as
you have heard alalready, opens the mouth of our adversaries to blaspheme
Christ and our Religion. Scimu^ and censtat quia castrorum acts tunc
tetribilis host thus ost enditur, quan^o ita suerit constipara arque densata ut
in nullo loco interrupta vide^tur. Nam si ita disponitur ut to c^s vacuus per
quem host is possit ingredi vedeatur host bus terribilis no^ est Nos ergo per
char^tatem semper uniti and constracti nunquam interrupti per discordiam (...)
ve ^^aemur, etc. Greg.


Thirdly, It is good for the Church. This union is a great strengthening unto
it, makes that terrible as an army with banners, Cant. 6.4, 10. The strength
and terror of the Macedonian Phalanx, lay in stipatione and condensatione, in
their thick, firm, close standing. So in the Church: as it is in the body
natural, not only the beauty, but the safety, the strength, the life of the
body (consists in the union of parts. The luxation of a member, pains, deforms
the body, but the dismembring destroys it. So in the body mystical the
Church. The Church is a ship; let the winds rise, and the waves swell and
toss: as long as the planks, the sides of the ship hold, there may be some
possibility of outriding the storm, and escaping the danger, but if the planks
and pieces of the ship start and fly one from another, there is no way but
present perishing: laxis laterum compagibus -- etc.

Fourthly, It is good for those that are without, it may help to ingratiate
Religion and the truth of God unto them, and draw on their conversion. There is
nothing (says Chrysostom) so attractive as love. (...) (...) etc. Chrys^ in 1
Cor. Hom. 33.
For signs and wonders wrought by you (says he) men may emulate you, but for
this they will admire and love you, and loving you, will apprehend the truth,
and walk in the way. And if presently the Heathen (for of such a man he is
speaking) do not turn believer, wonder not, be not troubled at it; but suffer
him to praise you and love you, and in time he will in this way come to be a
believer. Behold then how good this unity is! good for your selves, good for
the Lord Christ, good for the Church, good for those that are without;
therefore for their sakes, for the Churches sake, for Christ's sake, for your
own sakes endeavor after this unity.

Secondly, This unity as it is good, so it is pleasant. Behold how good and how
pleasant it is! and it must needs be so, if heaven it self be pleasant, for
there is perfect Union and Harmony. In Heaven they all think and speak the same
thing, there are no divisions in Heaven. And I am confident there is none of
you can imagine, but if we could attain to such an union and harmony here upon
earth, it would be a most sweet and pleasant thing. For first hereby we should
be the better enabled to praise and glorify God, Romans 15.5. Now the God of
patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one toward another in
Christ Jesus. To what end? That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The more union and harmony among
us, the more melody in our praises, the more glory to our God.

Secondly hereby we shall converse together with the more joy and gladness, Act.
2.4. And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, did eat there meat
with gladness and singlenes of heart.

Thirdly, By all this the Gospel and ways of Religion, will be rendered more
lovely and amiable in the eyes of others. See Act. 2.47. Praising God, and
having favor with all the people. It was not so much their speaking with
tongues, or working of miracles, as their union and accord among themselves,
(...), etc. C^rys in 1 Cor. Hom. 32.
that procured them this favor with all the people. If men (says Chrysosto^)
should do 10. thousand signs or wonders, and be at variance among themselves,
they would be ridiculous: Whereas on the other side, if they love one another
perfectly, though they do no wonders; they will continue reverenced and
unconquered. We admire Paul, says he, not for raising the dead, nor for
cleansing the Lepers, but because he said, Who is weak, and I am not weak? who
is offended, and I burn not? for if you add ten thousand miracles to this,
(...), you speaking of nothing comparable with it. Nothing among the Saints so
amiable in the eyes of others then as unity, behold how pleasant it is!

Now if any shall say, how may this unity be attained? Hic labor hoc opus. To
give direction unto unto this, would be the work (not only of another Sermon)
but of a large discourse. For the present be pleased to take these few, but
sure directions.

First labor to get all our hearts convinced, that it is our duty to endeavor
union: till this be done, our hearts will never set to endeavor it in earnest.

Secondly, See our differences, our disunions, our rents, divisions, to be our
sin, our shame, and not our felicity or glory, that we have so many differing
opinions and ways.

Thirdly, Examine our selves every one how far we have had our hands in these
rents and divisions, either as authors, abettors or encouragers of them, and
so far as guilt cleaves to any of us let us be humbled for it.

Fourthly, See a beauty and comeliness in union, look upon it not only as a
duty, but as a lovely duty, as a pleasant duty, and this will make us not only
endeavor it, but endeavor it in love,

Fifty, Get the graces that are conducing to it, Romans 12.18. Be of the same
mind one toward another, there is the duty: mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own eyes; Recompense unto
no man evil for evil. Could we thus be and walk, how soon should we be at one
among our selves, Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace: There is the duty, ver. 3. with all lowliness and
meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love, ver. 2. there
are the graces conducing to this union, Phil. 2.2, 3, 4. Be ye like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, having the fame mind; There Is the
duty. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of
mind, let each esteem others better then themselves. Look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of others. Let the same mind be
in you that was in Christ Jesus. There are the means of attaining to this duty.
O that God would write these Scriptures in our hearts, root out the corruptions
here condemned, plant in us the graces here commended, how soon should we see
an end of our differences, and all the people of God be of one heart and one
soul.

Sixthly, Pray much for union. There are other things that we are much in prayer
for, we pray for purity, we pray for Reformation, and we do well; we pray
against persecution, that the Saints may not be persecuted, etc. but how few
pray for union, that the Saints may not be tossed to and fro with every wind
of doctrine, that the Saints may not be divided in judgment and affection,
though I know not any Church-blessing we have more cause or more encouragement
to pray for then this; This God has promised, Jer. 32.39. In praying for this,
we are sure we have Christ joining with us. That prayer of his Joh. 17. is
eternally present with the Father, and of eternal efficacy to this purpose: O
therefore pray, pray, it is that which God has promised, it is for that which
Christ has prayed: Pray for union among brethren, for union in the Church of
Christ. Now the God of all patience and consolation, grant you to be likeminded
one toward another according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with one mind and
one mouth, glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 6. line ult. moneat read maneat, p. 7. l. 1. cessit r. cessat, p. 18. l.
20. Idolathytes r. Idolothytes, p. 21. l. 6. then we cannot r. then when we
cannot, l. 25. Laws of and dele of, p. 22. l 14. will fully r. wilfully, p.
25. l. 5. Gospel are to dele are, p. 29. l. 16. which so precious r. which is
so precious, l. 26. dele then, p. 33. l. 20. (...), p. 34. l. 17. Damacus r.
Damasus, l. 30. beteradox r. beterodox, p. 36. in marg. l. 19. triviae r.
trivie, p. 36. l. 28. Camerarus r. Camerarius, p. 17 l. 6 asperto r. asporto,
l. 8. ost ensuirat r. ostensurus, l 18. Sinnonde r. Simonds, l. 20, and 2^.
Britanamochia r. Britannomachia, l. 23. Flarius r. Flacius, p. 39. l. 18.
judicious r. injudicious, p. 40. l. 23. risieth r. rises, p. 45. l. 12. and of
an evidence dele of.


